A SCRIPTURE-MAP OF THE Wilderness of SIN, And Way to CANAAN.

OR THE SINNERS Way to the SAINTS REST.

WHEREIN The close Bewildring sleights of Sin, wiles of the Devil, and
windings of the Heart, AS ALSO The various Bewildrings of Lost Sinners, yea,
even of Saints, Before, In, and After Conversion; the necessity of LEANING upon
Christ ALONE for SALVATION, with directions therein: As also, the Evident and
Eminent Danger of False Guides, False Ways, False Leaning-stocks, are plainly,
and practically Discovered.

Being the Sum of LXIV Lecture SERMONS Preached at Sudbury in Suffolk, on
CANTIC. 8.5.

By FAITHFVL TEATE, M. A. Minister of the Gospel.

They wandered in a Wilderness in a solitary way, they found no City to dwell
in. Psalm. 107.4. (Therefore) the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which
was lost. Luke 16.10. He led them forth by a Right Way, that they might go to a
City of Habitation. Psalm. 107.7. By a New and a living Way. Heb. 10.20. (even)
The Way, the Truth, and the Life. Joh. 14.6. Therefore there remains a Rest
for the People of God. Heb. 4 9. London Printed for G. Sawbridge at the Bible
on Ludgate Hill. 1655.

Aprilis 25. 1654.
I allow these 64 Sermons on Cant. 8.5. preached by Mr. Faithful Teate, for the
Press.

Thomas Gataker.

TO My Dear Friends of the Borough and Town of SVDBVRY; Together with all
Christian Auditors of the ensuing Lectures.
THough the Intricacy of the Text, the Importance of the Subject, with the
sense of mine Insufficiency for these things, have sometimes overcast me with
a Cloud of Discouragement, yet durst I not but follow that bright Pillar of
truth, which (like their Star in the East) passed on before me. I have
believed and therefore have I spoken; knowing that Gods Truth never needed my
Lie (and from whom should I look for thanks, should I lie for God?) I can say
in simplicity, so far as I have known my wretched heart, that I have feared
to strain, but hated to pervert the holy Scriptures, whereof I reckon the
CANTICLES a portion so transcendently spiritual, that I accord with those that
judge it to be understood most rightly (if the sense be fair and scriptural)
when most spiritually.

I know the difficulty of demonstrating, that one, and not another, is the
sense of the abstruse passages thereof, has occasioned the giving and taking
of much Liberty (that I say not latitude) by Interpreters; whereby Satan has
gotten advantage of us, who as he is a known enemy to the Scriptures in
general, so has ever been a professed Adversary to this Book in particular
(which confirms me the more, that the weapons thereof are not carnal but
spiritual; and mighty through God to the pulling down his strong holds, and
therefore to be made use of by every good soldier of Jesus Christ) I am not
ignorant of his old Device, which prevailed on the people to whom this
scripture first came, and by whom it was taken to be an Oracle of God, who
excluded all under 30 years of Age, from the reading thereof, so favoring
shamefacednesse, but not fearing sacrilege: At this day he shows his
inveterate hatred, by a new wile, viz. whilst one understands it grossly and
carnally, another Historically, a third Prophetically, though the most and Best
understand it Mystically of Christ and his people. Says Satan, you cannot
demonstrate, adventure not to interpret; and so should it lie by as a Book that
is sealed: And as for me, my feet were almost gone, and my steps had well nigh
slipped whilst. I was thus tempted, until I went into the Sanctuary, then
understood I that this Scripture was profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in righteousness; being led of the Lord (as I
hoped, and you believed) to understand by being in [the Wildernesse] the lost
estate of sinners, by [comming up] Conversion, by [leaning] saving faith, by
the [Beloved] the only Lord Redeemer Jesus Christ.

Yet little thought I of divulging my thoughts on this Text further then your
Pulpit would carry them; There is nothing that more nauseats my Natural genius
than to see a surfit-sick press disgorging crudities into the lap of a nice and
critical Generation; But and if I had judged my clusters to be ripe for the
press, (who on the contrary am very conscious to their immaturity) it would
have been small inducement to me to appear in Print at such a time when one
may easily discern the evil of the Age, by the Appetite of the Press, which
(almost professedly disgusting the simplicity of the Gospel of peace) craveth
only what is curious or contentious; to the former, all may see that I am a
stranger; and (if I mistake not in my self) I am more than so to the later.

Yet have I chosen to displease, if not to disadvantage, my self, and to incur
the censure of strangers in the impression, rather than to grieve some poor
hearts of you, in the suppression of the following discourse; wherefore whilst
I do what I durst not deny, I would have all men know, that though I ever
thought obscurest Oblivion a winding sheet good enough for the best of my
papers, yet I never judged any Age or Eye too good to view the plainest of Gods
Truths.

And now I come at your call, in my plain Pulpit-dress, upon your Affections
the second time, with those truths that were right welcome to them at the
first; wherefore, as I had great joy, to find many of you out in the
Wilderness of your sins, (who can easily remember the wormwood and gall, the
thorns, and the stings, the bruises, the running sores of your destitute,
disconsolate, and desolate souls in that day when the chief Shepherd both
searched you and sought you out) I shall now have no greater (when ever I leave
you) than to leave you walking in the faith, and such as I found lost, to leave
leaning; and such of you as I found scattering your ways unto strangers, to
leave you espoused to one husband, even Christ. And now blessed be God who has
so prospered my journey to you whilst I came to woo a wife for the son of my
Lord.

My speech has indeed been as rude as my person contemptible, but my errand
into this Wilderness was to look for lost sheep, not to loyter about flowers;
and 'twas my happiness to meet with such Travailers as craved plain guidance
rather than quaint eloquence, and would willingly stoop for their manna to the
plain ground, being long lost, and thoroughly hunger-bitten in this spiritual
Wilderness.

Yet knowing that I have prophesied but in part, I would willingly lead you
through this plain Porch of the sinners Wilderness, to that excellent
Discourse of Mr. Richard Baxters of the Saints Rest. It is most certain we are
all Pilgrims (as were our Fathers) and have begun our Travailes in the
SINNERS WILDERNESS, oh! that our end after all may be THE SAINTS EVERLASTING
REST.

In order whereunto, I beseech you suffer a word of EXHORTATION.

First, As for the public and precious interest, spiritual and civil, let my
Text teach you to cease from (Mere) Man whose breath is in his nostrils, for
wherein is he to be accounted of? It cannot be that God should do much by any
of us for one another, whilst we make Idols one of another, the Lord is God,
and it is his glory to have all your dependencies upon himself, and he will
not give his glory to another. There is not one way for a soul, and another way
for the Church, or for a people, but one way for both to come up from their
Wilderness; and that one and only way is by leaning upon the Beloved.

Secondly, Unto you as living in this quarter of the Country, I have more to
say than unto others. I seriously tell you, the Lord looks, and they that
labor for the Lord among you, and the holy Angels of God that have pitched
their Tents about you, and all the Saints that have heard of you, and of the
way of the Holy one in the midst of you, may justly expect from you, that you
should become a peculiar people, excelling in holiness the Seize of
others, being much more zealous of good works. The Lord has expressed more
favor upon you, than upon most of your Neighbors. 1 In your Immunity from the
sword of your Adversaries. 2 The Community of the word of his grace. O the many
Chariots and horsemen of Israel, faithful, skillful and powerful even unto
eminency, burning and shining lights (with whom I profess my self unworthy to
be numbered) Messengers of Peace sent unto you, from time to time by the God of
Peace! The same is the Lord of Hosts, who gave you a protection, and made you
(as Salem) a peaceable habitation in times of War; you have been as a Goshen
of light, when the Day of the Lord has been darkness round about. Light has
been in your Houses even from the dawning of the day, after the dark night of
National Popery, when Darkness has continued in some Neighboring places: But
fire has been on your Neighbors houses on each side of you, both Norfolk and
Essex, and when it was making toward, yea and in the very sight of Sudbury,
your selves are my witnesses, your selves have told me (and to write the same
thing to me is not grievous, but for you it is profitable,) The wind, that
blows where it lists, blew those flames to your Neighbouring-County and
town of Colchester, so that the goodness of the Lord to you-ward, and severity
to them, may be read in black letters in that poor place even to this day. I
will not say that the Lord has dealt thus by you, rather than others, because
you are, but that you might be, better than others, even as he dealt by
Israel of old: and therefore if he should now find you, like them, a
stiffnecked and gainsaying people, running from the Shepherd that has so
followed you with care, and watched over you for Your good; if you should yet
make war with the Lamb, who has been so studious of your Peace, and
unwilling to fight with you when he smote your neighbors round about you, if
you should be so foolish a people and unwise, as thus to requite the Lord; O
Suffolk! O Sudbury! what should he then do unto you? Wherefore be you not
unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is concerning you, that you
may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke in the midst
of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom, the Lord looks, you should shine
as lights in the world; Holding forth the word of life, that we may rejoice in
the day of Christ that we have not run in vain, neither labored in vain. For
so is the will of God, if any speak evil of you in the things they know not,
that with well doing you put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Finally my
Brethren, be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace, holding fast the form of
sound words, and the profession of the faith without wavering, considering one
another to provoke unto love and good works. Not forsaking the assembling of
your selves together as the manner of some is: But rather, Brethren, warn them
that are unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient
toward all men: Pray without ceasing, in every thing, Give thanks. Brethren
pray for us: And the very God of P^ace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God,
your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, So Prays

Your Servant by love, FAITHFUL TEATE.

THE Author to the Ingenuous READER.
OUr Savior says of the unclean Spirit Mat. 12.43. Luk 11.24. (...), He
passes through dry (i. e. desert) places. On which Text though Beza admit of
no allegory, and the truth is (which experience confirms) that Ziim, Ochim and
Jiim, do frequent incult and desolate places, Isa. 13, 21, 22. Yet does as sad
and more frequent experience, and the very Scope of that Scripture show, that
the unclean Spirit, with the seven other worse than he, do much more delight
to inhabit the dry and the desert Soul, where they cry to each other as the
satyrs of the wilderness to their fellows, Isa. 34.14.

Wherefore being sent of the Lord in these labors, not only to spy out where
Satan's seat is, but to beat up his very head quarters, no wonder if (as in 2
Cor. 7.5.) without have been fightings, and within fears. I often thought one had
need be both sanctified from the womb, and waxen strong in the spirit, as
John Baptist, who should lift up his voice in this Wilderness; but knew my
self to be but a child, and one of unclean lips, unable to allarm those bold
Legions, or to encounter that Old Serpent: But he that sent me said unto me,
My grace is sufficient for thee, showing me, that they that were with me,
were more and mightier than they that were against me; wherefore (with fear
and trembling through manifold Temptations) most willingly though m st weakly
have I followed my commission. And now, having studied all playnnesse in the
ensuing treatise, I shall briefly, for the clearing of the Text, preface
thereunto.

The Wilderness described is the WILDERNESS OF SIN spiritually so called,
(for I allude, and no more, to that Wilderness of SIN, Exo. 17.1. by
contraction of Sinai which coming of (...) a thorny thicket, is an acurate
emblem of the ways of sin, which through its greenness though it please the
beholder, yet it is both tyring and tearing to the Travayler.) And as is the
name of the Wilderness in the Text, so is it (...) (per Antiphrasin) a (...)
loquutus est, i. e. locus sine locutione, It has its name of much speaking,
whereas there is no speaking there; even so is sin the most sociable way, and
evil men the good fellows, but like Beasts of the Wilderness are they each
unto Other, and who so is among them, may say, my Soul is among Lions, Psalm.
57.4. and to him it may be said, Briars and Thorns be with thee, and thou do
dwell among Scorpions, Eze. 2.6.

The word answering midhbar in the Greek is (...), a wilderness, or place where
men go wild, that is, go astray and wander, says a learned Critic; so that
trangressions, bewildrings, wanderings and goings astray, may well pass for
identicall expressions; which word when adjectively taken, de re et persona
dicitur, says the same Author, and so is applicable both to sin and the Sinner.

This is that Wilderness wherein we are, as soon as we are; and begin to
go astray, as soon as ever we begin to go. I observe the Hebrews have only
the difference of one small punctum between (...) and (...), gressus et
transgressus est.

From this wilderness there is no way but what is of Christ's own making,
therefore the Text presently subjoyns to (...) ascending (...) upon her
beloved; Which way is an ascent or an up hill-way to the soul (for the word is
applicable to the Minds elevation, says the Critic) wherein the soul is
ascending, for it is (...) and not (...) that is to say, she is coming up, not
come up, she is Ascending, but not Ascended; whence you may read of a
Wilderness after conversion, as well as a Wilderness of unconversion ( that
is, when a Peter, a convert, needs an after conversion, as Luke 22.32. for if
converts turn neither to the right hand or to the left, all is wilderness till
they return to their way) And God that will not lose them (Eze. 34.16.) will yet
make them to know, that they are again in the Wilderness by bringing them back
by an hedge of Thorns ( Hos. 2.6, 7.) You read of the Spouse coming up from
the Wilderness Cant. 3.6. i. e. (as Junius well expounds) certa fide extra se
et supra Mundum pietatis inanissimum effertur ad Christum, by a sure faith she
is carried out of her self, and the evil of the world, unto Jesus Christ. And
yet, after this, Christ is fain to cry after Her, Cant. 6.14. Return, return, O
Shulamite, return, return. This truth is explained in the ensuing Tractate, by
a prolix, if not tedious, Allegory, yet pardonable, I hope, the substratum
being Scripturall, and the (...) not a single experience, but an Experimental
series. And thus much as the sum of my three first Doctrins.

As for the fourth, viz. the choice Doctrine of Recumbency, I think there is not
a more pregnant Scripture. (...) is an Arabic word, and no where else extant
in the Bible. And if the former be of force to Mr. Cottons Notion of the
Churches coming up from the Wilderness of Arabia, we may think, from the
latter, that the holy Spirit would on purpose make choice of so rare an
expression, thereby to hold out so rare an example; for this is certain, that
this leaning Spouse is propounded in the Text (as a wonder on earth) not only
to the Imitation but Admiration of others, whom whilst the Spirit points at,
by an who comes here? we may well be solicitous to understand the matter.

The word in the Text is (...) in Hithp. which Conjugation denotes (says the
Grammarian) actionem reciprocam et frequentativam i. e. adjungens semet
indesinenter et continuo. This word is expounded of some by associans,
adhaerens, innitens; of others by delicians, delicias agens, deliciis affluens,
et innitens; of others by confirmans, corroborans semet etc. Of others by
Recumbens super dilectum suum, h. e. per (...), whence (...), Mat. 8.11. Such
as enjoy with Abraham the Everlasting Rest in the heavenly Canaan. Observe

1 That this leaning is the elicite and spontaneous act of the soul; adjungens
semet etc.

2 That it is a fixed, resolved, and permanent act of the Soul; Innitens
indesinenter etc.

3 That this Leaning is after the Souls weariness; Recumbens super dilectum
suum.

4 That this Leaning is in the sense of the souls weakness; Confirmans,
Corroborans semet etc.

5 That this Leaning is the close and entire act of the Soul; Adhaerens etc.

6 That this Leaning is the Complacential act of the soul; Delicias agens super
dilectum etc.

This one word signifies cordially and constantly to adjoyn, to cleave to, to
rest and strengthen her self upon, to solace and abundantly to delight her self
in HER BELOVED. And thus much have I noted from the Hebrew, (not for
ostentation, neque enim tanti est, but) partly to show the rare excellency of
the Text, partly that though the succeeding treatise be dilative, yet not
transgressing the Limits, and Cancels of the Text.

Farther, let me advertise thee, Reader, that I deny not in the least the
Historical respect that some Scriptures have, whereof I have made use
mystically; for instance page 4. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces,
and gave him to be food to a people inhabiting the Wilderness Ps. 74.14. By
Leviathan I understand in the type Pharaoh, in the antitype Satan; so by the
people inhabiting in the Wilderness, in the letter, the children of Israel in
that visible desert, mystically the elect of God, or true Israel, in the very
region of Satan, and spiritual Wilderness of unconversion; which appears, in
that as it is said historically the Lord did it, Ps. 74.14. so it is said
prophetically, and by way of promise, that the Lord will do it, Is. 27.1. Yea
though I cannot but apprehend that the words of my Text bear respect to Isreal's
coming up from the Wilderness of the land of Egypt by Josuahs conduct, in the
type ( yea though Mr. Cottons notion be allowed, whilst the holy man pleads
for a mystical use (as he does p. 9.) I see not any ground of exception
against Junius his interpretation; ascendens ex ipso deserto, i. e. says he,
veterem hominem deponens, abnegans se, et mundum ipsum totum etc. coming out
of the Wilderness, that is, putting off the old man, denying her self,
forsaking the world etc. which sense Ainsworth and others do allow. According
whereunto I have understood, in the Antitype, by the Wilderness, an
unconverted state and condition.

For there is a seavenfold Wilderness mentioned in the Scripture.

The First is Local and properly so called, viz. The Wilderness wherein Israel
wandered 40 years before they came to the land of Promise. Amos 2.10. sometime
called the Wilderness of Sin, Number. 33.12. sometime The Wilderness of the land
of Egypt, Ezekiel 20.36.

The Second is Local, but comparatively so called, viz. The Wilderness of
Judea, Mat. 3.1. Luke 1.80. being the Hill-Country, where the Villages were but
few, and so the Country but rarely inhabited.

The Third I may call Personal, viz. The Wilderness of the people, mentioned
Eze. 20.25. Meaning such Nations and persons as are (like a Wilderness) to God
and his people, even a vexation and grief of spirit. Such is that Forest
whereof God threatens to set fire, Isa. 10.8. and so to consume it both Soul
and Body. Hence that notable expression concerning the wicked, Eze. 28.24.
There shall be no more a pricking Bryer or grieving Thorn to Israel of all them
that despised them.

The Fourth I may call Penal, viz. the Wilderness of affliction and
desolation, the consequent of sin. Thus Jer. 22.6. surely I will make thee a
Wilderness, and Hos. 2.3. Lest I strip her, and make her as a Wilderness, and
a dry land.

The Fifth, Is the Wilderness of Impenitency and Unconversion, expressly
mentioned Luke 15.4. where the unconverted is called a lost sheep; but as soon
as convicted and converted, is called a lost sheep on the Shepherds shoulder;
but as for the whole Rabble, that continue where they were, the ninty nine that
need no Repentance ((...)) he leaves them in the Wilderness.

The Sixth is the Wilderness of Conviction unto Conversion, whereupon follows
spiritual Consolation. Compare Ezekiel 20.35, 36, 37, 38, with Hos. 4.14. I will
bring you into the Wilderness etc. in the former; I will allure her, and bring
her into the Wilderness, and there will I speak comfortably to her, in the
latter; wherein is some difficulty and discrepancy amongst Interpreters;
Tremelius reads it, Cum deduxero, etc. and so Junius refers it to the third
verse of the Chapter; that is, says he, when I have afflicted as before is
threatened, by bringing her into a Wilderness, then will I speak comfortably to
her, [in the Wildernesse] that is, in such place where she shall think her
self destitute of all help and comfort, Engl. Annot. Mr. Buroughs on the place
recites a Jewish Custom, whereof, he says, he has read. Their Bridegrooms
and Brides used on their Mariage-days to go forth together into the fields, and
there to sing their Love-songs, and to solace each other with conjugal
delights, and at length the bride used to return home into the City, leaning
upon her Bridegroom; which Custom, says he, the Scripture seems to favor,
and so quotes our Text, Cant. 8.5. wherein he expresses himself but
conjecturally. But why should such places be called a Wilderness? says he,
either because they were Champain dry Grounds; Or however, be the places what
they will be, this is certain, says he, that by this ceremony God would mind
them of his bringing them from the Wilderness of the Land of Egypt; in this
he expresses himself dogmatically. It is an excellent Reason that he
renders, and his Improvement is answerable; supposing the truth of the story,
which I would readily do, did I but know that the Authority of the Relator (
who is (...)) were like the Reciters, whose praise is in all the Churches.
Which Custom, if supposed with the reason assigned, does yet leave me a
sufficient groundwork to the ensuing Discourse, for who knows not that the
Wilderness of the Land of Egypt is a clear type of the Desolate state of
sinners by reason of sin, even as the House of Egypt is of their bondage under
Satan? Else what enforcement lies upon Us (who never were, we, or our fathers,
in that Egypt literally taken, or in that Pharaohs house of Bondage) to keep
the Commandments, from that preface to the Decalogue, I am the Lord thy God
that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage? etc.

But I have rather judged those two Scriptures, as I have laid them together,
to expound each other. Inasmuch as it is evident, that (though Hoseah
Prophesied before the Captivity, and Ezekiel in it, who being nearer the
deliverance sees more into the method of its accomplishment, yet) both Prophets
do de industria declare the self-same Restoration. Says Hoseah, There will I
comfort them, etc. Says Ezekiel, There will I accept them, there will I accept
you with a sweet savor, v. 40, 41. But what is the Order of the fulfilling of
these Promises? Why, Their Consolation comes after Conversion, v. 37, 38. I Will
bring you (by causing you to pass under the rod) into the bond of the
Covenant, and I will purge out the Rebels, and them that transgress. And this
their Conversion, how comes it but by Conviction? ver. 35, 36. I Will bring you
into the Wilderness of the people, ( which, according to Expositors, is to be
understood of their Oppressors, who were unto them as a thorny Wilderness) and
there will I plead with you face to face, like as I pleaded with your Fathers
in the Wilderness etc. (i. e. until you remember your ways and your doings
etc. and loath your selves etc. verse. 43.) And who knows not that the times of
Wildernesse-dispensations, i. e. sad providence (spiritual, or outward, or
both) are usually the Seasons wherein God fastens Conviction? or that
conviction must of necessity be in order to Conversion, and Conversion to solid
Consolation; And thus whom he allures into this Wilderness, he does and will
speak comfortably unto.

The Last is the Wilderness of Protection, and preservation, Rev. 12.6. And
the Woman fled into the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God,
that is, for her shelter and security. For though the Wilderness properly so
called be the habitation of Dragons ( Isa. 35.6, 7.) and deserts (as was said)
be Demoniack places, yet here you have the Church secured from the Dragon by a
Wilderness, but it is a place of Gods own preparing.

Now of these several sorts of Wildernesses, The two first, viz. local, fall
not under the notion of good or evil, morally considered.

The two last which I mentioned, are evidently good, and the soul is rather led
into them, than out of them, by leaning upon the Beloved.

The Third and the Fourth, viz. Personal and Penal, are evil, but not in
every respect evil; for as the persons of sinners are the creatures of God,
and the punishments of sinners are the Administrations of God, they are Good.

But then the Fifth, viz. The Wilderness of sin and of Unconversion is
(omnimodo et per se) purely, primarily, intrinsically, of it self, and in every
respect, evil; for it is sin only that makes any people a Wilderness unto God,
and the Providence of God, a Wilderness unto any people.

Now then since SIN is the worst WILDERNESS, and JESUS the best JOSHVAH; and
since it is only by JESUS that we are saved from SIN, and primely from SIN,
that we are saved by JESUS ( Mat. 1.21.) and only by LEANING (Jsa. 51.5. My
salvation is gone forth, and on mine arm shall they trust) I say only by
leaning that we are saved by him Therefrom, I have not doubted to adhere to
the sense of the Text rendered and prosecuted in the subsequent treatise.

I have done, Only let the Reader instead of [Wildernesse-sin] (the Compositors
compound, who was either too penurious of pains, or too pregnant of fantasy)
Read [into the Wilderness, and into sin] Chap. 1. Contents, so [in the
Wilderness, and in sinne] Chap. 2. Contents, and so toties quoties; know also
that in the first two sheets (which indeed are worst done not only through the
unaccustomednesse of the Compositor, but even through mine own inadvertency,
who little intended those sheets for the Press when I first wrote them; and,
through providence, wanted the opportunity of revisall before they passed the
Press,) my character for verse. was mistaken, and so Chapter put for verse.
where more vers^s than one of a Chapter are quoted after each other. As also
these two Scriptures Jer. and Isa. compared, are both translocated unto the end
of the second Chapter, where they should not be read.

Other Erratas, such as trouble the sense, are referred to their Table to be
there inserted, such as trouble not the sense, (with some pseudographies, and
mispointings of the Compositors) to thine ingenuity, to be overlooked.

Now if thou reap any fruit of my poor endeavors, let God have thy praises,
who only deserves them, and let me have thy prayers, than whom none can more
need them, who am

The most unprofitable of the servants of Jesus Christ, FAITHFUL TEATE.

ERRATA.
PAge 4 line 11. read, self justiciaries most expressly. p. 10. l. 15. r.
Conviction. p. 13. l. 27. r. hell bound. p. 23. l. 4. after thereby, insert
Can. 5.1. p. 70. l. 31. r. desirous of. p. 77. l. 10. r. by slacking. p. 87. l.
26. for heart. r. hour. p. 112. l. 28. for word. r. world. l. 31. r. refuse my.
p. 136. l. 34. r. (...). p. 137. for a friend r. afraid p. 141 r (...) l.
10.11.12. Methods. Managers. Rulers p. 154. l. 28. r. cries the man did so and
so. p: 148. l. 7 r: (...). p. 201. l 4. r. viz. Declining of p. 229. l. 1. for
and r. est p. 260. l. 7. r. sovereign p. 264. l. 3. r. it is not. p. 275. l.
12. r. leaving. p. 279. l. 24. for shining. r. sinning. p. 337. l. 25. for
ways r. naies. p. 339. l. 20. dele if. p. 355. l. 26. r. third Negative
Hindrance. p. 385. l. 24. r. beautiful. p. 412 l. 25. for and r. that p. 430.
l: 30. r. Psa. 49. p. 432 r. (...) p. 434. l. 2: r. carelessenesse. p. 440. l.
9: r. is Pioner p. 445. l. 28. r. This therefore.

CHAP. I. Contains the Preface, sense of the Text, reasons of the sense,
Inscription and parts of the discourse, proofs of the first Doctrine,
Explication and Application of it in the first branch; showing the entrance
into wilderness-sin to be fair and facile.
Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, Text.
leaning upon her beloved? (the Text runs on) I raised thee up under the
apple tree, there thy mother brought thee forth that bare thee. Cant. 8.5.
THis Book is called The Song of Songs, Preface.
then which is none more Rhetorical, none more Spiritual, teaching the soul to
know Christ, and it self, its whole duty: The whole business of the Canticles
is to set forth what Christ is to the gracious Spirit, what the soul is to
Christ; particularly what, Christ is in himself, what the soul is in it self;
what Christ has done for the soul, what the soul ought to do for Christ; what
affections there are in Christ to the soul, what affections there ought to be
in the soul to Christ.

This Scripture imports in what condition the soul is without Christ, in what
she is stated by Christ; The sense of the Text.
she is bewildred in her self, she comes out of the wilderness leaning upon
Christ; That a sinful, natural, unconverted condition is here figured by the
wilderness, I urge from these three Particulars in the words.

First, Reasons of the sense.
(Her coming up from the wilderness) is made the direct, immediate, primary
result and effect of her leaning upon Christ: I grant, coming out of the
wilderness of misery or affliction, to be also the issue of leaning upon
Christ, but that is secondary, and because of the former.

The holy Ghost allusively, but lively, expresses our state of unconversion; I
raised thee up under the Apple Tree; as if he said, first Eve, and after her
Adam ea^ of the Apple, and fell down dead under the tree (and so true was that,
In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die) and there they must have
lain to Eternity, unless [I] who am the resurrection and the life, had raised
them up from under the Apple Tree.

3. The holy Spirit does interpret his intent to be the natural estate in which
every son and daughter of Adam is born (there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.) This premised,

You see my work is Topographical to draw out the Map of the wilderness in the
Text, the wilderness of unconversion: The first thing will be to assign it an
inscription, Inscription.
before we give it a description; you may find the title of this Map, Exodus
17.1. so Numb. 33.12. The Israelites if they intend for Canaan, must journey
from the wilderness of Sin: You Will say that name was accidental, I grant it, but
if Canaan represent grace, why may not the wilderness represent sin? It would
be our wisdom to warm our affections with every Scripture, even Historical,
though they do not all alike strongly bind our judgments: I mean, when the
allusion is nothing contrary to the analagy of Faith; I find a place as
accidentally called Salem, as this wilderness Sin, which yet the Apostle
improves as high and higher then I do this, even to prove Christ to be the King
of peace; compare Genesis 14.18. with Heb. 7.2.

The wilderness of sin.
We have found out the inscription, It Is the wilderness of sin, and so call it.

In the Maps that I have seen of the wilderness, which the children of Israel
passed from to Canaan, these four things I have observed, Parts of the
discourse.
which (God-willing) I shall follow: 1. You have a character of the place,
situation, trees, wild beasts, length, breadth, etc. and this engages me to
describe punctually this wilderness of sin. 2. You have lines describing all
the circuitions, windings, turnings, returnings, crossings, wanderings of the
children of Israel in the wilderness, before they could get to Canaan; and this
engages to describe the souls wanderings, while in this wilderness of sin. 3.
You have Moses described upon Pisgah, turning his back upon the wilderness and
pointing toward Canaan; this engages me to discover what concernment lies
upon the sin-bewildred soul to turn its back upon sin, and set its face toward
Heaven. 4. You have Joshua succeeding Moses, and leading the Israel of God
quite from the wilderness into Canaan; and that engages me to tell you, That
what the Law could not do (in that it was weak) That God sent his own Son to
do, even Joshua which is Jesus, that he might turn us thoroughly from the state
of nature, and conduct us unto grace: Indeed Moses represents our misery
whilst in the wilderness, and points us out to a better condition; The Law is
our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. but Christ our Savior to
bring us unto God: According to which four concernments of the Map, you have
these four observables in the words, naturally, I think, arising and clearly
founded upon the words.

That sin is a wilderness.

That a sinful condition is a bewildred condition.

That it is the great concernment of the bewildred soul to

That there is no saving way of coming up out of the wilderness

In the first, You have the wilderness appearing.

In the second, You have poor Israel wandering.

In the third, You have Moses (on Pisgah) pointing.

In the fourth, You have Joshua (that is, Jesus) leading.

For the first, D. 1. Sin is a wilderness.


Sin is a wilderness, Canticles 3.6. Who is this that comes out of the
wilderness like pillars of smoke (in allusion to Isreal's cloudy pillar)
perfumed with all the precious spices of the Merchant? i. e. The soul
interested in all the merits, and adorned with all the graces of Christ, is
said to come up out of the wilderness; surely the wilderness of sin, Psalm
74.14. Proofs.
You have the accomplishment of the promise made to Christ, Genesis 3.15. viz. the
breaking of the Serpents head, and this (says the Psalm) for a people
inhabiting the wilderness; surely he means poor Converts, souls that being once
in the wilderness of sin, were under the power, and in the Region of Leviathan,
the crooked Serpent Satan, Luke 15.4.5, 6, 7. Christ has a 100 that ate of the
flock of Creation; one sees his need of Christ in his lost condition, the other
99 need no repentance; Christ regards the poor lost undone single soul, the
other he leaves in the wilderness, chap. 4. that is, To die in their sins, as
he expressly tells them, John 8.21. He means both of the self-justiciaries; more
especially, Ephesians. 6.11. That ye may stand, (...), against the bewildrings of
Satan, our Translation reads wiles: A wily man is one whom you know not where
nor when to have; he is sometimes this way, sometimes that, sometimes neither
of them both; and thus is sin a wilderness.

Sin, wherein a wilderness.
Sin is like a wilderness from first to last.

1. The first view and entrance into both, being fair and facile.

2. The passage and progress in both, dismal and destructive.

3. The coming out of both difficult, and as to us desperate.

1. Demonst. The entrance and first view fair and facile.
1. The entrance and first view is fair and facile, ready to tempt, and apt to
deceive: The view of a flourishing Forest upon the shore from the sea, is
pleasant and delightful, promising variety of pleasant walks and refreshing
shades, and seemingly quiet and secure, no noise or roaring of the wild
beasts, nor howlings of the Dragons is to be heard; whatever there is within,
nothing appears without in view, but pleasures and security: And these two may
be thought to be the great temptations of the wilderness to draw men in.

1. Seeming pleasures are th^re.
First, Seeming pleasures, Jer. 23.10. The land is full of adultery, and because
of swearing it mourns; the pleasant places in the wilderness are dried up:
There are pleasant places in the wilderness as to appearance, that tempt poor
creatures into the wilderness, seeming pleasure in adulteries, drunkenness, and
so forth.

Secondly, The wildernesses men take to be secure places, 2. Seeming security
is there also. Sam. 4.19.
before they try them: The poor Germans, and other nations in time of public
danger and calamity, to fly the enemy, have taken the Forests, and there have
been destroyed of wild beasts: You know, men if they desire to speak what they
would not have heard, or to do what they would not have seen, be take
themselves into Woods, Forests and Wildernesses, as accounting them secure; and
surely wildernesses of Gods appointing are secure places, witness Rev. 12.6.
however it fares with other wildernesses.

You see the two great temptations which make men love sin before they try it:
1. The pleasures of sin a temptation to sin.
pleasures and security appear in the face of this wilderness of sin, what ever
lodges in the heart.

The first temptation carries the semblance of pleasure in sin; sin ever deals
like a deceitful cheat, who sets the best side outward; just so does the
wilderness, Heb. 11.25. They are called The pleasures of sin for a season; for
the season while you hear them speak; O they promise you pleasures for the
season you look upon them, before you thoroughly make trial of them: Oh! they
look like pleasures, pleasures for a season; just such is the wilderness, irs
that brings sin its guests, Prove. 7.16. I have decked my bed, says sin; hence
Paul, Tit. 3.3. We our selves also were foolish, serving diverse lusts; (why?)
he intimates, because they took them for pleasures, and expresses, because
they were deceived; says he, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures.

The second temptation into sin is security: 2. The pleasures of sin backed
with security.
Men run into sin farther and farther, that God, Law, Conscience, Terror, may
not find them, may not see what they do, may not hear what they say, Psalm,
10.9. You have a wicked man compared to a Lion (a wilderness beast) He
croucheth like a Lion, Chap. 10. He says, God will not see, chap. 11. wild
beasts in the wilderness have courage because it is their place of security; so
sinners, Psalm. 64.5. They encourage themselves in an evil matter (the reason is
their security, for) they say, Who shall see them?

But what? Will the wilderness answer these expectations? Oh! certainly no;
Instead of pleasures, behold thorns instead of security, a Lions den: This is
the deceitfulness of the wilderness, and this is the treachery of sin.

1. Instead of pleasures thorns.
First, A man expected pleasant walks, but finds nothing but thorns, Judge. 8.7.
you have mention of flesh torn with the thorns of the wilderness; and I believe
experiences can tell you, of consciences torn with the thorns of sin, chap. 16.
with the thorns and with the briers of the wilderness, says the Text, he
taught the men of Succoth; so God will teach thee (O sinner) with the thorns of
sin one day, what it is to sin, Hos. 2.2. I find the Church was a wilderness
in the day she was born, and I find her running again into the wilderness,
chap. 3. she does it upon great hopes of great advantage, chap. 5. she meets
with nothing but an hedge of thorns, chap. 6.

2. Instead of security, a Lions den.
Secondly, Poor men by running into a wilderness, think to avoid merciless men,
and they fall among merciless beasts; so in sin, they think by drinking, or
whoring, or swearing away conscience, or the like, to avoid an angry
conscience, and alas fall among Lions; the roaring Lion on the one hand, the
sin-revenging Lion of the tribe of Judah on the other, and so come to be torn
to pieces: The young man thinks to escape the good man, Prove. 7.19. bur yet is
cast down and slain by the woman, the woman sin, chap. 26. I find a precious
Scripture, Cant. 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon (my spouse) with me from
Lebanon; look from the top of Amanah, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from
the Lions den, and from the mountains of the Leopards: Its the call of the soul
by Christ, when the soul is upon the pinnacle of temptation, it looks upon sin,
and thinks it the most pleasant thing in the world, like Lebanon, like Hermon
and Shenir, which among the Hebrews were like the Baiae, the pleas^ntest of all
pleasant places; but Christ gives it another Character then she thought of. Oh!
says he, Though you take them to be thus pleasant, yet let me assure you, the
Lions den, and the mountains of the Leopards are there: And suppose, I pray
you, a man were in a paradise (as the case is now with us) Oh! how would a
Lions den, or a Leopards mountain dash to pieces all thoughts of pleasures and
security!

And therefore by way of Application.

If sin be thus like a wilderness, promising pleasure, Application
producing pain, promising security whilst it stirs up Lions:

Oh then! First, Look off of sin least it tempt, Cant. 4 8. look from Shenir,
look from the top of Hermon, Look off of the wilderness of sin.
do nor too much loook upon it, because it looks so like a Lebanon: Oh! that
men could be persuaded to look off from sin, when sin looks upon them; there
can no good, Pro. 4.25, 26.
but much evil, proceed from wanton and unwarrantable feeding of the eye with
sin.

Be not so foolish as to be deceived to serve lusts, counting

Secondly, Never believe sin as long as you live; Never believe sin when it
flatters.
The wilderness is a lie, fair without, thorns within, Psalm 4.2. How long will
you love vanity and seek after lies. Selah. That is, observe it, observe it
(beloved) every sin is a lie. Be not, O be not therefore so vain as to seek
after lies, never believe a liar when he speasts fairest.

CHAP. II. Contains the progress in wilderness-sin dismal, Lecture 2.
destructive; of the second branch of the first Doctrine, showing the
dismalness of wilderness-sin, in two things, because both are barren and
fruitless; dry and moistureless.
WE come in the second place to the passage and progress in the wilderness and
sin; The passage and progress in both, dismal and destructive. 1. It is dismal
in both we find them dismal and destructive.

First, The way of the wilderness is dismal, so is the way of sin.

The way of the wilderness is dismal in these several respects; it is fruitless,
moistureless, companionless, comfortless, wayless, and husbandless, and so is
the way of sin.

1. Fruitless.
First, The wilderness is barren and fruitless; you know the complaint Israel
made of the wilderness, Numb. 20.5. this evil place (say they) its no place of
seed, of figs, or vines, or of pomgranats; they do not deny but that it was a
place of brambles, and thorns, and briars, but no place of seed, grain or
fruits, figs or pomgranates: Just thus it is with the soul under the power of
sin, its barren and fruitless toward God; you cannot deny a sinful heart to be
a place of vanity, lust, excess and foolishness, but it is no place of seed, no
place for the word to thrive in; its no heart of prayer or thanksgiving,
obedience, faith, holiness, hope, love, goodness, righteousness, truth, which
are the fruits of the spirit, Ephesians. 5.9. But have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, chap. 11. men's works while they are in the state
of sin, are like the wilderness, unfruitful works: The wilderness (Beloved)
brings forth thorns, but a garden brings forth fruits, etc. we read, Gal. 5.19.
Of the works of the flesh; but of the fruits of the spirit, etc. v. 22. a
carnal heart brings forth works, but its only a spiritual heart brings forth
fruit: Now then, would thou know whether thou be in this wilderness? what
fruit do thou bear? speak conscience; the fruit of the spirit yea or no? (you
know the sinner is represented by the barren fig tree) if thou do not bring
forth fruit, the fruit of the spirit, thou art a bramble of the wilderness. I
will not deny the wilderness to be in some sense fruitful. I should wrong it if
I should, and so should I sin also; it is fruitful, so is sin, but how?

1. If fruitful.
First, The fruit that the wilderness bears is wild fruit.

Secondly, It bears all its fruit unto it self.

Thirdly, If it be fruitful unto any other, its rather to the Chimney then to
the Table, such is the fruit of sin.

Wild fruits.
First, Its fruit is wild fruits, ye know such fruits as naturally grow in
forests and woods, without grafting, planting or pruning, we use to call them
as they are, wild fruits; and truly all the fruits that grow upon the soul,
whilst its a tree in the wilderness, before grace has transplanted it, are
but wild fruits: The trees of the wilderness are but wild trees, wild
branches, wild roots, and therefore the fruit must needs be wild fruit; so in
sin,

The sinner himself is a wild plant, stark wild, root and branch, father and
son, at his first conception and throughout his conversation, Romans 11.17. Thou
being a wild olive tree were graffed in; and therefore certainly the fruit
must needs be like the fruit of the wilderness, Isa. 5.2. It brought forth
wild grapes; Ah! thinks the soul after conversion, how wild was I hitherto?
how vain, how foolish? how wildly did I use to pray? how wildly did I use to
carry my self in public duties? how wildly did I use to come to the
Sacraments? truly every fruit that grows upon the wild Olive Tree, is a
wild fruit.

Secondly, If the wilderness be fruitful, 2. Wilderness fruitful to it self.
it is fruitful to its self; there the fruit grows, there it ripens, there it
falls, pray who is the better for it? Thus it is with thee, O sinner, if thou
bear fruit, it is for thy self, God is never the better for it (as I may say)
he gets nothing by thy estate, he gets nothing by thy policy, he gets nothing
by thine industry, if thou can keep it; none of it promotes his cause, none
of it maintains his poor, none of it advances his praise; behold, Thou art the
man that art a wilderness to the Lord; thy good husbandry shall never save
thee, thy fruit lives and dies, grows and rots with thee; the Lord complains of
thee, Hos. 10. 1. Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to himself:
Though he be never so fruitful, yet is he empty, if only fruitful to himself;
though thou be never so like a fruitful garden, yet I will count thee a barren
wilderness, if only fruitful to thy self.

Thirdly, If the wilderness be fruitful unto men, 3. Wilderness brings forth to
the furnace
it is for fuel, not for food; for their chimney, not their table; the fruit of
the wilderness is thorns and briars, bad food but good fuel; such are the
fruits of sin, they are thorns, Cant. 2.2. As the lily among the thorns, that
is, the saint among sinners; such God will not set upon his table, but surely
put them into his furnace, Heb. 6.8. That earth which bears thorns and briars
(he speaks it of a sinful Apostate) is rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose
end is to be burned: Me thinks your souls within you should tremble: Tell me
now, what fruit do you use to bring forth, good or wild? Every tree that
brings not forth good fruit (it is a wilderness tree) shall be cut down and cast
into the fire, Mat. 3.10. Think again, to whom have thou brought forth fruit,
to God or thy self? If only to thy self, thou art still a wilderness, and you
know how God threatens Israel, who only looks after himself, his children,
and his own family, without any taking notice either of God, or Gods, Hos.
9.16, 17.10, 1. Oh! what will thou be able to answer God another day, thou that
have been a wilderness unto God here? when the Lord shall mind thee of all the
fruit which his mercy and providence has brought forth unto thee! Beloved, you
have a sad condition, Jer. 2.31. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? The
conviction is this, O Israel, thou have been a wilderness unto me, thou have
brought me forth no fruit; or if grapes, behold wild grapes: Have I been a
wilderness unto thee, that thou should so serve me? has not my Sun shined,
and my rain on thee fallen? O England, England, think of this; of all the
Nations of the world we cannot say the Lord has been a wilderness unto us, and
yet what a wilderness, what a barren wilderness have we that are called the
garden of the world, been to the Lord to this very day? O read Jer. 9.9, 10,
11, 12, 13. I fear the Lord means England there, If a sinner be fruitful, it is a
fruit unto death, Romans 7.5.

2. Wilderness dry and moistureless.
Secondly, The wilderness is dry and moistureless, so is sin, Psalm 107.35. The
wilderness and dry ground are made all one; so Jer. 50.12. A wilderness, a dry
land, Hos. 2.3. I Will make her a wilderness, and set her as a dry land, Zeph.
2.13. I Will make Ninevoh a desolation, and dry like a wilderness, and therefore
you have mention of the heath of the wilderness, Jer. 48.6. and 17.6. And so it
is with sin.

Our Savior compares a sinner under mercy, unto parched ground under seed, Mat.
13.6. good seed is sown in parched grounds, and for lack of moistures there it
dies; the dew falls upon parched grounds, and for lack of a principle of
moisture in themselves does them no good, the Sun shines upon them and
scorcheth them quite up. This word is to you, ye parched consciences, ye feared
sinners, from whose hard hearts and dry eyes, all the judgments of God,
mercies of God, Gospel of God, cannot squeeze one tear of godly sorrow. Oh! how
has the Lord in these times crumbled the scorched consciences of men to
pieces, yet how few are melted? The Lords people are a melting people, Psalm
22.14. My heart is like wax, it is melted within my bowels, a great difference;
their heart is like wax, other men's like the wilderness: The more the Sun
shines upon the wax, the more it softneth it; the more it shines upon the
wilderness, the more it scorcheth and hardens it: Now speak soul, Art thou like
wax under a judgment, a mercy, a sermon? or art thou like a wilderness? Have
thou a relenting, giving, mourning, melting heart? or art thou as hard, as dry,
as parched as ever, or more then before? thou art a wilderness, thou may
find thy character, 1 Timothy 4.2. Thy conscience is a seared conscience; and
what do men do with feared Trees? Hew them down, says the owner, why cumber
they the ground? if fear-wood be fit for the furnace, surely such seared
consciences are fit for hell. A Chymicks Limbeck they say, will extract
moisture out of seared sticks and hardest stones: Gods Limbeck will melt thee,
O thou seared sinner, whether thou will or no; time shall come, that the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, then shall the wilderness melt, even thy
soul, Jer. 9.12. compared with Isaiah 35.1.

CHAP. III. Contains the Explication of the third and fourth consideration,
showing the dismalness of wilderness sin, because solitary and companionless,
desolate and provisionless.
3. Wilderness solitary.
THirdly, The wilderness is solitary and companionless, so is the wilderness of
sin: This wilderness is companionless, mistake me not, I do not say its void of
passengers, but void of company; there are upon this road too many catch-poles
and cutthroats, as you shall hear more when we come to open the
destructiveness of the way; there are not wanting Lions, and Leopards, and
Dragons, and Bears, and Wolves, and wild Boars, and wild Bulls, but there is
no company for a man, as Job 38.26. It is termed The wilderness where there is
no man: There you may meet with beasts, savage beasts, that make it their
business to destroy one another, and thee too; but says the Text, There is no
man there: So in the ways of sin, you may meet with Devils and Drunkards,
Whoremongers, Sabbath Breakers, Murderers, Thieves and Hypocrites, that make
it their business to destroy one another souls, and thine too, but thou shall
meet with no good company to comfort thee, to direct thee, No God. Psalm. 5.4.
No Christ or Spirit. 2 Cor, 6.15. No Angel. Psalm 34.7. No Saint. Genesis 49.6.
to secure thee, no not in all the wilderness; no God, no Christ, no holy
Spirit there, no good Angel, no Saint so far as sanctified: Oh! what dismal
traveling is here, here is scrieching of Owls, and the howling of Dragons, the
roaring of Lions, the bellowing of Bulls, the yelling of Wolves, but not the
voice of one Man; here is roaring, and swearing, and lying, and cursing, and
blaspheming, and backbiting, and evil-speaking, but not a prayer, not a
thanksgiving, not a gracious word: Oh! think what a terror it would be unto you
to travel amongst wild ravenous beasts all your days; such are sinners,
scriprure usually terms them so, Lions and Bulls of Bashan, wild Boars of the
forest, wild Asses of the wilderness, Beasts of Ephesus, they are called
(...), Romans 1.31. that is Brutes, and so expressly construed, 2 Pet. 2.12. Brute
beasts made to be destroyed; so Jude 10. O Saints, since through the Lords
grace (I scarce can imagine how) we live by them without being destroyed of
them; O let us have as little converse as possible, no sinful converse with
them, lest we be destroyed with them; Men do not use to converse with wild
beasts, except upon an advantage to tame them: Converse thou as little as is
possible with sinners, unless upon opportunity to convert them. Homo homini
lupus, one man is a wolf to another, a proverb most true in that sense which is
most spiritual. Thus is sin a wilderness, a way for beasts and not for men. How
desolate and dismal are thy paths, O sinner? you have this character of the
wilderness with the former, Jer. 9 12. A wilderness burnt up, that none passes
through: you say that is a dangerous ill road indeed, where there is never an
honest man upon the way. O how solitary and wretched is the way of sin then?
where there is never a good passenger, none but roaring Lions, and ranging
Leopards, and the like; I abhor that profane spirit of that godless proverb,
Spiritus Calvinisticus spiritus melancholicus, as if a pure spirit must needs
be a dumpish spirit: Let me tell thee, O profane heart, believe it if thou will, a Christians heart is usually fullest of joy, when his eyes are fullest
of tears: Can thou think him Melancholic that has so good company
heavenward, whilst thou art so jovial amongst thy dismal hell-bounded
companions? But and if he weep, may not thou tremble? If he be pensive that
is coming up out of the wilderness leaning upon Christ, in the company of the
Father, in the fellowship of the Spirit, in the Communion of Saints: O how
should thou be dismayed that art wandering in the wilderness, amongst Lions
and Leopards, and no company to rescue thee, to secure thee, or to guide thee?
Certainly if the Saint be over-pensive, its unbelief of this truth that makes
him sad; if thou be jovial, its thy dismal unbelief of this dismal truth that
makes the merry. 4. Wilderness desolate and provisionless.


Fourthly, The wilderness is desolate and comfortless, destitute and
provisionless, Isaiah 27.10. desolate like a wilderness, Jer. 12.10. a desolate
wilderness, Zeph. 2.19. A desolation like a wilderness: And God expressing the
extremity of judgment when it should be highest, threatens Israel that he
will make it desolate, yea, more desolate then a wilderness, Ezekiel. 6.14.

The wilderness is a desolation, destitute and provisionless, no housing, no
fire, no water, no bread, no clothing to be had, no not in all the wilderness;
if you light of any food at all, it is wild and unwholesome food, light and
windy food: The Ass of the wilderness is spoken of in scripture as feeding upon
the wind, Jer. 2.24. Thus the wilderness is provisionless, mistake me not, I do
not mean it is void of all provision, but that there is no comfortable,
convenient, wholesome, substantial provision: For the wild Asses and savage
Beasts there is accommodation, but there is none suitable unto man; hear
Isreal's complaint made of the wilderness, Numb. 21.5. Wherefore have thou
brought us to die in the wilderness, for there is no bread, neither any water,
i. e. according to their dialect (for they did use to put bread and water, and
sometimes water only for all manner of comfortable accomodations, as in that
Scripture, Genesis 37.22. v. 2. compared with Zach. 9.11. now say they, In this
wilderness here is neither bread nor water; Manna they had, but that they
accounted a light bread. What they in the ingratitude and hardness of their
hearts said of that Manna, we may truly say of this spiritual wilderness, here
is neither bread nor water, i. e. no true substantial comfort, and our souls
may loathe the light bread. Beloved, we may say of the wilderness of sin, That
it has no food at all for us; I confess, if we will be beasts (as
Nebuchadnezzar was turned to be) then the wilderness can produce food for us;
and upon the account of this truth, I dare affirm that that soul that takes up
a resolution to live upon sin, may take up a resolution to become a beast:
What Is an unclean person that lives upon lust, better then a wild goat? What
other is a drunken gluttonous person that lives upon excess, then a swine? What
difference 'twixt a crafty covetous wretch, and a serpent of the wilderness,
that goes upon its belly, and feeds upon the dust? What Is a persecutor that
feeds upon the blood of Saints, better then a Lion that feeds upon the blood of
Lambs? What is a roaring, swearing, ranting wild sinner, better then the wild
ass of the wilderness that snuffs up the wind at her pleasure? If you will live
upon such diet, you must turn beasts; but if you will be men, you must look
after higher provisions then the wilderness can afford you. The bread of the
wilderness is light bread, thy soul must loath it: All the provisions that the
sinner by sin makes for himself, are wilderness provisions, Eccles. 5.16, 17.
He laboreth for the wind all his days, he eats in darkness: The food that he
takes all his labor and pains about (in the travel of sin) it is at best windy
food: Oh! Isaiah complains of sinners sadly upon this occasion, Isaiah 55.2.
Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not? If we had only bodies, sin happily might
satisfy us, though its meats be but light and empty provisions; but we have
souls, and souls will not be satisfied with such light bread; I appeal to all
your consciences, were ye ever yet satisfied at a feast of the wilderness? I do
not ask you, were you ever filled? I know this windy meat can fill, and clog
and burden, but satisfy it cannot: And hence it comes to pass, that as its
said of the children of Israel, the longer they continued in the wilderness,
the more their carkases should waste, Numb. 14.33. Your carkases shall waste,
and you shall fall in this wilderness, and you shall wander forty years, until
your carkases be wasted: So this is Gods dismal doom, upon impenitent sinners,
the Lord suffers them to live many a year, and the longer they live, the more
do their souls waste, till they come at length to be quite spent in sin, and
then they fall in the wilderness. Men that live upon sin, the longer they live,
the leaner and more carkase-like do their souls grow: Have you not seen some
Colchester carkases, so spent and wasted for want of provision, that although
they were not quite dead, yet their hands were faint, their knees were feeble,
so far spent, that they were grown quite mindless of food, they had not a
tongue to ask it of the passers by, not a mouth or stomach to receive it: Oh!
thus it fares with poor sinners, that have fed out their time in the wilderness
of sin; at length they have not so much as an hand or a foor, or a heart to
strive, they have not so much as a tongue to beg, or a mouth to receive any of
those provisions, that the Lord has made for poor souls in Jesus Christ: Thus
is the wilderness provisionless as for food.

As for raiment what you have, the wilderness, the thorns, the brambles can
rend away, and tear from you, but all the wilderness cannot help you with one
garment; So it is with sin, if you have any clothes on any good parts or good
nature (as they call it) the thorns, and brambles, and temptations of sin can
tear them off (Oh! how many gallant parts and good natures has sin rent to
pieces?) but if you be naked, you must walk naked for all sin; sin can strip
you, but it cannot clothe you; you are all naked whilst you are bewildred,
Ezekiel. 16.8. and there is none to help you: Therefore till you come out of the
wilderness leaning upon Christ, and have gotten him up on whom you lean, to
cast his skirt over you, you walk naked, and God sees your shame; there is no
raiment to be had for the soul, but only where Christ keeps his Markets, Rev.
3.18. and so for other accommodations; all which being thus, makes me sadly
say, Sin is a wilderness, that is, provisionless: O how evil is sin to men? and
which is saddest of all yet, yet are men kind to sin; Sin cannot feed you, and
yet speak your consciences, do not most of you feed sin, and cherish, and
nourish sin? sin cannot clothe you; O what shall become of those men for their
courtesy that cover sin? In a word, sin cannot make provision for you;
therefore I beseech you close with the Apostles counsel, Romans 13.14. Make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

CHAP. IV. Contains the two last considerations showing the dismalness of
wilderness-sin, because both are wayless, waste and husbandless: As also the
application of the first consideration: Exhortation, Labor to find Christ to
thy soul a Gardener to make thee fruitful.
FIfthly, The wilderness (as it thus provisionless, The wilderness is wayless
upon which account there is no encouragement to abide in it) so also is it
wayless, there is no way to get out of it: This, vain Poets could conclude as
the most dismal traveling in the world, viz. when they were to go per avia,
that is, wayless places; and this indeed the holy Ghost imports as alike dismal
to the people and princes of the earth, whom God thus punishes, Job 12.24. He
causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way: And thus it is
with sin; you are not to think that there are no ways in the wilderness; there
is (as you read) the track to the Lions den and Leopards mountain, there are
ways further into the wilderness, but there is no good way, no right way, no
way out again, no peaceable and secure way, etc. Thus there are many, too many
ways of sin and into sin, but there is not one good way amongst them all: Sin
acquaints sinners with ten thousand ways, and yet amongst them all, the way of
peace have they not known, Romans 3.17. The ways of sin are ways to the Lions
den, etc. Prove. 7.27. Her house is the way to hell, and Prove. 5.5. Her feet go
down to death, her steps take hold on hell: Least thou should ponder the path
of life, her ways are moveable; she has ways great store, but not so much as
one good living way, as one foot-path of life amongst them all; therefore (as
we are to show afterward) though sin has as many ways as the wilderness, yet
may we in the same sense that the holy Ghost calls the wilderness without way,
conclude sin wayless: If you will have it, the ways of sin are wayless ways; so
that as one says of the way to the Lions den: -- vestigia terrent
Omnia te adversum spectantia, nulla retorsum:
So says the holy Ghost of sin (many beasts went to the Lions den, but none
return back again) Prove. 2.19. None that go to her return again, neither take
they hold of the paths of life.

The wilderness is waste and husbandless.
Lastly, It Is dismal, because waste and husbandless, and so is the whole region
of sin; you have the wilderness and waste places as importing one and the same
thing, Isa. 51.3. The Lord will comfort all her waste places, and make her
wilderness like Eden; yea, you have waste the character of the wilderness,
Deuteronomy. 32.10. In a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness: and surely
it must needs be so, if that be true which we have heard Scriptures already
speak, In the wilderness there is no man, Job 38.26. no man to plant, no man to
pluck up, no man to plough, no man to sow, how should it be but waste?

In this as in the rest is sin a dismal wilderness, there are no provisions
there, as you have heard, for it is desolate; there are none like to be, for it
is waste and desert: The plain English of the word desert is what God expounds
it, Isa. 27.10. The habitation forsaken and left like a wilderness; Therefore
when any soul through sin is a wilderness, you may write upon that soul desert,
the Lord has forsaken it. This is a sad consideration when the soul goes on a
long time in sin, and then God comes with a judicial act, and does (as it were)
bind it in its sins; The soul says, I am willing to be as a wilderness unto
God, unfruitful to him, etc. and God says, If thou will be a wilderness, thou
shall also be a desert, I will forsake thee: Thus God threatens for sin to set
Jerusalem, and make her as a wilderness, Hosea 2.2. Now this is most sadly
true, when the soul has been under the pains and charges of the Lord; as you
say, this piece of ground I have fallowed, plough'd, sown thus often, tried
thus long; and it has brought me forth nothing answerable to mine
expectations; I have lost, say you, my time, toil and cost about it, and now
you cast it up, So the barren Fig tree: Mat. 21.19.
(as God gave them up: Psalm 81.12.) Let what will become of it, you will never
look after it more. Now is this ground left DESERT.

Thus the Lord tells, Isai 5. what husbandry he had bestowed upon Israel, his
Vineyard, v. 7. which yet brought forth none but wilderness-fruit, viz. wild
Grapes, v. 4. I Will tell you, says God, v. 5. what I will do with it: I will
take away the Hedge, and it shall be eaten up, and break down the Wall, and it
shall be trodden down; I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned, nor dug;
but there shall come up Briars and Thorns, and I will command the Clouds that
they rain no rain upon it, v. 6. And O, what a dismal Wilderness must the soul
needs be, when the Lord shall thus forsake it! There is none to plant, prune,
or protect it; no word or spirit to water it; it must needs follow, that it
shall be laid waste, and eaten up, and trodden down, and nothing but Briars and
Thorns shall grow there. How sad instances hereof have we in some that have
lived long under Gospel-means, But are not thereby become as a Garden! Are they
not as a Wilderness? Yea, of all others the most sharp and thorny: and no
wonder, since they are left of the Lord, and desert.

Is it so then that the Wilderness of Sin is so dismal, because fruitless,
moistureless, companionless, provisionless, wayless, waste and husbandless? I
shall only improve this sad Consideration unto a double word of Exhortation,
respect being had unto the several particulars.

First, Are we, by sin, become barren as a Wilderness; Exhortation. Labor to
find Christ as a Gardener to thy barren soul to make it fruitful.
it is only by grace that we can be made like Eden; Isai 51.3. CHRIST is the
Gardener that can both furnish us with fruit, and make us bear fruit; for this
end he chooses the grounds he gard'neth. John 15.16. Of our selves we neither
have fruit for our selves, nor bring forth fruit to the Lord: but CHRIST gives
fruit, and makes fruitful: He is the Apple Tree, Cant. 2.3. He is the true
Vine, John 15.1. And yet the Dresser of the Vineyard, Luke 13.7. Our Wilderness
comes to nothing till it becomes his Husbandry. 1 Cor. 3.9. Our souls are not
comforted with Apples till we taste of his fruit. Cant. 2.3, 5. When we were in
Paradise, we were as a Paradise; it was fruitful to us, and we to God. Now we
are in the Wilderness, we are as a Wilderness; sin is fruitless to us, and we
to the Lord. The Tree of Life made Eden a Paradise; the River made it a
fruitful Paradise. We lost both when we lost our selves. There is now no Tree
of Life with us, to bear us fruit; nor Water of Life, to make us bear fruit.
But yet both are with Christ, Rev. 22.1, 2. And who so do his Commandments have
right thereunto, v. 14. Christ can set us with slips of Paradise: [Alas! who
would (as they Isai 17.10. be setting their hearts with strange slips?] thy
people shall be all righteous, the branch of my planting, the work of mine
hand, Isai 60.21. Yea, and that they may be called Trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord, that he may be glorified; As the Garden causes the
things that are sown in it to spring forth, so the Lord will cause
righteousness, and praise to spring forth before them. Isai 61.3, 11. Again,
Christ can replenish us with fruits of Paradise: [Alas! why should we savor
those fruits unto death? Romans 7 5.] from me (says the Lord) is thy fruit
found. Hos. 14.8. Even the twelve manner of fruits of the Tree of Life, (enough
for all the Tribes) and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the
Nations. Rev. 22.1, 2. Compare Ezekiel. 47 8.12. with Rev 22.1, 2.
Here Is food and physic, life and healing, for Jew and for Gentile; surely the
Wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them. Isai 35.1. When those
waters, Ezekiel. 47.8. Go down into the Desert. But what is the wilderness the
better that there are gardens in the world? Or we, that some strangers have
such rare plants, or choice fruits in remote countries? Christ has born, and
does bear fruits various and precious, old and new, such as wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, with fruits of joy and peace in
believing. Yea, his mediation, and the counsel of peace between him and his
Father; fruit as old as Eternity: his intercession, and tendering himself a
sacrifice for sin, as soon as we had fallen, as a Lamb slain from the beginning of
the world; fruit as old as the world: his incarnation, birth, circumcision,
temptations, sorrows, sufferings, death, burial, resurrection and ascension,
fruits above sixteen hundred years old: his word, his spirit, his daily
intercession and gracious dispensations, fruits as new as every day: These,
these are the fruits that Christ has brought forth, and unto which they have
right that obey his call, his command. Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse [is
his call] Cant. 4 8. Eat O friends [is his command] Cant. 5.1.

Now be not thou unmannerly modest or disobediently humble: take what is given,
and come when thou art called. Thou will be little the better though Christ be
a tree of life to others, unless thou come to Christ and feed upon him: Oh!
therefore be encouraged poor barren soul, to leave the desolate wilderness, and
to hasten thence ere thou perishest therein; why should unbelief detain thee
any longer from everlasting blessedness? for, Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, for these have right to the tree of life; and then will Christ's
fruit be sweet unto thy taste, as the Spouse asserteth, Cant. 2.3. and then,
and never till then will thou be able to say, My Lord and my God, my Savior and
my redeemer; for they only can truly call the Lord our Righteousness, our
Advocate, our Peacemaker, who can look upon all that Christ did as done for
themselves in particular.

Oh! what pleasant fruit is here laid up for the poor soul, that was barren and
fruitless as a wilderness even until now!

CHAP. V. Carries on the general Exhortation, Labor to find thy soul a
fruitful garden unto Christ, etc.
BUt secondly, 2. Labor to find thy soul as a fruitful garden unto Christ.
labor also to find thy soul to be a fruitful garden unto Christ; for though
the other do not depend upon this, but this upon the other, yet thou will
hardly find the other, till in some measure thou have found this: O it is a
sweet thing for the soul of a wilderness to be made a fruitful garden unto
Christ! Marvelously is Christ delighted with it; he speaking of the Spouse,
Cant. 7.7. thy breasts, says he, are like clusters of the grapes, and row also
shall thy breasts be as the clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose
like apples: Oh! when believers hearts and breasts are fruitful in holiness
unto Christ, how marvellously is he delighted? yea, then Christ delights (...)
them also, chapter 6. v 11.12. Let us get up early (says she) to the vineyards, to
see if the vine flourish, or the tender grape appear, or the pomgranate bud
forth, there will I give thee my loves: O there Christ also manifests much love
(his loves, that is all his love as 'twere) to the soul, when and where the soul
brings forth fruit unto Christ; when Daniel was praying, then comes out the
message, O Daniel, greatly beloved: when the soul acts faith, or zeal, or any
of the fruits of the spirit are budding forth, O then Christ takes great
delight in it, and therefore he observes and watches the souls fruit; God could
tell if Ephraim were but an empty vine; so Cant. 6.11. I went down (that is
Christ) into the garden of nuts (when Christ takes a nut-tree out of the
forest, and transplants it in his garden, makes a sinner a convert, then he
observes the fruit it brings forth) to see the fruit of the valley (that is of
the poor, penitent, lowly, humble heart) and to see whether the vine
flourished, and the pomgranates budded; that is, whether this and that, and the
other grace, faith and humility, and holiness, etc. flourished and brought
forth unto him: Therefore as Christ in the forequoted place calls the fruit of
his garden the Spouses, so the Spouse calls the fruit of her garden Christ's;
blow upon my garden, and let him eat his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16. If thou
would have evidence that Christ did in earth, and does in heaven bring forth
fruit unto thee, labor to find that thine heart, thy lips, thy life, do all of
them bring forth fruit unto Christ.

2. Labor to find Christ unto thy soul a river of waters of life.
Secondly, labor to find Christ a river of waters of life unto thy soul, since
thou have been hitherto moistureless, like a wilderness; when Israel was in the
dismal wilderness, where there was no water, Psalm 78.15, 16. the Lord clave
the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great depths; he
brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like
rivers: But what is this to me a sinner? may the soul say, Why? the Apostle tells
thee, this rock was Christ; these waters flowing out the rock, were streams
from Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. They drank of that spiritual rock that followed th^^,
and that rock was Christ: Christ is that river, the streams whereof make glad
the poor bewildred soul.

There are three sorts of streams (which O that you could find) flowing from
the Lord Christ: 1. 1. Stream of blood.
Labor to find the red stream of Christ's blood, Christ's satisfaction, and
justification, and reconciliation purchased thereby; this is there, as in many
other Scriptures, called Christ's wine, I have drunk my wine: Have thou by faith
seen this rock smitten by the Lords rod, and this red stream issuing out? Have
thou seen Christ's side lanced, and the blood streaming forth for thy soul? Have
thou seen this blood of the new Covenant poured forth for thee? Oh! how would
this stream make thy soul glad?

Secondly, 2. Stream of milk.
Labor to find the crystal stream of Christ's Spirit; by the other the soul is
counted righteous, by this it is made righteous: I know the sincere heart
desires as truly this as the other; the other is the fountain open for sin,
that is the guilt, the curse, the condemnation; this is a fountain open for
uncleanness, that is the defilement and pollution, and both is for the house of
David to wash in; this is there, as in other places, called Christ's milk; and
to show that Sanctification and Justification go hand in hand one with another,
therefore says Christ, I drunk my wine with my milk; though the wine be the
first, yet is it not without milky streams, but they go along with it: I cannot
but imagine but that in the order of nature, Christ Justifies before he
Sanctifies, and yet I believe he never justifies; but therewith he sanctifies,
as here wine first, yet wine with milk, even both together so we have, Isa.
55.1. the same order, and the same conjunction, Buy wine and milk without money
and without price; that is, my merits and my spirit shall be both yours, if you
close with me, though you deserve neither.

But thirdly, Labor to find yet other streams, 3 Stream of honey.
even honey streams from Christ in the Ordinances; this is called as often by
David before, so Cant. 5.1. Christ's honeycomb and his honey: Have thou then
found communion with Christ in prayer, hearing, reading, or the like, sweet as
honey, sw^eter also then the honeycomb? Can thou say as the spouse of
Christ, Cant. 4.13. His lips are like lilies (even like lilies) dropping sweet
smelling myrrh? Have those sweet streams from Christ's mouth flown down thus
upon thy soul? surely such floods cannot choose but make thee joyful in the
house of prayer.

2. To find thy soul a watered garden to Christ.
Now secondly, Labor to find thy soul a watered garden unto Christ: The soul
was in the wilderness, Cant. 4.8. and she becomes a garden, ver. 12. and in
this garden there are both springs and fountains, though both shut up and
sealed; that's for Christ's use they are reserved, who alone is found worthy to
open the seals.

1. The fountain of thine h^ad.
First, Then let the fountains of thine head be opened unto Christ, the streams
of thy lips, of thine eyes, thy words, thy tears, the working of thy brains,
let them all stream forth toward the Lord Christ; say as the prophet, O that
mine head were fountains, and mine eyes rivers of tears! Jer. 9.1. let it be
with thee as with David, Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because men keep
not thy law, Psalm 119.136. O that all our heads and eyes were as rivers
streaming toward Christ, and Christ only! O that our brains might work more
after, and more for Christ! We were as a moistureless wilderness before; let us
even in this sense become a watered garden now, Isa. 58.11.

2. Of thine heart.
Secondly, Let the fountains of thine heart be opened unto Christ: If God have
shed his love abroad in thine heart, shed now thy love abroad into Gods heart:
We were as a wilderness, we could scarce pour out words before God before, let
us now, Psalm 62.8. pour out our hearts before God, let all our affections,
desire, fear, love, joy, etc. stream forth toward God: Thus David poured out
his soul within him, Psalm. 42.4.

3. Of thy life
3 Let the fountains of thy life stream forth toward Christ, as the fountain
both of Christ's life and death to boot did flow out unto thee, whether you eat
or drink, or whatever you do, let all the streams of your lives run into the
channel of his glory. According to this threefold counsel, you have mention of
a threefold breaking out of waters in the spouse, Cant. 4.15. A founta^n of
gardens (there is one sort) a spring of living waters (there is another sort) and
streams from Lebanon, there is a third sort, that is, if I mistake not, one in
the head, another in the heart, a third in the conversation. The fountain of
the head waters the garden of the affections, the spring of the heart
enliveneth the fountains of the head, knowledge would otherwise be a dead
water; and now from both together, to wit, head and heart, there are streams
from Lebanon, that is, Knowledge and Grace flow forth as streams into the
conversation: You may therefore observe comfortably, that as Christ had spoken
high! before of the streams that flow from himself to the soul, so speaks he
exceeding respectively of the streams flowing forth from the soul toward him:
Hear what he says of the fountains of the head, Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as
the honeycomb, honey and milk are under thy tongue, Cant. 4 11. milk and honey
dropping, are the prayers and praises of his saints unto him: Hear what he
says of the fountains of the heart, Cant. 4.10. How much better is thy love
then wine? and as for the streams of her life, her self, Cant. 8.2. I would
cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomgranates.

Thirdly, If thy condition be solitary and companionless, 3. Labor to get
Christ's company.
like a wilderness, labor to find Christ a companion for thy soul, and thy
soul in some sort fit company for Christ.

First, If ever thy soul come from the wilderness, our Text says, it must be
by getting Christ to be thy companion: You have Christ offering his company to
the poor soul in the wilderness, Cant. 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon, the
lions den, etc. and over again, as if this should en^ice her, with me from
Lebanon, my Spouse with me from Lebanon: so she inticeth him, Cant. 7.11. let
us go forth; and verse 12. let us get up early: He proffers her his own
company, she him her company: Oh! who would not go along with Christ? You have
again the soul laboring to get Christ's company, and when she has got it, she
will not part with him: You have her seeking him, and following him, Cant. 3.1,
2. and when she has found him, verse 4. she holds him, and keeps his company,
and will not let him go; she could not rest till she had got his company, and
having gotten it, she can less rest when she has lost it, Cant. 5.6. I opened,
and my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone, 2. Labor to find the soul
company for Christ's.
and my soul failed.

Secondly, Labor to find thy soul as company for Christ and for God, that thou
may be able to say as they, 1 John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus: shall I tell you, you cannot more desire
Christ's company, then Christ does yours, Cant. 2.10. Rise up my love, my fair
one, and come away; and verse 13. rise up my fair one, and come way; yea, as if
he longed for her company: O my dove, let me see thy countenance, let me hear
thy voice, for thy countenance is comely, verse 14. O what a happy change is
this? amongst lions before wandering in the wilderness, Cant. 3 6. with 4, 8.
with Christ now lodging in the villages, 4. Labor to find Christ as a spread
table unto thy soul.
Cant. 7.11.

Fourthly, Since thou have been so long in a desolate and provisionless
wilderness, so that thy soul has been as a wasted carkase there: O labor now
to find Christ a Gardenbar quet-house, a spread table unto thy soul! I know
some poor unbelieving soul will be ready to judge its condition so desolate, as
not to think it possible that God should supply; and to say as the Israelites,
Psalm. 78.19. Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? but that Text tells
you, that they speak against God in so saying. Alas! here is a strong mistake;
the poor creature thinks it humility, and thinks he only speaks against
himself, when he cries out, Oh! my soul is so poor and destitute, and so like
to Pharaoh's lean kine, that I can never think that it can be furnished: Alas!
thou art deceived, thou speakst against God; it is Gods work to furnish a table
for thy soul in this wilderness, and I would have you to know, that all the
provision that Christ gathers in to himself, and has in himself, it is to bid
you welcome, with Cant. 2.4. He brought me into his banqueting house; and what
does he say then, I am come into my garden, I have gathered mine honeycomb
with mine honey, 2. Labor to find thy soul as a spread table unto Christ.
etc. eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly: O beloved! (all his
banquettings are for his friends, neither is he nigardly to his beloved) Can.
5.1.

Secondly, Labor to find thy soul as a spread table unto Jesus Christ;
Friends, it is not only as meat and drink unto Christ to do his Fathers will
himself, as himself says, but it is meat and drink to him to see you do it
also, Cant. 6.2, 3. My beloved is gone down to feed in the gardens (that is)
amidst the services or his people, and he feeds amongst the lilies, that is,
amongst the Saints; therefore says the Spouse, Let my beloved come into his
garden, and let him eat, Cant. 4.16. yea, so much is Christ delighted with such
food, as that he will rather bid himself to the souls table, then fail to be a
guest, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice and open unto me, I will come in to him, and sup with him.

Fifthly, 5. Find Christ a way out of the wilderness.
If thou have been in a wayless wilderness thus long, labor to find Christ a
way for thy soul to walk in, John 14.6. I am the way, no man comes to the
Father but by me; but of this more afterward.

Secondly, 2. Thy soul a way for Christ to walk in.
Labor also to find thy soul a way for Jesus Christ to walk in; this was the
Spouses great desire, Cant. 4.16. O, says she, awake north wind, and blow
south, and raise up my spices; and all to fit her for the incoming of her
beloved into her garden: Oh! happy, happy is that soul, that having been a
wilderness before, becomes a garden of walks unto Jesus Christ now.

Sixthly, If thou have been as a waste wilderness, 6. Find Christ husbanded
for thy soul.
and in a waste wilderness hitherto; O labor to find Christ Jesus husbanded
for thy soul! says Christ, John 15.1. I am the true vine, and my Father is the
husbandman: It seems Jesus Christ is husbanded, and I Will tell you how; God
suffered the plowers to plow long furrows upon his back, Psalm 129.3. yea,
Christ was willing to be husbanded, insomuch as the Lord himself seems unto me
to stand admiring at Christ, when he sees him so husbanded, and willing to be
so dressed, Isa 63.1. Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from
Bosrah? it was Christ, and how comes he to be red in his apparel? Why? he trod
the wine press alone, verse 3. this, if you respect his vengeance toward his
enemies, mentioned verse 4. may be understood as it is expressed, actively; but
if you will respect the coming of the year of his redeemed, mentioned also,
verse 4. it must be understood passively, and so this expression is, but
parallel to Isa. 53.4. he trod the wine press, that is, he was bruised in the
wine press, bruised for our iniquities: This is clear, if Christ be a vine, and
so husbanded in the yard; if this vine bring forth, and its fruit be husbanded
in the press, both are for the poor souls advantage.

2. Labor to be husbanded for Christ.
Secondly, Labor if thou have been a waste wilderness unto Christ thus long, now
to become unto him a well-husbanded garden all thy days.

Remarkable is that passage unto me, Cant. 8.11. Solomon had a vineyard, and he
let it out to keepers, and every one for the fruit thereof, was to bring a
hundred pieces of silver: If the soul be husbanded, it is for Christ; Christ
must have the rent, yea, and the soul will give it him too, Cant. 8.12. Thou, O
Solomon, (that is Christ) shall have a thousand, and the keepers of the fruit
(that is Christ's faithful Ministers) shall have two hundred. O that I could now
hear you cry out unto Christ, as the Spouse does, verse 13. Thou that dwell
in the gardens, the companions hearken unto thy voice, cause me to hear it:
Friends, this is Christ's voice which is hearkened unto by Christ's companions,
even this which you hear this day; you dwell in the wilderness, but Christ
dwells in the gardens, wherefore he calls you out of the wilderness to come
unto him, yea, he call; you from the wilderness to become unto him as a garden;
the Lord cause you to hear it.

CHAP. VI. Answers this Query, How may the soul of a barren, etc. wilderness,
become unto Christ a fruitful etc. garden? with many precious promises unto
wilderness-like souls.
ME thinks I now hear the soul sighing out this Query: Query, How to find
Christ a gardener, and to become a garden. Answ. By coming to and leaning upon
Christ.
I hear his voice indeed that dwells in the gardens; but how shall I be able to
find him a gardener unto me, that I may be a garden unto h m?

Poor soul! art thou in a wilderness? art thou a wilderness? I know no way to
help thee out of this condition, unless, as in the Text, thou come out leaning
upon Christ: It is touching Christ, taking of hold upon Christ, and Christ
alone, that can help thy poor soul: O Sirs! did you now but see where you are,
what flocking should we have after Christ this day? even as they in the days of
his flesh, that they might but touch the hem of his garment, Matthew. 14.36. for,
says the Text, as many as touched, were made perfectly whole; so say I, as
many as touch him, shall be perfectly changed from wildernesses into gardens;
so Mark 3.10. as many as had plagues pressed upon him for to touch him. Have
thou then the plague of a barren heart, a moistureless eye, a seared
conscience, a waste, carkase-like, lean, starving soul: O press after Jesus
Christ! They there were sensible of the plagues, because they were bodily
plagued; and our Savior was fain to have a ship to receive him, lest they
should throng him, Mark 3.9. but alas, the plagues are spiritual, and you do
not discern them; and therefore, though Christ be in the midst of you, yet who
presses amongst you to lean upon him? I shall briefly, according to the
present occasion, tell what I mean by leaning upon Christ.

Secondly, How you may take hold upon him in order to your finding him a
Gardener to you, and your becoming to him a fruitful garden, stored with the
plants of Paradise.

Which leaning imports four things. 1. A sense of thy wilderness like
barrenness, etc.
First, then leaning (briefly) imports four things:

First, Art thou sensible of thy being a wilderness, and that thou art not able
of thy self to stir toward a better state? else can thou not, else will thou
not lean upon Christ in order thereunto. A man that thinks his ground, his
heart, is well husbanded, will not care for Christ's being a vine, or Gods being
an husbandman; tell him of it, he will say, Pray then take him for your own; my
ground, I thank you, is well enough: Therefore it is the main observable in that
parable, Luke 15. where you have an hundred sheep in the wilderness, there is
one is a lost sheep, but all are bewildred, lost; what is that? why one that is
sensible thereof and not able to help himself, a sinner, a repentance-needing
sinner, verse. 7. the other are in the wilderness too, but they see it not; they
are just in their own eyes, they need no repentance, their way is so good, they
need not turn head (as many unconverted duty-mongers, and self-justifiers) the
Lord Christ leaves all these, though 99 in the wilderness, and takes care of
that poor lost sheep, and lays that upon his shoulder, and rejoices more in
that then in all the rest, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. O Friend! thou that art damned in
thy self, undone in thy self, in the midst of the wilderness, bewildred in sin,
in thy very duties, that can see nothing in thy self but a wilderness, thou
art the only fit man thus to improve Christ, and to be improved by Christ.

2. The discovery of a sufficiency in Christ.
Secondly, Leaning requires the discovery of a sufficiency in another; if the
soul be a wilderness, yet if it see not Christ to be an all-sufficient
redeemer, it will stay as it is, and not not care for changing: A man will not
lean, unless there be discovered a strength in that whereon he leans, suitable
to the end for which he leans upon it; that is a choice Scripture, persuading
and inviting poor wilderness-like souls to a change, Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in
me (says God) yet who would set briars and thorns against me in battle (if you
will be still a wilderness, and if this briery and thorny wilderness will still
stand out against me, and reject my gracious motions) I would go through them;
I would (says he) burn them together (if thou resolve to be a thorny
wilderness, he also will resolve to be a flaming fire) But as if his earnest
desire were, that it should be otherwise, see what he puts them upon in the
immediately following words, verse. 5. Or let them take hold of my strength
(that is Christ) who you know is Gods strength to believers; without whom God
will (I may say with reverence, as God stands covenanted) God can do nothing,
that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me; or let them (I
am much taken with the manner of expression) If they will fight, if they will
set up their briars and thorns against me, let them; then I will d^stroy them,
or let them (Oh! God had rather make peace then conquer, though he be sure of
victory) take hold of my strength; let them, that is (as we must needs take it
by reason of this particle (or let them) the briars and thorns take hold of my
strength: Why? what good shall they get by it? Why? they were as barren as
briars and thorns before; my strength (that is Christ, if they take hold on him)
shall cause them to take root, to blossom, to bud, to fill the face of the
world with fruits, ver. 6. What can thou, that see thy soul a wilderness,
desire more? Now I beseech you mark, if you would effectually take hold upon
Christ for such a change, from a thorny wilderness into a blossoming, budding,
fruitful garden, you must see Christ to be Gods strength, no^ only to make
peace for your souls, but to work fruitfulness in your souls

We have also another full Scripture, Isa. 51. God promises to turn the
wilderness into Eden, and the desert into his own garden: now how shall this be
effected? verse 4. you have Christ represented as a light to the people, verse
5. you have his plain names righteousness and salvation; but now how shall the
people share in such salvation as shall make them of a wilderness to become a
garden of the Lord? Why on mine arm (that is Christ) shall the isles trust: You
must then discover Christ to be that strength, yea, that arm of God, by which
the Lord turns the desert into Eden, or else, though you be a desert, you will
not care for leaning upon Christ. 3. Laying our burdens of barrenness, etc:
upon Christ.


Thirdly, Leaning imports the casting of our burdens of barrenness and
fearedness, etc. upon that strength whereon we lean: If you would then so lean
upon Christ, as to come up from your wilderness-like state, then you must lay
the burdens of your barrenness, your dryness, your desolateness, your
leanness, your wastness upon Christ; and verily to encourage you, you should
know that Christ was for this very business sent into the wilderness of this
world, that he might bear all the burdens of poor bewildred brokenhearted
sinners, Lev. 16.21. Aaron shall confess all the iniquities of the children of
Israel, and all their transgressions (that is their bewildrings, their goings
aside) in their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send
him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness; and the goat shall bear
upon him their iniquities, unto a land not inhabited, and he shall let go the
goat into the wilderness: How and if we should expound it thus? Christ in his
resurrection was this scapegoat, or his Divinity, in which he could not see
death, and by which he was rai^ed after death, though as man he was the
sin-offering goat, mentioned verse 15. Isreal's bewildrings (what else mean you
by transgressions?) are charged upon his score; from Israel he is sent by a fit
man (that's the Gospel-minister, who should be apt (that is fit) to teach this
Gospel) into a land not inhabited (so ordinarily are the Gentiles (in respect
of the then ordinances of God) represented) and there even in this wilderness
is he let go; this salvation is free to us a poor wilderness in respect of the
Jews, as well as to them: If I mistake in the place, I am sure I mistake not in
the thing; you sinners, says my Text, are in the wilderness; and Christ the
scapegoat (says that Text) is there also, if you meet him, lay your burdens
upon him (I speak to such as are lost) his business, his errand in coming
thither, is to bea^ your transgressions, Isa. 53.4. Surely he has born our
griefs, and carried our sorrows, yea, upon him they are, ver. 5. yea upon him
the Lord has laid them, ver. 6. Art thou unable to carry thine own grievances,
and to bear thine own barrenness? fear not, 4. Receiving streng^h from Christ
(...) a change.
only believe, lay them in the humility of thy soul upon thy Savior; he will,
he can bear them for thee.

Lastly, Leaning imports a deriving of strength and power from that upon which
we lean, in order to that upon which we lean; Would you then so lean upon
Christ as to come out of your wilderness? Take hold upon Gods strength so long,
till your briars and thorns be rooted up, and the word have taken a new root,
brought forth new buds, new blossoms, new fruit, Isa. 27.5, 6. yea, till thy
whole conversation be filled therewith.

Oh! but (says the soul) how shall that be? that is it I would have; Oh! how
should I so lean upon Jesus Christ. I cannot see him, I cannot find him, I
would come out of the wilderness leaning upon him? yea I sought him, but I
found him not; Oh! saw you my beloved? whither is he gone? whither is he turned
aside?

Poor soul! thy beloved is gone down into the gardens, Isa. 51.3. The Lord
shall comfort Zion; how is that? Oh! there is comfort indeed, the Lord will
make her wilderness like Eden; this word be spoken unto you, O ye
wilderness-like souls; and what can comfort you, if this word do not? Before
you had Gods strength mentioned, here you have it engaged, lean therefore and
take hold upon it, Isa. 35.1. The wilderness shall be glad, it shall rejoice
even with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, the
excellency of Carmel and Sharon; how is that? they shall see the glory of the
Lord: and what then? strengthen then the week hands and feeble knees, etc. Who
sees not that this is spoken to poor souls, to wilderness-like souls? so the
Psalmist, speaking of Gods turning the wilderness into a standing water, and
dry ground into water springs, Psalm 107. cries out, verse. 36. and there he
makes the hungry to dwell, etc. souls that are not only lean, but hungry; not
only such as are in misery and lost, but that see their misery; there he makes
them to dwell in happpiness and plenty, verse 37.38.

1. Promises to the barren wilderness.
But more particularly thou complainest thou art a barren wilderness, and thy
souls desire is to be made a fruitful garden; urge those promises, Isa. 35. the
desert shall blossom as a rose (there is the quality, it shall blossom sweetly)
ver. 1. and as for quantity, it shall blossom abundantly, ver. 2. and in the
habitation of dragon, where each lay, shall be grass, ver. 7. Isa. 27.
whosoever take hold of his strength, he shall cause them to take root, to
blossom, to bud, to fill the face of the world with fruit, verse. 6. Psalm 107.
there (that is in the wilderness) he makes the hungry to dwell, ver. 36. and sow
fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield their increase.

2. Promises to the dry wilderness.
Thou complainest thou art a dry and seared wilderness; others can weep for
their sins, thou can not; others can mourn for the afflictions of Joseph,
thou can not; rivers of tears run down the eyes of others, because men keep
not Gods law, yet run none down thine, though thou thy self keep it not; thou
groanest under a hard heart, a dry eye, a feared conscience, and fain thou
would it were otherwise with thee, poor soul; lean thou also upon Christ in
the urging of those promises, Isa. 35.6. The tongue of the dumb shall sing, for
in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert, waters of
sorrow for sin, streams of affection toward God: if (as I said in the other)
thy soul be hungry, it shall be made fruitful; if now thy soul be thirsty, it
shall be made springs of water, and the parched ground shall become a pool: see
the Lords promise, Isa. 44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and
floods upon dry ground, that is, says he, My spirit which shall make him
spring; you, whose soul God has turned, can witness hereunto by your own
experience.

3. Promises to the solitary wilderness.
Thou complainst thou art a solitary wilderness, that thou have none of Christ's
company, no communion with the Spirit, no acquaintance with God, urge those
words of grace, Isa. 35.1. The wilderness, etc. the solitary place shall be
glad: though thou have been solitary, Christ will, if thou act faith upon these
promises, come to thee, and be with thee, and thou shall be glad; so that the
voice of joy, gladness, thanksgiving and melody, shall be found in thy soul,
though thou had been a wilderness, Isa. 51.3. Rev. 3.20. I will come in to
him; yea, Isa. 42.16, These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.

Thou complainst thou art a wilderness, 4. Promises to the provisionless
wilderness.
destitute and provisionless, and art ready to say, Can God spread a table in
this wilderness for thy soul? Is it possible that even thou should be made
fat and flourishing in the ways and things of God, that art so lean? Yes, God
can do it, yea he has said he will do it. Those that are thus removed out of
the wilderness, and transplanted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in
the courts of our God: they shall still bring forth fruit, they shall be fat
and flourishing, Psalm 92. 13, 14. Isa. 49 9, 10. Mic. 7.14. He shall feed the
flock which dwells solitary in the wilder- (as the Gene.)
Rev. 3.20. He shall sup with me: Look what provision Christ has, the same
shall be set before such a soul: It is remarkable, Psalm 105. The people asked,
and he satisfied them with the bread of heaven: He opened the rock, etc. and
the reasons rendered, for he remembered his holy promise, verse. 40, 41 42. poor
soul, art thou hungerbitten? be Gods remembrancer of his promises, and thou
shall have bread from heaven.

Thou complainst thy soul is bewildred, 5. Promise to the wayless wilderness
thy condition is wayless, and thou know not on which hand to turn, thou art
in the wilderness, where there is no way.

Have thou not heard, poor soul, have thou not understood the voice of one
crying in the wilderness? Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the
desert an high way for our God: John Baptist was his prepater, Christ was this
way, Isa. 40.3. with Matthew. 3.3. and this in pursuance of that promise made to
poor souls in the wilderness, Isa. 35.8. and an high way shall be there, etc.

Thou complainst that thy soul lies waste and not husbanded, like a desert
land, 6. Promises to the waste wilderness.
and thou art afraid that the Lord has deserted thee, and thy God forsaken
thee: know that the Lord has said, The desert shall rejoice and blossom, Isa.
35.1. I will make her desert like the garden of the Lord, the Lord will comfort
all her waste places, Isa. 51.3. Here Is comfort indeed; her judgment, her
will, her affections, her conversation, all were waste; there came up nothing
but briars and thorns, and nettles, etc. and thereefore justly was she desert
and forsaken; but now all her waste places are comforted (how is that?) Why? her
very desert is made as the garden of the Lord: now is she the Lords vineyard,
and the Lord will husband her, he will keep it, and water it every moment, Isa.
27.3. And thus is Christ given for a covenant to the people, to cause to
inherit the desolate heritages; therefore they shall feed in the ways, and
their pastures shall be in all high places: They shall not hunger, not thirst,
because he that has mercy on them shall lead them, and by the springs of water
shall he guide them: and he will make all his mountains a way, and his
highways shall be exalted, Isa. 49.8, 9, 10, 11. Could you wish that God
should speak more encouragingly to you? Behold you have a strength to lean
upon, that can, that will, that stands engaged to make you of a desolate
heritage, such as you desire to be before the Lord.

CHAP. VII. Contains the Explication of the destructiveness of the progress
in wilderness-sin, because of famine, thorns, serpents, wild beasts, etc.
2. Progress in the wilderness destructive.
YOu have heard now of the dismalness of the wilderness, and so of sin; We come
now to speak of the destructiveness of both. Therefore,

Secondly, The way of the wilderness is destructive; so is the way of sin.

The wilderness through which Israel journyed toward Canaan, is not a more
lively representation of sin in any thing then in this: Multitudes of people
came into the wilderness, multitudes came out of Egypt, yet exceeding few of
them came out of the wilderness, but were destroyed there: multitudes of poor
creatures come into the world, into sin, yea multitudes come out of Egypt
(that's gross darkness) that hea^ of Canaan; and come, as many Israelites,
almost in sight of it, almost in sight of heaven, that yet perish through the
destructiveness of sin: The Israelites complained much of the destructiveness
of the wilderness then and I presume they complain more of the destructiveness
of sin now, Numb. 20.4. they cry to Mose^, Why have ye brought the congregatin
of the Lord into this wilderness, to die there? Oh! Why have you brought us out
of Egypt to die in the wilderness? Numb. 21.5. More sadly will thou complain of
thy parents, thy sinful companions, etc. Oh! why did you lead me, why did you
bring me into sin to die in sin? you have much people perishing there together,
Numb. 21.6. you have them dying by Fourteen thousands, and Seven hundreds at
once, Numb. 16.49. what more? you have them complaining and saying, Behold we
die, we perish, we all perish, Numb. 17.12. were sinners consciences awakened
by multitude^, you would have them much more crying out by multitudes, we die,
we perish, we all perish; they would all agree in this language, if we could
hear them all crying out in hell.

The ways of the wilderness are destructive; and are the bewildring ways of sin
not so? Romans 3. They are all under sin. verse 7. gone out of the way, verse 12.
destruction and misery are in their ways, verse 16. it is as much as if he
should say, sin first bewildreth and then destroys; verily there were
multitudes that dyed in that wilderness; and that which killed them was this
wilderness: God threatens it, Numb. 14, I have heard their murmurings, ver.
27. your carkases shall fall in this wilderness, even all that were numbered of
you, verse. 29. which were Six hundred thousand, and Three thousand, and five
hundred and fifty, able to go out to war (besides the numerous tribe of Levi,
which were not numbered (and yet perished) with the rest, Numb. 1.46, 47) God
brings it to pass, Numb, 64.65. Amongst all these, there was not a man that
escaped, but Caleb and Joshua; for the Lord had said of them, they shall surely
die in the wilderness: you have both it and the reason yet more express, Josh.
5.6. Israel walked in the wilderness, till all the people that were fit for war
were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord: You see what
reason I have to say, 'twas this wilderness made that destructive: Zelophehads
daughters confession is very remarkable, Numb. 27.3. Our father died in the
wilderness (in the beginning of the verse) he died in his own sin (in the
latter end of the verse) you have the same conjunction, Heb. 3.17. He was
grieved with them that had sinned, whose carkases fell in the wilderness, 1
Cor. 10.5. with many of them God was not pleased, for they were overthrown in
the wilderness: It would seem uncharitable and rigid doctrine, if we should now
say, that as many as came out of Egypt, yet died in the wilderness, so many are
born in the world, yea in some sort come out of Egypt, get some knowledge, some
light, and yet perish and die in sin; yet certainly there is a proportion of
truth in it, that is, heaps upon heaps, multitudes, and thousands upon
thousands that are called Israelites, that are named Christians, do yet perish
in this wilderness; and there are but a few, one of a family, and two of a
tribe; some Joshua's, and some Calebs, that fulfill to walk uprightly, and that
come savingly to enjoy a Canaan, so destructive is the wilderness of sin: More
particularly it appears to be so in these four respects.

The Famine of the wilderness is wasting and consuming.

The Thorns of the wilderness are rending and tearing.

The Serpents of the wilderness are biting and envenoming.

The wild Beasts of the wilderness are ranging and devouring.

1. The famine of the wilderness is dismul and destructive.
First then, You have heard before that the famine of the wilderness is dismal,
it is destructive also; therefore have you mention, not only of wasting, but of
dying in the wilderness, they and their cattle, Numb. 20.4. for want of bread
and for want of water, Numb. 21.5. you have mention also of a burning hunger,
and bitter destruction, Deuteronomy. 32.24. the same thing is represented by the
parable of the lost son, Luke 15. you have his confession, verse 17. I perish
with hunger: It Is a burning hunger that poor souls undergo, that have not a God,
a Christ, a Covenant to feed upon; they that are lost, must needs perish
through this hunger. If David oppose an interest in God to all natural good to
support life, corn and wine, etc. Psalm 4.6, 7. If only they that fear and
seek the Lord are provided for, whilst Lions (the chief beasts of the
wilderness) yea, young Lions (the chief state of those chief beasts) do lack and
suffer hunger, Psalm. 34.9, 10. and that hunger be, as you hear, a burning
hunger, an hunger that eats up the soul (as fire does fuel) whilst the soul
has nothing, no interest in God, no comfort from God to feed upon; surely such
lost souls, such bewildred sinners, had need to make much haste home: it is not
a hunger unto drying, but unto burning not to leanness only, but unto death;
you perish with hunger, what ever food you have to feed upon besides Christ; it
will not be able, as we say, to keep life and soul together: it is chaff which
prodigals may have, yet cannot fill themselves with all; and though they feed
upon it, they must yet perish with hunger.

Secondly, The thorns of the wilderness are rending thorns, 2. The thor^^ of
the wilderness are destructive.
piercing, wounding, killing thorns, as you may read, Josh. 8.7. and 16. you
may meddle you think with sin now, and not be pricked; but if ever God tend
your conscience, either in wrath or mercy, by these thorns; it will be, that
God will teach you, as Joshua did the men of Succoth, in judgment, and as God
taught Saul afterward in mercy: how hard it is to kick against the pricks, Act
9.5. it is said, 1 Timothy 6.10. They erred from the faith, and pierced themselves
through with many sorrows: Oh! what piercing, what thorow-piercing thorns are
here? they are called choaking-thorns unto the word, Matthew. 13.22. and
therefore needs must they be choaking-thorns unto the soul; sin seems blunt and
smooth now, you will find it sharper another day: This I speak of the guilt of
sin.

3. The Serpents of the wilderness are pdisoning, and so destructive serpent^
The Serpents of the wilderness are mortally poisoning Serpents, those
especially in the old wilderness do best suit with the serpent Sin: In the
wilderness were fiery serpents and scorpions, Deuteronomy. 8.15. yea, Numb. 21.6. The
Lord sent fiery serpents amongst the people, and they bit the people, and much
people of Israel died: Sin does not only rend the soul, but envenom it too,
and so makes the wound uncurable: You have the wicked going astray (that is) in
this wilderness, Psalm. 58.3. You have mention of their poison, like the poison
of the serpent, verse 4. Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel
venum of asps, Psa^m 104 3. they have sharpened their tongues like serpents;
adders poison is under their lips; so that, as Job says of the arrows of the
Almighty, Job 6.4. That the poison thereof drinks up his spirit: so must sin,
which sharpened and envenomed those arrows, much more be a soul-destroying
poison; yea verily, what ever poison there is in death it self, it is from sin,
1 Cor. 15.56. the sting of death is sin; let not us therefore tempt Christ, as
some of them tempted and were destroyed of serpents, 1 Corinthians 10.9.

4. The beasts of the wilderness are devouring beasts.
Lastly, The Beasts the soul meets with in this wilderness, are as in the other,
devouring wild beasts: The sound of these beasts makes the way of the
wilderness (as you heard before) dismal, meeting with these beasts, makes it
destructive: I Will bring lions upon him that escapes of Moa^, Isa. 15.10. the
beasts of the field come to devour, yea, all the beasts of the forest, Isa.
56.9. see a full Scripture, Jer. 5.6. A lion of the forest shall slay them, a
wolf of the evening shall devour them; a leopard shall watch over their cities;
every one that goes thence shall be tom in pieces, because their
transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased, Jer. 5.6, As
long as we are, and continue in the wilderness of sin, we can meet none but
such as like wild beasts will devour us, whether men or devils; they all will
be found as destroyers unto our souls. 1. Men devouring beasts.


Amongst men, I shall primely instance in two ranks, that of all others are most
so, though all sinful men, and wilderness companions in their kind and degree
are so (such were the beasts of Ephesus.)

First, Sinful magistrates, sinful great ones, 1. Evil Magistrates.
they are wilnerss beasts, and greatly destructive to poor souls; they lead men
by precept, by practice into the lions den, and leopards mountains, they lead
men to hell by authority, Prove. 28.15. As a ranging lion and a roaring bear, so
is a wicked ruler over the poor people.

Secondly, Sinful and godless ministers, 2. Evil Ministers.
such are ravening wolves, though clothed with the fleece in sheeps clothing: I
remember the Popish painters humor, who limning a Friar in a coul, with a
wolves head, preaching unto a flock of sheep, choosing that Text of the
Apostles with a little variation; God is my witness, how I long for you all in
my bowels: Verily it is not far from the Lords own language, Ezekiel. 22.25. There
is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion
ravening the prey, they have devoured souls. Friends, let us Ministers look to
it, there can be but two kinds of us; either shepherds, or devouring beasts,
ruining the souls committed to us.

Secondly, 2. Devils, devouring beasts.
Devils (whatever delusions they carry the poor soul away with) will be found
in the end, to be as Peter calls them, 1 Pet. 5.8. Roaring lions, going about
seeking whom they may devour: therefore take heed of Satan, come he as an angel
of light, yet is his business to carry you into the pit of darkness, the Lions
den, whence there is no more return.

Lastly, Christ will be found unto such, 3. God himself.
the Lion of the tribe of Judah; and surely miserably will that soul be rent,
which God tears: terrible are those expressions; I Will be unto Ephraim as a
lion, and as a young lion unto the house of Judah: I, even I will tear and go
away, Hos. 5.14 so Hos. 13. I did know thee in the wilderness, verse. 5. they
have forgotten me, ver. 6. therefore will I be unto them as a lion, as a
leopard by the way will I observe them. I will meet them as a Bear bereaved of
her whelps, and I will rent the caul of their heart, and there will I devour
them like a lion; the wild beasts shall tear them, verse 7, 8. you see, Men
rend, Devils tear, God destroys; what can be more sadly thought upon? yea the
famine consumes, the thorns pierce, the serpents poison, the beasts devour, Is
not this a destructive wilderness?

CHAP. VIII. Contains the Application of the former Chapter.
LEt me improve this unto your Conviction and Exhortation:

Conviction, how fearful is it to die in sin.
First, For conviction; Understand from hence, what it is to perish in the
spiritual wilderness of sin: of all places on earth, the wilderness in
scripture is called most terrible; and surely of all deaths, dying in the
wilderness is most terrible: The children of Israel had such a natural horror
of that natural wilderness, that it seems they had rather have died any where
then there: Because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to
die in the wilderness? Exodus 14.11. And it had been better for us to serve the
Egyptians, then to die in this wilderness, ver. 12. rather do any thing, rather
suffer any thing, rather die any where; would we had died when our brethren
died before the Lord: and why have you brought up the congregation of the Lord
into this wilderness, that we should die there? Number. 20.3, 4. O friends, did
you but consider what it it is to die in this wilderness of sin, you would
rather choose bondage, prison, death, any thing then sin, for fear least you
should die in sin: There Is that in dying in the wilderness, which to my
thoughts, does better represent dying in sin, then any other kind of death
does. To say nothing more of the sad variety of wilderness-deaths, he that
scapes the famine, is pierced through with thorns; he that scapes the thorns,
is stung and bitten with serpents; he that scapes the serpents, is devoured of
wild beasts; he that scapes the Bear, the Lion finds him; he that scapes the
Lion, is torn of Leopards; he that scapes the Leopard, some other Beast of the
forest devours him; one plague or another, one curse or another will be sure to
ruin the sining soul: There are these three things observable; It is the most
remediless death, it does represent a double death, it does figure an eternal
death.

First, Dying in the wilderness, Wilderness death is remediless.
is of all deaths the most remediless; you may easily fancy it in these three
particulars:

First, 1. None to deliver.
if a man be in danger of death by robbers upon the road, he may hope for the
coming on of passengers for his rescue; but if a man be in danger of death in
the wilderness, there is no man, yea none to be hoped for to redeem him; thus
it is with the soul that dies in sin: Now consider this, you that forget God,
least I come and tear you in pieces, while there is none to deliver, Psalm.
50.22.

Secondly, If there were any to intercede for, 2. None can rescue.
or rescue a poor wretch ready to die in the wilderness, yet could they not be
able: when a young Lion roareth upon his prey, though a multitude of shepherds
be called out against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, neither will
he abase himself because of them, Isa. 30.4. when wife, children, friends, do
all of them lift up their voice for the dying sinner, if once the Lion take him
in his paw, none can, none shall deliver him, Mic. 5.8. If a young Lion amongst
the flocks go through, he both treads down and teareth in pieces, and none
can deliver: so will it be with God, Hos 5.14. As a lion will I be to Ephraim,
as a young lion unto Judah, I will tear and go away; I will take away, and none
shall rescue.

Lastly, If a man be taken by his enemies, 3 Thy own c^ies will be in-effectual.
he may plead for mercy, and plead so, happily, as to prevent death; but if a man
become a Lions prey, a prey in the wilderness, he may cry aloud, but the Lion
roars louder, the Lion understands not, the Lion knows not what you say: The
foolish virgins cry aloud, Lord, Lord open, Matt. 25 11. but God roars louder,
I know you not, ver. 12. And now friends, what think you of dying in sin? I may
say to you, and to my self, what the prophet speaks, Amos 3.8. The lion has
roared, who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can hut prophecy?

2. Wilderness death a double death.
Secondly, Dying in the wilderness, does best represent the double death of sin:
If a man dies on his bed, yea amongst his enemies, yet does he die but once,
his body is buried, and returns unto the dust in peace from whence it came; but
if a man per^sh in the wilderness, where body and soul are parted a sunder, his
carkase also is rent in pieces, and being rent is devoured of wild beasts, and
so finds, as it were, a living grave: and do you not know that such a grave is
hell? The Lord threatens it as a sad judgment upon the people, that after
death their carkases should be devoured of wild beasts, Jer. 7.33. Their
carkases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and beasts of the earth, and
none shall fray them away: Therefore does the Lord compare that, which by John
is called the second death, unto some beast of the forest opening his mouth,
and widening, as it were, his throat to swallow down the prey, Isa. 5.14.
therefore hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without measure: I
tell you, hell has a wide mouth, and open throat to receive the carkases, the
souls I mean of those that perish in the spiritual wilderness of sin.

3. Wilderness death an eternal death.
Lastly, Isreal's dying in that wilderness was a type of eternal death; surely
dying in this wilderness will be seconded with that, Heb. 4.17, 18. They that
fell in that wilderness, could not enter into his rest: That rest was (as it is
there expounded) a type of heaven, so that falling short is expounded also a
figure of eternal ruin: Let us therefore fear, least a promise being left us
of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short, Heb. 5.1.

Exhortation to lean upon Christ.
Secondly, Be exhorted to lean upon the Lord Jesus, that you may come forth of
the destructive wilderness of sin: If the famine, the thorns, the serpents, the
wild beasts of the wilderness be so killing: Oh! what need have we of a
Christ? Christ is Jesus, and can be life unto us, notwithstanding all
exigencies.

First, In this wilderness-famine, Who is, 1. Bread in this famine.
the Lord Jesus is Manna, bread from heaven, angels food, bread of God; what
can a poor famishing creature desire more? 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. They did all eat of
the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink; and that was
Christ.

Secondly, 2. Healer of these rents and piercings.
If thy soul be pierced through or torn with the thorns of this wilderness, the
guilt of sin: The Lord can bind up that which was broken, Ezekiel. 34.16. as well
as seek that which was lost in the wilderness; therefore let us take their
counsel in Hosea 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn
us, and he will bind us up.

Thirdly, 3. Curer of these serpents bitings.
If thy soul be bitten by the serpents of this wilderness, you have heard of
Isreal's cure, Numb. 21.8. it is also ours, the brazen Serpent, the Lord Christ:
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so was the Son of
man lifted up, that whosoever belived on him should not perish, but have
eternal life, John 3.14.15.

Lastly, If thy soul once get an interest in the Lord Jesus, 4. Rescue from
these beasts devourings.
thou need'st not fear what all the beasts of the wilderness can do against
thee: This is that spiritual David, that slaies both the Lion and the Bear, 1
Samuel 17.36. and he verily that reads not Christ there, misseth of the best
part of the story.

First, Then Christ is able to secure thee, 1. Being a lion.
for he is the Lion of the tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.5. therefore despair not,
only believe.

Secondly, 2. Able to bring honey and ^ood.
He is that Sampson that brings honey out of the Lions carkase, Judges 14 8.
tha^ can make even Satan's temptations thine advantage, food for thy faith, and
matter of thy Christian experience, for thy future support, Psalm. 74.14. Thou
brakest the heads of Levi than, and gave him to be food for a people
inhabiting the wilnerness.

Thirdly, He shall as a Lion arise for thy salvation, 3. Able to make thee as a
lion.
Psalm. 31 4, 5. Like as a lion, and a young lion roaring upon his prey, that
will not be afraid of a multitude of sh^pherds; so will the Lord of hosts come
down for mount Sion, and for Jerusalem; as birds flying, so will the Lord
defend it; defending also, he will deliver it; and passing over, he will
preserve it.

Thus will the Lord Christ will make thee, through his strength, prevail against
all thy spiritual enemies, be they never so many; yea, thou shall be more then
Conqueror, through Christ that loves thee, Mic. 5.8. The remnant of Jacob, in
the midst of many people, shall be as a lion amongst the beasts of the forest,
as a young lion amongst the flocks of the sheep; who if he go through, treads
down, and tears to pieces, and none can deliver.

CHAP. IX. Contains the third Branch or Evidence of the first Doctrine,
showing that the coming out of the wilderness of sin is difficult, and (as to
our own power) desperate.
Third evidence. The coming out of the wilderness difficult and desperate.
YOu have seen sin like the wilderness, both in its first view and entry, and in
its further discoveries and progress: We come now to the third; Sin is a
wilderness to the last, as well as from the first. Therefore,

Thirdly, The coming out of the wilderness is difficult and desperate, so is
the coming out of sin.

I may say -- Facilis descensus eremi;
Sed revocare gradus --
Hic labor, hoc opus est.


It Is easy (Friends) to find the way into the wilderness, and into sin, The
Israelites were soon gotten into the wilderness Exodus 13.20. I believe they
were not forty hours in getting into it, but they were forty years in getting
out of it: Adam and his posterity were in a few hours got into sin, Adam and
his posterity are not to this day got out of it: There were not many hours from
the Creation before we were all bewildred in sin, Genesis 3.6. There are thousands
of years since the Creation, and yet are not we got out of sin: The way of life
is soon lost, and mist of, but it it is not so quickly found again. There are
these things considerable in the wilderness, which make the coming out of it
difficult and desperate, and the same too truly hold in sin: The wilderness is
great, this great wilderness is full of diverse ways, these various ways are
perplexed, these perplexed ways are uneven, these uneven ways are dark, these
dark ways are thorny, and these thorny ways enclosed; and so exactly is it with
the ways of sin.

First, Because First, The wilderness is great.
The coming out of the wilderness is d^fficult and desperate, because of the
greatness and immensity of the wilderness; were the wilderness never so thick
and thorny, if it were but small and little in space, one might the better make
his way out of it, as in our woods and groves; but that which renders the
wilderness so terrible, is because it is so great: This is that taken notice
of, Deuteronomy. 1.19. We went through all that great and terrible wilderness, and
Deuteronomy. 8.15. Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness: The
wilderness is great in length, and great in breadth, and therefore when one is
in the wilderness, he may go forward, and yet be in the wilderness, to the
right hand, and yet be in the wilderness, to the left hand, and yet be in the
wilderness; to the east, west, north, south, backwards and forwards, whither
soever he turn, all is wilderness; and thus it is with sin: Sin is wider,
greater, and m^re terrible by far then the wilderness; Wide and broad is the
way that leads to destruction, Matthew. 7.13. therefore says our Savior, so few
find the way out of it: Would you know the extent of this wilderness? it is in
a word, as wide as the world, the whole world is a wilderness of sin, East,
West, Europe, Asia, etc. Ireland, England, City, Country; if a man could leave
sin behind him in any place, and not find a new part of the wilderness
whither ever he goes, he might have some hope of getting out of it; but Caelum
non animum mutant, they carry this wilderness with them wherever they go, yea
they find it wherever they come, and how should they then get out of it? 1
John 5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness: Is not this a great wilderness?
yea, but sin is yet a greater wilderness, it is as large as the heart of man,
which is much larger then the world, Genesis 5.6. All the imaginations of the
heart of man are only evil continually; he thinks of this, and sins; of that,
and sins; and wherever his heart turns, it turns but like a man in the
wilderness, from one part of it to another; he goes forward and yet sins, Isa.
30.1. They add sin to sin, as those that add drunkenness to thirst: They go
backward and yet sin, tracing over their former wanderings, and are as a dog
returning to his vomit, and a fool to his folly, Prove. 26.11. They go to the
left hand, and grow covetous, and to sin; they were profane, they grow
hypocritical, and so both on the right hand and left, turn off from the way of
God, Isa. 30.21. so that as one in the wilderness having gone far (and some
they say, having gone forty days journey in the Hercynian Forest, Prove. 23.35.
When I awake, I will seek it yet again.

1. The wil^erness full of various ways
Secondly, The wilderness is so full of diverse paths, that its hard to find the
way out of it: There Is the way to the Lions den, and the way to the Leopards
mountains, Cant. 4.8. there is the way to the habitation of Dragons, Isa. 55.7.
and there be many other deadly tracts in the wilderness (though not a living
way amongst them all) thus is it with sin also; There Is the way of the fool,
Prove. 12.15. and the way of transgressors, Prove. 13.15. and the way of the
wicked, Prove. 12.26. and the way of the slothful, Prove. 15.19. and the way of a
man with a maid, Prove. 30.19. and the way of an adulterous woman, Prove. 30.20.
and the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2. Pet. 2.15.
and many more such ways; and if all these ways, with the rest of the paths of
sin, be not enough to make a wilderness, judge ye: This is that then that makes
the coming out of sin so exceeding difficult, the exceeding diversity of ways
that are in sin: A man, you say, may change his path, and yet keep the way; a
man may much more change his way, and yet keep the wilderness: Thus many are
converted, not from sin to God, but from one sin to another; and many think
they have left their sins, when they have only changed their sins. It Is the
diversity of lusts that deceives souls, Tit. 3.3. It Is the diversity of lusts
that leads away silly souls, 2 Timothy 3.6. In these our days, what are many (that
thinks themselves Converts and Saints now, and count that themselves were
sinners before) but turned from the lusts of the flesh to the lusts of the
mind? (for there is such variety spoken of Ephesians. 2.3.) that turn from
licentious practices to licentious principles: thus does Satan turn men from
carnal conversation to carnal profession; and this is the policy of the harlot
sin, least thou should ponder the path of life, (that path is but one) her
ways are moveable, that thou can not know them. Prove. 5.6. The sinner when he
is weary of one path, has another way to recreate himself in; from the
Alehouse to the Game-house, and from the Game-house to the Whore-house; from
gross ignorance, to gross superstition; from gross profaneness, to gross
formality; and from gross formality, to gross presumption: thus has he many
ways to satisfy his hearts lust with, that he may enjoy his fill of sin; yea,
and if he love to wander in this wilderness, he shall have his fill of the
wilderness before he get out of it: The backslider in heart, shall be filled
with his own ways, Prove. 14.14.

Thirdly, Though there be so many ways, 3. The wilderness ways are entangled
and perplexed.
yet this is not all, but these ways are all of them perplexed: Many ways meet
together, and cross one another, and you by them are put into such a confusion,
as that you know not indeed which is which, Exodus 14.3. Pharaoh will say, they
are entangled in the wilderness: It seems the wilderness is an intanglement to
our ways, and is it not so with sin? These are called (as we hinted at first)
(...), the bewildrings; it signifies the intricate windings and turnings of
Satan: we read it, the wiles of Satan, not impertinently, Ephesians. 6.11. as a wily
man that moves backwards and forwards, to and again, hither and thither, and
you say you know not what to make of him: Thus does sin hurry the soul
sometimes forward, sometimes backward; sometimes it turns the soul round, and
yet brings it where it was at first, so that the soul is quite bewildred,
thinks it should know that way again, yet cannot tell; thinks it has changed
its condition, yet cannot tell, till by and by Satan brings it round into the
same sin, and then it finds that it is in the same wilderness; therefore Prove.
5.6. Her ways are moveable; ways, there is the number; movable, there is the
nature; viae versatiles, wily ways: Sometimes they seem right unto a man, as
Prove. 14.12: at the beginning of the verse; sometime they seem the ways of
death, as at the end of the verse: In these is the soul entangled, and hence it
proves so difficult to get out of the wilderness of sin: I could spend much
time in instancing in the wilyness of this wilderness; one word for many, Satan
makes some believe they shall surely be damned, and therefore they think they
may sin as they list; Satan makes some believe they shall surely be saved, and
therefore they think they may sin as they list: here are different paths, yet
both leading into the same way; here is the wiliness of temptations, these are
the entanglings of this wilderness: Its no less then a miracle that any soul
should ever get out of it because of them.

CHAP. X. Adds four other Reasons, and concludes the first Doctrine with
Application; as also a word of Caution, what use ought not to be made of this
doctrine, That sin is a wilderness.
FOurthly, the ways of the wilderness are rough, The wilderness ways are uneven.
crooked and uneven, and these obstruct the coming out: therefore the ways of
the wilderness must needs be stumbling ways; upon this account the prophet
heightens the Lords mercy toward bewildred Israel, Isa. 63.13. He led them as
an horse in the wilderness, that they might not stumble: It seems if an
horseman travel in the wilderness, he had need lead his horse, and not his
horse carry him; so crooked, rough and uncouth are the ways of the wilderness:
You have mention of desert ways, Isa. 40.3. they are called crooked and rough
places, ver. 4. this makes them stumbling ways: And is sin short of a
wilderness in this, rather then before? Compare scriptures, Prove. 2.13. Whose
ways are crooked; and pray what means the word Iniquity, but unevenness? these
are those ways that are laid with stumbling blocks. Rev. 2.14. and therefore as
he that travels in the wilderness, and thinks perhaps now certainly to get out,
but in the mean time stumbleth he knows not how, and by that stumbling loses
that view which he had out of the thicket into the open field, and so falls
into some pit of darkness; so says the Holy Ghost of the way of sin expressly,
Prove. 4.19. The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they
stumble: O Sir! I would fain leave my swearing, but an oath drops out I know
not when: O Wife, I would fain leave my drunkenness and gaming, etc. but when I
am in company, I am drawn in, and overcome, and I know not how: I would fain
(say thou) leave my vain thoughts, but I am in the midst of them before I
know it; this is the way of the wilderness, and you fall in it, and yet know
not at what you stumble. But of this more afterward.

5. Wilderness ways dark ways.
Fifthly, These stumbling ways are also dark ways: The wilderness is full of
thickets; wickedness shall kindle like fire in the thickets of the Forest, Isa.
9.18. and these thickets must needs be dark and shady, when the trees thereof
grow so thick together, and so interwoven with under-woods, with briars, and
brambles, that the very light of the sun is hid away; and when the very
brightness of heaven does not break through, must it not be difficult for the
bewildred passenger to break through? must it not be difficult for the be
wildred passenger to break through, when he is not able to see any way before
him, neither does any light come to him? well may he be quite lost: You have
mention of the thick boughs, and shadowing shroud of Lebanon, Ezekiel. 31.3. And
are there not such thick boughs, such shadowing shrouds in the wilderness of
sin? are not they, that being bewildred, want Christ's guidance, such as sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death? then read Luke. 1.71. Is not the way of
the wicked darkness? then read Prove. 4.19. Yea, are not thickets of this
wilderness (I mean) Satan's temptations, and natural corruptions so great, that
the Sun shines upon the wilderness, yet cannot enter in? the light darts upon
your souls, yet are your souls still dark within, and the light of the glorious
Gospel of God shines not unto you? then read 2 Cor. 4.4. Can you wonder now
that the coming out of this spiritual wilderness is so difficult, when the
coming in of the spiritual light is so obstructed? This is thy misery poor
wilderness-soul! the light shines at top, and the air is full of it; thy head
perhaps is full of knowledge, and yet thine heart that lies at bottom is
shrouded over by the thick boughs; its no wonder thy works are darkness, for
thy ways are such.

These wilderness ways are thorny ways.
Sixthly, These dark ways are full of thorns, and as you heard before that these
make the wilderness way destructive, so they make the coming out of it
exceeding difficult; for as one moves to the right hand, a thorn takes hold
upon him; as he breaks from that, a left hand bramble catches him; you know
what flow stirring there is in a thicket: and such verily are the ways of sin,
thorny, as you heard before, and therefore such as will catch hold upon you, on
this hand to hinder you, on that hand to interrupt you, and all to stop your
motion, and to make your coming out of sin desperate; and therefore as you
would phrase your hindrance by brambles, or thorns, or briars, Oh! say you,
they caught hold upon me, and as soon as I got off from one, I was presently
hung upon another on the other hand, and seldom could I get off from any
without a rent; so the holy Ghost phraseth temptations: So she caught him,
Prove. 7.13. and she caught him by his garment, and he left his garment in her
hand, Genesis 39.12. I appeal friends to your experiences, if temptations are not
just like briars unto your souls; even herein also, to retard your stirrings
toward God, yea to rend you, if so be you yet get from them: Does thy wife
never catch hold upon thee, O good husband, do not strike the child; good
husband, be not so strict and rigorous in your office, you will lose your
customers, and get nothing but hatred from your neighbors; are carnal friends
never hindering thee in the ways of God, nor rending thee, if thou get off from
the ways of sin? these are the thorns of the wilderness, take heed of being
laid hold on by them.

Lastly, 7 The wilderness is encompassing.
Therefore is the coming out of the wilderness difficult, yea indeed desperate,
because the wilderness does environ: This Pharaoh knew well enough, when he
said, as Exodus 14.3. The wilderness has shut them in: And this last adds as
much as all the rest (as giving strength unto the rest) unto the exceeding
greatness of the difficulty of coming out of the wilderness; were the
wilderness Ten thousand miles in length, and withal but very narrow, yea were
it, when thou come to any part of it, open to the east, though it were
wilderness Ten thousand miles toward west, and north, and south, thy recovery
then were not so desperate; but this is the utmost, and it is enough: the
wilderness it does surround, yea the wilderness has shut thee in, and how
should thou then get out again? And if it be not so with sin, see Heb. 12.1.
Let us lay aside the sin that so easily besets us, and run, etc. There is no
running, I Will tell you friends, till sins surroundings be removed: It seems Sin
uses to beset us, and Satan when he sees us ready to find a gap (through
mercy) out of the wilderness, makes it his immediate business to stop that gap,
and to environ us still with Sin: as for instance, such a Minister is like to
do thy soul good; and Satan sees thou beginst to have a glimering of light,
and a little to see the open field through the thickets; now will Satan, if he
can, remove thee from his ministry, or raise some discontent, that his ministry
may be unto thee ineffectual; and a thousand such ways has he to hedge thee
into the wilderness yet again, as fast as God plucks up the brambles that
hinder thee, Satan will endeavor to plant and set more; and surely, if God were
not quicker at plucking up temptations and obstructions, then Satan is in
planting them, never could any soul get out of the wilderness of Sin. Thus
deceitful are thy first appearances, thus dismal and destructive are thy ways,
thus difficult and desperate are thy comings out, O thou wilderness of Sin!

Application. To those that come up from the wilderness.
First Then to thee friend, whosoever art come up from this wilderness, I have a
great message from this truth. Surely if if any truth in the world can heighten
the thoughts of Saving grace unto thy soul. this very doctrine may do it in the
highest kind: What shall I say! I am come to call for the expression of that
mercy which is beyond expression, thoughts of grace beyond thoughts: Oh the
height, and the length, and the depth, and the breadth of that love which
brought thee up from a wilderness so long, so broad, so great, so terrible! I
may say as Paul elsewhere, what shall we say then to these things? Thou were a
wilderness, a barren, parched, solitary, destitute, waylesse, waste wilderness;
thou art made the garden of the Lord. Thou were amidst the famine, thorns,
Serpents, savage beasts of this wilderness, ready to be devoured, doubly,
irrecoverably, everlastingly: And yet are thou now come forth out of this
wilderness, and thy life is given thee for a prey. Thou were in the great,
variously-pathed, perplexed, stumbling, dark, thorny, surrounding ways of this
wilderness, and yet art thou now in the one, good, living way, the way of
peace. Oh! may thou say, when I was entangled in the wilderness, I did never
think, or hope of getting hither? but the Lord has found me, when I was lost,
the Lord has led me when I was bewildred. Admire then, for ever wonder at the
finding mercy, and the leading grace of God. 1. Admire that God should choose
thee thence.


First, Ever retain high thoughts of the electing mercy of the Lord: what,
consideration can raise it higher? when I was as a wilderness, and in a
wildernses, when I was barren, and when I was lost, that is, when I was neither
fit for service, nor worthy of favor, the Lord was pleased to pitch his
electing grace upon me: Surely, if we will but grant election, let schools
expound it what way they will, this cannot choose but lift it up beyond even
admiration, that God should choose us, when he foresaw us under these Spiritual
and soul bewildrings. This is that which in Isreal's case is noted (if I mistake
not, as I think, I do not) the whole Israel of Gods election, which are Gods
portion, and the lot of his inheritance, (as you shall find Deuteronomy. 32.9.) now
this I say, is that whereby he heightneth the thoughts of that mercy, in which
he singles out Jacob for his portion ver. 10. He found him in a desert land,
and in the waste howling wilderness. Surely, this is Spiritually to be laid to
heart, though it has its allusion to Jacob's history in the letter; for
neither was all that Jacob, Spiritually the Lords people, portion or lot of
inheritance: Neither were all they that were the Lords among them, found in
that visible wilderness, being all the old ones of them brought out of Egypt
into the wilderness. It Is as if the Lord should say: Israel was a wilderness,
and Jacob in a desert; I found him in a desert land, that is, he was forsaken,
I found him in a wilderness which was wast, that is useful unto none! I found
him in a howling wilderness, that is, amongst Lions, and Leopards, Bears,
Dragons: and yet have I allotted him to be my portion and inheritance: so that
this Scripture is in substance (in my thoughts) the same with that memorial of
the Lords dealing with his people in their natural condition, 2. Admire that
ever God should bring thee thence.
and in sin, Ezekiel. 16.3. etc. cast out into the open field, etc.

Secondly, For ever wonder at the calling mercies of the Lord. Thou were in a
wilderness, that ever God should send a Christ to call thee thence; were a lost
sheep in that wilderness, that ever Christ should bestow the pains to look thee
out, and to take thee up, to lay thee upon his shoulder, and to bring thee home
again: O what exceeding great mercy is here! God might have given thee for
gone, and though he had found thee in the wilderness, yet might he have left
thee alone, and left thee as he did so many of the Israel of old, to die in the
wilderness; or (which is all one) so many of Israel afterward to die in their
sins, John 8.24. but having found his Jacob in the wilderness, and having
chosen him thence for his own portion, he crowns his finding-mercy, with a
leading-mercy; his directing, with a protecting mercy: He seconds his
protection with provisions, he supports and supplies: He found him in the
howling wilderness, he led him about, he instructed him, kept him as the apple
of his eye; as an eagle stireth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads
abroad her wings, takes them, and bears them on her wings, Deuteronomy. 32.9, 10,
11. Thus has God dealt with thy poor bewildred soul; he has taught thee the
way, he has led thee in the way, he has protected thee from danger, and as in
verse 12. he has made provision for thee: This is the Song of Moses, and truly
I am the bolder to make improvement of it to all converts, because it is also
the Song of the Lamb, Rev. 15.3. Now Friends, look to it, if after God has
found you thus like Jacob, and has dealt so with you, and you instead of a
thankful, humble, holy, and continual remembrance thereof, with Jesurun wax fat
and kick (that is rebel against him and grow carnal) and forsake the Lord, and
lightly esteem this rook of your salvation; as ver. 15. know, that it will
provoke the Lord to jealousy, as verse 16. as zeal is the height of love, so
is jealousy of indignation: jealousy you know, follows upon miscarriage after
greatest engagements: A man is fearful of his foe, but jealous of his friend;
of his bosom friend, of one that he has done most for, is he most jealous, if
he begin lightly to be esteemed. Take heed friends: The Lord tells you, Prove.
6.34, 35. Jealousy is the rage of a man (and if so, surely it is the sury of
the Lord) and therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance, he will not
regard any ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou offer many gifts:
It may be, yea (if God have set his love upon thee) it shall be that thou shall
be saved, but thou shall yet pay dearly for thy sin; thou shall offer gifts,
and yet not be accepted; yea, many gifts, and yet not find thy services
regarded; thou will never find the Ten thousandth part of that sweetness in
sin: Therefore if ever God have brought thee out of the wilderness, take heed
of venturing in again: If ever God bring thee out, it shall be through the
thorns and briars.

Thus much for use of the point: I have but one thing more upon my thoughts,
and that is the taking off the use; I would rather call it the abuse, of such a
truth as this is, which sinners make unto themselves.

Is sin a wilderness, may a profane heart say, What use ought not to be made
of sins being a wilderness.
are there thickets, dark and shady places there? That Is it, says he, that I
would have; for my part, let who will love it, I hate the light, and care not
for coming to it; then what care I though it come not to me? my works are works
of darkness, my time is tempus tenebrionum, the times of Lions rising for their
prey, the twy-light, the evening, the black and dark night: Is It a wilderness?
I am glad you tell me of it, it is so fit for my purpose: I love to go from sin
to sin, and I was afraid I should never have found ways of sin enough; never
enough cheating varieties, never enough diversities of uncleanness: I am almost
weary of tracing backward and forward the same paths: I am glad I can hear of
fresh paths, there I can walk with new delight: I am glad to hear of such
thickets: Oh! there I can please my mind with security, and sin with shelter:
I am glad you tell me of these wiles and entanglements: I hope now you
Ministers shall never be able to find me out; I was afraid of nothing, but
lest these thickets should have been cut down, and least the Sun should then
look in upon me; lest a gap should have been made into the wilderness, and all
your Pulpit-terrors have made an inrode upon me, and either frighted me from my
prey, as they have been sometimes ready to do; or at leastwise, to have made me
eat my prey in fear, and so to have sinned with less delight.

Poor wretch! Is this it that so satisfies this profane fancy? That thou
have now got shelter from the storms, and light of God, and that thou shall not
now be found out? Thou might think that, though none could come in to thee
to disturb thee, yet are there enough within thy wilderness to devour thee: The
Lions are but yet asleep, not yet rouzed from their den, there is time enough
for conscience to awaken yet, and then what shall become of thee? but to let
this pass, Know that;

Though sin be a wilderness unto thee, that thou can not find a way to God,
yet is it not a wilderness unto God, but that God can easily find a way to
thee: There are two things remarkable concerning God, with respect unto the
wilderness wherein thou art.

1. The Lord can and will discover it, and what will thou now do? 2. The Lord
can and will shake it, and what will thou now do?
First, Though thou hide thy self in the thickets of Carmel, yet will God
search and take thee out thence, Amos 9.3. God knows, and well observes all the
secrecies, passages, windings and turnings of this wilderness of sin: This is
that which the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 29.9. The voice of the Lord discovers
the forests, and in his temple we must speak this unto his glory: It seems the
wilderness may for a time cover thee, but what will thou do when the Lord
discovers that? The heart-searcher is, you see, a searcher of Carmel, and the
heart-discoverer, is a discoverer of the wilderness. This is his glory, which
(if you perceive it not in his Temple now) you shall rest assured of it,
whether you will or no, another day.

Secondly, Though thou lie secure at the bottom of these thickets, and think
that no danger shall reach thee, yet even there (as his language is in Amos
9.4.) He shall commaud the serpent, and he shall bite thee: Thou go into the
wilderness for shelter, thinking to bear off storms of wrath and conscience, by
farther sining; but Psalm. 29.8. The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness,
the Lord shakes the wilderness of Kadesh: What will thou now do? A man goes
into a forest, or thicket, etc. to keep off the rain that falls in smaller
drops, and it does so for a season; but by and by there rises a great wind, a
shaking wind: Who has the best on it now, he that is in the wilderness amongst
the thickets, or he that is in the open field? Now that that would have fallen
before but in small drops, and this wind would have dried again, falls upon
him, nay rather is poured down upon him as it were full viols, and this wind
drives it through him: These are the direct issues of these shakings of the
wilderness: Death is a shaking wind to all, but yet it is a drying wind to
those that are got out of the wilderness, that have an interest in Christ; but
a drenching wind to thy soul, whoever art in sin: Consider this before the Lord
arise, as he is determined, Isa. 2.24. tearibly to shake the earth: I, but say
you, we shall hold together, and cheer one another for all this; therefore
says God, Isa. 9.18. Wickedness burns as the fire, it shall devour, and
shall kindle in the thickets of the forest; yea, Nahum 1.10. Whilst they be
folden together as thorns, they shall be devoured as shubble fully dry: You
see, the very thickets where the thorns are folden most together, shall be
devoured: This is that which the holy Ghost otherwise expresses; Though hand
join in hand, yet shall not the wicked go unpunished, Prove. 16.5.

The second part of this Treatise, discovers the bewildred or lost estate of
every unconverted SOUL.
CHAP. I. Contains the general proof of the point, and begins the Induction of
Particulars. First Particular, We are conceived and born in the wilderness of
Sin, proved and applied.
HAving proved sin a wilderness, Come we now to enquire, who they are that are
bewildred: Our Text tells you, All that have not yet come unto, nor yet leaned
upon (that is, savingly believed in) the Lord Jesus Christ: And therefore our
second Doctrine tells you;

That whoever thou art, for person or quality in the world, Every unregenerate
state is a bewildred estate.
that art yet in an unconverted and unbelieving state: Thou art yet in a
bewildred estate and condition, and sin is a wilderness unto thy soul.

I say whosoever thou art, young, old, high, low, rich, poor, living or dying,
thou art in a wilderness.

This I shall first prove, and then open; I shall prove it first in General,
then by Induction of Particulars: I shall open it by declaring what advantages
satan has, what pains he takes, what means he makes (and are made) use of unto
the bewildring of poor souls. Of these in order.

Proof. General.
First, Then for proof of the point in General; viz. That all unconverted ones,
are spiritually bewildred ones, even lost in the wilderness of sin: Hear what
the Psalmist says, and the Apostle from him: When God looked down from heaven,
to take a view of men on earth, to see if any, if any I say, sought after God:
Hear Gods own language, Psalm. 14.2, 3. They are all gone aside: And what is
that but to be bewildred? And hence the Apostle concludes all, Jew and Gentile,
one and another, to be under sin (which you have heard proved a wilderness)
Romans 3.9. None better, no not one, ver. 12. How emphatically does he express
it? now see how amply he proves it.

They are altogether become unprofitable, ver. 12. and what fitter character
for a wilderness?



And that first, By showing that they are gone out of the right way; They are
all gone out of the way, ver. 17.

Secondly, by declaring, That being out of it, they have neither wisdom nor
knowledge to find it any more; for, The way of peace they have not known, ver.
17.

Thirdly, By giving an account of the ways they are gone into, which is the
very character that I have, from Scripture, given you of the ways of the
wilderness of sin; Destruction and misery are in their ways, ver. 16. And I
pray, What are ways of destruction and of misery, if the ways of the
wilderness be not? Now then as the Apostle speaking puts us altogether, let us
put all that he has spoken together: They are, says he, whether Jew or
Gentile (ver. 9.) gone out of the way (ver. 12, and know no more the way in to
peace (ver. 17.) but instead of that way, are in the ways of misery and
destruction, (ver. 16.) and now, my Friends, Believe you that this is
Scripture? I know that you believe: This you have God frequently complaining of
Ezekiel. 2.3. They and their fathers have transgressed; of which word, this is the
plain English: They have both father and child, one and another, gone aside
out of my ways; then he pursues his complaint against the same persons, and
calls them briars and thorns, and scorpions, which are all of the wilderness
(as you have already heard) Though briars and thorns be with thee, and thou
dwell among scorpions, yet be not afraid, ver. 6. but speak my words unto
them, ver. 7. as who should say, I have sent thee as a voice to cry in the
wilderness, but be thou not afraid. My friends, I desire to speak it with grief
of heart, as the truth of God; there is not one soul of you that is out of
Christ but it is in the wilderness, that destructive and miserable wilderness
of sin: There is not a soul amongst you that lives out of Christ, but it lives
in that wilderness; that dies out of Christ, but it dies in that wilderness;
and for this, Oh! that my head were fountains! that this should be heard of and
spoken of, and so much concern every man, and yet no man lay it to heart!

Secondly, 2. Proof by induction of particulars.
I shall conclude all unregenerate souls under these spiritual bewildrings, by
induction of particulars.

You have heard that murmuring and unbelieving Israel came short of Canaan:
It Is the Apostles phrase concerning all unbelieving ones, That they all are
come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. and this you shall find sadly true,
begin or end where you will, from the child in the womb and cradle, to the
aged in the litter and on the beer; if not in Christ, then in the wilderness;
if short of Christ, then short of Canaan: The familiar expression of that
Prophet, who was so much in parables, is a wilderness, or forest to express the
world, Ezekiel. 17.24. You have mention of high trees, and low trees, of dry
trees, and green trees there; and so it is: In the wilderness, are all sorts of
trees; in sin, are all sorts of persons: You have masculine and feminine among
the trees, you have young and old, sound and rotten, cedars and shrubs,
flourishing and verdant, and ^ea^ and withered, and yet all wilderness-trees
still: O how is sin a wilderness! Here are some but sprigs, new come out from
the earth, some but small and of a little growth, of an hand, of a span, of
yard high; some taller, some full grown, some overgrown, some sixty, some an
hundred years old, yet all in the wilderness: Some are men, some women; some
are rich and sappy, some poor and without substance; some flourishing under
forms of godliness, some as withered trees, not so much as a leaf of profession
upon them, but all in the wilderness of sin still.

I shall begin with the child in and from the womb, and observe him till he
comes to the grave.

1. We are conceived and born in the wilderness of sin.
First, The child is conceived in the desert, and brought forth in the
wilderness, by the carnal conception and natural birth: If you look unto
conception, 'twas in the wilderness, or else you must deny this point, That sin
is a wilderness, or that which I am not afraid to reckon among fundamentals,
Psalm 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive
me.

If you look unto your birth, it is in the desert; read but from our Text to
the end of the verse, There thy mother brought thee forth, whoever she was that
bare thee. Friends, where does the wild Ass bring forth her colt? Is it not in
the wilderness? where that is brought forth, is man born, Job 11.11. Man is
born like a wild asses colt: compare Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. with Deuteronomy. 32.9. where God
speaks of the same Israel at the same time; In the day that thou wast born (in
Ezekiel.) thou wast cast forth in the open field, and there I spied thee; and
(says he in Deuteronomy.) I found thee in the waste howling wilderness: so then to be
born in sin, is to be born in a wilderness.

A sign hereof in the sufferings and death those rendings of little babes
If you require a sign, and will not otherwise believe: O look upon your sick
and sorrowful little Babes! Are they not sometimes torn a sunder in the birth?
are they not pricked to the heart with pains, sometimes as soon as born? are
they not rent with convulsion fits? Did not David's firstborn by Bathshebah,
die when newly born, as well as Absalom full grown? If you see a man's face and
hands all scratched, nay if you find him bloody and torn to pieces, limb from
limb, and perhaps half, or almost all devoured; will you not say that he might
thank the thorns and the savage beasts of the wilderness? Oh! that I could
never look upon my sick child, but with mine heart full of grief for mine
original wilderness-transgression! surely these rendings are from those thorns.

First, Then from hence take a view of thy birth-condition; Use hereof, 1. As
to our selves.
I would present it to you to the same end, that God did to them, Ezekiel. 16.
That you might look upon your persons as they were in the day of your birth,
and loath them; and upon the bowels of the Lords compassion toward you in that
day, and admire them: surely you cannot sufficiently do the one or the other,
and for my part, I think that he was never savingly humbled, that has not been
humbled to purpose for original-bewildrings: I cannot but deny their
conversion, that dare deny original transgression.

Secondly, From hence take a view of thy poor children: 2. As to our little
babes.
you use to look upon your children as soon as born, Oh! look upon them as born
in the wilderness! where the wild Ass has brought forth her colt, there have
thou brought forth thy child; and can thou find in thine heart to leave it
there? O pity, pity the fruit of thy loins, and of thy womb! You Will count it
an argument of a whorish woman, that shall be so unnatural as to go into a
desert to bring forth, and shall then leave her child there: You have chosen
to bring forth your children in the wilderness, whereas you might have brought
forth in Paradise, had not Eve your mother been in the transgression, and led
Adam also into that wilderness: O tremble to think of leaving them where you
bear them!

You Will say, What can we do for our little babes? what are they capable of? Why,
as soon as they are born, you can wash, and cloth, and feed their bodies, that
are not bewildred; and can you do nothing for their bewildred lost souls? you
cannot counsel, or instruct, or correct them, they are not capable, but yet you
may pray them out of the wilderness. Learn of Hannah, she had a way to bring
her son to Zion, to the Temple, to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.11. (by supplication)
from the womb, and (by dedication, or giving up to God) from the breasts, ver.
28. Take thy child from the wilderness, it is better carrying it to the temple.

CHAP. II. Contains the second, third, and fourth Particulars; that from the
womb in the wilderness; boys and girls; young men and maidens in the wilderness
of sin: proved and applied.
2 From the womb in the wilderness.
SEcondly, As in the womb and day of birth, so from the womb and birthday, the
unregenerate are spiritually bewildred.

Take your account from the very womb, the Scripture will begin as soon as you,
which says, Psalm 58.3. The wicked are estranged from the womb, as soon as
they be born they go astray. You use to say of little children, they have no
hurt in them; verily as soon as they have any thing in them, they have hurt in
them; as soon as they go, they go astray, and what is that but to be bewildred?
Isa. 48.8. Thou wast called a transgressor (that is) one turned out of the way
from the womb: The very first steps that the child can take, when it begins to
go alone, are steps in the wilderness, quam primum ingreditur, transgreditur:
Have you not observed rebellion, and the old Adam in the first gestures, and
looks, and broken words that your children learn? will not, will not, says the
child, when it can say no more; and wrangles, and fights, against it is best
friends: Surely it is not for nothing that the Holy Ghost so often joins the
character of our natural state to the word children, thus; children of wrath,
children of disobedience, rebellious children, children that are corrupters,
backsliding children, etc. I believe that though he speaks unto men and women,
yet by the phrase he imports (as the former Scriptures asserted) that they
began those ways when they were but children: Friends, you delight in your
children when they begin to go, O pity them herein, that now they begin to go
astray.

Thirdly, as little children newly speaking are speaking lies, 3. Boys and
girls in the wilderness.
and newly going, are going astray; so boys and girls (I mean of bigger growth
(playing in the streets of your town, you may find them sporting in the paths
of the wilderness: In this sense is that's too true, that God has promised to
fulfill in a better, Isa. 6.7, 8. The sucking, the weaned, the little child
plays with the lion, and leopard, and lay their hands upon the hole of the
asp, and cockatrice den.

And verily the elder they grow in years, the farther they go into the
wilderness: The Devil counts it not lost labor to play with your children in
the streets, to teach them sinful words, apish gestures, and to tread out such
paths in the wilderness for them, as their little feet may take pleasure to
trample in: But hearken little children, and I will (tell you a story that may)
teach you the fear of the Lord: If little children, even little children, you
of five, six, or seven years of age, will be meddling with the sinful ways of
the wilderness, the wild beasts of the wilderness will not be far off: Turn
your children often to that sad story, 2 Kings 2.23. There came forth little
children, and mocked the prophet, and said, Go up thou bald head, go up thou
bald head; (a business perhaps that some of you would rather smile at, then
smite at in your children, and say, more years will teach them more wit, etc.)
but these, though children, were under a curse from the Lord, even a
wilderness-curse, as it was a wilderness sin; and the Prophet turned back and
looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord, and two she-Bears out
of the forest came, and devoured forty and two children; and perhaps (though I
would gladly be charitable) that the Bears no sooner rent a sunder their little
carkases, then the roaring Lion seized upon their souls: Children, take heed of
cursing, and lying, and mis-calling, and mocking, and stealing, and playing at
prayers, etc. If you would keep out of the way of the Bear, keep away from the
side of the forest, meddle not with sin.

Let this affect the hearts of parents; say not of your children, as Paul of
himself, 1 Cor. 13.11. When I was as a child, I spoke, and understood, and did
as a child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things from me:

What do you talk, say you, it is but a child, and afterward it will it self,
as Paul did, lay aside and forget these childish sins: Truly Friends, it is well
when it is so, but it is not well for you to trust to this that it will be so.

To parents to teach the way.
You Will ask me then, What should you do?

Why first, Are thou not bound to do as much for a child, or an Apprentice of
thine own, as thou art for an ox, or an ass of thy neighbors? Art thou not
bound to do as much for a child of thy friends, committed to thee, or thine
own child, as for an ox or an ass of thine enemies? Exodus 23.4. If thou meet
thine enemies ox, or his ass going astray, thou shall surely (a strait in
junction) bring it back again: and will thou let thy child go astray, and not
set that into the way, but leave it lost and bewildred still? O the vanity of
that fancy of late growth, that children must not be taught the ways of God,
because not able to understand them! and tell me what old one is able without
teaching? Was not Nicodemus, a Doctor, as simple as a child? etc. Did he not
propound as childish questions, as to the mysteries of the Gospel? John 3.4.
nay does not God make old ones babes, and to become as little children, before
he reveal to them the mysteries of the kingdom? Matthew. 11.25. We despise not
the broken language of our little ones, nor does Christ the Hosanna's that were
sung by the little children: But if we could say nothing, God has commanded,
and who dares pretend to a counter-wisdom, Prove. 22.6. Train up a child in the
way wherein he shall go, or should go; mark the words: In the way that imports,
if it be not there, 'twil be in the wilderness, in the way wherein he should
go, or shall go when he is old, though he be not so prompt at it whilst he is a
child.

Yea, but say thou, I teach, but he will not learn; I point him the way, but
he will not learn in it: In such a case what do thou do with the ox or the
ass that thou find astray, and when thou bring^^ it into the way, will ever
and a non be running out again?

Therefore secondly, Have thou not a rod in thine hand? 2. If they will go out
or not keep in, to whip them into the way.
if it will not come out of the wilderness by calls or persuasions, whip it
out; if it will not keep in the way which thou leadest it into, whip it in: You
think it is better to whip your beast, and so to bring it home, then that it
should miss those blows, but be lost still: And will you suffer the soul of a
child to be lost for not gathering, or for not using a rod? Prove. 23.13, 14.
Thou shall not withhold correction, but beat him with the rod, and deliver his
soul from death and hell: Though folly be bound in its heart (and it be by that
folly in the wilderness) shall not the rod of correction fetch it out? Prove.
22.15.

Fourthly, Pass we on to young men and maidens, 4. Young men and maidens in the
wilderness.
they also if unregenerate, are bewildred: I desire to speak affectionately to
you, wishing you well in the Lord, as being young my self, and exposed unto your
temptations; know, my friends, that (as the shoo-maker has another last in his
shop of another size, so) Satan has another part in the wilderness for your
growing foot: There Is a road in the wilderness, and a broad one too, called by
the name of the young man's way, Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice, O young man, and walk in the
ways of thine heart; ways there are fitted to the youthful heart, when childish
ways are turned aside from; flee (says the Apostle) youthful lusts, 2 Timothy
2.22. lusts fitted unto youthful feet, long hair, and fine locks, and naked
bosoms, and fair-meetings, and drinking and dancing, and wantonness, and
chambrings, such are ways of the young men and maidens wilderness; and you shall
see them beaten to purpose on a Town-fair-day; yea, there are ways on purpose
in fashion for some foolish ones, such as ranting for Sophistets, and clubbing
for journey-men shoo-makers, etc. and they are not good Artists, unless they
can lose themselves in these fashionable paths: Therefore what pains takes the
wise man to keep young ones right in the way? Prove. 5.7. Hearken, O children!
remove thy way far from her, ver. 8. and he presses it hard home from two
Arguments.

The first, If thou go on (says he) but a little further, thou will get into
the midst of the wilderness; for, says he, I my self following the ways of my
youth; was almost in all evil, in the midst of the congregation and assembly,
ver. 14. this is sad; in the midst of a congregation, and yet in the midst of
the wilderness still; in view of men, yea perhaps in the midst of a Sermon, and
yet thine heart will be in the midst of the wilderness of sin; so sadly will
sins of youth bewilder you.

Then secondly (says he) If you keep not your way, you will meet with the Leopard
and Lion, etc. ere it be long; therefore (says he) Keep thy ways far from her,
lest thou give thy years to the cruel, ver. 9. If you have a mind to have your
years cut off, then get you into the wilderness; there are beasts enough, and
sufficiently cruel to devour you: Say not you are young, and have strength, and
shall out-wear; for Prove. 7.24. Hearken, O ye children! ver. 25. go not astray;
many have been cast down wounded, and many strong men have been slain there,
ver. 26. It may be you will say you feel no harm; and it may be so to: Many are
shot that feel it not till their blood be cold; and Prove. 7.23. A dart strikes
through the young man's liver, and yet he knows not it was for his life: Youth is
the heat of blood, and though you feel not the wound in this heat of blood, yet
at length sin shall sting like an adder, and bite like a serpent (of the
wilderness) Prove. 23.32.

To young ones Now to come up from the the wilderness.
Hearken then, you young ones, unto me, and I will show you an excellent way.
Youth (I know) is of all ages and states most desirous, and indeed most free
for travel; but it pities me to think that so much gallant youth, and the
strength thereof should be spent in wandering up and down in the worthless
wilderness of sin; Encouragement. 1. The fitness of youthful time for that
travel.
rather if you will be traveling, remember Canaan.

Oh! what a time is the strength of your youth, to make out your way from the
wilderness of sin? Thou have some strength to rush through the thickets, more
then an old man has; and if thou lose a little of thy flesh in breaking
through the thorns, thou art young, and thy flesh will come again; if thou lose
by repentance (as to carnal respects) there is time enough before thee to have
amends made thee. I observe, as the young ones were those of the Israelites that
got through the wilderness unto Canaan, Numb. 26.64. so at this day, those that
are converted are converted young, ten to one of those that live to be old, and
yet come to be new born. If old men will have their old ways still, and scorn
to learn a new lesson being old; yea if their joints be stiff, and their knees
feeble that they cannot travel, yet let us young men get up, and be going, and
the Lord be with us. This day the Lord calls you young ones from the Lions de^,
and Leopards mountains; if you refuse this call to day, you will mourn at the
last, when your strength is consumed, and say, How have I hated instruction,
and mine heart despised reproof? Prove. 7.11, 12. Take a tree from the
wilderness when its young, set it in your Garden, keep it and water it; etc.
and little fear of its death: but take an old tree from the wilderness, and
transplant it in your Orchard, and do what you will, there is little hope of
the life of it, if there be, 'twill cost much ado, (much weeping) to water it,
etc. hear David crying, Psalm 25, 6, 7. Remember thy tender mercies, remember
not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. If thou have only thy youth
transgressions, or bewildrings to reckon for, it will be work enough for thee,
though thou have thy youth strength to do the work in.

Secondly, As this is the fittest time for thee, 2. The acceptableness of youth
herein unto God.
so is it the most welcome time to God; young ones, if you did but know how
kindly the Lord would take it to see you come up from the wilderness, such
youthful Spouses leaning upon the Beloved, it would ravish your hearts within
you. I Will give you a taste, for God has bidden me go, and cry in your ears,
saying, Thus says the Lord, I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of
thine Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness in a Land that
was not sown, Jer. 2.2. Oh, Christ (the Shepherd) is come into the Wilderness
to seek, and to save that which is lost! Oh if thou will in thy youth be so
kind as to follow him (till thou shall come to Canaan) God will never forget
this love of thine espousals, say not that thou art too young to marry Christ,
the younger thou art the better Christ will like thee.

CHAP. III. A fifth particular, to wit, that man's estate is a bewildred estate,
the world is a wilderness, proved generally, proved particularly; the first
particular, poverty a wilderness, opened and applied.
Fifthly. Man's estate a bewild red estate.
FIfthly, Men and women as soon as they enter upon the world (as we say) that is
upon the heart of the world, they enter upon the heart of the Wilderness. The
world is a Wilderness to the unregenerate; for here grow those Thorns that
choke the word of God, The world is a wilderness here are the thorns.
Mat. 13.22. He that has the word choked by the Cares of this world, is said
to receive it among thorns. When the Word meets with a worldly heart, it is
like good seed sown in a thorny wilderness. Worldlings (you that hear me this
day) I appeal to your consciences, if it be not so. In comes a note, or an
observation, an advice, or a conviction, and up start the thorny worldly
thoughts, that are within thee, even whilst thou art within the reach of the
word, and choke that good seed, Here are the the entangling ways.
that it brings not forth. Again, The world is a wilderness to the
unregenerate, for here are those crooked and foul ways, that are the
entanglements of the poor soul the Apostle 2 Pet. 2.20. (mentioning the
pollutions of the world) says, They are entangled therein, and overcome. The
world is a thorny thicket and entangling wilderness to the unconverted.

My friends, were it only your Babes, and children, They that enter upon the
world enter the very midst of the wilderness.
and youth that were bewildred, it were less to be feared: you might hope that
when they came to have experience of, and to understand the ways of the world,
they might come to understand their own ways; or at least, if you were not
your selves lost, you might set them into the way. But let me tell you what
ever you think, or speak of, Men of the world know not what way they wall in.
or unto any man (Oh say you I know well enough what I do, and about what I go,
and what way I am in) there is not an unregenerate heart amongst you, but is so
far bewildred as not to know the way, that thy soul is in, Prove. 20.4. Man's
goings are of the Lord: how then can a man understand his own way? He that is a
stranger from Gods ways, is altogether ignorant of his own ways: nay how can
he understand them? Man's goings are known of the Lord; The interpretation of
this Scripture may be according to Prove. 5.21. Man's ways are before the Lords
eyes, and he pondereth all his ways. It Is Gods prerogative to understand not
only his own ways, but thy ways, as it is the Saints prerogative (that know
God) not only to understand their ways, but Gods ways: but it is thy misery,
neither to know Gods ways, nor thine own, Prove. 12.26. The way of the wicked
seduceth him. Seduceth, that is, his very way leads him out of his Way. It
seems a right way unto him, but the end thereof are ways of death, Prove.
14.12. The end of his way, he thinks, is thriving and riches, and a comfortable
life, this thinks he will be the end of his grinding the faces of the poor, and
cheating the rich, and this, he thinks, is a right way; he may lawfully buy as
cheap, and sell as dear as he can, But the end (says God) of those ways are
death, Prove. 16.25. Thus far are the men of the world themselves (though never
so wise in their generation) from understanding the ways that themselves are
in: Therefore thy plottings to grow great or rich, or honorable in the world,
are but all of them as so many plottings to entangle thy self in the
wilderness; Psa. 9.16. The wicked is snared in the works of his own hands;
Higgajon, Selah. Mark it well: What do thou when thou plottest? thou make a
snare: for whom? for thine own feet. So true is that Prove. 5.22, 23. His own
iniquities shall take the wicked himself, etc. and in the greatness of his
folly he shall go astray. Were there no temptations from Satan, His own are
great enough to make a wilderness: and therein therefore he shall go astray.
Thy little one speaks it knows not what, but one fancy and thought coming in
after another, makes it at a lose in its language, and thou can not
understand what it at first intended: and as thy child has word upon word,
till it lose it self, and bewilder its wits in speaking; so have thou vain
thought upon thought, until thou bewilder and lose thy soul in thinking, and
worse in working. Thy child is a little fool, and thou art a great one. Thy
child is a little astray, and thou art much more. In the greatness of their
folly they go astray.

I shall first speak more generally to the bewildrings of man's estate, then
more particularly to those two eminent dividers of this estate; I mean poverty
and riches, and unto their bewildrings.

Proof. 1. General.
First then more generally, the world is a wilderness unto all, whether rich or
poor, one and other. All that I shall farther speak hereunto, shall be some
notes from Mat. 21.13, compared with Mark. 4 9. and with Luke 8.14. In these
three places you have Christ speaking to one and the same thing, and that is,
the comparing of the word sown upon the world, unto seed sown upon the
wilderness, where thorns come up and choke it. Now what are these thorns of the
wilderness? Says Matthew, The cares of the world, and those you know entangle
all, relating to all, whether rich or poor. Says Mark, The cares of the world,
and the lusts of other things, and that relates more properly to the needy:
what they want, they bewilder themselves in lusting after. Says Luke, The
cares of the world, and the pleasures of this life; and that relates more
properly to the wealthy: what they have, that they bewilder themselves in
taking pleasure in. They that want, lose themselves in the thoughts of what
others have, and how to reach unto their estate, a garment, a gown of such a
fashion, a kitching so adorned, a room so furnished, an orchard, a garden so
fair and beautiful, Oh! that they had it! Here are bewildering lusts of other
things. They that have enough and abundance, lose themselves in the thoughts of
what they have, how to dispose of it. They can keep Hounds, and Hawks, and
race-horses, and what not? Bauds, and Parasites to flatter them, and Whores to
satiate them, and all to bewilder them. Or if they be not wholly so vainly
disposed as the former, or so wickedly as the latter; yet still there are
wilderness ways enough. This corner of the house must be pulled down, and
built again in another mode, and this takes up a twelve month perhaps, that
they cannot tend their souls: but they poor fools go astray, they know not,
they mind not whether: As they are in bed at night, they fall a fancying their
building till they fall asleep, and as soon as awake or up in the morning, they
must look upon their workmen before they look upon their hearts: and when this
end is done, the other, end must be made suitable; when one bewildering way is
passed through, they come into another. From their workmen to dinner, from
dinner to bowls, etc. from bowls to supper, from supper to bed. These are the
bewildring pleasures of this life. You may enlarge according to your own
experiences, and whilst you consult with them, you will have reason to admire
that such foolish vanities as do, should so bewilder your noble and immortal
souls. And as to the third, The cares of the world bewilder all. Apprentices
may think (when God at a Sermon touches their hearts) Oh that I were as free
as my master is! I would hear Sermons oftener then he does; and perhaps as soon
as thy time is our, the world, the same wilderness, gets thee in; thou have a
wife, and a stock, and a great deal to do, and now will thou get out thy self
as little, or let out thy servants as little as ever thy master, thy cruel
carnal master, would let out thee. Improve these experiences you, in whose
bosoms I have been this day: and let me entreat you to lay them to heart. Have
not your hearts been a woolgathering sometimes (as our proverb is) I speak unto
you that trade into the Wool country, whilst your bodies are here in the
Cong^egation? if so, then lay it to heart.

Proof partic.
But Secondly, More particularly, There are two sorts of men I will speak unto.

Poverty is a wilderness.
1. The poor of the world. To these their poverty is a wilderness. They think
were they rich, they could, and would give God more time, etc. than they do.
This is their weakness, but yet verily their poverty is their snare into the
wilderness. 'Ile turn you to the poor man's wilderness, as you shall find it
described from a poor man's mouth, even holy Asaph, Isa. 73. and how does he
express it? verse. 2. As for me, my steps well nigh were slipped, my feet almost
were gone. Mark that. Poverty is almost enough to take a Saints feet from under
him, or to turn them aside, and so to cause him to go astray.

There are two sorts of transgressions, or bewildrings that poverty quickly
entangleth the soul in. First, those of the heart: Secondly, those of the life.

Those transgressions are goings astray of the heart, or thought-bewildrings,
poverty readily leads unto; such as these I will instance, as I said in Asaph.

To the thoughts.
1. Swelling thoughts against Gods dispensations toward others; wherein there
is great transgression, Psalm. 73.3. I was envious when I saw the prosperity of
the foolish and wicked. Why says the heart, what is there in such a one, but
God might as well have given me hundreds a year as him? Why should such a one
thrive, and I want? grow rich, and I grow poor? this is a great, and (I fear)
an usual transgression.

2. Over-high thoughts of the estate of the rich because of their wealth, and
this also is a great transgression, verse. 4. There are no bands in his death.
What a strange fancy is this, as who should say, death cannot hold a rich man.
Oh! thinks a poor man, I shall dye of this sickness; but if I were as such a
rich man is, I could have such a cordial, and such a Physician, and such
attendance, that doubtless I should quickly get up again.

3. Over-hard thoughts of Gods dispensations toward himself, verse. 10. Waters
of a full cup are wrung out unto them. Nothing but wrath, and the dregs of the
wrath, the very wringings out of wrath are (he thinks) reserved for him. And
verse. 13. All the day long have I been plagued. What all the day long? take
heed of saying so; nothing but plagues? no mercy? no refreshment? no
breathing-time? no intermission? I do not believe it. You think to hardly of
the Lord. This is a great transgression to think that there is nothing but
plagues in poverty.

4. Wretched, yet ordinary, thoughts of losing the bands of poverty, for
slacking the cords of conscience, thoughts of getting more liberty in the
world, by taking more liberty in the wilderness, I mean in sin, verse. 13.
Verily I have washed mine hands in innocence, and cleansed mine heart in vain.
I had better turn flatterer, and so get favor with the rich; or cheater, and so
grow rich, than be as I am, having a name of innocence, but consumed and undone
with poverty; this is a great and grievous heart-transgression, though it never
come so far (as it did not in Asaph, and will seldom do in the Saints) as unto
the act.

2. The transgressions of the life and conversation, 2. To their lives and
practices.
Prove. 30.9. Least I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain.
You cannot steal without taking Gods name in vain: and you cannot be poor
(unless you be rich in grace) but you will be ready to steal.

1. From men by dishonesty in your callings and dealings with them, and this is
to make Gods commandment (which is his name) to be in vain.

2. Or at least from God, by taking that time to thy worldly cares and labors
which thou ought to reserve for Gods service, and herein thou contractest
such guilt, as that God will not hold thee guiltless: for the Lords Ordinances
are his name.

3. From thy self, by hindering thy soul of those precious advantages, which the
gain of ten thousand worlds cannot recompense. Perhaps thou art earning two
pence, or a penny at thy loom, whilst thy soul might have been converted, and
for ever enriched at a Lecture. And judge you when the word is preached, and
thou neglectest it, because of thy poverty; when thou might rise well
perhaps one day in the week an hour sooner, or go to bed an hour later, do
thou not herein steal (from thy poor soul) and take the name of the Lord in
vain?

To poor ones bewildred by poverty. Advice as to their thoughts of heart.
1. Then a word as to the wilderness of thy thoughts, then of thy ways.

1. If thy poverty-thoughts bewilder thee, take Christ's council: take thou
little or none of them; better for a poor man to be quite without thoughts,
then to be bewildred by his thoughts, Mat. 6.25. Take no thought for your life,
verse. 31. Take no thought what you shall eat, or drink, or be clothed with,
verse. 34. Take no thought for the morrow, that is, no distracting, disturbing,
bewildring thought: better no thought at all then such thoughts. Or if you will
be thining,

1. Think of your God often. Daniel had nothing but pulse to live on, Dan.
1.12. yet Daniel could think of God, and make solemn supplication three times a
day, Dan. 6.12. Seek then the Kingdom of God first, and those things shall be
added, Mal. 6.33. Therefore,

2. Think of your voyage out of the wilderness often; if you be never so poor,
God will bear your charges unto Canaan. God will enable thine old clothes to
keep thee warm still, if thou can not get new, Deuteronomy. 29.5. I have led you
forty years in the wilderness, and your clothes are not waxed old, nor your
shoe upon your foot. And God will make thee as fat with pulse as the children
fed at the Kings Table, Dan. 1.15.

2. As to the ways of their lives.
2. As to your life, maintain holiness in your ways; when the beasts of the
wilderness, even the strongest and most ravening of those beasts, the young
Lions shall suffer hunger; that is, those that can range in the ways of the
wilderness, in the paths of sin, to get an estate or a liveliehood any how;
then they that fear the Lord are sure to want nothing, Psalm. 34 10. God will
withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, that's in the right and
strait ways, Psalm. 84.11.

CHAP. IV. Riches a wilderness to the unregenerate, opened and applied.
SEcondly, 2. Riches a wilderness to unregenerate ones.
Riches themselves are but a wilderness to carnal ones, 1 Timothy 6.10. The love
of money is the root of all evil. What then grows up from that root? truly
thickets enough to make a wilderness: remarkable are the two things that follow
in the same verse. First, they that have coveted it, have erred from the faith
(there are the paths.) Secondly, they have peirced themselves thorough with
many sorrows (there are the thorns of the wilderness.) Hence 2 Pet. 2.15. They
have forsaken the right way, and have gone astray, following the way of Balaam:
What Is the reason? Who loved wages of unrighteousness. Express is that language
in all three Evangelists, Mat. 13.22. Mark. 4.19. Luke 8.14. We read it the
deceitfulness of riches, but the Greek is (...), of (...) (that signifies a
way) and the privative (...), in plain English, riches, whose property it is to
lead out of the way. Or (which translation of the word cannot be quarrelled
with) the bewildrings of riches. More particularly riches of the world are
subject to bewilder by the multitudes of their occasions, temptations, and
excuses.

1. Riches set men round with a wilderness of occasions, 1. Their occasions.
so that they know not which way to turn toward Canaan, Pro. 30.9. Give me not
riches, says Agur, verse. 7. least I be full and deny thee, verse. 9. When the
house is full of Mammon, seldom it is that there is room for God. I am bold to
understand fullness of business created by riches, as one sort of fullness here
meant. He has so great trading, and so many to speak with, so many ways at
once to go, that he has not time to speak with God, as he goes by, or to walk
in the ways toward Canaan, or to trade for heaven. I have very rarely
observed that any man has had more time for heaven then another, by having
more of earth then has another. If the rich man can find time enough from his
occasions to have a lesson set him, or to hear it read, Good master what shall
I do to be saved? he can by no means stay to take it forth; He went quickly
away; for he had great possessions, Mat. 19.16, 22. The rich have barns to pull
down, and greater to build, and a thousand more occasions. Ask them, and say,
Come let us go up to Zion; they must needs deny you, their hands are already
full of their own occasions. I have seen what time some had to take money in,
but I have wondered what time they have had to pray in. Or if you turn unto
duty, which yet is as sad, do not the occasions of the world go along with your
hearts. Ezekiel. 33.31. They come, and sit and hear, but their heart goes after
their covetousness.

2. Their temptations.
2. The temptations of riches are a wilderness to the soul: This the poor man
thinks not of, when he would so fain change estates with the rich. 2 Timothy 6.8,
9. Having food and raiment let us be content. But they that will be rich fall
into temptations, and into a snare, and into many an hurtful lust. Such as
these.

1. Temptations to forget their dependence upon God; they that are fed from
hand to mouth, are not so subject. But the rich man (if carnal) Psalm. 10.3, 4.
boasts of his hearts desire, and God is not in all his thoughts.

2. Temptations to sensuality and carnal lusts. These men have fuel to cast
upon the flame, more than others have. The rich man can go always in purple
and fine linen, and fare deliciously every day, Luke 16.19. Poor men (though
they would) cannot: And verily what is all that they have in the world more
than others, but the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride
of life?

3. Temptations to desire always to be here: to undervalue heaven, to build
upon earth, to neglect, yea, to forget their latter end. If the fool has much
good, he presently dreams of many years, Luke 12.19. and says, he shall never
be moved, Psalm. 10.6. such and a thousand more such like temptations are enough
to bewilder a poor soul.

2. A wilderness of excuses. The more riches, 3. Their excuses.
the more occasions: and the more occasions, the more excuses (and excuses, as
one said, are as hilts upon the hands, and make it much more difficult to make
men lay down their weapons.) Such a friend must be seen, I, and that this day;
to morrow will not do so well; let this excuse mine absence from this days
Lecture. Such a customer must be waited on, who just now is to go out of town;
let this excuse another time, Luke 14.18, 19, 20. What with rich bargains, and
rich leases, and rich wives, or one thing or other, all with one consent began
to make excuses. There were different excuses, but all with one consent. If he
had not had money enough to have bought those Oxen, to have hired that farm, to
have joyntured that wife, he might, for ought I know, have been a guest at the
wedding supper. Mark further the language of excuses, I have bought a piece of
ground, and I must needs go and see it, I pray thee have me excused. I have
pointed the man to meet me there, and he will be frustrated, except I go; pray
tell your master, if it were not a case of necessity I would have come unto
him, but now I must needs go another way. There is a wilderness of excuses.

Give me leave then you that are rich in this world, Advice unto rich men.
and perhaps I might say in this wilderness, to present a few things to your
considerations.

1. May not this be a worm unto all your enjoyments, 4. Considerations for rich
men.
to think, as perhaps you have reason to do, if unregenerate you ought to do,
that what ever you have gotten, you have gotten it in the wilderness. It Is the
Lords own notion, not mine. Read Job. 24.5, 6. Behold, as wild Asses in the
desert, go they forth to their work, rising betimes for a prey; the wilderness
yields food for them, and for their children, etc. Thou have got (thou can
say) an estate for thy self, an inheritance for thy son, portions for thy
daughters; but if thy neighbors or thy conscience can say, thou have got it in
the wilderness, that sin has yielded food for thee, and for thy children, do
thou nor think this thought will spoil all, in the day that thy wilderness
shall become an howling wilderness? Surely it shall. Therefore, Go to now, rich
men, lament and howl for the miseries that shall come up on you, James 5.1.

2. Consider, It Is not more hard for any to get out of the wilderness, then for
the rich; as strait as the gate is that enters into life, so strait is the gap
that leads out of the wilderness. And surely it is not for those that are fat
like Jesuron, clothed (as the Prophet speaks) with thick clay, to crowd or
creep out at so narrow an hole. The passage is no bigger then a needles eye;
therefore one way or another, by losses, or self-denial, or contempt of the
world, thou must be brought to a single thread to go thorough the needles eye.
The young man might else have got out of the wilderness, but he was too thick to
go thorough, for he had great possessions, Mat. 19.22.

3. Consider what a foolish and vain purchase it is to grow rich in a
wilderness; for whilst an estate is gotten, thy self is lost. And upon this
account, what would it profit thee to gain the world, whilst thou losest thine
own soul? Mark. 8.36. This was the folly of that fool, Luke 12.19. He boasted
what an estate was his, when that very night it appeared that his soul was none
of his then; Whose are the things that he had provided? verse. 20.

4. Consider, Whatever thou gettest in the wilderness, thou shall undoubtedly
leave there. The thorns and the briars of those thickets will never suffer thee
to go away with thy fleece that grew there. Thus he that gathers riches, and
not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and in the end shall
be a fool, Jer. 17.11.

Therefore let rich men learn to choose the way of truth, as David, Psalm.
119.30. Yea, to turn their heart thereto, and not to covetousness, as verse. 36.
Yea, To rejoice in the way (mark the phrase, the way) of Gods testimonies as
much as in all riches. My friends, Gods testimonies are a way; all riches
without them are but a wilderness.

CHAP. V. Old Age a wilderness to the unregenerate, opened and applied.
SIxthly, The unregenerate aged ones are yet bewildred: 6. Old ones
unregenerate act as old trees, rotting in the wilderness.
and even old age a wilderness unto their souls. These are the trees of the
wilderness of 60. 90. 100. years old. Verily I was much affected when I spoke
of your babes as born in the wilderness; but oh! how shall I speak unto thee
who art already rotten, and every day falling to dust in the wilderness of sin?
you have a phrase for an old man, that he has one foot in the grave; oh! how
sad a case is he in when both feet are in the wilderness? 1. If you call him a
tree in the wilderness, oh! how unfit is he now to be transplanted? 2. If you
call him a travailer in the wilderness, oh! how unfit is he to go thorough
those uneven and stumbling ways, that scarce can creep in a plain way? Mine
heart aches to think of your hoary heads, and unregenerate hearts. Your heads as
white as a Dove, your hearts as black as a Raven. You Will say of a grave and
snowy-bea^ded ancient one, there goes a fine old man: it is so indeed, and only
so, when his heart is as holy as his head is white, Prove. 16.31. The hoary head
is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness. It Is that that
makes it so. A crown is a very glorious thing indeed, but there are but few of
them. An old man walking in the ways of righteousness, is a glorious fight;
oh! that I could see more of them. But mark, If it be found in the way. It
seems old men are not ordinarily in the way, and they that are out of the way
are in the wilderness. Now 2. if he be found in the way with a hoary head, what
then? why? then he is a Crown. But how and if he be found in the wilderness,
and his gray hairs be found in sin? why, then he is a curse, Psalm. 65.20. A
sinner of an hundred years old shall be accursed. A wilderness tree of an
hundred years old, is a cursed tree. 3. If it be found in the way; who should
find whether he be or no? has he been lurking so long in the wilderness, and
must he now be found out? yes, God will find what ways you walk in; and be
you as crafty as an old Fox, yet God will find your haunts in the wilderness.
Suitable is that Job 14.16. Thou numbrest my steps, thou watchest over my sin.
Thou have forgot, but God can reckon how many steps thou have taken in the
wilderness. Oh! that we could always so walk, as always remembering that we
shall be found in what ways we are walking. Happy are you young ones that are
found so doing, and you hoary heads, if you be found in the way of
righteousness.

And doubly bewildred must the aged sinner needs be, partly in the remembrance
of younger years, In two respects.
partly in the infirmities of his old age.

1 His younger years bewilder him. 1. Youth-vanities.
1. His younger years must needs be now a wilderness unto him, as to their
vanity, their guilt, their abiding iniquity.

1. How can he choose but be lost in his own spirit, when he looks back, and
thinks of the emptiness, vanity, and dissatisfaction of all his youthful
courses? sure when he sees all the works which he has done under the Sun, he
must say as Solomon, Eccles. 2.14. All is vanity, and vexation of spirit. Yea,
will he or nill he, this shall be; for the evil days shall come wherein he
shall say, I have no pleasure in them, Eccl. 12.1.

2. How can he choose but be lost in his own conscience, when he looks back upon
his youth-sins and strength-sins? 2. Youth-guilt.
The pleasures of sin bewildred him then; the horrors of sin amaze and bewilder
him now, Job. 13.26, 27. Thou writest bitter things against me (says holy
Job) thou make me to possess the sins of my youth, thou look narrowly to
all my paths. God (that looks so to thy paths all thy life) will by his
writings, upon thy conscience, put thee in full possession of the sins of thy
youth (as you make writings, when you would put one in possession) thou shall
have them, and hold them: for God writes bitter things against thee, and thou
shall possess thy youth sins. Oh! what a burden, what a wilness is the guilt
of twenty or thirty years sins to one then converted? And if so, at what a lose
may the sinner of an hundred years old be?

3. 3. Remainders of youth-sins.
The speculative, re-actings of his youth and strength-sins, in his aged and
crazy years, do much bewilder him; seldom is it (though his body be spent, and
consumed in sin) but his mind is as full for it, and as much taken up with it
as ever. Desire fails (as to his body) but his heart is as lustful as ever; To
see and to hear of the actings of his old sins by younger ones, pleases him.
Methinks it is a sad expression, Job 20.11. His bones are full of the sins of his
youth. It seems sin will hold as long as any thing holds; when his fl sh is
consumed, his bones hold still: when sin leaves his flesh, it enters into his
bones, that is, his abiding part; if his body be disabled for sin, yet his
mind is full of it, yea, and it shall lie down with him in the grave. Thus do
youth-sins bewilder him when he is old.

2. 2 Infirmity of old age.
The infirmities of his age cannot but be as a wilderness to his soul, and
render his condition much more lost and remediless. To instance but in two
amongst many. The dimness of his sight, and the lameness and feeblness of his
legs and feet.

1. His dim and dead-sightedness is such as he cannot see the way; for those
that look out at the windows are now darkened, Eccl. 12.3. His judgment and
apprehension is gone, as to naturals, and how unfit then for the view of
spiritual things? he is dull of hearing and slow of remembering, and all his
mentals are impaired, and which is worst of all, the Lord in rightousnes
smites such aged ones that have had long, and slighted long, the
opportunities of knowing the way of peace, with judicial blindness and blockish
sottishness, that as they will not, so they cannot, yea that they might not see
with their eyes, lest they should be converted, and he should heal them, Isa.
6.18.

2. Such lameness is in his legs, and feeblness in his feet, that if he could
see, yet could he not walk in the ways of God; and what can you now think but
that he must perish in the wilderness? Eccl. 12.3. The strong men bow
themselves, His affections were strong, his soul was vigorously carried out by
them, for they are the feet of the soul, but they now bow under him: And how
can his desire think you be vigorous for God? for the very native edge is taken
off of it; for verse. 5. His desire shall fail. His affections are now gone,
that were strong: if he go to God, he must go without legs; but alas! little
of that; old men both in naturals, and as to spirituals, love to lay their old
bones at rest. (Alas! how should he put up strong supplications, that is
himself so weak? or be frequent in prayers, when he hales for breath? such as
will, and must be in the pangs of conversion.) In a word, how should he get out
of the wilderness, that is not able to stir from the place where he lies?

But yet my heart breaks to think of leaving thee there. Old ones, Use. 1.
Encouragment to Old ones desirous to come out of the wilderness.
has God touched any of your hearts this day? have you any unfeigned desires
to travel out of your old wilderness in your old age? If you have, speak: and
then 'Ile speak. Truly if you have but yet an ear to hear in good earnest, know
that though it be impossible with man to transplant such an old tree, and to
make it take root in a new soil, or to take such a withered branch, and to
graft it into a living stock; yet with the Lord nothing is impossible: for the
grace of the Gospel nothing at all is too hard. That God that is able to make
the hypocrite, though a green tree, to be dried up, is able, yea, and according
to his promise, willing to cause thee though a dead and a dry tree to flourish;
read Ezekiel. 17.24 Yea, but will thou say (as well thou may) my strength (as
you said) I find is gone; I would travel after Christ, but my strength is
spent in wandering in the wilderness. I fear never was any converted whose case
was so desperate: yea, but it was so with the lost sheep, Luke 15. It had spent
its strength in the wilderness, and could not go; but Christ could carry it
(and so he can thee) he took it, and laid it upon his shoulder, v. 5. If then
thou can not come out of the wilderness but by leaning upon his arm, it is no
unmannerliness: Beg of Christ with importunities to take thee, and to lay thee
upon his shoulder. Object not thy lameness to come to Christ.

But for you aged ones, 2 Terror ^o those that resolve to stay there.
that have lain under the droppings of this word of grace this day, but yet
despise the day of your visitation, so near night, and will not hear his voice
to day, but harden your hearts as in the former days of your provocation in
the wilderness, know that it shall fare with you as with the dry trees there;
those drops of rain (that cause other trees to sprout forth) falling on them,
cause them to rot the sooner. This word shall soake into thine heart, Oh! thou
dead tree, and rot thee within more and more, until thou by thy rottenness be
perfectly fitted for Gods furnace. Job 22.15, 16. Have thou marked the old way
which wicked men have trodden? who have been cut down out of time, whose
foundation was overflown with a flood. Thou have trodden the same paths, even
paths of wickedness, and of the wilderness; Thou shall be rooted up, and the
flood of Gods wrath shall overflow thy foundations: Thou shall be cut down out
of time, and committed to eternity, and the everlasting flames of wrath shall
take hold upon thee. Think of this your aged ones that are in the twelfth hour
of your day. If you have not found the way out of the wilderness, whilst your
day shall last, know that when the night comes you shall never find any way,
save to bed only, I mean, to the grave, to hell.

CHAP. VI. The dying hour a bewildring hour to lost souls, and Hell a
wilderness to departing sinners, opened, and applied.
BUt sevethly, 7. The dying hour a bewildring hour unto poor lost souls.
The dying heart is a bewildring hour unto poor souls. And every one that dies
in the state of sin, dies in the wilderness. The Lords threatening to the old
Israel for their old unbelief was this, Your carkeses shall fall in the
wilderness, Numb. 14.27. And the same sin being renewed by the same people,
this threatening is renewed in a plainer dress, John 8.21. You shall seek me,
but you shall dye in your sins, whither I go, you cannot come. I go to Canaan,
says Christ, but thither you shall never come, for you shall dye in the
wilderness of your sins. Joshua walked uprightly, but Israel did not. Yea,
says Christ, You shall seek me, but you shall dye in your sins. That is, you
that have wandered in the wilderness thus long, but would not be turned; when
you see the Lion, fain would ye flee to the shepherd then; when night comes,
fain you would get out of the wilderness: but then you shall seek me as a
guide, but shall not find me; You shall seek me as a way, but shall not light
upon me; for as you have lived, so shall ye die: You have lived in your sins,
you shall die in your sins: and friends, you have heard that to live in sin, is
to live in the wilderness: You now hear that to dye in sin, is to dye there.
Therefore Zelophehads daughters join both together, Numb. 27.3. Our father dyed
in the wilderness, he dyed in his own sin.

Three things make the sinners death a wilderness to his soul. Three things
make death a wilderness to him. 1. Horror of what is past.


1. The horror of what he has been. Do you think friends that when all the
sins that ever he has committed, shall stand round in order about him, the
thoughts and horror of them is not enough to bewilder him? Now he sins, and
takes not any notice perhaps, or at least but a little. He was drunk and
forgets it. He committed uncleanness such and such a time, and has forgotten;
but God that remembers, will also make him remember: God will methodize his
sins, and they shall come in their order, and stand before him, when God
reproves him; and that of all times most eminently at the hour of death. Psalm.
50.21. And surely if single sins could wilder us, much more can they all, when
they are set in order before us. Oh! such a day in the forenoon I met with such
a company; and in in that company fell into such sins: and that ^fternoon I met
with such company, and then I wandered in such si^ns, and that night when I
came home, I acted with such and such fresh si^s: and sirs, I would have you
believe, that if you would study, you cannot half so orderly remember the sins
of yesterday, as God will make you able the to remember the sins of your whole
lives: And if your will not yet think this a Wilderness, Listen Sirs, listen!
whose voice is tha^ in the next verse, viz. verse 22. Consider this, you that
forget God, lest I come and tear you in pieces, whilst there is none to
deliver: If that be not the voice and roaring of a Lion, then let not your
methodized guilt, and horror of your sins be called a Wilderness. Here you have
sins set in order, and would you know what order it is? Why this is the order,
his sins are set round about him, yea, so near him, that they take hold upon
him; yea, so many of them, that they are more than the hairs of his head, yea,
they reach so far, that they are innumerable: so that he is not only unable to
get out, but even unable to look out of this Wilderness. This is the souls
condition till mercy break in upon it. Psalm 40.12. Encompassing horrors.
For (says David) innumerable evils have compassed me abeut, mine iniquities
have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up, they are more than
the hairs of mine head, therefore mine heart fails me. These are the very
words, and if this do not make a very Wilderness, I know not what can. Now,
when is the time that God sets the sinners sins in such order as this is? He
tells you in Job 36.8, 9. They be holden in the coards of affliction, and bound
in fetters, then he shows them their transgression, wherein they have exceeded,
that is, (to English the word Transgressions) their bewildrings, wherein they
have gone astray.

2. As the horror of what has been, 2. Sorrowful thoughts of what is.
so the distracting thoughts of that which is, are enough to bewilder him.
Balshazzar in his dying day, though he were in the midst of his Nobles, his
Concubines, his wise men and Astrologers, his wine, his women, his dainties,
his delights; yet in the midst of them all was he in the midst of this
Wilderness, and as you know, at an utter loss, for says the Text, His thoughts
troubled him. Dan. 5.6. What, thought he, must I now die, and leave all this?
Leave all this, and be taken away? Be taken away, and know not whether? And
must I leave this Crown, this company, this glory, these delights, to lie
down in the dust, and in the noysom grave? O! such and thousands more such were
his thoughts; and if these were not enough to make him at such a loss as he
was, Encompassing sorrows.
and so to bewilder him. See Psalm 116.3. The sorrows of Death compassed me.
Observe the Phrase, the sorrows of Death are surrounding, and therefore they
are bewildring sorrows. As sorrowful friends stand round about the dying man's
bed; so do these bewildring sorrowful thoughts stand round his dying heart.
Pray Sits, What do ye now think you will then think of? Certainly you cannot
tell.

3. Fears of what shall be.
Thirdly, as the horror of what has been, sorrow for what is, so fears of what
is like to be, (nay, what is sure to be) cannot but bewilder the dying sinner.
You have heard that the horror of sin is an enclosing horror; you have heard
the sorrows of the grave are enclosing sorrows, Encompassing fears.
and so are these fears enclosing, and therefore bewildring fears, Jer. 46.5.
Fear was round about, on the right hand and on the left hand, above, beneath,
forward, backward. Look which way the sinner will, or the sinner can, there are
these fears. Look backward, sin makes him afraid: on the right hand, and the
wrath of the Lamb scares him; on the left hand, and the roaring Lion frightens
him: upward, and God, and Heaven, and Judgment make him afraid: and downward,
and Hell fills him as full of fears, as it is of such sinners as himself is. So
that here is fear round about; and therefore a Wilderness. If these horrors,
and sorrows, and fears, were only on the right and on the left, one might get
out before or behind, but seeing they encompass, you cannot but think that
they bewilder.

O^her^ a Wilderness to dying sinners.
I might add, that as the dying sinner is a Wilderness to himself, so usually
others are a Wilderness unto him. He makes choice of wicked, and vain, and
carnal companions for his friends, whilst he lives and in his health; and God
(in judgment) hemms him in with them, when he comes to die. Is there nor many a
dying sinner in whose conscience Hell-flames break forth in his sick bed, and
then, O! for such a Minister, such a Christian. He vomits up his sins, and
cannot be quiet, casts up mire and dirt, and yet he cannot rest; he must speak
with them: and carnal friends are about him, that would not perhaps have any
thing break out, because they have had fellowship with him in his sins, and
they smother all again. The Minister's not at home. We sent to such a man, and
he will not come at you; when perhaps there is no such matter. Yea, the carnal
Physician must counsel, O! let not him be sent for, if he come, the sick man
will spend his spirits, and it will be enough to undo him, to spend himself
with speaking, Or thus, You shall not need so to trouble your self or them. You
shall not die, but live, says the Physician: No fear of dying this bout: and
yet presently drops the poor bewildred sinner into the dust, whilst these
carnal friends stand (just like the greener and fresher Trees of the
Wilderness) round about him. And (as you have heard) whilst they be thus
folden together as Thorns, they shall be devoured as Stubble fully dry. Nahum
1.10. And this leads me unto thoughts of Hell it self. As Death so Hell is a
Wilderness to the wicked, for Hell followed with him. Rev. 6.8.

The souls that depart in the Wilderness of sin must hence to the howling
Wilderness of Hell; 8. Hell a Wilderness to departing sinners.
there shall be weeping and wailing, yelling and houling, and gnashing of
teeth. I would have you to reckon no more difference betwixt Sin and Hell, than
just betwixt the Wilderness unkindled, Hell a Wilderness but set on fire.
and the Wilderness set on fire. For Wickedness burns as a Fire, it shall
devour the Briars and Thorns, it shall kindle the thickets of the Wilderness,
and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke. Through the wrath of the
Lord of Hosts is this Land darkened, and the People (Mark, the People are the
Trees of the Wilderness:) shall be as fuel of the fire, no man shall spare his
brother. Isai 9 18 19. Sinful mates in that day shall betray, and accuse, and
do what they can to make one another brands in the burning, that have been here
as brethren in iniquity. Therefore houl ye for this day of the Lord, it shall
come, as destruction, from the Almighty. Isai 13.6. And where shall this fall,
but upon the houling Wilderness? For when the boughs thereof are withered,
(that is fit for burning) they shall be broken off, the women shall come and
set them on fire, and he that made them will not have mercy on them. Isai
27.11. For this he has resolved, that he will go through them, and burn them
up together. v. 4. So true is that (which God speaks figuratively) in that
sense which is most spiritual, Sin shall have great pain. Ezekiel. 30.16. God
speaks it of that material Wilderness, that is, of the People that dwelt round
about that desolate place; You will find it as fully and sadly true of the
spiritual Wilderness of sin, if ever you come to Hell. When Sin comes to have
great pain, when this Wilderness is set on fire, that is Hell. Read Ezekiel. 20.47.

And thus you see from first to last, the unregenerate are spiritually
bewildred; young and old, living and dying, they are in a Wilderness of sin.
From hence,

Vindication of Gods justice in punishing sin.
Let me first plead the righteousness of God in damning sinners. When God comes
to punish men's crooked ways, their crooked hearts are blasphemously ready to
reckon Gods ways crooked. If therefore you now reflect how wretchedly crooked
your own ways have been in trespassing, you cannot think Gods ways crooked in
arresting. The Lord himself thus vindicates his own righteousness, Ezekiel. 18.24.
In his trespass which he has trespassed, and in the sin which he has sinned,
shall he die. Blame not justice for arresting you when you die. Ye have been
Trespassers, that is, you have gone out of the way, all your lives. Therefore
God challenges them for challenging him. Yet ye say, my way is not equal. v.
25. Hear O Israel, are not my ways equal? Are not your ways unequal? 29.
Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, according to your ways: Repent
and turn from all your transgressions, (that is, from all your goings astray)
and so iniquity shall not be your ruin. v. 30. And what can the Lord say
other? If (says God) you will not cease trespassing, you shall die in your
trespass; but if you would turn, (and O that you would) says God, from your
transgression, it should not be your ruin. Therefore cast away all your
transgressions, v. 31. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
says the Lord, wherefore turn your selves and live, v. 32. And if (for all
this) you shall so love rather to wander, and to trespass, than to walk in the
highway of God, the way of peace, Be it unto you according to your hearts
desire, The Lord shall judge you according to your own ways. Therefore,

Secondly, 2. Caution what ways you walk in.
Let me entreat you to be exceedingly observant what ways you walk in. There is
but one way of life. All the other ways are Wilderness. The ways of infancy,
ways of childhood, ways of youth, ways of manhood, of old age, are all a
wilderness, if the condition of the soul be Christ-less: therefore mark the way
thou walk in. Many times experienced travailers miss the way which they well
know, by having their thoughts otherwise employed, and (as to their way)
inconsiderate. David's question of young men holds true in all, Wherewith shall
a young man cleanse his way? Why? by taking heed thereto according to thy word.
Psalm. 119.9. So Job 22.15. Have thou marked the old way which wicked men have
trodden? Mark the bad way, take heed unto the good, and so shall thou keep in
the way of salvation, and out of the wilderness of sin.

Thirdly, 3. Terror to those that are and will continue in the wilderness.
But what shall I say to those that (notwithstanding all that has been spoken)
are yet, and yet resolve to be, in the wilderness of sin? That have been young,
and now are old, yet still in sin? Sirs, do you not hear God inviting you into
his way? Do you not hear the Lion roaring in your own way? Do you not hear that
a wilderness-death follows a wilderness-life, and that Hell follows with it?
You are sometimes scared from thought of the ways of holiness, and
mortification, self-denial, etc. upon hearsay and thought, that there is a Lion
in that way. Prove. 26.13. when there is no such matter; and though God himself
tells you, that himself in these your ways will be as a Lion to you, and that
your transgression will be our ruin, and asks you, Why will ye die? all that he
can ge^ from you is this, We will die in the wilderness we have lived, in the
wilderness we will die. What can God say, but, Be it as you have spoken, and
Die eternally?

Repent and turn from all your transgressions. Ezekiel. 18.30. and cast away from
you all your transgressions. v. 31. that is, turn unfeinedly, turn universally.
Turn you, and the Lord shall come, Encouragement to com out of the wilderness.
Christ will meet them.
and meet you in your way. For the Redeemer shall come to them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, says the Lord. Isai 49.20. O! but what shall I do with
my sins, my wanderings, my wilderness-provocations? I durst come, were it not
for them. Why? Sirs, I pray deal plainly with me, and with your selves; Are you
willing to come in good earnest? Speak, and I Will speak. If you be, (I dare say
of you) young or old, rich or poor, as of any of the Saints of God already
converted; All we like Sheep have gone astray. (Mark that, we, and all we) And
the Lord has laid upon him all the iniquity of us all: and we have turned
every one to his own way, And bear their burden for them.
(and yet the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all) Isai 53.6. O! that
(as all of us have thus gone out of the way) we might all of us come up out of
the wilderness, leaning upon our Beloved.

CHAP. VII. Containing the discovery of the Point in three Queries. Qu. 1. What
advantages Satan has to bewilder Souls. 1. From our selves, our hearts are a
Wilderness, proved and applied.
THus much for the doctrinal proof of the Point. Discovery of the Point in
three Queries. 1. What advantages Satan has to bewilder poor souls.
We come now to further discovery of what you have heard so fully, so sadly
proved. I pitch upon these three Heads.

First, what advantages Satan has.

Secondly, what pains he takes.

Thirdly, what means he makes to bewilder poor souls.

And what first are Satan's advantages? The Apostle 2 Cor. 2.11. puts us on
this. Lest Satan (says he) get an advantage of you, for we are not ignorant of
his devices. It seems Satan is very careful to take, and to improve, all
advantage of poor souls. And unto what? Why unto his own devices, called by the
same Apostle Ephesians. 6.11. Wiles or Methods, or (as we englished) bewildrings.
You must think the same thing to be intended in both places, so then call them
devices or bewildrings, or bewildring devices, which you will; there is
advantage that Satan has, and that Satan takes in order unto them:

There are two sorts of advantages that Satan has, 2. Sorts of advantages. 1.
Sort from our selves. 2. Sorts of them.
as to the bewildring of poor souls. From our selves some, others from himself.

First, from us. There are two great advantages.

First, our hearts naturally are a wilderness.

Secondly, subject to tempt, and lead us into the wilderness. Therefore you may
observe this difference of expression. Sometimes God complains that they walk in
the counsels of their own hearts. So Ier. 7.24. they hearkened not, etc, but
walked in the counsels, and in the imagination of their evil heart. So chap.
11.8. So chap. 13.10. Mark their walk, or their way, is that he speaks of. And
where is it? Why, in their evil hearts: here their hearts are made the
wilderness. And othertimes God complains, that they walk after the counsels,
etc. of their own hearts. So Ier. 9.14. But they walked after the imagination
of their own hearts. So chap. 18.12. We will walk after our own devices, and we
will every one do after the imagination of our own heart. So chap. 23.17. They
say to every one that walks after the imagination of his own heart, etc. Here
their hearts are become guides to lead them into the wilderness. Wonder not
then that we are so easily bewildred spiritually, since our hearts are not
only a wilderness unto us, but tempters also, that lie at catch to seduce and
bewilder us.

1. Our hearts by nature are a wilderness.
First, then this is Satan's great advantage that herein he has from us, our
souls by nature are a wilderness unto us. Perhaps some carnal one might say,
What do you talk so much of a wilderness? I see none, Where is it? What is it?
How can these things be? Why look within, and thou can not look off of the
wilderness. Men walk (says God) in their own evil hearts. Why there is the
wilderness. I said (says God) Ier. 7.23. Walk ye in all the ways that I have
commanded you; but they hearkened not. Sure you will grant now that they are in the
wilderness, when they are out of all Gods ways: and what is that wilderness?
Where did they walk then? Why, In the counsels of their evil heart, and what
follows? They went backward and not forward, v. 24. Whilst men and women go
aside from Gods counsels and ways, they go backward, and if you will ask me where?
It Is in the imaginations of their own hearts. So in Ier. 11.7. You have God
rising up early, and protesting his ways from day to day unto them. And now
that God is in such a serious posture, a protesting God, (whose bare word is
truth infallible) What hinders them now from Gods way? Why? (says God) it is
this (their heart is a wilderness) they walk every one in the imagination of
their own evil heart, v. 8. Memorable is that Scripture Psalm 95.8. You have
mention of Israel that he was in the wilderness provoking God there. But what
was it that grieved God, yea grieved him forty years? Was it, that Israel was
in that material Wilderness? Oh that was not the worst of it, but ver. 12.
It Is a people that do err in their hearts, and they have not known my ways.
Sirs, what say you now to this heart-wil-dernesse^? 'Twas erring in heart
('it was heart-bewildring) that kept them out of Gods ways. Hence that sad, but
pregnant expression. Ps. 64.6. They search out iniquities: That is, in their
Counsels, and imaginations, in their hearts. Search them out, That is, as one
that has lost a sheep in Wilderness, he looks into this corner, and that
quarter, and another quarter, and a fourth Corner, until he has searched it
out. So when they design such an Evil, they search this affection, and that
affection; and this fancy, and that fancy, this thought, and that thought:
until they have searched out their iniquity, and this is the Wilderness of
the heart: but how sad a Wilderness it is, who can declare? For Ps. 19.12. Who
can understand his Errors, that is bewildrings, which he speaks of the
Wilderness of his heart. For says he) cleanse thou me from secret sins.

For further Evidence hereof, Evidence hereof.
I shall look to Children, to Fools, to your own Experience.

First, Children (they say) speak their hearts, 1. In Children.
and if so, I Am sure, as soon as ever they begin to speak, they speak them to
be a Wilderness. Childrens words are as vain and foolish, and as inconstant
and inconsistent as men's thoughts are. For Children speak as Children. 1 Cor.
13.11. Men and women have as confused thoughts, as Children have words: trace a
Child's sentences, and in two or three of them the Child will have quite lost it
self, and does not this speak what a Wilderness the heart of the Child is out
of the abundance whereof the mouth speaks, yea, what a Wilderness thine (or
mine) heart is by nature? Though thou can cover thine heart-bewildrings in
more wisdom, then the Child can do; yet God complains of men and women (as much
as thou can note from Childrens most childish words) Jer, 4.14. How long
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee. Children speak of one thing, and of
another, and a third thing almost with one breath: and thou think of as many,
almost with one glance of thine heart. Children talk, as thou think, of
impossibilities. Children put themselves out of what they began with, by
heaping up more new and vain words, and thou do the like, by multiplying new
and vain thoughts. Is it not too true, when thou set thy self apart for
meditation of thy souls estate before the Lord of thy former condition, of
repentance from dead works? etc. Oh! how do a thousand thoughts come in, of
one thing and another, and one upon the neck of another: so that thou art
presently at a loss, as to thy chief business, and so thine own heart becomes
thy Wilderness.

Secondly, Fools. These you say as well as Children speak truth; 2. In fools
and madmen.
and if you will believe it undoubtedly, you must conclude their hearts to be
no other then so many Wildernesses of confusion. Have you not observed how
madly mad men and women will express themselves? Why? they do but write upon
their own foreheads, what thou writest upon thine own heart, such madness is
in the heart, (if it be not in the mouth) of the Sons of men. Eccles. 9.3.

3. In your own Experience.
But thirdly, I will rather choose to convince the intelligent Christian hereof
from his own Expetience. Thou say, thou would keep holy days after an holy
manner, and pray frequently, and perform all duties strictly: and why do thou
not? Oh! say thou, because of the bewildring multitude of my vain thoughts
they come in, and lead me from one thing to another, from that to a third, from
that to more, and by all from the business in hand: and thus does thine own
heart prove a wilderness unto thee; sometimes bad thoughts, sometimes good, but
bad for thee; sometimes good in themselves, and good for thee too, (such as
thou might be glad of at another time) but bad for thee at this time, as
carrying thee off from thy present duty. The Psalmist complains, Psa. 94.19. An
account or reasons hereof.
of a multitude of thoughts within him. It seems, there are enough to bewilder,
there are a multitude: but alas shall I need to tell you so? I Am sure you find
it so. I shall therefore rather pass on to declare how it comes to be so. Take
with you this threefold account. The exceeding bigness, and vast latitude and
Dimensions of the heart. The extreme numerousnesse of the ways that are
therein. The windings and turnings that are in those ways.

First consider the vast Dimension of the heart of man. 1. The vastness of the
heart.
The World (as you have heard) is big enough for a Wilderness, but the heart
is much bigger. The world is not large enough to hold thine heart, but thine
heart is big enough to hold a great many worlds. Alexanders heart was too big
for the world, for when he had conquered it he sat down (some say) and wept,
because there were no more worlds for him to conquer. Eccles. 3.11. He has set
the world in their heart. The World is nothing so big as the heart. I remember
I once saw the pictures of our several faculties, as Will, Memory, etc. one
was the fancy of fancy, or the figure of the fantasy; and O it was a
painter painted, painting an heart, and in that heart the world in one Corner
(an harlot) the Emblem of the flesh in another: and the Devil in the third:
and I judge it lively expressed. The heart is so much bigger then the World, as
to be able to hold the flesh, that is, corrupt Nature, and the Devil too. Now
put together our own Corruptions, all Satan's temptations, and the World
allurements, and if that heart that is big enough to comprehend all these be
not large enough by these to become our Wildeernesse, judge you.

CHAP. VIII. Contains further proof and discovery.
2. Many ways that are in the heart.
SEcondly, Consider the great many ways of this great heart, I Will warrant,
enough to bewilder you. Pro. 19.21, There are many devices in the heart of man,
and Pro. 16.9. A man's heart devises his way. Put both together. There are many
Devices of man's heart, and all these are the ways of man's heart; therefore
many are the waiee of the heart of man. Like so great a City, that has so many
streets, that one supposed to be bred and born in it, is not able to reckon, or
to know them all, such a City or Wilderness rather is man's heart. To
understand this, I would have you know, that all the ways of a man's life (that
are properly man's ways) are first in man's heart. A man's heart devises his
way. It Is said, Psalm. 84.5. Blessed is the man in whose heart are the ways of
them, etc. that is, of Gods people. Gods peoples ways are in their hearts: So
sinners ways are first of all of them in sinners hearts: Hence I prove that
their hearts are Wildernesses unto them. As if a man be to ride to London to
morrow, the nature of the heart is to ride the journey beforehand to night;
when it goes to sleep, or in the morning when he wakes. So his heart sins over
his sin beforehand. And how can these ways but be an heart-wilderness to the
unregenerate? Therefore says God, Isai. 47.13. Thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy Counsels, and verse 15. The Merchants which thou have labored
with from thy youth, shall wander every of them to his Quarter, none of them
shall save thee. Evidences of the multitude of ways in the heart.
The ways and counsels of their own hearts were that which undid them, I
shall farther offer two or three things under this head to your Consideration,
which may abundantly prove the multitude of the ways of our heart, and
readiness of those ways to bewilder us.

First, There never was any way of sin in any heart, but thine heart and mine
are expose thereunto, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no tentation taken you, but that
which is common to man, etc. but God will make a way to escape. Mark, Every
temptation is a bewildring tentation, unless God make a way, thou can not
escape, and every such temptation is common to man, even every one upon the
Earth. The same temptation that undid Cain, and Cham, and Jeroboam, and Judas,
are common to thee; and thy soul might be bewildred in the same ways, if God
made not a way to escape. Now think, what multitudes of ways are there for
sinners that live now to walk in, even all the ways that ever sinners walked
in hitherto; therefore it is registered of some afterward, that they went in the
way of Cain (before them) Jud. 11. and followed the way of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2.15.
Their ways, and the ways of all other sinners that ever were, are before the
eyes of their unregenerate heart.

Secondly, There was never way of sin in any heart, but thine heart and mine
are naturally disposed to it, Prove. 27.19. As face in water answers face, so
the heart of man answers to man. Thy face, in the water (which was then, I
suppose, their only looking-glass) is not more like thy very face, then thine
heart and another are by nature alike: the same dispositions to cruelty, as in
Cain; to covetousness, as in Balaam; to betray Christ, as in Judas, or what
ever else was committed by whomsoever else you have heard of, or read of, or
known, are naturally in thine own heart. Thou art not only subject and
exposed, but inclined and disposed unto them. And truly, I think it becoming
us, when we hear of another sin in the Act and Fruit, to look upon it as
our own in the Root, and so to be humbled for it, and rapt up in admiration of
his Grace, who has made the difference.

Thirdly, There was never any sin in thine own life, but it was the way of
thine heart first, Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, etc. They are
all gone aside, verse 3. so Prove. 7.25. Let not thine heart decline to her
ways; go not astray in her paths. The heart goes always before the rest goes.
Now then if all the ways of sin that ever thou were in, or that ever any
other were in, are and have been either actually, or as we say, in actu primo,
in their original, root and spawn, in thine heart, thou can not but rest
convicted, that there are in thine heart ways enough to make a wilderness.

3ly, The many windings of those ways.
Thirdly, As the heart of man is very great and full of ways so are those ways
full of windings and turnings to and again; and therefore the heart cannot but
be a Wilderness. The heart of man is compared to the belly of a man, Prove.
20.27. because of any creature a man's bowels (as Anatomists note) are fullest
of windings: so full of windings are the ways of the heart, so full I say,
that himself that walks in them, cannot know where he is, Jer. 17.9. The heart
is deceitful above all things, and who can know it? In the fifth verse, you
have mention of an heart, departing from the Lord, and therefore becoming an
Heath in the Desert, a salt Land, and a Wilderness, verse 6. And this is the
heart that is so desperately full of windings and turnings, verse 9. When Peter
thought that he was in the steadiest way of profession, his heart was winding
into the way of apostasy. Well might Christ say unto his Disciples, What
spirits you are of, you know not, Luke 9.55. Discoveries of of the hearts
windings. 1. Sort. 1. Head.

They thought they were in the way of Elias his zeal, but they were in the way
of their own carnal passion. This I shall farther say of the windings of our
hearts.

First, You shall find them ready to wind into any other way; yea, though it
be the way of another duty, rather then to keep in their own way; that they
connot endure, yea, to away of their own duty at another time, rather then to
keep in the way that is now their way. Oh! thinks the poor man, if If I were
but rich, what would not I do? If I were as the chief Governor, as the
supreme Power, say some hearts, oh! what would not I do? Yea, but thou art
what thou art: and tell me, do thou do what is thy duty now to do? It Is
certain (if otherwise) that those are but the wildernesse-windings of thy
crooked heart: thus Absolon, 2 Samuel 15.4. Oh! that I were made judge in the
Land, I would do every man right. If Absolon were but King, he would be a
Saint, but in the mean time never was there a more Devilish subject. So as our
hearts wind off from our duty to another, 2d. Head.
so from one duty to another, our duty but at another time. As perhaps
sometimes when thou art hearing, and thine heart is ready to melt, and thine
eyes to run over. Oh! think thou now, (if I were in secret) how sweetly and
brokenly could I power out my soul, and perhaps in such thoughts losest thy
self, and some part of the Sermon: perhaps by that time thou art come at home
and in a corner, thy heart is wound off again from that frame; and now, oh!
that thou were a hearing again to warm thee: to this purpose see farther, how
mistaken duty is a means to bewilder us, whereunto somewhat is to be spoken
more largely in the following discourse, whither at present I refer you.
There are many such windings to be found in your particular experiences, as
many as you find observe and shun them.

2d. Sort.
Secondly, You shall find your hearts from whatsoever they take their rise
(though they be different, yea contrary principles) yet to wind unto the same
sinful Conclusions. You say, There are many ways to the wood; many ways, but
they meet in the wood. Many ways in your hearts, but they all of them wind to
the Wilderness, and meet in sin; and that although they seem not only to
be contrary one to another, and yet both meet in the same part of the
Wilderness, but also though the beginning of the way be quite contrary unto it
self in the end of it.

1. Head.
First, Although the principles be quite different one from another, yet does
the heart wind both to the same sin: For instance, take one case that I
touched upon before, viz. Presumption and Despair; more different principles
there cannot be; yet the heart can wind into the selfsame sin beginning at
either of these; I Will prove it from Scripture, says one man, Whatsoever I do
now, I shall do well enough in the end; this is presumption. Now what does he
conclude? why, therefore says he, I will sin still; says another man, I see
there is no hope for me, however I repent, or pray, or do any thing: this is
despair. Now what does he conclude? therefore I will sin still. Compare Deuteronomy.
29.19. with Jer. 18.12. In Deuter. God calls upon Israel to keep in his way.
If any man shall bless himself in his own heart, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the imagination of mine own heart, to add drunkenness to
thirst, etc. Here Is presumption. And how stands the Argument? thus, Whatever I
do, I shall have peace, whatever way of my heart I walk in: therefore, says
he, I will go on still, and add sin to sin still, even drunkenness to thirst,
there is the Conclusion. In like manner in Jer. God calls upon the same people
to walk in his ways, Return every way one from his evil way, and make his
ways good, verse 11. And they said, there is no hope: but we will make every
one after his own devices, and the imaginations of his own evil heart, verse
12. Here Is despair. Now how stands this Argument? thus. Whatever I do, there is
no hope for me, and therefore I will walk in the ways of mine own evil heart
still. No fear in the former, therefore he will sin. No hope in the latter,
therefore he will sin. Thus Presumption and Despair (though one came from the
East, and the other from the West; or one from the North, the other from South;
from the right hand, the one, the other from the left; yet this heart (that we
speak of) leads by both to the Wood, and leaves men in the wilderness of
sin. How frequently and sadly does experience confirm this Observation
amongst the children of men? such are the windings of the ways of a natural
heart.

Secondly, 2. Head.
As it can wind from beginning in various ways into the same Wilderness at
last, so it can cursedly wind the end of the way to a contrariety, to the
beginning of the selfsame way. I shall mind you but of one instance for
proof of the truth, whereof I shall appeal to the experience of those that
know what it is to keep watch over their own hearts: (and if it be so with the
people of God, how much more with the unregenerate?) And it is this; the
gracious spirit being put (through tentation, or natural corruption) upon some
piece of pride; It goes solicitously to the Throne of grace, that God would
break its pride of spirit, and give it a lowly, broken, tender, humble heart.
And in its exceedingly earnest supplications and Agonies of soul, God comes in
exceedingly: the heart is hereby much broken, the Spirit exceedingly humbled
and abased, and laid very low. Now watch for these windings of heart that I
speak of: and perhaps you may too soon spy them out. The poor heart begins to
look upon it self under these enlargements, and to like it self, to reflect
upon its broken-heartednesse and humility, and to be pleased in them, and with
them; yea, verily, in plain english, to grow proud of its very humility: and
this, as I said, is to wind quite round: Now as soon as ever it becomes thus
wound aside, you may know its in a Wilderness by the thorns it shall meet
with, 2 Cor. 12.7. Thorns in the flesh, there must and will be, when the heart
winds about to this pride in the spirit.

Now then if the heart be so capacious, and so full of ways, and those ways
so full of windings, you cannot but conclude, how easily the heart, nay, how
necessarily it becomes a Wilderness. Thine heart is exposed, yea, and disposed
too to all the ways and windings of spirit that ever entangled any soul in
the world,

Oh let this consideration to purpose humble thee! wherever thou go, thou
carriest thy wilderness about thee.

Come we now to a second sort of Satan's Advantages, that he has from us to
bewilder us, which is

CHAP. IX: ^pntaines the second advantage from our selves, our hearts are
tempters into the wilderness, opened and applied.
2d. Advant. Our hearts are tempted into the wilderness
SEcondly, Our hearts are not only a Wilderness unto us, but tempters and
seducers into the Wilderness. Naturally they are a sinful Wilderness, and as
naturally do they inveigle us into the Wilderness of sin. And alas! how
easy is it for Satan's devices to bewilder us, since he has such advantage of
us. Our hearts advise, counsel, and persuade us, having been first persuaded
by Satan. Hence are the expressions of that other sort, Jer. 9.14. and 18.12.
and 23.17. They walk after the devices, and counsels, Note.
and imaginations of their own hearts. Their hearts are their guides, and they
go after their hearts. Now when man follows his hearts guidance, if his heart
lose it self in sin, he must needs be lost in the same Wilderness, Mat.
5.28. Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart. In this case the heart is the Baud: the heart
is lost first, the whole man goes after it, and is lost with it. It Is said of
the young Man, and the Whore, Prove. 7. She was the first, she caught him, and
kissed him, and with an impudent face tempted him, verse 13. And he goes after
her, verse 22. Our hearts being forwardest, as Harlots, tempt us, and we as
fools straightway go after them.

And this our hearts take up of themselves: Naturally so.
it is natural to them, to lead us to the wilderness. Their bent is that way:
Look what way the bent of any thing in the world is, that way will it go.
Compare two Scriptures, Hos. 11.7. They are bent to backslyding from me, (to
slide back from my counsels, and calls, and ways, to slide back into their own
ways, wilderness, etc.) And then, Prove. 14.14. The backslyder in heart shall
be filled with his own ways. Mark, Backslyding, that is before the peoples
bent, is here called the hearts own way.

You shall therefore find, that the Lord challenges the heart, as first in
the transgression or going astray, Act. 7.39. In their hearts they turned back
to Egypt.

Our hearts subject to be tempted into the wilderness from these two reasons.
Now then a word or two to give you an account; first, that our hearts are bent
to walk after the ways of the wilderness, and then that we are bent to walk
after the ways of our own hearts.

First then, The bent of our hearts is by nature to the wilderness.

There are but these two things that engage the bent ones heart to one place
rather then another.

1. Innate affection.
First, An innate affection. I like this place the best of any place that ever I
saw, says one; How much is that place my darling, says another? Beloved, the
Wilderness of sin is our hearts darling: we fancy no place naturally so
much as this wilderness; no ways please us so well, as the ways of sin.
There is something in every particular place, that suits some man's particular
fancy, that makes him abide there. There is something in every particular
sin, that suits some sinners particular fancy, and that makes him dwell there
still. Our heart naturally suits with these ways of sin, therefore it is
that men walk in them still.

2ly, Cuflomatinesse.
Secondly, A Customary abode. I have lived says one, all my days in the City,
and I do not know how now to dwell in the Country. I have lived says another,
all my days in the Country, and I cannot tell how to away with the City Air,
the City-noises, the City-Company, etc. Our hearts by nature are, and ever,
have been accustomed to the wilderness, therefore the bent of our hearts is to
the Wildernesse-ward still. We cannot brook dwelling in Gods holy City, the
heavenly Jerusalem. We have not been accustomed to such manner of living, such
company, such converse. You have both these pregnantly expressed in one
scripture, Jer. 14.10. Thus says God to this people, Thus have they loved to
wander, they have not refrained their feet. They have loved to wander: there is
their innate affection to this spiritual Wilderness. They have not refrained
their feet, there is their Customary bewildring. Wandering they love, and
wandering they are used to. It suites with their fancy, and it is that which
they have spent their days in: and upon these two accounts it is that the bent
of their hearts is toward the Wilderness. And now

Secondly, Our hearts prevalent in tempting us upon two grounds.
If the bent of our hearts be Wildernesseward, it is easy to conceive how they
bend us toward the Wilderness. Hos. 4.8. they set their heart on thoir
iniquity, and I will punish them for their ways. Verse 9. Their ways are
according to the bent of their hearts. So 2 Timothy 3.6. Led away with diverse
lusts. Lusts those are the stirrings and motions of the heart, and these are
the tempters to lead us away. Remarkable is that Ezekiel. 12 21. But as for them
whose heart walks after their abominations, I Will recompense their ways upon
their own heads. Such therefore as their hearts are, such will their ways be.
And that upon these two grounds.

First, our hearts are the men of our Counsel. 1. They are our
Bosome-Counsellors.
They lie in our bosoms, and therefore, as to the choice of all our ways, with
them it is that we consult. Our bosom-friends and darling relations are our
hearts. If man be refractory, as to any way; It Is policy to persuade the wife
of his bosom; prevail with her, and it is likely she will prevail with him.
Satan when he would seduce us into any of his ways, he first makes it his
business to overcome our hearts in our bosoms, and us by them. Pray thee
husband go says the wife, and then he goes. Pray go says the heart, and away
he goes. 1 Timothy 2.13. Adam was not deceived (that is, not first) but the woman
being deceived was in the transgression. Two things there are here remarkable.

First, the woman that lay in Adams bosom was bewildred (for so the word
signifies) before the man.

Secondly, the heart of the woman was bewildred, ((...)) before she her self
((...)) was led to go astray. The woman in Adams bosom bewildred him; the heart
in Eves bosom bewildred her. The influence of the wife of thy bosom to persuade
thee, is grounded upon propriety. She being thine own so nearly, so dearly,
thou think she will not persuade thee, but to thine own good: and the
influence that thine heart has upon thee to guide thy bent after its own bent,
and thy ways after its own ways, is the propriety that thou have in it, and
it in thee, thus Jam 1.14. Every man (says the Apostle) is tempted, when he is
lead away of his own lust. That which tempts him, leads him, and that which
leads him, leads him away, and that which thus tempts him and leads him away
is lust, and the reason why lust has such prevalency upon him is, because it
is his own lust. So then it is his own heart that leads him to the Wilderness
of his own ruin.

2d. Betwixt Gods ways and Satan's, the heart has the Casting-voice.
Secondly, Our hearts have the casting voice: betwixt the Counter-voices of God
and Satan. If three men be travailing and come to a parting way, and debate
arises which of the two ways shall be taken; Says the one this way: Says
the other, that way: now observe what way the third says, carries both, for
he has the casting voice: so here; Come with me from the Lions Den, from the
Mountains of the Leopards, says God. Stay still in my Den, and I will use you
well, says Satan. Now what says thine heart? what way it votes, that way thou
go. Come now; is Gods voice: Not yet, says Satan: Not yet, says the heart,
why truly then thou stayest in the Wilderness still. You have often mention of
Gods voice to Israel, yet little good was wrought by it: Why what hindered? oh!
their hearts voice was the third voice, and that was a Counter-vote to Gods. So
Jer. 7.23. I said, Obey my voice, and walk in my ways. Gods voice is, walk in
Gods ways: But they hearkened not. ver. 24. But walked in the Counsel of their
Evil heart, and walked backward, and not forward God cries forward, and into my
ways: Satan cries, backward and keep your own ways: Their heart cries,
backward and let us walk in our own ways still: and thus as the heart voiceth,
so they walk. So then observe in all the motions and calls of God, which way
stands thine heart affected? which side votes that on? Verily till God in the
wonderful work of Conversion come, and make the heart say as he says, and
vote as he votes: the soul cannot choose but (as those in Act. 7.) thrust him
away, and despise his voice, because the hearts voice is to turn backward again
to Egypt. And this makes our heart so prevailing a tempter into the
Wilderness. If our heart have the casting voice, it will certainly persuade us
to go where it uses, and loves, it self, to be.

To improve this unto all that hear me this day.

First, To those that are come out of the Wilderness. To keep their hearts
from going back.
to those that through mercy are come out of this wilderness. Oh! sirs, if thy
heart in thy bosom thus love, and has thus been accustomed to wander, and is
so ready to tempt, so dangerous in tempting, so like to prevail, let me still
beg of you, that above all keepings you would keep your hearts from rambling
again: for if they get into the Wilderness again, they will quickly get you
thither. Me thinks Satan should never be able to bewilder us, unless he had
this advantage of us, he ploughs with our heifer, he makes use of the wise of
our bosoms, I mean our hearts, and then are we suddenly led away. Some think
it is enough, if they can but guide their feet in the way; I mean their outward
Conversation, but the wise and holy man thought not so, whose counsel is this,
Pro. 23.19. Hear thou my Son, and be wise, and keep thine heart in the way.
When David's heart cast those wanton darts from the house top to Bathshebah,
little thought he that he was entering such filthy, such bloody paths of the
Wilderness. Therefore as Pro. 7.25. Let not thine heart decline to her ways,
if thou would not go astray in her paths.

2. To the bewildred to labor to get out their hearts forward.
Secondly, To those that are yet in the Wilderness; desirous, but ignorant, how
to get forth. If thy heart be thy tempter, thy bewildring Guide and seducer; if
thine heart were the first in the Wilderness, labor the first thing thou do
to get this heart of thine out of the Wilderness. This is the Lords express
Counsel. Jer. 31.21. Set thine heart toward the high way, Even the way that
thou wentest: turn again, O Virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy Cities. I
have observed, you can never get out some Table or Couch, or the like out of a
very narrow door, through the which it came in, till you turn it the self same
end forward that came in forward. Thou may strike at this sin, and that
corruption, and strive to mend this, and that, but thou will never get out of
sin, till that end go out foremost, that came in foremost: You came into the
Wilderness with your heart forward, and you must out again with your heart
forward, or not at all: as it is with the body crouding through a narrow hole,
get your head thorough, and then all will thorough: so here, get your hearts
thorough; and then all will thorough.

Motives hereunto.
This double advice I shall desire to set home upon your hearts upon this double
consideration.

First, There is not any thing in the Word that God accounts worse, and that
grieves him more then these heart-bewildrings, Jer. 13.10. This Evil people
which refuse words, and walk in the imaginations of their heart. This is that
which God calls Evil. Yea, in this God charge them as doing worse then their
Idolatrous and rebellious Fathers. Jer. 7.24, 25, 26. This is the Generation
that grieveth God, even they that err in heart. Heb. 3.10. Yea, he
complains, he is broken with their whorish heart. Ezekiel. 6.9.

Secondly, There is not any thing that God wili deal worse with thee for, then
for this, and grieve thee, when time serves, more then for this. There is not a
place that I quoted that mentions these heart-bewildrings, but with them their
destruction. Therefore he will bring Evil on them, such as they shall not
escape, Jer. 11.11. therefore he will feed them with wormwood, and give them
water of Gall to drink. Jer. 9.15. therefore their Carcasses shall be meat for
the fowls of Heaven, ^^d beasts of the Earth, and none shall fray them away
Jer. 7.33. Therefore God will recompense their way upon their own heads. Ezekiel.
11.21. and what shall this recompense be? Why? a grievous whirlwind of Gods
fury, which shall fall suddenly upon their heads, and at length they shall
know it, and that perfestly. Jer. 23.17, 18, 19, 20. So Ezekiel. 6.10. Because
they loved to wander, and refrained not their feet, therefore the Lord will not
accept them, but will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sin. Jer.
14.10. Yea, because he is so grieved with those that erred in heart, therefore
he swear in his wrath (that they should die in the Wilderness) that they
should not enter into his rest. Heb. 3.10, 11. I shall conclude in the 12th.
Verse. Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart (for the
reason is employed, that will make you) to depart from the living God. And thus
you have heard what advantage Satan has from our selves to bewilder us, by
nature Our hearts are a Wilderness, by nature they are tempters into the
Wilderness of sin.

CHAP. X. The second sort of Advantages Satan has from himself, largely
opened.
2d. Sort of Advantages, Satan has from himself.
COme we now to the second sort of Satan's Advantages, which he has of himself,
in order to the bewildring of the poor soul: His nu^^ers, Their Unity: His
Nature, his Relations, his Experience.

First, Satan has a great advantage, as to the bewildring of souls in respect
of the numberless numbers of satanical spirits. As 1. Head. His numbers.
The Dragon and his Angels; who can number them? if they do but stand round
about a poor unregenerate Creature, who can but be bewildred by them? When
Christ asked the possessed person, what his name was, Mark. 5. He answered,
saying, Isid. 9.3.
My name is Legion, for we are many, verse 9. Many? how many is that? A legion
is six thousand. Satan's numbers are so great, that he can even spare 6000
Devils to bewilder one poor soul. Now think with your selves: if there be
six thousand Counselors about a man, one says, go this way, another says,
go that way; a third, another way, a tenth, a tenth way, an hundredth, an
hundredth way, etc. The proud Devil cries, go my way: the drunken Devil, go my
way: the unclean Devil, go my way: the blaspheming Devil, go my way: the
profane Devil, go my way; the superstitious Devil, go my way: the
transformed Devil, or the Devil turned into an Angel of light, go my way:
The mad-merry frolic Devil, go my way: and the melancholic despairing
Devil, go my way: how can it be but that a poor soul must needs be bewildred
amongst all these, and five hundred times as many more? for I have reckoned but
twice six unto you. When six thousand tempters and temptations shall at once
environ one single spirit, as Legion did here this poor man; can you wonder if
as you read of this man, Luke 8.29. That he was driven into the Wilderness; so
you find it true of your own souls, that they are so often bewildred. I
observe that in some cases, Satan does as the great Turk, that bears down all
merely with the numerousnesse of his Armies. When poor souls shall think with
themselves to be serious with God, and to go indeed about the business of
Conversion: oh! what swarms of Devils, what multitudes of temptations be
there, even to the tyring out of such thoughts and resolutions! Oh! how do
these Legions bewilder us both in prayer and meditations, and indeed in every
spiritual Undertaking. It were easy for Satan at even hand to conquer us, no
wonder then if he lead us captive even whither soever he will, being six
thousand to one, that is great odds.

Secondly, 2d. Head. His agreement unity, and concord.
Great is Satan's advantage as to the bewildring of your souls, because of the
accord and unity that is amongst them all. So the soul be but bewildred, they
care not which of them does it; and indeed whoever of them prevails to seduce,
meets all the rest of them in the Wilderness. As now there are millions of
ways in England, a way likely in every pasture, and that foot-path leads to
some lane, that lane to some Market Town Road, and that Road in time to
London-Road, till at length all will meet at London: so amongst the millions of
temptations and legions of tempters, the smaller temptations lead into greater
ways, and those into greater, till at length all run together into the broad
way of the wilderness of sin, for all of them conspire to meet one another
there. There is a mavelous strange concord amongst whole legions of Devils
(Oh! that there were no breaches to be seen amongst the thousands of Gods
Saints. You may observe, that though this man were possessed with many, even
with a Legion; yet Christ calls them all but an unclean spirit, Luke 8.29.
ver. 27. He had Devils, verse 30. a Legion, even many Devils were entered into
him, yet verse 29. Jesus commanded the unclean spirit: so Mark 5.8. He said,
Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. And all the Devils besought him, ver.
12. and forthwith the unclean spirits went out, verse 14. I observe that the
Devils be they never so many, agree all of them as one. Hence it is, that you
hear but of Satan and the Devil in the singular, when we mean all those
numberless numbers of unclean hellish, tempting, damned spirits. And what is
it now, that they are thus agreed upon, or accord better in, then in tempting
of souls into this wilderness? He was tempted of a whole Legion: it is said of
him, Luke 8.29. He was driven of the Devil into the Wilderness. It seems they
all agreed in this, as one Devil to lead him thither. Now who can imagine, but
it is rather Satan's business to lead a spiritually possessed soul into this
spiritual wilderness, then to take so much pains about such a poor Gadaren,
to drive him into dry and desert places? Whatsoever may be the literal import
of this scripture, sure I am, that the Devils in our days design, and accord
an hundred fold more in the bewildring of poor souls, by their legion of
temptations, then to lead them into desolate and visibly desert places.

3d. Head. His nature.
Thirdly, As Satan's numbers and accord, so his nature gives him advantage unto
your spiritual bewildring. He is a Spirit, He is an Angel, He is a Devil.

1. He is a Spirit, and there^^^^
First, Satan (by his nature) is a Spirit: and this is an eminent advantage
spiritually to bewilder us, Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that you
may be able to stand against the methodizings or bewildring* of Satan, for
says the Apostle, verse 12. We wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, and against spiritual wickednesses in high places. Oh! if those
Principalities were not spiritual wickednesses, our souls should less need
to fear their devices: it were easier to stand against the wiles of the
Devil. But now because Satan is a Spirit, therefore he is the better able to
eneer into the soul: the nearer related he is to the soul, the more able is
he to argue out the business with the soul.

First, Satan being a spirit, 1. He is able to enter into the soul.
is easily able to enter the soul. When a General besieges a City, though he
cast a trench about it, yet every one within it does move in his own motion,
and go his own ways for all him, or any of his commands, while he is
without: but now if once he enter the City, then they must go whither soever
he drives them, some to Prison, some into the Water, others to the Gallows,
others into the Wilderness: so though there be legions of Devils without us,
yet till they enter us, our hearts may keep their own motions; yea, though
they be round about us: but you will say, They must needs go whom the Devil
drives; though it be into Water, as the herd of swine; into the halter, as
Judas; in the Wilderness, as Legion: and the Devil may easily drive when he
enters, and indeed may easily enter, because he is a Spirit. Sirs, What can
possibly keep out a Spirit? shut down your Windows, lock your doors, yea
though your Gates were Iron, and your Bars of Brass, yet will a Spirit
enter, and that without penetration, because its not a body. It Is said, Luke
22.3. That Satan then entered into Judas. From henceforward trace him; and where
ever he goes, you may plainly see the Devil drives him. It follows
immediately, verse 4. And he went his way. He goes Christ's ways no longer, but
his own, and his own are but Satan's; for first he goes and betrays his
Master, and then he goes and hangs himself. He must needs go, the Devil
drives him. Drunkards, you little think who drives you to the Alehouse, he
that drives you, is got within you, and therefore though you cannot see him,
yet you go with him whithersoever he would have you to go: so it is with all
sinners. Satan's a Spirit, and therefore he can enter: he enters, and therefore
he can drive: he can drive, and you must therefore needs go, and hence you are
driven of the Devil into the Wilderness, as he was, Luke 8.29.

2ly, He (as a Spirit) is akinne to the soul.
2ly, Satan is a Spirit, and therefore he is (as it were) akinne to the soul:
You know the proverb concerning Birds, and I may say in some sort, Satan is of
a feather with our souls, and one wing one way. Hence it is that when our
souls see Satan go before, we are so mad of fluttering aftrr. Beloved, Satan's
suggestions are so alike our own hearts motions, that we sometimes shall
find it very hard to know his footsteps from our own. Now mark, If a man be
in a Wilderness, and there be never so many tracts of this, and that, and
the other wild beast, if the man light upon a print but of one man's foot, oh!
that is the way that he will be sure to take; and Satan's footsteps are so like
ours, that who can sometimes know the print asunder? You have Peter dissuading
Christ from suffering, Mat. 16.22. And it is said, Peter began to rebuke him;
and I verily think, that Peter thought it it was his own way, and an
expression of his own hearts love to Jesus Christ: and I believe the other
Disciples thought it was a print of Peter's feet, of Peter's tender affections to
his Lord and Master: But it seems it was not so, or primarily so: 'twas Satan's
footstep rather then Peter's, for Jesus turned him, and said unto him, Get thee
behind me Satan, verse 23. We are often going Satan's way, when we think we are
going but our own way. Therefore with ease may Satan lead you into the
wilderness, when we may so easily persuade you that is your own way.

Thirdly, Satan is a spirit, 3. He (as a spirit) is able to converse and reason
with the soul.
and therefore able to Converse with the soul, as to look our spirits (as I may
say) in the face in their own likeness, so also to speak to them in their own
language. As Hannah spoke with her heart, when she spoke not with her lips, so
can Satan speak to our hearts, and they to him without any opening of the lips,
for both are spirits. As are we, so Satan is a discursive rational spirit;
and as at first he disputed out the business with Eve, and prevailed, so ever
since in the serpents voice, though not in the serpent skin, he maintains a
like argument in our souls; and this he can do because a spirit. You shall
therefore find that the same that is called (...). Ephesians. 6.11. the bewildrings
of Satan, is called, (...) 2 Cor. 2.11. the devices of Satan; so we read it,
but the word is that which signifies the reasonings and arguings of our hearts.
So then Satan seduceth us into the Wilderness, by pressing upon us our own
arguments, he persuades us by our own logic, in the natural language of our
own hearts. A Lion may roar long enough, before a man that is without the
Forest, and hears him, would come in to him: But if instead of a Lion, a man
were there calling, and so the other should hear one crying in his own voice
and language, that might perhaps persuade him. It were vain for Satan to roar
men into sin, though he be a roaring Lion: but he must flatter them into it by
secret whisperings, in their own language, to their souls. If the Devil
should appear and speak to the drunkard in the morning, in a dog or a toad, as
he does to some witches, sure the Drunkard would be affrighted for that day.
But he speaks in the man's own hearts language: Go to such a place, there is such
company, and such ber, etc. Therefore that Scripture is sadly to be thought up.
Ezekiel. 11.21. Their heart goes after the heart of their dete stable things, and
of their abominations. Here Is one heart going after another: the heart of the
tempted after the heart of the temptation. Our hearts in sinning, going after
Satan's heart in tempting. He projects and we prosecute; his heart designs, and
our heart pursues the design. The temptations of Satan are destable, yet they
are after his heart, and our heart goes after the heart of the detestable
things, that is, after Satan's heart; you see the same word that signifies our
Cogitations, the Holy Ghost uses for Satan's devices: and this is because he
is a Spirit.

Secondly, As he is a Spirit, so he is an Angel, and this gives him yet far
greater advantage: 2dly, He is an Angel, and therefore can present all his
temptations specious and angelical.
God tells them. Exodus 23.20. that he would send his Angel before them, and
that encourages them to venture upon that Wilderness. So Satan sends his
Angel before poor souls, and so gets them into this spiritual Wilderness. He
is an Angel, and therefore all his temptations shall be gilded temptations;
beautified with Angels feathers. Though he be a Devil, yet his Apparitions to
the soul, shall be as an Angel, even as an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11.14. It Is
said of some that they draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and sin as it were
with Cart-ropes. Isa. 5.18. and what are these drawing Cords? ver. 20. they
call evil good, and put light for darkness, and sweet for bitter; and whence
is this? but because the Devil can appear as an Angel; the first view of
temptation is as Paradise, the last view or end thereof as Hell. The young man
is enticed. Pro. 7. with a decked bed, Coverings of Tapestry, carved works, fine
linen of Egypt, perfumes of Mirrhe Aloes and Cinnamon: fill of love, solaces
with loves. ver. 16, 17, 18. Fair words and shows, but flattering. ver. 19.
and he goes after these, but it is like an Ox to the slaughter, or a fool to the
Correction of the stocks. This then is Satan's leading-influence, his
temptations though as Hell, as Devils, seem as fair as Angels. Therefore I
may say of Satan, though he speak thee fair, believe him not: for there are
seven abomination in his heart. as Pro. 26.25.

Thirdly, As he is a Spirit, and an Angel, 3dly, He is a Devil, and so cares
not what means he uses.
so is he a Devil, and therefore has yet the more advantage. A Devil;
therefore he cares not what means he uses to bewilder souls. A Minister must
not lie for God, he must not vent a lie to save a soul; But Satan will tell a
thousand to undo a soul. Yea, he had as live damn them with speaking false as
true, he is a Devil, and therefore cares not what way he goes. One of you
shall betray me (says Christ) One of us, Lord? might they say, who could find
in his heart to do so? who could dare to do so? why? says Christ, One of you
is a Devil. He can do any thing, he is a Devil. A Devil cares not what he
says, nor what he swears, in order to the ruin of a poor sool. An highway
man cares not, though he swear you, or lie you, into a wrong way; telling you
its right, that there he may have opportunity to rob you. Ioh. 8.44. When he
(that is the Devil) speaks a lie, he speaks it of his own, for he is a
liar, and a Father of it: and that because he is a Devil.

CHAP. XI. Contains its further opening and improvement.
FOurthly, The Relations that Satan stands in, 4. Head. His relations.
to the men of the World do greatly advantage him as to their bewildring? what
was it (think you) that persuaded the little Ones amongst the Israelites to
adventure into that Wilderness? sure it was, because their Relations went;
Their parents went, and what made their Parents go? why? because Moses their
Prince and leader went; and what was it that made Moses go? because God had told
him that he would be with him, and go before him, as you may clearly observe in
that story. And verily one great advantage that Satan has to bewilder souls,
is the relations that he stands in to unregenerate souls.

1. He is a father to the World: therefore followed readily.
First, Satan is in relation of a Father to them. Suppose you should choose to
live in a desert, do you think your Children would not be willing to bear you
Company? to do as you do, and be where you are? surely most Children would.
You would follow a Father even into a Forest, though it were a place of
danger; you would be loath your Father should go alone. Natural relation
teaches in such a Case, to say as Ruth to Naomi, Ruth 1.16. Whither thou go,
I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge. And such indeed is the language
of our hearts to Satan, who as we are unregenerate, stands related as a father,
to us. The very reason why men do his works, and walk in his ways, Our
Savior gives, Jo. 8.44. You are of your Father the Devil, and his works you
will do. They do them, and they will do them, and what is the reason? they are
of their Father. The young man's Father in the Gospel bids him go into his
Vineyard, and he cries I go sir. Satan your Father bids you drink and rail, and
curse, and revenge, etc. and the Lord knows, you go, sirs, at his Command.

2. He is a Prince to the world.
2ly, Satan stands related to them as their Prince, therefore they will follow him
into the Wilderness. What has been the common voice of these times? What
shall not I go after my King? shall not I follow my Prince? yea, that they
would, though into a Wilderness. You have mention of thousands of murderers in
the Wilderness. Acts 21.38. and whence was it? oh? oh! their leader that
Egyptian went before them thither. So in spiritualls. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, You were
dead in trespasses (that is, in your goings out of the way) Wherein in times
past ye walked according to the course of this world (and what follows?)
according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now rules in
the Children of disobedience: among whom we also had our Conversation in times
past. etc. By nature we all walk in this Course (that is, race or way) as long
as we stand in relation to, and are under the power of this Prince.

Thirdly, 3. He is the God of the World.
Satan stands related as a God unto them. What gracious heart would not
willingly follow God, though he should lead them into a Wilderness of
affliction, and surely Satan being their God, they are soon persuaded to
follow him into this Wilderness of sin; you have mention made of some that are
lost spiritually. 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost. If the light be hid, or the guidance be in vain, it is to those that are
lost, yea, but how came they to be lost? ver. 4. In whom the God of this world
has blinded their Eyes, etc. He is their God, hence it is that they are lost.

Fifthly, Consider Satan's Experience: 5. Head. His experience. He has
bewildred all merely men, therefore he may easily bewilder thee.
it gives him great advantage to bewilder thee: Oh Satan is so old a serpent,
that he knows all the turnings of the Wilderness; and he can soon tell when
he does but see thee, which of them all will best suit with thee. It is not
strange Satan should bewilder thee, that has bewildred so many thousands
before thee.

There never was a mere man, but Satan both led him into the Wilderness, and
lost him there. Avoid her ways (says Solomon of the tempting harlot) Pro.
7.25. go not astray in her paths, for she has cast down many wonded, yea, many
strong men have been slain by her, ver. 26. Take heed of coming near this
Lions Den, for he has drawn as many, as ever passed by, into it. And do thou
think amongst all the souls that Satan has bewildred in former ages, there
has not been some one just of thy complexion and constitution? if there have
been, then as a last made for another, yet if it be of the same size with thy
foot, it will fit thy foot: So the same temptation, the same way will serve to
wilder thee. David was a ruddy man of complexion, and the Devil knew by a look
of him, what path of the Wilderness would entangle him. The Devil has
bewildred passionate folks before, and proud folks before, and lustful ones
before, and covetous ones before, etc. and it cannot be but (what ever the
length of thy foot is) that Satan by this time should have a way in the
Wilderness fitted for thee. (As an old cheat that will have more tricks then
one, that if one fail, another may take, and that the young fool might not know
all. So Satan, Pro. 5.6. lest thou should ponder the path of life, his ways
are moveable, so that thou can not know them.) And this is his great
advantage; It may be thou art a young Christian, a young Saint, but thou have
to do with an Old Serpent.

If Satan have so great advantage to bewiider you.
And thus you have heard, what advantages on all hands, Satan has to bewilder
the soul. I shall desire the improvement of it in a word or two. You have heard
that our own hearts are Wildenesses of sin, and tempters too into the
Wilderness: that Satan by Legions, and their ageement being a spirit himself,
and and ^n Angel, and a Devil, as also being a Father, a Prince, a God, to
the natural man, and lastly being an old Serpent, experienced in all the
windings and turnings of the Wilderness, is easily able to bewilder souls,
and if you be convinced: then

1. Caution in the choice of your way.
First, Be very careful in the choice of your way. Would you cleanse your way,
then take heed thereto. Ps. 119 9. My friends, as you would tremble at the
thoughts of following Satan as your King, and God, and Father, in his way, be
very careful in the choice of your own ways. I have observed that
carelessness of our ways is the adding of advantage to Satan, to all his
advantages, and it is as if you should say, Satan has not enough already, I Will
give him more. How many are there that go on and on, and never consider in
what way or to what end? He that goes and considers not whither, is like to be
lost he knows not where. Jer. 3.12. God calls Israel a backsliding people. It
follows, ver. 13. acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed (or
gone out of the way) and and have scattered thy ways to strangers. Mark that
Those that are inconsiderate and heedlesse of what things they have, are they
that scatter them. Here Is a scattering of ways to this strange temptation, and
that strange lust, etc. now what is the way to keep from scattering, but by
narrow looking to that which otherwise we should scatter? As David says, I
said I will take heed unto my ways! Psalm. 39.1. Those then that are heedlesse
of their ways, are scatterers of their ways: and know it, sirs, whatever
ways you scatter, Satan will be sure to gather. Scatter a Sermon out of your
memories, and these fowls of the air will pick it up, and carry it away.
Scatter but a thought or any affection on a carnal or sinful object, the
Devil will snatch it up and carry it away. This then is the desperate folly of
our hearts, that by heedlesnesse we should scatter our ways to strangers.
Therefore says the same Prophet to the same People, Jer. 6.16. thus says the
Lord, stand ye in the ways, and see and ask. etc. Surely many a man's
bewlldred, because when time was, he did not stand and ask. Oh that I could
bring but sinners to a stand this day! whither away so fast, thou galloping
drunkard, and ranting roister? What, wilt not once stop before thou lightest at
Hell-Tavern? Will thou take all the ways thou hittest upon, without once
enquiring whether thou art in the right way? Oh! Pause a little, and ask and
see: Perhaps there may be nere another house betwixt thee and the Wilderness
to inquire at: Perhaps thou may never hear a Sermon more, or be at a
public meeting more, and therefore whilst thou passest by the door of this
days discourse, stand a while, and ask and see. What madness is it to run
preposterously into any way, when a sober inquiry might find a right? I am
confident this is the undoing of many a soul, they are never brought to a
stand, till Hell stops them. But let us take Gods counsel to day in Gods
fear, to stand and ask, and see and choose. Two Expressions of David laid
together, may engage Christians hereunto, Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the way
of truth, I have stuck unto thy testimonies, verse 31. And I will run the way
of thy Commandments. Oh! sirs, Choosing Christians will be sticking
Christians. If you will walk in Gods ways deliberately, and of choice, you will
find in your heart to stick to those ways; yea, though you mend your pace, yet
to keep your way; though you run, yet to stick still: and then though thou
see the God, and King, and Father of the world, going another way, and all the
world in course following after him; yea, though thy natural heart had been
accustomed too, and had loved the other way; yet having made such a stand, and
in thy stand such a choice of this way, here thou will stick notwithstanding
all the other ways.

2ly, Be careful of your Way-markes.
2ly, Since Satan has such advantage to bewilder you, be very observant of your
Way-markes: you heard before of taking heed unto your ways, and this must be
according to Gods Word, Psalm, 119.9. If a Father send his Son such a
dangerous journey, where there are many upon the Way, whose business it is to
turn the traveller aside, that they might in a Corner make a spoil of him;
the young man knows not the way, only the Father gives him a Paper of
directions concerning it. At such a place you must turn on the left hand of
such a steeple, and when you go farther, you must turn on the right hand of
such a Windmill, etc. Now when he comes to such a place, and sees such a
steeeple, he perceives the marks to be true marks: a Robber enters discourse
with him, enquires his way, tells him his way lies right with his, they come
near the steeple or windmill, etc. The Robber tells him, he must turn one way,
he looks on his Note, and that says he must turn another; upon this he
seasonably and securely parts, and avoids the danger by due observance of his
Way-marks. Therefore says God to Ephraim his Son and dear Child, to repenting
Ephraim, Jer. 31.21. Set thine heart toward the high way, set thee up
Way-marks. My Brethren, lest the lying Devil should bewilder us, God has
given the Holy Scriptures for Way-marks unto us. Keep your Marks, or lose
your way. God has (blessed be his name!) set down in a Paper, which way we
should go, and what way we should turn from, both upon the right hand, and
upon the left. And this use of the Scriptures is presidented to us by Christ
himself the only begotten Son of God. Satan leads him to the Wilderness,
with design (could it have been) to bewilder him there: He would turn him as
you heard before, into many ways, presumption, self-murder, etc. but Christ,
though he knew of himself the evil from the good, yet (to direct us too, and
to credit the use of the scriptures herein) He looks upon his writing, and
turns off all upon that account. No says Christ, spare thy Counsels, and get
thee behind me Satan, thy ways, and my Way-marks do not agree, Mat. 4.3. Go
this way says Satan, no says Jesus, verse 4: It is written, etc. Then go
that way says Satan; verse 6. And because he tempt^ again, Jesus said unto
him, it is written again, etc. verse 7. But then says Satan, if thou will go
neither of the other, yet go this way, and thou shall get by it: All these
will I will give thee, if thou will worship me, verse 9. No, says Jesus, Get
thee hence Satan, my writing says I must go another way: For it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only, verse 10.

Note.
You may sadly observe in these times, how soon they that have flowne off from
the Scriptures, have also flowne off from all the ways of God: These are the
Way-marks whereunto you do well if you take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.

3ly, Take great heed unto your guide.
3ly, If your enemy Satan has such advantage to bewilder, then take you great
heed of your friend and guide, keep close to Jesus Christ. 1. To his footsteps.
2. To his voice.

1. His footsteps.
First, Keep close to the footsteps of your Guide; His ways are all just and
true, who is the King and leader of the Saints, Rev. 15, 3. Therefore thou
can not go amiss in keeping close to his foot. In all the History of Jesus
Christ, what ways you read that he walked in, those ways walk you in. I
find him much in the ways of strict Obedience to all Gods Commandments, of
full belief in all Gods promises, of selfe-denyall, Righteousness, and
sobriety, as to the things of men, and his own things, and of exact
carfulness in all Gods Ordinances, and Worship public and private, in those
ways do you walk. We may take up a lamentation for ever, when we think how
prompt and ready we have been, to follow the course of him that is God of the
world, and how backward and unwilling to follow Jesus Christ, who is the King
of Saints. It Is said of Abraham (and it must be so of you, sirs) Isai. 41.2.
That God called him to his foot. Oh labor thou to keep thee there.

2. His voice.
2ly, Keep close to your Guides voice. If you be sometimes as those in Isaiah,
Walking in darkness, and having no light; if you cannot see his footsteps, yet
you may hear his voice, and if you walk exactly after that, you may keep
your way at midnight, Isai. 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, this is the way, walk in it, when you turn to the right hand, or to
the left. Though there be legions to bewilder thee on one hand, and the corrupt
inclinations of thine heart within on the other: yet has God promised a voice
behind thee, he pursues thee with suggestions, and motions of his own spirit.
Only grieve not that holy Spirit, by stopping thine ears against his wise
charmings. Wh^re there is such a word to say, this is the way, it is fit there
should be Ears to hear. He that has Eyes to see the Guides footsteps, and
Ears to hear his voice, and writes down in his heart those Way-marks, will
doubtless hold on in his way as the righteous, Job 17.9. Yea, and as the
Innocent, grow stronger and stronger.

CHAP. XII. Quest. What pains Satan takes to bewilder souls, opened and
applied.
WE come in the second place to consider, Discovery of the point in the 2.
Query, viz. What pains Satan takes to bewilder souls.


The pains that Satan takes to bewilder, or to turn poor souls out of the
way, that he may devour them in the wilderness. You know the pains a Spirit
takes, is incessant pains. When you sleep, your soul waketh; and when you
sleep, Satan (who is a Spirit) waketh. Now all that incessant pains that Satan
takes, is only in order hereunto, 1 Pet. 5.8. Your adversary the Devil walks
as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in the
faith, verse 9. All his pains are to this purpose.
Three things I hence note unto you to our present purpose: That all the pains
that Satan takes, he takes it as a wild beast of the Wilderness, as a Lion of
the Forest. Again, That all that pains is out of emnity to, and in order to
the ruin of poor souls. Lastly, That there is no way for your security, but
the holding of your ground, and standing stiffely in the way where God has set
you; lose your ground, and you lose your souls; therefore resist him steadfast
in the faith: The same counsel is prescribed in the same case, Jam. 4.7. Submit
to God, but resist the Devil. If God meet you in your way (as he did Moses,
Exodus 4.24.) Submit unto him: but when Satan meets you in your way and would
hinder your passage, take heed, take heed of turning aside, keep your standing
sirs. Resist, that is stand against him, as the phrase is, Ephe. 6.11. That you
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. That is, neither turn to
the right hand, nor to the left, for flattery, nor for fear of Satan; but
stand where you are, and keep your way, and so you shall keep out of the
Wilderness. Methinks, though you should be faint-hearted, and afraid to fight
with Satan for the way; yet when God thus comes after you, and by a voice
behind you, calls to you to keep the Way; then methinks you should be
encouraged to turn the Devil back, or aside out of your way. Now this is the
call of Gods voice, 1 Cor. 16.13. Stand fast in the faith, and quit your selves
like men: so Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot, says God, keep thy footing. Oh! this
is Gods frequent counsel, and therefore let us (in opposition to Satan, and
obedience to God) as David, Psalm. 101.3. Hate the work of them that turn aside.
Hate thou those works, and the rather, for as much as the Devil loves to be
employed in the turning of souls aside. For discovery whereof,

Discovery hereof in three heads.
Observe, when ever Satan changes either Postures, Persons, or Practices, all
is done in order to turn poor souls out of the way.

1. 1. Head. All his postures, 1. When Serpent and couchant.
You shall find Satan in different postures throughout Scripture, and all to
this one purpose. The first posture that ever we find the Devil in, was
[Serpent] or a creeping posture, Genesis 3.1. He comes meekly and lowly, as it
were upon his belly, creeping and oringing to Eve; and what is the end of all,
but to turn their Eden into a Desert, and their Paradise to a Wilderness? You
may see this to be his posture in his instruments: It Is said of the wicked,
Psalm. 10.10. He croucheth and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his
strong ones.

2ly, You shall sometimes find him standing up, 2. When erect.
when that posture shall be more available to his purpose, 1 Chro. 21.1. Satan
stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number the people. Now what is
Satan's drift in this? Joab will give you an account of it, in his demanding of
the King, verse 3. Asking the King, why would he be a cause of trespass to
Israel? Trespass? when does a man do that? why, you know when he turns out
of the way that he should go in, and goes in the ground wherein he should not
go, then he is a trespasser, Satan's end therefore in standing up, is to be a
cause of trespass unto Israel.

3ly, 3. When passant.
You shall sometimes find this Lion [passant] Satan, in a moving-posture, Job
1.7. I come, says Satan, from going to and fro in the earth, and from walking
up and down in it. And why (do think?) does Satan keep such a walking up
and down in the earth, but to keep thee walking up and down in the
Wilderness? to turn as many as he meets out of the way, and into the
transgression as he did Eve, and would have done Job here.

4ly, 4. When rampant.
You shall sometimes find this Lion [rampant] Satan in a running and ranging
posture, as you heard: as a roaring Lion, and going about etc. and then says
the Apostle, Be sure you keep your way, it seems his business will be to
turn you out of it.

So that whatever posture thou art in, Satan can keep pace with thee, If
either thou lie in sin, or stand up to sin.
So then whatsoever posture thou art in, Satan can keep posture with thee. It
may be thou art a Crouching sinner, that art not willing to sin above-board,
as we say, sub dio. Why? Satan will crouch to keep thee company in thy dark
and wilderness Den, and suit thine humor with such temptations. It may be
thou art a Daring sinner, and art not afraid to stand to it, as Goliath, that
stood and defied the Armies of Israel, and the God of Israel: or as the proud
presuming Pharisee, that stood and prayed. Why, Satan will stand at thine elbow
to strengthen thee in thy way: If thou get up from creeping in sin, to stand
to it, Satan will get up as well as thou. It may be thou art a Rambling
sinner, Or ramble about in sin:
thou must be first in this way, and next in that: thy vain fancy runs to
and fro in the earth, and thy wicked heart seeks up and down for fresh
delights and paths of sin. Why? Satan will be thine attendant still, his
service shall be at thy command (whilst thine rather is at his) for he can go
up and down, and to and fro as well as thou: Thou art as the Harlot, Prove. 7.
Now she is without, now in the Corners of the streets, her feet abide not in
the house. Why? Satan will keep thee company still. It may be thou art a
Ranting sinner, Or rant and run on in sin.
that will go galloping to Hell, as those Romans 3. Whose feet were swift to shed
blood, and says the Apostle, They think it strange that you run not with
them into the same excess of riot. Why? Satan can yet keep pace with thee,
and suit his temptations to thee; for he is a Rampant Lion, and thou and he art
but in the wilderness of sin together all this while.

Again, If thou be either a crouching Saint.
Again, It may be the Lord has begun his Work upon thee, and the spirit of
bondage m^kes thee crouch under fear of Death, and fear of Hell, and fear of
Conscience, and fear of divine wrath; and now thou beginnest to creep out of
the thickets of the wilderness. Now you shall find Satan will crouch as low
as thou can crouch, to meet thee with full breast, either to turn thee back
again, or to turn thee to the right hand, or to the left, or at least to stop
thy progress; or if he cannot do one of these, then to crush thee to pieces
with loads of black temptations, to blaspemous despair. You, whom God has
brought low, when he began to bring you out of the wilderness, cannot, I am
sure, forget the assaults of that couchant Lion. It may be, God has set thee
upon thy feet, Or a raised and standing Saint.
(as the Spouse raised up under the Apple tree) and thou have got a little
strength, comfort, and resolution for God, and now thou think to feel thy
feet, and without any doubt to be gone: Truly Satan will now get up upon his
feet too, and stand as Rev. 12.4. before thee, if he cannot bear thee down
again, yet to keep thee from stirring any farther. Oh! whence are those
wretched stops unto our resolutions? whence is it that after we are upon our
feet, we move so slowly forward? It may be God has given thee a stirring, Or a
stirring or a moving Saint.
as well as a standing principle, and thou must be up and down in the ways of
God, sometimes in this duty, sometimes in that: Why? Satan can go up and down
as well as thou, and will go whither thou go, and all to bewilder thee in
thy duties. It may be God has so far enlarged thine heart, Or an enlarged
running Saint, Satan can still keep posture with thee.
as to run the ways of Gods Commandments. Why? truly now Satan must run for
it, if he will do any thing; he must ply hard, and fast with temptations, and
so he will be sure to do, for he is a Lion rampant, seeking whom he may
devour.

2ly, Satan sometimes changes personages, 2. Head. All his personatings.
and all the pains that he industriously takes under different persons is, to
turn poor souls out of the way. You have him sometimes as a Lawyer at the Bar,
sometimes as a Minister in the Pulpit, sometimes as a Soldier in the field.

1. As a Lawyer at Bar.
First, You shall find Satan sometimes acting the part of a Lawyer at the
Bar. And what is the business of a corrupt Lawyer, is the business of Satan
that set him on work. It Is said, Amos 2.7. They turn aside the way of the
meek: that is in judgment. If a man be not of a contentious spirit, though he
be in the way of right, yet his way is turned aside; so Amos 5.12. They take a
bribe, they turn aside the poor from their right. This is Satan's very
business, to turn poor souls as (a Lawyer) out of the way of their right.
And have you never seen a corrupt Lawyer sweat at a bad Cause? such pains will
Satan take, to turn aside the way of poor ones: so Zach. 3.1. He showed me
Joshuah the high Priest, standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan
stood at his right hand to resist him. It was the High Priests Office to stand
and plead with God for the people. It was it seems, Satan's work to stand at
his right hand, and to plead against both him and them. So when a poor soul
goes to plead at the Throne of Grace, Satan will be sure as an adverse
solicitor to be there, and to plead against them. And as some have observed it
to be the work of corrupt Lawyers, to invalidate the suite of poor ones, on
whose side the right has been by defaming themselves, or their witnesses, by
Obloquies, Opprobri^^, Calumnies, and reproaches, and all to turn their right
out of the way, just so does Satan. What? says Satan, do thou come to the
Throne of Grace as interested in God? What? thou a Believer? thou a Child of
God? Remember such a day what a lie thou toldst, remember what a vain heart
thou have had, what a worldly mind, how proud and how passionate thou have
been: and if thou can now prove a believer, who may not? with such like
wretched Calumnie^, is this corrupt solicitor Satan, ready to turn our very
prayers, and repentance, and faith, and all out of the way: I appeal herein to
your own experiences.

Secondly, 2. As a souldie^ in the field.
You have Satan sometime personating a soldier in the field, and still his
business is to turn poor souls out of their ground and way. Paul says, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, I have finished my
course. So if you would keep the way of believing, which is your way, and
finish your Course therein; you must resolve to fight for it, there is no
holding your ground otherwise, therefore says Paul to you also, Put on the
whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the bewildrings of
the Devil. Ephesians. 6.1. Sure it requires the shield of faith, the Helmet of hope,
the breast plate of righteousness, etc. (and all these require the management
of a soldier) to stand your ground, to withstand your Adversary in the evil
day, and then having done all to stand.

Thirdly, 3. As a Minister in the Pulpit.
you have Satan sometime personating a Minister in the Pulpit, what pains
should a godly and Conscientious Minister take to lead into, and to keep poor
souls in the way? such will Satan take to turn them aside from the way. 2 Cor.
11.14, 15. Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light: therefore it
is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
righteousness. What sad experience have we of the preaching-Devill, and of the
pulpit-Devill in these times, in those that are so sadly and strangely led
away, 1 Timothy 4.1. You have mention made of these two together, seducing spirits
and Doctrines of Devils. The spirits that preach the Devils Doctrine, will be
sure to be seducing spirits. This is a truth however that place be understood.

Thirdly, 3. Head. All his practices.
you shall find Satan engaged in different practices, and all in order unto
soul-bewildrings. His waitings, his watchings, his huntings, his wrestlings,
etc. are laborious employments; yet he is sedulous and diligent in them all
unto this end. As

First, you have Satan waiting upon God, 1. His waiting.
or upon the soul. For Satan to wait upon God, I believe is the hardest service
to him imaginable, certainly that damned and despairing spirit cannot but
tremble even to the height of an hellish horror, when he looks God in the face;
yet upon God, for all that, will he wait amongst the sons of God. Job. 1.6.
and you may find the end of this was to turn the upright man into crooked
paths. Yea, beloved, Satan will stand as a suitor and wait as a Petltioner at
Gods door. Simon Simon, Satan has desired to have thee? and what did he with
Peter when he had him? he led him first into temptation, and into a
transgression by the temptation.

2. His watching.
Secondly, You have Satan watching, as it is said of the wicked. Ps. 10.8, 9. He
lies in the lurking places of the Villages, in the secret places does he
murder the innocent: His eyes are privily set against the poor. He lies in
wait secretly as a Lion in his Den. Friends, know that Satan lies in the very
secret places of your hearts to watch your hearts, and if he watch them, it is
to this purpose, that the rentings of a Lion, even that a Wildernesse-death may
come upon them. No sooner were David's eyes upon Bathsheba, but Satan's eyes were
as intently upon David.

3. His hunting.
Thirdly, you have Satan hunting, and that is laborious Exercise. Jeremiah
laments in Lam. 4.18, 19. They hunt our steps that we cannot go in our streets.
Our persecutors are swifter then the Eagles of Heaven, they pursued us upon the
Mountains, they laid wait for us in the Wilderness. If you view this scripture
with a spiritual eye, and do but think of your spiritual persecutors, you may
take up a sadder lamentation. Surely Satan is a mighty hunter (upon the account
of that scripture) 2 Timothy 2.26. That they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, that we ((...)) the word signifies, taken alive (in
hunting) by Satan at his will. Therefore says the Apostle, in the verse
before, if peradventure God would give them repentance to the acknowledging of
the truth: You may easily see whither it is that Satan leads them, that he
takes alive in hunting.

Fourthly, You have Satan wrestling, 4. His wrestling.
and that Exercise you know calls out all the strength, and requires choicest
diligence. Now all the pains that he takes in wrestling too, is, to cast
them, and so to throw them out of the way. That you may be able to stand
against the methods of Satan. Ephesians. 6.11. For we wrestle not with flesh and
blood, but with principalities and powers. ver. 12.

First, Then if it be so, If Satan take such pains to bewilder souls. 1.
Conviction to sinners that are so mad as to take pains to bewilder themselves.
that Satan takes so great pains to bewilder poor ones, let me speak to the mad
wanderers, and bewildred wretches of the World, whom Satan cannot take pains
fast to bewilder, but they will take pains enough themselves to bewilder their
own souls; as if the Devil could not lay snares enough for the unclean
person, or the like, he will lay them for himself. You have mention of some,
Isa. 30.11. that say to the Prophets, Go you out of the way: turn aside out if
the path, and cause the holy one to cease from us. That is, turn you aside that
you may turn us aside. Oh! how sad is it where a man shall say to his Minister,
or to his Conscience, that should be his Guide, go you out of the way, and
turn aside. You need not take pains to tempt the tempter, he can tempt you
fast enough without being tempted by you.

Secondly, If Satan take such pains to bewilders us, 2. Exhortation to become
laborious unto God in the keeping of our way.
let those that hear me this day, become a laborious people to the Lord. I
remember what the Poet says Ut jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones.
Ut ^eipsum serves non expergisceris --


Shall thieves take pains to kill men, and not men to keep themselves? shall
Satan take pains to get you into, or to keep you in the Wilderness, and not
you to get or to keep your way? withstand, my brethren, Encouragemeet herunto.
in the evil day, and when you have done all, stand. Ephesians. 6.13. Alas! say
thou, this I should do, but this I know not how to do. I am afraid to stand it
out against Satan.

We shall have Gods armor and strength.
If I be but in the dark or alone. Oh! how shall I do to stand or keep my way?
Why? to this the Apostle tells you. ver. 10. be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might. ver. 11. Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be
able to stand.

The Lord Christ has taken as much pains to secure thee in thy way as Satan
can to turn thee aside.
If thou with a whip be afraid to adventure to turn an armed man out of the
way; yet when a stronger then he shall come, and not only arm thee, but
second thee, not only give thee whole armor, but his whole strength is laid out
for thee; of whom should thou now be a friend? Take faith for a shield, and
hope for an helmet, and the word for a sword, and Christ for thy strength, and
what can Satan do unto thee? Never were pains taken by Satan against thee, but
the Lord Christ has taken as great, yea greater, to secure thee. If Satan
creep; Christ was humbled. If Satan rise up upon his feet; Christ also is
risen. If Satan walk to and fro, up and down in the Earth. You know Christ has
done as much, and his eyes do as much continually. If Satan run and range to
devour; surely Christ will make have to deliver.

Again, If Satan turn Lawyer at the Bar to turn thy faith, or prayer, or
title, or right to Heaven, out of the way, and stand at Iosuahs right hand to
resist Iosuah; Christ the Angel will be sure to stand at the Devils right
hand, to resist him, and to say, the Lord rebuke thee Satan. Zech. 2.2. the
Lord said, the Lord rebuke thee (that is, I am persuaded) the Lord Christ said
so to the Lord God the Father. If Satan take the pains of a Minister in Pulpit
to deceive thee; Christ who is anointed a Prophet and preacher of the Gospel
of truth will take much more pains to undeceive thee. If Satan as a Soldier
fight against thee; Christ did undertake as thy Protector, with his whole.
strengh and armory (as you have heard) to secure thee

Again, If Satan wait either on God or thee, that he might have thee to tempt
thee; Christ does wait with more carfulness upon both to pray for thee, that
thy faith fail not. So says himself. Luke 22.32. and thus as Satan watches
you, Christ watches Satan. If Satan hunt after you to take you in his snare;
Christ will also pursue and hunt after Satan to take him in his own snare; And
so Satan shall be reserved in chains for ever. Jude 6. If Satan wrestle with
you, and you fear lest you should get the fall; know Christians, that Christ
has already wrestled with him, and prevailed, when Satan would have cast him
down from the pinnacle of the temple, the Lord Christ threw him down into the
bottomless pit; therefore what ever pains Satan takes, he is still but a Lion
in his grate, or a chained bear to those that are strong in the strength of
Jesus Christ, therefore resist him steadfast in the faith.

CHAP. XIII: Contains the third Querie what are the means of Soul-bewildrings,
unfolded in the general, particular false ways opened.
WE come in the third and last place to consider. Discovery of the Point in
the third.

Querie.

What the means of soul-bewildrings are.




What are the means of the bewildring of souls? Surely all the means that
can be used shall be improved by Satan hereunto: He that will take all pains,
as you have heard of Satan in the last, will also use all means that may be
conducible to his end. I remember Paul's ardent care for the Thessalonians. 1
These. 3.5. for this cause when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your
faith, lest by any means (as the original well bears) the tempter may have
tempted you. Satan will make use of any means whatsoever unto the bewildring of
poor souls. Friends you must therefore pardon us, if we exhort seriously, and
advise sollicitously, and reprove cuttingly and sharply, if we cannot forbear
doing so, you must bear with us, for we are necessitated (as Paul here)
hereunto, because by any means the tempter will be tempting you. Satan will
make use of means, of any means, of all means: now all the means (observe) that
he uses as a tempter, he uses to bewilder souls. Compare that scripture with
the fore quoted. 1 Timothy 2.14. (You know Satan made use of any means, lying
means, flattering means, deluding means to tempt Eve, and this text expresses
it (as you heard) thus, she being led out of the way, went out of the way. So
that Satan's tempting means are all of them bewildring means.

Four kinds.
Now there are four kinds of means of our Ordinary bewildrings (I shall for your
Memory-sakes observe that Method.)

1. Many false ways.
1. Says one, such a time I was traveling, and I came to a turning where there
were many ways, and s^ I lost my right way.

2. Man false guides.
2. Says another, such a time I was travailing, and I met with such or such a
man, and he told me such and such a way was my way, and seduced me.

3. Darkness.
3. Says a third, such a time I was travailing, and night came so fast on, and
it grew so dark, that by reason of the darkness, I lost my way.

4. False light ignes fa^ui.
4. And says a fourth, I was travailing such a night, and kept my way, till at
length a light flasht and danced about me, and by following the light I lost my
way.

So that multitude of ways; falsehood of Guides: You have Satan's temptation
therefore called.
the coming on of darkness, and meeting with fires or false lights, are the
usual means of our bewildrings. And surely something there is in it, that
Satan's tempting-means, (or means of temptation) are set forth sometimes by the
one, sometimes by the other. For instance.

Satan's means of tempting are compared to a multitude of ways, where they are
called (...) Ephesians. 6. Sometimes Methodiai, or multitudes of cross-waies.
the method of Satan.

Sometimes called darkness, Sometimes Darkness.
and so the manages of worldly temptations are called rules of the darkness of
the world. Ephesians. 6.12.

Sometimes called Deceit in that text; Sometimes deceit.
Whose coming is after the working of Satan with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness. 2 These. 2.9, 10.

Sometimes called false lights, as 2 Cor. 11.14. Sometimes false light.
Where Satan is transformed into an Angel of light, these must needs be
means of bewildring unto poor souls.

The first means of our spiritual bewildrings are the multitude of ways for
our souls to walk in. 1. Sort. Meanns, viz. false ways in which multitude.


Before I come to particulars, I shall mind you of two things more generally.

1. Satan in this multitude has choice or change of paths.

2. He has trim or pleasant paths, and both these are great means to
bewilder souls.

1. 1. Satan has change of paths.
In the multitude of paths Satan has change for thee. If thou be weary of
drinking, he has a whore for thee: if thou be weary of profaneness downright,
he has formality for thee. And so as thou movest thine inclination, Satan can
move thy way. If thou changest thy mind, Satan can change thy path. Prove. 5.6.
lest thou should ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable. And, why
gaddest thou about to change thy way, says God. Jer. 2. v. 36.

2. He has trim ways.
2ly, In the multitude of ways, Satan wants not trim ways, even such as you
may be taken and enamoured with.

It may be, before Satan, was carrying thee to Hell, in the way of
drunkenness, now in the way of Civility or sobriety; this is a trimmer way
then the other; yet this without grace is but a Wildernesse-way still. It may
be before thou wast going cursing or swearing to Hell; but now (being legally
convicted and wrought upon) it may be, thou art going fasting and praying with
the Pharisee to Hell. Why? this is a trimmer way then the other, yet but a
bewildring way still. We may say to Satan, as God says to his instruments,
which skill doubtless they derive from him their Master. Jer. 2.33. Why
trimmest thou thy ways to seek love? therefore have thou taught wicked ones
thy paths. What Is the reason Satan has so many scholars to learn his paths?
Oh! it is because he does so trim some of his ways to seek love.

Particularly.
But more particularly these are these various and trim ways, which Satan
usually bewilders souls by.

The way of carnal pleasure
1. The ways of Carnal and sinful pleasure. If these will but bewilder them,
he will never go farther. I have decked, etc. I have perfumed my bed. Pro. 7.16,
17. Come let us take our fill of love till the morning. As long as the season
of the pleasures of sin last, if those ways will bewilder them, Satan will
give them their very fill. So Ephesians. 2.3. We had among them in times past, our
Conversation, fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the
flesh, and of the mind, etc. and in Ephesians. 4.22. he says put off, concerning the
former conversation, (or ways) the old man, which is corrupt according to
deceitful lusts. The reason why so few walk in Gods ways, and so many in
Satan's Wilderness, is because Satan lets them, lets them walk in ways
gratifying, to fulfill their own lusts.

2ly, To quiet them in the ways of sinful delights, 2ly, The way of carnal
security.
he leads them into the paths of carnal confidence and security. The poor man
thinks his way a right way: Every way of man is right in his own eyes, Prove.
21.2. Yea, though the end thereof be as the ways of death, Prove. 16.25. He
walks those paths, where he treads on Serpents every day, yet fears not, for
he goes after Satan streight-way, as a Bird that hastes to the snare, and
knows not (mark that) that it is for its life, Prove. 7.23. Oh! if you
drunkards and swearers, and proud persons, and hypocrites, did but know what
Satan is leading, and you following him for, in the fairest and most verdant
paths of the Wilderness; believe it, believe it, you would say now, as you
will do when the evil days come, I have no pleasure in them; Eccles. 12.1.

3ly, 3ly, The way of Civility.
But when Convictions of Conscience come to unmask, and to unvizard carnal
security, and to wipe off the paint and verdure of sinful delights. Now Satan
must change and move his way, and so he does. And now for Civility. Oh! the man
leaves off swearing, and ranting, etc. and now thinks he, this is a good way
indeed: truly this in it self is a better way then the other; but yet the
ways of Civility, and morality, may be but bewildring ways to the soul, Mat.
19. Here Is a civil lovely young man, as to Moralities he had kept all the
Commadements from his youth, verse 20. Yet other temptations were to him a
Wilderness, and he goes sorrowful away from Jesus Christ, verse 22. And
truly, as you may see in this young man, these civil paths of the Wilderness,
are in some respect most dangerous, because most fair and ready to silence the
grudgings of natural Conscience. What will he say, have I thought my self a
good man thus many year? and have all my neighbors thought me so too? and
shall I now think that all is nothing worth, because you undervalue
Civilities; or for want of a little preciseness and godliness? sure it is a
very hard matter to persuade a mere civilized person to become a Christian.

4ly, The way of Duties.
4ly, But when Convictions are deeper, and the view of the strait-Rule of Gods
command, makes him sadly see the crookedness of his Moralities, and their
maimednesse without Godliness. Now Satan himself can permit him to fast and
pray, and that often too, and yet, in this way, bewilder him. Thus the
Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. He got often into the way of Duty, and religious
Exercise, but never into the way of Justification, verse 14. I do believe,
that many of you may as well (or as ill rather) be bewildred in this House, and
these services (though I dare not forbid your coming hither) as others are in
an Al^house, and in their cursed works of darkness.

5ly, The way of humiliation
5ly. But Convictions may yet grow greater, and discover as much vileness in
his Duties, and religious Exercises, as in his moralities before. It may be
Satan will be content a Sermon should fetch a tear from him now, which if it
do; Oh! sure says Satan, thou art in a good way now: this is repentance, and
thou needst look no farther. May Satan say, time was thou could not abide to
hear a Sermon, especially any Sermon that might move thee, but thou would
say as Ahab, 1 King. 21.19. Have thou found me, O mine Enemy. But now, says
he, thou can be humbled at a Sermon, and mourn and weep: and truly,
friends, so did Ahab afterward, ver. 27. Where he heard those words, he rent his
Clothes, and put on sackcloth, and humbled himself, in so much, that God
cries to the Prophet, see thou how Ahad humblet^ himself before me, verse
29. And yet you know, tha^ Ahab was a lost wretch for ever, for all his
humbling.

There are two desperate turnings in the way of being humbled, But with this
snare, either
that Satan uses to bewilder souls in.

1. 1. To make the soul restless.
Humblings either make the soul (through Satan's temptations) altogether
restless; so that it is put beyond comfort, and must needs perish in the
wilderness of black despair, so Judas was humbled, Mat. 27.3. He b^ings again
the money, and vomits up his sin by sad confession, ver. 4. and repents; but
instead of casting himself now upon a Crucified Christ, (he crucifies
himself) he goes and hangs himself upon a Tree. So Cain, as soon as, being
thus humbled, he should have come to God by faith, he cries, My punishment is
insupportable, and so goes out from Gods presence, and becomes a Vagabond in
the Earth, and never comes near God more, Genesis 4.13, 14, 16. Or

2ly, Or 2. To make it rest there.
Humblings (through Satan's cunning) make the soul to rest there, and the soul
may be lost in this, as in the other way, and thus it was with those in Isai.
58.2, 3. They (says God) seek me daily and delight to know my ways. And say
they, ver. 2. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not, and afflicted our
souls, and thou take no knowledge? Mark, They had afflicted their souls,
and they think they are before hand with God now; they wonder God does not
give them more respect now: Oh! as good never to be at all humbled, as to be so
proudly humbled; to rest in being humbled, to think that God is beholding to
thee for being humbled; yet such is Satan's policy, and our Propensity, and this
is as ready a way to be lost in as any. 6ly, The way of making up a
righteousness betwixt Christ's and our own,


6ly, It may be Convictions grow so much higher, yet that God shows thee, as
he did them, how little worth is in thy very humblings: and then it may be thy
way is to look out for a Savior, for another performances and worth to lean
upon. Now this is Satan's last remove, if he can but make thee to mingle thy
worth with Christ's, and thy works with Christ's works, and so to walk in a
middle way (for such a way there is) betwixt Faith and Works, Satan will not
so much disturb himself, for thou art in a lost condition still; for this is
the Highway of Gospel-salvation, to set thy feet in the way, but not to rest
thy soul upon the way of doing; but to set down thine Hope as thy staff,
softly, and singly upon the way of believing, I will not deny, but that in
performing (as David speaks) thou may expect reward; but if thou look for
thy reward for thy performances, thou losest it, and thy self for ever. You
read, Rev. 10.2. of an Angel that set his right foot upon the Sea, and his
left foot upon the Earth. And so truly do many men, the best (and yet the
worst in some some sort) of the unregenerate, they set one foot, and it may be
the right foot (I do but allude to the place) upon the Red Sea of Christ's
blood; but then they will have one foot, the left at least, upon the Earth of
their own Righteousness, but these things ought not so to be. Thus the
Papists do, Our Works, say they; merit, dipped in Christ's blood. And oh! what
natural Doctrine is this to flesh and blood? How easily are we made Papists?
Whence is it, to give you one hint, that a poor soul when enlarged in prayer,
though (perhaps) it have acted little faith in such a prayer, can please and
pride it self so much, when at another time it has looked as much, and more
at Christ, and less a great deal at self; and yet because it has been
straightned, has it thought, it should not be so well accepted at the Throne
of Grace. Do we not thank our selves, as well as Christ, for our acceptance;
as he that thanked his Tumbrel, as much as God for his Harvest. Now this,
though it be the last and trimmest way of all the rest, yet is it extremely
dangerous: for there is no coming out of the Wilderness, but only by
leaning, and by leaning only upon Jesus Christ, as our Text it self, and
farther Discourse, may give you to know. It Is not the way of Carnal pleasures
or security: it is not the way of Civilities or Duties either: it is not the way
of being humbled, it is not a mixed way between working and believing; that is,
betwixt thy Works and Christ's, (though thy workings must be) but the way of
pure believing, that can lead thee out of sins Wilderness. The other may be
trim ways, but this is the only true way.

CHAP. XIV. Second sort of bewildring means, false Guides. 3. False Guidances,
Multitude, evil Magistrates, evil Ministers.
THe second sort of means of our bewildrings, 2d. Sort of means, viz. false
guides.
are false Guidances. I shall Note but these particulars: The false Guidance of
the transgressing multitude. Of bewildred great ones: of bewildring Ministers:
of professing Hypocrites: of miscarrying and misguided Saints: of unseasonable
Duties, and of mistaken Graces; and lastly, of wrested Scriptures: In such
variety of seducing Guidances, it may well be easy for us to be led aside.

1. 1. The guidance of the transgressing Multitude.
The great guidance that Satan improves unto the bewilding of single and
particular souls, is the erring Multitudes. Thus much that holy Caveat plainly
imports, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil: neither
shall thou speak in a Cause to decline after many to wrest judgment. He
seems to speak of the Corruption of Juries particelarly, if eleven be agreed,
the twelth accords; though many times perhaps against his judgment. Now this
he calls declining; that is, at turning out of the right way. In this
particular, he exemplifies that general counsel, Thou shall shall not follow
a multitude to do evil. It Is very hard for a single soul to go on in a way
of right, when a multitude goes wrong; or to see the right way, for the
multitude of them that go wrong. Now it is the Multitudes unhappiness, that
that ever walk in the ways of the Wilderness. The way that leads to
destruction, is the way that MANY find, Mat. 7.13. And their guidance gives
this threefold advantage to those ways, it renders them facile, fashionable,
and secure.

1. That makes the way facile.
1. That way the Multitude goes in, becomes thereby a facile, or easily attained
way. The way that the multitude of men walks in, our Savior calls it the
broad way, Mat. 7.13.

It is hard indeed to break through an hedge, or to go over a ditch that no
body has done, or gone over before. But when a multitude goes any way, they
render the way beaten, broad and facile. It is easy to find the ways of
sin, for they are all beaten before unto us, and for our turn. Broad is the
way that leads to destruction, therefore many find it; many find it, therefore
broad is the way.

2ly, Fashionable.
2ly, The way of the Multitude is a fashionable way. And it is strange to think
how much our hearts affect the fashions, though foolish ones: so Ephesians* 2.2. In
times past you walked according to the fashion or course of this world,
therefore (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.14.) Not fashioning your selves
according to former lusts. The ways of former lusts, were fashionable ways,
because they were the Course of the World; that is, of the Multitude.

3ly, Secure.
3ly, The way of the Multitude is therefore a secure way: A man will be a little
shie of breaking through a field or pasture, etc. that he has no footing or
beaten way before him in; but when others have adventured before him, specially
when many have, he takes a great deal of boldness to follow, though still it
be a trespass^. It Is said, Isai. 41.7. That they helped every man his
neighbor, and the Carpenter encouraged the Goldsmith, etc. That is, being many
of them in the ways of sin, they confirmed one another, as you know its
usual with Travelers in Wintertime, when many together commit a trespass.
So the Alehouse-keeper encourages the drunkard, and the Maulster the
Alehouse-keeper, and so in the other ways of sin: and thus the guidance of
the Multitude renders the ways of sin secure, thinks the sinner, I shall
not be arrest^d for going in a way that so many have gone before; but yet
though facile, fashionable, and secure, thou shall not, says God, follow a
multitude to do evil.

Second sort of Guidance that Satan makes use of to bewilder souls, 2. The
false guidance of erring great ones.
are the bewildred great ones of the World. Oh! what influence as to leading,
has a Landlord upon his Tenants, or a Lord in his Town: they would go a
better way, but that such a great one goes so bad a way; they would have voted
a better man to an Office, but that some man was Greater that was worse. Oh!
what a guiding thing has such a thing as a Kings example been?

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.

Who would not go the way that he goes, without any more inquiry about it? 2
King. 4.18. The Lord pardon thy Servant, if when my Master leanes upon my hand
and worships, etc. and I bow down my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord
pardon me in this thing. Oh! say thou, I love a faithful Magistrate with
mine heart; but why did thou not choose one then? truly, In this thing you
must pardon me, I had a Master to choose, etc. Men think it pardonable to
follow wicked men's ways, if they be but Great men's ways. Therefore it is said,
Isa. 3.12. they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy
paths. Leaders then had need take heed what ways they set, and inferiors had
need as much to take heed what leaders they follow. It Is said that Aholah
played the harlot with the Assyrians, which were clothed with blew, Captains
and Rulers, etc. Ezekiel. 23.5, 6. And that Aholibah was worse then she, because
she doted on the Assyrians, Captains and Rulers etc. ver. 12. Now what is the
note that God makes hereupon? ver. 13. Then I saw that they were defiled, and
that they both took one way. Thus are men ready to dote upon great People, and
doting upon them to take one way with them.

3. The false Guidance of some ministers so called.
Third sort of Guidances that Satan makes use of to bewilder souls is Ministers
so called. And herein I dare not be silent, surely if Ministers (that are
precious guides indeed whilst they keep the way) once take the paths of the
Wilderness among the many that follow after them, many will be bewildred by
them. Sad is that saying, Jer. 23.13. I have seen folly in the Prophets of
Samaria (and if they be fools that should be Guides, what will become of the
people now? he tells you) they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel
to err. How Is that? Caused them to Err? what? their Prophets? Yea, sad it
was, yet so it was: and this is the best that comes of bad Ministers, and yet
that word is sadder, Mich 3.5. The Prophets make my people to err. I may
tremble to think on it. Oh! there is a kind of necessity of peoples erring, when
their Prophets therein become their Guides: as if God would say, or as if the
people might have pleaded against them; We would not have erred, but that you
made us err. We would not have been so superstitious, but that Ministers pressed
superstition upon us: We would not have been so vain, and so jovial, but that
our Minister used to be so himself, and to bear us company in doing so. etc.

There are three sorts of soule-bewildring Ministers.

1. A Minister that speak something that is good, And 1. Such a Minister as
says but does not.
but walks himself exceeding ill: truly his exhorting them unto good is as much
as to bid them to do evil. I remember an Holy man amongst other expressions of
them (that I might refer to this Notion) compares them to spittle-men, or posts
set up in an highway pointing to a great Road in a place of turning; Those
posts are to point out the way to living travailers, but themselves are dead
trees, and though they guide others, yet they stand still themselves till they
rot; and those spittle-men use by their tongue and finger to guide and point
others to the way, which they themselves perhaps never went mile in: and these
Ministers though they be not quite so dumb as the Posts, yet are they as lame
as the spittle-men, and there they stand or sit, whilst they die and rot, for
all they point others another way. Now what advantage is here for Satan's
improvement. If two be going to London, and one being a stranger be beholding
to the guidance of the other, it is vain for him by the pointing of his rod,
etc. to persuade the ignorant person to go one way, as long as he sees the
Guide to go himself another way. Says he, if you be for London, as you pretend
to be, and this be the way as you pretend it is; why does your self turn
another? If you say sobriety and godliness, etc. are the way, why are you your
selves drunkards and profane; may wicked men say unto wicked Ministers. Full
to my purpose is that, To. 2.19. ^rt thou confident that thou thy self art a
guide of the blind? hat teach another, and teach not thy self, that
sai'st a man should not steal, and thou stealest, etc. thou art a sad Guide
indeed! (says God) though thou be never so confident, that thou art a Guide;
and indeed we use to say, None so bold as blind-bayard. None will take it
usually? more in snuff to be undervalued, as to their Ministry, then such
lame, dead, standing, resting Ministers.

2 A civility preaching Minry.
2. A Civility-preaching or practicing Minister, that in neither life nor
doctrine goes farther: whose business it is only to make their hearers good
neighbors, and as they call it, good Townsmen, living lovingly, and dealing
righteously: truly that is good, and it may be themselves will set them a Copy
therein, by living peaceably and honestly amongst their Neighbors: And I would
all that are called Ministers, would do so well. But yet let such know that
they and their people for all such preaching and practicing, are in the
Wilderness, if they come no farther. There are some Ministers in the World of
this stamp, whose people I believe, would go to Hell (and dye in the
Wilderness of sin) though they should do all that their Ministers bid them do.
When the civil man came to Christ, and asked him, what he should do to inherit
Eternal life. Christ to try him, Preaches at first after their rate. Mat.
19.18, 19, thou shall not commit Adultery, nor steal, etc. and honor thy Father
and Mother, etc. Why thus far it seems his teachers had taught him, and thus
far he had learnt (from his youth ver. 20.) say you so? Oh! but says Christ (
Luke 18.22.) One thing thou lackest, go and sell all, and follow me (which is
the sum of the Gospel) that which he had learnt was Morality, but one thing he
lackt, and that was Divinity, that was Christianity; that was self-denial,
self-abasing, gospell-humbling, gospell-repentance (sell all) and
gospell-faith, and gospell-obedience (come and follow me) this Doctrine he was
never taught before, and this he never learnt, and therefore notwithstanding
his proficiency in the other, and due observancy of those Guides; yet was he
left in the Wilderness still and lost ther^, as you may see in the close of
the story.

3. A general preaching Ministry.
3. A general preaching Minister; that either preaches notions, or general
things of Doctrine; or else practical truths, but in a general way. Truly the
reason, I believe that people generally continue bewildred, is Ministers
preaching so much in a general way to particular souls in their natural
condition, that do not use to take home any more to themselves then we carry
home into their bosoms, whether almost they will or no. Surely as it is not
food in general that supports, or Physic in general that heales the body, so
is it not the truth in general that cures the soul, but this or that food, or
Physic applied to this or that body, or this or that truth applied to this or
that soul. You know that Drunkards do usually sleep under invectives in
general against Drunkenness, and be very safe too. Oh! I am not the Drunkard,
I am but a good fellow, or the like; till the word come close, and plain and
home. And truly the Guidance of a generall-preaching Minister is little more
worth, then the Counsel of a Country-Ideot, that when a travailer should ask
the way to London, he should answer London-Road: and the man should reply,
yea, but which is London-Road, or which way shall I take to get into it? and he
should answer nay, I cannot tell. So they preach that sin is the way to Hell,
and Repentance and Faith are the way to Heaven; yea, but says a poor soul
which hears them preach thus generally, yea, but what is Faith, or Repentance?
or how shall we do to know whether I repent, or believe, or no? What is it to
mortify the deeds of the flesh, and what is it to walk after the spirit (which
you say we must do?) and truly the Minister is come the next time to a new
Text; and never unties the old knot. And so the poor soul is as much at a loss
as ever it was; Only it knows now that sin will damn it, and that faith
would save it, but how to get out of the Wilderness of sin, or how to get into
the way of faith, never does the Minister show; and this is the guidance of
general Preaching. A sad instance of such Preaching, and an happy instance of
the contrary we have at once in one Preacher, and upon one hearer. Nathan and
David Nathan he forms a curious and elegant story, wherein he lively and
wittily reproves David's sin to David's very face. 2 Samuel 12. the four first
verses; Now mark as he Preaches in the general, so David assents in the
general, and is convinced in the general. ver. 5. as the Lord lives says
David, the man shall die that did this. Why? David was the man. But yet for all
the beating of the very bush that David was hid in, till David himself comes by
particular and plain dealing to be smitten upon, the general conviction is
not worth any thing to him, but himself lies secure in the Wilderness of sin
still. But when Nathan comes to preach particularly, David begins to apply
particularly, and when Nathan smites him, he smites upon his own breast. [Thou]
art the man, says Nathan, ver. 7. Thus says the Lord, I did thus, and thus
for [thee] verses 7, 8. and yet thou have done thus, and thus against me [Thou]
have slain Uriah and [thou] have taken his wife to be thy wife, and [thou]
have despised the Commandment of the Lord, and [thou] have done evil, etc.
ver. 9. And therefore says the Lord, I will raise up evil against [thee] and
the sword shall never depart from [thine] bouse. ver. 10, 11. Now David begins
to be startled to purpose, and to be downright in acknowledgement, as Nathan
was in conviction; And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.
Verse 13.

Whilst Nathan the cries man did soso and, David cries the man shall die: But
when Nathan cries thou art the man; David criee I have sinned against the Lord;
and if you read but the Penitential Psalms of David, you shall find what a sad
cry it was. Particular Preaching makes penitent hearers; Whilst Peter cries
out, Ye have Crucified, etc. Act. 2 36. They cry out, What shall we do? v. 37.

We say Dolus latet in Universalibus, It is easy to deceive or to be deceived
by generals: A sedulous inquiry in quiry into the particulars of truth, and a
close application to particular Cases; are the choice means for us Ministers,
to undeceive others, and to be undeceived as to the state of our own souls.
Thus much of the third bewildring Guidance, viz. of some Ministers so called.

Come we now to the next.

CHAP. VI. There are other bewildring Guidances. Professing Hipocrites, Erring
Saints, mistaken duty.
FOurthly, the next guidance that Satan uses, 4. Guidance professing
hypocrites turning aside.
to bewilder souls withal, is of professing Hypocrites. This I observe, that
although Satan will never make use of the example of any sincere heart, thereby
to persuade, or to keep any in the way, yet will he constantly improve (to
lead out of the way) the miscarriage of any prefessor that shall turn aside.
You read that the hands of the wicked are strengthened, Note
and by whom? but by those that would seem to be Prophets, but were not true
Prophets? by their Doctrin^s, by their examples in a word, by their guidances
were the wicked strengthened, even that they should not return from their wicked
way. Ezekiel. 13.22. Let those that profess take heed unto their ways, for if
they go into, or walk in the Wildernesse-waies of sin, they will never be
alone. Instances.
You have Balaam making an huge profession. Numb. 22.18. If Balaam would give
him an house full of Gold, he would not go beyond the word of the Lord more or
less. Yet to Balak this great professor did go, and what use does Satan make
of his guidance, but to lead poor Israel into a spiritual Wilderness, that
they might stumble? Rev. 2.14. It was through professing Balaams means, that
Balak made Israel to stumble. So that 2 Pet 15. Many are said to forsake the
right, and to follow the way of Balaam. Men are willing to follow Hypocrites
profession, that they may have liberty to follow their sins too. Now how
influential a professing Hypocrites deviation and turning aside is, I shall
show but in another instance. viz. in Balaams Brother Judas; for I may call
Judas the Balaam of the New Testament, and Balaam the Judas of the Old. Compare
two Scriptures in Mat. 26.8. You have all the Discipels in a passion of
indignation at that good act of Marie's, that Christ has made famous
throughout all after-ages: It Is said, when the Disciples saw it, they had
indignation, saying, to what purpose is this wast? It Is strange that they, all
of them should grudge him a little Oil, that did not grudge them his heart
blood! whence was this? (think you) if a rude man, an open Enemy to Christ had
gone that way to work, that they would have followed? truly I believe they
would not: but, now, Ioh. 12.4, 5. One of the Disciples Judas Iscariot, said,
why was not this Ointment sold, etc. Satan had led Judas into the way of
Balaam, that loved the bag; and by Judas, Satan had easily led the rest of
the Disciples into the same stumbling paths of the Wilderness. Judas was a
professing Hypocrite: and the sincere Disciples are so gulled thereby, that (I
tremble to think on it) they take part with Judas against Jesus. Therefore
says the Apostle, take heed brethren, lest you depart from the living God.
Heb. 3.12. and lest any of you be hardened: if some depart, others are hardened.
ver. 13. And how sadly, how frequently, do we findt it?

Let professors be warned (for others sakes) what ways they walk in; Caveat
to professors, and to all.
and others (for their own sakes) what professors they walk after.

5ly, The next of Satan's Guidances to bewilder souls is, 5th guidance, erring
Saints.
the erring and turning aside of the very Saints, known and approved Saints.
Oh! how many are there that will follow David in his Adultery? Noah in his
Drunkenness? Abraham in his Dissembling? Peter in his denying Christ, and
cursing and swearing? that never mind to follow David in his Repentance, or
Noah in his Righteousness, or Abraham in his Obedience, or Peter in his bitter
sorrow? It grieves mine heart to think, there is scarce a sinner but will have
some trespass of a Saint, under which he will endeavor to shroud his own
transgression; but as for all their presidents of Repentance, Holiness,
Humility, Zeal, Care, Fear, Revenge, Sorrow, Indignation; how few are there
that will follow the Saints in these paths? This then is Satan's great policy,
by Saints to bewilder sinners: yea, to make them isntrumental unto the
bewildring of one another. When Satan had in person tried to bewilder our
Savior, when he had often tried by the Scribes and Pharisees to entangle him,
then as his last shift he gets into Peter, and by Peter designs to ensnare
him; Christ said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan, Mat, 16.23. Oh! if he
had not been Christ, (the guide) an hundred to one he had now been bewildred.

When Satan makes use of the erroneous Counsel of a Saint unto a Saint;
believe it, If they give wrong counsel.
the case is very dangerous. If a Peter, a Father, a Friend, that is godly to
boot, be used by Satan as his snare for thee, to draw thee into any sinful
carnal way, let thy heart look to it self now. Or have false apprehensions.
We are ready to suspect counsel to be carnal, from those that are carnal; but
if it be a Peter that persuades us to spare our selves, we think not so then:
so if godly persons have, or declare false conceptions about any thing, we are
ready to take all to be as true that comes from them, as the grace that is in
them.

I have have had to do with some poor, I am persuaded, sincere hearts, that
have had nothing to say against themselves, (I mean, as to their sincerity)
but that such a Godly Party told them (in a passion) that they might be
Hypocrites for all their progress so far; and truly I had much ado to fasten
satisfaction upon them, but that it must needs therefore be, that the work of
Grace was counterfeit in them. Godly Ministers had need take heed that they
speak not more or less to distressed Consciences, then the Word will warrant,
for such poor souls are prone to take all for Scripture (especially at such a
time) that such an one shall say, of whom they are persuaded, that he is Godly,
and so perhaps by an inconsiderate word, we may make the heart sad, that God
would not have to be made sad, as the speech is, Ezekiel. 13.22. So if Godly
persons undervalue, or misconstrue Providence, they shall hardly do it alone.
How little due notice is taken of the operations of Gods hands, when any
eminent for godliness are either (with reason) distasted with the Means, or
possibly (without reason) Jonah-like displeased with the Mercies. So if any
eminent for Holiness, err either in judgment or life, how fearelesse do
others follow? O such a one I know to be godly, Or decline to any evil way.
and I am confident he durst not speak it if it were not so, and would never
embrace it, if it were not good. You have Peter under a temptation, Gal. 2.14.
Paul charges him, that he walked not uprightly, nor according to the truth of
the Gospel: and what comes of it? Why, other Jews dissembled also, and
Barnabas (the Saint) was carried away with their dissimulation, v. 13.

Querie. But you will say, How shall I do to know Satan's voice from Peter's,
since (it seems) Satan can speak in Peter: or how shall I do to walk in the
ways of Peter as a Saint, and to keep out of his paths, so far forth as
sinful?

I answer, by looking beyond all, Solution.
unto that guidance which is one, and which is above all. Thou may, and must
set the cloud of witnesses before thee, and follow them, but thine eye must
still be fixed upon the first guide, Heb. 12.1, 2. Seeing we are compassed about
with a Cloud of witnesses, let us run with patience the race that is set before
us, verse 1. Looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, verse 2.
Thus Paul says of those, 1 These. 1.6. Ye became followers of us, and of the
Lord. Its good following of the Saints, when in them thou see that thou
followest the King of Saints. Paul desires, godly persons, or Ministers may
desire no more, but that you should follow them so far as they follow Christ.

Oh that the Saints would exceedingly fear sinning upon this accoune. Perhaps
the wicked sees thy sinning, that never sees thy sorrowing: and if God in mercy
bring thee out of the Wilderness, yet may thou leave ^y thine ensample
another there irrecoverably, who though he found thy way in, yet will never be
able to find thy way out again, but there must perish to all eternity.

6ly, The next means of Satan's improvement to bewilder is, 6th Guidance,
Mistaken duties to bewilder us in our duty.
by the prompting guidance of another duty to lead us out of our now-duty. Oh!
it is very dangerous, when it is our duty (as we mistake it) that becomes a false
guidance to us. Untimousnesse may unduty our duty, Psa. 137.4. The Lords songs
are not at all times to be song: Now its Satan's policy, when he cannot break us
from the duty, then to divert (and disturb us from the time: But Solomon tells
us, That, God has appointed a season for all things; to rejoice, Note.
and to mourn, etc. To every purpose there is a season, Eccles. 3.1. Now that
may be thy duty to day, which would be thy sin another time; and it must
needs be so, because the whole nature of some duties, lies in reference to the
season, so that when the Season cease, the duty cease to be then our duty;
yea, that which was duty because of that season, becomes sin because of this;
as for instance, many civil duties, at some season, and upon some occasions,
It is meet that we should make merry, Luke 15.32. And it is better to go to the
house of mourning at another season, and upon another occasion, Eccel. 7.2.
Yea, in Religious Duties too; on these I shall insist, because its Satan's great
business herein, and hereby to bewilder us.

I shall for instance pitch upon our two great and solemn occasional duties,
Humiliation and Thansgiving (although some proportion of these are as blood and
water that run through all our veins, and must run through all our
spiritual exercises: Instance.
) you shall too often find

1. That when God calls us to soul-humbling, our spirits are for rejoicing and
refreshing: for this God challenges Israel, Isa. 58.3. In the day of your fast
you find pleasure.

2ly, When God calls us to soul-rejoycing, our Spirits are then for
soul-humbling. This God reproves also in the same people at another time,
Nehem. 8.9. This day is holy to the Lord, weep not, neither mourn, for all the
people wept, and verse 10. Go your way, eat the fat; and drink the sweet, and
send portions, etc. neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your
strength, verse 10.

Now Satan has great advantage hereunto through our ignorance: for surely the
the people thought they did dwell in weeping: Why? 'twas for their sins when
they heard the Law read: 'twas for offending God that they wept; could this at
any time be unseasonable? Yes, that measure of it now was, and to be reproved,
as Nehemiah and Ezrah did. And thus does Satan by the guidance of some other
mistaken duty, turn us aside from that frame of spirit, that we ought to have
in the present duty. When God bids them mourn, they find pleasure; when he
calls them to find pleasure, and to rejoice before him, Note.
they mourn bitterly. Thou may be affectionate in a sin, thinking it verily
to be a duty.

Querie. But now here lies the difficulty, Psalm. 2.11. We are commanded to
rejoice with trembling; how then can Satan be said to lead us out of the way
by the one, from the other, when both together are our duty? and if so, how
could Israel be reproved for their mourning, in the day of their rejoicing?
since rejoicing is not as it should be without trembling; nor (by the same
Rule, and Scripture) must trembling be without rejoicing: rejoice with your
trembling.

Ans. I answer, I apprehend it true, that there must be something of an
Humiliation day in every Thansgiving, if rightly managed; and something of a
Thansgiving in every soul-afflicting day, else may we mourn our selves into
despair, or joy our selves into presumption. Surely there is no contrariety in
Christian duty, therefore two different duties may be incumbent on the same
subject, at the same time; and one frame of spirit made up of both, fit for
either: but withal, the duty of the day must (as we say) carry the day, or
else we sin. In a Thanksgiving day we must rejoice with trembling: in an
Humiliation, we must tremble with rejoicing. Now Satan's business is, to
transport us beyond due bounds, by poysing our spirits most unto that whereof
should be least, as was clear in those instances, and is too often in our
expriences, and so to bewilder us in duty by duty. If you will ask how much must
there then be of trembling in our holy Feasts? or of rejoicing in our Fasts? I
answer, just so much as makes us fitter for the due management of the present
duty. A little of spiriuall joy gives advantage, as your experiences can speak,
unto the due guidance of godly sorrow. And a little trembling rightly attempers
holy rejoicing, and whatsoever is more then thus comes of evil. Now Satan's
business is to make us lose our sorrows in rejoicing, or our joy in sorrows,
and our selves into both, and ever most of that whereof the present day and
duty calls for least; and thus may not only a Felix want a convenient season,
but you Saints may find it difficult to redeem a season for soule-searching
from prayer, or for resolving upon Reformation afterward in a serious sort from
soul-searching: You may enlarge it in other instances, as his bewildring our
Meditations, by enclining us then to pray, or to break us off from prayer, by
injecting useful Meditations (as formerly I have hinted) and the like to these.

CHAP. XVI. Contains two last bewildring Guides seeming Grace, wrested
Scripture.

7th Guidance, Seeming grace to turn us aside from true grace.

Instance.


SEventhly, The next means of this sort (that I shall name) is Satan's plotting
to lead us out of the way of true and real grace, by the false guidance of
seeming Grace. I shall give you one instance. There is not any Grace in the
world, that does better accord with, and more strengthen another, then Faith
and Humility do mutually: Yet is there not any thing whereby Satan turns
poor afflicted spirits more aside from the way of believing, then the false
guidance of pretensive humility. As now when the soul lies convicted under
the sense of its being in it self poor and wretched, and miserable, and
blind, and naked; the soul has nothing to do next, but to buy of Christ Gold
tried in the fire, and white Raiment, and Eyesalve, etc. that is, whatsoever a
lost sinner needs in order to salvation, Rev. 3:17. And Christ terms are
without money, and without price, Isai. 55.1. So then such a soul is
immediately enjoined upon its allegiance to God, whose Commandment it is, That
we should believe, and upon righteous principles of Selfe-preservation, freely
to take as the waters of life are freely tendered, and by acting faith upon a
promise, and with a bare hand to take hold, and to lean upon Christ, and so to
come up from the Wilderness. Will thou then, or will thou not? speak thou
that need a Christ, will thou have one? Oh! says the soul, I would feign
have a Christ, I need him, I see I am undone without him; but I am naked,
ragged, and ashamed to come to him in this dress; I am leprous, and filthy, my
hands are not clean, and I dare not with such hands take hold upon him:
Humility forbids me; stay but till I have got better Clothes, (as some will say
of their coming to Church) and have washed my self, and then i will com, I am
afraid and ashamed to come before. And will thou stay from Christ till thou
can fit thy self for him? even stay an eternity, i will warrant thee thou wilt
never be fit. And is this humility? thou lie Satan, it is Pride, and the
height of it too, even of Gospel-pride, to think that without Christ's Sumpter,
thou shall be ever able to give Christ fit entertainment. Souls call it
humility, to get something for a present for the Lord Christ, as Jacob for his
Lord Esau; but this in thee is Pride, as in him it was Policy: Thou call'st it
Humility, but God calls it Pride, Romans 10.3. They have not submitted to the
righteousness of God; a sad word. Its mere pride, and stoutnesse, and
high-spiritednesse, the wretched remainders of unbroken-heartednesse, (what
ever Satan tells thee) that only is humility, that makes thee entirely close
with the Righteousness of faith, with Christ's Righteousness, upon Christ's own
terms.

8th Guidance, mistaken or wrested Scripture.
The eighth and last that I shall speak to, is Satan's bewildring us by the
false guidance of mist^ken Scripture, and this is now much in fashion, and
prevailing in the world. Time was, when ignorance was in fashion, and for men
to walk in blind pursuance of another supposed light: So in Popish times,
many cared not for, nor at all enquired into the Scripture. Then for the Priest
to do as the Prelate did, and the people as the Priest did, was enough. But
our times have seen the Scriptures brought more into use, and almost every
one, at (least in profession) will say, as David (and as it is fit they should)
Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a light unto my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths.
Men will not now take things to be so, because the Minister said it; but they
will, as the Bereans did, search the Scripture, and truly it is not only the
use, but the fashion now. Now mark, when Satan sees that we are so much for
Scripture, and that the way to bewilder us is by pressing Scripture; truly (as
formerly he labored to suppress it) now he will press it, and oppress it
too; Note
as a Tyrant by plain torture, to make the guiltless Scriptures to speak
against themselves: say you so, says Satan? are you for light? i will fit your
turn by dressing my self as an Angel of light, Satan will quote Scripture.
2 Cor. 11.13, 14. And thus by false glimmerings of the true, but
misrepresented light, Satan turns souls aside into the shady Thickets of the
Wilderness, even into Works of darkness. When Satan had once observed that
our Savior kept so close to the guidance of scripture, Mat. 4.4. It is
written, says Christ, that man lives not by bread only. Truly now Satan
himself in the very next temptation will quote scripture too, but curtelized
and abused; cast thy self down, for it is written, he has given his Angels
charge to bear thee up, etc. abuse unsufferable ^ for he leaves out that
clause, that would have marred the logic of the temptation, viz. he shall keep
thee in all thy ways; which casting himself down from the Pinnacle, could not
be. You have mention of some that wrest the Scriptures to their own perdition.
2. Pet. 3.16. They turn the Scriptures out of the way, that they themselves
may with more security and freedom turn aside: and this trade they take up, as
you see, from their father the Devil.

I shall give you amongst many, 1. An instance in two sorts of persons.
but a double instance the one of persons, the other as to times. For the first,

There are two sorts of persons, both of which are bewildred.

First, Such as either endeavor not at all, or

Secondly, Such as, if they do endeavor, trust to their endeavors. Now Satan
do usually pervert Scripture unto the seducing of them both.

First, For such as labor not at all; 1. Such as endeavor not at all.
Usual i^ is for such, though they will not stand to the guidance of other
places of the Scripture, yet close to follow those which they mistake, and
carelessly to run on in the ways of sin still. There are some that never
frequent Ordinances, or take any pains either in public or private with their
own souls, and ask them why they are so negligent in the weighty things of God
and their own souls? Why? say they, do not the Scriptures themselves teach as
( Ioh. 6.44.) that we cannot come to God, except he draw us: we do but stay for
his drawing. If we should take never so much pains, all would do no good,
Without him we can do nothing (as Joh. 15.5.) and would you not have us stay
for his coming. If the spirit moves us we shall pray, and if God turn us we
shall be turned, and when God wills, we shall believe, and repent, and till God
please, we by our endeavors can do nothing. This is the language of many
hearts, and upon this, their practice is to sit still: and what is this other
then to be quietly kept in the Lions Den? 2. Such as trust to their endeavors.


Secondly, for such as endeavor, but trust to what they do; these are as far
out as the other. Ask them, what will you make your prayers, your
righteousness, your alms, your attendance upon the word, your duties, your
Savior? will you rest there? why? those as you have heard, are but part of the
ways of the Wilderness still. Say you so? says that soul, nay, but you shall
never make me believe that: does not the Scripture say: wash you, make you
clean, Isa. 1.16. Cast away your transgressions, make you a new heart and a new
spirit, why will you die, turn your selves and live you. Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Does
not the Scripture say, If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good
of the Land. Isa. 1.19. Why? I have done thus, and I have been thus, and why
should not I expect to live by what I have done, and to receive what God has
promised, as I have done what God has commanded? And so when the forementioned
soul shall come, and tell God that he is an austere Master, gathering where he
did not sow, if he bid them do what the Scripture says they cannot do; as that
wicked servant. Luke 19.21, The later will come, and boast, and glory in
himself as that wicked Pharisee. Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, I have been,
and I have done so, and so. Now both these are out of the way, and yet they
think that Scripture is their guide; as that blasphemous Papist, who when he
had vented his popish tenets, and as he pretended, and perhaps thought, managed
them by Scripture, he breaks out in a wretched rapture, If I (says he) be
deceived, decepisti o Petre, decepisti o Paul: Peter and Paul had deceived
him, Scripture had deceived him, etc. but amongst all the rest forgets that
which was truest, that the Devil transformed into an Angel of light had
deceived him.

Querie, But in this case what shall we do? I confess they are to be sadly
pitied, that err and think they have the Scriptures company, and countenance
in their Erring (although I believe there are many that pretend the Scriptures,
against their own light, as Satan to our Savior.

Answ. I answer, We are not in the least from hence to slight the true
guidance of the Scriptures, no more then we should cease to drink, because
some abuse the good creature unto drunkenness. But now that we may come at
this true guidance, I shall entreat you to deal by Scripture, as the Apostle
says of the Prophets. 1 Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and
let the other judge, and ver. 32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets. Let Us hear what the Scriptures can say, that put the soul upon
working, as if it had a self-ability: and lets hear what those speak also,
that call the soul off from leaning upon its own endeavors, as being when it
has done all, an unprofitable servant; and lets hear what a third shall judge
of them both, and surely if both kinds of Scriptures should seem to strive (as
I may so say) a third would come in and say as he said (and vitulo tu dignus
and ille est) both have won. Read but Phil. 2.12.13 Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you both to
will and and to do of his own good pleasure. You must work it out, yet it is
God that works in you. It is God that works in you of his own good
pleasure; yet you must work it out: yea, and therefore; for it is God, etc.

2dly, As to times: 2. In two sorts of times.
there are two sorts of them as to Gods account, six days he has given us,
the seventh he has reserved for himself.

Now then all the week the men of the World spend peaceably in seeking only
after the World, 1. Weekdaies.
all the week-daies, I say, and they would not have you blame them for it; if
they hear a Lecture now and then, they think that is more then they need to do,
the Minister is beholding to them for their Company, and God for their
attendance, and they will have Scripture to follow too: Why? is it not written,
Six days thou shall labor. It Is true say I, but again is it not written,
therein thou shall do all that thou have to do? and have thou nothing to do for
a poor soul? have thou a Family to provide for, and many things, to do (as
Martha) about them? and have thou no provision to make for a poor soul? of a
truth this is exceeding sad.

2. Lord's Day.
Again, when the Lords day comes, then some in the City or in the Town sleep it,
and eat and drink it almost all away, rising that morning very late, (as having
sat up very late the night before at work) and go that night to bed very
early (that they may be up soon on monday morning to follow the World.) They
take their penniworths out of the sleep of their Apprentices all the week
before, and they willingly suffer their Apprentices to take their penniworths
out of the Lords day, morning and evening: and they will tell you they have
Scripture for it too, why does not Scripcall it a day of rest?

Again, as for those that live in the Country, and have other kind of affairs;
they think if they wait but on the public Ordinances they do hugely well, for,
as for all their other time they spend it in foddering, or milkng, or looking
after their Oxen, and swine, and sheep and the like. And does not Scripture
tell them they may do so? they will tell you that Christ allows it them. Mat.
12.11. But does not Christ that allows thee to pull an Ox out of a ditch upon
the Sabbath: much more require thee to pull thy poor soul out of the fire with
fear and trembling? Thou think it is fit to look after a dumb Creature that
is gone astray upon the Lords day, and may perish if thou look not after it,
and the Sabbath thou wilt say, from Scripture, is a day of mercy. True, but does
the Scripture give thee leave in such a day, to be only cruel to thine own
soul? that that may be lost and wander in the Wilderness, and never be looked
after? Oh! take heed whilst you pretend to be led by Scripture-guidance, lest
you become unrighteous Judges of the Scriptures in your own thoughts; though
God has said: That he will have mercy and not sacrifice; yet how can thou
think, that in such a day, God will have mercy shown to Beasts, and to Bodies,
and not to Souls?

And thus you see how Satan makes it his business by Scripture-guidance, to
bewilder souls; I could multiply instances. Instance in distressed Consciences.


Alas! how do poor distressed Conscience urge Scriptures against themselves,
to hinder themselves from laying hold on Jesus Christ, and to the condemning of
themselves, and their courses even to despair?

And how do bold profane sinners urge Scripture for themselves, and for their
sins, And bold presumers.
to hinder their souls from being humbled unto conversion, and to the
justifying of themselves and their courses even unto that presumption? I
tremble to think, and I dare not speak, what I have heard in this kind, lest I
should put a sword into any mad man's hand, whereby he might kill himself,
unless I had time enough (as to each particular) to take it out of his hand
again. I have heard Tippling, Chambering, long Hair, painting of the face,
etc. defended, and pitifully too, by abusing, and by wresting holy Scriptures:
But surely they that sin by Scripture-shelter, will have a miserable
Comforter of it in the latter end.

Now because there is so much danger of being lost under a mistaken
Scripture-guidance, I dare not leave the Saints without a word of serious
Exhortation, that by frequent prayer they would effectually and frequently, put
in suit that precious Scripture-promise concerning the holy Scripture-guide,
Joh. 16.13. I will send the Comforter, ver. 7. and when he, who is the spirit
of truth shall come, he shall guide you into all truth, for he shall not speak
of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. And thus much
of Satan's bewildring souls by false guidances. The

CHAP. XVII. Contains the third sort of bewildring means, viz. Darkness,
with four general Considerations concerning souls bewildred therein, applied.
Third sort of bewildring means, viz. Darkness.
THird sort of means of spiritual bewildrings, are spiritual darknesses. And
nothing is more frequent then this in both kinds: You Will say, Those that are
bewildred, are usually bewildred in the night: I Am sure so it is with sinners.
They that are drunk n, are drunken in the night, 1 These. 5.7. And so for other
sins: for a drunken sinner, is a notable resemblance of every bewildred
sinner, see Isai. 19.14. They have caused Egypt to err, as a drunken man
staggereth. A drunken man cannot keep the way, no more can erring Egypt, a
bewildred people, or person; they stagger out of the way, first on one hand,
then on the other, and this is in the night; the dark gives advantage hereunto,
so Ephe. 5.8. You were darkness sometimes, though now you are light in the
Lord (therefore) walk (as who should say, it is good walking now.) If our light
be darkness, sure our walk will be a Wilderness. Therefore if Paul turn
sinners from the power of Satan unto God, it must be by turning them from
darkness to light, Act. 26.18. And if his Gospel be hid in others, and they be
lost, it will be by Satan's blinding their eyes, lost the light of the glorious
Gospel should come unto them, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Its Satan's work then to casts
mists, and fogges, and thick darkness before the eyes of poor Creatures, and
so to blind their souls.

Now what darkness is in Naturalls, Or ignorance. Note.
that ignorance is in Spiritualls: And as Darkness bewilders Traveling
persons outwardly, so Ignorance bewilders traveling souls, Romans 3.12. They
are all gone out of the way: Why? What Is the reason? verse 11. There Is none
that understands, verse 17. The way of peace they have not known: so Heb.
3.10. They do alwaie err in their heart (and what is the reason still?) and
they have not known my ways.

Object. But will you say, if ignorance be the cause of soul-bewildrings,
whence is it that so many that have much knowledge, and light enough to come
out of the Wilderness, keep there still?

Solu. I deny that. There is not any soul that is in the wilderness, that has
enough of true light to help it thence. Verily, all the notionall knowledge,
Note
and brain-light in the world, is little better then darkness, if not
darkness according to that intimation of Christ's, Mat. 6.23. If the light that
is in thee be darkness, how great will that darkness be? and I would have you
know, that all the knowledge the head can hold, is not enough to disentangle
the bewildrings of the heart.

The Pharisees could say, we see, they had sooner got out of the Wilderness,
if they had been blind, as Christ tells them, Joh. 9.41. You have a strange
passage, Mar. 12. by the way, the Pharisees and Sadduces too were such knowing
men, hat they had exquisite Observations upon the Scriptures, they could quote
them, and gloss upon them, and start Queries about them, and notably discourse
out of them, as here verse 19. Master, Moses wrought thus, etc. Yet Christ
tells these very Sadduces, verse 24. You do err not knowing the Scriptures.
And here is enough in this one place, to prove all that I have spoken upon this
account, together. You [that is, you Sadduces, that can quote Scripture, and
argue out of it] do err [that is, are out of the way] not knowing the
Scriptures: Here ignorance, or spiritual darkness, is made the very cause of
spiritual be wildrings.

On this Theme, as mainly necessary, I shall somewhat insist, and propound some
particulars; and therefore I shall prepare my way with these more general
Observations, Four general Considerations concerning souls bewildred in the
da^k of ignorance.
in number four. Those that are bewildred in the dark, they are they know not
where, they go they know not whither, they stumble they know not at what, they
fall they know not when: and thus it is with bewildred and benighted Sinners.

1. They are they know not where.
1. They are they know not where. If you should meet a bewildred Traveller on an
Heath, or in a Forest, in a dark night, and should ask him where he is? he
might say, I am here: here, yea but where is that? truly, must he say, I know
not well where I am. Thus God demands, 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the Wise? where is
the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this world? Where? Why? the wise man is at
the Council, you will say: the Disputer is in the School: the Scribe is at
the Deske: Ah poor wretches, themselves know not where they are, else why does
God ask the Question: so likewise Isai. 19.12. says God, Where are the wise
men etc. I will warrant you, they thought they could give a very full answer, a
very fair and prudent account hereof, where they were, what they were doing,
and how to come off, they thought, no doubt, they knew well enough: but, God
knows, they know not. Let me ask you therefore, as God did Adam, Genesis 3.9.
Adam, where art thou? Why, it may be thou will say, Lo here I am. Yea, but
friend, where is thy soul? hap'ly thou may say, my Thoughts, they are after
my work, my business^: mine Affections, they are after the world; my Heart,
that is in my Coffers, my Compting-house, my Warehouse, my Workhouse, on my
Markets, in my Barn, on mine Harvest; my marrow and strength are yet in my
bones, and my breath is in my nostrills, and so (I thank God) I am in a good
thriving way, a way that I (and my friends) like well, and wherefore is it that
you do so question me? Oh! but friend, Where is thy soul all this while? --
my soul again? -- Yea thy soul; tell me truly, do thou know where thy
soul is? thou tellest me thy condition in respect of the world, but what is
thy souls condition and estate toward God? I fear the most of you may be
ready in heart to answer me, as Cain answered, being asked of God where his
brother Abel was: I know not, says Cain, am I my brothers keeper, Genesis 4.9.
Where Is my soul? I know not, am I my Souls keeper? I know I am the keeper of
my Moneys, and Means, and I know where they are; but where my soul is, truly I
know not, if there be such a thing, I never knew that I was the keeper of it.

Secondly, Those that are bewildred in the dark, 2ly, The go they know not
whither.
they go they know not whither, Joh. 12.35. He that walks in the dark,
knows not whither he goes: so 1 Jo. 2.11. He walks in darkness, and knows
not whither be goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes: So he that
walks in the Works of darkness, knows not whither he goes. The way may seem
right unto him (as you have heard from Prove. 16.25.) but what the end is knows
he not, for the end of those ways is death. The young man, Prove. 7. went he
thought to a carved bed, etc. but indeed he knew not whither he went, for he
went as a bird that hastneth to the snare, and knows not that it is for his
life, ver. 23. So Drunkards drink drunk, and Swearers blaspheme, and Cheaters
cozen, and Hypocrites dally with, and profane ones trample upon the things of
God, and little do they know that all this is for damnation: so Prove. 5.6. Her
ways are moveable, that thou can not know them. What, does not the Drunkard,
and Oppressor, and Adulterer, know his own way? No, he does not, neither can
he know them. He knows perhaps what they begin at, but where they end he
knows not, whither they go he knows not, because they are all of them in the
dark. Alas! who knows the power of Gods wrath? Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the
infinity of his justice? who knows how much sin deserves? or how much the
sinner shall suffer? Sirs, then let me ask you this day, and let your
Consciences answer, Whither away so fast? sirs, where are you going, you that
make such have after your pleasures, such have to be rich? where are you going?
to Hell or Heaven? to God or the Devil? Oh! where will you lie down at night?
where will you lodge when you come to dye? you that are so hasty in your
journey, that you cannot stay to bait at a Lecture, where do you think you
shall lodge at night, that you make so much have now? That Is a sad demand,
Isai. 10.3. What will you do in the day of Visitation, and where will you leave
your glory? says God. Sirs, every ones master sin is his glory; yea, though
it be their shame: it is yet that which they glory in, as one in his Pride,
another in his unrighteous Mammon, a third in his profuseness, etc. Every
Traveller upon the Road of this World, has a truss behind him of that which
he counts his glory: but now let me ask you, yea rather God demands of you,
and answer you him. Oh! where will you lay down your Truss at night? Oh! where
will you leave your glory? You know where you took up your Honors, and upon
what terms: you know where you took up your Estates, and upon what terms:
whether with a good Conscience, yea, or no: But oh! where will you leave them?
leave them you must, nothing more sure; but where? Why? with my Son thinks
one in such an Inheritance, and with my Daughter thinks another in such a
Portion: Thus in their inward thought, that their Houses shall continue for
ever, Psalm. 49.11. but verse 13. This their way is their folly: thou fool, thou
neither know whither thy self, nor they are a going. In the dark thou have
taken them up, in the dark thou shall lose them; in the dark it is that thou
walk, and whither thou go thou do not know. Oh! let this Querie be a
stop to your speedy course, and post-hast in the darksome Wilderness. Often
ask your selves this question, when passion begins to get up, or any other
Corruption, o animula, Quo vadis? O my poor soul! whither is it that thou art
now a going?

Thirdly, They that are bewildred in the dark, 3ly, They stumble they know not
at what,
stumble at they know not what, Joh. 11.9. If any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he sees the light of this world, verse 10. But if any
man walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.

And this you shall find expressly of sin too, Prove. 4.19. The way of the
wicked is as darkness, they know not at what they stumble. Tell a wicked man
that he gets a fall, and a bruise by every sin, he knows it not, he is not
sensible of it. I Will mind you in a word or two, of what you stumble at, and tell
me whether you have been sensible thereof or no: I remember God says, Ezekiel.
3.20. If such a one sin, and I lay a stumbling block before him. There Is not
a sinner of you, but God has laid stumbling blocks before you, and without all
peradventure, you have stumbled over them, and yet I believe you have not known
at what you have so stumbled. I Will instance therefore in two things. 1. Instance.
Gods Works. 2, His. Word. God in his Works: Christ in his Word.

First, Dark souls, and bewildred sinners, 1. In Gods providence.
stumble at all Gods providence, and it know it not. I tell you, you stumble
over your very Tables which your bread stands upon, over your very Beds that
your bodies lie upon, over your very Houses that you dwell in, etc. and this I
fear you have not known, Isai. 5.12. They (he speaks of rich voluptuous ones)
consider not Gods works, nor the operations of his hands, and what is the
reason, verse 13. They are without knowledge (i. e. they are in the dark) and
what of this? Why? they stumble and fall, and sadly too, so as to rise up no
more; for verse 14. Therefore Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her
mouth without measure, and their glory, and their multitude, and he that
rejoices, shall descend into it. Do you think that joviall sinners, think
that Gods providence are such a stone of stumbling? No, they have no knowledge
thereof. There are some that fancy, that Sun, Moon, and Stars, preach
Christ, I am far from thinking, that Creation, or providence alone, are
enough to be a Jacobs Ladder, to lead us up to Heaven: but thus much I know,
that they are too many as a stone to stumble at (who know not that the
goodness of God (in them) should lead us to repentance, Mercies.
(as Romans 2.4. Thou stumblest at the Globe of the Sun, or of the Moon, that
dishonourest God by day, or by night, under the light of the one, or influences
of the other.

Yea, other sorts of providential Dispensations there are, as Corrections; and
at these the darkened and bewildred souls stumble: Chastisements
if they be not as stairs to help them nearer unto God, they will be as
stumbling stones over which they fall, and on which they shall be broken, see
Isai. 1.5, 6. Why should they be stricken any more? they will revolt more and
more: it follows, the whole head is sick, and heart is heavy; from the sole of
the foot to the crown of the head, there is nothing but wounds, and bruises,
and putrified sores. Oh! who sees not what stumbling here has been? Sirs, the
day is coming, when you shall know that upon every Affliction whereby you have
not risen to more holiness, and faith, and obedience, etc. You have stumbled,
to wit, the day wherein you shall be made sensible of the wounds and bruises
that now are in your Consciences; but now you are in the heat of blood, the
heat of sin, and like wounded Soldiers, go on still without feeling it.

Secondly, Bewildred and benighted sinners, 2ly, Gods word, and at Christ
therein
stumble at the Word of God, and at Jesus Christ in that word, yet know it not.
In every Sermon, where Christ is revealed and tendered, they stumble at him; and
you may say of these, as of those that Crucified him, himself said, That they
know not what they do. Peter tells you, 1 Pet. 2.7. That to them that believe
Christ is precious, but unto them that are disobedient, verse 8. he is a stone
of stumbling, and a Rock of offense, even to them which stumble at the Word, as
1 Cor. 1.23. Christ crucified to the Jews, is a stumbling block. Only now take
heed that it be not with you, as with one that gets a fall when he is drunk,
and feels it not till he be sober: therefore give glory to God, before your
feet stumble on the dark mountains, Jer. 13.16.

Fourthly, Bewildred and bedarkned sinners, 4ly, They fall they know not when.
fall they know not when; suddenly, or ever they are aware. It is not unusual
in this wildernersse, for souls to stumble upon a Lions Den, and to fall into
it, not thinking of it: Joviall and merry at an Al^house to day, and dead and
damned in Hell at night. I believe when the fool was that night cast into
Hell, he could not but be in a more sad ecstasy than one that should of the
sudden tumble into a Lions Den. Ah! Lord, what am I here? am I here Lord? --
What in Hell? in Hell? I dreamed not of it. Alas my Brethren, now adays, as
Solomon speaks, because sentence is not speedily executed against an evil
work, therefore the hearts of the Sons of men are fully set in them to do
evil, Eccles. 8.11. But fair and softly, perhaps more suddenly then thou art
aware of, Jer 51.8. Babylon is suddenly fallen. Mark, her fall is sudden to
her, she knows not of it, down she goes, and is not aware of it. We would
have healed her, Note.
but she would not be healed, verse 9. God commonly snatches souls that are
under healing Dispensations,, and refuse to be healed, suddenly away. So God
threatens to send a Destroyer (as a Lion of the Forest, that falls suddenly
upon his prey) to fall suddenly upon them, Jer. 15.8. Because they had gone
away from God, verse 6. Thus Isa. 47. They were perverted, verse 10. therefore,
says God, evil shall come upon thee, that thou shall not know whence it
rises, and mischief that thou shall not be able to put off, and desolation
shall come upon thee suddenly that thou shall not know. So likewise, Isa.
30.10. You have them turned out of the way, and verse 11. trusting in such
perverseness; verse 12. and therefore iniquity (says God) shall be to you, as
a breach swelling in an high wall, ready to fall, whose breaking forth comes
suddenly at an instant. Oh! if it had not been so sudden, the people might
have escaped out of the house. So if they had not gone to Hell in such a
moment, such an unexpected moment, they may imagine they would have prevented
it. But he that is bewildred in the dark, falls he knows not when. Oh!
firs, if you might die of Consumptions, (which you say are fine repenting
times) if you might know of death some years before hand: Oh! you think you
would be ready then: but this sudden, sudden falling that you shall not
know of, whence or when it shall be, yet it certainly shall be, let this
startle you.

In one word or two then from what I have this day been speaking.

Is it so, that souls are usually so blind, because of spiritual darkness,
Uses of these general considerations.
that they know not where they are, whither they are a going, what it is they
stumble at, and are also ready to fall they know not when? Oh then,

First, Admire the exceeding merry of the Lord, that he should ever, (as at this
day) send a guide with a light in his hand unto thee, so bewildred in the dark,
Luke 1.78, 79. Through the tender mercy of our God, the dayspring from on high
has visited us (that is Christ in the Gospel) to give light to them that sit
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of
peace. Oh! that was tender mercy indeed, let it be tenderly accepted by you.

Secondly, Let it be as carefully improved. Let not an hard heart lose the
sweetness of such tender mercy. My Brethren, Christ is come in the dark unto
you, into the Wilderness, he has bruised himself, and pricked his own feet:
yea, even pierced them through in coming to you, and that he might bring you a
light, and lead you into the way that you have lost. Is it a small thing to
you, that he should appoint this, and that man to show you the way of
salvation? as they say, Act. 16.17. if it be, yet think it not a light matter,
that the light himself is come to be your guide: Christ is come into the
darksome wilderness of the wicked World, and now take heed of loving your
darkness rather then light, for Jesus himself says, Joh. 12.35, 36. Yet a
little while the light is with you, walk whilst you have the light, lest
darkness come upon you: for he that walks in the dark, knows not whither he
goes. While ye have light, believe in the light, that you may be Children of
the light.

Thus have you heard in some general Considerations, how bewildring spiritual
darkness is: I shall conclude them with an Observation from the form of the
expression, Jer. 2.31. Have I been a Wilderness to Israel? a land of darkness?
When ever Satan leads you into a Land of Darkness, he leads you therein into a
Wilderness. Thus in the general.

CHAP. XVIII. Contains particular sorts of bewildring darkness. 1. Sort
before conversion, in six particulars, Opened.
In particular. Three sorts of bewildring darknesses.
BUt more particularly, There are three sorts of soul-bewildring darknesses:
some before Conversion, some in it, some after it.

1. Sort. Before Conversion.
1. There are bewildring darknesses before Conversion, that Satan improves to
hinder the soul by from conversion; Such as these.

1. Stupidity and sottishness.
First, The darkness of senseless stupidity, and sottish ignorance. It may
well be called darkness, and you know it is a bewildring darkness, Isai. 1.3.
The Ox knows, but Israel does not know: The bruit Beast knows what is good for
it self, but brutish Men and Women do not know. You complain of a sottish
poor in your Town, that have no more sense of spiritual good, then the
stones of the streets that they tread upon, and the blocks that they sit on.
You know that stocks and stones, if they be in the wilderness, there they
stay, there they lie, they have no sense to remove themselves; but Beasts, if
they be in the Wilderness, if danger approaches, if the Lion roars, they have
knowledge to run for it, to change their place, posture, and condition: but
miserable Men and Women can hear the voice of the Lord in his providence, in
his Word, as the roaring of a Lion, and yet stay where they were, and as they
were, and in the same posture they were in, even in the Wilderness of sin
still; and this is the reason they are blockishly ignorant and stupid, as to
spiritual things. Now unto what shall I liken the people of this Generation?
it is even like unto Egypt, Exodus 10.21, 23. There was a thick darkness,
darkness that might be felt, so that no man rose from his place, for the time
that that darkness continued: so there is thick darkness upon these Spirits;
so that though they be in an Egypt, in a Wilderness, they stir not, because
it is a Land of darkness: wretched hearts that mind only to day, what they
shall eat, and what they shall drink, and wherewith they shall be clothed
(and perhaps scarce that) but how to arise spiritually from the place they sit
in, the condition that their souls are in, verily hereunto they have no
knowledge: and thus they sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, Luke
1.79. They sit in darkness, and though the shadow of death be there, yet it is
darkness, and therefore they continue in it, 1 These. 5.5, 6, 7. We are not of
darkness, says the Apostle, therefore let us not sleep, for they that sleep,
sleep in the night. This is that night, and that darkness, you may know it by
their sleepiness. When men are asleep, you may speak in the room and they
hear not: the Gospel, the voice of God is in the midst of this sottish
Generation; but they are in the night, in the dark, and asleep, and therefore
it is that they receive it not. But unto such, if there be any here, let me
tenderly speak as Paul, Romans 13.12. v. 11. Know ye the time, that it is now
high time to awake out of s^^p, for the night is far spent, and the day is at
hand, therefore cast off the works of darkness. But if you will not, let me
tell you, as the Father told those painted and spotted Ladies of his time, that
God would not know or acknowledge them for his Creatures in the Great day,
because he made them of another color, and without those Spots. So may I, and
dare I say, and you shall find it too true, that God will not own your sottish
hearts as his, in the day of the Lord, because he made you intelligent and
knowing souls; and now the restitution of knowledge to you is tendered in the
Gospel, so that the day is come, and the night is spent, but you sit still in
your places, as they in the Aegyption darkness. Neither do I tell you this,
but God himself by the Prophet, Isai. 27.11. It is a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will show them no favor.

This is the first sort of Darkness, and millions of them that are called the
Christian World, are bewildred by it.

I proceed to the

2ly, The darkness of inconsiderateness.
The second sort of Darkness, and that is Inconsiderateness. You have this
with the other, Isai. 1.3. Israel does not know, my people does not consider.
Many of them are so stupid that they know not, and those that know do not
consider: this is also a bewildring Darkness; Read Job 34.24, 25, 27. He shall
break in pieces mighty men without number. And when shall he do it? verse 25.
He shall overturn them in the night, and why does he do it? verse 27. Because
they turned back from him, Note.
and would not consider any of his ways. I have observed that very few, either
of the richest of all, or poorest of all, ever come to get out of the
Wilderness; (but it is a middle sort of persons) what is the reason? Why, the
very poor know not, and the very rich care not, they consider not, they think
the things of God are below their Cognizance, although through Education, their
parts are sublimated to some knowledge. Now this is here said of the
Inconsiderate Great ones (as was proved before of the brutish poor ones) that
they also perish in the Dark, in the night the are overturned, verse 25. If
Inconsiderateness then be such a bewildring night of darkness, it is no wonder
that the Lord does so persuade us to consider our works, and ways, and that
Satan does so design to hinder us, as Prove. 5.6. Lest thou should ponder the
way of life, her ways are movable. Oh! Satan cannot ^ndure that thou should
consider the way of life. Hence also those Counsels, Prove. 4.26. Ponder the
path of thy feet, etc. Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy feet, etc. and offer not the
sacrifice of fools, for they consider not that they do evil. It Is want of
consideration, that makes souls to lose their footing, their ground, their
way; but ponder the path of thy feet, and thy ways shall be established, Prove.
4.26. So that inconsiderateness is as Darkness; yea, and it is a bewildring
darkness. Let me persuade you therefore, that are intelligent to one step
forwarder; I mean to be advised, to ponder and lay to heart, the things that
you know belong unto your peace. How many souls continue lost under the means
of knowledge, in the darksome wilderness of inadvertency and
non-consideration? I have considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy
Testimonies, Psalm. 119.58. And as for such as will not consider, let them know,

First, That though they consider not their own ways, yet they are
considered, for God ponders them, Prove. 21.2. Every way of man is right in his
own eyes, but the Lord ponders the hearts.

Secondly, God will make the most inconsiderate heart amongst you, perfectly to
consider another day, Jer. 23.18. Who has stood in the counsel of the Lord,
and has perceived and heard his word? Who has marked his word and heard it?
there is his challenge of their inconsiderateness; but what follows, verse 20?
In the latter days you shall consider it perfectly. You have heard of
Inconsiderateness in what they know of the things of God. The

Third is Unperswasibleness, 3ly, The darkness of unperswasiblenesse.
as to that which they do in some sort consider: this is also a bewildring
darkness.

Now men in the state of lost nature, are called (...), Romans 1. and (...),
Unreasonable, or absurd men, 2 These. 3, 2. Men, whom no Arguments from any
Logical Topics, are able to persuade. Now mark such kind of Spirits, as when
they knew God, yet would not be persuaded to glorify him as God, as you have
it charged upon them, Romans 1.21. It Is said in the same verse, That their
foolish heart was darkened: This was the darkness of unperswasion; and this
darkness is now natural unto the Children of men, for the Apostle calls them,
Ephesians. 2.2. Children of disobedience: so, our Translation, but the words are
(...), Children of unperswasion, such as will not be persuaded, and so you
have it sadly rendered, Luke 16.31. Neither will they be persuaded, though one
arose from the dead. Poor souls, they cannot be persuaded that God means, as
he says of Death, and Hell, and Judgment. Can not? nay, they will not be
persuaded: As one that I once heard of, that in discourse was directed to a
place of Scripture, that spoke point blank against him, says he, I cannot find
such a place: says the other, Look, here it is; nay then, says he, I will not
see it. So say you, We cannot find what need we have of Gods Counsel, and of
Christ, and of Grace: says God, look here, and I will show you what need you
have, and how undone otherwise you are, etc. Nay then, says the Soul, I will
not see. I remember a plain Observation of a Child, where I was once, was
playing in the Yard, and his Father out of the Window called him in; the Boy
was eager of his play, and though his Father called again and again, yet came
he not in; at length his Father told him that he would be sure to whip him, if
he would not come, yet he could not persuade him in; at length in he fetches
him, and whips him, Sirrah, says he, did not I tell you, that if you would not
come in, I would lash you; yes Father, says the Child, you said so, but truly
Father I did not believe you. So God calls, and exhorts, and persuades sinners,
and tells them, if they will not now, they shall consider afterward: if they
will not come in now, they shall be fetched in, and damned to eternity, whether
they will or no: And my Brethren, if God shall (as he surely will (ask them at
the great Day, Did not I call you by such a Ministry, and such a Minister, by
such and such a Sermon; and did not I tell you what would come on it. Hell, and
Wrath, and eternal ruin, if you came not in? Oh! the poor soul trembling and
astonished, will answer in that day, yes, Lord thou did so, but truly Lord we
did not believe thee; thus are sinners unperswasible ones, even the Children of
unperswasion. God cries out, Turn ye at my reproof; but when he calls, they
refuse, when he stretches out his hand, no man regards, Prove. 1.23, 24. And
therefore though he calls from Lebanon, from Amanah, from Shenir, and Hermon;
yet they continue through their unperswasiblensse, in the Lions Dens, and
Mountains of the Leopards yet still.

Fourthly, Presumption is also a bewildring darkness, 4ly, The darkness of
presumption.
and its business is to hinder the soul from Conversion. To what shall I
liken a presuming sinner? It Is even that beast, which when he is in danger of
being seized on by the Lion as his prey, runs his head presently into a bush,
and because the head is in the dark, and sees no danger, therefore it thinks
it self secure. Or as I have seen a Boy, that when his Father has gone by at
a distance, the lad has hid his head behind another lad, so that he could not
see his Father, and therefore has been very confident, that his Father has
not seen him. Presumptuous sinners run their hearts into the thickets of the
Wilderness, they walk themselves in the dark, not seeing God, and therefore
they presume that the Lord takes no notice of them, and this verily is the very
nature of presumption, Psa. 73.11. They say, how does God know? and is there
any knowledge in the most high? Psa. 64.5. They commune of laying snares
privily, they say, Who shall see them? Wretches! that if they get but into a
blind Alehouse, where the Magistrate cannot see them, think themselves past all
danger, when they are as much in it, as that Creature that while it turns away
its face from beholding its devourer, exposes its whole body to be his prey:
In such a darksome bush shall a presumptuous sinner be caught, instead of being
hid, and be destroyed instead of being secured; for Psa. 139.12. The darkness
hides not from God, but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the
light are both alike unto him. As to Gods eye and ear, thou had as good the
Magistrate should hear every Oath thou swearest; thou had as good be
staggering in the streets, and whore, as Zimri, in the openest view, as to go
into a Corner, and say, Does God see it, because thou turnest away thine eyes
from beholding of God.

5ly, The darkness of despair
Fifthly, Despair is also a bewildring darkness utterly obstructive to
conversion. Presumptions product commonly is Despair, and well may they go
together; like Egg, like Bird. When Sinners have spent the most of their time
in presuming, they many times spend the rest of it in dark despairing. Oh! we
have so long mocked God, that we cannot think but if God should tender
salvation now to us, it would be but to mock us. Oh! I have so long walked
aside from God, that if I should now turn to him, he would undoubtedly turn
quite away from me: this is the way of despair, that many poor ones that are
willing, if they durst, to close with God, are bewildred in; and this is called
(which is pat to our purpose) a walking in darkness, Isai. 50.10. Who is there
among you that fears the Lord, etc. that walks in darkness, and has no
light, etc. That is clearly and eminently to be understood of the darkness of
black despair. God would before, but they would not: they would now, but they
are afraid that God will not, but let them stay upon the Lord; they may injure
themselves, and dishonor God in this one farther work of Darkness, as much as
in all the rest that were before it.

6ly, A mixed darkness of all these.
Sixthly and lastly, A mixture of all that have been named, is a bewildring
darkness to many a soul; some things they know not, and there they are in the
dark; other things that they know, they do not consider, and so they are in
the dark and bewildred still; that which they do consider, they will not be
persuaded of, or unto; and so from such wilful unperswasion, pass on to
Presumption, and from Presumption, strait forward (when time serves) unto
Despair: and surely all these blended together, are enough to make a darkness
more dark then that of Egypt. Therefore when the Apostle tells you what
Methods Satan has to bewilder souls, Ephesians. 6.11. He calls the Devils
immediately, verse 12. The Rulers of the darkness. As a Commander would order
such and such a Party for one place, such an one for another, a Forlorn-hope, a
Left-wing, a Right-wing, a Reserve, etc. So does Satan Marshall and order
various darknesses to undo poor souls, for he is the Ruler of them, that if
Ignorance cannot do it, Inconsiderateness may; if that will not, that wilful
unperswasiblenesse may, if God sometimes almost persuade, as he did Agrippa,
that Presumption may still hold; or if ever Presumption leaves them, that
cursed despair may seize upon them, for he is (...), the great Ruler, or
General, or Commander of Darkness.

CHAP. XIX. Contains the second sort of bewildring darkness, viz In
conversion, whereof three kinds. 1. Such as relate to our selves. Four
particulars removed.
THe second sort of bewildring Darknesses, 2d. Sort of darkness. In Conversion.
are such as attend the soul in, or unto Conversion. And these are a
wilderness of Gods own providing; not a wilderness of sin, but a
wilderness wherein to afflict the soul for sin; as it is said of that
Wilderness wherein the Lord led Israel forty years, that it was to humble and
to prove them, Deuteronomy. 8.2. And to do them good in their latter end, ver. 16. So
when God intends to convert a soul, he brings it usually, if not always,
first into a Wilderness, but the design of God is to humble it, and to prove
it, and at length to do it good. The first view that souls have of God, is as
if his ways were a Wilderness, a Land of darkness, and it is the pleasure of
God it should be so, Hos. 2.14. I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, (that is a dark dispensation indeed) Oh! but then, says God, I
will speak, comfortably to her. I will first bewilder her to humble her, and
then at her latter end, I will do her good. Verily sirs, if you will walk (as
we all naturally do) in the dark wilderness of Soul-transgression (though
you be the dear Elect of God, yet) shall you walk in the darksome wilderness
in Soul-affliction, and be as those, Isai. 50.10. Walking in darkness, and
seeing no light at all. As God tells Israel, Ezekiel. 20.34. etc. so will he deal
with the soul that he brings home to himself; I will bring you out of the
people, and ver. 35. I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and
there will I plead with you face to face, and verse 37. I will cause you to
pass under the Rod, and bring you into the bond of the Covenant, and verse 38.
I will purge out the Rebels from among you. These are the pure designs and
aims of God, in bringing souls into such a Darkness, into such a Wilderness,
namely, to gather them out of other Countries (i. e. from the world, and their
vain Conversation) to cause them to pass under the Rod, (that is, to humble
them, and to bring them, as Israel in the Wilderness, into a new bond of
Covenant) and to purge out the Rebels, etc. that is, by making sin (the
hearts rebellion) a bitterness to their souls, to give Corruption a
Deaths-wound in their souls.) As God of old by bringing Israel into the
Wilderness, thereby first brought them out of Egypt, and then humbled them to
purpose there, and ^ade them enter into Covenant, to be his people, and there
he wasted the rebellious ones that were amongst them: so usefully (however
irksome) it was for Israel to be brought into that Wilderness; and verily so
needful is it, if not much more in all these respects, that God should first
lead a soul into this darksome Wilderness, before he lead them into Canaan, or
speak comfortably unto them. Neither may a sinner take this ill at the hands of
God; for if he find a Convert perverting his way, he will make him know, that
he wae again in the Wilderness, by bringing him back by an Hedge of thorns,
and by setting darkness in his paths, and fencing up his way that he cannot
pass; therefore wonder not at the Thorns, Hos. 2.6, 7. or the Wilderness,
verse 14. Only as you know how busy Satan was to lead them (whilst they were
in that Wilderness) into temptation; (so that it is called, The day of
temptation in the wilderness, Heb. 3.8.) So verily will he be sure exceedingly
to endeavor to make this time of thy being led into the Wilderness of Gods
own providing, an hour of temptation unto thee, that so he may in sin
bewilder thee; whilst God designs by such bewildring of thee, to lead thee out
of the wilderness of sin.

I shall rank the bewildring-darkness of such a day, Of these three kinds.
under this Threefold Head: such as respect our selves, such as respect God,
such as respect the way of Reconcliation betwixt us and God. All which God (at
least) disposes for our good, though in them Satan purposes our ruin.

First, In the time of Conversion, 1. Kind, such as relate unto our selves.
we are exceedingly subject to be bewildred with much darkness relating unto
our selves, as to have exceeding dark thoughts of our selves, Of this kind are
to pass dark sentences upon our selves, to take up dark resolves concerning
and against our selves, and make dark resolutions with our selves.

First, 1. Dark thoughts concerning, and of our selves.
Souls in such a time have dark thoughts of themselves, and in them they are
bewildred: before they were be wildred in sin, now they are bewildred in the
sense of sin, so that they cannot find any way out, no way but one, and that
is Death, there they must die for it, they must fall in this Wilderness.
Memorable is that passage, The sense of sin.
Romans 7.9. Sin revived, and I dyed: that is the sense of sin; then it
follows, verse 11. For sin taking occasion by the Commandment deceived me,
and by it slew me. When the terrors of the Law, join with the serious sense
of sin, and these surround the soul, this is the entangling killing
wilderness, the dark valley of the shadow of death. It deceived me; how is
that? truly thus much I can say to it, from the experience that I have had of
poor souls in such a condition: Darkning us.
that their sense of their sin has been more then true, even greater in
some respect then their sin. Consult with Paul, who tells you here, that he
was deceived, but does not tell you wherein, 1 Timothy 1.15. Christ came to save
sinners (says he) of whom I am chief. Why? how could that be? Paul was
before Conversion, a sober, blameless man, as touching the Law, Phil. 3.6.
Zealous according to his light: if you urge his persecuting of the Church, why?
still there are as great, if not much greater sinners then he, for 1 Timothy, 1.13.
He did it ignorantly. Yet still when the Law stirs up the sense of sin, as
encompassing poor Paul; this is that that kills him, that he is the chief of
sinners. Thus is it with our poor hearts: Oh! when we see the brightness and
glory of the Law of the Lord, how Holy, and just, and good it is, and how vile,
and sinful, and abominable, our selves are: Oh! never was there any sin like
ours, never any guilt like ours: What sin against such means as I? against
such light as I? against such mercies as I? against such calls of Grace as I?
Oh! never any one sinned as I have done. Yes friend, think as bad of thy self
as thou will, others as sinful as thou have gone before thee.

Now this is one bewildring darknesse^ in the fence of sin, which may more
humble then hurt you, I would many were allured into this wilderness this day.

But now comes Satan, as I said before, Darkning that splendour of Gods mercy
unto us.
and his business is to raise the darksome fogges of thy selfe-condemning, and
soul-bewildring thoughts; yet higher, so as not only to bedarken all that is
within thee, but to cloud the face of mercy, and to obscure the glory of
Christ's undertakings, by the black guilt of thy sins. Here is a worse
deceiving by the sense of sin (through Satan's temptation) and this makes the
forms Wilderness much more bewildring, and the poor lost Creature ten
thousand times more at a loss then it was before; when the soul comes to see
its sins greater, then any other sins of the Children of men, Satan
strikes in, and takes advantage to make it account its sins greater then any
of Gods pardons; and this is a deceiving indeed unto slaying; and such I
believe was the dark bewildring sense that Cain and Judas had of their sins;
take heed, take heed of this deceit in your sensibleness of your sins; and
yet even in this dark wilderness, are many dear unto God for a season left,
and as it were, lost till God come and speak comfortably unto them.

I can give you two eminent instances both of mine own knowledge: Instance.
The one was when I was a little one; A rich man was walking, and there comes a
poor Creature to him with death in his face, and begges of him some relief:
the man was an hard man, and denied; the poor wretch importunes, and through
importunity prevails thus far; says the rich man, come to my house to
morrow, and I will give you something: Oh! sir, says the poor one, I shall
die before morning, if I have not something to succor me this night; yet could
not the Rich man be then prevailed with: that very night the beggar dyed, and
was sound dead the next morning: the Rich man lays this to hear (as I confess
well he might) and was so terrified, that for much time not the least comfort
could be fastened on him, but never was any guilt or sin like his; by night he
was feign to have constant company, and Candles burning with him, and it would
frequently cry out, That now the Devil was ready to seize on him: He was
through providence brought unto a godly Minister where I was, and to whom I was
related; I being little was left in the room, when the Minister and he were
together, Oh! it would have broken any heart that had the least of tenderness,
to see the poor man, what pains he took to load himself with misery, and to
obstruct the way of mercy; and this was the upshot of all, never was there such
a Murderer as he, that obtained mercy. I remember (for the afflicted man's
carriage made the discourse take more impression on me) the Minister instanced
in David's Murder, and aggravated it, what a man David was, of what profession,
under what mercies, etc. and what a man Uriah was, a godly man, a faithful
subject, a public spirited man, etc. and what a murder it was: known,
wilful, devised, plotted, longed for, and pleasing to David when accomplished;
and yet I remember, would not that poor man be persuaded, but that his sin
was far greater then David's, and so such as God would not pardon, although at
length it pleased God by that Minister, to fasten some comfort on him.

Instance.
The other was mine own experience, also not long since. Indeed the good woman
desired me for Caution unto others (concealing her) to take some occasion to
speak of the thing. Her great sin, for which she thought there was no
mercy, no pardon was a lie; and on this manner she was private at duty in a
room that was said to be haunted (as the phrase is) in the night, and there
came by the Chamber door, a man of the house that hearing some stirring there,
asked her (it being very dark) whether she was there or no, calling her by her
name, she being unwilling that he should know that she used to be there, of
the sudden answered, that it was not she; he urged her again and again, she
denied: At length the man half affrighted, prayed her, as ever she looked for
mercy from God, that she would tell him if it were she, and she being much
moved, and yet unwilling (through the strength of the present temptation) to
unsay what she had spoken, denied it yet again. I thus far agreed with her,
that it was indeed a very great sin, and deeply to be sorrowed for; but her
language was, that it was the greatest sin that ever was committed, and that
there could be no mercy for her, because she had denied the mercies of the
Lord. I instanced in Peter's denial of Christ once, twice, thrice, till it came
to cursing and swearing, and perfect disowning of his Savior, I know not the
man; I aggravated it from Peter's solemn profession of Christ, his engagement
not to deny him, etc. and yet notwithstanding he obtained mercy. But for all I
could say, I could not for the present persuade the woman, but that her denial
was a far greater sin then Peter's; and though she believed that there was
mercy for him, and salvation for him, that declaredly denied his Savior; yet
could I not persuade her, that there was any mercy for her, who as she
thought, had more perfectly denied mercy: Yet I believe the woman to be a good
woman, something of refreshment she had e're she went away. This is the of
sin, a bewildring darkness to such a soul: aggravate your sins as much as
you will, only by their aggravation take heed of diminishing the freeness or
fullness of Gods grace.

Secondly, Souls in such a case, 2. Pass dark sentences on our selves.
lose themselves in the dark sentences that they pass upon themselves. Paul
tells you, that sin by the Law slew him; that is, passed a sentence of death
upon him, according to that phrase, 2 Cor. 1.9. Who received the sentence of
death in our selves. Poor souls will save God (as I may so say) a labor in
the condemning of them, for they will condemn themselves, and their sentence
shall be very dark, even as dark as death it self. Oh! never did any deserve
Hell more then my self, thither I am a going, and there I must receive a just
recompense of reward. Let me go to Hell, said one, for that is the fittest
place for me.

Thirdly, They often in such a season, take up dark Resolves concerning
themselves; 3ly, Take up dark, resolves concerning themselves.
they themselves passed Sentence, and now they proceed to Execution. They say,
they have deserved Hell, and it must be so, they must go to Hell, there is no
help for it; say what you can to comfort me, my sin will slay me; do what
you can for me, my sin will slay me. I have heard such language, and now the
soul's at an utter loss: Oh! I shall verily die in my sins, Jer. 15.18. My
pain is perpetual, and my wound incurable. Oh! if the terrors of the Lord
were but for a day, or a year, I might better bear them, says such a soul;
but they are perpetual, eternal death is the wages of my sin, what shall I
do? Oh! if my wound were curable, though it be great and terrible! but I am
without any expectation of recovery, past all hope. Thus poor ones in this
darksome wilderness, do resolve concerning themselves.

4ly, Dark resolutions with themselves.
4ly, From dark Resolves concerning themselves, they sometimes pass to darker
resolutions with themselves. Their hearts language is not only I may be
damned, and I must be damned, there is no other way; but even almost, I will be
damned. There Is no comfort for me, and I will take no comfort to me, Jer.
15.18. My pain is perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuses to be
healed. Not only incurable (that is, that cannot be healed) but that refuses
to be cured, (that is, that will not be healed) and verily, as for souls that
have a long time said, Note.
that there is no mercy or comfort that belongs unto them, there is a kind of
spiritual pride in the lowest ebb of very despair, they have so long said
that they shall perish, that when they begin through mercy to be better
persuaded, they are very loath to think that it shall be otherwise, and so
refuse to be healed: so Asaph, Psalm. 77.2. My sore ran in the night, and ceased
not, my soul refused to be comforted. Oh! take heed of thrusting Gods precious
Consolations so often, or so long from you, as to get an habit of refusing him;
habits are hardly left, though there be never so great reason to dissuade us
from them. Sometimes poor souls in this darksome wilderness, are ready to be
of his mind and vote, who desired that he might be in Hell, that he might know
the worst of his torment: yet God that allures into the wilderness, fastens
comfort oft-times upon such a soul.

These are bewildring-darknesses as to our selves.

CHAP. XX. Contains the second kind of bewildring darkness in conversion.
viz. relating to God in four particulars removed.
BUt secondly, 2d. Kind, such as relate unto God.
There are attending upon conversion bewildring darknesses, as relating to God,
Dark thoughts concerning the Purposes, the Thoughts, the Providence, the
Justice and mercy of God toward us.

1. 1. Darkness as to Gods purposes.
Such a day many times bewildes poor souls in dark thoughts concerning Gods
purposes about themselves. Oh! says many a soul, I should be glad to pray, to
repent, to believe, to do any thing for God; but I am a Reprobate, I know God
has from all eternity cast me away, and therefore it is in vain for me to do
any thing, but (as my deserved portion is) everlastingly to despair.

Here is the blackness of darkness indeed; but who told thee that thou are a
Reprobate? Why? I am sure I am a Reprobate. But why do thou think that Gods
eternal purpose was to pass thee by? Why? I am sure I am a Reprobate.

My Brethren, I know it is the great duty of every Saint, to give all diligence
to make their calling and election sure, and so says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.16.
We ought to make sure, (that is, be assured of) our election, so that we might
conclude it, and comfortably assert from our Calling; that is, because we find
that we are converted, to rest assured that we were elected, because called,
therefore that we were chosen of God. But there is no Scripture, that either bids
or warrants us, to make our Reprobation sure; that is, to stand assured that we
are reprobated, no not because we are unconverted. You Will say, the Apostle bids
us to examine our selves upon such terms, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not your selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? the word i^ (...).
Why? Jesus Christ is not in me, therefore I am a Reprobate. Is this thine
argument? truly then thou must also say, that there was a time when Paul was a
Reprobate (that spoke it) for there was a time when Christ was not in Paul:
Yea, that the Saints that are in heaven were once Reprobates; for certain it
is, that they were once Christless: and if this be so, then to be Reprobate is
no more then to unconverted; and if this be thy meaning, why should thou
despair upon the thoughts that thou art a Reprobate? for though thou be
Christless, and by such reasoning a Reprobate to day, as Paul before
Conversion, yet may thou be saved as well as he, and so reprobation shall no
more hinder thy salvation, then unconversion. But it is evident from the dark
despair, that rests upon their spirits unto whom I speak, that conclude they
cannot be saved, because (as they think) they are Reprobates, that they are
not so critical as to distinguish betwixt Reprobate as opposed to Elect, and
opposite to Gods present approbation, which an Elect (but unconverted) person
may not have: but take Reprobate in the saddest sense, in which I cannot
apprehend how any with reason, can make unconversion an assuring token of it:
only glad they are (poor souls) to take up any staff wherewith to beat
themselves. I shall therefore in a word, tell you what I think from these two
Scriptures that I have mentioned.

1. That souls that have Christ and are converted, may from thence be sure that
they are elected: but yet that it does not hence follow, that souls that are
yet Christless, and unconverted as yet, are reprobated. But yet

Again, (so much I presume the second Scripture speaks) that no soul can come
to say, I am not reprobate, I know I am not, but by being able to say, Christ
is in me: although another soul may not say, because Christ is not in me,
therefore I am a Reprobate: Christ is in me, therefore I am no Reprobate, that
Scripture concludes undoubtedly true Christ is not in me, therefore I am a
Reprobate, that Scripture concludes not, neither can it so conclude, for it is
a lie: sinners in hell may say, we are all Reprobates, therefore Christ is not
in us: sinners upon Earth may not say, Christ is not in us, therefore we are
all Reprobates; for though Christ be not in you to day, who can, or dare say,
but that God may convert you to morrow?

I shall illustrate the whole of this, 2. Simile.
by a similitude obvious to you. You have in your Town an hundred shifts by a
Benefactors will, to be dealt forth to an hundred poor men and women, whom the
Trustees shall choose out of all the poor. They are chosen before the Dole,
which is to be at twice, and in two several places, some to be distributed in
the fore-noon, at one place of concourse; some in the afternoon at another:
the man or woman that receives in the forenoon, may rest assured, that he or
she was elected or chosen, because they have received; but he that stands by
and receives not, cannot rest assured, or be sure, that he is not elected,
because although he receives not then, yet he may in the afternoon. Sinners
that are timously converted, may be sure they were elected, because they have
received the gift of God: But sinners that are yet unconverted, I grant, they
have abundant reason to question, whether they be elected or no, and a great
deal of reaon to fear, lest God should call them Reprobate silver, but they
cannot be sure, they may not conclude that they are Reprobate, because God may
at the eleventh hour send them into the Vineyard. Though he that receives not
in the forenoon, may fear he is not chosen; yet he may not conclude, so as to
neglect to wait in the afternoon, it may be he may then receive. Unconverted
ones have reason to fear, that they are unelected ones: and let this to purpose
humble them, but let them not so wretchedly conclude as to despair, and so as
to neglect the afternoones dole: yea, surely they should be the more humbly
solicitous, because there is but one part of the day to deal in, and if that be
over, and Christ the gift of God not received, they may then conclude they were
reprobated; but whilst they are yet on this side Hell, let them return to God,
for who knows, but God may return to them, and leave a blessing behind him,
Jon. 3.9: So then my conclusion is, that whatever thy Conversation has been,
it is not for thee to conclude (if now thine heart be in any measure inclined
toward God) that thou art a Reprobate, only let profane and impenitent ones
know, that I speak to poor distracted Consciences this day. Your arguments are
such as these.

Never were such great sins committed by any elect, therefore I am a Reprobate

Ans. I do seriously believe, that if David's murder with Adultery, and Peter's
denial had been committed by thee, thou would have thought (as I believe
they did) that they were the greatest sins in the world; yea, greater than
those very sins that thou arguest thy reprobation from. But this is no
argument, for they were the elect of God.

Oh! but my sin has been against light of Conscience, against profession of
God, against vows, and Covenants etc. my sins admit of all manner of
aggravations, therefore I am a reprobate.

Ans. Read the entire stories of David, and Peter, and if thou may not
unfeignedly judge, that if thou had been the aggravator of their sins, as
thou art of thine own, thou would have spoken as bitter things of their
sins, as thou now do of thine own, and found as sad circumstances whereby to
heighten them, supposing them thine: then (I had almost said) be disconsolate
still.

Thirdly, Oh but mine whole Conversation has been a very again and again, even
as I could, with both hands greedily, even unto this end of my days; and now I
am just agoing out of the world, and therefore I am a Reprobate.

Ans. I confess this is very sad indeed, but yet I must say, Here is not
enough in the premises whence to infer the conclusion. For the Thief, Luke 23.
was a Thief to his dying day, whose whole trade was to sin, he lived upon it,
and no question used both hands in it, delighted in it, and which is sad; it is
said, that both the Thieves (at first) reviled Christ, and cast the blasphemous
reproaches of the wicked multitude into Christ's teeth, Mat. 27.44. And this was
the very day that the Thief (that was saved) went to be hanged, so Mark 15.32.
And yet this Thief presently falls a reproving the other, condemning himself,
justifying Christ, praying unto Christ, believing in Christ, and says Christ
unto him, Verily this day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.39, 40,
41, 42, 43. Therefore he was Elected, and therefore thou can not hence
conclude, that thou art a Reprobate, as opposite to Elect; for (...) is
sometimes to be taken for one that is as yet unsound, though he may be elect.

But to close this: I pray you, who are the reprobates that I am now speaking
to? even such as I could wish the most of you that hear me this day were, if
they be not already such, even such as Job was, Chap. 27.2. The almighty has
taken away my judgment, says he, that is, God has rejected me, he will have
nothing at all to do with me, and yet ver. 3.4, 5. he says again, All the
while my breath is in me, my tongue shall not utter deceit, nor my lips speak
wickedly: I will hold mine integrity until I die. My brethren, they are such
among you, that fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his servants, that walk in
this darkness and see no light, Isa. 50.10. I remember once I was in discourse
with a poor woman, whose whole complaint against her self was in conclusion
this; that she was a Reprobate: I perceived much good in the woman's spirit, yet
this was at the end of all: I asked her why she concluded so hardly against
God, and her self, that whatever God had done as to others (whose mercy to
others she was wrapped up in the admiration of) God had cast her away? I asked
her if she were resolved to harbor sin, and to hold her iniquity till she
should die, that she did so determine, that she was a Reprobate? The poor heart
brake out into a passion of tears, and said, Oh! no, I had rather be damned
with holiness, then carry sin to heaven with me; for, God knows, I hate it
with a perfect hatred: These are the souls I speak unto, that are under this
bewildring temptation, because of their darkness in respect of the purposes of
God, of whom I am bold to conclude, that though they be their own Reprobates,
yet are they none of Gods.

2ly, Darkness as to Gods thoughts.
2ly, They are bewildred in exceeding much darkness, as to the thoughts of Gods
heart toward them. You know in general, we are very apt to measure every ones
thoughts by our own. The proud Spirit wonders that every one does not think him
worthy of that respect, that he thinks himself worthy of: and again the lowly
Spirit that thinks meanly of himself, wonders that any one should think
better of him, then he does of himself; that any Godly Minister or Christian
should think well, or speak well of him, when he cannot bestow a good thought
upon himself; and indeed whatever it be that we have taken up a strong
persuasion of, we admire that every one thinks not as we think. Now when once
poor souls come to harbor those sad thoughts, that I have spoken of against
themselves, they are much in the dark concerning Gods thoughts, being wholly
disposed to measure Gods thoughts by their own. When a Minister brings them a
comfortable word, they cannot be persuaded that God is of that mind, because
they are not of that mind. When David brings lame creeple Mephibosheth to eat
bread at his own table, 2 Samuel 9.7. He cannot be persuaded that he means as he
says, that he should eat bread always there, ver. 8. What is thy servant,
that thou should look on such a dead Dog as I am. What? would you make me
believe, that God has any thoughts of saving such a dead soul as I am? such a
sinner? how can it be? I know mine own thoughts, that I would never find in
mine heart to do such a thing for such an Enemy of mine, and of my good, as I
have been unto God, and unto his glory: therefore I can never think it. I
think if I were as judge, I should undoubtedly damn such an one as my self
is, and therefore let me alone: God can have no thoughts of good concerning me.

Now hold a little, whilst we read Isai. 55.7. 8^. Let the wicked forsake his
ways. Why? what shall he get by that, is there any hope of good for a wicked
man? Yes, God will have mercy upon him. Yea, but says thy soul, not upon such
a grievous sinner as I am: yes, God will abundantly pardon. Do you say so? O
but I can never think that. Yea, but friend, that is an unrighteous thought, and
you must forsake it: Let the unrighteous forsake his thoughts. Forsake it, why?
ver. 8. For (says God) My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways
my ways: but as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways then
your ways, and my thoughts higher then your thoughts, ver. 9. So that it is a
bewildring darkness for thy poor heart to conclude, that God thinks no thoughts
of peace toward thee, because thou can not think thy soul worthy of that
peace, etc. For says God, I know the thoughts that I think toward you,
thoughts of peace, Jer. 29.11.

3ly, Poor souls in such a day, 3ly, Darkness as to Gods providence.
are much in the dark as to Gods providential dispensations. Oh! says the
soul, if God intended to pardon me in the end, he would never thus long keep me
upon the rack: if God intended to save me in the Conclusion, he would never
suffer Satan thus to buffet me, unbelief to have so much power over me,
temptations to blasphemous thoughts, and despairing words thus far to prevail
against me, etc. Therefore does Eliphaz sinfully and uncharitably, conclude
concerning good Job, Jo. 22.5. etc. That his wickedness was great, and his
iniquities infinite, etc. because ver. 20.11. That snares were round about him,
and darkness that he could not see, etc. And thus think poor souls of
themselves, that because they are under darker dispensations (as they think)
then any others, that therefore their sins are greater, and their conditions
more desperate then any others. Now this is darkness: for this is to judge
according to the appearance, and not with righteous judgment. Thus though God
had brought comforts to Zion, and tells her, that he will have mercy upon his
afflicted, Isa. 49.13. Yet (because she was afflicted) verse 14. Sion said, the
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. He would never have staid
so long, says the soul but that he has quite forgotten me, he would ^ever
have served me so and so, but that he has quite forsaken me. Now how much
darkness there is in this kind of arguing, you may easily see in the next
verses: though a Mother forget her Child (and can that be?) yet I will not
forget thee, says the Lord) for thou art graven upon the palms of mine hands,
verses 15.16.

4ly, Darkness as to Gods justice and mercy.
4ly, They have exceeding darkness upon their thoughts, as to the justice and
mercy of God, and hereby they are also bewildred. They (poor Creatures) can not
think but that God is more inclined to justice, then to mercy toward them; and
here still they judge according to flesh and blood. Indeed flesh and blood
says, it is the glory of a man to revenge himself upon them that have wronged
him; but the Spirit says, It is the glory of a man to pass by an infirmity.
Now this they cannot but judge, that God will have more glory in damning them,
then in saving them; therefore they conclude that they shall be damned: justice
must pass upon them.

Now such thoughts are very darkness, for verily neither is Gods delight so
much in, nor his glory so much advanced, by taking of revenge upon his Enemies
(though vengeance be his, and he will repay) as in showing mercy unto poor
souls.

1. God delights most in mercy.
1. Scripture seems to hold forth, that there is nothing so much of Gods heart
in punishing, as in pardoning, as is clear in those two known Scriptures, Isa.
28.21. Where judgment is called his work, but his strange work: his act, but
his strange act, as if he did not know how to go about it. How shall I give
thee up Ephraim? etc. but Mich. 7.18. God pardons iniquity, and passes by
transgression, because he delights in mercy: he delights in mercy, in the
work of pardoning sin, in the act of passing by transgression, as if he knew
not how to go about any other work: how dark then are thy thoughts that
persuade thee, that it will please God better to damn thee, then to save thee.

2ly, The exerting of pardoning grace, 2ly, Gods glory is most in mercy.
sets the brightest crown of glory upon the head of the Almighty, Exo. 33.18.
Moses begs of God, I beseech thee show me thy glory: and how does God answer
his prayer herein? why ver. 19. I will make all my goodness pass before thee,
and I will proclaim (...) name of the Lord before thee, and will be gracious
to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy to whom I will show mercy; this
is Gods name, and his glory. If this then be the darkness wherein thou have
walked, that God will have most glory in damning thee, take hold upon this name
of the Lord, and stay thy self upon him as thy God.

CHAP. XXI. Contains the third kind of bewildring darkness, viz. relating to
the way of reconciliation betwixt us and God in three particulars, under the
last whereof this question is resolved, what humiliation is sufficient to
reconciliation.
THe third and last sort of bewildring darknesses attending conversion it self,
3d. Kind. Such as respect the way of reconciliation betwixt us and God.
are such as relate unto the way of Reconciliation between us and God. And
verily, though we have a desire now to make peace with God, yet how shall we
come at him, if we be in the dark, as to the way of peace? The way of peace
they have not known, may be truly said for some season of some souls that would
have peace. I remember, when God had hammered them by so many judgments, Amos
4.12. At length he comes to a nameless judgment so sad, that it seems, it
could not be expressed, Therefore thus will I do unto thee. Thus? how is that?
truly I cannot tell how: and what of that? Oh! therefore prepare to meet thy God
O Israel! to meet him; therefore you must go only in that way toward him,
wherein he is a coming toward you; if you go in any other way, you I will
miss of him, not meet him: and if you be in the dark, though you desire to
meet him, yet may you miss of the way, and so be bewildred, when you would be
reconciled: therefore Mat. 5.25. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst
thou art in the way with him. If thou would agree with God, thou must be in
the same way with God: if thou would meet him, thou must meet him in his own
way. Now there is but only one way of Reconciliation, wherein God will draw
near unto a lo^t soul, being justified by faith through Jesus Christ we shall
have peace with God, Romans 5.1. And therefore the same is our only way of
Pacification with God, so Heb. 10.20. This is the new and living way. Now all
other are but dead ways, wherein a lost soul seeks life. Now what heart has
light enough at the first to see, and to hit upon this new and living way? I
can challenge your darkness in this respect, upon this threefold account.

1. You think, that undubtedly you must give something to God, 1 Darkness we
think we must give something to God.
toward your reconciliation with God. Now this is very darkness, for it is
Gods giving of Christ unto you, not your giving of any thing unto God, that is
the bottom of your pacification. But very ready are we to think, and Satan to
persuade us, that there is no coming unto God, but by bringing something of
our own unto God. Hence that enquiry, Mic. 6.6. Wherewithal shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before him? shall I come before him with
sacrifices, etc. Oh! that is the dark counsel of our vain hearts: Bribe
Justice, and then you shall have its favor.

I speak not to streighten your hearts or hands from lending to the Lord, but
to direct your souls where to bottom your peace. Does your goodness extend unto
him? or will he take a reward to clear him that is guilty? God forbid that any
heart should think so: and yet if many an heart were asked, Wherefore are all
these alms that thou give? Conscience must answer, as Jacob in his course
Complement to Esau, Genesis 33.8. Esau said, What meanest thou by this drove? and
Jacob said, These are to find grace in the sight of my Lord; he had need call
him my Lord, when he intimates him to be of so base and ignoble a a spirit,
that a Bribe should purchase pardon for a Brother. Just so deal souls with God,
the alms they give, their bounty to Saints, to Ministers, etc. are to find
favor in the sight of God. But if Esau can refuse his present telling him he
has enough, surely God may much more despise thy gifts, be they what they will
be, because all things are his, Psa. 50.9, 10. I will take no Bullock out of
thine house, nor Hee-goat out of thy fold, for the beasts of all the Forest,
etc. are mine. Set a side the Lord Jesus Christ, and peace in believing, and I
dare say it would beggar all the Saints and Angels in Heaven and Earth, to make
one Peace Offering to the Lord for any lost soul.

2ly, You think, 2d. Darkness. We think we must do something for God*
that undoubtedly you must at least d^^ something as a bottom and ground to
your reconciliation with God. Now this is also a soul-bewildring darkness; for
if it be only what Christ has given, then it is only what Christ has done,
that can be a propitiation to God for us. What, will God ever be friends with
me, that give him nothing, nor do any thing for him? how shall I think that?
Verily flesh and blood will hardly think it, therefore as the former question
was, Wherewithal shall I come before God? what shall I give? and the answer
from God comes, without money, and without price: so the next question that
dark nature prompts, is this; Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I
may inherit eternal life? Mat. 9 16. What good thing shall I do? Oh! we think
it must be some good thing of our own doing, that must be at the bottom of our
salvation. What good thing? says Christ, keep the Law, and fulfill the Gospel,
and that perfectly, for that is the sum of Christ's answer to him. Now friend, if
thy goodness extend so far, then go on to meet the Lord in thine own way. But
now thou that live upon such terms, if ever God take thee, (as Solomon took
Shimei, when he had gone beyond his limits from Jerusalem to Gath, after his
runaway servants, 1 Kin. 2.39, 40.) The Lord will deal with thee, if ever he
find thine heart running after the world, or after sin, as he dealt with
Shimei, ver. 44. God will call thee to a severe account upon every old score,
and return all thy wickedness upon thine own head, judging thee by thine own
mouth. Think of the Pharisee, who comes and tells God what he has done for
God, etc. Lu. 18.12. And yet went away unstified, v. 14. Think of those lost
souls, that shall come to Christ in the last day, telling what they have done
for him, how they have preached in his Name, and cast out Devils for him. etc.
And yet Christ tells them, he does not know them. Think of Noah's Workmen, that
help to build the Ark, yet were not saved by the Ark. But you will then say,
What shall we do with our doings? truly I must say as to the business of
justification, and making your peace with God, say when you have done all (as
Lu. 17.10.) That you are but unprofitable servants.

3ly, But when the soul comes to be yet farther enlightened and directed; 3d.
Darkness. We must be humbled to such a degree.
so as to think indeed that what it can give, or what it can do, are nothing
indeed, neither are they that which (as to peacemaking) God requires; yet is
there bewildring darkness upon the Spirit, when the soul comes to be of David's
mind, and to speak his language, Psalm. 51.16. Thou desire not sacrifice,
else would I give it, thou delightest not in burnt-Offerings: then in comes the
17, v. The sacrifices of God are a broken heart: and here the poor creature is
at a loss, and in the dark still, crying out, Oh! what shall I do for such a
Sacrifice? Now goes he to hammer his own spirit, and to see if he can break
his own heart, and yet it does not please him. Poor ones place this brokenness
of heart, in such a measure of being humbled: yea, David might well say indeed,
that he he had a Broken heart, and so a sacrifice which God would not despise:
for he watered his Couch with his tears; if I could do so, says the soul, I
durst then think that I had a Sacrifice. Yea, but profane Esau had multitude
of brinish tears, and yet he had no Sacrifice, Heb. 12.17. Thou think the
Sacrifice of broken-heartednesse, consists in such degrees of being humbled,
and till thou come to such a measure as such an one had, thou dare not
believe in Jesus Christ, and so thou still walk in darkness. Observe what
the Psalmist says, The sacrifices of God ((...) not (...)) not the Sacrifice,
but the Sacrifices of God are a broken heart. And here it seems, that a Broken
heart, if it go alone, and carry not along with it another Sacrifice, ( viz.
Christ,) can never be acceptable unto God. For it is not only expressly
manifest, that David looks beyond the Sacrifices of the Law, by what he says
in the precedent verse, but it is to me evident (not only from the clearness
and Evangelicalness of this Psalms whole style, but) particularly from that
particular Petition, v. 7. Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean; which
Hysop was of a twofold use in the Ceremonial Law. 1. For the sprinkling of
the blood of the clean Bird (a type of Christ) by which sprinkling the Leper
was to be cleansed, Lev. 14.6, 7. And 2ly; For the sprinkling of the water of
Separation, or purification, Numb. 19.9, 18. called therefore Holy water, Chap.
5.17. because the unclcan were therewith purified: It is, I say, to me evident,
that by faith, David had respect to that Blood and Water, that at once issued
out of the side of Jesus Christ, Jo. 19.34. At that time when he offered up his
body once for all, Heb. 10.9. That one Sacrifice offered for sins for ever, v.
12. Which Blood and Water is expressly called Zach. 13.1. (and I think not
impertinently to this matter) a fountain opened for sin ( viz. that of blood)
and for uncleanness ( viz. that of water) to the house of David, (...) for
sin, and for separation; that is to say, separation for uncleanness, expressly
respecting that Water of separation, which was a type of sanctification, as the
fountain for sin, that blood, for Justification, and both are for the house of
David. Oh happy re^urne of the foresaid holy prayer! But now where is the
bleeding Bird, and the running Water, and the Hysop wherewith this sprinkling
is to be made read but the preceding verses, chapter 12.^0. I will pour upon the
house of David (again) the spirit of grace and supplications (that is the same
thing that David in the foresaid Psalm, calls the broken spirit, the
Sacrifices of God; but how comes it to be so?) They shall look on me whom they
have pierced, and mourn etc. (there are the Sacrifices) a bleeding Spirit,
looking to a bleeding Christ; a pierced soul, taking hold by faith upon a
pierced Christ; a broken heart acting faith (for the same thing that in our
Text is called Leaning, is in that Text called Looking) upon a broken Christ.
Oh these are Gods Sacrifices, such as he will not, such as he cannot despise:
such a soul has the blood of pierced Christ, for the doing away of the
Leprosy and plague of sin, and the water of a pierced Christ, for the purging
of pollutions of sin away from it; and it want, not the Hysop of bitterness
(if you look to the end of the verse) that bitter but purgative grace (of godly
sorrow to repentance, never to be repented of) whereby that Blood and Water are
sprinkled upon it unto Righteousne^s and Holiness, whilst it by faith
continues looking on him that was pierced, or (in the language of our Text)
leaning upon the Beloved. But and if we shall think, that the Psalmists
expression is only an Hebraism, the Sacrifices; that is to say, the best or
chief Sacrifice of God, is a broken heart; we must yet understand it, of an
heart Evangelically broken, and so the matter of necessity returns to the same
thing.

Know ye therefore this day, Note.
That all the business and use of a broken heart, as to Pacification and the
Atonement of the sinner unto God (though as to us there may be other uses of
it, such as to make us to walk humbly with good Hezekiah all our days, Isa.
38.15) I say, all the use of the broken heart as to pacification with God, is
merely to make the penitent sinner willing to take hold on a broken Christ; and
when these two go together there are the Sacrifices of God. Thou art in the
dark, if thou think that thy broken-heartedness makes peace with God for thee
(any more then any Gift or Work of thine) by or of it self; but
broken-heartedness makes thee see what need thou have of, and makes thee
desirous accordingly to take hold upon Gods strength, that He may make peace
with God for thee. Thine humblings (be they as great as Esaus) are no better
Sacrifices to God, then his tears, unless thy broken heart hold up a broken
Christ for a sin-offering, for a propitiation unto God. Solu.
I answer, If thine heart (whether it be harrowed or shattered to pieces more
or less, according to the different fram of it, or of thy conversation, through
Education or Restraining grace, etc.) I say if thou be so far broken, as to be
truly necessitous and poor in spirit undone sensibly, and undone utterly
without a Christ, and so willing to close with a broken Christ absolutely upon
his own terms; let them be what they will, yet thou must have him: and art
willing to come up to any terms, rather then to go without him: whether thy
sorrowings have been years or months, or weeks, or days, or hours: whether
thy tears have been many or few; whether thine humblings have been more or
less, thine heart is enough broken to take hold upon, and by Christ to become
the sacrifices of God, even such as he will not despise.

Illustration.
And sirs, let me deal familiarly with you; what is that you account the
breaking of a Child's spirit? You have a Child some of you froward and cross,
and it will not eat but in what dish and with what spoon it pleases: well says
the Parent, i will break your spirit. You know that a word will do as much to
one, as a blow to a child of another disposition. Now the business is not how
often it be whipped, once or twice, or thrice, or whether it be whipped at all or
no, if so be that the child be now made thoroughly willing to lay down its own
humor and will, and to eat in what dish, or with what spoon, or after what
sort the Parent will, etc. If that be done, you account that you have broken
the child's spirit. So what ever the manner of Gods dispensation in humbling of
the soul be, whatever measure of the terror of the Lord is known by it, or
unto whatever degree of affliction the soul be reduced; if the soul thereby be
but made unfeignedly willing to come up unto the terms of God, wholly laying
aside its own wisdom which is folly, its own righteousness which are rags, its
own riches which are very beggary, that is the broken and contrite spirit which
God will not despise. This is the sum of our Saviors own doctrine, Mat. 16.24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and
follow me: That is, let him disown his own terms, his will, his ways, etc. let
him lay all them aside, and let him take up his Cross and follow me; that is,
though my ways and will be cross, and conttary to his own, and as a cross to
flesh and blood, yet let him follow mine, and not his own; this is to have a
spirit Evangelically broken, and such a sacrifice God will not despise.

CHAP. XXII. Contains the third sort of Bewildring darkness, v^z. after
conversion in three particulars, the first whereof in this Chapter: viz.
Declaring our first Love.
THere is a third kind of bewildring darkenesses, The third kind of bewildring
darkness, viz. after conversion.

As to our comforts.

3. particulars.


which I refer to our after-Conversion-State, which either bewilder us, and
make us at a loss, as to our comforts, or as to the exercise of our graces.

1. There are darknesses bewildring us after our conversion, as to our
comforts; And those are principally upon one of these three accounts, either
from the withdrawing the first light of Gods countenance, or our first Love; or
2. Gods darksom dispensations outwardly toward us: or 3. our own dark
backslidings from him.

First, The declining of our first height of zeal for God, and Gods ravishing
smiles upon us.
the declining of our first height and heat of Love, and also of the ravishing
sense of Gods pardoning grace and love toward us (which we sometimes have in a
very high measure in our first conversion, but abates often times afterward) is
as it were the setting of the Sun upon us, and leaves us many times so much in
the dark, as to make us at a loss, as to all our Spiritual comfort, and
brings us indeed into a second wilderness.

Give me leave to illustrate this by a parable. A parable. The first Apostasy
of our hearts.

The state of unconversion.


Suppose a woman in a cross humor leaving her husband, and forsaking his
house, makes (as she intends) for some friends house that may receive her, and
where she may better indulge her own mind, and cocker her own will and spirit:
But missing of the way, lights into a wilderness and loses her self, and anon
the night overtakes her, now she weeps and wailes, The state of Conviction.
but there is none to comfort her, she listens and harkneth if she might
happily hear the voice of any guide, but in stead of the voice of a man to
comfort her, there are the roarings of all the devouring beasts to affright
her, she is afraid to call out for help, lest by such intelligence, the
ravenous beasts find her and seize upon her, and she spends the miserable
night, but yet is kept alive, till at length the day star arises, First
glimmerings of hope or tidings of mercy.

Dawnings of some comfortable hopes. Conversion.


and that is some refreshing to her, the day breaks, and that is more; the sun
arises, and the Lions lay themselves down in their dens, their roaring
cease: oh! now she gets up and listens, and whose voice should she hear, but
the voice of her affectionate, careful, faithful husband, who had followed
her with love to find her when she was lost; and how do you think will that
voice revive her? yea, but when he comes to her, embraces her, pitties her,
pardons her, leads her out of the wilderness, he gives her wine,
Justification, etc.
he powers oil into the rents which the thorns of the wilderness had made:
the briars of the wilderness having torn away her clothes from her, he takes
his own garment and casts it over her, Ravishing joys.

Enlargements of heart toward God.


he adornes, he perfumes her. Oh! what ravishing joys are there now think you
in the heart of this woman? Oh! now she will return home, she will go, and
dwell with him, and she will never forsake him any more. Yes, home she must;
and she has such a mind to it, that sometimes she outgoes (as it were) her
husband, he does not go fast enough for her: But at length as willing as she
is, Drowsinesse after conversion.
her legs grow weary of that fast pace, and her spirits are so tired, that she
draggs behind and falls asleep, and there she lies: her husband looks, and
calls her, but she is fast asleep: he comes to her, joggs her, and awaketh her,
but she is immediately asleep again, being heavy with sleep: Darkness
through Gods withdrawing. Bewildring after conver.
At length the night comes on again, and her husband withdrawes himself, she
wakens, but is near the borders of the wilderness still; she hears yet again
the roarings almost as lightly perhaps as when she was in the midst of the
wilderness: she looks, she calls, she feels for her husband, but he is gone,
yet she goes in the dark, and after him she goes, but in stead of finding
him, loses her self: Now perhaps she may fear, yea think, yea be persuaded,
that the joys of yesterday were but a dream, and that she was never at all
brought out of the Wilderness: Thus she takes on, perhaps, more than at the
beginning; until the day again breaks, and her Husband (that all this while
observed her) speaks unto her, and reveals himself afresh, and comforts her.
And now this is that she will do, she takes hold of him, she follows after
him, and yet keeps close unto him; she makes him her strength; if she cannot
go, he must lead her, he must carry her; for home with him she must; she is
resolved to go.

Pardon the Allegory; for I speak of Christ and his Church. The Soul departing
from the Lord (as all of us did in Adam) is called a woman departing from her
first Husband, Hos. 2. It thinks to please it self in sin, but instead of
finding a way to true pleasure, hits upon this spiritual Wilderness. The
Night is the darksome clouding of a convicted, wounded spirit. The Lions
roaring, etc. is the terrors of the Law, temptations of Satan, horrors of
Conscience. In this condition (as I said) the soul is afraid of crying out for
a Guide, for a God, for fear of the Devil: Many a such soul is more afraid of
praying now, than it was of cursing, or swearing before. This Sunset of carnal
comforts, this Midnight of black terrors may, and often does continue long,
and always long enough to make the poor heart weary of the Wilderness: But
God is faithful, who suffers not the soul (that he loves) to be tempted above
what it is able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape:
Through the tender mercy of this God the Day Star at length visites the soul
thus sitting in darkness. And here is some glimering of comfort to the heart:
Yea, but anon, the Sun of Righteousness arises with healing under his
wings. And now are the beasts of the prey laying themselves down in their
dens: Satan is chained up from assaulting: the Law is prohibited from
condemning, and Conscience begins a little to be cheared, and now the soul gets
up upon her feet to hear what God will say; and the sound that she hears, is
the voice of her Beloved, where art thou poor Soul? come unto me, and I will
give thee rest: And this abundantly revives her; yea, but by and by Christ
comes and manifests himself unto her, and receives her, making her able by
Faith to embrace him: He puts (his Robes) his Righteousness upon her
nakedness; his Oil (his Comforts) into her wounds; his Wine (his Joys)
revive her; his Grace (his Ointments) do perfume her: and now the heart that
was rent, and the bones which were broken do rejoice with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. And now the soul makes too much haste home, even greater than
Christ sees convenient for it, crying out, Oh that I were dissolved, that I
might be at home with the Lord! Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace. Oh! that I had but power according to my mind, what would not I do for
God? This is much haste, but does this hold always? No verily, the Spirit
indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak; its not able to bear such hard
travail, it grows drowsy and dull, and heavy with sleep, I mean security, or
sloth, or the like; yea, and asleep it falls under the edge of the
Wilderness; though it be out of the state of sin, yet it is near unto the
terrors and actings of sin still: And as soon as this soul falls asleep,
Christ seems to withdraw: Anon the soul is again awakened, but night is come
upon it. It is not yet so free from the Wilderness but it can again hear the
roaring Lions, that is, it is again afflicted, perplexed, troubled: Satan's as
loud, Conscience is as loud as ever: And now says the soul, alas! all was but
a dream, but a delusion, and I was never at all brought out of the
Wilderness, never savingly wrought upon. Now she gets up, and loses her self
in looking a Christ, now she is in as much darkness as ever, as to her
apprehension; and this is the first bewildring darkness after Conversion, v^z.
upon the souls falling asleep in spiritual sloth and security, even upon such
withdrawing of its first zeal, and Gods withdrawing his first smiles. But when
Christ has to purpose tried, he will graciously return unto such, and restore
the joy of his salvation: yet, perhaps, never again in such a ravishing
transporting measure here, though he will restore a convenient measure to
support for the present; yet (it is like) so sparingly, as to keep the soul in
more humble and close dependence for the future.

I have been the longer, Made out in the Spouse.
because I have been telling the main of the story of this Spouse in the
Canticles unto that verse which is my Text.

You may observe mention of two eminent times of darkness, or benighting times
to the poor Spouse; Twice in the dark.
the first was Cant. 3.1. By night I sought him, etc. Being in the dark she was
afraid to be any more without him. The second was, Cant. 5.2. when she fell
asleep, and Christ waited to awaken her, till his locks were bedewed with the
night, says the Text. Now in both these darknesses she was at a loss for her
beloved, Cant. 3.1. I sought him, but I found him not. so ver. 2: so also Cant.
5.6. I sought him, but he had withdrawn himself. Here it seems she had once
found him, but now she has lost him.

Now suitable to this double loss, Twice coming out of the Wilderness.
and benighted condition, you have mention made twice of her coming out of the
Wilderness. Cant. 3. she is bewildred and benighted, and at a loss for
Christ, but ver. 4. at length she gets at him; and it follows ver. 6. Who is
this that comes out of the Wilderness perfumed with all the precious powders
of the Merchant? Where you have to observe, 1. How sadly she was bewildred
till she came at Jesus Christ. 2. In how glorious and transcendent beauty she
was, when she, by taking hold upon Christ (as is said ver. 4.) came out of the
Wilderness. Oh it is such a bright day now, that she does not think of another
night, so much peace of conscience and joy in believing, so much ravishment,
such smoking perfumes, etc. Now she comes out of the wilderness, and she is a
perfumed Spouse.

But then again, as you read of her second Night, and second Bewildring in the
fifth Chapter, so of her coming out of the wilderness the second time in our
Text. Only observe the difference, and you shall find it what I said true: Who
is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved, Cant.
8.5. Oh! it was a long time this last bout, ere she could find that which she
had lost in a nights steep of sloth and security. At first, you see her at a
loss, chap. 3.1. and coming out of the wilderness, ver. 6. But now you must
read from Chap. 5. to Chap. 8. before you hear of her coming up from the
wilderness: At first she comes up in full sense of her glory; she is a perfumed
Spouse. Next bout she comes up in full sense of her infirmity; she is now a
leaning Spouse. Th re was more sparkling, flaming, smoking, perfumes of joy
before; but more serious, sober, settled humility and dependence now. Before she
was more proud of her Beloved, and less ashamed of her self: But now how glad
in her Savior, and yet how sad in her self. Yea, herein her heart (although
she lean, and come up from the wilderness) is ready still to fail; because
after she had tasted of his love, she fell asleep: And although she were out of
the first Wilderness (viz. that of the state of Condemnation) yet fell into the
second Wilderness, even that drowsinesse of spirit after Conversion. Therefore
let not any poor heart among you (for whose sake I have spoken all this) say,
that it was never truly brought out of sin, because it is now, or has been
upon the wrack of new terrors, because of its after-conversion, drowsinesse,
or security: Only if ever thou be (as no doubt thou will be) brought out of
the Wilderness the second time, covet rather to come out a leaning Spouse,
than a perfumed Spouse. I mean, rather desire to be kept low, and in dependence
by Grace, than to be raised over-high by comfort. Thus much of the first
bewildring darkness after Conversion, as to the enjoyment of our comforts. I
would not let him go, chap. 3.4. (That Is her language at her coming first out
of the Wilderness, and it is pretty high and confident) but chap. 8.1, 2. O
that thou were as my Brother, I would lead thee, and bring thee, etc. (this is
her Dialect at her second coming up from the second Wilderness) here is more
humility and dependence.

CHAP. XXIII. Two farther particulars, dark providence on Gods part, and
backslidings on our parts, darkning our comforts; as also two particulars
darkning our graces.
THe second sort of after-conversion darknesses, is, 2. Dark providence as to
our outward man.
Dark Providence, as to our outward man, and hence we are many times
bewildred, and at a loss, as to our inward. As they (that I spoke of) were
found despairing before conversion, so these repining after conversion, if God
lead us into a Land of seeming darkness, it will be to us a wilderness, Ier.
2.32. Surely says the soul, I have been but deluded in spirituals, to think
that God would save my soul, for in naturals I am at a great straight, and God
does not provide for my body. If he loved me, he would never keep me so low, he
would never so afflict me. Now this is Darkness, for says Divinity, If he
should not afflict thee, surely he does not love thee. Such a dark cloud of
providence in Jobs outward Estate, makes him at a loss for his inward hope.
Hear his language, Job. 19.8. He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, he
has set darkness in my paths: that is the darkness that I now speak of, for
verse. 9. He has Stripped me of my glory; and what of that? why verse. 10. Mine
hope has he removed: when his outward glory, his attyring glory, (for says
he) He has stripped me) is lost, his inward hope is lost too, because his
enjoyment of earth is gone for the present, he is at a loss for the hope of
heaven, etc. And this is our very usual and bewildering darkness, to measure
and account Gods inward love or hatred, from what providentiall dealing
outwardly is before us, but no man knows it thereby, Eccle. 9.4.

Gods chastisements then to Gods own children, Gods chastisements on his
Saints, a cloud, a dark cloud.
are Clouds so full of darkness, that they are often bewildred as to Gods
Inward favor, and the light of his countenance, (which they have sometimes
accounted better then life) that sun sets in this cloud. A cloud it is, and a
dark one too, under which (without great wisdom from above) we may sadly lose
our selves, as to our comforts. But Gods chastisements to his people in their
own nature are, (and so does God intend them) only as Isreal's Cloudy pillar
in their Wilderness. 'Twas very dark, but very useful. 1. For Protection. 2.
For Guidance. But

1. A protecting Cloud.
1. This is a dark, but a protecting Cloud. God makes those providence serve
to keep his Saints, wherein they think they shall be lost; what dark thoughts
have many of the Saints of God had, of that authority and power (as if all
should be undoubtedly lost under it) which God has made our protection
hitherto? cross providence frequently keep us out of danger. As when your
child is crossed in bringing of it in from under the horses heels, or like danger
in the streets. It Is good for me, says David, That I have been afflicted. That
is, It would have been worse, if it had not been so bad. It Is better to be poor
and godly, then to be rich and proud, by the dark cloud of poverty, God
protects them from the danger of pride and vanity, etc.

2. A directing Cloud.
2. Gods chastisements are a dark, but a guiding Cloud, and such was that to
Israel. And my Brethren, no matter how dark it be, if God by it point thee to
thy way; this is the very use of Gods darkest dispensations to his dear ones,
Psa. 119.67. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I have learnt thy
precepts. No matter how black the Rod be, by which thy guide points out thy way.

3. Dark backslydings.
3ly. The Third sort of bewildring darknesses after conversion, are from our
partial apostacy, and wretched back-slydings. In this dark we lose our
comforts. No sooner does Satan turn us aside, but he bewilders us; he turns us
aside from holiness, and bewilders us as to comforts. For my part, I judge it
impossible for any, even for any Saint to maintain spiritual comfort, in
turning aside to a carnal conversation. If you will adventure into the dark of
sin, you shall be lost sadly (though not finally) in the dark of sorrow,
Mich. 7.8, 9. When I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light unto me: I will bear the indignation of God, because I have
sinned against him. From hence you may observe thus much.

1. That the back-slydings, or fall of Saints, shall not be unto death, as the
sins of the wicked, I mean to death eternal.

2. But yet if they will dare to sin, they shall find darkness wherein they
may fall.

3. Yea, and if they fall into sin, they shall sit, (that is) continue some
sad season in the dark, and bear (not only feel) the indignation of the Lord.

4. But at length, God shall plead the cause of such a soul, and he shall
bring it forth unto the light, and it shall behold his righteousness yet
again, so says the 9th verse. so then from all put together, you may conclude
how little there is in a Saints back-slydings, either for the enemy, or for
themselves to rejoice in; because if they fall, they shall arise; but not
until they have sat in darkness, or born Gods indignation: and believe it,
this is a wildring work for them that have tasted of his goodness; their
pardons, and all other their comforts, may continue where they were still; but
the darkness is like to be such, as that for the present, they can neither read
the one, nor find the other. As you say of an Eclipse some years ago, is was
so dark that you could not see to read, nor find readily what you looked for,
although it were at full day. It Is easy for the Eclipse of our graces, to
bring a bewildring darkness upon our comforts. And as for you that have found
this, sin no more, least a worse thing come unto you.

Secondly, 2. As to the exercise of our graces.
There are after conversion darknesses bewildring us, as to the exercise of our
graces. And verily my Brethren, this is sad to purpose; a man that has been
kept in a dark dungeon, and has never seen the light, it is not so much for him
to be continually kept in those chains of darkness; but for a man that comes
out of a light Room, to walk in dark ways, oh! this is sad, and sadly
dangerous. He may the sooner stumble, because he came from the light. Now this
darkness the Children of light meet withal, whilst they have too much to do
with the world, and secondly with this world.

1. The dark things of the world.
1. The world will be as it has ever been, an hinderance to the people of
another world. Conversion indeed calls us out of the world; yet after
conversion, how ready are we to be tempted back into the world? and truly as
soon as we be in the world again, so soon shall we be in the wilderness again:
I mean, so soon as we begin to walk in the custom, and after the fashion of
this world: Oh Conversion for the present bears us up to heaven, and says the
soul, let the world go which way it will: but afterward our old acquaintance
and we begin to meet again, and to parle again, and hence are our bewildrings
after conversion: Satan to get us to them, makes huge use of darknesses of the
world, Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle against the Ruler of the darkness of this world.
Oh! that is a bewildring darkness. He had said verse. 11. Take the whole Armor
of God, to stand against Satan's bewildrings. Now how sad, yet how frequent is
it, to see the children of the light of another world, Worldly cares.
bewildred in the dark things of this world? My Brethren, how does providing
for the family; yea, sometimes for the flesh, for pride, profuseness, vanity,
lust, etc. darkely bewilder many that pass for Saints, as to their due
providing for another world?

Worldly delights.
How do the da^k beauties of the things of this world, bewilder our affections,
and make them at a loss, as to the beauties of holiness.

Confidences.
How do our dark confidences in worldly supports, bring the actings of our faith
to a loss, when they are purely called forth, and summoned to follow aftr God
alone?

Hopes.
How do our dark hopes in worldly vanities, render us lost Creatures almost,
when we have nothing but the anchor of spiritual hope to take hold upon?

How are we bewildred in the dark joys of this world? Joys.
so that we little know what it is to have the joy of the Lord for our strength.

Thus worldly fears, and worldly love, Fears, Love, etc.
are dark principles, and the more you find of them, the more you feel we are
at a loss for the contrary spiritual graces. Now the old Serpent is the Ruler
of all this darkness; therefore he will order it the most politiquely that
possibly he can, that thereby he may the more effectually bewilder poor
converted ones. I have heard of a Commander, Simile.
who being in the field, and in danger of being surprised by the powers and
numbers of the prevailing Enemy in the same field, caused a good quantity of
Powder to be cast on the ground, betwixt him and his approaching enemy, and on
the sudden fired, that by the advantage of the dark smoke, he might securely
draw off his own men, as well as the prisoners, that he had before taken from
his enemy. Thus did he, and so does Satan, (the Ruler of the darkness of this
world:) sometimes he has some of Gods Soldiers prisoners, and when God
encounters Satan by his word, (for the weapons of our Warfare are not carnal,
but spiritual) and is ready to rescue his Saints, as well as to surprise some
of Satan's followers; this Ruler causes some of these worldly delights, etc. to
flash betwixt them and God, the flash is but short, (the pleasure of sin
soon gone) but the smoke continues, it darkneth the air, and gives Satan
advantage not only to carry his own men, but too too often some of Gods own
people off the field; that they are not at that time rescued out of Satan's
power, by reason of the flashing, smoking, dark things of this world. Oh! what
need have converted ones to walk as children of the light? Oh! what need have
they, as they are Gods Soldiers, to put on the whole Armor of light?

Secondly, The darksome temptations of this age.
There is a bewildring darkness in this world, I mean, this Age, that sadly
casts a black veil over the face of the firmament of Profession, which I think
other Ages have scarce ever seen so black as we have done. A dark cloud of
Levity in the things of God.
Men there are that speak of conversion, as if they were feelingly acquainted
with what they say, those that hear, take them unquestionably to be Saints, but
says the Proverb, Loquere ut videam; mark their conversation, and what ever
their hearts be, (perhaps Jacobs Saints sometimes from their profession, dare
not question) or their voices (which are plainly Jacobs;) yet their hands look
strangely on it, (like Esau's.) This is a strange kind of time, you can neither
well call them Saints, nor yet confidently wicked persons. These are like that
time spoken of Zach. 14.6.7. It shall come to pass in that day, that it shall
not be light, nor darkness, night nor day. Hear them speak, and you would
verily think they are Children of light; and observe their walking, and what
can you call their deeds, but darkness? They make little conscience what way it
is that they get by, whether by right or wrong, true or false; little
conscience make they of a promise, little conscience of paying their debts,
though they be able etc. What shall we say to these things?

This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. Your plain proverb
says, That an handful of old courtesy, is worth an armeful of new
Complements; and indeed I think it too true in Civils: sure I am, that a good
handful of old Puritanisme, is worth many Cart-loads of new Profession. It Is
little to me that thou can speak of faith, or for free grace; what care I
what thou hold: this is a great word, I hold this, or I hold that, as to
matter of opinion; I hold that Infants are not to be baptized, and I hold that
they are; I hold for the Presbyterians, and I hold for the Independents, etc.
Yea, but friend, there is something else that thou hold, thou do not speak
of, thou hold thy pride, and thy covetousness, and thine uncleanness, and
thy lusts still! and what care I what else thou hold; hold what thou will,
as long as sin holds thee it mattereth not much. Yea, This is a lamentation,
and shall be for a lamentation, that some that were judged once to be
converted, have in the dark smoke of prating, arguing, disputing, wrangling,
levity seemed to lose the substance of Christianity. Oh sirs, If we be chafe
instead of Corn, What shall we say to Jesus Christ, whose Fan is in his hand,
and he will thoroughly purge his floor, but burn the Chafe with unquenchable
fire, Mat 3.12? What shall we say to our God, even our God, (though we think
we can so call him) for he is a consuming fire? Heb. 12.29. What shall we say
to our time of Pilgrimage here on earth, which is this Taskers casting time,
wherein he casts his Corn and his Chafe together? Now you Husbandmen know,
that the Corn when you cast, it flies home, and the Chafe as soon as out of
the showel, it falls short. So says the Apostle of those professing
Israelites, that had nothing but Chafe instead of Corn, they fell in the
Wilderness, Heb. 3.17. And therefore let us fear, lest a promise being left
us of entering into his rest, any of us should seem to come short. Mark that
expression; If there be any falling short, surely it will be of the Chafe.
Take heed, take heed, empty Christians, lest your souls fall in this darksome
Wilderness, Heb. 4.1. And thus have I done with the Third means of our
spiritual bewildrings, viz. DARKNESS. There remains the

CHAP. XXIV. Contains the fourth means of bewildring. viz. False Lights (or
ignes fatui) explained.
FOurth means of our spiritual bewildrings, 4. Means of our spiritual
bewilderings. viz. False lights, Ignes fatui, Kinds of them.
viz. FALSE LIGHTS. There is in nature a Meteor, that vain and ignorant persons
have conceited to be a walking spirit. This sometimes appears by Sea, and
sometimes in single flames, which were the ominous forerunners of great
tempests, therefore they called it Helen, alluding to that pernicious
firebrand of Greece: sometimes it appeared in double flames, and then they
called it Castor and Pollux, superstitiously thinking (for Heathens they were)
that then it was a sign of a prosp^rous voyage, whereas there is reason in
nature, why it should appear single before a storm, when its matter is so
thick that it cannot be dissipated, and in distinct flames when its substance
is more tenuious, and more easily parted asunder, which imports a clearer air,
and more free from that which is the matter of tempests. Of this Meteor, under
this name of Castor and Pollux, you have mention made as the sign of the Ship
that Paul went aboard, Act. 28.11. Otherwise this light appears by land,
sometimes dancing on the one hand, sometimes on the other hand of the Traveller
in the night, until by its deceitful guidance, it has brought the Traveller
to an uncertainty, and loss of his true way, and then he becomes prone to
follow it, supposing it to be a blazing light in some house or hand, and so
hoping to come at some body that may lead him into his way, or some house where
he may enquire it, at length according to its nature, it is spent and extinct,
tending to pits or bogs, to places of ruin, or precipices of destruction, from
whence the Latins called it ignem fatuum and erraticum, and we frequently call
it, going-fire, fools-fire, or the like. This many have been bewildred by, and
can bear testimony unto; and there is as clear natural reason assigned of it,
as of any other known Meteor. And this spiritually understood, is that which I
complain of, as the last occasion of our spiritual bewildrings. This the
Ap^stle complained of as a Prophet, this may we sadly lament, Seducing spirits.
as seeing the prophecy fulfilled, 1 Timothy 4.1. The spirit speak^s expressly,
that in the latter times (which on all hands are confessedly ours) there shall
be departing from the faith (and what is that, but going out of the way?) and
what is the occasion? giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils.
Whence these Notes. 1. Satan if he cannot bewilder otherwise, will do it by
Doctrines. 2. He will have erring spirits to carry these seducing Doctrines up
and down. 3. That poor Travelers are very prone to give heed unto them. 4.
They that give heed unto them, will presently be seduced by them, to depart
from the way of truth, to err from the faith. This is an express prophecy of
our times, and he that runs (through England) may read it fulfilled. And what
can I call these temptations so aptly, as going-fires, or seducing lights? By
these Satan keeps in play, or in fashion now (methinks) more then ever. Oh!
these are lights, the other that I speak, are bewildring Darknesses; but these
are bewildering lights: and oh! how much is light in fashion, be it of what
kind it will? yea, may I sadly say, How much is that Angel in the fashion, that
is now transformed into it! O! my brethen, in these days seducing spirits had
need be lightsome: Lights they are, but which is very suitable, the Apostle that
calls them lights, calls them going-lights, yea, erring lights; lightsome
whilst they are above ground, but, as was said of the going fire, lighting, and
at last going down into a darksome pit, so says Jude verse. 12. Wandering
stars, Wandering stars.
for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. I would not,
friends, be understood as condemning the Generation of the just, whose portion
I know it, Caution:
has always been, to be branded with the soul names of Blasphemy and Heresy,
etc. Jesus Christ himself not excepted. Of this speaks Paul, Act. 24.14. I
confess, that after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of
my fath^rs, believing all that is written in the Law and the Prophets. Oh! that
I could have cause once to call them Heretics in this sense, whom the
scripture calls wandering lights, I mean the way of believing all is written
in the Law and the Prophets. Neither would I be understood, as speaking out of
passion, or ill will (whereof I know not any reason) but of love, and
tenderness, and commiseration unto their souls, to whom I am speaking, with
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure would
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, according to my
express duty, 2 Timothy 2.25. And yet on the other hand with such love unto the
truth, as to contend earnestly for for the faith, which was once delivered to
the Saints, which is a duty as express, Jud. verse. 3. I would be farther
understood as speaking without any respect of persons, accouning those, and all
those, to be going fires, and bewildring lights, whom the Scriptures bring
under the following Characters. And further I shall not desire, or dare to affi
x any other brand upon such, then what this Bible in mine hand shall prepare
unto my hand: wherein I dare not be so unfaithful, or inaffectionate to their
souls, as to conceal from them their danger; for we have Christ himself the
true light, telling us before of these false ones, and you know we are
commanded to hear for afterward. My brethren, there is danger in following every
light, for says our Savior, Mat. 24.23. If any man shall say, lo, here is
Christ, or lo, there is Christ, believe him not: That is, follow you not every
light; what not when they speak of Christ? No, verse. 24. For there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets etc. and verse. 25. Behold, I have told you
before. verse. 26. Wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold, he is in the
desert, go not forth; if in the secret Chamber, believe it not. Lights then
they are, but but false lights; Prophets, but false ones, false Christ's.
Wherefore you must not go out after them, if you do, you may find a desert,
but not find a Christ. To come then to the parallel.

Description of a going fire
A going, or fools fire, is a more gross and fatty Exhalation, kindled either
by its own motion, or by contrary cold, etc. carried unconstantly up and down
in the lower Region of the Air, and frequently leading Travelers into places
of danger, into pits and precipices, being exhaled out of some rank and fat
soil, such as burying-places, or fields where great slaughters of Armies have
been made, or bogges and putrid parts of the Earth, So these false lights

1. Arise from Corrupion.


etc.

1. Then these spiritually wandering and bewildering lights, arise (as that
Meteor from putrid places) from men's corrupt minds. It has been accounted of
late by some, a solaecisme to call Men Corrupt from their opinions: oh! he is a
very honest man (let his principles be as corrupt as may be) but it was not so
in the days of the Apostles, 2 Timothy 3.8. Men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, the Apostle calls him Corrupt; that is, Corrupt as to the
faith, as well as him that is corrupt as to obedience. Opinions that are
wicked, render men corrupt as well as wicked practices. Now then let us take
heed what Principles we suck in, as well as what Practices we run into. Oh!
there is a corrupt mind, as well as a sound one, and from the former do arise
these seduing fires, 1 Timothy 6.5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds.
Yea, but such as these will charge you of corruption in judgment, and who
shall judge?

I answer, Two kinds of Corruption.
There are two undoubted signs of corruption in the flesh, and those may well
serve here, since the Apostle charge corruption upon some spirits, 1.
Swelling. 2. Running. Under either of these, who can clear the body from
corruption?

So then, those Principles that in their own nature, Swelling signs.
tend either to the swelling of the spirit, or the running; I mean to
spiritual pride, or pollution, cannot but pass for corruptions of mind, and
out of these are generated these going and bewildring lights.

1. Swelling Principles. The Apostle is full to this purpose, 1 Timothy 6. v. 3.
He consents not to wholesome words, etc. verse. 4 He is proud, v. 5. Perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds (and what follows?) destitute of the truth.
So 2 Timothy 3.2. Boasters, proud, etc. and v. 8. Men of corrupt minds. And upon
this account, I am altogether dissatisfied with the Armine^^cei urine of
free will, because its necessary and direct tend^^ the ^s they expound it) is to
gratify pride in its highest kind, even spiritual pride; that vain man might
be able to say of his own salvation, Is not this Babel which I have built by
the strength of my might? etc.

2. Putrefaction.
2. Putrefying Principles, whose immediate tendency is to filthiness of spirit;
for what ever they think that would have none censured for their minds, yet is
there filthiness of spirit as well as of flesh, from which, even from all of
which Gods heirs of promise must cleanse themselves, 2 Cor. 7.1. Now Principles
there are tending to this rottenness, such are theirs, who turn the grace of
God into wantonness, Jude 4. Yea more express, 2 Pet. 2.18. They speak great
swelling words of vanity (there is the former) They allure through the lusts of
the flesh, through much wantonness (there is the latter) Those that were clean
escaped from them that live in Errors. Mark the phrase: Now, how did they
allure them? Why? that which is forbidden to Saints, ( Gal. 5.13. viz. Not to
use Christian liberty as an occasion to the flesh:) is intimated to be their
practice, verse. 19. Whilst they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of Corruption. Mark that: you may be sure that Principles tending to
looseness, lust, wantonness, are corrupt Principles, and out of those bogs
arise these lights.

Secondly, That Meteor is a fatty viscous Exhalation: so these going and
seducing lights, 2. They are carnal.
are sensual principles, carnal principles, fl^shly principles, and such are
the men themselves, Jude 19. These be they that separate themselves, sensual,
having not the spirit. There is an holy separation that Scripture calls for;
but amongsts us there is a vain carnal separation without the spirit, but not
without sensuality: these separate from men, but not from sin; they are
forsooth better then others, but they do worse then others; they are begodded
above men, but they live beastially and below men. One drinks drunk, and
speaks not at all of Christ, as the rude profane drunkard: pices her drinks
drunk too as the other, but professe^ such I speaks of Christ, and says he is
a Saint, and others in darkness; and why? may not this be counted the more
profane of the two? These are they that say they cannot sin, that delight in
nothing else but sin.

Thirdly, That Meteor is light, uncertain, 3. Uncertain.
carried about with every air; so these are car^yed to and fro with every wind
of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. One while you must seek Christ here, and another
while, lo, Christ is there: one while he is to be found in the Wilderness,
another while in the Chamber, Mat. 24.23. etc. One while in the Ordinances,
another while above the Ordinances; therefore some now, and all another time,
and none of them another. Now the noise that these going fires make, cannot
possibly be a saving sound, because they are an uncertain sound; and if the
Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle?
Truth is not so, it cannot be at uncertainties; from the beginning of the Bible
to the end thereof, in all the Types, Histories, Prophesies, Gospel, etc.
there is only one thing, and that at all certainty preached, viz. Jesus
Christ. Hence is that testimony born unto ^he Scripture, 2 Pet: 1.19. You have
a sure (or certain) word of prophecy, whereunto you do well that you take
heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the Day Star arise in
your hearts, which is only to be understood of the day of glory, according to
that (and other) Scriptures, till I come, give attendance to reading, etc. And
lo, I am with you to the end of the world, till glory come, the word is a sure
guide. Now it is not possible that a true light to day, should be a false light
to morrow; or a light to day, and none to morrow: wherefore it is called a sure
word.

4. The Meteor has not its light from the Sun, 4. Kindled not by the Sun, but
by the cold or self motion.
but it is kindled either by the Antiperistasis (as they call it) of the
coldness of the night, or its own motion, etc. Of the first of these our
Savior says, Mat. 24.12. The love of many shall wax cold, and verse. 11. Many
false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many. We give advantange unto false
Opinions, by the coldness of our hearts, and want of zeal in the true. These
Meteors have not their light from the Sun, I read no Philosopher saying so.
Selfe-kindled they are, and so are these false lights. They have not their
light from the Word, but from self, 2 Timothy 3.2. Men shall be lovers of
themselves. It is the first of those many Characters, that he gives of those
false guiding lights. Whence are Errors? Why? Men are in love with themselves,
with every Notion of their own brain, and thought of their own heart. Yea,
it is zeal for self, and zeal from self, that kindles their light. The
Character that the spirit affixeth upon that fools-fire Theudas is this, Act.
5.36. He boasted himself to be somebody. Self is at the botome, and self is
the concernment. Oh! that doctrine is very dangerous, and very likely to kindle
many fatty, carnal, sensual hearts, that gratifieth sinful self, 2 Timothy
3.4. They themselves are lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God; and
their Proselytes or Disciples, verse. 6. Are still led away with (that is under
the power of) diverse lusts. Selfish doctrine is carnal doctrine, and so must
needs be a false light; for true doctrine is, Deny your selves, and welcome to
a profane heart, shall be that light that will lead to heaven, and not burn up
sinful self.

5. They lead to pits of ruin and precipices of destruction.
Fifthly, (Which is extremely sad) These lights lead to places of ruin, to pits
and precipices of destruction. Take heed, take heed, of destructive Principles
in whatsoever dress they be. There be damning Principles, as well as
Practices: one may be damned for his drunkenness, and thou for thy Heresy,
else the Apostle knew not what he said, 2 Pet. 2.1. As there were false
Prophets among the people, so there shall be false Teachers among you, who
privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, and shall bring upon themselves swift
destruction. But God that cannot lie calls them so, therefore they are so: so
then there is damning danger in going after them.

CHAP. XXV. Contains the Application of the foregoing Chapter.
TO improve now what has been spoken. To pity those that follow false lights.
If there be a possibility of being Bewildred, by following of the Light, what
shall we then do? Why? truly, my brethren, Pity such as follow them, and do
not only take heed of darkness, but of light also. You know our usual word to
a stranger whom we lodge, I pray, Sir, follow the Light; but truly if a
transformed Devil can set up Lights, let us take heed what Light we follow. A
King being about to Invade a Country, whereunto he must come by Sea, and
plotting to take his advantage in the Night, the Governor of that Country,
having intelligence, appoints burning Lights to be set upon some Rocks not far
from shore, and which run some way into the Sea, having some of their heads
above water. The Invader made no question, but that they were Lights upon the
shore, and so runs destructively upon the Rocks without fear. Satan does,
verily, set many a Light a burning, but they are all deceitful ones, they are
all set upon the Rocks; and those Souls that come near them (as Paul's phrase
is) concerning the Faith make Shipwreck. O pity therefore, pity the poor
Souls that rush upon the Rocks, while they follow the Light, and think it to
be the true Light. I believe amongst our bewildred ones, many such poor ones
there are: Oh! pray, pray hard for such, considering thy self, lest thou also
be tempted.

And secondly: As for your selves, Take heed what light you follow.
take heed what you sure word to go by: Try all by the Scriptures; even try
the Lights, whether they be of God or no. For thus much I dare assert, even
concerning these Times, That though there be many false Christ's, and false
Lights, and that many follow their pernicious ways, as is said 2 Pet. 2.2. yet
may we say with John, 1 Epist. 2.8. that the true light now shines. Though
there are many false Lights, yet there is a Sun in the firmament, and a true
Christ in the word preached. If you demand

Quest. How the true light is to be known?

Answ. By humble address to the Throne of Grace.


But how shall I do to know whether that Light, which I follow, be the true
light or no?

I answer: Address thy self in all humility to the Throne of Grace (in the
sense of thy weak and wandering judgment, how unable thou art to discern of
things that differ, how unable to choose that which is good, how subject to be
carried about with every wind of doctrine) 'Twas (I think) the Devils undoing
sin to be proud, but Psalm. 25.10. The meek will God teach his judgments, the
meek will he teach in his way; the humble will God teach, and they shall know
his way. Go thus to God, and he will tell thee which is the true Light, and
which the false. But I know, you would be glad in such a case to carry a
promise with you to the Throne of Grace, to put it in suit by prayer there; A
promise that we shall know the true light.
take that, and I think it worth the bearing along with you, Isa. 52.6.
Therefore my people shall know my name; therefore they shall know in that day,
that I am he that does speak, behold it is I. Act Faith upon this promise, and
God shall make thee to discern the true Light, though thou be not able to
dispute for it; yet shall thou be fully satisfied in it by the guidance of the
Spirit.

Object. Yea, but will these Seducers say, we have the Spirit as well as you,
and we are as sure as you, and why may not we be right as well as you?

Answ. They and we cannot be both sure, and both right, because we are
Contradictory. But that you may know which is true, for both cannot be true,
take this a more general and precious Rule. A general rule to know false light.
There is no true Light differing in the whole kind, or contradictory to
another true Light. There may be a true Light, yet lesser than another; as in
this respect, there is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of
the Stars, yet are they all true Lights; but then they are not contrary, but
subordinate the one unto the other. Thus the light of a Candle and the light of
the Noon-sun b^th are true lights; for though the Sun's do swallow up the
Candle's light (as it were) yet you see the Candle has its light still. But
now take a Glowworm, or a Scale of a Fish, or a piece of rotten wood, these
shine in the dark also, but they are false Lights; for bring them to the
Candle, or to the Sun, and there is nothing like light in them, they differ
from it in the whole kind. Thus the light of the Law, and the light of the
Gospel, and the light of Grace, and the light of Glory, are different Lights,
or distinct, one subordinate to the other, but not in the least contrary. But
bring an Error to the Light of the Word, and it is (like a piece of rotten
wood brought unto a Candle) very darkness, ceasing altogether to be a Light.
So then what ever Doctrine it is, that is contrary to any known true Light,
resolve upon it, that that is a false Light.

More particularly, take this threefold Rule; Three particular Rules.
for there is a threefold known Light. So then whatever Doctrine runs counter,
either first to the light of Nature, or secondly to the light of the Spirit, or
thirdly to the truth as it is in Jesus, cannot be a true Light.

1. Then, 1. The light of Nature, that is, so far as men go along with the
Bible without a Bible.
there is an undoubted impresse of Eternal Verity upon our natures, some
sparks whereof yet remain after our ruins of Nature in the fall, which
nothing in all the Scripture is, or can be contrary unto, because it is a true
Light as far as it goes, and for the quality of it. This you read of in the
Heathens, Romans 1.19, 20, 21. I say not, that by improvement of that, they might
have demerited a saving measure of true light, but so much they had, that by
the using of it, they might have avoided that gross Idolatrous darkness, that
he there speaks of; for this is flatly contradictory to the light of natural
reason, that that which was made by me (suppose an Idol) should be my Maker. I
remember once in Ireland, one went about to dissuade the soldiers from
opposing the Rebels; for, said he, If one smite thee on the one cheek, turn to
him the other; and this he called a Scripture-self Resignation, mistaking that
scripture, and opposing it against the Law of Self-preservation written
indelebly in all hearts. I have also read in the History of Munster in Germany,
of two men that solicited two young Virgins (made their Proselytes) to
Fornication; the Maids refused the motion with disdain, telling them, that
their natural modesty and shame abhorred it; they replied impudently, and
importunately, and it seems too prevailingly, that that was self, and to be
denied, else no salvation. Now that could not be a true light, because natural
conscience it self did abhominate it. In such cases we may say as Paul, 1 Cor.
11.14. Does not even Nature it self teach you?

2. The light of the Spirit that is in the Scriptures.
Secondly, That which is contrary to the light of the Spirit of God, must needs
be false Light. But they pretend to the Spirit as well as we, and there are no
immediate decisions of our Disputations: how then shall we know what judgment
Gods Spirit is of in any Debate?

How we may know the judgment the holy Spirit.
Answ. As by the Writings of Judge Cook we know his judgment in things of Law,
and by the Writings of any other Author that is personally withdrawn, we see
his mind, so though the Holy Spirit has withdrawn himself, as to any more
vocal decisions of our Controversies, yet has he not left himself without
witness, in that the Scriptures are express, and expressly his, 2 Pet. 1.21.
The Prophecy came not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke, as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Object. Yea, but say they, we maintain our opinion by Scripture, and that is
your exposition, and this is mine, that is your sense, this is mine, and why not
mine be true as well as yours?

Answ. There is not any intelligent Author, but it is easy to gather the
tendency and scope of the whole discourse. Now we may very usually meet with a
passage, which being viewed alone, and at sudden appearance, may seem to
contradict the genius of the whole discourse: Now if that sentence be
competently capable of another sense, (than that which singly and suddenly it
seems to bear) and that other sense be fairly coincident with the plain bent
of the whole discourse, in this case no man ever doubts to say, that this
sense, (so made out, and orderly according with the whole) is the Authors very
judgment.

So here, the Scriptures (as before) are the undoubted writings of the holy
Spirit. Sum of the Scriptures.
The plain tendency of these is clearer then the Sun. viz. That salvation is
from God only through Christ, and according to the Election of grace unto
mankind once happy, now lost, by that lively faith which carries perseverant
obedience in its bosom, to the praise of the glory of his grace, that God may
be all in all. This, who so runs through the scriptures may read, and such a
scope you have called the Analogy of Faith. Now then if there be any single
sentence that seems to divide from the whole, either you must deny the
scriptures to be the Holy Spirits, (which is blasphemous, and who so comes
that, first let him seek satisfaction of whom he will, I study not to satisfy
him) or if you yield them to be of divine inspiration, you must suppose (that
though you be ignorant, or your reason in the dark, which may well be) that yet
there is a sense of it that you discover not, that bears a sweet harmony with
the whole; and some worthy men have sweetly studied out much exquisite Music
in these seeming discords, which they have gathered by collations of scripture
with scripture: and if a sense be discovered (though latent as to the letter,
or first view, etc.) that may competently fall in with the present intended
discourse, and accord with the whole frame of the scriptures, we cannot be at
such a blind confusion, as was supposed in the Objection; that you may say,
this is your sense, that is mine; and why may not I be as right as you? Thou
have one sense of a scripture, and another has another: thou think that
thine interpretation unties all the knots of that scripture, and his thou
think does not: but now friend, if thy sense be contrary to the undoubted
principles of truth in general, and the tendency of the scriptures, though thou
be not sure that the other man's sense (supposed to accord with the rule of
faith) is the very sense of this very place, because he cannot by it resolve
all thy difficulties; yet may he be sure that thy sense is false, as to this
scripture in particular, because it will not stand with the sense of scriptures
in the general; for every spark is Homogeneous, and of the same kind with the
whole flame.

The Apostle writes expressly to this purpose, Romans 12.6. Make use of the
Analogy of faith.
Let us prophecy ((...)) according to the rule, or square, or scope, or
proportion of the faith. When we preach upon a particular verse, let us not
onele suit our Doctrine to the particular notions that we have raised from
thence, but be we sure that the scope, tendency, and proportion of the truth
will bear it, lse how sparkling or shining soever our Notion may be, they will
prove but ignes fatui, bewildring false lights. And verily (I think) it were
easy upon this score, to attaint many of those ranging Errors of the times.
Who can reconcile the Popish Doctrine of merits to that undoubted Rule, there
is no name whereby we must be saved, but the name Jesus Christ? Who can make
the licentious notion of fruitless believing, to stand before that Capital
truth, that faith without works, is dead faith? Who can bring the Arminian, or
Pelagian Doctrine of free will, to a subserviency to the praise of the glory of
free grace? Thus much for scripture-^ight.

3. The truth as it is in Jesus, the rule of the new Creature.
But thirdly, That light which is contrary to the truth as it is in Jesus, can
not but be a false light. This is elsewhere called the rule of the new
Creature, and as many that walk according to it, peace be on them, and on the
whole Israel of God, this is described, Ephesians. 4.21. If you have been taught by
him, as the truth is in Jesus, verses 22.23, etc. Put off concerning the former
conversation, the old man, that is corrupt according to deceiptful lusts, and
be renewed, etc. Put on righteousness and holiness, verse. 24. Putting away
lying, speak truth, verse. 25. Putting away wrath, verse. 26. Not stealing, but
laboring, verse. 28. Not corrupt in communication, but edifying, verse. 29. Not
grieving the holy Spirit, etc. verse. 30. If any thing, called light, be
contrary to these Rules of the new Creature, as most of our wanton licentious
going fires are, it is unquestionably false light. So then to conclude in the
Prophets language, Isai. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, Conclusion.
if any speak not accordding to this word, it is because there is no light,
(that is, no true light) in them: But let us say with David, Psa. 119.105. Thy
Word is a lamp unto my path, and a light unto my feet.

CHAP. XXVI. Contains the Collateral doctrine, that every unregenerate soul,
is a lost soul, expounded and improved.
ANd thus have you heard what advantages Satan has, what pains he takes, what
means are made use of unto the bewildring of poor souls. And thus much for
the discovery of the point. Instead of Application (because I have all along
applied things in particular) I shall subjoyne a Collateral doctrine, A
Collateral Doctrine.
and that is this; If every unregenerate heart be in a bewildred condition,
then that

Every soul that is in an unregenerate state, An unregenerate soul, is a lost
soul.
is in a lost estate, Psalm. 119.176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep.
Souls that are astray, that is, spiritually bewildred, are spiritually lost.
Christ binds down this truth with a threefold Cord, three Parables, Luke 15.
The lost sheep, verse. 4. The lost piece of silver, verse. 8. The lost
Prodigal, verse. 24. and all these to import the unregenerate condition. An
unconverted soul, is a lost soul.

Lost? -- I know not what word goes higher to express an undone estate. Many
say, I had a good wife, but I have lost her; a dear child, but I have lost
him; a precious friend, a fair estate, but I have lost them. I believe if you
should be questioned for the cause of most of your complainings, 'twould be
found that (lost) lies at the bottom of them: Losses are burdensome, we know
not how to bear them. Rachel had lost her Children, and she refused to be
comforted: Let me look then among you Mourners and Complainers: one mourns for
the loss of a debt, a Ship taken by Pirates, an house burnt; another for the
loss of a friend, a relation, etc. A third has lost his strength, his limbs,
his hearing, his sight; and amongst you all are there none whose lamentation
is, Oh! but I have lost a precious soul. It Is strange that that there is so
much moan for other losses, and so little for this; for let me till every
unconverted heart amongst you, that thou art not possibly liable to such
another loss as this, for this is a comprehensive, an irreparable, an eternal
loss.

1 This loss is comprehensive.
1. This is a comprehensive loss, even of all other losses, for that man that
loses his soul, loses himself, and all things else, and what can be more?

1 Lose thy soul, and lose thy self.
1. The soul is such a thing, as in the enjoyment whereof a man enjoyes
himself, and therefore losing it, loses himself. You say of some mad
distracted man, he has a fair estate, a good wife, pretty children, but he
has not himself; and what poorest man amongst you, would exchange Estates with
such an one? so the unregenerate of the world have honors, pleasures, profits,
what not? but they have not themselves, they have lost themselves, because they
have lost their souls, Mat. 16.26. It runs, What will it advantage, if a man
gain the world, and lose his own soul? But Luke 9.25. If he gain the world
and lose himself. He that loses his soul, loses himself: You say, Anima
hominis and homo, the soul is the man, sure here it must pass for current
undoubtedly, if thou have lost thy soul, thou have lost thy self. The
Prodigal was a jolly man whilst he was a lost Son, but in the Lords eye, and
his own, when he came to be enlightened, he was not an enjoyer of himself,
Luke 15. v. 17. When he came (that is by repentance) to himself, he said.

2. In the enjoyment of our soul, 2. Lose all other things too.
we enjoy all things else. If thou can not say, that thy soul is thine, thou
can not say any thing else is thine, therefore in losing thy soul, thou have
lost all things else: as

1. God is none of thine. 1. Losest God.
Thus the Apostle expressing the unregenerate estate of the Ephesians, Chap.
2.12. says, they were without God in the world. Hence our ordinary phrase,
unregenerate ones are ungodly ones; graceless ones are godless ones. What, my
Brethren, lost God? Heaven and Earth tremble at this loss! lost God? there is
one word for all, for God is all in all. A Saint may say as Jacob said, I have
all, Genesis 33.11. for so the Hebrew Text bears, Qui habet habentem omnia, habet
omnia, he has all, that has him that has all. A Saint may say, this is my
wine, and my wool, and my flax, and mine oil, for the Lord is my God, and
therefore

Secondly, Mammon is, and shall be none of thine. 2 Mammon.
Vain men care not for losing their souls, if that be the worst of it, that
they must lose God by it, for they say unto God, depart from us: Vain men care
not for losing their souls, so as that they may either get, or save their
Mammon. But friend, if thou lose thy soul, that is the way to lose thy Mammon
also. If thou can not say thy soul is thine, whose shall those things be
when that is gone? If thy soul be required this night of thee, then whose
shall these things be that thou have provided? Luke 12.20. The lost Son was
feign to rob the Swine, to fill his belly with their husks. Thou art a robber
when thou take either fleece or flesh from the poor sheep to feed thy belly,
or to cloth thy back; and, save that the sheep is dumb before the shearer and
slaughterer, it would cry out Robbery and Murder, for it is more innocent then
thou, neither is it any of thine, save only by Gods permission and thine
usurpation. Therefore God says, (as if thou usurpest his right) I will recover
my Wool, and my Flax, and take away my Corn and Wine, Hos. 2.9. if thy soul be
not thine.

2. Irreparable.
2. The loss of the soul is an irreparable loss, Mat. 16.26. To lose his
soul, Luke 9.25. Or lose himself, is to be cast away. Oh! that is a sad word:
such an one is cast away, that is, he is drowned, and sunk, and buried in the
bottom of the Sea, and can never be recovered any more. A poor wretch that
loses his soul, is cast away, that is; drowned, and sunck, and buried in the
bottom of Hell for evermore. If you have lost your Gold by hiding it in the
Earth, you may dig for it, and find it: but if you have lost your Gold in the
bottom of the Sea, it is irrecoverably lost. If thou losest a Wife, or a
Child, or an Estate, etc. these losses are recoverable; or if God take away
these, he can for Counters give us Gold: But if thou lose thy soul, nothing
can repair that loss, Mat. 16.26. What shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? that is, there is nothing so much worth as it, nothing able to repair
the loss of it. Set apart the inestimable righteousness of the Lord Jesus,
and it would utterly beggar heaven and earth to repair the loss of any one
poor soul. When we exchange our souls with any thing that this world can
afford, we are as a rich fool, (and much more foolish then he) that gives away
an exceeding great Estate for a painted Apple, or gilded Nut. An hundred
thousand times more then what he gets, would not countervaile the one thing
that he loses.

3. Eternal.
3. It is an eternal loss, because it is the loss of that which is immortal.
It Is in the soul that the worm lives that never dies: It Is upon such a soul
that the fire feeds, that never goes out, Isai. 66.24. The grief, the
sense, the sorrow of other losses dies with thee; but this loss, and the
unconceiveable sadness of it, begins most to live when thou dyest; the loss
of temporal things is but temporal, but the loss of the immortal soul is
eternal: What friend! lost for ever? for ever? -- Oh! let that word break thy
heart.

From hence, let me first speak to those that are lost, shall be for a
lamentation. To those that are lost and not yet found, lament.
What my Brethren, have you lost your souls, and not found them? Why, every
one is solicitous for losses, 1 Samuel 9.3. The Asses of Kish were lost, and he
said unto Saul, arise, take servants with thee, and go and seek the Asses. Up
and call in help, and take all pains, and all to seek the lost Asses. And
thus they pass through the Land of Shalishah, but they found them not, through
the Land of Shalim, but there they were not; through a third Land, and yet
found them not, Seek your souls.
and yet on they went to seek them still, verses 4.5. Oh! how shall this story
rise up to condemn poor souls? Have thou ever taken such pains to find thy
lost soul? to go from Ordinance to Ordinance, from duty to duy, from one
endeavor to another, restlesly laborious in seeking that which thou have lost?
You have a saying, that I love you as I love my soul. Why? upon the account of
this history, I had rather be some man's Ass, then thy soul; yea, most men's
Dog, rather then thy soul; if they lose their Dog, they will whistle for him:
If a Gentleman lose a setting Dog, etc. all the Country shall be searched for
it; but how few Gentles or others, take pains inseeking their lost souls?
Alas! this is in a sort, an infinite loss, wherein thou losest an infinite
God? How sad is it then, that herein thou should be, or not at all, or so
sparingly affected? My friends, I see you are yet alive; and thus much
according to the same truth, I would say to qualify what was before spoken of
this loss (for the sake of broken hearts, not of obdured sinners) that the
soul is not so (as I said) lost until your lives be lost: for until you have
lost your lives it is good seeking, and great hopes of finding your lost souls?
Possibility of being found.
The lost Sheep, lost piece of Silver, lost Prodigal, were all three of them
found, Luke 15.6. Rejoice with me, for I have found my Sheep which was lost,
verse. 9. Rejoice with me, for I have found the Piece which I had lost, verse.
24. This my Son was lost, and is found. Therefore though thy soul be lost,
yet seek it, for there is comfortable hope that it may be found.



in seeking the Asses; and as they, when they had done all, went to the man of
God for them, 1 Samuel 9.6. So when you have taken, or shall take all pains, and
use all endeavors to find your lost souls, go out of your selves, and beyond
your own labors, go to God that he may find you; thus David goes to God, and
says, Psalm. 119.176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant.
Art thou gone astray? is thy soul lost? Oh! seek to God to seek you, Gods
way to seek thee, is by making thee to seek him. In this God works by making
thee to work with him. It is safer thus to join the Notions, then to make too
nice distinctions in Theory, it is (I think) undoing to make distinctions in
practice. If thou say, thou will stay till God seek thee, thou may never be
sought: and if on the other hand, thou trust to thy own seeking, thou may
nere be found; therefore as it were, quicken, and stir up God to quicken thee;
Be exhorted hereto.

1. For your own sakes.

Yours the loss.


say unto God, Lord, seek my poor lost soul. Let me beg this of you.

1. For your own sakes. Oh! friends it is you, it is only you that can properly
be said to have the loss: if thy soul be lost, surely it is thy loss: If
thou lose thy own soul, mark those appropriating terms, Mat. 16.26. Alas! thy
damnation will not hinder either Gods being glorified, or thy faithful
Ministers being saved; but thine own salvation, thine own glory, this is lost,
lost eternally.

Secondly, For Gods sake, for Heavens sake. 2. For God and heavens sake.

Heaven loses.


Although not properly, yet in some sort it is loss to Heaven, when a soul is
lost; for it is joy in heaven over any soul that is found. The Angels rejoice;
yea, God says, Let us be merry, for this my Son was lost, and is found, Luke
15.32.

3. For the Gospel sake, for your Ministers sake. 3. For the Gospels sake. That
loses.
You pretend to love the Gospel, and to love your Ministers; Oh! then look
after your lost souls. Friends, if your souls be lost, 'twil be in a sort the
Gospel's loss, 2. Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid in those that are
lost; thy loss is an Eclipse, a kind of hiding to the Gospel. Yea, if you be
lost, 'twil be in a sort our loss also, 1 Cor. 3.9. (Though I rather take this
Text to be meant of the building up of Doctrines, then of Hearers; yet give me
leave to allude unto it. You have Ministers called laborers with God, the
labor is building, Christ is the foundation, v. 10. The materials are Gold,
Silver, precious Stones, (these you know will abide the burning) Hay, Wood,
Stubble, (these are combustible) v. 12. (Some are Saints and precious Souls,
some Hypocrites, some wretched Creatures.) Now every man's work shall be tried
by fire, of what sort it is, v. 13. Whether you be rot^^n or sound, that day
will manifest: Now if any man's work abide, he shall receive a reward; (if your
souls be saved, your Preacher shall be a gainer) v. 14. But if any man's work
be burnt, he shall suffer loss, yet himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire,
v. 15. When God comes to look over a Gospel Minister, and finds him faithful,
(though souls have perished under his Ministry) himself shall be saved; yet
though he be saved, if they perish, he shall suffer loss; for those that
convert many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars of Heaven, Dan. 12.3.
Think of this you Formalists, in whose profession there is no more substance,
then hay, or stubble, no more durableness, then in wood before the devouring
flame.

Encouragement hereunto.

Christ's office is to find lost souls.


Now for the encouragement, as to a search after your lost souls, I shall say no
more, but only tell you where you may hear of them. If you lose a Book, or
any thing else in the Congregation, you go to the Clark to enquire for it,
because it is his office and business to take up that which you have lost, and
to save it for you. Oh! go to Jesus Christ, it is his very office, Luke 19.10.
To seek, and to save that which is lost. If you would hear of your long-lost
souls, go to Christ, he can tell you tidings of them. Indeed it cost Christ
dear, before he could take them up, but you may have them again at an happy
rate. He that understands the value of his soul, or believes what I have said
this day, will not think it an ill bargain to redeem his soul upon any terms.
Come to Christ and welcome, you have lost your selves in selling your selves
for naught, as it is said, Isai. 52.3. But you may be redeemed without money,
and without price.

To those that were lost, but are found.
Art thou found? Why, welcome friend, I am glad to see thee, only labor
henceforward to follow close after that God that has found thee. The spouse
was once bewildred, but now she is found; therefore she will lean upon her
beloved. That you may so do,

Rules.

1. Be shie of the ways of sin.


1. Be exceeding shie of the ways of sin, and of your own hea^ts. Oh! how
cautelous is that Caution, Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the
wicked, and go not in the way of evil men. Do not go, do not so much as
enter. And then in the next verse, Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it,
and pass away. He cautioneth, as if he could never enough caution us, surely
there is great danger in having the least to do with those ways.

2. Be very observant of the true light.
Be very observant of the true light, Psalm. 119.104. Through thy Precepts I get
understanding, therefore I hate every false way.

3. Be watchful over thine Affections, the feet of thy soul.
Thirdly, Be very watchful over thine Affections, the feet of thy soul, Psalm.
119.101. I have refrained my feet, from every evil way, that I may keep thy
word. Keep the Word, and it shall keep thee, If so be that the Lord have
graciously found thee. Keep thy feet, and thou shall keep the word.

The third Part of this Treatise, 3. Part.
discovers the great concernment of lost Souls. viz. to come up from the
Wilderness of sin.
CHAP. I. Contains two precious Doctrines. 1. That there is a way from the
Wilderness of sin. 2. That it is an uphill way. The latter is largely opened
and applied.
ANd thus much of the second maine point in our Text; That every Christlesse,
or unregenerate soul is a bewildred, and so a lost soul. We pass on to the

Third main Doctrine; That It is the great concernment of poor bewildred
souls to come, 3d. Main Doctrine, under which two previous Doctrines.
even to come up from the wilderness of SIN. And so you have the third thing
propounded in the draught of this MAP, viz. Moses on Pisgah, turning his back
on the wilderness, and pointing toward Canaan.

Before I come to handle this point, I must mind you of two previous and
employed truths in these words, Comes up from the wilderness.

First, That there is a way from the wilderness of sin. That there is a way
from the wilderness.
and came out of that WILDERNESS.

But this point I shall but mention here, because I shall have occasion to
explain it afterward, showing Who is this way, viz. Christ, how he is, and came
to be this way? what manner of way he is? and what improvement we ought hereof
to make?

The way out of the wilderness of SIN, The way from the wilderness of sin, is
an up hill way.
is an up-hil WAY. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness?

My Brethren, my business is to chalk out unto you, the best and truest, not
the easiest way. You would have small cause to thank any man, that should lead
you into the way of the valleys, when your way is the way of the hills, and
life and death depends on the dispatch of your journey. I had as live Christ
should have no followers, as such as will not follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes; so Rev. 14.4. Now the usual posture of the Lord Jesus is, Leaping over
the Mountains, skipping upon the Hills, Cant. 2.8. When God calls a soul by
conversion, it is like his Call to Lot in Sodom, Genesis 19.14. Up, get you out of
this place, for the Lord will destroy this City. Up, g^t you out of the state
of sin, for the Lord will set fire on the thickets of this Wilderness. Up,
get you out, so says Christ to the Spouse, Cant. 2.10. Rise up my love, my
fair one, and come away. Himself was upon the Hills and Mountains, v. 8. and
therefore he calls her to come up thither, that (as his phrase in John is)
Where he is, she may be also. Therefore I said, Christ had as good have no
followers, as such that will only follow in the way of the plains.

Proof of it.
Now that the way from the Wilderness of sin, is an up-hill way, I shall
labor to prove by induction of Particulars considerable in that motion, the
terms of the motion, and remarkable circumstances, as to the motion of the
soul in the way that leads from the Wilderness of sin.

1. By induction of particulars.
1. By induction of particulars, I shall mention these four. 1. Repentance. 2.
Faith. 3. Obedience. 4. Gospel-converse. And verily for proof of each these, I
think I shall need little more then your own ordinary expressions of your own
ordinary experience. Oh! what a-doe have I (say thou) to get up mine heart
unto true Gospel-sorrow for my sins? Oh! what an hard work is it (says
another) To bring my heart up to a belief of the promises? to trust God in
difficulties, etc. Oh! how difficult to get up the hill of Gospel-obedience?
what pains must I take to get to Communion with God in the spirit? etc.

1. The way of Repentance is an up-hil way. 1. The way of repentance is an up
hill way.
This is the language of the repentant Prodigal, Lu. 15.18. I will arise, and
go to my father: without getting up, nothing can be done as to repentance. Sin
is asleep, it is a death at the bottom of the hill, and there is no repentance
without an awaking, an arising, a getting up to the top of the Hill. Think with
your selves, and remember you that have been acquainted with repentance,
whether mortification for sin, mortification of sin, dying under it by the
Law, and dying unto it by the Gospel, were an hard or an easy matter, an
up-hill or an down-hill way.

Secondly, Faith is an up-hil way. Have you not heard of the fath of Abraham?
2. The way of faith.
(as the scripture says of the patience of Job?) Now where was it, that
Abraham was canonized for the father of the faithful? why you have the story of
it, Genesis 22.14. 'twas in the place named Jehovah-Jireh, In the Mount of the
Lord it will be seen. Faith must get up to the top of the Mount, the Mount of
the Lord, e're ever it can see what it would, what it should see; as we go to
the top of an hill for a prospect, when we desire to see a great way round about
us; and the higher the hill is, the more pains is it to get up, but when we are
up, the farther we see. Prove. 18.10. The name of the Lord (which is that you
know, that faith leans upon); is a strong Tower, the righteous running into it
is safe. A Tower? why, that is usually situate on an Hill, as there is Tower-hil
in our great City; and if so, then he that will into the Tower, must up the
hill, and he that will into the name of the Lord for security, must up the Mount
of the Lord by believing.

3. Of obedience.
Thirdly, Gospel-obedience is an up-hil way. Its hard to get a great weight up
an hill; therefore when the Apostle presses Gospel-obedience, he bids us lay
aside the weight, that we may run with patience, Heb. 12.1. The old Adam is a
clog to our obedience, and weights easily pull us down, and if down, to rise
again, it is up-hil work; such is obedience. Gods call for our obedience, is
like his command to Moses, Genesis 32.49, 50. Go up to Mount Nebo, and dye there.
So, go up into thy Closet, and kill thy Corruptions, let thy dearest lusts dye
there, pluck out thy right eye there, and cut off thy right hand there. I had
as live dye, (says a stubborn spirit) as do such a thing, and such verily is
our natural stubbornness against God. When God bids us up and do this, or that,
flesh and blood had as live dye as do it. When the Gospel bids thee look about
all things, Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Lands, Houses, Life; and Leave,
Forsake, Hate them all, and then thou shall be a Disciple unto
Gospel-obedience: Is not this every whit as much, as go up to Mount Nebo, and
dye there? surely he never yet found this way, that has not found it to be an
up-hil way.

4. Of Gospel converse in spiritual duties.
Fourthly, The way of Gospel-Communion or Converse with God, with Christ, with
Saints, in the Spirit, in an Ordinance: My Brethren, is not this an up-hil way?
Is it not this that makes your hearts sweat again, to get up, or keep up your
Spirits duly in this way? Our Savior went up into a Mountain to pray, and
unless thou can come up into the Mountain, thou will very hardly come to
pray. The Spouse looked for Christ in the highways; that is, (as I said
before) the Ordinances; but she had not looked yet high enough for to find him,
Cant. 7.5. The King is held in the Galleries. If thou be as the Spouse, Cant.
2.14. In the secret places of the stayrs: I am come to meet thee this day, to
tell thee that the King is above in the Galleries; his voice then to thee is
this, Come up hither: for I, says Christ, do not use to come down lower, the
King is held in the Galleries; that is, If you be in the Spirit whilst you are
in the Ordinances, you shall find Christ, and not unless you be under spiritual
Communion, Christ will not show himself lower, the Hebrew word bears thus much,
the King is bound in the Galleries. Christ has bound himself by promise, to
be found in spirituality of duty; and has as it were, bound himself that he
will not be found lower, not in formality. I judge it may refer hither, that we
read of the Mountains of Prayer, the Mountain of Holiness, the Mountain of
Praise, typing that the way of Gospel-Communion is an Up-hil way.

Secondly, If you consider the terms of the motion, 2. By cons^deration of the
terms of the motion.
of the soul that comes from the wilderness of sin to grace; the term from
which, the term to which.

First, The term from which is the Wilderness, 1. The term from which is so
low.
and it it is so low a situation, that you cannot possibly come out of it, but
you must come up out of it. Paradise was a lofty state, and as it were a lower
Heaven, but in the day that Adam was cast out of it, he went to inhabit so low
a soil, sin I mean, that it is said of it, Prove. 5.5. Its steps take hold
of Hell If the sinner were but one step lower, he would be in Hell. Nay, what
if I should say, that the wilderness of sin, is in a sort as low as Hell:
nay, in a sort, an Hell, Psalm. 86.13. Thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest Hell. Sin is an hell, but I cannot say it is the lowest Hell; the
lowest hell is the second death. If thou be in the state of sin, thou art in
Hell already; understand it soberly. He that believes not, is condemned
already, Joh. 3.18. Damned already: only the Gravestone is not yet rolled
unto the mouth of this Grave, the gulf is not yet fixed, the way is yet open,
and poor souls may come out by believing.

Secondly; The term unto which souls move, 2. The term unto which it is so
high.
when they come from the Wilderness of sin, speaks it to be an up-hil way.
You have heard of an higher and lower hell, and you may hear of an higher and
lower Heaven. As sin is the upper Hell, so grace is the lower Heaven, Phil.
3.20. Our conversation is in heaven. Paul's, and the converted Philippians
conversations were in heaven, that was in the lower Heaven. Memorable is that
passage, Heb. 10.22, 23. Ye (that is living Saints) are come unto Mount Sion,
and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly, and Church of the
first born which are written in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and the
spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus, etc. If this way that shall
lead hitherto be not up the hill, judge ye.

3. By consideration of this eminent circumstance in the motion. viz.

If your foot slip, you do not get nearer to grace by it, but more back again
into the wilderness:


Thirdly, If you consider but the remarkable Circumstances of the motion, as
this now: Would you know whether or no the way out of the Wilderness, be an
Up-hil way, observe when thy foot slips, whether thou gettest nearer grace, or
nearer sin by that slip. If thou get nearer sin, as thou do undoubtedly,
then sin undoubtedly is the down-hil way, for we slip not up the hill, but
down; we fall not upward, but down-ward: Now this Circumstance is clear in
scripture, in experience, and where not? and it is convictive hereof, viz. That
the way from the Wilderness of sin, is up-hil; for upon any slip our souls
slip to sin, so that the Lord instantly cries out, Return o backslyding
Children, etc. Jer. 3.22. etc. All the ways of sin are backslyding ways,
therefore they are down-hil ways; and therefore the way from the Wilderness,
is to come up. Thus much for proof, and surely of this mind was Solomon, when
he said, that The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from
hell beneath, Prove. 15.24. Whether you respect the hell of sin, or of suffering
for sin, which are both beneath: but the way of life, whether of holiness or
happiness, is above to the wise, that is an Up-hil way.

Use. 1. Challenge.

1. That takes no pains, yet thinks to come out of the wilderness.


From hence a word of Challenge, a word of Caution, and a word of Exhortation.

1. Hence let me challenge souls. Sirs, how is it that you dare hope of
coming at length out of the Wilderness, when you take no pains to walk in
the up-hil way? surely to let repentance, and faith, and obedience, and the
duties of holiness alone, is to resolve to dwell in the Wilderness yet still,
for that is the valley of the shadow of death, and these are the Up-hil ways.
Come up, come up, from the wilderness you idle hearts, that love to walk only
in the way of the plains. Oh! but say you, I have tried to come out, but I
have made no progress, I can easily go in farther and farther; but why can I
not as easily go out? no wonder at all, going in to it is down-hil, coming out
of it is up-hil; therefore never think of coming out of it, unless thou take as
much, nay more pains to get out of sin, then ever thou did in sin.

And by the way, 2. That take pains to go farther into it.
let me further challenge poor wretches of very madness, that in stead of
taking pains to come up from the Wilderness, take (as some do) much pains to
go farther down into it: Alas, poor souls, it is down-hil way, thou art likely
to be at the bottom soon enough (even in the lowest hell) without running
down: and if any take pains this way, how shall this condemn those that take
no pains the other way?

2. Use. Caution. Is the way from the wilderness up the hill? Take heed of
fainting, take heed of falling, 2d. Cautino.
either of these will endanger your tumbling down the hill again.

1. Caution. Take heed of fainting. My Brethren, 1. Take heed of fainting.
how conscious are we to our selves; how ready are the strongest of us to faint
in those forementioned up-hil ways? Now it is not the pleasure of the Lord
Jesus, that any should faint in the ways of attendance upon him, Mat. 15.32. I
will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. Let us also be
careful, lest our hearts faint in any of the ways of Jesus Christ, although
they be never such up-hil ways, For which cause we faint not, 2 Cor. 4.16. And
as we have received mercy, we faint not, v. 1. We shall reap, if we faint not,
Gal. 6.9. And this is the praise of Ephesus, Rev. 2.3. Thou have labored, and
not fainted. In laborious up-hil services, they walked without fainting. Rules
to prevent fainting. 1. Look not down-ward.
Now to help you herein, take these two Rules.

1. Look not much down-ward. 2. Look much upward. You have both these together,
2 Cor. 4.16. For this cause we faint not, v. 18. Whilst we look not at the
things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that
are seen are temporal, but the things (that he looked at) that are not seen,
are eternal. If a man you know, would go up a Spire-steeple, or Beacon of
great height, it is very dangerous, and dazeling to look down-ward; his way
must be to look upward all the while.

1. Look not down-ward, look down and faint, and so fall down. Observe the
Apostles opposition, he sets minding of earthly things (that is the looking
down-ward that I speak of) against having our conversation in heaven, Phil.
3.19, 20. Carnal hearts that mind earthly things, will faint in the first steps
of that way that leads out of the Wilderness, for it is an up-hil way.
Therefore says the Wise man of riches, and things earthly. Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not, Prove. 23.5. That is, Do not so much as set thine
eyes upon it. 2dly,

2. Look much upward.
Look much upward. I will look unto the hills, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 121.1.
I will lift up mine eyes. The Apostle comparing our lives to a race or journey,
bids us, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. To look unto Jesus, etc. lest we be weary, or faint
in our mind. It would extremely help us, to have our conversation in heaven,
to be often, yea, always looking thither, whence we look for a Savior, Phi.
3.20. This would keep us from fainting in this up-hil way. If you be risen
with Christ, (to the top of this hill, and would keep there, why then) set your
affections upon things above, Col. 3.1, 2. For thus says the Lord, Isai.
40.30.31. The Youths shall utterly faint, and the young men shall fall, but they
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, (yea though it be an up-hil
way) they shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run, and not be
weary; they shall walk, and not faint.

2dly. Caution. Take heed of falling. 2. Take heed of falling.
Is it an up-hil way? believe it, it is very ill getting a slip, 1 Cor. 10. He
minds us of the falls of the poor Israelites in the way toward Canaan: he
gives variety of instances from the 5. v. he brings all close down for our
admonition, verse. 11. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he fall, v. 12. How charily do men go up an hill in a frosty day, when the
ways are slippery? Oh! this is the danger, it is an up-hil way. Let us
therefore labor to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the ensample
of their unbelief, Heb. 4.11.

Thirdly, Exhortation in two words. 3ly. Exhortation. 1. To come up.


First, Is it an up-hil way? then pray let us up and be going; let us up and
repent, up and believe, up and obey, up and pray, and read, and hear, and
meditate, etc. and that leads me to the Third main Doctrine yet before us,
whitherto I shall refer it.

Secondly, Is it an up-hil way? wherein is such likelihood of faintings? such
fear of falling? Oh! 2ly. To come up leaning.
Then labor to lean upon the beloved, whilst you come up from the
Wilderness, to repent and lean, to believe and lean, to obey and lean, to pray
etc. and lean: and this would lead to the fourth main Doctrine, therefore we
shall dismiss it for the present. We pass on to

CHAP. II. Contains the third maine Doctrine, That it greatly concerns lost
souls to come up from the wilderness of sin, discovered and applied with
choice directions thereunto.
THe third maine Point, 3d. Maine Doctrine.
viz. That it is the great concernment of lost souls, to come up from the
Wilderness of sin.

The Spouse in the Text had been in the Wilderness, but now up she gat, That
is the lost souls great business, to come up from the wilderness.
and away she came; and this is thy great business. The voice of the Lord unto
such a soul, is like the voice of Christ to his chosen ones in Babylon, Rev.
18.4. Come out of her my people, lest you partake of her plagues. Come out of
the Wilderness, my poor Creatures, lest you dye wlldernesse-deaths: and now
must the answer of thy soul be, I come Lord. The Lords bewildred spouse, Hos.
2. takes up this main resolution, as her maine work and business. I will
return to my first husband, Hos. 2. v. 7. I will go and return: so the
Prodigal, I will arise, and go to my Father: The bewildred Spouse, the lost
Son: this is it that they make their great work and business, and it is not
strange that it should be so, if you consider that the coming up of lost
souls, is the very great work and business of God himself, For this is the
great business. 1. Of God the Father.
even God the Father, Son, and holy Spirit.

1. It is the great design of God the Father, that poor souls should come up
from this spiritual wilderness, Deuteronomy. 32.9, 10. Jacob is his portion, he found
him in the Wilderness, and led him about, and instructed him; you have this
explained, or (if you will) seconded; Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 34.11. I,
even I will both search my sheep, and seek them out. They have been scattered
in the cloudy and dark day, v. 12. (Of this we have spoken) I will feed them
in a good pasture, on the high Mountains, there shall their fold be, etc.
verses 13.14. (Of this we spoke in the last discourse) I will seek that which
was lost, and will bring again that which was driven away. I, even I, says
God. My friends, shall the Lord God make it his own great business to seek
thy lost soul, and shall it not be thine? the Lord forbid. I would have thee
know, if thy soul be lost, and God seek it, and thou do not thy self seek
it; And thy neglect a despite to him.
if thou do not cooperate, thou offerest despite unto the Lord God. When God
looks for lost souls, and they would not be found, but the language of thine
heart is as Ahabs to the Prophet, 1 King. 21.20. Have thou found me O mine
enemy? Poor souls count God their enemy, when his Word or Spirit comes so near
them, as to find them: why this is to offer despite unto God, yea, then when
he is offering the greatest mercy conceivable, yea more then can be conceived
unto thee. Thou art scattered, God would gather thee; thou art lost, but God
would find thee; this is his challenge against Jerusalem, under which it should
quite be ruined, Lu. 13.34. He would, but they would not. If a child should
lose it self, and the father finding it, should offer to bring it home again,
and the child should wrangle, and refuse his offer; what would you call this?
or what would you account the child worthy of? Gods goodness is a leading
goodness, and if thou refuse to be led by it, thou shall be accounted a
despiser of it, so says the Holy Spirit, Romans 2.4.

Secondly, It is the great business of God the Son. We have had occasion to
show that, 2. This the great business of God the Son.
though Christ were never bewildred, yet was he led into the Wilderness, that
he might learn to look after lost souls. This he professes to be his
business, Lu 19.10. I came to seek, and to save that which is lost. This was
the errand (as you have heard) that the Father sent the Son into the world
about, and this he pursues, as a light to them that sit in darkness, and a
guide into the way of peace, Lu. 1.79. And now shall it be the business of the
Lord Jesus, And thy neglect a despite to him also.
to seek thy lost soul, and shall it not be thine own? Why? Thou offerest
despite to Jesus Christ. When Christ tenders himself as a new and living way,
and souls notwithstanding resolve to be lost still, this the Apostle
aggravates by them that despised Moses, Heb. 10.28. and calls it a treading
under foot of the Son of God, v. 29.

Thirdly, It is the business of the Holy Ghost, 3. It is the great business of
God the holy Spirit. 1. By our Ministry.
to bring poor souls out of the wilderness of sin.

First, By our Ministry: the Holy Ghost is at the charge of sending forth
guides furnished with Gifts for the seeking of the lost, and all that expense
is hereunto: this therefore the Lord sorely challenges, and severely
reprehends them for, that were called Shepherds, that they sought not that
which was lost, Ezekiel. 34.4. And his sheep were scattered; yet none did search,
or seek after them, verse. 6. Despite done to Messengers herein, is done to him
that sent them.
And truly in pursuance of this message, whatever despite you offer unto any
messenger, you offer it (as Christ says) unto him that sent him; that is, the
Spirit. He that despises you, despises me, Luke 10.16. And shall the Spirit
of Grace employ so many Ministers to call thee from the Lions Den, etc. to look
after thy lost soul? and do thou not make it thine own work? Oh! what
despite is this unto him that sent them?

2. By his own.
Secondly, By his own Ministry, by the ministration of himself, his light, his
grace, his guidance, Io. 16.13. The spirit of truth shall guide you. The great
business of God the Holy Ghost, is to be a guide to poor souls; and shall it be
his work, and will thou have no care of thine own lost soul? this is to do
despite flatly to the Spirit of grace. So says himself, And to neglect this,
is to do despite unto the spirit of grace.
Heb. 10.29. Consider, consider; it cost God the Father the loss as it were
(for a time) of his own Son out of his own bosom, to help lost souls. It
cost God the Son, the loss of his own precious blood out of his own heart,
and veins, to redeem lost souls. It cost the holy Spirit, the shedding abroad
of his gifts and graces, the sending forth of multitudes of messengers to seek
poor lost souls; and wilt not thou make it thy great business also? Wilt not
thou be at any cost or charges to accomplish it? if thou will not, at once,
thou do dispight (not only unto me, or any others, as poor messengers, but
also) unto all the three, that are one God. Woe, woe, woe, unto such a soul!

Querie. What means coming from the wilderness. 1. It requires.
But now the Querie will be, what this coming up from the Wilderness means?

I shall briefly answer. 1. By showing what it requires.

2. Wherein it is dispatched or attained.

1. Then what does this coming up etc. require?

I answer.

never come out of this Wilderness, A new principle of life. viz. raising up.
as long as it continues dead in sin. You may call long enough to a dead Corpse
to come up from the Grave, except you put a new principle of life into it; and
as long upon a dead heart, to come up from sin, unless God put a new life
into it. The call of Christ to Lazarus, put life into Lazarus, and therefore he
came up from the Grave, Joh. 11.44. The call of conversion to a sinner, puts
life into the sinner, and therefore he comes up from the Wilderness as the two
witnesses, Rev. 11.11, 12. The Spirit of life entered into them, and then they
heard a voice saying, Come up hither. Have thou heard the voice of the Son
unto life? if thou have not, thou have not yet stirred from the ways of the
wilderness, which are ways of death: thou must have a new life to walk in
these up-hil paths, for this is a new and a living way, Hect. 10.20. Never
think to be rid of a bewildred heart, until thou get rid of a dead heart. Our
Text is pregnant: Who is this that comes up from the wilderness? How came
that? I raised thee up under the Apple tree. God must raise thee up, or else
thou can not come up,: or rather God by raising thee up, makes thee to come
up.

Secondly, A motion answering such a life. 2. New motions. viz. coming up.
As the soul can never come up, unless it be raised, so say I, there was never
any soul raised up, but was willing to come up; for that is raising up, when
God raises up us, and our wills at once. My soul hates their profane Notion,
that teach souls to lie still as the beast in the ditch that cannot stir,
dawbing with such untempered Mortar as this, if God will, and when God will,
thou may and shall repent, and believe, and thou can do no more then God
will, and therefore trouble not thy self to take any pains, or to go any
farther: my Text says not, Who is this that was taken out of the wilderness,
but who is this that comes out, etc. though God raise up, yet she must come up.
Gods motions herein may help, but must not hinder thine own motions.

2. It consists.
But Secondly, Wherein is this coming up from the Wilderness dispatched?

I answer.

1. In the getting up of our eyes.
First, In the getting of our eyes up. Oh! labor we to look from the top of
the Wilderness, from the Lions Dens, and from the Mountains of the Leopards.
Art thou going up the hill? Why? Prove. 4.25. Let thine eyes look right on. Oh!
how do Christians hinder their progress toward Canaan, for want of due
observance unto this rule? We must be looking this way, and that way, (to this
vanity to day, to another to morrow) like fools and children, and so trifle
away our time, wherein we should dispatch our business, Psalm. 119.5. Oh! says
David, That my ways were directed, that I might keep thy statutes. And what
will he do to this end? v. 15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and have
respect unto thy ways. There he gets up the eyes of his soul. When I have
respect to all thy Commadements, v. 6. More expressly, 37. Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity, and quicken me in thy way. Would thou be quick in the
ways of God? Why? Turn away thine eyes from vanity: please not thy self with
it, meditate not upon it: I persuade my self, that the reason why so few come
up to the ways of holiness, is, because they never yet lifted up their eyes
unto the beauties of holiness, and have therefore thought that the only
pleasing ways are in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 1.21. The World by wisdom knew
not God. My Brethren, we must get up from our wisdoms, (to look higher then
that) or else we can not get up from the Wilderness: that is, We must come
verily to apprehend, judge, and account the ways of God to be the best ways;
and what carnal wisdom can do so? Thus must you get up your eyes.

2. In the getting of our hearts.
Secondly, In the getting up of your feet. i. e. your Will and Affections, Prove.
4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet, Psa. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from
every false way, that I may keep thy Word. Get up the feet of your souls, and
you get up all; when you once truly set your affections upon things above, then
are you risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. Then are you come up from the Wilderness
leaning upon the beloved. Drunkards, get up your affections from drunkenness:
you Worldlings, get up your affections from the world; if your affections were
once truly up, 'twere easy, 'twere nothing to get your conversations up; Set
your affection on heaven, ver. 2. And 'twere the ready way to mortify your
members which are upon earth; v. 5.

This Doctrine has been Practical, instead of Use, this Querie offers it self.

But how shall I do to get up my feet from the Wilderness?

I answer. Take these four Rules. Rules to help us herein.

1. Occasion our hearts the uphil-way.




First, Let your occasions lie this way. If a man's occasions lie an up-hil way,
it matters not much how high the hill be: he must go that way, his occasions lie
there, Ier. 2.24. In her occasion, who can turn her? When your occasions are
for London, though it be up to London, yet you will go, and who can turn you?
My Brethren, some men's occasions lie in the Alehouse, as (Maulsters etc.) Oh!
this is sad! who can persuade or turn them upward, when their occasions lie
down the hill, down to hel-ward? yet I condemn not that Calling, but caution
the men: labor thou to have occasions lying at the Throne of Grace, in the
house of Prayer, etc. and then God shall have more of thy company.

Secondly, Accustom thy heart this way. Its little to him to go up to London
every week, 2ly. Accustom we our hearts that way.
that is accustomed to go up: 'Twil be tedious to pray, if thou do not
accustom thy self to pray. He that is accustomed to a way, can say as Paul, I
forget what is behind, and press forward to the price of the high Calling of
God, Phi. 3.13.14. Though we be called to high duty, as well as high
privileges; yet on can the Saint go, that is accustomed to go. You read of
some accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23. Get you the custom, as well as the
conscience of doing well.

3ly. Keep we up-hil company.
Thirdly, Keep up-hil Company. I am a companion of them that fear thee, and that
keep thy word, Psa. 119.63. Oh! Company is a great solace in a wearisome way:
if two walk together in one way, and the one fall, the other shall lift him up.
Unchristian people know not the benefit of Christian communion; therefore it is
that they do not prize it, and so missing of the company, they often miss of
the way.

Fourthly, Above all, get a nature that may move that way. 4ly. Get we a nature
moving up-wards.
The stone naturally moves down-ward, but the sparks as naturally fly upward.
If there be any spark of grace in thee, it will be soaring upward, 2 Pet. 1.4.
That you might be partakers of the divine nature; That is, the nature I speak
of: Oh! that will always he mounting upward: if you press down a flame, it
will up again: if temptation crowd down grace, as soon as ever it can get
from under, will up again, toward God again; what ever means else you use,
nothing will be effectual, unless you get a new nature, then (though it be up
the hill) you will be able to go in the new way.

The fourth Part of this Treatise, discocovers the only way of salvation to
lost souls, viz. Leaning upon the Lord Jesus.
CHAP. I. Contains the proof by way of Removal of nine false leaning Stocks.
ANd thus much be spoken concerning so much of the Text, viz. Who is this that
comes up from the wilderness. It follows that we now speak to the words that
follow, viz. Leaning upon her beloved.

In these words you have that Action that gave life and vigor to her motion;
she [comes up etc.] [leaning upon etc.] leaning upon her beloved. [leaning]
there is her Act; [upon] directs you to the Object: [her] shows her interest,
the ground and spring of the Act; [her beloved] speaks her relation to him whom
she leanes upon, from whence we may conclude the nature of the Action; she
comes up leaning upon one [to whom solely she commits, to whom wholly she
submits her self;] upon one [with whom she dares fully trust, to whom she
freely can yield her self:] she leans with all complacential satisfaction,
with all conjugall subjection: It Is her beloved she leans upon. Now the End of
this Action, is the foresaid Motion, she leanes on him to come up by him. This
is a Mystery, but it is spoken of Christ and Converts, of Christ and his
Church. A Mystery say I, and so says the Text; a matter worthy the enquiring
after, and admiring at; Who is she that comes up from the Wilderness? Who is
she that comes leaning upon her beloved? ye daughters of Jerusalem, look out at
your windows, and ask who comes yonder? It Is your sister, it is your sister,
and the daughter of your Mother! she was dead, but she is alive again, born
dead by her that once bare her, but raised up under the Apple tree by him that
now bears her; she was lost, but she is found; she was cast out into the
wilderness, in the day that she was born, to the loathing of her person, but
now she comes up from the wilderness, leaning on her Lord in the day of her
espousals! Call her no more Mara, but Naomi, for the Lord has dealt very
graciously with her! see how she leanes, and look how he perfumes, behold how
she looks like pillars of smoke, with all powders of the Merchant! So let the
Lord Jesus be glorified in his Saints, so let him be admired in all them that
believe. Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed Garments from Bosrah?
There Is a wondering at the Bridegroom: Who is this that comes up from the
Wilderness? Here Is a wondering at the Bride. He that speaks in righteousness,
mighty to save is the Bridegroom, (Isai. 63.1.) She that needs a Righteousness,
and a mighty salvation, is the Bride. It Is a joy in heaven, and a wonder on
earth, to see them together, and never, never like to be put asunder! she leans
on her beloved; that is, her Lord Jesus Christ, [her Lord] that commands her to
come from Lebanon, Cant. 4.8. [Her Jesus] that inableth her to come home from
the wilderness, Lu. 15.4, 5, 6. [Her Christ] that perfumes her with Mirrhe and
Frankencense, with all Powders, (knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness,
as Prophet, Priest, and King) while she comes up from the wilderness, Cant.
3.6. And (as you have Prophet, The fourth main Doctrine, There is no salvation
for lost souls, but only by leaning on the Lord Jesus Christ.
Priest, and King, in one Christ, so) she leanes on the Lord Jesus Christ in
one beloved.

Come we therefore to

The fourth and last maine Observation, viz.

There is no coming up from the Wilderness of sin, but only by leaning upon
the Lord Jesus Christ; that is,

Gospel-reliance on Jesus Christ, is the only way of salvation to lost sinners.

Lost souls had need be leaning souls, for there is no recovery of the sinner,
but by recumbency on the Savior.

Eve was the first that was in the transgression, she comes out of the
wilderness, though an exile from Paradise, looking at Christ in her promised
seed, whom she therefore names SETH, (Genesis 5.25.) A foundation to be leaned
upon. Abraham of old, has respect unto his day, and bottoms his joy thereupon,
Joh. 8.56. David, though his Father, yet calls him Lord, ( Lu. 20.43.) And in
the day of Calamity, this Lord (says David) was my stay, Psa. 18.18. The word
(is (...) In sustentaculum.
of (...) in Niph. Jnnixus est and) properly signifies, the Lord is my leaning
stock. And Mary, though his Mother, while the Child was yet unborn, leans for
salvation upon the Babe in her womb, Lu. 1.47.

He is the anointed, the accomplished Savior, Proof of the point.
sent on purpose to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19.10. Neither
is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. Christ is that living stone to
whom we must come, that Corner stone (upon which all the building does lean)
and he that believes on him shall not be confounded: and unto them that
believe, he is precious, (beloved indeed of the leaning soul,) 1 Pet. 2.6, 7.
And even in this sense may I say, Other foundation can no man lay than which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
etc. This is the great Commandment in the Law.

Thou shall lean on the Lord thy Redeemer with all thine heart, and with all
thy soul, etc. This is the great Commandment of the Gospel. Look unto me, and
be ye saved all the ends of the Earth: surely shall one say, In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength; in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory, Isai. 45.22, 24, 25.

I shall therefore endeavor the proof of the point. 1. By taking from under
you, your other supports. 2. By roling your souls, with mine own, upon Jesus
Christ.

And 1. For Negative proof of the point, by way of removal of other leaning
stocks. 1. Negative. By removal of other leaning stocks.
I may say in the general of all other supports, what is said of the
Hypocrites, His hope shall be cut off, and his trust shall be a spiders wed; He
shall lean his upon house, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it fast, but
it shall not endure, Job. 8.14, 15. A poor house, you will say, that falls if
the Owner of it do but lean unto it; such are all Christless supports to the
lost soul. It Is recorded of Absalom, That having no Children (for his Name and
Memorial to rest upon) he built him a Pillar, 2 Samuel 18.18. that was before
that he had, (or else when he had buried) the Sons spoken of, Chron. 14.27.
Let those souls that never have heard of a Christ to rest upon, make Pillars
for themselves of other things: But as one living Son would be better then a
thousand dead Pillars, so is one living Savior of (infinitely) more value then
10000 dead supports for thy poor soul to lean upon.

I shall speak particularly to these nine, the only likely leaning stocks,
Particularly these nine.
none of which shall without a Christ, stand thee in stead when thou leanest
upon them.

First, If thy leaning stock be thine old acquaintance, with God as Creator, 1.
Leaning upon God as Creator.
it is as nothing (if it go alone) in order to salvation; many poor creatures
have this, and no more to lean to. What do you think God that made me, will
damn me? yes truly, I do think so, if thou have no more to say for thy self;
for if this were enough to salvation, none, no not Devils, should be damned. It
is not old acquaintance, as a Creature; but new acquaintance, as a new
Creature, that is spoken of Job 22.21. and that is, (as says the Apostle, by
being in Christ.) As for any others, The Lord that made them, will not have
mercy on them; and he that formed them, will show them no favor, Isai. 27.11.
It would be sad believing, if poor souls have no better promises then this to
lean unto.

Secondly, 2ly. Leaning upon the providence of God.
If thy leaning stock be only some latter acquaintance with God in his outward
providence. And believe it, with very many this goes very far. What, do you
think that God that has given me such prosperity, will in the end damn me? I
have a fair portion of outward things, shall all this love end in eternal
hatred? Nay, when I was in great streights, God gave me great deliverances;
when I was at deaths door in such a sickness, etc. and do you think he will
now cast me into hell? Verily for ought I know he may, and if thou have no more
to lean unto, I know he will. You have an eminent passage, a providence to a
miracle, yea to heaps of miracles, Psalm. 78.23. He opened the door of heaven,
gave them Corn of heaven, verse. 24. Angels food, meat to the full, verse. 25. He
rained flesh as dust, and feathered foul, as the sand upon the Sea shore, verse.
27. He gave them their own desire, verse. 29. Yet while the meat was in their
mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, verses
30.31. Mark, First, Whilst it was in their mouths. Secondly, The fattest of
them. Ah! friends, many times, fair pasture is a foul sign; You, your selves,
litter and fodder those Cattle best, that you intend for the slaughter soonest.
Go to therefore rich men, lament and howl, and let your joy be turned into
weeping, if you have nothing but this worlds good to lean unto, as a token of
Gods love for the present, or your own salvation for the future.

Thirdly, If Civility be thy leaning stock. 3ly. Leaning upon Civility.
Of this I spoke before (as a way) and therefore shall only set a brand of it
here, that you may know it again to be a rotten Pillar, an house with a sandy
foundation, if you lean unto it, will not stand. All these have I done from my
youth, Mat. 19.20. says the civil young man, yet went a way with a sad heart,
for all he had his Crurch of civility, (and riches to boot) to lean upon.

Fourthly, 4ly. Leaning upon religious duty.
If thy leaning be upon thy religious exercises (of this also, as some men's way
before.) This (sirs) stood by the Pharisee, and he thought he might stand by
it, Lu. 18.11. He stood and prayed; Let such a soul read Isai. 1. For all
their duties, and the multitudes thereof, the Lord bitterly rejects them, as
the men of Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, verse. 10. And tells them, he is weary
of their services, verses 11.14. Calls them vain Oblattions, verse. 13. And sure
if it be vanity to bring them, then how much more vanity to lean upon them?

5ly. Leaning upon adventures for God. or successes therein.
Fifthly, If thou lean upon thine Adventures for God; yea, though thou have had
prosperous successes therein. Many, many, lean here, and with a great deal of
confidence too. Come, see my zeal for the Lord, says Jehu. Many that fight the
Cananites, etc. the Lords enemies; many that fight the Lords battles, shall
never come to possess the Lords Canaan: and truly we would think it great
pity, that any should make such fair adventures, and do God such eminent
service, and that the Devil should pay them their eternal wages; yet so too
often it is, in those that think themselves, and indeed are eminent instruments
in the Lords hand, as Cyrus, as Jehu, as the Earth helping the woman against
the Dragon, Rev. 12. Nay, perhaps eminent dispencers of the Gospel to others,
yet come themselves to be cast away. My beloved, I tremble to think what
singular adventures they were engaged in, what signal success they had, how
confidently they leaned hereunto, how miserably their Pillar shrunk from under
them, when they leaned upon it, and easily gave way to their going down into
hell, Mat. 7.22. Many shall say to me in that day, (mark, it is not a rare
instance, this is a common leaning stock) Lord, Lord, (there is confidence)
Have we not prophesied in thy name? (there is the adventure) and in thy name
have cast out Devils? (there is success) and in thy name done many wonderful
works, (there is the quantity of the adventures, and quality of the successes.)
And what follows, verse. 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew
you, depart from me you that work iniquity. Ah! friends, this may make the best
hear^ in our bosoms ache, if we have no more to lean to then this, to be able
to say, I have been in these many battles for God and Religion; I have preached
so many Sermons, and done so much service in the Gospel; when all the work is
done, the Lord will not know us; that is, acknowledge us, so as to pay us any
other wages, then the wages of iniquity.

Sixthly, If thou lean unto thy Church Priviledges. 6ly. Leaning upon
Church Priviledges.
If thou presume that thou art alive, because thou have a name to live; and
that surely God accepts thee, because men think well of thee; thou art judged
worthy of Gospel-seales, and to be admitted into Gospel-fellowship, etc. And is
this that which thou leanest unto? Verily this is but a rotten pillar. Sardis
had a name to live, but was dead, Rev. 3.1. And God says expressly, Jer. 7.4.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these: That is, Lean not to this, if you do,
you will find it a lie, it will deceive you, and verse. 8. Behold ye trust in
lying words that cannot profit. Nay read that Tremendous passage, Amos 6.1. Woe
be unto them that are at ease in Sion, that trust in the Mountain of Samaria,
that are named the chief of the Nations, unto whom the house of Israel came,
etc. Sirs, It is privilege unspeakable, and blessed are they that dwell in the
house of the Lord; but if there be any of you, that shall grow lazy, and at
ease, because they are in Sion, in a Church Way, and therefore think they are
well enough, leaning unto the Mountain of Samaria; woe, woe, unto such a soul.

Seventhly, Repentances and Reformations, 7ly. Leaning upon repentance and some
Reformations.
are but rotten supports if leaned unto. They in Isai. 58. Leaned so much to
their humblings, that they wondered God did not accept them, verse. 3. Wherefore
have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? And in very deed
they leaned so much, that God wonders that they should once think that he
would accept them, ver. 5. Will thou call this a fast? an acceptable day to the
Lord? Oh! how might this qualme our heart from leaning upon such humblings, if
we consider how different an estimate and value the Lord and we set upon them.
Nay, my friends, there may be something done in good earnest by way of
Reformation, that is not yet to be leaned unto: Some reformado Drunkard may say
perhaps, As long as I haunted Alehouses, I could have no peace of conscience,
but now I have left those courses, and grown civil, I can walk very quietly and
calmly: this is well that thou have left off the practice of sins, that did
once ensnare thee; but if thou stay here, or lean hereon, all is nothing, Mat.
12, 44. The house was empty, and swept, and garnished, (that is, it was voyded
of sin, reformed, and now had some garnish of civility, formality, or the
like;) but because it was emptied of the former unclean spirit, and not filled
with Christ's spirit; the first, in time returns. v. 45. and takes with him
seven spirits worse then himself, and they enter, and dwell there, and the
last estate is worse then the beginning: verily, this may well be called a
repentance to be repented of. The poor man thinks, if his bad tenant such a
corruption were out, it is no matter for getting Christ in; But godly sorrow
works repentance, never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. There are, it should
seem, repentances to be repented of; and undoubtedly of this sort, is every
repentance that you rest in, or lean upon.

8ly. Leaning upon the promises without Christ.
Eighthly, If you lean upon the promises of God themselves, and not upon Jesus
Christ in them; this will also come to nothing: Whence is it that you shall
have so many souls bringing a promise to the throne of grace, and carrying so
little away from it? I fear it is frequently from hence, because they lean
unto promises, without leaning to Christ in the promise. Thus you shall find
the Jews in scripture, to lean much upon the promises of the Messiah, who when
Christ came that was the Messiah, him they rejected altogether. Thus many would
willingly own the promises, that will not lean upon Jesus Christ. But what
says the Spirit? 2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God in Christ are yea, and
in him, Amen: That is, the assurance, stability, certainty of them all stands
in leaning upon Jesus Christ; He is the Yea, and Amen of them. Now what a
vanity would it be for a man to put a Paper in suit, which has neither yea nor
amen to it, neither hand nor seal to it? Sir, might he say to any man, These
are your Articles, you know you wrote them: wrote them, says the other: but
who subscribed them? who sealed them? the Hand and Seal are the confirmation of
the Bond, which without them, let it relate never so much, is worth nothing in
Law, no wise man will lean to it, so vain a thing is it to put any one
promise into suit at the throne of Grace (because all the promises in Christ
are Yea, and in him only Amen) without leaning upon Christ in them: for indeed
they say nothing, what ever they say, there is neither Yea, nor Amen in them;
there is nothing affirmed to thee in them, nothing confirmed; neither hand nor
seal to these Bonds, if thou have not Christ; therefore, thou have no part nor
portion in this matter.

Ninthly, Yea, 9ly. Leaning upon God himself out of Christ.
though you should lean upon the God of promise, without leaning upon Christ
in whom he has promised, the Lord would reprove thee for making choice of
himself, as an absolute God for thy Leaning-stock. You have some severely
threatened by the Lord, that are yet said willingly to lean upon the Lord, Mich.
3.11. God was in Christ reconciling sinners to himself, and seeking lost
souls, 2 Cor. 5.19. Woe to them that come to him, not bringing this his
Benjamin along with them. Lean not immediately, I mean without the Son, but
by the Son upon the Father: for (as the Lord has limited himself by his
own purpose and word of truth, wherein it is impossible for God to lie.) God
can do nothing for a poor lost soul, without Jesus Christ; therefore (to
speak with all reverence and holy sobriety) to come to God without Christ for
spiritual help or support, is to come to one that cannot help you, because he
has resolved, and said he will not; and it is uncomfortable leaning where we
are forbidden to expect relief. My Brethren, it may be in great concernments,
as needful for us to have interests in a great persons Secretary or Officer of
his Seal, or his Lord privy Signet, or Master of Requests as to have favor
from the Prince himself, because his Law and way, whereunto he in foreign
freedom, has bound himself, is to dispatch such things by such officers, and
by his Seal which is in his Officers keeping, and not to dispatch them
otherwise; so that if one be supposed to come to such a King, and sue for the
accomplishment of such a business, and do not bring the Officer with him, by
which the King will only transact it, the King would put him off, and say, My
Lord Keeper etc. is not in the way, and nothing can be done without him. Now
Jesus Christ is the Lord Commissioner, and sole Commissioner of the broad seal
of Heaven, the only Master of Requests unto the great King of Glory; come then
with as much confidence of Gods favor, (as those in Micah) even as it is
possible for any Christlesse soul to have, the Lord will utterly reject thy
suit, and turn thee back, until thou look out the Lord Jesus Christ to come
with thee unto the Father; and thus much Christ himself has told thee, No man
comes to the Father but by me, Joh. 14.6. But why speak I thus mildly herein?
Sirs, should you bring your Christlesse souls, and cast them upon the Throne
of an absolute God for a resting place, having not made the Kings Chamberlain
first your friend, (as they did in the Acts 12.20.) without making the Angel of
his presence, the Lord Christ your friend: behold, Divine justice would
immediately spy you out, and as soon cry out, Behold a REBEL in the Court,
and so apprehend you, and immediately deliver you to the Tormenter for ever;
thus it was with them, Mich. 3.11. They will (by all means) lean upon the Lord;
and yet this God, verse. 12. expressly declares, that he will plough them up, and
make them to become heaps. Now friends, if God himself will not be leaned
upon out of Christ, what then shall poor Christlesse Creatures dare to lean
unto? And thus much for removal of other leaning stocks.

Secondly, 2ly. Positive proof, by propounding Christ as the only leaning
stock.
I come now to assert and propose Jesus Christ as the only stay and stable
support for lost souls to lean upon. And that upon this clear and familiar
evidence. If you lean to any man in the world, what is it that persuades you
to lean to him for any thing? to lean at all, or to him, rather then to any
other? Why? these are the two, and only two grounds. 1. His word of promise.
2. His power of performance. It were vain to trust to a poor man that is not
worth a groat, who it may be owes thee a thousand pounds, and has often
promised it to thee, when he was able, but the man is now beggered and thou
know his beggary, to trust, I say, upon this money, and lean to to his
payment, because there wants power of performance, though there want not
promise. And it were a greater vanity for thee, to go to a rich man that is
worth 40000 l. and lean upon him for a thousand pounds that never promised
thee, or said that he would give thee so much as a farthing of it, because
though he be able to perform what thou desire, there lacks promise. But now
when a man has said, and engaged that he will give thee so much, and he is
able to give it thee, and thou know him to be an honest man, this thou may
lean to, thou reckonest this as good as money in thy Purse, thou buildest upon
it, and trustest to it.

Now upon this account, I undertake to prove that Jesus Christ is immediately
to be taken hold upon, and leaned unto by lost souls, because he is alone. 1.
The word of God. 2. The arm of God. He is the promise. He is the power of
performance. He is Gods truth, and Gods strength Now whatever soul shall lean
elsewhere, (yea though it be on God himself, out of Jesus Christ) leanes
where there is no promise. 2. Where there is no power of performance (as I
hinted before) but as for them that lean upon Christ, they have

1. Because Christ is Gods word and Covenant.
1. The Lords Word Oath, Promise, and Covenant to lean upon. You have all these
words in scripture applied unto Christ; you have this bundle of Mirrhe broken
up, when God brings Christ into the world, Lu. 1. He has raised up an horn
of salvation in the house of David, ver. 69. As he spoke by the mouth of his
holy Prophets, which have been since the world began, ver. 70. To remember his
mercy promised, and to remember his holy Covenant, ver. 72. The Oath which he
swear, ver. 73. Christ is the Word, Promise, Covenant, and Oath of God: and now
tell me, how can thou lean upon God for salvation, upon any other account
then this, his Word, Promise, Covenant, and Oath? Yea, so fundamental and
express is this truth, that Gods Covenant is, that Christ alone shall be his
Covenant; and Gods promise is, That Jesus Christ shall be his promise, Isai.
42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant to the people, so that if thou lean upon
God in his Christ, thou leanest upon him in his Covenant, and thou have nothing
to do with his Covenant, unless thou lean upon him in his Christ.

2ly. Christ is Gods arm and power.
Secondly, They that lean upon Christ, have the Lords power, as well as promise
to ^ean unto. As the case stands, Gods power is in Christ's hands. All power is
given unto me, says Christ: And hence you have Christ called the strength of
God, and therefore to be taken hold upon, or leaned to. Let them take hold upon
my strength, says God, that he may make peace with me, and he shall make
peace, Isai. 27.5. Stand off says God, do not lean upon me immediately, but
upon my strength, that he may make peace with me; he has power to reconcile
you and me together: I will not, I can not do any thing for you, unless he
make peace with me, for he is my strength, therefore take hold; that is, lean
upon him immediately, and upon me reconciled and pacified in him.

Upon this account also you have Christ called, the Arm of the Lord, Isai.
53.1. To whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed; that is, To whom is Christ
revealed? for in the next words he speaks clearly of Christ, and linketh that
to verse. 1. For he shall grow up, etc. You had an He-strength in the former,
you have an Hee-arme in this latter scripture, so Isai. 51.5. The Isles shall
wait on me, on mine Arm shall they trust; that is, My Christ, for he speaks
clearly of him there, and says God, because he is mine Arm, therefore shall
they trust on him, that is, lean unto him.

CHAP. II. Begins five Queries. 1. Who are fit to lean. Answ. The weak and
weary. How weakness fits for leaning on Christ, opened and applied.
THus much for proof of this point. The opinion of the point in five Questions.
The opening of it I shall endeavor by discussing these several Queries.

1. Who they are that (amongst bewildred sinners) are only fit (according to
the Gospel) to lean upon the Lord Jesus?

2. What it is that they are to lean for, or in Order to?

3. What this leaning upon Christ (in reference to those ends,) is?

4. What are the hindrances of our leaning thus upon Christ?

5. What are the advantages by such leanings upon Christ?

First, 1. Question. Who they are that are fit and truly able to lean upon
Christ.
viz. Who they are that alone are fit and apt to lean upon Jesus Christ? Who
is this (says the Text,) That comes out of the Wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved? So say I, Who are they amongst lost souls, (for all are bewildred)
that can come leaning upon Christ out of the Wilderness? There are an hundred
lost in the Wilderness, Luke 15. And there is but one that comes home
leaning. Though all be lost, yet few be leaning souls.

Now who are those few?

The weak and the weary.
you will say, the weak are for leaning, and the weary are for rest. The strong
and the fresh, what care they for a leaning stock? But to the weak and weary,
it is precious; and indeed the more weak and weary they are, the more precious
it is unto them. I observe the principal scope of that excellent experimental
and incomparable Book of the Preacher, Is the conviction and demonstration of
the weakness and wearyingnesse of all that is here below, Eccle. 1.14. I have
seen all the works that are under the Sun, and behold, all is vanity and
vexation of spirit. Vanity, there is their weakness and impotency to help us:
and vexation of spirit, there is their wearysomnesse unto us, for that which is
vexing to the Spirit, is tyring and tedious to the Spirit. Now this is the
preaching of Solomon, and unless you be under the power of it in this point,
it will be vain to press you to lean upon the Lord Jesus, although a greater
then Solomon be here; but who so believes that Text in Ecclesiastes, will
readily close with this Text in the Canticles: But as for Pharisees, that can
feed without fear on the feast of their own cooking; and Worldlings that can
battle themselves in their sins, is it not strange that they are too strong
and too lusty, too fresh and too lively, to lean on the Lord Jesus Christ: so
then, it is only weak and weary ones, that either will, or can savingly lean
upon the Lord Christ. I crave leave to be full both in proving and pressing
this practical truth.

1. Lost souls that will be leaning souls, 1. Weak souls may be leaning
souls, and only they. A fourefold account.
must be weak souls; and they that are weak souls, had need be leaning
souls: this truth looks both ways, and will manifest it self on this
fourfold account.

1. That God would never have engaged the strength of Christ hereunto, if any
strength of ours, or any others on this side Christ would have served the turn.

2. As long as a soul has strength on this side Christ, it will not care for
leaning for strength upon Christ.

3. The strength of Jesus Christ, is at first laid out for this very end, to
weaken our strength.

4. Jesus Christ will never give in of his strength, until he has weakened
ours.

First, This Proposition I shall lay down, 1. Jesus Christ had not laid out his
strength upon lost souls, if any other strength would have served the turn.
That if our strength might have served to the saving of our lost souls, the
Lord would never have laid the strength of Jesus Christ out unto such an end.
Friends, you may not think, that that God who is so loath that your blood
should be lost, would be prodigal of the blood of his own dear Son, surely
he would never have suffered Jesus Christ to have dyed in vain: Now therefore
it was that Christ loved not his life unto the death, that as by his wounding
we might be healed, as by his poverty we might be made rich, so by his weakening
through the flesh, we might be strengthened with all might by his Spirit in the
inner man: which if all things else had not been too weak to have accomplished,
Jesus Christ would not at so dear a rate have effected it. If any thing might
have been supportant to our bewildred souls besides Jesus, it must have been
Moses; I mean performances, services, righteousness of the Law. Our strength
in the Old Covenant was by doing, in the New Covenant it is by believing; Now if
that first Covenant could have stood lost souls in stead unto salvation, Jesus
Christ had not been engaged, but in this the Apostle is express, Romans 8.3. For
what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, etc. If any thing could be our
strength on this side Christ, it must be the Law. But the Law cannot, being
weak through the flesh, that is, our carnal hearts and conversations:
therefore God sent his own Son. Now if Christ were sent in default of other
strength, into the world for lost souls, I hence conclude; that any soul that
expects salvation by leaning upon Christ, must lie under weakness, as to any
and every other strength.

2ly. There are none but weak souls that will be leaning souls.
Secondly, There are none but weak souls that will be leaning souls, because
there is no soul that has strength of its own, that will care for the
strength of Jesus Christ. This you have eminently observable in the story of
the woman with the bloody issue; as long as she had either money in her Purse,
or Physician to go to, she never comes to Jesus Christ: that is, As long as
there were any other course to be taken, if security will do it, or formality,
or any other means may be used, our hearts naturally abhor coming to Jesus
Christ. But when all was gone, money out of her Purse, and hope out of her
heart, etc. then she comes to Christ to take hold on the hemme of his Garment,
and (as small a measure of leaning as that was) it restored her strength unto
her, Luke 8.43, 44. You sometime say, That you are not weak enough to lie by
it, though you be scarce well enough to sit up: So, though fowls
halfe-convicted, are scarce well enough to live without Christ, yet are there
but few of them weak enough to lie by it; that is, to lean upon Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, It is the business of Jesus Christ, to weaken, as well as to
strengthen souls. 3ly. Christ will take away thy strength before he will bestow
his own.
To weaken the strong, as well as to strengthen the weak: and therefore no
soul can be a leaning soul, till it be a weak soul; for Christ will weaken
it, as to its own strength, before he strengthen it with his own. What David
complains of in another case, Psalm. 102.23. That God had weakened his strength
in the way, the same must thou say in thy souls experience, for Christ weakens
whomsoever he strengthens. Thus Rev. 3.17. He takes a course to make them out
of love with their own riches, etc. and then counsels them to buy of him. And
truly (my friends) Christ has as hard work of the one, almost as of the
other; and our business in his Gospel, is to weaken your strength, as well as
to strengthen your weakness. Have thou any selfe-strength? if Christ love thee
he will never leave thee, till he has weakened thee, 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons
of our warfare are spiritual, mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong
holds. God will pull down what is strong in thee, before ever he build up what
is weak in thee, 1 Cor. 1.27. God has chosen the weak things of this World,
to confound what is mighty, weak preaching to confound mighty corruptions and
strong lusts. If you build a Babel, strong holds of your own of one sort or
another, the Lord Christ will bring them to naught, he will confound them:
Whether thou be strong in thine own corruptions, or mighty in thine own
righteousness, he will weaken thy strength in the way: therefore unless thou be
weak, there is no leaning upon him.

Fourthly, It is the way and method, 4ly. In thy weakness only will he
glorify his own strength:
and only method of the Lord Jesus, to give in strength unto those that are
made thus weak. Hear Christ's voice, 2 Cor. 12.9. My strength is made perfect in
weakness, says he to Paul. And hear the answer of Paul's experience, ver. 10.
For when I am weak, says he, then am I strong. Yea, this is the constant
experience of all that receive strength in the way of Faith; that is, leaning
upon Christ. When the Apostle had spoken of so many believers, and thought of
more, that the time would fail to reckon them up, and what they did by faith,
this he inserts in the close of all Heb. 11.34. A double instance. 1. Would
thou have thine understanding strenthened, thou must become a fool.
That out of weakness they were made strong.

I shall illustrate this in a double instance.

1. Would thou have strength into thine understanding by leaning unto Christ
for strength, truly thou must go in all manner of sense of the weakness of
thine understanding, to the Throne of Grace, and complain of thy blind heart
in that language, I am of yesterday, and know nothing; or in Asaphs, Psalm. 73.
I am brutish and ignorant, and as a beast before thee. If thou go knowing to
the Lord Jesus, thou shall come away ignorant; if thou go blind, thou shall
come away seeing; if thou be a fool when thou go to him, thou shall come
savingly wise from him; if thou go in the thoughts of selfe-wisdome, thou
shall be a fool at thy coming away, 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself,
if any man amongst you thinks himself to be wise, let him become a fool that
he may be wise.

2ly. Would have thy whole soul strong? thou must be sensible of thy
weakness, in will, affections, etc.
2. If thou would by leaning upon Christ, derive any strength into thy will or
affections, thou must go in the sense of thine infirmity, viz. That thou art
not sufficient of thy self so much as to think any thing that is good; that
thou have from thy self, neither to will, nor to do; thou must come
complaining as Paul, Romans 7. When I would do good, evil is present with me.
21. Nay, that thy will to good is but weak, and thy will to corruption strong,
so that the law of thy members does not only war, but take thee captive to
the Law of sin, as he complains, ver. 23. and cries out upon it, Oh wretched
man that I am! ver. 24. Then comes he out of this Wilderness, leaning on the
beloved, I thank God through Jesus Christ, ver. 25.

A twofold word of improvement.
Before I go farther, I shall desire to fasten this more upon your hearts, by a
word of improvement to you that hear me this day. And

1. To those that are truly weak, comfort.
1. To those of you that are truly weak. Is it so that none can lean upon
Christ, unless they be as thou art? here then is abundant matter of rejoicing
and reviving to thee, where thou thoughtest there was nothing but sadness,
even sorrowing unto death. There have sundry souls come sad unto me upon this
account, and this was the great burden of their complaint. Oh! I am so weak
in prayer, of such a weak judgment, that I cannot discern, or so weak a
memory, that I cannot retain the things of God; and surely it can never be
well with me, and truly mine heart has often leapt within me, for joy to
behold this their sweet sorrow: these poor ones do not find others complaining
so much of weakness, and therefore they think that every one is indeed
stronger then they. Now to such let me speak, even to those amongst you, whose
strong holds the weapons of our warfare have been pulling down, and whose
strength the Lord has weakened, that if there be any cause of rejoicing unto
any soul on this side Jesus Christ, it is barely, and only our being made
weak by Christ, or our thorough sense and feeling of our weakness out of him:
and herein verily we may boast, so far as our weakness gives an objective
advantage unto the glorifying of the strength of the Lord: so says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. I will glory in mine infirmities, that the power of
Christ may rest upon me; yea, I take pleasure in my weaknesses, for when I am
weak, then am I strong. Methinks, I am sent this day with that message unto
such souls that I meet with, Isai. 35.3. Strengthen you the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees: Say unto them be strong, ver. 4. What ever infirmity
you can complain of, I think the Lord has there on purpose answered you. The
blind shall see, the deaf shall hear, the lame shall run, the dumb shall
sing, verses 5.6. Yea, the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err in that
highway, that way of holiness; and which is there to be remarked, all these
promises are made to wilderness-soules, ver. 1.2, 6, etc. As if so be the Lord
should on purpose say, whatever weakness you can complain of, it shall not be
able to hinder your everlasting joy spoken of v. 10.

Secondly, Let me speak to those of you that are strong, 2ly. To those that are
selfe-strong, confusion of face.
but not by leaning on Jesus Christ. Let me tell you, that had you no more to
answer for, or to reckon with God for, then your very strength, there is enough
for the Lord to confound you; yea, and he will confound you. That God that is
resolved to stain the pride, is resolved to pull down the strength of all
flesh! Woe be to thee, whose strength is in thine hearing, or praying, or Alms,
as Samsons was in his hair. The Lord will be sure to cut off thy proud locks,
and then where shall thy strength be found? These are the souls that compass
themselves with sparks of their own kindling, that warm their hearts at their
own fire, and say, aha! aha! such as these shall have no hold on the name of
the Lord, no stay upon the beloved, but instead thereof, this shall they have
of the hand of the Lord, they shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50.10, 11.

CHAP. III. Discovers how soule-weariness fits for Christ; Opened and applied.
2. Weary souls as well as weak.
BUt you will say, are there not some weak ones that rest in their ever
complainings of their weakness, as well as some strong ones that rest in their
strength? truly I believe there are, of whom we may say as Paul of those women,
that were ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth,
2 Timothy 3.7. So there are some, that are ever complaining of their weaknesses,
as to the things of God, which are never able (because not truly willing) to
grow stronger, or to come up to any strength of grace. They fear that Christ
will not break the bruised reed, they think that he surely will pity the weak,
and such are they; and here they rest, taking neither due care, nor pains to
grow any stronger: these some have entitled The whining Hypocrites. Now
therefore

The weak and weary of their weakness, are fit to be leaning souls.
In the second place, It is not only weakness, but weariness, that disposes
the soul for leaning effectually upon the Lord Jesus. The soul that is weak,
and weary of its weakness: for indeed, as the strength that we spoke of, was
the Pharisees weakness; so the weakness we spoke of, the Hypocrite makes it his
strength. But now that soul that is thoroughly solicitous to be rid of its
weakness, which can only be by weariness, is fit to sit down upon this well
of living waters: for Jesus himself also being weary (according to the flesh)
sat down upon the well, Joh. 4.6. Till Hagar was wearied, as well as weakened
in the wilderness of Beer-shebah, the Angel of the Lord never opened her eyes,
nor discovered unto her the Well of waters, Genesis 21. from the 14. to the 19. So
until souls be weary of the wilderness of sin, as well as weakened in it, and
by it, the Lord will never reveal unto them those refreshments that are from the
presence of the Lord, in the hand and dispensation of the Angel of his
presence, First proved, after opened. Proof. 1. In that God the fountain is
only open to the weary.
the Lord Jesus.

This I shall first prove, and then open. I prove it thus,

1. The Lord is the fountain of all spiritual refreshments, so says the
Scripture, Act. 3.19. The times of refreshing come from the presence of the
Lord. Now this fountain which experience shows us to be a fountain sealed to
the rest of the world, is a fountain opened unto weary souls that they may
drink, and drink abundantly, Jer. 31.25. I have saciated the weary soul; that
is, given them refreshment unto saciety, viz. as much as they need.

2. 2. In that the Lord Christ the dispenser of refreshments
The Lord Christ is the Conduit pipe of this refreshment from God unto the
soul: or rather thus, Christ keeps the lock and key of this fountain, to him
is committed the dispensation of these refreshments: and upon this account
there are these three things that the scriptures mind me of.

First, 1. Has his instructions peculiarly to respect the weary.
That the Lord Christ has particular instructions from the Father, that gave
him his commission to dispense refreshments peculiarly to such weary souls.
Read, and be ravished with that expression (which is plainly the Lord Christ's)
Isai. 50.4. I cloth the heavens with blackness, (says he) ver. 3. Therefore
it must be understood of Christ, not the Prophet. Now he goes on, ver. 4. The
Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak
a word in season (to weary souls) to him that is weary, he wakeneth morning by
morning, he wakeneth mine Ear to hear as the learned: As who should say, the
Lord does renew my instructions every morning, lest the weary should want
seasonable refreshment any time of the day. It follows, that he gave his back
to the smiters, etc. which makes it clear, that it is Christ that speaks of
himself principally, though subordinately it was the Prophets commission, as
it is ours in the Gospel, to speak in season a word to weary souls.

2ly. Makes invitation to the weary.
Secondly, In pursuance of these instructions, Christ directs his precious
invitations to the weary; I mean his effectual invitations, though many be
bidden to the supper that never sit down at it, and many are called, but few
are chosen; yet they that are truly called shall come, and be welcome when
Christ invites them, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor (as our late
translation,) all ye that are weary, (as other translations) all ye that labor
unto weariness, (as the Greek word (...) imports, for the same word (...) is
used, Joh. 4.6. and translated as you saw even now, Jesus being weary) and I
will give you rest. This is Christ's own invitation. Let weary souls make have
and come away, they need not bring their stools with them that are thus bidden.

3ly. Applies these refreshments only to the weary.
Thirdly, In pursuance of this invitation, Jesus Christ makes Application of his
refreshments to the weary, Isai. 32.2. And a man (when he had spoken before of
the Kingdom of Christ in the first verse) shall reign in righteousness etc.)
shall be as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. Look how weary those
Eastlanders (to whom he then speaks) ever were under the scorching heat, of the
Sun in their torrid zone at noonday: look how weary Jonah was even of his
life, when his Gourd that shadowed him was gone, so weary must souls be of
their burning lusts, and the scorching flames of their awakened Consciences,
before they will care for Jesus Christ: but when they are once thus weary, his
refreshments shall not be far off from them: Christ is a shadow of a great
Rock, but his shadow does ever stretch forth it self upon the weary Land.

The point thus proved, The opening in two Queries.
I shall endeavor to open by showing what we must be weary of, and how we may
know whether we be thus weary or no.

1. What must we be thus weary of?

I answer, Of all that we have formerly leaned unto, 1. What we must be wearied
of?

1. Of Satan and his counsels.


before we can can lean unto Jesus Christ. More particularly,

1. Of Satan, and of all his counsels and persuasions. This is the voice of the
daughter of Sion in her spiritual travail, those wearying pangs of the second
birth, Jer. 4.31. I have heard a voice, as of a woman in travail, that
brings forth her first child; the voice of the daughter of Sion, that
bewaileth her self, that spreads her hands, saying, Woe is me now, for my
soul is wearyed because of murderers. 'Twas a long time that she conversed
with them, but now her soul is wearyed with them. Murderers they are now,
when the soul is in the throws of birth, it finds them so; before the pleasure
Devil, and the profit-Devil were the best friends, the best companions: but now
the soul is wearied with them all as so many murderers. How weary of the
company of Cutthroats would a man be, that should be surprised on the Highway,
and in danger of his life, because of those that are with him, every step he
goes? surely so weary of Satan and his company, must the soul be that comes to
Christ? Or, how weary (if thou should be taken by a Lion of the Forest, and
kept for some space alive) would thou be of the presence of the Lion? and
upon this, how glad would thou be that some mighty man, some David should
come and rescue thee? so weary of Satan must thou be, if ever thou would
come up from the wilderness leaning upon the Beloved.

2ly. Of the World, and her projects and courses: 2ly. The world and her
courses.
these also we use to lean unto, and therefore must be weary of. We must say
of our selves, as God says of Israel, Isai. 47.13. Thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy Counsels: thou have labored with them, even thy Merchants
from thy youth, they shall wander every one to his quarter, none shall save
thee, ver. 15. When you have been trading up and down in the world with the
customs, or creature-vanities of the world, whatever thy merchant from thine
youth has been, bid them farewell, let them go to their quarters, expect not
to be saved by any of them, come to be weary of them all, or else there is no
true leaning upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

3ly. Self and all its perfections.
Thirdly, Of Self, and its glories and perfections. Some that have been
converted, have been so proud of a fore-top, a lock, and garb, an attire
formerly, that they have thought they should never be weary of them, or of
pleasing themselves in them: but now when they have come to draw near to
Christ, they have been soon weary of these, and most readily fling them from
them. So Paul even of his selfe-righteousnesse, calling it dross and dung, away
with it, Phil. 3. Thus Hab. 2.14. The people shall labor in the fire, and
weary themselves for very vanity. When God casts all our perfections into the
furnace, and we come to see that there comes forth nothing but dross, we shall
(as Paul) be weary of our selves, as well as weary our selves, because there is
nothing in us but very vanity. And that Hab. 3.16. is very eminent; When I
heard (says he) my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, (when God
speaks conviction and terror to the soul) rottenness entered into my bones, and
I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. Mark you, the
only way to have a sure support in a troublesome day, is to be as much weary
and willing to go out of our selves, as a man would be that lodges in a very
rotten house, when that winds and storms are at the highest. Unless thou have
trembling and weariness in thy self, thou will never have strength and rest in
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, But how may we know, 2ly. How we may discern our w^ariness.
whether we be thus weary, yea, or no?

I answer, By our willing desisting from former labor, by our appetite after
refreshments, by our glad acceptance of a convenient resting place.

First, By desisting from former labor, 1. By desisting from our wearying
labor.
viz. the work that wearied us. You perceive that a man man grows weary, when
he becomes solicitous to take up his Inn; and indeed, though all ceasing from
labor at all times, be not an argument of tyredness in the work, yet when
ever thou art tired in any work, thy vote will be for surceasing from the
labor; so though every leaning of sin be not an argument of
through-weariness, (because there may be as many occasions of a man's suspending
the sin, as of the formers suspending the work that he delights in, though he
be not weary of it) yet when the soul is thoroughly wearied of sin, it will
desist from sin: and if there be a ready and free sitting down from sin, it is
a good argument of the souls weariness. I think what Isaiah observes,
concerning them that had wearied themselves with so often going down to Egypt,
Isai. 30.7. Therefore I have cried concerning this, their strength is to sit
still: the s me may I say to poor sinners, that have wearied themselves in
going down unto uncleanness, drunkenness, formality, etc. their strength is now
to sit still; that is, to desist from their wearying trade of sinning. You know
the language of a truly weary one is such as this, I will, I can go no farther;
and this is the language of a soul in conversion, Job 34.32. If I have done
iniquity, I will do so no more: or in Jobs own language, when at length God had
made him weary of his standing upon his own righteousn^sse, Job 40.5. Once have
I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no farther.
There Is the voice of true weariness. Oh! that I could hear some drunkards of
you this day crying out, so often have I been drunk, or so long have I been a
drunkard, but I will proceed no farther; and so for every other sin: Thus
long have I leaned upon my own performances, but I will do so no more, etc.

2ly. By our appetite after spiritual refreshments.
Secondly, The weary will have a thorough-appetite unto refreshments. Thus
Siserah was thirsty, Judge. 4.19. Being weary, ver. 21. Yea, Jesus himself being
weary, asks for water of the Well, Jo. 4.7. So spiritually weary souls, will be
spiritually hungry and thirsty souls. I have saciated the weary soul, Jer. 31.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, they shall be
satisfied, Mat. 5.6. If thou be very much a thirst for the waters of life. it is
an argument thou art weary of the Wilderness ways of death. And if thou be
thus thirsty, thou will have an heart to desire, and a tongue to beg, yea,
continue begging till thou get relief.

3ly. By our willing close with Christ our resting place.
Thirdly, If thou be weary, thou will be glad to sit down, and to close with a
convenient resting place; thus Jesus when he was weary, sat down on the Well,
and thy soul, if it be weary, will be glad to sit down on Jesus Christ.

My Brethren, if you were indeed weary, your souls would leap within you to
hear the words that you have heard this day, concerning the refreshments to be
had in the Lord Jesus.

Two suspicions that few are weary.
But on the other hand, there are two things that too too plainly speak the most
of the Children of men to be little weary of the Wilderness.

1. That they can pass by Christ, and forget their resting place.
1. That they can come to the Inn where souls should lodge, and where there is
as fair and convenient accommodations, as the whole heaven can afford for
weary Spirits, and pass it by without turning in, that they may be refreshed.
I Will never believe that man to be perfectly weary, who when he comes to a good
Inn, and especially be solicited to alight, shall spur on, and say, no, let us
ride an hour longer, or we will go three or four miles farther. If an Ague
take you by the way, and tire you, oh! say you, When shall we get in sight of
the Inn? Upon this account is the Lords challenge, Jer. 50.6. They have gone
from Mountain to Hill, they have forgotten their resting place. Ah! it is a
slender sign that a Traveller is thoroughly weary, that passes by, and
forgets to take up his lodging at his resting place. Souls, you do but dally
with God, if you pretend to be weary of the ways of sin and vanity; and yet
can come by Jesus Christ in so many Sermons, etc. and forget to sit down upon
him, or to lodge with him.

2ly. 2. That though they pretend tyrednesse through sin one while, yet are
they quickly fresh for sin again.
That they can pretend (as some do) to so much tyredness in the ways of sin
to day, (whilst some strong convictions are upon them) that can be fresh again
for sin to morrow. I Will never believe that he was perfectly weary of any
toil, that can be so soon fresh for the same toil. You are a little weary
perhaps, that use to ride to London weekly, when you lie down, but as fresh
(you say) in the morning as at first setting out. Thus many an Hypocrite is a
little weary of sin for the present, but says as the drunkard, Prove. 23.35.
When I awake, I will seek it yet again: and thus they return as the Dog to
his vomit, or the Swine that is washed to the wallowing in the mire. You have
heard, who they are that are fit to lean on Jesus Christ, the weak and the
weary souls. Of both these I have spoken severally.

CHAP. IV. Contains a farther joint discovery of this weakness and
weariness: also improvement to the weakening of your Christless strength.
THat which I shall further do, A farther inquiry into the state of this
weakness and weariness. jointly.
shall be to enquire jointly, concerning the true state of these
qualifications, and to endeavor to work your hearts farther hereunto. You
have heard of weak and weary ones, and what manner of ones they are, for surely
it is not every weakness nor weariness, that drives a soul to Jesus Christ:
Pharaoh was weakened by some visitation, wearied by others, and there are many
plagues that weaken and weary many, but drive few to Jesus Christ. Now then the
Question yet worth our searching into, will be, What weakness and weariness
that is, which we have been speaking of, and which we shall desire to work you
to?

A threefold Declaration of it. 1. As to their kind they must be spiritual.
I answer, They must be for the kind, spiritual, for extension, universal, for
intensivenesse, burdensome.

First, That weakness and weariness must be spiritual. Many there be sensible
enough, that their Estates are weak, thyir bodies weary, etc. but few that are
disturbed with spirits-weaknesse, or souls-wearinesse. But these must be such.

1. Spirit-weaknesse.
First, This weakness must be soul-weakness, Isai. 35.4. Say unto them that are
of a fearful heart, be strong. Thy want must be heart-strength, or
spirit-strength; for no man can soberly understand that of the carnal or
corporal heart, you know the scripture-Dialect. When thine understanding wants
strength to conceive, thy will and affections to receive, thy whole heart to
practice the things of God, (as is further explained in the following verses,
thou art spiritually deaf, and blind, and lame, etc.) that is the weakness
there, and here spoken of.

Question. How that shall be known. Answ. By spirit-complainings.
But perhaps will thou say, How shall I do to know then, whether my weaknesses
be spiritual or no?

I answer, Let me but hear thy complaint, and I will salve thy doubt. Oh! I
have a poor weak Husband, says one, and weeps bitterly: I have a poor weak
Child, says another, and wrings her hands: I have a poor weak stomach that
can take nothing, says a third: My strength is even done, I am at deaths door,
says a fourth: Oh! How weak is mine Estate now come to be, says a fifth?
Where was the Child's weakness? 2 King. 4.19. Oh! you may quickly know, if you
but hear him speak, he cries to his Father, My head, my head. Now speak
Conscience, and tell me what thy complaint is, and i will tell thee what thy
weakness is. Oh! there are amongst the many other mourners over weakness
(that I speak of) some precious ones, whose daily groans are, my soul, my
soul; Woe is me, how weak my prayers are! how unfit and unable am I for any the
least thing that is spiritual? Thus David cried; and what wast he cried for? He
cried to be strengthened with strength in his soul, Psalm. 138.3. In his soul,
mark that. Sirs, If you have but a weak Estate in the world, and are yet more
weak in spirituals, I would have you narrowly to watch, when as your hearts are
most feelingly carried out in prayer; when you come to that Petition, Thy will
be done on Earth as it is in Heaven; or that, Give us this day our daily bread.
If to the former, it is a sign that thy weakness is truly a soule-weaknesse,
and such as will spur thee unto Jesus Christ.

Secondly, 2ly. Spirit-wearinesse.
This Weariness must also be a spirit-weariness. Many are wearied with their
suits of Law, that never come to be wearied with their sins against the Gospel:
but says Sion, My soul is wearied, Jer. 4.31. It is souls weariness, and not
barely so, but soul-wearinesse. This also you may discern by your
Complainings. What say thou herein? art thou weary of the world, because of
poverty, or iniquity? art thou weary of thy life, because thou continuest
shining? or because thou continuest suffering? Thou art sick, but sinful,
which tyres thee most; which complain'st thou of most? which is most wearying
to thee, to go without the Creature, or without the Creator? You know the
complainings of that holy Asaph, Psalm. 77.1, 2, 3. He could not get God to hear
his prayer, nor to cure his soul, and therefore he complained, and his spirit
was overwhelmed, Selah: (that is, mark that,) it was spirit-complaining.

Secondly, This weakness and weariness, 2ly. As to their extent they must be
universal. 1. Weakness.
must be for the extent of it whole and universal.

First, The weakness must be universal weakness, as they that have Isai. 35.
Neither eye to see, nor ear to hear, nor tongue to speak, nor feet to walk,
verses 5.6. All this is summed up in the fourth verse, where the heart is said
to be weak, for heart-weakness you know is whole-weakness, so says the
Apostle, I will glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon
me, or that I may rest upon the power of Christ weaknesses, not weakness. Paul
opposes, and so must thou, Christ's single power to all thy weaknesses. I tell
you, if you fail of unniversall weakness, when you come to Christ, you shall be
sure to fail of universal strength, when you come away from Christ; for where
ever thou have any strength of thine own, the strength of Christ shall not
advantage thee; and as the Lord says to Israel concerning Egypt, Isai. 30.3.
So say I to you, That strength of yours shall be your shame, and your trust
under the shadow thereof, your confusion. You shall hear some say, I confess I
have but a weak memory, and I am not able to discourse as many of them are, but
I thank God I have as good an heart as any of them all. Fie, fie, if you have
any thing good, all is naught. So

2ly. Universal weariness.
Secondly, Thy weariness must be universal, (which necessarily follows from
what I said in answer to the first Question whereof we must be weary;) and
therefore if thy soul have any resting place on this side Christ, thy
weariness of one sin or another, of one support or another, can no ways
amount to true weariness.

3ly. As to the intensivenesse, it must be burdensome. 1. So thy weakness.
Thirdly, Thy weakness and weariness must be burdensome as to the intensiveness
of it.

First, Thy weakness must be burdensome. Many there are that are weak in
duty, and weak in grace, (if so be they have enough to denominate them weak in
it) and that see it too, and yet are not burdened with it. This is not the
load that lies upon their spirits; but an Habakkuk trembles, his lips quiver,
and his heart faints at it, Hab. 3.16. And the Lord God shall be his strength,
ver. 18. A Paul will cry out of it, O wretched man! and who shall deliver me?
and it is a body of death, q. d. It could not be a greater burden to me to have
a dead body fixed to me to carry about me, then to carry about this dead heart,
etc. And then he can thank God through Jesus Christ, Romans 7.24.25.

Secondly, 2ly. So thy weariness.
Thy weariness must be burdensome weariness, never be thou well till thou be
rid of it, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laiden.
Many are weary, that are not greatly burdened with their weariness: but Asaph
was so laden, that he was even overwhelmed again, Psa. 77.3.

Now if thy soul be thus burdened with thy spiritual either weakness or
weariness, And if it be so,
thou may thus discover it.

First, 1. Thou will willingly part with that which so weakens and wearies.
Thou will be marvellously willing to part with thy burden, to part with that
that weakneth or wearieth thee, when Christ at any time offers to take it from
off thy shoulders. Come to me and I will give you rest, ver. 28. Nay, there is
not a Gospel Sermon you hear, but in some sort or other, such a tender is made
unto you, and how few do then account their infirmities their burden?

Secondly, Yea, you will be glad at heart, but to change burdens with one that
has a lighter and easier then yours: Why such is Christ's, (if you be truly
weak and wearied) Mat. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for my
yoke is easy, and my burden light. Thy soul will think it an happy exchange,
to pass from Satan's plough, to the Lords plough; when once thou feel the
weight of Satan's Chain, thou will esteem the greatest of the Lords
Commandments, or thy duties, as a chain of gold to hang about thy neck. Every
neck would be willing to be so burdened.

From all that has been spoken, A Conclusion from the precedent truth, that no
soul comes home to God in the strength of its own legs.
to me it is easily to be concluded, that there is no lost soul that ever yet
was, or ever shall be brought home unto God by the strength of its own legs: I
shall therefore conclude the state of these qualifications, according to the
express doctrine of Lu. 15.5: The shepherd lays the lost sheep on his
shoulders rejoicing; that is, he takes the lost sheep off its own legs, and we
read of its carrying, before its curing, (as of the Prodigals coming, before
his clothing) that relates to another particle (as I may so say) of
conversion. First; God acts when we act not, I mean in the first moment (I do
not mean of the time, but) of the work: next, that acting of God makes us act
together, as to time. Christ carries (in the first parable) and we come (in
the next) Arminians deny the one, Antinomians the other: I assert both. In that
primely-prime act (as I may call it) Jesus Christ does not cut off our legs,
but yet he does not use them, for he lays us upon his shoulders. And who can
conceive, if there be any portion of the conversion-act, wherein that may be
truly said, that in such an act the sheep uses its own legs, when it is
carried upon the shepherds shoulders?

And this does genuinely fall in with what I have spoken of the spiritual and
universal weakness and weariness, that must burden us, before we have
advantage from the strength of Jesus Christ. This sheep had neither leg to
stand on, or to go with, (though it had all its legs still) for if it had, it
would undoubtedly have had legs to run away with; and suppose that Christ
should cure us, whilst we lie weak and weary upon the ground, and so set us
upon our own legs, (which blessed be God shall never be) and not bind us to
his own shoulders, (or bring us as the Spouse to lean upon him) by an union
indissoluble; I need no argument, but sad experience to convince mine own base
heart, that I should quickly use (or abuse rather) my cured legs, and the
rene^ings of strength, and of refreshment unto the turning aside into the
crooked paths of the wilderness still, or to the running away from him that
healed me. But now by virtue of this union, our legs gather strength, as the
woman that touched him, drew virtue from him, and now they can walk and run;
they are the old legs still (the same affections, will, and understanding,
etc.) But it is not their old strength that they move by, but Christ's put into
them, Christ gives them his Wine to refresh them, and make glad their hearts,
his Oil to heal, and make strong their bones, his life to act, and to inform
their Organs: And thus, they that were weak in the Wilderness, and not able
(as Israel, Ezekiel. 16) They that had wearied themselves with wandering, and were
too weary to go (as the lost sheep, Lu. 15. do now come inseparably to wait
upon the Lord (Christ, and by leaning on him) to renew their strength that they
may run and not be weary, that they may walk and not faint, Isai. 40.31. And
what is this precious Scripture but the sum, or the Epilogue of all that I
have been speaking? viz. That it is only the weak and weary that can
profitably lean, and by leaning, comfortably draw strength and refreshment
from the Lord Christ.

And upon these accounts it may (by the way) appear how strangely (some that
call themselves Ministers of the Gospel of Christ) go to work about poor
souls. Ministers strengthening those whom God would yet have to be made weak.
One comes to them, that can say, Sir, I thank God I have had an honest heart
from my Cradle, I never wronged any man in my life, no man can say that black
is mine eye, I have ever had a good mind toward heaven, I use prayer often,
and give much Alms to the poor, and your self can bear me witness, sir, that I
always pay you Tithes of all that I possess, and am constantly at Church with
you every sunday. But now I grow aged, (or I am sick, etc.) and I would be sure
what estate I am in, I pray sir, what think you of my condition? Why? ^ruly it
is the business of many men's preaching, to send away such a self-justifying,
and so self-undoing Pharisee to hell, (as some think that the Prophet sent away
Naaman into the house of Rimmon) with a Go in peace, and tells them, You are an
happy man, I would we had more such as you are, I would not have you to
question farther, you will do very ill to trouble your self with any doubting
thoughts; and indeed what should they answer more, or other; for the line is
like the Co^py they set, and the man has done what they have called for. This
is to strengthen the strong whom God would not have strengthened; for had this
man come to one that takes up the Gospel from Christ's own mouth, he must have
said, Oh! but sir, one thing you lack. You must go and strip your self of all
this strength, your righteousness will not here avail you; You must part with
all, and become a beggar, or you can never become Christ's Disciple: and
although you have been one of the best, the strickest, the choicest of
Pharisees, you must see your self to be the chiefest of sinners. Go, and sell
all that thou have, is a Doctrine seldom preached by such Ministers, or
regarded by such hearers.

Ministers weakening those hearts that God would have made strong.
Again, Let others come to them with hearts full of sorrow, and eyes full of
tears; Oh sir, I know not what to do, I would pray, but I have no strength to
it; I would believe, but I cannot! and why say I that I would? alas! alas! I
have no strength to will any thing that is good. I find every corruption very
strong, and nothing strong but corruption; and truly I am even weary of my
life, because of mine infirmities. Good sir, What must I do? how shall I get a
better heart? etc. Why? says some Minister, You complain much, but perhaps
mend as little? you must go and turn from your evil ways, and amend your
doings, repent, and pray, and read, and keep your Church; I cannot give you a
jo^ of comfort, or speak any peace unto you, till you grow better.

And can thou not? this truly is to weaken the weak, whom God would have
made strong, this is to speak a word altogether out of season (like rain in
Harvest, or snow in summer) unto him that is weary; it is as if a Physician
should say to a fainting man ready to swound away, you must stay till you be
thorough well, before I can give you a cordial. But it is Christ's work (and
should be ours) to give Cordials unto such, to make them well: and for my part,
I hope I shall account it my work, wherever I see a lost soul strong, to
weaken it, that Christ may give it strength; or if another be thoroughly weak,
and weary, to help it up (as much as my poor endeavors may any way thereto
conduce) unto the shoulders of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore my now-design, in stead of Application, Improvement.
shall be an endeavor first to Weaken, and then to weary the lost souls that
are amongst you, if so be that thereby they may be made ready for the shoulders
of Jesus Christ. And

First, For the weakening of your Christlesse strength. 1. To the weakening of
your Christless strength.
Surely the weapons of our (ministerial) warfare, are peculiarly meant, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. where they are said to be mighty thorough God, to the pulling down of
strong holds; this is (as I said) Gods work, and it is to be mine this day, and
indeed there is a strong man, and an armed, that is in every Christless soul,
that must be cast out before ever the grace of the Lord dwell in that heart,
Mar. 3.27. And it is in vain to say to the everlasting doors, stand open,
unless you have cast every carnal unregenerate strength out of doors, for every
such strength will lay hold on the bolt, and manage the bars; so that Christ
himself says, No man can enter into the house. It is our ministerial charge
to pull down, as well as to edify, to weaken strength, and to strengthen
weakness, to root out, and to plant, to throw down, as well as to build, Jer.
1, 10. I shall therefore take the Axe of truth, and lay it to the root of your
strength this day. Two or thee blows (if God strike with me) shall be
sufficient to cut it down, and down with it my Brethren even to the ground,
why cumbreth it your souls?

First, 1. Consid. your choycest strength is with very weakness.
Consider the utter weakness of thy choicest strength, to stand before the
immense, the inconceivable and infinite justice and wrath of God, with which
thy strength must wrestle and encounter. Were thou to contend with man, or to
enter into judgment with the Sons of men, perhaps thy slender, broken, finit
strength, might help thee to prevail, but it is God with whom we have do,
whose very weakness is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1.25. And then what is his
strength? Thy strength O Pharisee, we know, and thy power we know; but who
knows the power of Gods wrath? even according to his fear, so is his anger,
Psalm. 90.11. Did thy soul fear him more, then woulst thou understand the power
of his wrath better; though when all is known that can be understood, it
passes knowledge; Who knows it? Holy Job was most graciously under this
conviction, Job 9.19, 20, 21, 22. If I speak of strength, lo he is strong; and
of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead? If I justify my self, mine
own mouth shall condemn me; If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse: Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul, I would despise
my life. That is, mine own strength were enough to ruin me, therefore had I
more of it then I have, I durst take no notice of it, because I have to do
with the most strong. Let this serve for the first blow.

2d. Consid. All your Christ less strength is idolatrous.
Secondly, Consider that what ever strength thou have on this side the strength
of God in Jesus Christ, it is idolatrous. And will thou look to be saved by an
Idol? I observe in Scripture, that amongst the many expressions that it has
for an Idol, the strong is one of them, Isai. 1.31. The strong shall be as tow,
(that is, the Idol shall be as tow) and the maker of it as a spark, and they
shall both burn together, and none shall quench them. What ever thou make thy
strength on this side Christ, thou make it thine Idol. If thou make prayer,
or hearing, or alms, thy work, etc. thou do well: but if thou make them thy
strength, thou make them thine Idol, and so thou, and thy prayers, and alms,
and just dealings, shall down to hell together; they shall be as tow, that is,
as fuel to the flame, that shall be in thy Conscience, and none shall be able
to quench them from burning together to all eternity. Therefore may I yet say
unto you, now your Altars, and images, and Ceremonies are gone, as John to
those in his time, (when the Gospel (I believe) had dispelled those grosser
Egyptian darknesses) 1 John 5.21. Little Children, keep your selves from
Idols. Amen.

3d. Consid.
Thirdly, Consider what ever strength thou have on this side the strength of
Jesus Christ, it is an Artichristian, as well as an Idolatrous strength. Your
Christlesse strength is Antichristian.
And will thou hope to be saved by an Antichrist? Romans 10.3.4. The Jews going
about to establish their own righteousness, (that is plainly to make their
righteousness their strength.) They have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God, for Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness to
them that believe. Who sees not what I say? they have not submitted: If thou
make thy strength thy righteousness, this is very rebellion against the Lord,
and Antichristianitie, even the setting of thy self in battle array against the
righteousness of faith, and the strength that is to be had in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Precious is that language of David's, Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted O
Lord in thine own strength, so will we sing and praise thy power. Mark that, if
we pretend to exalt the Lord, but we will do it in our own strength, (as
Arminians in their own free will, etc. When we come to the matter of praise, we
shall quickly confer it (as I observe them to do) upon our own power, and not
the Lords. O the noble Principles, cry they, of the understandings, and
reasons, and minds of men! which the scriptures, whilst unregenerate, call
darkness, and foolishness, and enmity against God; and say they, O that noble
principle of free will! which the scriptures call an heart of stone, and
declare it to be to every good word and work (of it self) Reprobate. Let us
arise in the might of our own principles, say they, etc. But, Let God arise,
and then his Enemies shall be scattered, say we. Yet will we also say, When the
Ark arises, it is not a time for Israel to sit still. It is not their working,
but their working in their own strength that I plead against.

Let me leave then this word with tender Consciences which I am not afraid of,
declaring as the sense of my soul unto the world, although it be a sad
apprehension. Let a poor creature go a begging to two doors, the Master of the
one house takes a knife, and cuts a piece of victuals, and gives it as an Alms
to the beggar, and thinks when he has done, that for this he is more in the
books of God, (I mean as to the merit of favor and acceptance) and goes away
priding and pleasing his own heart in what he has done, and concluding from
the bare act, that he offered to God a sacrifice, such as thereby to make him
his Debtor. And the Beggar comes to an others house, where another man (in a
passion) takes a knife, and cuts the poor wretches throat, and by that act his
own Conscience is wounded, and his heart struck dead, that he now comes
trembling and astonished before the Lord, whilst the other boasting, cries
out, God I thank thee, I cut him bread, but this man cut his throat; But the
murderer cries out, The Lord be merciful, etc. Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness O God, etc. I believe this Murderer way be nearer Heaven,
then that Alms-giver: The former has murdered the Beggar, the other has
murdered the Lord Jesus Christ. Our Savior resents it thus, and thus
expresses it to the face of the Pharisees, Mat. 21.31. Verily I say unto you,
that the Publicans, and the Harlots, go into the Kingdom of God before you.
For they believed, verse. 32. Those that were unclean Harlots, are saved, when
often-washing Hypocrites are damned. Those that were oppressing Publicans, are
justified, when Believing Pharisees are condemned. And thus much be spoken in
order to the weakening of your strength.

CHAP. V. Contains farther improvement by a design to weary you,
notwithstanding your Christless refreshments.
2ly. To weary you notwithstanding all your Christlesse refreshments.
SEcondly, I shall labor to weary your Christless souls, even under any of
your Christless refreshments: know therefore from the Lord, that these are
truths, and such as you shall find to be so sooner or later.

First, That whatsoever the matter be, that thou be not weary, yet
notwithstanding there is enough in all your wilderness ways, and refreshments
too, to make you weary.

Secondly, That this being so, it is the saddest symptom in the world, and of
the most dangerous importance, not thus to be weary.

First, Whatsoever the reason is, 1. There is enough in all your
wilderness-wayes to weary you, however it comes to pass you are not wearied.
that you are not weary, there is enough in the ways and pleasures of sin
too, to weary your poor souls: Surely as Noah's dove that could find no rest,
till it came to the Ark from whence it came, so can no soul find any rest after
all its weariness, but by returning to the Lord from whom it at first
departed; and if the Lord be as Noah, Jesus Christ is as the Ark, there is no
returning to the Lord, but by returning to Jesus Christ. I shall evince what I
am a saying, Evinced.
from Scripture testimony, reason, and experience.

First, For Scripture testimony. 1. From scripture testimony.
The Holy Ghost tells you, Isai. 40.30. The youths shall be weary, and the
young men shall utterly faint; but only those that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strengeth: The young men that are the likeliest to continue fresh,
or to find refreshment in the ways of sin, even all that can be found, they
shall faint and utterly grow weary. Thus says God concerning Israel, Thou art
wearied, Isai. 47.13. And so Jer. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit
iniquity, so Ezekiel. 24.12. She has wearied her self with lies, that is, (says
God) they sin till thy tire themselves, and commit iniquity unto weariness;
only here is the sad difference. As there are many humbled that are not
humble, so many are wearied that are not weary: they are humbled indeed against
their will by punishment, but yet they are never the more humble: so are they
wearied by continued acts of sin, and it is against their will it should be
so, but yet they are never the more weary of it.

Secondly, For Scripture Reason. It must needs be, 2ly. Scripture. reason.
that there should be all manner of weariness in the ways of the Wilderness,
if you consider either what you walk upon, or what you sit down upon.

1. Wearying ways to travel in.
First, All the ways or works that are on this side Christ, are very wearying.
The ways of the wilderness are thorny ways, (as you have heard) and it is
tyresome traveling upon thorns; either wonder then at thine own lethargy, or
dead palsy, or else expressly deny that Scripture, Job 15.20. The wicked man
travelleth with pain all his days; for if thou assent to this truth; thou
must needs infer that it is a tyring travail.

2ly. Only beds of thorns to rest upon.
Secondly, As wearying as the ways are, so when ever thou come to lie down at
night, you have but tyring entertainment in the ways of sin, and nature. He
travailes with pain all the day, and this, says God, You shall have of mine
hand, you shall lie down in sorrow, Isai. 50.11. Oh! how wearying must it needs
be to travail in sin, and then when we have done, to lie down in sorrow?
It Is want of sense in thee, not of truth in these Scriptures, that thou do
not thus feel it for the present, but there is time enough before thee, for
thee to know it in.

3ly. From experience.
Thirdly, For Experience. I shall appeal to Heaven, to Earth, to Hell, to all
things Created, or uncreated, God, Men, and all other Creatures for their Vote
herein.

1. Gods own experiedce: Your wilderness ways have wearied him.
First, I shall appeal to the experience of God himself; what ever the matter
is, that thou art not weary of thy Christlesse ways, there is enough in them
all, in the best of them all, to weary God himself. Hear him speak.

First, There is enough in thy worst ways, Isai. 43.24. Thou have wearied me
with thine iniquities. It may be so; says some selfe-righteous One, with the
wicked God may be angry, and with their iniquities be wearied; but surely not
with my services, with my devotions. Yes

Yea even the best of them.
2. With thy best services, Isai. 1.13, 14. Your Oblations, New Moons, Sabbaths,
solemn services, (Though these were Gods own appointments) they are, says
God, a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them.

Secondly, I appeal to the experience of all men, 2ly. Experience of al men.
as soon as they come but to understand things as they are; whether Noah's Dove,
or his Raven; I mean, the best, or the worst of men.

First, For the Saints, they can say, I dare say for them, 1. Saints experience.
that the Lord made them weary of other things, as a man would be of carrying a
load of dross, or a burden of dung, when Gold or Silver is offered unto them
in their stead, Phil. 3.8. or as a child that would quickly be weary of its
lapfull of stones, when one comes and offers it an apron-full of plums.

2dly. For the worst of men. Those that are in Hell, 2y, Experience of the
worst of men.
have already found; they that are yet on this side Hell, shall quickly find
what weariness there is in the ways of sin and vanity, Isai. 2.20. In that
day, (that is the day of Conviction) shall a man cast his Idols of Gold, and
his Idols of Silver, which they have made each one for himself, (Mark that,
every man's particular Corruptions and beloved lusts) to the Moles, and to the
Bats; (that is, they shall be utterly weary of them) let who will take up their
trade after them, they will follow it no longer.

Thirdly, I appeal to all other Creatures, 3ly. Experience of the whole
Creation, all wearied under the burden of sin.
even this whole Creation. I tell you, that the Sun is tired in its Orb, with
beholding the abominations of the Children of men by day, and the Moon and the
Stars in their courses, by seeing their works of darkness in the night. I tell
you, the Earth would sink under you, as it did under Corah, Dathan, and Abyram,
as weary to bear the burdens of your sins, if the Lord would but give it a
discharge. Yea, how do the very houses of Clay, that sinners dwell in, spew
them up, and cast them forth in a few years, as if weary of being so long
possessed by them? Yea, how does the very Gluttons, and Drunkards stomach tell
him to his face, that it is weary of bearing his surfeiting, and drunkenness,
and therefore disburtheneth it self upon the ground. This is no Notion or
Hyperbole of mine, but a very express truth of God, and so to be by you laid
to heart, Romans 8 20. The Creature was made subject to vanity. And we know, ver.
22. that the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together until
now. The very Heavens are weary of covering, and the Earth of bearing wretched
sinners, and their continual groan in their kind unto God is, Oh! when shall
there be an end of sinning? Oh! when shall we be delivered, verses 19.21.

2ly. Aggravated. Your not being weary when you are wearied, a symptom of
spiritual death.
Secondly, Is it so that there is so much in sin to weary thee, and yet thou
art not weary? truly, this is the most dangerous, and mortal symptom that can
be imagined.

As it is the saddest sign of a red sea ruin, to be humbled so often with
Pharaoh; and yet not to come once to be humble: so it is for thee to be so
often wearied by sin, and never to become once weary of it. Sinners, I dare
appeal (as the last appeal) unto you Consciences, even such as they are,
whether you have not often wearied your selves with drinking, drabbing, etc?
although you were never yet weary of the sin for the kind, yet wearied by the
sin in the act. Thus those wretched Sodomites (who were now near a double Hell,
even first an Hell from Heaven, and then an Hell in Hell) Genesis 19.11. They
wearied themselves to find the door: wearied, yet not weary. And will thou not
be weary? Yes friend, thou must, and thou shall be weary, only thy weariness
shall be, when times of refreshing shall not be, but when thy case is beyond
Cure; thus was Moab: and oh! let every one of us all take up that lamentation
from the mouth of the Prophet, Isai. 16.11. My bowels shall sound like an Harp
for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-haresh. Why? what is the matter? ver.
12. It shall come to pass when it is seen, that Moab is weary on his high
place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray, but he shall not prevail.
Oh! now father Abraham, one drop of refreshing water to cool my tongue, but it
shall not be granted. It Is said of the Grave, that there the weary be at rest,
but the quite contrary shall be said of Hell. Oh! sirs, you are not weary
enough to drink in the waters of refreshments to day; I had almost said, here
is much water, and little or no thirst; there shall be thirst enough (such as
it will be) but no water. When a sick man has been a long time tossing his
wearied body on this side of the bed first, and then on that, and after all
these weariednesses, come to lie still, and stupid, and senseless of any
weariness; what do we, I pray you, reckon this, but the sleep of death? When
wretched sinners come to be wearied with every sin, so that the Lord can say,
they weary themselves, and yet their cursed hearts can say, We are not weary,
eternal death is in this man's countenance. We that are Physicians, have some
sad reason to give him over, Jer. 51.64. Thou shall say, Thus Babylon shall
sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her, and they
shall be weary. She had wearied the people of God with her cruelties, and God
himself with her abominations, but she her self was not weary, well says
God, thou art now a sinking O Babylon, and thou shall be weary. So say I, thou
art quickly a sinking into the Grave O sinner, and into Hell, and verily thou
shall be weary.

What say I? thou art sinking into Hell: what, Such are the veriest pictures of
Hell above-ground.
and if I should say, thou art an Hell above ground? Verily there can not be
such another picture of Hell drawn as thou art, who art wearied every day with
sinning, and yet art fresh for sin still, The Heathens themselves represent the
infinity of the torments of Hell by one Sysiphus, who (say they) is damned by
the Gods to roll a great stone up a very high hill, and ever when he has
gotten it up near the top, it is to tumble down again upon him perpertually
time after time: and truly is is a pretty strange kind of piece of heathenish
Divinity: if they believed what they said, though it were but fabulous; yet had
their hearts some nearer guesses at the truth, then the daring sinners that are
amongst us. Their figure was something like, but thine is exact: for as Dives
in hell suffers unconceivably to day, yet is perfectly fresh for the sufferings
of to morrow, and so unto eternity: so thou sinnest to day, and travellest in
pain, and weariest thy self to commit iniquity; yet art thou perfectly fresh
for sin to morrow. We wonder to think how damned spirits contract fresh
strength for their new torments, and so they shall to all eternity: but we need
the less wonder, if we observe wearied sinners getting fresh strength for new
sins: for as face in water answers face, so does the heart of sinners upon
earth, answer the heart of sinners that are in hell; for these would also be
fresh for sin, (if God should suffer it) unto all eternity.

So then as its a sign of a Saint-like, and heavenly mind to be spiritually,
and universally weary of the ways of nature, so far as they hinder from
leaning upon the Lord, even so weary of them as he is of his guest, Prove.
25.17. Remove thy foot from thy neighbors house, least he be weary of thee,
and so hate thee, to be so weary of them, as to hate them, Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Lands etc. which must be, Luke 14.26. Yea, so as to be weary of
their life, because of temptations unto sin, Genesis 17.46. As Rebekah was of the
daughters of Heth, least they should draw her Jacob from the Lord: (if Jacob
take a wife of the daughters of the Land, what good shall my life do me? so
say they) as long as temptations prevail against them, they are even weary of
their very lives, because of their lusts: so it is a very sign of a very
reprobate mind, and hellish heart to be able to go in the ways of the
wilderness of fin, and there to run without weariness, and to walk without
being faint.

A word to those that are weary of no ways but Christ's ways.
But still there is one thing that I cannot pass over, but must lay it upon
your hearts, as a lamentation. viz. since none can lay hold upon Jesus Christ,
but those that are weary of all other ways; What shall we say to those that are
weary of none, but his ways? I find it an easier matter by many degrees, to
make some of you by close preaching, weary of the word, to go, to ride, to
house your selves from the wearying word; then to make you weary of the world,
to leave, to hate, or to forsake the toyling vanities and wearying ways of
fin. It is to be observed concerning the people of the Jews, when now the Lord
was weary of them, and the precious Ordinances were taking wing, as weary of
their despised abode among them; and the word of truth was a flying from
Malachi to Matthew, (and from the Jews unto the Gentiles, to whom it might be
new news and welcome) His great controversy (upon which he parts) with them
is this, Mal. 1.13. Ye also have said (that is, of my service, of mine
institutions, as you may see in verse before) Behold, what a weariness is it?
and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts. What a tedious man (say
some) is this, he never knows when to have done; and then they look at the
hour-glasse, and snuff, and nothing tyres them so much as these holy things.
Ah this is plain-dealing when thou say so, God also deals as plainly with
thee, Mal. 2.17. You have wearied the Lord with your words. Well met, you
weary of God, and God of you: but ah poor Creatures, who shall have the worst
of it? Now all that I have said this day, I have spoken to this end, that if
any amongst you are hereby wearied, and made truly weary, you might know where
to have a resting place.

My God has said unto me concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, as to Isaiah, as to
Israel, Isai. 28.12. This is the rest wherewith you may cause the weary to
rest, and this is the refreshment: (but oh! my brethren, let it not be said of
any of you, as of Israel, in the words of the verse that run on) but you would
not. And so I pass on to the

CHAP. VI. Contains Querie second, for what are lost souls to lean upon
Christ. Answer 1. For all their strength.
2d. Question. In order unto what lost souls are to be leaning souls. Answer.
SEcond Question. For what it is that lost souls are to lean upon, the Beloved?

The answer of this Question will be obvious from the answer ^f the former; for
if the weak and weary be the only true leaners, then it is strength and rest
that they are to lean upon Christ for.

1. For all their strength.
First, Lean upon Jesus Christ for all your strength. You have heard this
hinted, that they that would stand against the bewildrings of Satan, must be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. Art thou weak?
Why? it is strength, yea the strength of the Lord, and the power of his might,
that thou art to lean for upon Christ: nothing else will serve thy turn, and
that thou may have by leaning. I shall speak to three comprehensive
particulars, lean on Christ as the alone strength of what thou have, of what
thou do, and of what thou art.

viz. 1. Of what they have.
1. Lean upon Christ as thy alone strength, in respect of all that thou have, or
would have. Would thou have grace or comfort? believe, and thou shall
receive strength to rereceive these, Heb. 11.11. By faith Sarah her self also
received strength to conceive seed. Thou have been so long barren, that thou
art afraid thou shall never be able to conceive the incorruptible seed of the
word of God, either as to the bringing forth of Grace, or Comfort in thy soul:
by faith thou may have strength to receive b^th.

1. Their Graces.
1. Faith will afford strength to receive Grace, whether as to Mortification or
Vivificattion.

i. Mortifying Grace.
1. Mortifying or subduing grace. Would thou have the strong man out of doors?
thy pride, thy passion, the vanity of thy thoughts thy lusts of uncleanness,
thy worldly lusts etc. removed? thou have no way but to make Christ thy
strength, who is stronger then these, and so to call in the Auxiliaries of
heaven: had David gone out in Saul's Armor, undoubtedly Goliath had made him a
prey; but David went out in the name of the Lord: Thus lean thou on the Lord
Christ, and then what though it be an uncircumcised corruption, Note.
a Giant-like lust that thou contendest with? The grand cause that some do
sincerely, yet insuccesfully war with those worldly lusts that war against
their souls, may be ignorance hereof, or neglect herein, Luke 11.21. The strong
man will keep his house till a stronger comes. Corruption, that is strong, will
keep thine heart, till a Christ, that is stronger, comes. It follows, He that
is not with me; is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters,
verse. 23. As I said of your Christlesse strength, it is Antichristian: so here
to War without Christ, is in some sort to War against Christ; and to think to
gain ground of thy sins in thine own strength, is the way to be a loser; a
^^sterer; though this verse, I know, has another intendment, yet is this
certain, if Christ be with you, (as he will be, whilst you be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. You shall carry the day, and divide the spoil, he that spoyleth
Principalities for you, can vanquish sin in you. Where this Josuah is General,
the field cannot be lost; he that brought up the Israelites, conquers the
Canaanites; neither can you be conquerors, but through Christ, Romans 8.37.

2ly. Lean on Christ for Vivifying and renewing grace. This is that Law of the
spirit of life which in Christ makes free (as you heard in the last) from the
law of sin and death, Romans 8.2. as who should say, Vivifying or quickening Grace.
let there be what there can, or what there will be in any soul, unless there
be the law of that spirit of life in Christ Jesus, there can not be any (...)
of grace there. Christ is the strength of your quickening grace, and that

1. As to the root, and life, and habit of it, 1. Of the root of it.
(I mean grace in the soul) Romans 8.10. If Christ be in you, the Spirit is
life because of righteousness. No life, or principle, or habit of
righteousness, (which is here to be expound^d by Sanctification) can possibly
be in you, if Christ be not the strength of it in you.

2. The fruits of it.
2ly, As to the fruit, act, and exercise of this root, life, and habit of Grace,
Io. 15.4. Abide in me, says Christ, and I in you, for as the branch cannot
bring forth fruit, of it self, except it abide in the Vine; no more can you,
except you abide in me. The strength of the branch is not able to bring forth
fruit, but it is the strength of the Vine: the branch is not able, (says
Christ) but the Vine is able: so the strength of thine habit of grace is not
able to exercise, or bring forth fruit unto holiness, but it is the strength
of Christ: for that grace which is said to be in thee, and unto thee as a root,
is in, and unto Christ but as a branch, and Christ is the Vine still, the
branch (as that which immediately feeds it) may in some sort be called the root
of the fruit; but in proper speech it is only the root of the Vine, that is the
root both of branch and fruit: and the strength of the Vine, is the strength
both of the branch and fruit and if their in being, or dependence on the Vine
were but a little interrupted, you should quckly see it: truly so it is with
Christ, both as to the habit, and exercise, the branch and fruit of thy graces:
for says Christ in the 5. verse, Without me you can do nothing: Mark, do
nothing. Suppose a branch; yet could there be no fruit: suppose a life; yet
could there be no action: but now oppose this phrase, or compose it rather unto
that of Paul's, Phil. 3.13. (where from occasion of the exercise of the grace of
Contentation, he digresseth to a general boasting, but in the Lord, as to all
the fruits of holiness) I can do all things through Christ which strengthens
me; so that all the outgoings of our graces are, and must be only in the
strength of Jesus Christ.

2ly. Of all your comforts.
2ly. Lean upon Christ as the only strength of all your comforts: You have
mention in Scripture of strong consolation (as well as of strong grace) Heb.
6.18. That we might have strong consolation. We? Who? why we; who have fled for
a refuge to the anchor that is before us, and have taken hold. That anchor is
hope, that whereupon that anchor catches hold, is Jesus the forerunner, ver.
20. No strength of comfort elsewhere. 1. Your foundation-comfort. viz.
Justification.


1. Christ, as the strength of your foundation-comfort, I mean Justification,
is to be leaned upon. If you be justified, it must be by faith, by leaning; and
if you have peace with God, and there be any strength in that peace, it must be
through Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. The Hebrew Idiom, puts often one substantive
with another, when in sense it is an adjective. So in that passage, Isai.
45.24. One shall say, surely in the Lord I have righteousness, and strength,
that is, strong righteousness: Others may have a righteousness as the
Pharisees etc. that have not Christ; but there is no more strength in it to
comfort, then there is in a few sparks to warm or to enlighten, Isai. 50.11.
But they that lean on Christ for a righteousness, have strength of
righteousness.

2ly. 2ly All yo^ upper comfor
Lean on Christ as the bottom strength of all your upper comforts, such as
come in upon the account of your justification. If Christ will to purpose
strengthen the hearts of his Disciples as to comfort, he must tell them as he
does Jo. 14.18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. What ever
else he either leaves them, or sends them, they will still be comfortless,
unless he comes to them. Miserable Comforters are Creatures to us, when Christ
keeps at a distance from us. Comforts they may be, and weak ones too, as
Christless righteousness has no more substance in it to hold out the light of
comfort, then a few sparks; so Christless Comforts have no more strength, then
the cracklings of thorns under a pot, Eccle. 7.6. Upon the matter the same is
the expression in the one and the other.

2ly. 2ly. As the strength of all that thou do.
Lean upon Christ as the alone strength of all that thou do, or would do,
as well as of all that thou have, or would have. Make Christ the strength of
thy duties. Surely as Jesus Christ was the strength of the Jewish Sacrifices,
so must he be of Christian duties. Alas what was there in the blood of a Bull,
or of a Goat, to take away sin, or reconcile to God? The Apostle shows this,
Heb. 10.1, 4. They were never able (says he) to make the comers perfect,
never able to take away sins. They were poor, weak, impotent, unable things;
therefore he brings in Christ as their strength and fullness, ver. 7. Then said
I, I come to do thy will O God. And truly what is there in our tears? what
poor things are our prayers? how weak, how weak are all our services, unless
Christ become their strength? what strength? alas! what strength is there in my
preaching an hour? or your hearing, in order to the conversion of any soul?
But now when Christ fell a preaching, there was might in his preaching, he
spoke with authority: yea, at his word there goes forth strength. The blind
see, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the sick are healed, the dead are raised:
believe it, there is power in such speaking. So when Christ fell a weeping, and
praying, you read they were strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7. Christ's crying
was strong crying. Now then if thou would get much of strength into thy
duties, labor to get much of Christ into thy duties. I strive (says Paul of
his Ministry) to present every man perfect, Of thy preaching.
according to his working which works in me mightily, and Col. 1.29. The more
there is of Christ in thy Ministry, the more might is in thy Ministry. Yea,
When all men forsook me (says Paul) 2 Timothy 4.16. The Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me, that the preaching might he fully known. So would thou get
strength unto any other performance, I say unto thee as Paul to Timothy; 2 Timothy
2.1. Thou therefore my Son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ: Mark, the
grace that is in Christ. Think not, if thou would be strong in prayer, to be
strong in the grace that is in thy self, Of thy praying.
but in the grace that is in Christ. As when himself was in prayer as Man,
Luke 22.43, 44. And there appeared an Angel from heaven strengthening him,
then he was in an Agony, and prayed (says the Text) the more earnestly. So if
thou be in prayer, and can by believing get help from heaven to strengthen
thee; Oh! thou will easily perceive more strength in thy sight, more agony in
thy groans, more earnestness in thy prayers. And as that Angel, Rev. 8.3.
Puts Incense on the prayers of all Saints (so must this Angel put strength)
whereby they might ascend up before the throne of God. Of thine hearing.
So when thou hear a Sermon, or receivest the Word, thou receivest no
strength by it, unless thou receive Christ by it. When the word of God is
received as the word of man barely, it has no more strength in it, then the
bare word of man, Gal. 4.14, 15. When the Galathians received Paul in his
Ministry, as an Angel of God, yea even as Christ Jesus; it was so mighty in
them, that he bears them record, that they even would have pulled out their
eyes etc. Oh! when souls come to receive Christ in the Word, they have
strength to do any thing, (for that is the meaning of it) to cut off right
hands, pull out eyes etc. any thing for Christ, he is so dear unto them; but
as for those that receive the Word, but not Christ in it, you may sadly and
easily perceive how little strength they have from it, for it is little or
nothing that they will do for it: What? part with an hand, or an eye for
Christ? No, scarce with an handful of that pelf that they should not set
their eyes upon, Prove. 23.5.

Thirdly, 3ly. As the strength of all that thou art, thine whole soul.
Lean upon Christ as the only strength of that thou art, I mean of thine
whole soul, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. I pray, says Paul, That ye might be strengthened
with might in the inner man, that Christ might dwell in your hearts by faith:
No strengthening at all for the inner man, but by Christ indwelling, and no
indwelling but by faith, by believing therefore say, I lean on Christ, that
according to David's phrase, Psalm. 138.3. Thou may be strengthened with
strength in thy soul; that is, in thine Understanding, Memory, Will, and
Affections.

1. As the strength of thine understanding.
First, Lean upon Christ as the only strength of thine Understanding, 1 Cor.
1.30, 31. He is made unto us of God, wisdom, that as it is written, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord. There Is no man in the world of judgment
and wisdom strong enough, to reach the things of God, but he that fetching his
wisdom from the Lord. Christ pays his tribute of glory not to himself, but
to the Lord Christ, Isai. 29.24. They that erred shall come to understanding,
and they that murmured shall learn Doctrine, when they shall sanctify the name
of God, and magnify his holy One. They that erred, that is, that were of a
weak understanding: And they that murmured, that is, That were more depraved in
judgment; and this is a more wilful weakness; yet such (through Christ) is
the gracious promise of the Lord; but herein they must sanctify his name, and
magnify his holy One: that is, His holy Child Jesus. You have multitudes of
promises also, of sight to the blind, knowledge to the ignorant, understanding
to the simple, of guidance by Gods counsel enough to lead them to his glory,
but all through his Christ.

2ly. Of thy Memory.
2ly. Lean upon Christ as the strength of your Memory, have thou a weak one to
complain of? Why, do but believe, and thou shall have a strange memory, if
thou have not a strong one, thou shall have a memory to carry away more of a
Sermon, then he that carries away all; his memory is in his head, but thy
memory shall be in thine heart: he may write it by his memory, when he comes
home down in a book, but thou writest it in thine heart and life, and there it
is known, and read of all men: I mean, whilst another carries away the
words, thou remembrest the power; he has the expressions of the minister, but
thou have the impressions of the truth. Such a mrmory as this, at least wise,
thou shall be sure to have by leaning on Jesus Christ, and this i am sure is
the best memory, and truly a convenient portion for thee of the other too, is
plainly held forth to them that trust on Christ's name, Jo. 14.26. The Holy
Ghost, whom the Father shall send (says Christ) in my name, shall teach you
all things, and shall bring all things to your remembrance, even, whatsoever I
have said unto you. If young Preachers that know what believing means, could
but lean more upon Christ in this promise, they need not lean so much (as
themselves complain) to their Notes. Has not Christ said, that his Spirit
shall bring to our remembrance what soever he has said? And what have we to
say more? If we have, for ought I know, our memory may be indeed most faithful
to us, wherein it may seem most to fail us, whilst we forget against our wills,
what we should have omitted with our wills: And how can it harm us, or spoil
our Sermons, if we be content to forego our fancies that we may act our faith?
The former may please and advance our selves; the latter shall advance Christ,
and please the Lord.

3ly. Lean upon Christ as the strength of your Wills. I Will grant to the
Arminians, that our wills are strong enough for Rebellion, and too strong too,
even as an iron sinew: but alas, alas, as to the strings of God (even a
Ephraim) (...) heartlesse Dove. Would thou now be strengthened there also?
Read Psalm. 110. Which is evidently spoken of Christ, to whom it is affixed,
Heb. 1.13. ver. 2. Send forth the Rod of thy strength out of Sion, and then
mark verse. 3. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power. If
ever thy Will get any sanctified strength, it is only in the day of Christ's
power, and by the sending forth his strength.

Fourthly, Lean, 4ly. Of thine affections.
one Christ as the strength of your Affections. Sirs, God will never be
contented with your affections, unless he may have the strength of your
affections. Thou (...) love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, Luke 10.27. Now unless thou have Christ in thine Affections, as
their strength they will be too weak for God, or the things of God. Now if you
could lean more, you would love more, and fear, and desire, and hope, and joy,
and put forth every other affection in more strength. You have the Spouse
leaning upon Christ in my Text, which is verse 5. And as soon as she lean^,
see how she strengthens affections, you would wonder there should be such
sudden virtue in leaning, for ve^^ 6. she breaks out, Love is strong as death,
the Coals there as the Coals of fire, with a most vehement flame, many waters
cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it: if man would give all the
substance of his house for love, (...) would utterly be contemned. If Satan
(says she) should u^ never so much means, if the Serpent should cast his
golden Apple before me, it would not allure me; if the Dragon should send all
the floods of his mouth after me, it would not affright me, but that I should
still zealously, ardently, vehemently, and unto death affect the dearly beloved
of my soul: such was the strength of her affections, and this she gat by
leaning on Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VII. Contains Answer 2d. Lost souls are to lean on Christ for all
their rest.
2ly. You must lean on Christ for all your Rest.
SEcondly, Lean upon Jesus Christ for all your Rest. Sirs, There are times of
refreshing from the presence of the Lord, for repenting and converted souls,
Act. 3.19. but those are only by the sending of Jesus Christ, verse 20. Till
God send Christ to thy soul, never look he should send refreshings to thy
soul. Observe that of the Apostle, Heb. 4.3. We which have believed, do enter
into rest, and then verse 8. If Jesus (that is Iosuah) had gi^^^ them rest etc.
From which it appears, that there (...) true and spiritual rest, but of
Christ's own giving Iosuah brought them to Canaan, but it is only Christ Jesus
that could give them rest: And again, that there is no way for poor bewildred
souls (for of such is the Apostles discouse there) to come at this rest, but
by leaning; that is, by believing. But more particularly lean on Christ as the
resting place of your Understandings, Consciences, Affections, whole souls
when wearied with the ways of the wilderness of sin. 1. As the rest of your
understands.


First, Lean upon Christ as the resting place of your Understandings, he is
the great Prophet of his people.

Secondly, Consciences.
Lean upon him as the resting place of your weary Consciences, He is the great
high Priest of his people.

Thirdly, Affections.
Lean upon Christ as the resting place of your tired affections, he is the
Lord and Husband of his people.

Fourthly, Lean on Christ as the resting place of your whole souls, Souls.
he is the God and Savior of his people.

For the first, viz. Our Understandings.

I shall lay down these two Propositions.

First, 1. Of your understandings.

Two Propositions.

1. Proposition,

That there is no resting place for our understandings, in the knowledge of any
other thing.


That there is no rest for them in the knowledge of any other object, but the
Lord Jesus Christ. I shall prove it by the most eminent instance that any age
in the world could give of it, and it is Solomon, who gave his heart to know
wisdom, and to search out all things by understanding, (as himself says
Eccle. 1.13. He had moreover all Opportunities, and helps which other working
heads have wanted, I am come, says he, to a great estate, and great experience
of wisdom, and knowledge, (verse 16.) And what shall the man do that comes
after the King, (2.12.) such a King, so great, so wise, so studious? This
wisdom of his reaches so far, as to excel all the Children of the East,
and people of Egypt (the wisest quarters of the world) yea, he had knowledge of
all the Trees and Plants from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hysop of the wall:
yea, also of all Beasts, and Fowls, and Fishes: He had exceeding much
understanding, and largeness of heart, and wisdom, as the sand on the Sea
shore, 1 King. 4.29, 30, 33. And yet this Solomon says of much study (though
undoubtedly as easy to him as to any man) It Is a weariness to the flesh
Eccle. 12.12. And in much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow, Eccle. 1.18. So that both weariness to the
flesh, and toil to the spirit, is the only rest to be expected in the
confining of our understandings unto any other speculation, save only the
knowledge of Jesus Christ.

2d. Propos. That there is sufficient and ultimate refreshing to our
understandings in knowing Christ.
But secondly, Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of him, is the resting place of a
tired understanding, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou correctest, and
teach him out of thy Law: Though God take the Rod into his hand to teach him
his lesson by, yet blessed is he, and wherein is he thus blessed, that comes to
learn in Christ's School? why? verse 13. That thou may give him rest from
the time of trouble: this will make thee a goodmends for the soarest whipping;
if thou learn the lesson of Christianity to day, thou shall have rest to
morrow. Thus God expressly speaking concerning this knowledge, Isai. 28.9, 10,
11. says of it, verse 12. This is the rest wherewith you may cause the weary
to rest, and this is the refreshing. And it must needs be that the knowledge of
the Lord Christ must be a refreshing knowledge to the soul, upon three
accounts.

For 1. It is a spiritual.
First, It is a spiritual, therefore a refreshing knowledge to the Spirit; it is
a knowledge of spiritual things, and after a spiritual manner. The
understanding of things carnal, or spiritual things in a carnal sort, cannot
indeed satisfactorily refresh the Spirit. The soul that knows Christ, knows
him not after the flesh, but spiritually, and whosoever to knows him, knows
the things that God has prepared for them that love him; and what are the
things prepared, but Mansions adequate and eternal rest? which things being
revealed by the Spirit, and spiritually discerned, by the soul, are ravishing
and refreshing to the soul, (your hearts bear testimony hereunto) compare, 1
Cor. 2.9, 10, 14. with Jo. 14.2.

2ly. It is an experimental, 2ly. An experimental.
and therefore a refreshing knowledge. They that know Christ, feel Christ, and
the feeling of him must needs be refreshing to them, 1 Jo. 1.1. Our hands have
handled the word of life: this experimental knowledge the Apostle
communicates, as being abundantly himself refreshed, that their joy also might
be full, ver. 4.

Thirdly, To know Christ, 3ly. A soul Centring knowledge.
must needs afford rest to our understandings, because Christ is the very
Center of all knowledge, knowing him, you need go no farther; knowing him, you
may well sit down, and rest, and refresh your your selves, for you know enough,
you know all, 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined to know nothing among you, but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, so Phil. 3.10. That I might know him, and the power
of his Resurrection, and fellowship of his sufferings, If Paul (as learned as
he otherwise was) could but reach unto this knowledge, he does not once
entertain a thought, that his wearied understanding should travel any farther.

2ly, 2ly. Of your wearied Consciences.
Come and lean your weary Consciences upon Jesus Christ. Oh! how do some
complain of tired Consciences? and how fallen would they sit down, but know not
where to rest themselves? This was David's sad outcry, Psalm. 38.3. There is no
rest in my bones, because of my sin. Now what shall such a soul do in such a
case? I Will tell you in Isaiahs words, Thus says the Lord God, the holy one of
Israel, Isai. 30.15. In returning and rest you shall be saved, in quietness
and confidence shall be your strength: that is, return to Christ, and lean upon
him, and you shall have rest, and strength from him, unto the quieting of your
wearied and distracted souls.

But how shall weary Consciences do to refresh themselves by leaning on Jesus
Christ? Question. How that shall be? Answer.


I answer, Bring all your Conscience fraught and laiden, and unburthen it upon
Jesus Christ. Christ does not bid weary and laden Consciences to lay down
their burdens, 1. Lay down thy burdens upon Christ
and then to come unto him; but come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, (which undoubtedly and peculiarly refers to Conscience-loadings) and I
will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. That is, b^ing your burdens to me, and i will
take them down.

1. Unlade the acknowledgements of your sins into Christ's bosom.
First, Let weary Consciences unlade all their acknowledgements, and disgorgings
of sin into Christ's own bosom immediately. Thus David in the fore quoted
Psalm 38.18. He resolves upon acknowledgement of his sin, and this he empties
into the Lords own bosom, verse 9.

1. Your sinne-sorrowes.
Secondly, As you bring your sin-acknowledgements, so bring your sin-sorrowes to
Christ, let your faith put the Lord Christ to the same work, whereunto he is
called by the Father, to carry our griefs and sorrows. So Isai. 53.4. Thus
David, Psalm. 38.6. When he was troubled, and bowed down greatly, going mourning
all the day long: he had immediate recourse to the Lord Christ.

3ly. Your wearying sighs and groanings.
Thirdly, Let us also disburthen all wearying sighs, and tyring groans of our
troubled minds, into the bosom of Jesus Christ. Thus David, Psalm. 38.9. Lord,
all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Would
thou pray down the guilt, or groan down the power of any Corruption, that clogs
thy poor Conscience, even to the making of thee weary of thy very life,? then
lean on Jesus Christ and thou shall find rest. Yea, this I would Note unto
you, before I leave you, that Christ does not bid weary souls to go to the
Father, Note.
but to come to him with their heavy loadings: believe it, 'twill be ill
leaning of a tired Conscience upon God the Father, with Christ the Advocate. If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1. Come not to the
Father first, but to the Advocate, and by the Advocate to the Father. If a man
have a Creditor to speak with, he will speak with his Surety first, and if he
can but engage him, he can with boldness look his Creditor in the face. But
woe, woe to that Conscience that comes sinful and Christlesse unto the great
and righteous, holy and sin-abhorring Majesty of the Lord God.

2ly. 2ly. Take up Cordials from Christ.
Let thy weary Conscience take from Christ's hand his Cordials, as well as lay
down thy burden on his shoulders. It Is true, I am the chief of sinners, (so
let repentance speak in thy soul) yea, But this is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, (so let thy faith speak) viz. That Christ came into
the world to save such. I shall o^e day fall by such a strong Corruption, if
Conscience-trouble say so, let faith say nay: but Christ came into world, that
he might destroy the works of the Devil, etc. And thus in any other case of
Conscience, the way to have an heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience, is to
draw near in the full assurance of faith unto Jesus Christ, having him as an
High Priest over the household of God, Heb. 10.21, 22.

3ly. 3ly. Your wearied affections.
Lean your tired affections upon the Lord Christ, and in him let them rest
themselves. As to know Christ, is the only true stay to the understanding: so
to love him, etc. is the only true stay to the affections. Set your affections
on things above, where Christ sits, Col. 3.1. As who should say, else will they
flutter about as the wandering dove, without any rest at all; but in Christ they
shall have a set Mansion. The Spouse bears pregnant testimony hereunto, Cant.
5.18. Where she says, He is altogether lovely, that is, an Adequate, entyre,
and full object for the affections to sit down upon; and having this, they have
Rest. Other things are not stays for our affections, because not altogether to
be affected. The world is not, nor the things of the world: Meat is to be
somewhat affected for the nourishment of the bodies sake, and Clothes for the
warmth, and Money for the service of the outward man in the world, and Wife and
Children, and Friends, as Helps and Comforts in the world: but our affections
may not, (nay they cannot, though they would) rest in these things, but are
still traveling farther, and the reason is, because there is not one of them
that is altogether lovely. Such is Christ, and therefore a Center him for your
affections, as well as a Rest for your minds and consciences.

Lastly, Lean upon Christ as the rest of your poor souls, 4ly. Your wearied
souls.
I mean as to their whole state and well being, when they shall be rent
asunder from the Carcasses wherein they dwell. Woe be to that soul, of whom the
world is weary, and whom the house of its habitation (I mean its body) as weary
of it, throws out of doors; if it have not then a Christ to cast it self
upon, and be not able to say as David, Psalm. 116.7. Return to thy rest O my
soul, Go up to Mount Nebo, and die there. Believe it, believe it, that is an
high Hill, and that is hard work; you had need of a Staff, and an Arm to lean
upon; you had need of an eye of faith to look upwards. Stephen when he dyed,
did so, Act. 7.55. Leaning on Christ, and leaving of the world, had need go
together: By faith, Jacob when he was a dying, (as typifying this) worshipped,
leaning upon his Staff, Heb. 11.21. And blessed are they that thus dye in the
Lord, (for as much as my present discourse says, and so says the Spirit) They
shall have rest from all their labors, Rev. 14.13.

And thus much of the second Question.

CHAP. VIII. Contains Querie third, what the saving leaning upon Christ is. 1.
As to the Object. How Christ was prepared to be the strength of the weak, and
stay of the weary: 1. By his estate of Humiliation.
COme we now to the third Question, 3d. Quest. What this leaning upon Christ
is? Answer in four Considerations 1. Of its Object. viz. the Beloved. And how
Christ came to be the strength of the weak, and the stay of the weary.
viz. What the leaning of a weak and weary soul upon Christ for strength and
refreshment is? In answer whereunto, these four Things fall under our
inspection. The Object, the Original, or spring of the act; the Notion, the
Nature of the Act.

First, For the Object. The Texts tells you, it is [the Beloved, that is,
Christ] But how? or in what respect is Christ? or how comes Christ to be the
strength of the weak, and the stay of the weary bewildred soul? surely it is
not Christ, any how considered, that is thus the souls support, and therefore
Christ is not confusedly to be leaned upon: but Christ so, and so considered
and understood, and therefore there are distinct Notions under, or in the which
he is to be leaned unto. Now the enquiry after these, falls necessary, and I
hope usefully under this head. For as it is not flesh that strengthens the
body simgly considered, but flesh thus, and thus wholesomely dressed, and
prepared, whence that in the 23. Psalm. 5. Thou preparest a Table for me: The
Lord as it were, condescends to dress his meat for him; especially you know,
that flesh must be well cooked; that is to strengthen the weak, that is
prepared for the sick: And as it is not a Bed that will give refreshment to a
sick and weary one, but a Bed thus, and thus prepared, well made; whence that
Psalm. 41.3. The Lord will make all his bed in his sickness: Mean work, you will
say, for the great God to dress our meat, and make our beds, yet such as he
pleases himself in, because he delights in mercy: So I say, It is not
barely the Lord Christ, but Christ (as I may say with reverence) thus, and thus
dressed, that is the strength of the weak; and Christ thus, and thus prepared,
that is therest and refreshment of the weary. Take Christ's own account of this
matter, Io. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must
the Son of man be lifted up; Mark, [must be]. It was not enough that he was
incarnate, and made flesh, that he was the Son of man; but being made flesh,
there is a necessity of his being dressed, and made ready for the food of souls.
The Brass did not cure them, unless it were thus and thus prepared; it must
be made in figure of a Serpent. Neither did this Serpent cure them, but it must
be lifted up, so Christ must be lifted up: And this one word speaks Gods whole
mind, as to the preparation of the Lord Christ, How Christ was prepared
hereunto.
to be the strength and the stay of lost souls; for this one word has a
double aspect, as Christ had a double lifting up. 1. He was lifted up to his
Cross, so prepared for the souls support in his state of Humiliation. 2. He
was lifted up to his Crown, and so prepared by his state of Exaltation: and
upon such account it is that Christ's salvation for lost souls, is called a
prepared salvation, Luke 2.30, 31. Mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou
have prepared. Unto each of these I must therefore speak a few words.

And 1. As to the estate of our Lord Christ's Humiliation, observe with me four
Things.

1. In his estate of humiliation. The explication of it in four particulars.
1. That Jesus Christ in the days of his flesh, was subjected to all the
weaknesses and wearinesses of poor souls, (sin only excepted.)

2. That it was for our behoof, rather then his own, and for our sakes, not his
own, that he was thus subjected.

3. That hereby he became an apt and suitable support for the weak and the weary
to lean upon. And therefore

4. They may herein have strong consolation, and encouragement to lean upon
him.

For the first, 1. Christ was therein subjected to all our weaknesses and
wearinesses (sin only excepted.)

1. Properly to our natural infirmities.


The Lord (in the days of his Humiliation) was subjected unto all our
weaknesses, and wearinesses, sin excepted; Yea, and to the sins of the Elect
too, but in a different kind.

1. Then Christ did properly, and in the plainest and fullest sense, bear all
the weaknesses and wearinesses appertaining unto, and following upon our
natures, I mean our decayed natures, (sin only excepted) for set sin aside,
Christ was a true man, not like unto Adam before the fall, and in the state of
immortality: Christ took upon him our Nature, not our Nature as it was at
first, but our crazy Nature, our decayed Nature; but do not mistake me, I say
not our corrupt Nature; he took not any thing up of our Natures, wherein was
sin, though he took up many things wherein were the fruits of sin: such are our
weakness s, and wearinesses, as abstracted from sin, so that all that is
natural unto us as men, yea, as fallen men, (setting aside our fall still, as
it contained sin in it, and left sinful corruption behind it) is natural to
Christ. I hope you can distinguish between infirmity, natural, and sinful;
at least wise it is easy to distinguish them in themselves, though not so
easy to distinguish them in us, where Sin and Nature are so interwoven. Now as
I dare not assert, that there was any weakness in Christ that was sin; so dare
I not deny, that the weaknesses that came upon us for sin, (such as
temptations, sorrows, sufferings, and death) were properly born by the Lord
Christ, in that nature which was the subject of his Humiliation; I mean, his
humane nature. This is plain to me, and I desire to make it plain to the
plainest of you, That Christ took not Adams nature, as it was at first,
(though he was as innocent as Adam was at first) he took fallen man's craziness,
not corruption; infirmities, not sins; the whole mortality of the body, but not
(in the least) the body of death; this I say is to me plain, from Heb. 2.16.
He took not the nature of Angels upon him, but the seed of Abraham. Mark, of
Abraham, not of Adam: of Abraham, that is Man in a state of imbecility, and
infirmity; not of Adam before the fall, nor of the holy Angels (who were both
as free from all infirmity as sin) but of decayed man, as the next words do
undenyably expound it: It became him in all things to be made like unto his
Brethren, verse. 17. Mark, In all things. How shall we then soberly bound our
thoughts herein? Why, the same Apostle makes the only Exception (that is to be
made) Heb. 4.15. He was in all points like us, yet without sin; And this will
be proved more fully, as I shall prove it more particularly.

1. In our bodies.
First, The Lord Christ in the state of his Humiliation, was weak as we are. It
is on all hands granted, (as far as I ever yet heard) that Christ began to be
Crucified, as soon as he began to be Incarnat. Now the Spirit says expressly, 2
Cor. 13.4. That Christ was crucified through weakness. If this had not been
true, that Christ had taken up the weaknesses of fallen man, he could never
have been crucified for the sins of fallen man. And if the other be true, that
Christ was crucified from the womb to the Grave, then the Apostles words will
prove, that Christ considered merely as man, was as weak from the Cardle to the
Grave as another mere man, only the Divinity protected him from all actual
frailties that were not foreordained for him. Else I believe as small a matter
would have crushed him in the womb, or the swathing bands as another Infant,
because as small a time put his life to a period, (when the fullness of his time
was come) as ended the days of others: yea, it is said, that Christ was dead
before them that were crucified with him. This truth is no more prejudiced by
this, that we do not read of his being at any time sick, etc. then if a man
should say, I have not the nature of decayed, crazy, fallen Adam in me, because
I am thus old, and never yet had a sickness; or as if he should say, I am not
mortal, because I never yet dyed. However whatsoever may be said, or denied,
as to the extent of this truth; this may not be denied, but that crucified
Christ was subjected to weaknesses, for so says the Scripture.

And again to me it appears, 2. In our souls.
that the whole humane nature (and not only the flesh) of Christ was subject
to weaknesses, yet without sin, I mean his soul as well as body: if there be
any soul-weaknesses separate from sin, as surely (methinks) there are (though I
confess I am very little acquainted with the nature of Spirits) for Christ
took not on him our flesh only, but our nature, as is clear in the Scripture
before cited; and if there be any weaknesses incident to our souls, that may
be possibly severed from sin, (and who can think but that they in this kind
suffer with our bodies) it seems to me that Christ took them also on him; as
now if there be any natural fainting of our hearts in prayer, etc. which is
not sinful, but the infirmity of the soul, and the fruit of our sin in
Adam, rather than a sin in us, being (originally) perhaps from some defect in
the flesh (as Christ says flesh is weak) that there was some such thing in
Christ (yet without sin) to me seems (I speak my thoughts with modest
submission) from Luk 22.43, 44. There appeared an Angel from heaven
strengthening him. Observe, it is not said only, discoursing with him, or
ministering to him (as at other seasons) but strengthening him, and what follows?
truly a passage very suitable to our experiences, of divine assistance in humane
frailty: then being in an Agony, he prayed the more earnestly. This is
therefore the sum of my thoughts herein, that all the infirmity, but not the
least of the iniquity of our Natures, was taken up by the Lord Christ properly,
and assumed personally in the state of his humiliation, in the days of his
flesh.

Secondly, 2ly. Our natural wearinesses. 1. Of Body.
As Christ took properly upon him the weaknesses, so the wearinesses of our
natures.

First, Bodily weariness upon occasion of bodily labor, Christ was as soon
tired therewith as another man (of his constitution, (etc.) would have been,
Jo. 4.6. Jesus therefore being wearied of his journey, sat thus on the well.
Now though it is manifest, that Adam in his primitive state, had labor imposed
on him by the Lord, I had rather say employment, (for labor as importing a
burden or trouble, doubtless it could not be) I never yet met with any one,
that thought that Adam was subjected unto weariness, for that is sensibly a
grievance, and the curse of sin, as is evident, Genesis 3.19. Which Curse Christ
bare and undoubtedly the weariness of Christ here mentioned, was to be
reckoned as one of our griefs, or grievances, which are said to be born by
Christ, Isai. 53.4. Surely he has born our griefs, etc. whence I conclude,
that it was our decayed nature that he took upon him; yea, the curse of our
natures, (such as weakness and weariness, etc.) though not the corruption of
our natures; for it is said, Gal. 3.13. That he was made a curse for us:
although I dare not go on step beyond this Scripture expression herein.

2ly. Soul weariness.
2ly. Christ was undoubtedly subjected to soul-weariness, as that of the body,
and to both as well as we. Tell me Christians, you that know by experience,
what is the hour of your spiritual weariness? is it not the hour of your
spiritual travail? Read what is said of Sion, Jer. 4.31. I have heard the
voice of a woman in travel, the anguish, etc. the voice of the daughter of
Sion, woe is me now, my soul is wearied: And mind what the Lord says of
Christ, Isai. 53.11. He shall see of the travel of his soul. Here you have
Christ in soul-travell; and if any shall make doubt of his soul weariness at
that time, let them compare the language of traveling Sion, with the voice of
her traveling King, Mat. 26.38. He says unto his Disciples, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: sorrowful unto death? What is that, but
weariness of his life? Hitherto refers all that former tyring travel of his
pilgrimage on earth, where you read of his groaning in spirit, and trouble in
spirit, Joh. 11.33. and Joh. 13.21. Sirs, what do you think of the travel of
his soul, when he cries out, My God, my God, whay have thou forsaken me? Think
you that this was not a tyring travel? for my part, I believe that never was
there any one soul, that knew most of the terrors of the Lord, those wearying
woes, and tyring terrors, that ever came near unto the sufferings of Christ in
degree: for he drank the very dregs of the Cup of Gods wrath, his Cup of
Vinegar and Gall, that he drank with his bodily mouth, I reckon but a shadow
and type of the tedious bitterness of his soul, and well therefore might that
Patheticall Poet make it the burden of his sad song (when he personates the
passion of lamenting Jesus, in the language of lamenting Jeremy) Was ever
grief like mine? And you may say to your Savior, Was ever weariness like
thine? Surely, if eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor heart understood the
glory of that REST, which Christ has purchased by that travel; neither have
they perceived the weariness that Christ underwent in that travel, we shall
never fully know the one, till we know both, nor be able to conceive of that
weariness, till we be able to receive that rest. Only thus we may argue in our
straightned understandings, That if the terrors of one sin, and the guilt of
one soul be so wearying to us, that nothing but infinite mercy can refresh us;
what tyrednesse must there needs be upon the soul of the Lord Jesus Christ.
2ly. He did imputatively bear the tyring guilt and curse etc. of our sins.
For as the next particular tells us -- The Lord Christ did (though not
properly, and so as either to be involved in the guilt, or depraved by the
stain) imputatively bear, and takes upon himself the sins of many souls,
even of all the Elect, to bear the weight of the sin, and the Lords wrath for
the sin, in behalf of their souls, who is therefore said 2 Cor. 5.21. To be
made sin for us, not for all, but for us; or if for all, yet but for all us,
Isai. 53.6. The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. These are the
many (considered in themselves, though they be but few comparatively) whose
sins he is said to bear, verse. 12. when he powered out his soul unto the death.
And this leads me to

2d Part, It was to our weaknesses and wearinesses, and for our sakes, not his
own.
The second Proposition, That it was our weakness and weariness, rather then his
own, that Christ took on him, and for our sakes rather then his own. This I
pass over, as being the full and plain importance of Isai. 53. throughout the
Chapter, and as necessarily deducible from what I have here already proved, and
therefore I shall proceed to

3d. Part. That Christ thereby became a suitable support for us.
The third Proposition, That the Lord Christ by being subjected unto our
weaknesses, and wearinesses is hereby become an apt support, and leaning stock
unto us. I have before showed, that the 110 Psalm, is by the Apostle expounded
of Christ, which closes with this brief prophecy of the sufferings of
Christ, and the issue of them, verse 7. He shall drink of the brook in the
way, therefore shall he lift up the head. It it is not said, then shall he lift
up his head, or therefore shall he lift up his own head, (though that were
true) but indefinitely the head; that is, (as his own, so) the head of those
that are bowed down, because his own head was bowed down to drink of the
brook of the waters of Marah; that is, therefore he is become a suitable Savior
to lift up the head; that is, to stay, to strengthen, to support the hearts of
poor disconsolate ones, because himself had his own head in the brook before
us; for two things are here imported, which are both expressed by the Apostle
to the Hebrews.

For 1. Thereby he gat skill as knowing our weaknesses and wearinesses
experimentally.
First, That, because Christ himself was once subject to weaknesses and
wearinesses, like as we are; therefore he has skill to succor us, as knowing
our grievances: indeed known unto the Lord God are all our sufferings, sorrows,
sicknesses, etc. but it is Cognitione intuitus, with a viewing knowledge: Known
they are to the Lord Christ, Cognitione sensus, with a feeling knowledge. Thus
Heb. 2.18. For in that himself suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. So in that himself was weary, and had need of refreshing
in his journeyings on earth, and had need of strengthening in his Agony,
therefore he is an accomplished high Priest, able to support the weak, and to
succor the weary.

2ly. Therefore also he has will to succor, 2ly. Therefore he has as good
will also because of sympathy.
as well as ability. Thou know the heart of a stranger, says God to Israel,
because thou wast a stranger in Egypt. So Christ knows the heart of an
afflicted, groaning, troubled, weakened, wearied soul: because it was once thus
with himself. This Antecedent, and Consequence, the Apostle has both
together, Heb. 2.17. Wherefore it behoved him, to be made like unto his
Brethren in all things, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest.
Hence is that sympathy of Christ in Heaven, with sorrowing Saints on Earth,
whose language is as Paul's, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? take
two Scriptures for it, the one Isai. 63.9. In all their afflictions he was
afflicted, and Act. 9.4. Why persecutest thou me? so says Christ to Satan,
when he assaults a weak Christian, Why temptest thou me? He was in Himself
persecuted before, now in his Saints; tempted before in his own soul, now in
his members, weak and weary before is his natural body, now in his mystical
body, therefore does his fellew-feeling engage him to faithfulness, and his
communion in sufferings, to commiseration on the sufferers. Therefore

Fourthly, and lastly, 4. Partic. That because Christ was made weak and weary
even as we, we have boldness to lean our weaknesses and wearinesses on him.
In that Christ was subjected to our weariness and weaknesses, and for our
sakes, and in our natures, and it is on him (thus prepared, and made a suitable
support) that we are called to lean: we may undoubtedly have great
encouragement, and strong consolation: so argues the Apostle, Heb. 4.15, 16.
We have not an high Priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, sin only excepted:
therefore let us come boldly to the Throne of grace. We may come to Christ and
say, Lord, strengthen us in our duty, as thou wast in thine Agony, refresh us
out of the Well of living waters, for once thou wast weary, and did sit down
upon the Well; Lord, lift up my head out of the waters of bitterness, for once
thine own head was bowed down to the brook in the way. Comfort you the
comfortless amongst you with these words.

CHAP. IX. How Christ was prepared to be the strength and stay of weak and
weary souls, by his estate of exaltation.
2ly. In his estate of Exaltation, he was also prepared hereunto.
BUt alas! what encouragement were this to weak and weary souls to lean upon
Christ, if he were only made weak and weary? you will say the less help is there
for us, if he were so too: and indeed had Christ laid down only his strength,
and forsaken for us his Fathers bosom, his resting place and had not
repossessed and taken them up again, I should not be so strongly persuaded to
plead with you to lean upon him. But this I know, that Christ is dead; yea,
rather that he is risen again: his strength was laid down, but it is taken up
again, his resting place was a while as it were quitted by him, but is now
restored unto him, and in him, unto them that lean upon him; for because he
lives, they shall live also: because he is strong, they shall be strengthened:
because he is at rest, they shall be refreshed: for he has therefore prayed
the Father, that where, and in what state he is, they may be also. Therefore

2ly, Christ was prepared to become a suitable support unto the weak and weary,
by being lifted up unto his Crown, and by the state of his exaltation. I shall
lay down these three Propositions.

Three Propositions explayning this.
1. That exalted Christ took up all strengrh and refreshment, as well as when
Crucified, he stooped down to weaknesses and wearinesses.

2. That that strength and rest was taken up in our behalf, for our sakes and
interest, as well as his own.

3. That therefore, herein we may take exceeding encouragement to lean upon him
both as to the one, and the other.

First, 1. That Christ glorified has received sufficient strength.
There is strength and rest enough with Christ glorified, and triumphant for
all believers militant.

First, For strength, read Ephe. 1.19, 20, 21. and tell me poor heart, what
thou would have more then is there expressed? Its said, the mighty power of
God wrought (and in whom?) in Christ Jesus, (and when?) when he raised him from
the dead (and to what end?) that he might set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places: (this was the exaltation of him who was crucified through
weakness) and what follows?) Where are those places, of what rank are they?
Why? far above all principalities, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, etc. and has put all things under his feet, (except
himself, who put them under, as the Apostle else where argues) so that,
Christian, name what name thou can, here is a name, one name that may revive
thee more then all they need discourage thee. Think of what power thou can,
or what might thou will, here is strength above all strength, might beyond all
might, as himself says, Look, and be saved: so say I, lean and be
strengthened. How say thou now? does the name of Devil disturb thee? does
the Principality Satan scare thee? does the power of legion affright thee? thou
dare not begin to wrestle with these, or if thou have begun, thou dare not
hold on; why? whilst a fearful heart names these, or any of these, let a
faithful heart name Christ in stead of all, and it will more then answer all;
for him has God exalted; yea, highly exalted, Phil. 2.9. and given him a name
above every name: yea, far above every name, whether it be principality, or
might, or power, present or future (that is to day, or can possibly be to
morrow) yea, in this world, or in that which is to come.

2ly. Rest for all that lean upon him.
2ly, For Rest. You heard in the last, that God set him at his own right hand,
so Heb. 1.3. He sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Now
sitting, you know, imports Rest, especially sitting in Majesty, and then [on
high] there is power and rest together. This glorious rest of Jesus Christ,
after all his labors, travells, and soules-wearinesse, is that which we
properly and particularly commemorate, in that which the Holy Ghost calls the
Lords day, that Christian Sabbath wherein Christ has rested from all his
labors (that is wearying labors) wherefore he blessed the Lords day, and
sanctified it.

It Is true, perhaps will your souls say, we know indeed, that there are enough
refreshments, and strength to spare in the Lord, and with his Son Jesus
Christ: but alas, what is that to us? we see in the world that others are rich,
but that is little to us, when we are poor: others strong, and healthful, but
that is little to us, when we are sick: Oh! what is his strength and rest to us?

Poor soul, much every way. I had almost said, as much as to himself. Have
you heard what Christ said in the days of his infirmity? For your sakes
sanctify I my self; could you but hear him speak from the seat of his
Majesty on high, his voice would be, For your sakes have I thus glorified my
self: yea, such has his voice already, and often been, and I have believed it,
therefore have I spoken. This therefore which is the

2d. Proposi.

That the strength and rest he has received, he has received for us. Proved.

1. From express Scripture testimony:


Second Proposition, will abundantly appear. 1. If you consider express
testimony of Scripture. 2. The Scripture Character of Christ's receiving this
strength, and rest. 3. Of ours received from, and through Christ. 4. Of
Christ's, until we have received ours.

1. For express testimony of Scripture. A threefold Cord shall I make use of,
to bind up your faith close unto this truth: Predictions that went before him,
the very words that came from, and together with him; the report that after
him, 1. The Scriptures before Christ.
is born of him.

1. The Scriptures that told the Believers of old of a Messiah, or Christ to
come, and of the returning of this King to sit down on the Majesty on high,
assured them also of their interest, and concernment herein. Thus the Psalm
which Paul interprets of Christ, Psalm. 68.18. Thou have ascended up on high,
thou have led captivity captive, (there is Christ's glorious exaltation, and what
follows?) thou have received gifts, (that is strength, and abilities, and
spiritual refreshments, and for whom were these received?) for men, yea, for
the rebellious, that God might dwell among them. And sure where God dwells,
there dwells strength; surely there are resting places in his dwelling House.
The Lord Christ, you see, is forespoken of as exalted for our advnatage, and
receiving his Throne for our sakes, as well as for his own glory. You hear
what the Prophets witness of Christ's receiving in trust for souls.

Observe Secondly, Christ's own confessions, both of what, 2ly. Scriptures taken
from his own mouth.
and for whom he has received. Mind his words, in the days of his flesh, Jo.
14.2. In my Fathers house are many Mansions, (that is Resting-places.) I go to
prepare a place (says he, for himself? no, but) for you: there is for rest, and
then for power, see verse. 12. of the same Chapter, Verily he that believes
(that is, he that leans) on me, the works that I do, those shall he do, and
greater works then these, because I go to the Father: that is, upon my
ascension, and glorification, the strength that I had in the days of my flesh,
shall you have; yea, the power that I shall farther receive, shall you receive
also: this precious promise cannot (without injury) be confined to the
Apostles, with respect to their works of miracles, which Christ himself has
set as an open door to every believer.

Thirdly, 3ly, Scriptures recorded after Christ, by his Apostles.
Behold what testimony his Apostles bare here unto in their own experiences. 1.
As to his power, as Ephe. 2.19, 20. What is the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward, who believe (that is, to leaning souls) according to the
working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him, etc.
and set him on high above all powers. I must not amplify, for more fully I
cannot speak: The power that works in the Believer, is the same exceeding
great and mighty power of Jesus Christ, etc.

2ly. For Rest. He is said expressly, Heb. 9.24. To appear in the presence of
God for us, that is say, in our behalfs. Now you have assuredly heard, that all
refreshings are from that presence. 2ly. From the notions under which
Scriptures represent Christ receiving them.


2ly, Remark under what Notions the Scriptures represent Christ as receiving
this strength, and Rest. Such as these, a Captain, a forerunner, an Ausband,
an Head, etc.

1. As his poor peoples Captain.
1. If Christ glorified has received strength, and refreshment, it is as
General of the Horsemen, and Chariots of Israel. Now if a General be said to
be strengthened as such, or to receive recruits, it is not as he is a private
person, but when his Armies are strengthened, when his whole body of Soldiers
are refreshed. Now what says the Spirit? Heb. 2.9, 10. Christ suffered death,
and was Crowned with glory, that he might through grace taste death for every
man, (how is that? every man? (that is every man that shall taste of everlasting
glory, for he limits his language) verse. 10. It pleased God in bringing many
souls to glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect, etc. Put both
verses together, and you have thus much to be plainly taken up, Note.
that, When Jesus Christ was perfected, that is, exalted unto glory, for whom
he tasted death, for them he received a Crown of glory, as their Captain, he
has received it; and as he has received it, so shall he give even a Crown of
glory, not only to Paul, but to all those also who love his appearing, 2 Timothy
4.8.

2d. Representative.
2ly, Christ is said to have received them as our Representative, or
forerunner. Now a surrendered City, or Garrison, Note.
is then said to be taken with all the strength of it, when the persons
appointed by the prevailing Army, or employed as their Representatives have
taken possession of it; though the whole Army (besides their Representatives so
commissioned) are as yet out of it. Thus Heb. 6.20. Whither the forerunner is
for us entered, viz. Jesus, etc. Christ is entered, but it is as forerunner, and
therefore it is for us that he is entered.

3ly, 3d. Husband.
Christ is held forth receiving them as our Husband, and therefore for our
advantage. If the Husband have received a Kingdom, who ever made question,
Note.
but that in that very hour, the Wife (though not yet actually invested, and
crowned) is made a Queen, so Psalm. 45.6. Thy Throne O God is for ever and
ever, (there is Christ's resting place) the Scepter of thy Kingdom, is a right
Scepter, (there is his strength, and power) now verse. 9. At thy right hand did
stand the Queen in gold of Ophir. The leaning soul makes Christ her Husband,
and beloved, and Christ makes her his Queen, to share with him in his
exaltation, and such honor have all Gods Saints. See also Cant. 3. you have
mention of Solomon's bed (that is Christ's glorious Rest) Threescore valiant men
are about it holding Swords, etc. verse. 7. (there is Christ's exceeding great
strength) And for whom is the glorious Rest, and mighty strength prepared? why?
verse 10. It Is for the Daughters of Jerusalem.

4ly, 4. Head, yea and
Christ is said to be exalted to the glory of all the foresaid power, and rest,
as he is the head of poor believers, Ephesians. 1.22. And (that is, when he had
spoken at large of Christ's glory before) has put all things under his feet,
and gave him to be head over all things to his Church. Is Christ glorified over
all things? It Is for, Note.
and to his Church. Now how can the Head be strong, and perfect, and be at
Rest, as long as any of the Members be weak, or as long as the Body is full of
weariness?

I might add, Christ was exalted not only as head, As their life also.
but as the heart also, and very life of believers: now how can our lives be
strong, and fresh, Note.
if we be weak and weary? Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear,
ye shall appear with him in glory. Is Christ glorified? it is as he is our
life: therefore because he lives in strength, and at rest, (for this is the sum
of all his glory) shall we live also, where none shall say, I am weak, nor
complain, I am weary.

3ly. From the style wherein Scriptures express the rest and strength that we
receive, arguing that it is the strength.
3ly, Observe how Scriptures express our spiritual strength, and refreshments
received by us from Christ: and you must acknowledge that they are the very
things received by Christ from the Father.

1. As for the believers strength, Col. 1.11. Who are strengthened with all
might, according to his glorious power. Almighty strength is derived from
Christ to believers, therefore the very strength unto which he is exalted, so
Phil. 4.13. I can do all things (here is a kind of Omnipotency in a Creature,
but how?) through Christ strengthening me. Note.
Let me tell the weak hearts that are among you for their comfort, that leaning
can do as much as Christ, on whom thou leanest, is able to do; and Christ can
do as much as God can do, for, he can do all things, so (with reverence I
speak it) can faith in him that was once crucified through weakness, but is
now raised in power, and unto power; that once being weary, sat down on the
well, but now being at rest, sits down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

2ly. Rest of Christ's own receiving.
2ly, As for the rest, quiet, peace, and establishment that the soul has that
leanes on the Lord Jesus, Scripture so phraseth it, that if it were not the
very rest, and peace of Christ in glory, (I still mean relatively considered,
viz. as the head of believers) in its measure, it would not be able to bear
such Hyperboles. It Is not called only peace with God, and rest with Christ: but
the very quiet, and peace of God, even that peace that passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts through Christ, Phi. 4.7. An infinite
peace shall keep house in a finite Creature, a peace that passes all
understanding, shall keep our minds. Now add this infinite peace to almighty
power, and how can you speak higher of Christ, the Prince of peace, on whose
shoulders the Government of all things in heaven and earth is laid?

Lastly, 4. From the notion in which scriptures represent Christ's own state as
Mediator, until we have full possession of that strength and
See how the scriptures represent Christ's estate, as he is Mediator (though
personally and absolutely considered, he is infinitely and absolutely God,
blessed for ever, yet) I say, as Mediator, and relatively looked upon; and it
will yet more fully appear, how that the strength and rest that Christ
glorified has received, he has received in trust for us, for till such time
as we all, that ever have leaned, or do lean, or shall come truly to lean on
him, come to be fully strong in him, and at rest with him, himself is not
complete in his glory. This is the judgment of reverend men, and to me it
seems sufficiently to he grounded on that phrase, Ephe. 1.22, 23. God gave
Christ to be head over all things, to his Church, which is his body, Note.
the fulness of him that fills all in all. Christ as personally considered, is
God filling all in all: Christ relatively considered, as head of his Church, is
not full till they be full; full of strength in all grace and goodness, full
of rest from all evil: so that in that day, that every believer shall come
fully to be saved, in that day shall Christ be fully glorified, and not till
that blessed, looked for, longed for day, which though it be for an appointed
time, yet in the end it will come, therefore wait for it, for in the end it
will come, and will not tarry. Therefore

Thirdly, Herein may leaners on this Beloved, 3d. Propos. Therefore may weak
and weary souls have strong consolation and encouragement to lean on Christ
for strength and rest
have strong consolation, a sure foundation, whereon the highest faith may
securely build. Is this a truth, that that Christ that was once both weak and
weary, and both for thee, has now all power, and rest, and all for thee? Why?
here lean O friends, yea, lean inseparably, O Beloved! O let thy faith be as
the Holy Ghost calls it, Col. 2.12. The faith of the operation of God, which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, wherein also you are risen
with him. Let persecutions, watchings, wearinesses; Note.
let Principalities, powers, and Dominions; let what has, or does, or can come
upon you, rise up against you; only rise you up against them, and you shall
rise up above them, through the faith of the operation of God, whereby he
raised up Christ for his own glory, and as you have seen, for your advantage.
Wherefore we having such strong consolation, who have fled for a refuge to the
hope that is set before us, Let us hold this hope as an anchor of the soul both
sure and steadfast (when Rain descends, and Winds rise, and Waves beat) because
our forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, etc. Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. Let
Isaiahs prophecy be found true of thee, and me, Isai. 45.24. Surely shall one
say, in the Lord I have strength, and righteousness. For this is his
Righteousness, and hereunto shall that strength be laid forth, that, To you who
are troubled there may be rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels, etc. 2 These. 1.7. When he shall render
vengeance to all that trouble you: to him be glory for evermore.

CHAP. X. Contains the reason why so few receive strength and refreshment from
Christ, that yet seem to lean upon Christ.
ANd thus have I explained the Object of this Act of leaning, viz. Christ as
humbled first to weakness and weariness; and then exalted to strength and rest,
that he might be the support of the weak, and the stay of the weary.

Object. But now if this be so, Whence is it that there are so many found
leaning on Christ, that yet continue in their weaknesses and wearinesses still?
Oh! says a poor soul, methinks my experience confutes your Doctrine; for I have
been an hanger upon Christ for some years, and yet my grace and spiritual
refreshments are as small as ever: how is it then that Christ is prepared to be
so suitable a support to leaning souls?

Ans. I answer thou may, its likely, think thou have been so, viz. a leaning
soul! but have got no strength, neither any refreshing? truly I sadly fear
thou have but pleased thy self with fancy, and never yet made application of
the Lord Christ unto thy soul by faith. Never, never, lay the blame on the
preparing of Christ, for he is exquisitely accomplished, and most fully
furnished to supply weak and weary souls: surely if he have not supplied, it
is because thou have not applied. Note. God has prepared Christ for you. And
now he must be improved by you.
The best made Bed must be laid down upon, if you would have Rest; the best
dressed food must be eaten of, if you would have strength. The Brass made into a
Serpent, and lifted up too, must also be looked upon, Jo. 3.14. There Is
Application as well as Preparation, and Jesus Christ lifted up both to Cross
and Crown, and so prepared must be looked upon, (believed on, acted upon etc.)
and so improved, and then no doubt but weakness shall be made strong, and
weariness refreshed. Therefore the misery lies not at all in the want of
Preparation, but Application and improvement. Note.
If a Feast were made ready enough to refresh forty thousand, and but forty eat
of it, there can but forty be strengthened by it. If there be Quarters in a City
large enough for an whole Army, and but one small Company will enter, and abide
in those Mansions; there can no more be recruited by those Mansions. I do
believe that the spiritual Canaan is big enough to be a Rest unto All of all
Nations; and that there is strength enough prepared with Christ, for universal
Salvation, when as yet I know that they are but some of all Nations, one of a
Family, or two of a Tribe, that shall be taken, and brought to Sion, or that
shall enter into his rest, when the most of men shall fall short, and perish in
the Wilderness. Canaan was in it self, as accessible to the one as to another;
Wherefore then was it that they could not enter in? Why? the Apostle asks it,
and answers it, Heb. 3.19. Because they believed not: that is, there wanted
Application. What Is the reason that one man thrives at a Table, and another
does not? because one eats and another does not: for as many as believed, Note.
they entered into rest, Heb. 4.3. Therefore I judge, that though our
Application of Christ thus prepared, be only the instrumental, and not at all
the meritorious cause of our receiving spiritual strength, and of our entering
into rest; Yet I am bold to affirm, that the non-improving of this prepared
salvation, is not only the instrumental, bur also meritorious cause of out
going without strength, and our tyredness under the terrors of the Lord: and
though I never thought that Christ was in the Fathers counsel prepared for
all, yet judge I that there is enough for all prepared in Christ, No absudity
in inviting ALL, though all cannot, or will not come, because there is enough
prepared to serve all, if all could improve what is prepared.
could it be but improved by all; therefore I am wholly a stranger from that
supposed absurdity in inviting all, though all will not, or cannot come (I
think both are ever true together) because there is enough made ready for all,
if they could or would but come; and what know we the servants that are sent to
invite, who (amongst the invited ones) will prove the guests? Nor yet have I
ever heard it accounted an absurdity amongst men seriously to invite those who
we are seriously persuaded) will not, or cannot come: Says the wife, Instance.
I will warrant such an one will not, or cannot come: yet says the Husband, we
will invite him howsoever. Who counts this to be nonsense? And, yet so
sharp-witted are some, as that they cannot discern with what color of sense,
God can invite those that he knows certainly cannot, or will not come; or how
God can be serious in it. Why? sirs, had they come, they should have been
welcome; yea, but our Doctrine supposes they cannot come: it is true, and so
does Scripture, yet if they could have come, there had (say we) been Christ
enough, grace enough, glory enough for them, and all ready and prepared. You
know it is no absurdity to bid more guests then can come; but this is the
absurdity, to have too little food for the guests that do come: Now this cannot
be charged upon the preparations of the Lord; for God sends out his invitations
unto all sorts of men, and says, Mat. 22.4. Behold I have prepared my supper,
and all things are ready; the Cloth is laid, Meat on board, Stools and
Chaires set, all conducements to repast and refreshments are ready; yea, but
the guests were not ready, they made light of it, and went their ways, one to
his Farm, etc. ver. 5. Now shall we dare to blame God for keeping open house,
(that is, inviting all, because the Lord knows all will not come upon his
invitation, or that all cannot? Why? yet he knows that they that cannot will
not; and who can (yet) have them excused? they may complement it with an I
cannot come, and it is true too, but God knows their meaning is, they will not
come. Sometimes your Great Men keep open House, invite all comers, and all
that do come are welcome, but all cannot come; because of this, what fool
will think that their magnificence is counterfeit and not serious? Yet dare
blasphemers say, that either you must grant that all have power and free will
to come, or else God is not serious in inviting all: does not Scripture say, He
would have all men to be saved? Why, think a little, suppose such a Noble Man
should say to his Steward, I am willing that all the poor of the Town should
be relieved, and all strangers entertained, and therefore discourage none from
coming, but bid as many as come welcome: and his Steward should answer, My
Lord, You know such and such cannot come, othersome think themselves as well at
home, others do not love your Lordship, and will not come; but, and if you were
really minded that they should All come, you would make them come, you have
power enough, etc. Never talk of inviting All, your Lordship is not serious in
what you say, and your Hospitality is but a piece of absurdity: Affront
insufferable, offer now such [language] to thy Governor, and will he be
pleased with thee. Mal. 1.8. Pray, how comes that Lord to be bound, to make
them to accept that which he was never bound so much as to offer. Especially,
how comes God to be so far in man's debt, as to be bound to make all come,
else he must be charged (as not serious) in inviting All; since the real
tenders of grace unto All, are of MERE MERCY, but the making of any to accept
those tenders (who once had freewill and full power to choose the good, but
have wilfully lost it, and are now unwilling thereunto, till they be made
willing) is (not a debt unto any, but) a MERE MIRACLE of MERCY to those few
that are vessels of mercy prepared unto that which is prepared for them. So
then, you may gather from what I have spoken, that Christ prepared, is not
enough to the actual stay and support of the weak and weary, but he must be
improved and applied by the leaning soul. And this leads me to

CHAP. XI. Discovers the spring of this leaning Act, viz. Interest in him whom
we lean upon. 1. Question, What this interest imports? Answer, An Assent and
Consent. The Assent described.
The 2d. Cons. The Original or spring of this leaning act. Her beloved.
THe second Particular in order to the Explanation of this Leaning Act of the
soul, viz. the Original or Spring of this applying, improving, appropriating,
leaning act of the Spouse (in the Text).

And verily to deal rightly with my Text, there is not any of these
particulars, that may be pretermitted, for as the Text mentions the Act, viz.
Leaning, and the Object, viz: the Beloved; so also the original of such an
act, which is an interest in the person leaned upon, and that is expressed
also, viz. [her beloved.] You speak Sirs, of leaning upon Christ; yea, but tell
me what interest you have in Christ? or how you came by it? else may I say with
a bitter scorn, Who art thou that leanest upon another Beloved? My Text bids
me thus to challenge you, for thus it runs, leaning upon her beloved. And who
can suppose Christ to be thy leaning-stock, if he be not thy Christ? yea, how
dare thou lay thine head in his bosom, unto whom thou never yet gave the
heart in thy bosom? Dare thou live as a wife with him, whom thou can not
love? Dare thou exact that benevolence which belongs to a wife, when thou will not perform the least conjugall duty that is due to an Husband? How say
thou, that thou have believed, when yet Christ is none of thy Beloved? thou
have leaned, but thou have not loved: surely it requires a brow of Brass, and
an Whores forehead, to attest such things.

It Is Interest, and only Interest in Christ, Viz. Interest in Christ whom we
lean upon.
that gives a right to this act of leaning upon Christ.

This word I take up from my Text, with respect unto the wanton Christians of
the present Age. Oh! they make nothing of believing, and of rolling all their
sins (were they more then they are, which can scarce be) upon Jesus Christ,
as I heard for certain of a woman of a vile conversation, who was got into
mounting Clouds of the Ranting Creed, when a Neighbor told her vainly, sure
Mistress, A word to wanton Confidents or leaners upon Christ.
such a one Christ will have a very heavy load of your sins, she answered
wickedly, Even let him take them, let him take them all, i will never trouble my
self with them: that was as to the guilt of them, for as for the Commission of
them, it appeared by her daily conversation, that that was too light a thing to
trouble her.

My Brethren, I would feign know, what such wanton Confidents (for believers I
know not how to call them) can say to what God has expressly said to them? Why?
will they say, Christ has said, Whosoever believes shall not perish, and
whosoever comes, will he by no means cast forth, and therefore you shall never
dissuade us from believing, or keep us from in-comming. Do you ask us how we
dare take such hold of Christ,? why, have not your self said, that he invites
sinners to take hold of his strength, Isai. 27.5. that they may have peace?
It Is true friend, but still upon his own terms, you must lay down your Briars
and Thorns; that is, your warring wicked conversation, you must forsake the
one, if you will hold to the other: But and if you resolve as yet to hold your
sins, at least wise if you do not resolve to lay them down, (for, God
knocks off their fingers from leaning on Christ.
Who will set them up, but he shall be burnt up together with them?) know, that
the Lord is so far from calling you to take hold, that he will even knock off
your fingers from holding upon his Covenant, Psalm. 50.10. But unto the wicked,
God says, what have thou to do, to take my Covenant into thy mouth? Unto what
wicked says God so? unto all that have been wicked? no, for he explaines it of
those that are resolved to be wicked still, verse. 17. Even that hate to be
reformed. Wherefore if thou say, thou leanest, show me thine Interest, whence
such an act of intimacy, as leaning is, should flow. It Is certain Christ
profits nothing, unless he be thus applied; and how should he be applicable,
but by being made thine? Thy soul undoubtedly must be able to say to Christ,
as Christ to God, Isai. 49.5. My God shall be my strength. That Is right indeed,
if he be thy Christ, he shall be thy strength. So David, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord
is my God, my strength in whom I will trust. If Christ be thine, lean, and
welcome; the more thou leanest, the dearer shall thou be unto him, as it is
said, He loved his Disciple best, that leaned upon his bosom most, Jo. 21.20.
Is he thine Husband? then lean thy head in his bosom, and it shall pass for
love: but if he be not, make him thy Beloved, or else thy leaning shall be
counted impudence and presumption. Dare thou go a Whoring with Satan, and
willingly a wantoning with the world all the day long, and then come in prayer,
and lean upon Christ at night? Why? Who art thou that leanest upon him, whom
thou have not made, Two Questions answered.
neither desire to make thy beloved?

I shall therefore first, briefly explain this Interest: And then a little
help you in the improvement of such interest, as the ground in order unto such
an act of leaning. And for the

1. This Interest does necessarily import, 1. What this interest imports.
and include these two things: An Assent, and a Consent, by which mutually
Christ becomes our Husband, and Beloved, and we his Spouse, even the Lambs wife.

1. A free and full assent of the Understanding, 1. An Assent described.
apprehending (in some satisfactory measure at the least) that Jesus Christ is
altogether lovely, and a meet head, or husband for us.

I say, a free assent, in opposition to acknowledgements, A free assent.
that may be forced out of the worst of men, yea, even of Devils concerning
Jesus Christ, and his loveliness.

I say, a full assent, A full assent.
with respect to those dividers of Christ, who think it meet indeed to have
Christ for their Priest and Savior: but do not assent to the needfulness and
loveliness of Christ as Prophet, Prince, or Sanctifier: Therefore say I, the
understanding in this assent, apprehends him to be altogether lovely.

Lastly, I say it is an Assent, A self, reflecting assent.
that he is a meet match for us. And this carries it beyond any assent that
can be given by Devils, or despairing Reprobates, who though they do, and may
apprehend, and believe that there is salvation with Christ for lost sinners,
yet whilst they believe they tremble, as not being able to apprehend that there
is any for themselves: and therefore though they confessedly assent to this,
that Jesus is the Son of the most high God, (and consequently able to save, and
meet to be received by sinners) yet they themselves, as for themselves, cry out
in the mean while, What have we to do with thee? as you may see, Luke 8.28. But
what says Paul, and I take it to be the language of this Assent, This is a
faithful saying, etc. That Christ came to save sinners of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. Jesus Christ, I persuade my self, in every respect will make a good
Husband, even a good Husband for me; and that he perfectly is worthy and meet
to be beloved, even my Beloved.

Methinks, I am fully convinced that I absolutely need such an Husband as
Christ is, to pay my debts which are great: and as much need I have of such an
head to live with me, (as a man of knowledge) to reprove, to convince, to
instruct me; and even as great need also of such an head as I see Christ will
be, to govern mine unruly Family, my heart, my thoughts, mine affections, etc.
Methinks, I see not in Christ any thing at all that I can spare, neither can I
find any thing missing in Christ, that my soul can stand in need of: this is
the voice of that Assent which I am speaking of. And this you have at large
explained, Isai. 45.21, 22, 23, 24. Where by way of promise, and prophecy, he
speaks of this very Assent, I have sworn says the Lord, That unto me every
tongue shall swear, (23. verse) And what shall they swear? That there is no
God else beside God, a just God, and a Savior, and that unto him they look
even for salvation by him only, verses 21. and 22. Yea, and surely shall one
say, in the Lord have I strength and righteousness, v. 24. That is, they shall
be assuredly persuaded, that in, and only by Jesus Christ, there is strength
and righteousnesss for those that look unto him; that is, for Believers; yea,
for themselves in particular.

Therefore let me ask your souls this question.

Were they ever fully, and satisfactorily persuaded, that Jesus Christ were
only, and fully such an one, as you could unfeignedly make your Beloved? If
you answer, no, Why, then take heed of leaning on him whilst you are of this
mind. If you answer, yea, you are so convinced, that Christ is wholly, and
only worthy of your affections. Oh! why is it that you sit so much, so
wantonly I may say, so whorishly in the laps of other Lovers.

CHAP. XII. The consent described. Direction how to improve this interest; As
also the third Consideration opening this leaning, as to the Notion of the word.
SEcondly, As an assent of the Understanding, 2. A Consent.
so a consent of the Will, is necessarily supposed unto such an interest.

This Consent I shall thus describe. 1. Described.


It is a free and full act of the Will, rejecting all other lovers, and
receiving whole Christ in his own way, or upon his own terms.

So that as the form of the Assent is in conceiving aright of Christ in the
understanding, so the form of this Consent is the right receiving of Christ by
the Will.

I say, it is a free act of the Will: for Christ wooes, A free act of the will.
and wins the affections, he ravisheth them not. Indeed at first, they are not
only coy, but crooked: He comes to his own, (in this sense) even his own
intended, and elect Lady and Spouse) but she receives him not. What gracious
heart is there, but with bitterness remembers, how many unmannerly and
unworthy ways, it gave unto Jesus Christ before he brought it unto a Yea, and
a Amen? But Christ of unwilling, makes them willing, and this is expressed,
Psa. 110.2, 3. The Lord by sending forth the rod of his strength, makes them a
willing people, in the day of his power. This power of Christ, by an holy force
upon them, (in the first working of grace) frees them, Christ's love constraines
them: He draws them (and it is with the Cords of a man) and then their
affections freely go, yea, They run after him, so Cant, 1.4.

I say also, a full act of the Will, A full Act.
because I thus judge that a divided heart never yet married Jesus Christ; thou
must not be almost, but altother persuaded to be a Christian; surely that
Christ that will not allow one man to serve two Masters, will never allow one
woman to have two Husbands; especially if himself must be one of them. Surely
herein, though our affections are not perfect, as to the degree; yet must they
be sincere, as to their kind, and united among themselves: for therefore I call
it the full act of the Will, that is, of the united affections. A woman does
not only marry her love, but her fear, her desire, her delight, even all her
affections, in their degree to her Husband: In a word, she engages her will to
her Husband. If David had need to cry out, unite my heart to fear thy name, as
Psalm. 86.11. What need have we to pray, Unite our hearts to bear the name, by
marrying thine only begotten Son, by matching our selves unto Jesus Christ. We
must have but one heart for one Husband, for one is our Husband, even Christ, 2
Cor. 11.2.

Rejecting all others.
I say moreover, rejecting all other lovers; that is, we must break our league
with Hell, and our Covenant with death. Indeed had our hearts been chaste and
faithful before, we should not need to break, but only to tie a knot, Note.
but because of our former wanton dalliance with, and engagements unto other
lovers, (as you may with shame and sorrow see Hoseah 2.7. Therefore will the
Lord Christ have us solemnly renounce and disclaim them, though they will not
give us a Bill of divorcement. Heaken O Daughter, and consider, forget also
thine own people, and so shall the King greatly delight in thy beauty, Psalm
45.10, 11. Farewell flesh, get thee behind me Satan, depart from me you workers
of iniquity, wantons, worldlings, my former lovers, my former lusts, for now am
I married unto the Lord Jesus Christ.

And receiving Christ.
I say withal, a receiving of Christ, because dissent from other suitors, must
be seconded with Consent unto him, as it is expressed Hos. 2.7. Having left
other lovers, she must return to her first Husband. It is not enough to
think, or say, I am none of Satan's, I am not for the world, I will not be for
sin, but I am Christ's; I am, and through grace will continue Christ's, and none
but Christ's. Is not this that which the Spouse so frequently professes, I am
my beloveds, and he is mine, Cant. 6.3. I am my beloveds, and his desire is
toward me, Cant. 7.10. My beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. 2.16. Observe
the variety and inversion: I am his, He is mine: He is mine, and I am his. What
is this but the marriage-match, and in the truest sense, the True-lovers-knot.

I say likewise, a receiving of whole Christ. Verily, sirs, Even whole Christ.
Christ is not divided. The soul that will marry her Savior, must marry her
Sanctifier; and in marrying her Priest, she must marry her Prophet: if she
match to one that will pay her debts, she must match to one that will manage
her affairs: yea, and her desire shall be toward him, and he shall rule over
her, so Psa. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him. You must not think
only of standing at his right hand, and of receiving honor by him; but also
of doing homage, and giving of worship to him. If you must come up to Sarahs
example in calling and and counting him your Lord. Thus David that Kingly
Prophet, takes him for his King, and his Prophet, whom he takes for his
Savior, Psalm. 25.5. Lead me in thy truth, (there is the first) and teach me,
(there is the second) for thou art the God of my salvation, (there is the third.)
So then, since true faith does ever take hold upon an whole Christ, who is
King, Priest, and Prophet, whether it be granted, that this Faith does
justify, as it receives Christ under the precise Nosion of Ruler and Teacher,
as well as of Priest, (which some affirm) or only of Priest and Surety, (as
others do judge) that is solely as presenting his righteousness to God for
us, and as putting that his righteousness upon us, and not as working that
righteousness in us, that is most usually called Holiness, which seems chiefly
(as to respect the Princely and Prophetical office of Christ, so) to relate to
that purifying or sanctifying act of faith, spoken of, Act. 15.9. rather then
that justifying act of faith spoken of Romans 5.1. Yet must I assert, that no
faith does justify, but that which takes Christ for King, and Lawgiver as
well as Savior, Isai. 33.22. Faith justifies, si non qua totum, saltem quae
totum and recipit and respicit Christum. Take heed, souls! of distinguishing
here between LORD and JESUS, as Judge Cook used to do (by laying off of his
Gown) between Judge and Cook: If Christ's Coat be seamless, surely Christ
himself is divisionless. And it is far safer for me, and you, to be careful
in uniting practically (what God has certainly joined together) then to be
overcurious in distinguing notionally, where if we divide practically, we are
undone everlastingly. Yea, are there not some Pilats (that ask what is truth?)
that even question Justification it self, because some raise so various, so
dubious Questions about it; and whilst these contend so much about the Cement,
they call into question the very Foundation, and say, the Builders shall agree
before we build with them.

Yea, and a receiving of him upon his own terms.
Lastly, I say, a receiving of Christ upon his own terms. Perhaps some guests
would come to the Marriage, when their Oxen are proved, and their Farms
managed, etc. and if they might first go and bury their Father, Mat. 8.21. And
thus would we be indenting with, and thrusting our own terms upon the Lord
Chrst, but if we marry him, we must marry on his own terms with him, and what
those are, we shall have occasion to speak in the Hindrances, and therefore
thither we refer thee for the present.

Now therefore, that soul that thus Assents and Consents unto Jesus Christ,
both in Understanding and Will; both in the knowledge and love of the truth:
the soul that thus Conceives and Receives, of such a soul may we say in the
language of Rev. 19.7. The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made
her self ready.

This is the soul that may and ought to lean, the soul that may and must
apply: How to improve this interest.
this soul has an interest. And now let me call for the improvement.

This is the soul that should be much in meditating, 2. By often meditating of
this strength and rest with Christ,
what strength and rest her Head and Husband has received or her, Psa. 45.1.
My heart is enditing a good matter; what was that? Why? Things appertaining to
the King; and what are those? a Throne, and a Scepter, verse. 6. that is, Rest
and Strength: and for whom? Why? For the Queen at his right hand, verse. 9. Now
sirs, do we believe this, that our souls are married to the King of glory? Oh
then! O then! why is it that we have such base and sordid familiarity and
fellowship with this World? surely the reason why there is so much Earth in our
lives, nay, may I say, so much Hell in our lives, is, because there is so
little heaven in our thoughts, Phil. 3.20. whereas our Conversation should be
in Heaven, whence we look for a Savior.

2ly. 2. By often speaking of it to others.
This is the soul that should be much in relating, what a gainer she has
been by making Christ her beloved. What Zeresh? what Wife amongst you could
hold your peace, if your Husband should be promoted to be second man in the
Land? Let thy soul make her boast in the Lord, To Christ himself.
and speak thou the things that thou have meditated concerning the King, Psalm.
45.1. Yea, speak much of it unto Jesus Christ, and say, I am thy Spouse, O
Lord, I am thy Spouse, and thou have received gifts for me, therefore give
strength, give refreshings to me: the language of Psalm. 68.18. (speaking to
Christ in the second person) will warrant such pleas at the Throne of grace.

3ly. 3ly. By enlarging affections toward Christ hereupon.
This is the soul that should improve her interest in Christ, by enlarging her
affections toward Christ. Have thou an interest in Christ for thy stay and
strength? say as David, Psalm. 18.1. I will love thee, O Lord, O my strength.
And indeed the stronger the love is, the stronger the leaning will be.

Lastly; 4ly. By living the life of faith.
This is the soul that whose life should be made up of faith, and of obedience.

Of Faith. For says David, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, and
upon what is is fixed? Why? trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7.

And obedience in the sense hereof.
Of Obedience. Be the work never so cross to flesh and blood, never so great
and difficult, though fighting with Beasts, though wrestling with Devils,
because she is strong in her Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10,
12.

Never so tedious and tyresome, though reaping in his Harvest, even all the
heat and under the burden of the day, because say the Apostles, such a soul
shall have rest with us; yea, even with Christ: for when his Spouse has
wrought with him all the day of her life, she shall lie down with him in the
night of her death, and rest from all her labors, because she is interested in
the Lord, for so says the Spirit. Reu. 14.13. Thus the Church of Philadelphia,
when she had but a little strength, improves it unto faith and obedience, she
kept Christ's word, (there is obedience) she denied not his name (there is faith)
therefore Christ will keep her from the hour of temptation, and give her
Victory over Satan, and his Synagogue, Rev. 3.8, 9, 10.

And thus have I done with the Object, viz. Christ prepared, and the spring of
the Act, viz. An Interest, or Christ appropriated. I come to

3d. Consid. What this leaning act in the notion of it does import More
remotely.
The third thing propounded in order to the opening of this act of leaning and
that in this Querie, What leaning in the notion of it does import?

I shall answer it in four particulars.

Two things it imports more remotely, yet necessarily; and two things more
intrinsecally, and immediately.

1. A coming unto Christ.
First, It imports (more remotely) a coming unto Christ; for no man can be said
to bait at his Inn, or to rest himself at his lodging, tell he come at his
Inn, or at his lodging. There are some pretenders, I fear, to lean upon
Christ, that never yet knew what it is to come at Christ: for there is nothing
but a clear sense of insufficiency in our selves, and of All Sufficiency in
Christ, that can (as we have hinted and may have farther occasion to show)
bring the soul to the Lord Jesus. Sirs, you must get at Christ, before you can
get hold upon Christ. As long as the Spouse was at a distance from him, we
never hear of her leaning on him. Every soul that is at never so little a
distance from Christ, has Courtiers enough, legions from the black Princes
Court, offering their service to lead it by the arm; but the soul must return
to the first Husband, before it can have any of his ravishing embraces: this is
that is said by our Savior, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, and I will give you
rest. Therefore if you would remove all that hinders you from leaning on
Christ, remove all that hinders you from coming to Christ.

It imports also (more remotely) a continuing, 2. A continuing with Christ
and abiding with Christ. There are some souls that may come at Christ, and
yet cannot be called leaners upon Christ, because they are quickly come, and
quickly gone, as Christ's throng that staid with him all dinner while, whilst
the loaves lasted, Joh. 6.26. but slunk away in the Sermon time, ver. 66. Or
that stay to hear him as long as his doctrine pleases them, but when the hard
sayings come, then they run away, ver. 60. such as are spoken of in that sad
Scripture, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. And such are compared to Corn upon the house top:
you know how soon that is come, and how soon gone, for says Christ, it had no
root, Mar. 4.6. So are there some that have a fair and fresh blade, but they
have no depth of earth, ver. 9. no hold, no root, etc. you may say, such and
such are forward comers to Christ; but you cannot say, they are leaners upon
Christ. Alas they are thrown upon Christ by some violence of present
conviction, of prevalency of custom, or expectation of advantage, but they
have no hold upon him. That word, Act. 11.23. That our Translation renders,
Cleaving to the Lord, is, (...) that is, permanently continuing with the Lord.
Will you say, that man that is thrown from the top of a mountain, and in the
way dasheth his arm or his elbow upon a Rock, and so passes away, that he
leaned upon that Rock? alas! this is all that Apostates and Back-slyders get by
coming at Christ at all; instead of leaning upon him, they rush against him,
and instead of building upon him as the chief Cornerstone, they dash upon him
as a stumbling stone, so says the Apostle, 1 Pet 2.8. He is a stone of
stumbling, and Rock of offense to the disobedient; but on the other hand, it is
not strange that the Spouse should be called a leaning Spouse; for when she
came at her beloved, she held him, and would not let him go, Cant. 3.4.
Therefore friends, you that are come to Christ, the elect and precious stone
laid in Sion, either by believing build upon him, so that you may continue with
him, or else know that in falling from him, you shall be dashed in pieces by
him, for this is the sum of that discourse, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8, 9, etc.

More in trinsecally. 3ly. A devolving of all our weaknesses, etc. upon Christ.
Thirdly, It imports (more intrinsecally) a devolving of all our infirmities
upon Christ. Jacob was then said to lean upon his staff, when he stays his
feeble arms upon his staff, when he rests his languishing, fainting, dying
strength upon the top of his staff, Heb. 11.21. Therefore our leaning upon
Christ, imports our employing Christ by faith, in that work whereunto God has
appointed him by his gracious counsel, viz. (as I said before) to bear our
infirmities, and to carry our griefs, and to bear the sin of many, and the
iniquity of us all, Isai. 53.4, 6, 12. When faith acts on Christ, as the Priest
upon the escape Goat, Lev. 16.21. (which I have before shown to be a type of
Christ) Confessing our sins upon Christ's head, and laying our iniquities upon
his shoulders; not as if Christ were the sinner, or a friend unto sin, but as
knowing him to be the satisfier for sins, and a friend unto penitent sinners.
And indeed though it be facile to get profane Ranters, and presumers hereunto;
yet I find it a difficult business to get penitent sinners hereunto: what the
others presume, these dare not believe. Such souls come to Christ with their
bloody consciences, as that poor woman with her bloody issue. It Is some time
before they dare touch at all: and when they do touch, they dare not take hold:
if they do take hold, it must but be upon the skirts of Christ in a promise,
upon the hemme of his Garment; and then as if they had stolen their cure, they
are ready to run away again, as being afraid and ashamed that Christ should
see them: you may see the story Luke 8.43, 44. But soft, sirs, Christ will not
lose his glory so; Christ will have you to come out into view, and to
acknowledge your cure; and though you were afraid to take hold upon Christ by
the hemme, he will not be ashamed to take you by the hand, and to say unto your
souls, as he did unto her, verse. 48. Be of good comfort, your faith, (your
leaning) has made you whole, go in peace. Therefore, my Brethren, bring your
souls forth under all their sicknesses, evils, and infirmities: your blind
eyes, deaf ears, dumb tongues, palsy hands, lame feet, feverish affections,
distempered spirits, dead hearts, bring them forth, I say unto Christ, as it is
recorded by the Evangelist, that they brought their possesed, their sick, etc.
Mat. 8.16. That it may be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet,
that himself took our infirmities etc. v. 17.

Fourthly, 4ly. A deriving of strength, etc from Christ.
It imports a deriving of and a carrying away strength and virtue from Christ,
as well as a coming to him, a continuing with him, and a devolving of our
infirmities upon him. When any true faith leanes on Christ, it draws strange
helping, healing, curing, comforting virtue out of Christ, as himself says,
Luke 8.46. Some body has touched me, for virtue is gone out of me. A man sits
down to eat bread faint, but rises up fresh: he lies down at night in his bed
weary, but rises up in the morning in the renewing of strength. Sirs, if you be
come at Christ, stir not from him faint, or feeble, for strength and
refreshings are with him, touch him, and take them. And so we come to

CHAP. XIII. Discovers the nature of this leaning-act in four Particulars.
Fourth Querie propounded, what are the hindrances of this leaning? Two
negative hindrances. 1. Few need him. 2. Few feel him:
4th. Consid. What the nature of this leaning Act is.
THe fourth and last Querie, viz. What is the nature of this leaning act, or
what are its constituting qualification.

I shall answer this Querie in these four Things. The soul must lean not
doubtingly, or waveringly; but fiducially, and resolvedly: not inconsiderately,
or unadvisedly; but of counsel, and deliberately: nor yet forcedly, or of
necessity; but freely, and out of choice and complacency: no nor yet loosely
and brokenly, but closely and intyrely: these Ingredients must compound this
leaning, if so be it be rightly qualified.

1 It must be a fiduciall.
1. It must be a stable, not wavering, a fixed, fiducial, and resolved leaning.
I say,

A fiduciall leaning. The soul must come to Christ, and cast it self upon
Christ, believing that he is, and that it is not in vain to seek him in any
exigency. The language of this leaning is not, it may be, etc. and who can tell
but, etc. which yet is found in Scripture, the highest language of faith in the
Saints, when they are at their lowest ebb of believing: but of a truth, God is
good to Israel: I know whom I have believed: though I fall, I shall arise, and
the Lord shall be a light unto me: It may be, says the poor doubting
Christian, that there is righteousness with the Lord Christ for me: Who can
tell, but that I may find strength in Christ for my poor soul? but says the
Lord of the leaning Spouse, Surely shall one say, In the Lord I have strength
and righteousness. As sure as I am weak, there is strength in the Lord, and
strength for me, Isa. 45.24. so Dan. 3.17. Our God whom we serve will deliver
us, and therefore we are not careful in this matter: they lean so, as that
they dare adventure their life upon their leaning. When thou leanest so, that
thou dare venture thy soul upon thy Christ: when faith takes the word out of
the promises mouth, and can confidently promise it self whatever God has
promised: I will, says God; God will, says faith: surely I wll, says God;
Verily thou shall be fed: surely God will, says faith, Verily I shall be fed:
And so for any other promise. This is fiducially to lean upon the Beloved.

Again, Here the soul must lean, And resolved Act.
and lean resolvedly. I have now got hold of thee, and I will not let thee go,
except thou bless me, as Genesis 32.26. I am come to Christ, and here I will
stay, and if I perish, I perish, (as Ester said in another case) Est. 4.16. I
am at Shusan, at the Kings Palace, at the Throne of grace, upon the account of
Christ, and if I perish, yet will I not stir from the horns of this Altar; yea,
though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. This is called a cleaving with
purpose of heart to the Lord, Act. 11.23. With the heart, and with the
resolution, of heart, (...), says such a soul. I believe what the Lord has
said of his Christ, that he is able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. And
therefore I will trust him to the uttermost. If Christ cannot justify, let God
condemn me: if Christ cannot save me, let me be unsaved. For verily Believers,
Christ is as those Pillars of Hercules; if you come to take hold of these
Pillars, Ne plus ultra: if you come to take hold upon Christ, stir no
farther: if you go beyond Christ, you will speed as ill as if you were still
short of him.

Secondly, It must not be preposterously, precipitantly, 2ly. A mature and
deliberate Act.
or of inadvertency; but upon mature deliberation, that the soul must lean
upon the beloved: Sirs, put Christ amongst ten thousand, and if he be not now
the standard bearer, the chiefest of them all (as the Spouse found him to be,
Cant. 5.10.) then do not trust your souls to him; if you will not, Christ's
Banner shall not want Soldiers, as long as himself is the bearer of it. Sirs,
you had need to be advised, when you choose your Guardian: a State will be
deliberate, before they make an alliance with another State: they propound what
shall they be advanced by it, or what they may lose; or will the gain
compensat the Detriment, in respect of other States, whose confederacy they
must lose by it, etc. And Christ himself improves such similes to this very
end, Luke 14. the unadvised Builder, ver. 28. The precipitant Warrior, ver.
31. Condemning the foolishness of both. A wise woman will not choose an Husband
without deliberation: she must needs then pass for unwise, that will choose an
Husband hand over head: for my part, my prayer and desire shall be, (as a poor
instrument) to make sound Christians, though not hasty Christians: Alas, soon
ripe, soon rotten: What Age has ever confirmed it, by so sad experience in
the most serious things? Do you wonder that so many fall away from Christ so
soon? truly if you had but known or observed them, you might as well have
wondered, how they came at Christ so soon. You wonder they can so soon depart
from the faith, and lay down duty: and I, in my small experience, have admired,
how they got the faith (they pretended to) so easily, whilst it cost others so
dear: that they took up duties so suddenly, whilst others have had many an
hard pull at their hard hearts, to get them up to duty: how they have come to
the joy without knowledge of such a thing, as the hour of travel: how the
Child has been borne without any pain; how they came to be so confidently
united and married to Christ, before ever almost they thought of Christ.
Therefore sirs, I shall deal ingenuously with you, in the counsel that I
shall give you. Take you a strick survey of all the Lovers that the world
affords, compare Creature Crutches, the best of them all with Christ; view his
countenance, and the face of other things; observe his power, and the worlds;
compare his faithfulness, and sins promises, and if so be when they come to
the upshot, there be any that do so well deserve your love, that can so ably
support your infirmities, that will so faithfully discharge your trust, as the
Lord Jesus, marry them for finding them. If Baal be God, then worship him! But
oh! what heart amongst you, dares (though perhaps it desires) in this
comparing, to Vote for any thing against the Lord Jesus Christ? If any dare,
let them please themselves, they shall never choose for me: But I hope better
things of you my Brethren: O let us cry out in the language of the Spouse,
Cant. 2.3. As the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the wood, so is my beloved
amongst the Sons.

3ly. It must not be forced and of necessity, 3ly. A free and complacentiall
Act.
but of complacency, and of choice; a leaning for love, (as we say) and not for
money. Christ never intended in any civil Marriage, that the golden wheel
should be the first mover, or that the silver Cord should draw the hearts
together; much less that we should love him primely for his loaves, or marry
him (as some time amongst men we see it) merely to be maintained by him. I have
sadly in my thoughts compared a soul taking hold upon Christ in a deathbed,
(when there has been no other way left) or under some strong fears of death,
and keepings under bondage thereby, to a naked hand catching hold of a naked
sword in a shipwreck: not, that it desires so to do, but for the present it
must hold or sink: Now let the man but come abroad, or ashore, and you shall
quickly see him let his hold go, and glad too. Poor souls, when there is no
other way but to dye, and be damned, O! then for a Christ. What? would you have
a Christ? yes, I would fain: yea, I must have a Christ: but Christ will
mortify your members, and subdue your sins: do you desire that? yes, will
they say. Oh! you cannot beat them off from leaning upon a Christ now, though
you cut their Fingers; but let them but come to shore, to health and strength
again, and you shall not need once to bid them to forego their hold upon Jesus
Christ. But the Spouse as you heard, would not let her beloved go: sure enough
it was, because she loved to lean, as well as leaned where she loved. Observe
Gods prophecy of the Root of Jesse (which is Christ) and the believing
Gentiles, Isai. 11.10. Unto it, (that is, unto Christ the Son of Jesse) shall
the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious. Mark, They shall take it to
be their glory, their joy, and their Crown to come, and sit down, to stay, and
to rest themselves upon the Lord Jesus Christ; thus rejoycingly must thou lean
upon the beloved.

4ly. A close and intyre Act.
4ly, and lastly, It must not be a broken and loose, but a close and entyre
leaning upon Jesus Christ. This is called a being joined to the Lord, 1 Cor.
6.17. the word (...), that is, agglutinated, as the Joyner fits piece to piece,
and then glues each piece to his fellow, in order hereunto. Thus much I have
already proved, that the entire, or whole soul, must lean upon the entire, or
whole Christ; at least wise it is easily deducible from the description of that
interest that must bottom this Act. That which I have more to say, is only
this, that as the Agent, and Object, so must the Act it self be entire, the
whole soul must wholly lean upon the whole Christ, Cant. 5.16. He (says the
Spouse) is altogether lovely: and if so, then altogether to be leaned upon: for
there must be some proportion between the Act and the Object. Oh! many there
be, that will seem to lean upon Christ; but how may this word [altogether]
startle us? We lean not so much upon Christ for provision in the world, as,
over him, upon the shoulders of our own wit, and care, and industry; or the
shoulders of such and such friends: If we leaned altogether upon Christ, we
should keep our faith, as Habakkuk, chapter 3. ult. Though all means should fail.

We lean not so much upon Christ in a sickness, as over Christ, upon the
Physicians shoulders: else should we think more of, or send oftener to, or
consult oftener with Christ then we do, whilst we, so much ( Asa-like) think
of, send to, and consult with the Physicians, 2 Chr. 16.16.12.

We lean not so much upon Christ in a duty, as, over him, upon the shoulders
as it were of the duty: hence is it, that we measure our acceptance by our
enlargements, when happily the heart has been more humble, and so better (as I
have noted) when it has been more straightned; so that all these are more stay
to us, than Christ. But oh! when? when shall we get close unto Christ Jesus?
lean adequately upon him? to stretch our selves upon him, as Elisha did upon
the Child; that our eyes may be upon his eyes, and our mouth upon his mouth,
and our face upon his face, 2 King. 4.34. Friends, it is only such near
immediate and adequate application of Christ to our souls, or (which is all
one) of our souls to Christ, that can bring life into our dead hearts, as into
that dead Child. The Spouse would have none betwixt her and Jesus Christ, no
not so much as the dearest enjoyment in the world: but his left hand should be
under her head, and his right hand should embrace her, Cant. 8.3. Which
embraces encourage her to re-imbrace her beloved, and so to come out of the
Wilderness leaning upon him, verse. 5. And thus much in answer to the third
Question, viz. What it is to lean upon the Beloved. Come we now to

The Fourth maine Querie, viz. 4th Querie. What are the Hindrances of this
leaning upon Christ.

Two sorts. 1. Negative.


Whar are the hindrances that keep lost souls from becommirg leaning souls.

I shall reduce them, or at least wise the most principal of them, unto these
two Heads. 1. Neagative. 2. Positive Hindrances.

1. As for Negative hindrances, take these three: 1. Few need Christ,
therefore few lean upon him.
Few need Christ, fewer feel him, fewest of all affect him.

1. Hinderance is this, That (though all lost souls do need Christ, yet) there
are very, very few, that apprehend their lost estate, and so perceive their
need of Christ comparatively: but one lost soul, one sheep of an hundred, where
there are ninty nine just persons that need no repentance, Luke 15.7. Oh! would
it not make an heart bleed to think, that when our poor souls are cast forth
naked into the open field, that there is none eye to pity them, (no not so
much as their own eye!) Ezekiel. 16.5. Souls are so lost, that they have lost
their pity toward themselves; they do not, they cannot lament their own
ruins. Poor they are and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, and
yet ask these very persons how they do? and they will tell you, they are in
need of nothing, Rev. 3.17. No, not in need of Christ: And therefore they care
not for leaning upon him. Come to some Widow, and mind her of such a man that
would make a very good Husband for her; why? says she, I am well enough as I
am, and I live quietly and comfortably, and need nothing. Now that word quite
stops your woing for a friend: and how does it obstruct our woing of souls for
Jesus Christ, when the most of souls live well enough on the world, and (as
they think) comfortably on their duties, and have no need of Jesus Christ? If
you you see a man go about to sell Crutches, and come to one man, and he
answers, I have legs of mine own: and to another, and he says, you see I can
go without a Staff, and what need of a Crutch? I will warrant you shall see
that man makes but a poor living on it. So friends, from hence, from hence it
is that Christ drives no greater trade in the world, although he does not set
to sale new Crutches, but new Legs, new Strength, yea better then you had in
the beginning, at such rate also, as none can except against, viz. without
money and without price: (and I read not in the whole Gospel, that ever he took
a farthing for any cure) yet oh the thinness, the thinness of Christ's Market
amongst poor souls notwithstanding all this! because there are so few that
need him. Give some upon the Lords Day, or a Lecture Day, but an Esans mess,
Bread and Pottage, and they will near complain of the need of a Christ; and this
is the reason that the doors of your houses are so thick of poor, and the
Allies of this house so thin. And verily, sirs, It is an hard matter to come
truly to need Christ, fully to need Christ: some see their need of Christ, that
do not see it fully, and even these come short of leaning upon Christ, Oh!
says Satan, says the World, says their own desperately deceitful heart,
what need you go so far? there are shops nearer that will supply your need,
as well as Christ's! and so comes one man to drink away his need of Christ, and
another, to pray away his need of Christ. Another parts with his convictions of
his need of Christ in an Alms that he gives to the poor: I mean when either
sinful delights, or religious duties, become our suports instead of Christ.
The Wordling needs him not, he has Mammon to lean upon: the Duty-monger needs
him not, for he has hapn'd upon a righteousness before ever he came at Jesus
Chist: he prays, hears, reads, fasts, and says he, Frustra fit per plura,
what need we to put Christ's righteousness upon all this? But memorable is that
scripture, Luk 9.11. He spoke unto the people of the Kingdom of God, and
healed those that had need of healing. O sirs, the hearing of the voice of
Christ, may be unto all people that need him, or need him not; but the healing
virtue of Christ does never go forth unto any, but the souls that need, him.

Second Hinderance. 2. Hindrance. Fewer yet feel him.
Of those that come to need Christ many there are that cannot feel him, know
not how to come at him. Souls there are that need a Savior, but have not yet
any experimental perception, that Christ is that Savior; and therefore they
come (as the High Priest Mark 14.61.) with an Art thou the Christ, the Son the
blessed? or (as John by his Disciples sent to Christ, Luke 7.19.) with an Art
thou he that should come? or do we look for another? But says Sampson to the
lad that led him, Judge. 16.26. Let me feel the Pillars, that I may leen upon
them. The reason why so few lean upon Christ, it because so few feel Christ;
that is, there are few thoroughly convinced and persuaded, that with Christ is
salvation, and with none other. You have already heard of the Disciple that
leaned upon Christ's bosom, and how expresses he his experiences of Christ? 1
Jo. 1.1. says he, Our hands have handled the word of life. Oh! when the soul
comes to feel Christ in a promise, (as Sampson felt the Pillars) then will the
soul cordially lean upon Jesus Christ, and not tell then. Therefore it is no
such wonder, that there are so few that lean upon Christ, because you know
they are a few indeed that come up to such sweet and soul-satisfying
experiences of Christ.

As for all men naturally, they want an hand to feel Christ; for a carnal hand
cannot take hold of a spiritual object. Sirs, we are all born not
Mephibosheths, not Agrippa's only; that is, lame of our feet, but lame of our
hands also, so that whilst we are only natural, we cannot take hold of
eternal life, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man cannot receive the things of God,
because they are spiritually discerned: He cannot receive spiritual things,
because he wants a spiritual hand, (for the force of the whole verse lies
clearly in that) and that he wants a spiritual hand, because he is no more then
a natural man. If Christ would be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
he must be connaturallized with us. Compare Heb. 2.16, 17. with Chap. 4.15. And
if we would be able to feel spiritual things, we must (as 1 Cor. 2.12. Be
spiritualized together with Christ; as he partook of our natures, to feel the
things of our natures, so must we partake of the divine nature, to feel the
things of Jesus Christ.

And as for many men, their hands and hearts are judicially seared (as their
Consciences are cauterized) so that if ever they had any thing like feeling, by
any common conviction of the Word, or stirring of the spirit in them, or rather
striving of the spirit with them: verily they are past it now, and so no
likelihood of their leaning upon the Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 4.2. Having their
conscience seared with an hot iron, and Ephe. 4.19. Who being past feeling. Now
these are the reasons why so few feel, and this is the reason why so few lean.

So that the Lord has sent me with this word in my mouth unto you, that (as it
is written Act. 17.27.) You should seek the Lord, if happily you might feel
after him, though he be not far from every one of us. If we may say so (as the
Apostle there) upon the account of our natural relation to God; how may we
much more say, that God is not far, but the Kingdom of God near unto every one
of us, upon the account of our Gospel-relations unto God; therefore let us seek
him, for to them that have no might (of their own) he renews strength, that
they may wait upon him, and they that waitingly seek, shall feelingly find:
and when thou shall thus come to feel Christ, there will be most likelihood of
thy coming out of the Wilderness leaning upon thy beloved. The

CHAP. XIV. Contains three Negative Hindrances, few like Christ's Port,
Person, Discourse, Carriages: and why?
THird, Negative Hinderance. 3d. Hindrance. Fewest of all do like him.
Of those that feel Christ, some do not like him. I mean of those that come
to have some kind of sense of Christ: many there are that do not like him, Its
Christ crucified (not Christ glorified) that goes a woing in the world.
that do not find in their hearts to marry him, or to make him their souls
Beloved. You may perhaps think it strange if Christ do go a wooing, that all
the world should not be won. But the Prophet Isaiah beforehand tells us, Isai.
53.2, 3. There is no form nor comeliness in him: when we shall see him, there
is no beauty that we should desire him. Again, That he is despised and
rejected of men, and that we hid as it were our faces from him. As when he goes
a woing, whom some coy Gentlewoman undervalews, she forsooth will not see him,
but chambers up, and concealeth her self from him. Thus Christ came to his
own, and his own received him not, Jo. 1. So when Christ comes a woing to our
carnal, or natural hearts, and we see him out of the window (as it were)
truly we hide our faces from him, we do not desire to be married to him. And
the reason he supposes all along that Chapter, because it is Christ Crucified
that goes a woing in the world. I find that is in the day of his Espousals (and
not when he goes a woing) that Jesus Christ puts on his Crown, Cant. 3.11. It
is Christ Crowned that marries; but it is Christ Crucified that woes, 1. Cor.
2.2. I determined to know nothing among you, (being an Apostle, a Paranymph, a
Spokesman amongst you for Christ) but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Sirs, If
you can not find in your hearts to love a crucified Christ, I dare not go a
wooing for Christ under any other Notion: We preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor.
1.23. and therefore to one a stumbling block, to another foolishness: and this
being supposed that it is a Crucified Christ that goes a wooing in the world:
truly never was any suitor more universally undervalued by the proudest Dame,
then Jesus is by carnal hearts; for they neither like his Port, nor Person,
nor Discourse, nor Carriage, nor Estate.

1. Few like Christ's woing Port.
1. Ca^nall hearts are prejudiced at the Port of Jesus Christ, when he goes a
woing in the world.

When a Nobl^man comes a wooing to some great personage in the World, notice is
taken of the Port that he comes in, what Chariots come with him, what Geldings,
what Servants, what Retayners. If a man should come a wooing to a great Lady
upon the back of an Ass, or with a beggarly retinue, were not this one thing
enough to hinder all hopes of a match?

Now such is the pleasure of the Lord Jesus Christ, that such shall his wooing
Port, such shall his Retayners be.

Instead of Coach, or Sedan, or led Horses, or Chariots, Christ rides a woing
on the Foal of an Ass, the foolishness of preaching
see Zach. 9.9. Rejoice O Daughter of Sion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem,
behold thy King comes unto thee, lowly, and riding upon an Ass; and upon a
Colt, the Foal of an Ass. And if you will have the mystery unfolded, it is
this, It pleases Christ, (whilst he passes by the enticing words of man's
wisdom, and the pompous port of humane Oratory) by the foolishness (that is
the plainness) of preaching to woo, and to win souls unto himself, 1 Cor.
1.12. and this is the preaching of Christ Crucified, (in a Crucified style) to
the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness, verse. 23. Hence it
is that the wise, the Scribes, the Doctors, the Disputers of this world dash,
and stumble upon Christ, instead of leaning upon him: because Christ is
preached as Crucified, and so evidently (by plain preaching) set forth as
Crucified amongst us, Gal. 3.1. Note.
I have observed but two dumb beasts whose mouths were opend, in the
Scriptures, One by Satan, the other by the Lord; Satan he makes use of the
mouth of the Serpent, the subtilest, Genesis 3.1. God, he makes use of the mouth
of the Ass, the simplest, Numb. 22.38. The Lord opened the mouth of Balaams
Ass. If you would choose a Speaker, you usually pitch upon the most eloquent,
but God often speaks by the Stammerer, and out of the mouths of Babes and
weaklings ordains his praise, and by such spokesmen wooes home most souls
many time, to Jesus Christ.

Again, Instead of P^inces, and Rulers, Christ brings his poor kindred and
despised spokesmen with him.
and chief Captains, and Counselors of the world for his Companions: He
chooses (to bear him company, even in the view of the world, and when he goes
a woing) not many wise, not many Nobles, 1 Cor. 1.26. But he has chosen the
poor of this world, that they may be rich in faith, (and so bear him company,
though ragged in Clothes) Iam. 2.5: Fishermen, Magdalens, Lazars; and these
when they keep his sayings, must be accounted his Mother, and kinsfolk, and
Brethren, Mark 3.35. Now even we our selves account her unworthy of a rich
Husband, who cannot find in her heart to acknowledge his poor kindred. I have
heard a Gentlewoman should say, (and I fear too many say so in their hearts)
that if it were not for Christ's followers, she could be content to follow
Christ. Ah! if it were not for Christ's great Charge of Children, and poor
kindred, many perhaps would look toward him more then do. But if you be
ashamed of them, know that Christ will be ashamed of you: I was naked says
Christ, (in my little ones) and you clothed me not, hungry, and you fed me
not, depart from me, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43.

2ly. Few like his person.
2ly, Carnal hearts are prejudiced at Christ's person, when he goes a wooing in
the world.

Sirs, I am sent to woe you to Christ, but it is unto him crucified, and
consequently for

His Raiment, either he is naked; they rent his Coat asunder, and cast lots
upon his Garments, as Mat. 27.35. or clad with Garments dyed in the
Wine Press, and red in his Apparel, Isai. 63.1, 2, 3. viz. Vestures dipped in
his own blood, Rev. 19.1.3. which one would think were enough to frighten
from Christ, in stead of wooing to him. And as for

His Countenance: it is marred more then any man's, and his form, more then the
Sons of men, Isai. 52.14.

His Face, instead of being washed with sweet waters, (as wooers wont to do) is
spit upon: and instead of shaving, is given to those that pulled off the hair,
Isai. 50, 6. As for

His Head, it is Crowned indeed; but it is with rending Thorns, Mat. 27.29. As
for

His Back; it is new-come as it were from the whipping-post, and whealed with
scornful stripes of merciless men: For he gave his back to the smiters, Isai.
50.6. As for

His sides, They are launced with Spears, Jo. 19.34. And behold a mingled
stream of water and blood. As for

His hands and feet, they also are pierced, as he himself records, Psalm.
22.16. Now friends, can you find in your hearts, (as Joseph of Arimathea did,
Mat. 27.57.) to make much of Christ in such a posture, thus used, thus abused?
if you cannot, it is in vain to persuade you to marry the Lord Jesus Christ,
therefore stand you by also.

3ly, 3ly, Few like his woing discourse in general. viz. Conviction.
Carnal hearts are as much prejudiced at Christ's wooing discourse. Christ
follows not the vain custom of other lovers. Their discourse is Complement,
vain flattering (many times) lying Complements: Christ's wooing discourse, is
heart-discovering, downright Conviction. They that, heard Joseph's rough speech
to his Brethren, at their first coming, (whereof they complain to their
Father, Genesis 42.30. The man that is Ruler of the Land, spoke roughly to us)
would little have expected that ever Joseph would have proved such a tender
Brother to them afterward: And they that hear how coursely (as flesh and
blood think) Christ's wooings are worded at the first, know not how to believe
that Christ will make such a tender Husband afterward. His first Complements
are no other then such as these: Soul thou art, and have been as an arrant
whore all the days of thy life hitherto; there is not a place, nor a time that
thou can thinks of, wherein thou have not gone a whoring from me; therefore
now return unto me, and I will marry thee. You have a large story of Christ's
wooing-language, Ier. 3. And how begins he? verse 1. Thou have played the
Harlot with many lovers. And verse 2. Lift up thine eyes, and see where thou
have not been lain with: Course Complementing, you will say; but is this woing
language? Why? read but the Chapter, and see your selves, this is the upshot,
verse. 14. Turn O back-slyding Children, for I am married unto you. Nor the
particular terms of it such as these
Thus of his language in general, and as to any particular terms of Christ's
woing discourse, they are altogether irksome and ungrateful unto flesh and
blood; for they are such as these.

1. You must forsake all your old friends.
First, Says Christ, If you will marry me, you must forsake and forgo all your
old friends, kindred, and acquaintance, you must come at home no more. Oh!
says flesh and blood, who would marry an Husband to be thus tied in? yet is
this Christ's express term, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O daughter and consider,
incline thine are, and forget thine own people, and thine own fathers house:
why? where did thou learn this wanton word, or that garb, or that
superstition, or this vanity? says Christ to the soul: Why? in my Fathers
house, I had it from the Cradle, what hurt is in it? I am sure my Father before
me used them, and all my Fathers house; yet you must forsake it (says Christ)
or forsake me: Nay, if I must be so strickt, and tied up, even farewell Christ,
will most of the world say; and yet Christ himself persists, and tells you,
that she that (in this case) hates not Father, and Mother, and Brother, and
Sister, etc. cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14.26.

2ly. You must expect many a sad day.
2ly, says Christ, If you will marry me, you must reckon to have many a sad and
sorrowful day. I must be often from home, and out of sight, and then must the
Children of the bride Chamber mourn. Therefore when the world shall rejoice,
Verily then shall you mourn, and lament, and be sorrowful: yea, as the travail
of a woman when her hour is come; Verily, verily, says Christ, it shall be so,
Jo. 16.20, 21. Yea soul, though thou be as David, yet must thou water thy Couch
with thy tears; though thou be as Peter, yet shall thou have seasons of bitter
weeping: yea, though thou be as the Spouse, even as a seal on Christ's arm, his
love, his dove, his undefiled one, yet must thou be as a Dove in the clefts of
the Rock (mourning) and in the secret places of the stairs, Cant. 3.14.

3ly. You must never look for an idle day, but be always carrying his yoke and
burden.
3ly, If you will marry me, says Christ, never think to have an idle time of
it, never look to have a loytering life on it. Assure your self, I marry you to
work, and not to play. You must take my yoke, and my burther, Mat 11.28. And
you must bid farewell to all your play-dayes, in your Marriage-day, and never
look for one idle day more, Luke 9.23. If any will come after me, let him take
up his Cross daily (Mark, daily) and come and follow me. Nay, then says the
world, let who will have Christ, if he tell us so before he be sure to us, what
will he say afterward?

4ly, If you will marry me, says Christ, 4ly, You must disowne your own will.
you must resolve to lay down your own will: You must rule your selves no
longer, for I will be your Lord, and worship you me, Psalm. 45.11. And that not
only in what pleases you, but also in what crosses your humor, and
thwarteth your Will. Not a lock not a look, not a lust, nothing more then what
I will give way to, Luke 9.23. If any come after me, he must deny himself. Nay,
then says the pride and stubbornness of carnal hearts, Marry Christ, who
will? we will not have this man to rule over us.

5ly. If you will marry me, says Christ, 5ly, You must part with any thing,
your very limbs at his command:
You must be so much mine, and so little your own, that if I call for an hand,
or an eye, or a foot, you must part with it; yea, though it be a right hand, or
a right eye, Mat. 5.29, 30. A custom, a course, a fashion, a fancy, a lust, a
sin, seem it never so sweet, pleasing, profitable, useful; yet away it must
be thrown, though it sit never so close, and near, if I and it cannot keep
house together. And thus he that forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my
Disciple: Yea, and if he do not hate his own life also, Luke 14.26, 33. Nay,
now flesh and blood will stop their ears. This is indeed (says Nature) an hard
sayi^g, and who can hear it? yet must you both hear and hearken to it, or else
there is no talk of a match with Jesus Christ.

4ly, 4ly, Few like Christ's woing carryages.
Carnal hearts are yet more prejudiced at the woing carriages of Jesus Christ.
You never heard of another that uses so to woe: Christ does not only speak
hard words, but withal strikes as hard blows; and indeed you shall find him
but a word and a blow, when that he takes the first acquaintance of any heart
by way of woing. He takes one soul out of one wilderness, viz. The wilderness
of sin, and allures it into another, viz. The wilderness of affliction in
spirit, and there he seems both to leave it, and lose it, before ever he
speak comfortably to it, Hos. 2.14.

Another soul he takes, and binds fast under the spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15.
as Joseph bound Simeon before the eyes of his Brethren, Genesis 43.24.

Another he takes, and beats it blind, and throws it down to the Earth, and
keeps it both without meat and drink, etc. and that many days together, as he
did Saul, Act. 9.4, etc.

Others he takes and wounds them, as the Keepers of the wall did the Spouse,
Cant, 5.7. and pierces them, and pricks them even to the heart, as he did
those Converts, Act. 2.37. Strange woing you will say, yet is this always the
manner of Christ's woing more or less.

CHAP. XV. Few like Christ's Estate, and why: Considerations opposed to the
foresaid hindrances, viz. How souls may come to the needing and feeling of
Christ.
5ly, Few like his estate or the terms relating unto it: such as these.

1. He must have your portion out of your own hand at his dispose.


FIfthly, Neither does any carnal heart like the Estate business better then the
former: for such as these, and only such as these are Christ's Terms, as to
matter of Estate.

First, Says Christ, If you will marry me, I must have all your portion ready
down. Go and sell all thou have, and come and follow me, Mat. 19.21. You shall
not have a penny, says Christ, but I will have the command of it. Leave your
Onyons, your Egypt, your Fleshpots, if you expect I should jointure you in a
Canaan. And know, that whosoever loves Houses, and Lands, in comparison of me,
is not worthy of me.

2ly, Says Christ, If you marry me, 2ly, You must take your jointure upon
trust.
You must take my word for your security, as to your jointure fom me: You must
live by faith, not by sense: The name of the Land I shall jointure you in, is
Promise-land; I may perhaps, if you please me, give you some distant view of
Canaan, from the top of some Pisgah, some Mount of transfiguration: but as for
the frame of your life, it must be by faith, Hab. 2.3. For the vision (or
sight of it) is yet for an appointed season, but in the end it shall speak, if
you will but tarry for it. Not I, says the Worlding, let who will tarry for
it, or trust to it; here are terms indeed, part with all, and all upon trust:
for my part, I think it not safe venturing a portion upon this Christ, if
promise, etc. be the best assurance he can give. Well then, if thou be so
minded, stand thou also by. But

3ly, I have yet more says Christ to indent, 3ly, You must go into another
Country for possession.
if you will marry me, You must go beyond Sea into another Counry, another
World, and then it is that I will make you Queen, for Jo. 18.36. My Kingdom is
not of this world. My Lands lie on the other side of the stood: My Canaan on
the other side of Jordan. And sirs, this is most certain, that if you will be
the Lambs wife, you must follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Yea, but says
a carnal heart, I know not how to stay for an Estate till I come at Heaven,
therefore adieu to Christ, I hope to marry one that will jointure me nearer
home. Yea but

Lastly, Here is more yet, says Christ; 4ly, You must die by the way.
If you will marry me, You must follow me into my Native Country out of your
own Land, (as Abraham of old) and you must suffer shipwreck by the way, and be
cast away as to your flesh and blood, for they cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God (which is my Fathers Country) 1 Cor. 15.50. Of a truth you must dye, before
you can be possessed of my jointure, and live as my Queen: I will give you the
title to it now, but your own life shall keep you out of possession; My Country
is Canaan, and the Red Sea of death you must past through, before you can enter
into my rest: and these things I tell you, that you may know upon what terms I
take you, and that you may not be offended in me, Joh. 16.1.

Now then as for those, that when they see Christ, neither like his Port, his
Person, nor Discourse, nor Carriage, nor Estate, what hopes are there left, of
wooing and winning these souls unto Jesus Christ? and herein have I desired to
deal faithfully this day, that I might, (if it be possible) bring one sober,
and beat off wanton lovers, (and so leaners) from Jesus Christ.

I have heard of some women, that have been in good earnest engaged in
affection to some, whom some of their Acquaintance, and Relations, have
solicitously dissuaded them from, that have silenced all with such an answer, I
will marry him, though I never have good day with him: And truly Christians, it
is somewhat sad, if your love to the Lord Jesus, do not exceed the love of
women. Jobs language is somewhat like this, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him: though he kill me, yet will I not be beaten from him.
Though he speak hardly to me, yet will I speak humbly to him: though he smite
me, I will love him: and though he slay me, yet will I lean upon him.

Which that you may the better be encouraged to, give me leave to subjoyne (as
I promised) unto these Negative Hindrances, Considrations opposed unto those
Hindrances.

1. As to the first hinderance, viz. Few need Christ.

1. Help. Labor to see your need of Christ.


some Considerations for Helps. And

1. As to the first Hinderance, viz. That few need Christ, though Christ be
that one thing (when there is but one thing) needful (as himself says, Luke
10.42.) yet does the world see their need of every thing, but of this one
thing. Every one needs Food, and Raiment, House-roome, and Fiering, Money and
Friends, etc. but who needs Jesus Christ?

Now if this be the reason, that few lean upon him, because but few need him:
then those Considerations that may help us to become needing souls, may help
us to become leaning souls.

Question, How then shall a lost soul come to need Christ for a leaning-stock.

Answ. I answer, Let poor souls come into a sick, shaken, sinking condition;
i will undertake for a soul in such a state, that it shall verily stand in need
to lean upon Jesus Christ.

First, Labor thou that art a lost soul, 1. by becoming a sick soul.
to become a sick soul, that is the way to become a leaning soul, Mat. 9.12.
The whole need not the Physician, but the sick: so the whole need not a Keeper,
but the sick: There are many things the same man wants, when he is sick that he
needs not when he is well. A man leanes upon his own skill as for his diet, and
all other accommodations, when he is well; but he leanes upon his Physician and
his skill, for direction for diet, etc. when he is sick: and the reason he
leanes on him now, and not before, is because he needs him now, and not before.
Sickness makes him need him, and therefore lean upon him; so there are many
things that the same soul never needed (that is, saw no need of) before, that
when it comes to be spiritually sick, it comes to need in good earnest, before
it could trust to its own wisdom, and lean to its own understanding, and
order its affairs according to its own will; but now it needs a Christ as
Physician, as its Keeper, and now it will lean to Christ's counsel, and to his
advice, and to his prescriptions, because it is sick of its own. There is a
Twofold spiritual sickness, that will bring a soul to need Christ as a
leaning stock.

First, A sickness of hatred unto sin: 1. Sick of hatred to sin.
for it is not every sickness that will make you need this Physician. Many are
sick for sin (I mean as the punishment of sin) for this cause we may say (as
Paul, 1 Cor. 11.30.) say indeed, that many are sick, but there are but few sick
of sin. But wherever there is a Sin-sicknesse, there cannot but be a
provocation to vomiting; David cannot hold, till he brings up all: Sin lies
upon a sick Conscience, as undigested Meat upon a sick stomach. You know also,
that where ever there is a propension to vomit, there is a great desire of
somewhat to lean upon. Oh! what would a sin-sick soul, that cannot possibly be
well, until it has (by broken hearted confessions) vomited up its iniquities,
give, that it had freedom to lean its head in Christ's bosom; so Psalm. 32.3.
While I kept silence, my bones waxed old, etc. therefore ver. 5. I said I will
confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest, etc. and verse. 6.
For this cause shall every one that is godly pray unto thee: As who would say,
when I was so sin-sick that I knew not what to do: I did but lean my head in
the Lords bosom, and bring it up again, and I had so much ease to my soul,
that I would advise every troubled heart to lean where I leaned, and to do
what I did.

2ly. Sick of love to Christ.
Secondly, A Love-sicknesse unto Jesus Christ. Many are also Lovesick, (but as
Amnon for his sister) for a lust, or for a corruption: but few are sick for
Christ. The language of Love-sicknesse, is such as this, I must have him, or
else I dye. Give me Christ, or none will content me. Thus those passionate
breakings forth of the Spouse. Love is stronger then death: Mine heart failed
when he spoke: I charge you O ye daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my
beloved, that you tell him, that I am sick of love, Cant. 5.8. Now this
Lovesick Spouse, will be sure to be a leaning Spouse: she sinks, she swoones,
she dies away, if Christ do not come unto her, Cant. 2.5, 6. Stay me, comfort
me, for I am sick of love: His left hand is under my head, his right hand does
embrace me. O! how does a poor stomach sick Creature desire to hold, and to be
held, when it is ready to swoon away.

2ly, By becoming a shaken soul.
So then, it is a sad sign, that you are neither sick of hatred unto sin, nor of
love unto Christ, when you see little need of leaning upon him.

Secondly; Labor th^^ that are a lost soul, to get into a shaken posture, that
is the way to get into a leanin posture. What Is the reason there is so little
catching hold upon Christ by worldly men in their time of health? Oh! it is
because there is little shaking of worldly things in that time; but now Isai.
2.20, 21. They shall one day cast away their Idols of Gold, and Silver, which
they have made each one for himself, that they may run into the clefts of the
Rock, when God arises to shake terribly the Earth. Oh! you see by frequent
experience in poor dying Worldlings, when God shakes their Earth, how
solicitous they are then to take hold (if they durst) on the God of Heaven.
When they see by these shakings, what slender supports their golden Gods, and
silver shrines are to lean upon: oh! then what would they give for Jesus
Christ, for to be their souls leaning stock? You read Act. 4.31. That the
place was shaken where they met, before God sent out upon them the Holy Ghost,
to speak the word of God with boldness: So this is the manner of his working,
to shake souls before he power out upon them the Spirit of believing, to apply
the promise of God with boldness. Thus did the Lord take Job by the neck,
(when he was at ease) and shook him to pieces, so says himself, Job. 16.12.
Now when God has shaken our comforts, and enjoyments in the world, and
scattered our duties, that they appear broken poor crazy things, when he has
shaken to pieces our righteousness, and all our selfe-supports: then sirs,
then if ever will Christ appear desirable unto us; oh! then shall we long to
lean upon him.

Memorable is that passage, Hab. 3.17. When I heard my belly trembled, my lips
quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my
self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. Here Is strange shaking, and as
strange establishment, I trembled that I might rest. The more shaking at first,
the stronger leaning afterward: for verily, Note.
though God does not shake all souls alike, before he make them lean upon
himself; yet have I observed, that the less the heart has been shaken in
the first stirrings of grace, the more feeble have the leanings been perhaps
many years afterward, and the more easiely interrupted and disturbed. Nay,
though the Lord has opened some hearts (as Lydias) without much manifest
shaking at the first; yet have I known many (even sincere souls) of them kept
almost in an every day Ague, almost all their lives after their Conversion; I
mean in continual spiritual shakings. Therefore if God has shaken thee, be
not angry, but as soon as thou can, catch hold upon Christ, and lean hard,
for else i will tell you, when we are greatly shaken, we may continue in great
danger of falling, if we have not an Anchor of hope to take hold on, a Pillar
of Christ's Chariot to lean upon.

3ly, By becoming a sinking soul.
Thirdly, Labor thou that art a lost soul, to get into a sinking posture, that
is the way to get into a leaning posture. This perhaps you will say is strange,
but this I know to be true, Mat. 14.30. Peter beginning to sink cried, Lord
save me. Oh! sinking souls, will be sure to catch hold, if it be possible, and
nothing shall discourage them, though Christ should cut their fingers; yet will
they hold, rather then drown: such a soul will take hold of Christ upon the
most cutting terms of the Gospel. A Boat! a Boat* a Boat! all that I am worth
in the world for a Boat, says a sinking person, and will never leave looking,
and crying, and catching, as long as it can either keep hand or head above
water. Thus David, Psalm. 69.1, 2. Save me O God, I am come into the deep, I
sink in deep water, where no standing is. And he is at it again, verse 14.
Deliver me least I sink. Sirs, none can imagine, but those that have felt, how
welcome a Leaning stock Christ is unto a soul in such a sinking condition, but
you who have sounded the deepes of a distressed, As to the 2d. Hinderance. Help
the second.
distracted Conscience, can bear witness.

Secondly, As to the second Hindeoance, viz. Few feel Christ, and therefore few
will lean upon him. I shall leave a word or two with you, to help your souls
in this also.

First, If you be desirous to feel Christ, Labor to feel Christ by feeling
sin.
labor to feel sin: I believe never did any come savingly to feel Christ, that
have not come seriously to feel sin. You never knew a soul earnestly complain
for a Christ, that could not earnestly complain of sin. When Christ's own
spirit is sent forth into our dead benumbed Consciences and senseless hearts,
how does it make us feel righteousness, but by making us feel sin, and
judgment, the sense of all must go together, where Gods Spirit is indeed at
work, Jo. 16.8. Sirs, how can we be sensible of the good of light, of peace,
of health, of plenty, better then by feeling the evil of darkness, war,
sickness, poverty? or the light, peace, or saving health that is by Jesus
Christ more effectually, then by the darkness, horror, and damning misery of
sin? I mean, when we see one by the other, Isai. 54.5, 6. It Is a woman
forsaken and grieved in spirit (in the remembrance and sense of sin, the
shame and the reproach of sin, as is intimated verse. 4.) I say, a woman thus
grieved in spirit, that God will call a wife of youth unto himself, and her
maker will become her Husband; that is, Christ will take that soul into the
nearest intimacy with himself, to lie (as a wife of youth) in his bosom, to
feel his stripes, to put its hand into the wounds of his sides, to feel the
stirrings of his heart toward sinners, that have had the nearest and closest
sense of sin, that have lain, and can most feeling groan under the heavy load
and burden of sin. Many there are that speak of the evil of sin, but not
feelingly; and as for these, if they speak of the good of Christ, you may
easily discern it is not feelingly. When Paul feels sin kill him, Romans 7.9. And
as a stinking, troublesome, tyring dead Carcass, cleaving to him, ver. 24. 2ly.
By conversing much where Christ is to be found, viz. in the Ordinances, and
with the promises.
Then presently comes he to feel the law of the Spirit of life in Christ,
making him free from the law of sin and death, Romans 8.2.

Secondly, Would you feel Christ? make then after his hand, and after his
heart. Get you thither where these are to be found, and keep you there.

Now Christ's hand is in his Ordinances. And Christ's heart is in his promises.
There, if any where; there, and no other where feel for them, and you shall
find them.

How often do you read in Scripture, that Christ's hands are stretched forth in
his Ordinances? if you have not done so, You may feel Christ's hands in his
Ordinances.
turn to Isai. 65.1, 2. I said, behold me, behold me, I have spread out my
hands all the day; (and how is that but in the Ordinances?) unto a rebellious
people which walked in a way that was not good. This is otherwise expressed by
his desire to gather them under his wings, Luke 13:34. Sirs, would you feel
for Christ's Hand to lean upon, or his wing to be sheltred under? Be much in
the Ordinances.

And Christ's heart in his promises.
Again, Christ's heart is in his promises. Could you but get into the heart of a
promise, it would be like Thomas his putting of his hands into Christ's sides;
you might feel Christ's heart, and how it works toward poor souls. What
living heart can survey the Promises, without a lively sense of Christ's hearts
tenderness? Sirs, do you not feel how his bowels are turned, and his
repentings kindled within him, when he says, not only, how shall I give thee
up Ephraim? (as Hos. 11.8.) but also, I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim (as he says verse 9.) And I
will heal their backslydings, and I will love them freely, (chap. 14.4.) And I
might transcribe a great part of the whole Bible, to lead you to a sense of all
those promises that plainly lead the Generation of them that seek the face of
Jacob, to a sense of Christ's heart, though now himself be at rest, toward
poor Israel in the Wilderness.

CHAP. XVI. Convincing Christ's loveliness by removing the foregoing prejudices.
THirdly, As to the third Hinderance, viz. As to the 3d. Hinderance. Helpful
considerations convincing Christ's loveliness, notwithstanding any prejudices.

1. Against his Port.

1. It is not of necessity, but choice, that his Port is so mean


That few like Christ so as to make him their beloved, being prejudiced against
his Port, Person, Discourse, Carriage, Estate. Consider

1. As to Christ's wooing Port, these three things: For my now design is to
remove the prejudices, and if it be possible to make up the match; and though I
woe, yet will I not lie for God, nor for his Son Christ.

Though Christ come a wooing in Port despised by the World, on the Colt of an
Ass, the foolishness of preaching; yet is it not of constraint, but of
condescension, and with a rich compensation.

First, It is, (let the world know) not of constraint, or necessity, that
Christ comes in so mean a Port. He could if he would, come so as to convince
you hereof; but it is of choice that he comes so meanly. I have read of one of
the Roman Emperors, that having been long molested by the King of an eastern
Country, having at length an Embassy sent him by some contemptible Messengers,
(yet the noblest that that Country afforded) the Roman Emperor thinking it
were in slight, asked them if their Master had none more Heroical then they?
they answering they were his Chieftains, he brake out in such an immoderate
laughter, that he dyed in it. The Great, and Wise, and Nobles of the World,
thus deride the Messengers of Jesus Christ, and him that sent them, because of
the meannesse of the Messengers: But let them know, that as he laughed himself
to death, in laughing them to scorn, so may these laugh themselves to damnation
before they are aware: and as for us, Call they us, and count they us as they
please, Priest, and croaking Calvinists, and what they will; yet may not we
answer that our Master has none more noble to send, or that he cannot come in
greater Port: for Psalm. 18.9, 10. He bowed the Heavens, and came down. and
darkness was under his feet: And he rode upon a Cherub, and did fly; yea, he
did fly upon the wings of the wind, so Isai. 19.1. Behold, the Lord rides upon
a swift Cloud. And this might be his Port.

So might Angels also be his Messengers, 1.7. Who makes his Angels Spirits,
and his Ministers flaming fire. Christ could go a wooing in a whirlwind, as
the Lord came to answer Job, Job. 38.1. And all his Attendants should be
flaming fire. If he give but a word among the Angels, great verily shall be the
number, and company of those that publish it, Psalm. 68.11. So that you see, it
is choice, and not constraint, the free pleasure of the Lord to make use of
such as we are, as Ambassadors for Christ.

2ly, It Is of abundant condescension.
Secondly, It is out of an abundance of Condescentsion to all our infirmities
and frailties, to mean men's weak Capacities, and to all our strong unbelief.

1. To the infirmity of all our Natures.
First, It Is riches of Condescension to the weakness of all our Natures, that
Christ comes a wooing in so mean a Port, and by such despised Messengers.
Friends, God could have sent an Angel from Heaven this day in my poor room,
to have wooed you for Christ; and I dare say, Glad would the chief among the
Angels have been of such an employment: and now behold a poor handful of
despicable dust in your Pulpit, a vile sinner, a man of unclean lips, and
dwelling among a people of unclean lips; and he must espouse you to one
Husband, he must woo you for Jesus Christ. Yea, but if an Angel had come to
preach, where would you have sat to hear? Alas! alas! if God had come to
preach Gospel to you from Mount Sion to day, as he once did preach Law to
Israel from Mount Sinai, when there were thunders, and lightnings, and Clouds
upon the Mount, and the exceeding loud voice, as Exodus 19.16. Oh! we should
have the stoutest heart of you coming before next Sermon, as they in the next
Chapter, Ezod. 20.18, 19. And all the people, when they saw the lightning, and
thunders, and Mountain smoking, etc. they saw it, and removed, and stood afar
off, and said to Moses, speak thou to us, and we will hear, but let not God
speak lest we dye.

2ly, It Is rich Condescension to the plainest amongst us. 2. Particularly to
the mean and plain ones amongst us.
May some say, If Christ would not woo by Angels, or Thunders, yet might he
employ great Doctors and Scholars of the world, to preach to us in elegant
style, and accurate expressions, and then we think we should be won. Ah! but
still it is not enticing words of man's wisdom, but foolishness (that is
plainness which they count foolishness) of preaching, that Christ ordinarily
both commissions, and crowns with success in this wooing work, and doubtless
in riches of condescension to the poor. I have often thought, that the most
learned may understand the plainest Preacher, but the plain Hearer cannot
understand the high-flown Preacher: Men may, and some do preach English, and
yet to the ignorant and poor (which yet Christ has ordained to receive the
Gospel) as it were in an unknown language: and how shall they receive what they
are not able to conceive? Oh! that some Doctors in our Israel would often ask
their Consciences that Question, 1 Cor. 14.16. What shall the person that
occupies the place of the unlearned, or plain man do? I am not worthy to
advise this, yet this will I pray for, because I have had some comfort in
plain preaching from those that sit at the footstool, or stand in the Alley:
and this I know, that God would not have the least of these little Ones to
perish; Therefore comes Christ a wooing not only by plain men, but also by
plain language.

3ly, 3ly, To the weakness of our faith.
It Is riches of Condescension to the weakness of our faith. If a Great man
should come to some poor widow of you in Gold, or Crimson, or Scarlet, etc.
Could you believe he intended to marry you in good earnest? we find it work
hard enough to persuade convicted sinners, that Christ, thus mean as his Port
is, will indeed marry such as they are: and I cannot think, but that if his
Pomp, his wooing pomp were greater, by so much would their unbelief be
greater. What, such a Prince marry me? sure he never said so, or if he has so
said, I cannot imagine that ever he will so do. But now if a mighty Prince
should come a wooing disguised (as I may say with reverence to Christ) in as
mean habit and Port as thine own, thou will not be so afraid or ashamed to
keep his Company, or so unwilling to believe his reality. This Moses foresaw,
and forespake of concerning Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord will raise thee up a
Prophet of thy Brethren, out of the midst of thee like unto me, unto him shall
you hearken. Oh! it gives great advantage to our otherwise unperswasible
hearts, that Christ comes a wooing to us as one of our Brethren, and as like us
in all things (sin excepted.) Upon this account we can entertain some little
belief, that when Christ wooes us, he does not mock us, Heb. 12. We are not
come to mount Sinai, but mount Sion, etc. verse. 18. And in the close of the
Catalogue of your company there, to Jesus the Mediator, and the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things then the blood of Abel; it is crucified
Christ unto whom! woo you, let this speak encouragement to you, that Christ
will have you. And methinks you might believe, that that Christ that has
chosen such a wretch as I know my self to be, for his spokesman to thee, will
not disdain to choose thee (though a wretch in own eyes) for a spouse to
himself.

3ly, It Is with a rich compensetion.
3ly, Though he come a wooing in poor Port, as to the eye of sense, yet with a
rich compensation as to the eye of faith. Therefore rejoice O daughter of Sion,
for though thy King is meek and lovely, riding upon an Ass, yet he comes
having salvation. Zach. 9.9. You call such preaching foolishness, but it
pleases God thereby to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21.

Christ comes in mean Port, but with a rich Present: behold, (whatever his
Port be) his reward is with him, and it is no less then Salvation. When Satan
comes a wooing, it is in the Hackney-Coach of this world, laden with lies, and
gilded with deceit. Now then if you will despise this day, the poor spokesman
of the Lord Christ; yet neglect not Christ, though his pomp be small, lest you
neglect so great a salvation.

2ly, As to this wooing person. 2ly, As to Christ's wooing person.
Against that also carnal hearts are prejudiced. To remove which,

Consider these four things.

1. As despicable as Christ's person is to the carnal, 1. If it be to be
despised, yet not by us, whose persons are to be lothed.
and unregenerate eye; yet what can be objected by the carnal and unregenerat
heart? Though there be any thing of uncomlinesse to be objected unto him, yet
unworthily by thee. Is he naked, and in his blood? Can thou say, that there
is no form in him, or comeliness desirable? Read Ezekiel. 16. And tell me, when
thou have laid it to heart, if he be not a suitor (make the worst of it) good
enough for thee, who art naked, and in thy blood, and thy person to be loathed,
as well as thou art, as to thy state, an outcast and forlorn.

2ly, 2ly, Christ is beautiful, if not to thy sense, yet to thy conscience.
As uncomely as Christ's outward appearance is to thy outward sense, yet how
beautiful is the inside of him to thine inward Conscience? As she says of her
self, who is his Spouse: I am black, but comely, or as the spirit of God of
her, The Kings daughter is all glorious within: glorious, and all glorious, at
least wise all glorious within: so may we, so must we; yea, so shall thou say
of Jesus Christ. The Angels call him an holy thing, yea the Devils saw him
look so like his Father, that they acknowledged him to be the Son of God. Yea
doubtless, whatever thy flesh and thy heart now say, yet shall Christ be
glorious in the Consciences of the worst of men: yea of Devils unto all
eternity. He that comes riding upon the Colt of an Ass is just, as well as
having salvation, (therefore lovely both in Port and Person, though despised by
the world in both) Zach. 9.9.

3ly, Even Christ's crucified outside is glorious in the eyes of the God of
glory.
3ly, Yea; and the very outside of Jesus Christ, contemned by the vainglorious
world, is exceeding glorious even to admiration in the eyes of the God of
glory, that surely knows better what beauty, glory, comeliness, etc. are, then
such a vain worm as thou art, see Isai. 63.1. God speaks there unto Christ,
and of Christ, Who is this that comes from Edom with dyed Garments, from
Bosrah? this that is glorious in his Apparel? I that speak in righteousness,
mighty to save (says Christ by way of answer) God asks the Question, as if he
wondered at the glory, and as if Christ were glorified [qua] crucified; as if
his Cross were his Throne, his Crown of Thorns were his crown of Glory; and his
blood-scarlet were his richest Robe. Yea, view Rev. 19. where you have Christ
in Majesty upon his white horse, verse 11. And on his head many Crowns, and
verse 12. He was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and his name was called
the Word of God. As if Christ Crowned and possessed of glory, did borrow a Robe
of Christ crucified, to make up his glory.

4ly. If his visage be marred, yet to be more loved by thee, because it was
marred for thee.
4ly, Objectest thou, that the Visage of Christ is marred more then any man's.
Answer thy self, and take away this prejudice by believing. Sirs, whom was it
for, that he was bruised, battered, buffeted, smiten, spit upon, scorned,
scourged, rent, torn, and wounded? Was it not the chastisment of thy peace? are
not his wounds and stripes for thy healing? and were they not for thine
iniquities? and not for his own? Read Isai. 53. And tell me, if thou dare now
despise his person, and not (as Joseph) make much of his Crucified Corpse, I
mean spiritually. Dare thou stumble at that Cross whereon he hung for thee?
Will thou love him the worse for skars, which he gat by standing between thee
and the stroke of divine vengeance, for venturing his own life to secure
thine? My friends! what shall we make of such a soul? If this be not to
return hatred in the highest kind, for love in the highest: if this be not to
kick against tenderest bowels, to give a Scorpion for an Egg, to return a
Stone for a Fish; yea, for his best work to stone him, let Conscience judge.
Greater love has no man then that: greater hatred can no man have then this:
It Is as if this should render a suitor contemptible to some woman of yours,
because he hazarded his life to save thine. The Emperor could affectionately
kiss the Martyrs deformity, where he had in the foregoing persecution lost an
Eye, accounting his blind side most beautiful, because he had lost an eye for
Christ. Now Christ lost not eye, or a tooth, or a limb, but his life for thee;
and being now come to life again, he comes a wooing to thee: Oh! wilt not thou
wash with thy very tears, those pierced feet? will thou not kiss those
pierced hands? will thou not anoint those precious Temples of his head, so
torn with the thorns of thy wilderness? or will thou make a scorn of him,
seeing thou were in the same condemnation with him? yea, and it was for thy
default, and not his; when he already was derided, despised, rejected, pierced
for thee; shall he again be derided, despised, rejected and pierced by thee? I
hope better things of you my believing Brethren, and fellow Christians.

CHAP. XVII. A removal of remaining prejudices.
THirdly, As to Christ's wooing-discourse. 3ly, As to Christ's wooing discourse
in general.
He speaks Conviction instead of Complement in the general, and his particular
Terms in his Discourse, are altogether cross to flesh and blood. I shall
endeavor to remove these prejudices, and to make you acknowledge the
loveliness of this kind of Christ's Discourse, and these terms in special.
And

Christ's Convictions.
First, As to Christ's Convictions, these three Ingredients sufficiently sweeten
that bitter Cup. They are Wise, Affectionate, and Consolatory.

1. They are wise, therefore lovely.
First, The sharpest of Christ's wooing-convictions are altogether lovely,
because altogether w^se. Hear what the wise man says, of wise Convictions,
Prove. 25.12. As an Earing of Gold, and an Ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise
reproof. Now if I can but prove, what I hope you dare not deny, viz. That
Christ's Convictions are wise Convictions; what can be more suitable for a
suitor, to bestow on her that he intends to espouse, then Earings of Gold, and
Ornaments of fine gold? Well then may these pass for Christ's dear love Tokens
in his first wooing. Wise reproofs are from riches of grace, and are themselves
a rich present, too rich for any to despise: in this Case, that soul that you
may call Coy, God will call no less then Scerner, Prove. 15.12. A scorner
loves not him that reproves him. If Christ's Convictions be not lovely to
thee, it is not because they are poor Tokens, but because thou art a proud
person, and a scorner. And whatsoever heart dare scorn the riches of Christ's
wooing Convictions, that heart would scorn even his Marriage-Consolations.
Yea, God will account thee a fool, as well as a scorner, Prove. 9.8. Reprove a
wise man and he will love thee. He that is wise enough rightly to estimate
these Convictions in his judgment, will highly esteem them in his affections.
He that knows them, will undoubtedly love them; I mean, that knows the value
of them. The wise will say, Let Christ reprove me, and it shall be an excellent
oil that shall not break mine Head, Psalm. 141.5.

Now to convince you of the wisdom of Christ's Convictions. Consider the
seasonablenesse and sutablenesse of them.

For 1. They are seasonable.
First, A wise Conviction is that which is in season, which Solomon calls,
Golden Apples in silver Pictures, Prove. 25.11. concluding seasonable reproof,
to be wise reproof, verse 12. This was Abigaels renowned wisdom, when David
was just a ruining her whole Family, had not she by gracious reproof stopped his
fury, taking that season, when by her present his passion was allayed, and how
lovely was it to David? 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. David was wise, and therefore this
word was an Earing of gold unto him. The same woman, with the same wisdom,
defers her Conviction as to her Husband till the fittest season, ver. 37. Till
the wine was gone out of him; but he was a Nabal, a fool, and his heart was
dead as a stone. Now such seasonable Convictions, are Christ's Convictions: when
souls are near ruining themselves and others, in strikes the Spirit, and
reproves of sin, of righteousness and judgment, at the best season: When Saul
was near Damascus, the intended bloody stage of his persecuting madness,
then, just then in comes a wooing word of Conviction, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? Act. 9.3, 4. Who of you can speak of Christ's Convictions,
but must remember that Christ took the best season; to say unto you, Soul,
Soul, why refusest, resistest, rejectest thou me? Thou may wonder that Christ
should send such a word, to stop thee at such a time, in such a season.

2ly, 2ly. Suitable.
As the wisdom of Conviction lies in choosing a fit Season, so a fit frame of
Spirit, fit words, fit matter; I say, fit to persuade, not to provoke; to
soften, not to incense, and so to harden. As, sirs, if you be never so good,
and the parties you reprove never so bad, your Reproofs cannot be acceptable,
if they approve not of you, that are reproved by you. Now this I can say, to
prove these Reproves of Christ lovely, That Christ rather manageth his wooing
Convictions in a pleading, than upbraiding way: Christ upbraids not but when
unbelief rejects him; and puts him away: and for this indeed he will upbraid
his very Disciples, even after Marriage, Mar. 16.14. Although he be slow enough
hereunto, as is to be marked from Mat. 11.20. He began to upbraid them,
because they believed not; but in other cases, He upbraideth no man, Jam. 5.1.
But like as he pleaded with the Fathers of old, so will he plead with souls,
Ezekiel. 20 36. A Chapter full of such pleading you have, Ezekiel. 18. And see how it
closes, verse 31.32. Why will you dye? I would not have it so, says God,
wherefore return, and live ye. Verily such language from the mouth of a
gracious God to wretched sinners, might melt an heart of hardest stone. Christ
might upbraide us into Hell, and yet when his words are sharpest, as Jer. 3.
before quoted, they are but to plead us into his own bosom. Christ delights not
to taunt us for our sin, but to humble us under, and to rid us of our sin.

2ly, They are loving, and therefore lovely.
2ly, As they are wise, so winning, they are loving, and therefore lovely
Convictions. They are pleadings managed by wisdom, full freight of affection:
no question Joseph's Convictions sat sad upon his Brethrens spirits, when they
were struck speechless, and could not answer him a word, Genesis 45.3. I am
Joseph whom ye sold, verse 4. There Is the Conviction. I am Jesus whom ye have
sold for sin, for lust, for vanity, for the world. Yea, but Joseph vents his
own affections, and breaks out into weeping upon them, verse 15. and that
gives vent unto their utterance, for after that (says the Text) his Brethren
talked with him, that is, When they saw how affectionate his Convictions were.
Now this is our Joseph's, our Jesus his manner; O sweet Convictions, when most
bitter, because sweetened by his most bitter tears. If Jesus convince
Jerusalem, his eyes shall speak it, as well as his lips, Luke 19.41. He beheld
the City, and wept over it, saying, if thou had known, etc. It Is that makes
these Reproves so rich a present, because Christ's tears are such precious
Pearls.

3ly, They are consolatory, therefore lovely.
3ly, Christ's Convictions are lovely, because consolatory. As soon as ever
Christ has made you weep, he will smile that you may rejoice. That passage is
to be remarked, Ioh, 16.7. I will send the Comforter; and how is that
amplified? ver. 8. He shall convince. You use to wrap up your bitter Pills in
sweet outsides, Sugar, Sirrups, etc. But Christ does otherwise, he puts the
most bitter outmost. You have some Nuts, that have hard shells, that must be
broken, and then you come at a bitter peeling, and under that lies the sweet
Kernel. Our hearts are those hard shells, Christ breaks these, and then we come
at Convictions, these are bitter peeles, but under these lie Consolations: Oh!
those are sweet Kernels. I am Joseph whom you sold; 'twas a cutting word, Genesis
45.4. Now therefore be not grieved, for God did send me before you to preserve
your life: there is a curing word for it, ver. 5. We cannot think that Joseph did
forbid them, to grieve for their sin: but to grieve inordiately, or
distractedly. I am Jesus whom you abused: Oh! there is a killing Conviction: but
be not grieved to despair, for I was sold to death, that I might preserve your
life, and sent to Heaven through persecution, that I might prepare a place for
you: Oh! that word will revive you. If Christ allure into the wilderness of
Conviction, making you as Joseph's Brethren, at a loss in your selves, that you
shall not know what to ananswer: know, that he can furnish a delicious Table in
this Wilderness, and there speak comfortably unto you, Hos. 2.14. Now then if
you be so scornful, or unwise, as to hate to be reproved, though Christ
convince so cordially, so comfortingly, and have Adders ears unto these
Charmings, charm he never so wisely; take your Course, please your selves: the
world will paint, when Christ will be as Fullers soap to wash your lying beauty
from you: the world will flatter, and dare deceive; Note.
Christ your suitor will not, his spokesman dare not. But know wherever you
make your choice, you must have bitter as well as sweet: Christ's is a
bitter-sweet, the world is a sweet-bitter: Christ's wormwood is first tasted,
the best wine is kept for the last, The Worlds, Satan's, Sins discourse are
lies, folly, flattery, etc. though these be sweet in thy mouth, and thou hide
them under thy tongue, yet shall thy meat in thy bowels be turned, and prove
the gall of Asps within thee, Job 20.12, 14. Thus much to persuade you into
love with Christ's wooing Convictions. But now more particularly. In particular,
The terms of Christ's discourse are also lovely terms. The first, viz. Your
leaving Fathers house.

1. Its reasonable.




Secondly, I shall endeavor to represent the loveliness of those wooing terms
of Christ's discourse whereof I spoke.

The first whereof is this, You must forget your own people, and forsake your
Fathers house, if you marry me, says Christ; unto which prejudice I answer,
it is no more then reasonable, nay, it is no more then is profitable.

First. It Is no more then reasonable. Except you mistake Christ's meaning, for
Christ does not require you to forsake natural Relations, any farther then
they forsake and persuade you to forsake Christ: This is clear, for says the
Text in the next words, Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him. If
they hinder thee herein, herein thou must hate them, be they Father, Mother,
Sister, Brother, Wife, Child, who they will, else thou can not marry Christ.
Now this is no more then what Reason, and the very Law of Nature obliges you
in, to your carnal and civil Husbands, Genesis 2.24. Therefore shall a man leave
Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife, and so on the other hand. What,
leave loving them? Yes, leave loving them better then his Wife, or her Husband.
Leave them, rather than by them be persuaded to leave one another. And surely
if any Husband in the world may righteously say, Hearken O daughter, and leave
thy Fathers house; Christ may say so, who is the most transcendent deserver of
our whole affection negative, and positive, our leaving love, and cleaving
love, with all the consequences and expressions of the most intimate and entire
affections.

2ly, Its profitable.
Secondly, It is no more then is profitable. You may object: Alas! I would marry
Christ if I durst, but my Father is carnal, and an enemy to the match, and now
if I should take your counsel, and own Christ, my Father would take away my
portion, and disown me: and as for that Son of man, your self have said, that
he has not an hole on Earth where to lay his head, and where will he then
find a pillow to lay mine upon. I answer, You cannot lose by leaving for
Christ. If thou have a Father, and a Fathers house which thou forsakest for
Christ, Christ has a Father, and a Fathers house, where there are breads
enough, for so runs the Greek (...), the expression is redundant, to show
that the provisions are abundant, Luke 15.17. And Beds enough, so says the
Text, Io. 14.2. And if it had not been so, Christ would have told you before he
had taken you out of the warm bosom of your Father or Mother; but because it
is so, He is gone to prepare a place for you, and will come again and receive
you to himself, that where he is made welcome, you may be also, verse 3. The
fewer friends you have for Christ, the more you have in Christ.

A second is this, If you will marry Christ, The 2d. viz. You must look for
sorrows.
you must look for many a sad and mourning day. This is an hard saying to flesh
and blood, but Grace can gladly hear it. We must be sorrowful, nay (as he
said of dying) blessed be God that we shall be sorrowful. It Is but for a time;
yea, it is a good time, and in order to a better time, as being it self a
seeds-time.

1. You shall be sorrowful, but not for eternity, But 1. It Is but for a time.
(which must be their portion that go without the Bridegroom to eternity) but
for a time called an hour, compared to the pangs of a woman, and then (as hers)
your sorrow shall be turned to joy: Christ will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22. Sorrows during you, and your enduring
sorrow may be for a night, or so, and then over again, for in his favor is
life, Psalm. 30.5.

2ly, Yea, and even this time is a good time, 2ly, Yea, and this is a good time.
better than the vain man's best time: yea, and such as perhaps thou will learn
to account one of thine own best times. Experience has taught the Worldling to
say, Rainy weather is good, because it is growing weather; and has it not
taught you to say, blessed are they that mourn? He that had experience of
joys and sorrows, as much as any man, and as much wisdom to give verdict,
has told us, Eccle. 7.3. Sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sorrow of
the Countenance, the heart is made better.

3ly, Its a good time in order to a better, viz a seeds time.
3ly, Yea, and it is a good time in order to a better time, for it is a Seeds
time. Sow now, and reap afterward: Sow tears for a small moment, and gather
everlasting mercies: Travel for an hour, and rejoice with joy, that none can
take from you. A little Seed brings a rich Crop: light afflictions for a
moment, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Moment any
sorrows, eternal joys, light afflictions, an exceeding weighty glory. You
Husbandmen set your hand to Gods plough, learn to sow this seed; turn to Psalm.
126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: He that goes forth
weeping, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again rejoicing, bringing
his Sheaves with him. Who can desire greater assurance, or surer advantage?

The 3d. You must draw in Christ's yoke, and carry his burden: But

1. It Is light and easy.


A third is, If you will marry Christ, you must draw in his yoke, and bear his
burden daily. Oh! but it is

1. But an easy Yoke, and light burden, Mat. 11.29. It Is upon the matter, but
as if one should say to his sweet heart, If you will have me, you must bear a
burden, and carry a Chain continually for my sake; the Chain is this
Neck-chain of Pearl, the burden, this Earing of gold. What one experienced and
true Christian is there of you, that would willingly be lightened of any one,
even of the heaviest links in all Christ's Chain? surely to carry Christ's
burden, is to share in Christ's glory. The burden that Christ's Spouse carries,
is glory all within, and Gold of Ophir without: and now how much is she hurt?
see Psalm. 45.9, 13.

But secondly, And if there be any tyring weight in it, 2ly, The heavy parts of
them will Christ bear for thee.
he engages himself to bear it for thee. I cannot apprehend, that it is the
advantage that Christ looks to take by our work, so much as the delight he
takes in our Company. For, upon the matter, we do but as it were hold the
Candle, whilst he does the work: we set our hand to the plough, but its he
that drives it. The wife of youth must be where the Husband is, because he
delights in her Company, though many times her help may rather hinder, and
make more work, then put forward that that is: Though Christ knows we know not
how to do any thing (for alas we know not how to speak as we should, Romans
8.26. much less to work as we should) yet will he have us set our hands to
every thing: but now read Isai. 26.12. Thou have wrought our works in us,
there is a word of experience. Read Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you
both to will and to do, there is a word of Doctrine, as a ground to such
experience. Read Heb. 13.20. The God of peace make you perfect in every good
work, working in you, etc. Here Is a prayer bottomed upon such a word of
Doctrine, and seconded ever, if put up in faith, by such Experience. So then
what of the Yoke and Burden, is bountiful and glorious shall thou bear; and
what of it is difficult, and too hard and heavy for thee will Christ bear:
Therefore it is said of the Spirit (...), Bez. reads sublevat, i. e. Not only
does the spirit helps us, but (as it were) bears with us over against us, and
so lightneth our burden, (for so the Metaphor taken from men that lift
together at a weight signifies) as well as strengthens our weakness.

CHAP. XVIII. A farther removal of remaining prejudices.
The 4th. You must forgo your own will? Which 1. Is a righteous term.
A Fourth Term is this, If you will marry Christ, you must not have your own
will. But this is also lovely and righteous.

1. It is a righteous Term, that when thou marriest, thy wife should subject
her desire unto thine, and that thou should rule over her, Genesis 3.16. And
how much more if Christ marry thee, that thou should be subject unto his
will, and disown thine?

Christ requires no will to be laid down, but what would undo thee.
2ly, Christ never desires to have any will from thee, besides that which would
undo thee. Such a will as the Lord speaks of, Ezekiel. 18.31. Why will you dye?
We have a will to undo our selves, to ruin our souls, to forsake our own
mercies, etc. and this is the best of our wills unregenerate, and unsanctified;
now that will Christ will have from us, or he will not have us.

3ly. Christ wills thy good more then thou can thine own.
3ly, Christ wills thy good as much, yea more, than thou can possibly thine
own; and therefore wherein thou willest for thy good, thy will is coincident,
and falls in with Christ's will, and therefore therein there can be no falling
out. Would thou be Rich or Honorable in the Woe ld? It may be thou must
herein submit thy will to Christ's; it may be it is not good for thee: but
would thou be Holy or Sanctified? why? without peradventure that would be
good for thee: see 1 These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your
Sanctification: Or would thou be happy, or glorified? Why? sure this will be
good for thee, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord will give grace and glory; and it is his
good pleasure (that is, his will in the fullest freedom) to give you the
Kingdom.

The 5th. You must part with your limbs for Christ's sake.

But 1. Christ will never cut off any, but what is a Gangrening the whole body.


The fifth and last Term is, If you will marry Christ, you must part with hand,
or foot, or eye, etc. for Christ, whereunto I shall speak two words.

First, Christ never desired, or will desire to have any Member from thee, but
that which is rotten, and rotting: not unless thy right eye, or hand, etc.
offend thee; that is, are ready to Gangrene the whole body. Immedicabile
vulnus, Ense recidendum est, etc.

Yea, If Christ call for the whole body, it is but that body of death spoken of
Romans 7.24. Mortify your Member. Col. 3.4. What Members? Fornication,
Uncleanness, Covetousness, etc. Or if for thy body in Martyrdom, it is but for
thy vile body, and that in exchange for a glorious body, see Phil. 3.21. And
this leads me to the next. Therefore

2ly, If Christ have a limb, or a joint, 2ly, Christ will give a new and living
member in the room of it.
or an eye from thee; it is not that thou may become lame, or a Cripple, a
blind, or a maimed Spouse; but that he may give thee better for them: the
seeing Eye, the hearing Ear, the walking Feet, and the working hand, for the
blind Eye, and deaf Ear, and lame Leg, and dead Hand, even the New man, for
the Old, Col. 3.9, 10. Put off the old man, put on the new, the living for the
dead, Romans 6.13. If Christ cut off your lust after the world, in the room of
it, you shall have love to God: If your covetousness after earthly things,
it is that you may more earnestly covet the best things: if your wilful
ignorant and Saul-like zeal, it is that he may give you in the room of it, a
Paul-like zeal, and according unto knowledge. Love was in Magdalen a rotten
limb, and to be cut off by Conversion, Love was in Magdalen a living affection
after conversion, and that which must remain lovely in the eyes, and for the
imitation of all unto whom that Gospel shall be preached. And now friends, go
home resolved to take Christ upon his own terms. 4. As to Christ's wooing
carriage. He smites not because he hates.
It could never have entered into your heart, to have indented so well for your
selves, as Christ has drawn your terms for you to your hands.

4ly, As to your dissatisfaction in Christ's wooing Carriages. Christ smites
before he smiles; he will pierce, wound, strike, bruise, yea, break the heart,
that he comes to woo, before he marry it. And yet for all this, must I say as
the Psalmist, Psalm. 141.5. Let Christ smite me, and it shall be a kindness. It
was not through any unkindnesse of the Father unto his only Son, That it
pleased the Father to bruise him, as it is said, Isai. 53.10. For he was ever
well pleased in him. No more may thou impute it to unkindnesse, that it
pleases the Son to bruise thee, for he intends everlastingly to take pleasure
in thee. I shall mind you but of three Things considerable, Three satisfying
Confiderations.
and then refer it to your own Consciences, to judge whether these be not kind,
righteous, and desirable smitings; though smitings ('it is confessed) they are,
viz. Who smites, for what, and what shall be done after that thou art smitten.

1. Who it is that smites.
First, Consider, Who it is that smites; It Is that Christ which was smitten for
thee, by thee, and is smitten with thee.

1. He that was smitten for thee.
First, He smites thee that was smitten for thee; therefore bear his smitings
patiently, Isai. 53.8. For the transgression of my people was he stricken:
Therefore what can the people object, if he strike them for their own
transgressions? they say, Mothers use to be most tender of those Children, for
which they have most suffered; and Lovers of those Spouses, whom they have
attained through greatest difficulties: surely then Christ will not needlessly
smite thee, since he was thus smitten for thee; therefore take gently his
gentle smitings.

2ly, He that has bin often smitten by thee
2ly, Its he smites thee, that has been so often smitten by thee. Art thou
pierced by Christ? he was pierced by thee first: therefore have thou little
reason to complain that he has pierced thee, Zach. 12.10. They shall look on
me whom they have pierced. Does his Word or Spirit wound thee? how often have
thy vain and vile words, and impenitent and unbelieving spirit wounded him?
Does his wooong Carriage now prick thee to thine heart? how often have thy
wandering Carriages struck Jesus Christ to the heart? Its fit that thou
should feel what it is to be smitten, since thou have so often tried what
it is to smite. And well may thou take it quietly, to be under wounds of
spirit many hours, yea many weeks, that have in thy sinful Conversation been
wounding Christ, it may be twenty, forty, or threescore years.

3ly, Its he smites thee, 3ly, He that is smitten with thee.
that in the mean while is smitten with thee, and therefore surely will not
smite to hurt thee. There Is no great fear, that that Father will wrong his
Child, that as we say, smites himself, while he strikes his Child. Surely in
all thine Afflictions, (most of all [spirituall] which are greatest) is Christ
afflicted, Isai. 63.9. If either Satan, Sin, or the Law persecuteth thee,
Christ will say, Why persecute you me? I have born, suffered, done, and dyed
for that soul: therefore I will not see that soul perish, but though I smite
it with mine own rod, yet will I not suffer you to ruin it. Surely as Paul
says, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is in the scorching
furnace of an afflicted Conscience, and I burn not? so will Christ say.

2ly, Consider, Why is it that Christ smites thee? 2. Consider. Why he smites.
look backward or forward, and there is little reason to murmur on either hand.

1. Look backward upon what thou were, 1. Look backward upon what thou have
been and do not complain.
and art thou smitten? wonder that thou art not struck down to Hell: never
think strange that thou art sore bruised as in the place of Dragons, but
rather that thou art not damned, and so turned down into the place of Devils,
Lam. 3.30. He gives his Cheek to him that smites him, says Jeremy of the
afflicted Spirit; and wherefore (says he, verse 39.) Does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? Art thou a sinning soul, and
yet a living soul? oh! though thou be a bruised soul, thou have small reason to
complain.

2ly, Look forward upon what thou art to be, 2ly, Look forward upon what thou
art to be, and complain no more.
and do not count it hard that Christ has smitten thee. Friend, Christ
intends thee (though thy heart have been crooked and knotty hitherto) for a
piece of Timber in his living house, for a living stone, (though thy heart has
been a dead and rough stone) 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye are built up as lively stones, a
spiritual house. I hope this will satisfyingly answer what is said, Hos. 6.5. I
have hewed them by the Prophets. If you will be part in Christ's building, you
must be content with Christ's hewing.

Again, We are called to be Vessels of mercy; and these must be prepared unto
glory, Romans 9.23. And whoever prepared Vessels of gold, but by the Furnace? let
this answer, Isai. 1.25. I wiil turn mine hand upon thee, Oh! that, think you,
is a scaring word; but why will God do it?) I will purely purge away your
dross, and take away all your Tin.

Again, You are called to be the Lords Jewels, and these Jewels must be made
up, Mal. 3.17. The word is, (...) of (...) He will finish his Jewels. And what
Jeweller is there, (though never so sparing) but will have some instrument in
his hand, to cut away the part or parts that are redundant, and so to fit the
Jewel before he finish and make it up in the ring of Gold. This answers that
gracious promise (though to a carnal heart a bloody threatening) Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord will circumcise thine heart, to love him with all thy soul, etc. That
is, the Lord will pare it round, he will take away the fleshly and carnal, and
redundant parts of it; this will cost sharp work to thy fleshly heart: Thus
will Christ deal with thee, to make thee to love him, when he wooes thee to
love him; only be not thou as Zipporah, crying out to Christ, as she to Moses,
Exodus 4.16. A bloody Husband art thou unto me, because of the Circumcision. So
that all the expressions that import thy future glory, do abundantly engage
thee to receive with meekness, 3ly, Consider. What these smitings shall
conclude in.

Thine Enemies ruin.


and thanksgiving thy present sufferings and buffetings.

3ly, Consider what these smitings shall conclude in, and be satisfied, viz. In
the ruin of thine Enemies, and in the healing of thee.

First, When God casts souls, (as those three, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego) into the furnace, and the Son of God comes to take acquaintance with
them, and to bear them company in that Furnace, as Dan. 3.25. What shall that
fire do more then burn their Enemies, as verse 22. Verily upon them shall it
have no power, nor shall the hair of their head be singed, verse 27. Thy
Corruptions, thy sins, thy dross, thy dirt, shall consume, and be burnt up;
but it shall not be able to hurt thy soul. But

2ly, As for thy soul, if that be bruised, 2ly, Thy souls healing.
it shall be anointed by that balm that is in Gilead, and the Physician that
is there, Vna eademque manus, vulnus opemque feret. Christ does use to wound us
as Enemies do, and then to let us lie, and perish for want of looking too:
near fear so great unkindnesse from so kind a suitor: no, no, but if sense
say as Hos. 6.1. The Lord has torn, and he has smitten; let thy faith say
also as theirs there, and he will heal, and he will bind us up, after two
days, (that is some short season) he will revive us, and the third day (at
farthest) he will cause us to live, verse 2. Hearken my friends, what Hezekiah
can say after all his chatterings like a Crane, and shatterings to pieces, both
which you have together, Isai. 38.13, 14, verse 16. O Lord by these things men
live, and in all these things, (Mark, all these things, as if he could not be
without, Note.
or miss one blow of them, and do well) is the life of my spirit, so will thou recover me and make me to live [so wilt thou] as if God had (as it were)
limited himself to that way of working, unto the reviving of a dead heart: So
then either Christ must marry thee whilst a Carcass, and lay thee a dead
piece of flesh in his bosom, or thou must be contented to be smitten; but and
if thou be smitten, he will verily revive thee, and cause thee to live: so that
upon the matter, the worst that you can object unto these wooing blows is
this, that Jesus Christ will quicken you, to marry you. Compare two Scriptures,
Return O backslyding Children, and I will heal you, Hos. 14.1.4. Return O
backslyding Children, for I am married to you, Jer. 3.14. So then to desire
that Christ should marry you, before he smite you, is to desire that Christ
should marry you, before he revive you, and without controversy, great is the
mystery of godliness. Blows from others strike you dead, but blows from
Christ strike you alive. If Christ in his wooing work give strange strokes, he
will make such strange work of it before he have done, that all that were
incensed at him, shall be ashamed, as Isai. 45.24.

CHAP. XIX. A yet farther removal of remaining prejudices.
5ly, As to Christ's estate.
THe fifth and last prejudice against Christ, is as to matter of Estate in four
Particulars, viz. That he must have your portion out of hand. That you must
take his word for your jointure. That you must go into another Country, To the
first term, viz. You must trust him with your portion first.

1. Consider it is but what thou had from him at first.


and die by the way, before you can be possessed of it, I come now to remove
this prejudice.

To the first of these particulars, I have four things to say for thy
satisfaction.

First, Though Christ require your portion ready down to be put into his hand,
and to be at his disposal; yet is it herein the more reasonable in that you
had it all from him, and from his Father at the first. It is not an ordinary
match, when Christ the only Son, of the only Creator, goes a wooing to poor
Creatures. It Is as if when the Father has got an Estate under the Stewardship
of some Noble Lord, or Prince, and that Princes Heir should come a wooing to
his Stewards Daughter: If he require all her portion at his dispose, it is but
what came from his Father, see Hos. 2.9. I will take away my Corn, and my Wine,
and recover my Wool, and my Flax, given to cover thy nakedness. Mark that,
Given to cover thy nakedness, yet my wool, etc. still. So Money is given to
fill thy Cofer, yet is it the Lords still: Meat is given to cover thy Table,
yet is it the Lords still: So that if Christ will have thy Wine, or Corn, or
Wool, to dispose of to a poor Member of his now, and then, it is no more then
his own, even what thou had received of him first.

2ly, If Christ take any thing from thee, that is called tine, it is not with
intention that thou should want it, 2ly, He intends not that thou should
want it, whilst he uses it.
or be a loser by it; Christ will not ask thy Coat, that thy nakedness may be
seen, nor thy Meat from thee, to starve thee. But if thou lend unto the Lord
Christ, that which thou lendest, shall he pay thee again, as he did the Widows
meal and oil in her Cruse. You have the Spouse inviting Christ unto her Garden,
Cant. 4.16. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, and blow upon my Garden,
that the spices thereof may flow forth: Let my Beloved come into his Garden,
and eat his pleasant fruits. And you have him requiting her love, and returning
her kindness with advantage, Cant. 5.1. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my
Spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh with my spice, my Honey Comb with mine honey,
my Milk with my Wine: Eat O friends, and drink abundantly, O beloved. This she
had (even this rich entertainment and abundant welcome) because she had been
so free to Jesus Christ. So Rev. 3.20. I will sup with him (says God, and what
of that?) and he shall sup with me. Sirs, Let me tell you (whatever the wisdom
of this world, Note.
which is foolishness with God, shall say against it) you cannot trust your
Estate in any certain hands, except you put it into Christ hand; whatever
confidence you can have of their repaying you, yet can you have no certainty.
The uncertainty of what they have, and what they are, forbids you to be
certain of it, but trust Christ with it, and read Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the
Lord, any do good, and verily thou shall be fed. Lend to others, and conclude
it may be, I shall be repaid again: Lend to Christ, and write down verily:
though Christ can find but few Creditors, yet blessed are they, for they have
trusted the very Paymaster.

3ly, He takes it to give thee better for it
3ly, If Christ take from thee any thing of thine, it is to give thee a better in
the room of it. It Is as if an Husband should say, Wife, Prithee give the poor
woman at the door thy old and plain Garment, and i will give thee a new, a
lasting, a richer Garment in the room of it. Friends, what can we part with
for Christ, but these momentany vain things, that perish in the usage? and
what we shall receive from Christ, are durable riches and substance, Mat.
19.21. Go and sell all that thou have, and give to the poor. Yea, but would
flesh and blood say, that is the way to want my self. Nay, says Christ, thou
shall have treasure (what kind of Treasure) heavenly treasure.

4ly, To husband it for thee, not to spend it for thee.
4ly, and lastly, Christ asks it not of thee to spend it from thee, but to
husband it for thee. The men of the world, as wise as they are, have not
wisdom enough to husband their unrighteous Mammon, that little time which they
do enjoy it: therefore beg of Christ, to husband thine Estate for thee. Your
Usury brings you but five or six (or the like) in the hundred; there is an
Usury that you know not of, that would gain you an hundred, and more in five.
Sirs, if you be of Peter's mind, and must needs know before hand, what you
shall get by parting with all for Christ, and to Christ, read that passage Mat.
19.27. Peter said unto Christ, we have forsaken all, and have followed thee,
what shall we have therefore? Christ answers, v. 29. They that have forsaken
Houses, or Lands, etc. for my sake, shall receve an hundred fold, and shall
inherit life eternal: An hundred fold in this time, as the other Evangelists,
and after that eternal life. It follows verse 30. But many that are first
shall be last, and the last shall be first. Many that are the wisest, and
richest, and best husbands, and the first in the account of the world, shall
appear the most foolish, and improvident, and beggarly, and poor in that day,
when Saints shall know what they have trusted Christ for, and hide-bound
worldlings shall see to what little purpose they have heaped up treasure
together against the last days.

To the second, viz. To the 2d. viz. You must take his estate upon trust.

1. Consider whom thou art to trust.


That you must take Christ Estate upon trust. Consider

1. Whom you have trusted. I have wondered sometimes, at Bonds that have been
drawn, wherein the Husband has stood engaged to his Wife as to money matters,
that she should trust him to be her Husband, whom she dares not trust to be
her Steward; or that she dare adventure her person into his hand, into which
she dare not venture her Estate. Surely if Christ be faithful and worthy to
cammand thee, well may he command thine Estate; and if thou dare trust him for
thy soul, well may thou trust him for thy jointure, It Is Christ's promise
(though but a Land of promise) Christ's I say, that cannot lie. Did you ever
hear, that he dealt faithlesly with any, that you dare not trust him? Oh the
hellish, the cursed nature of this unbelief! thou dare not trust him, that
never proved untrusty. Consult with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have
believed, and that he is able to keep what I have committed to him against that
day.

Secondly, 2ly, Upon what grounds.
Upon what grounds you are to trust him for your jointure. The Fathers Oath,
The Sons handwriting the Spirits seal.

First, God has sworn, as well as promised, 1. The Fathers Oath.
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong consolation. If thy spirit strive in unbelief, let Gods oath
end this strife; for, God willing to show more abundantly to the heirs of
promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, Heb. 6.16,
17, 18.

Secondly, Christ has written, as well as spoken, 2ly, The Sons handwriting.
and will himself by his own handwriting (which he never can, nor will deny)
become thy Witness in this Matter. Search the Scriptures, says Christ
himself, when you have to do with the things of eternal life, and they are
they that testify of me, Jo. 5.39. I will give you but one Scripture instead
of many, urge it upon Christ, and try if he can deny it to be his own words,
and handwriting, Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23. Neither pray I for these alone, but
for all that shall believe through their word, that they all may be one, as
thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one (with us, or)
in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me: and the glory that
thou have given me, have I given them, etc. (Mark that deed of GIFT under
Christ's own hand) that the world may know that thou have loved them: and verse
24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, be with me, that they
may behold my glory. etc.

3ly, The Spirits seal.
Thirdly, The Spirit has sealed what the Father has sworn, and the Son written
in his own blood, Ephesians. 1 13, 14. In whom after that ye believed, you were
sealed with that holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession shall come to
the praise of his glory. And now Christians, upon such assurance do but act
your faith: and as I have seen some London-Merchans, that have purchased Lands
in the Plantations beyond sea, which they never saw, but are taken up for them
by their Factors, Note.
they have Cards and Maps of them here: so will thy faith (in this Christ) be
the Evidence of thy things not seen, and of the things that are hoped for, as
Heb. 11.1. And so the Jointure promised to thee, shall come aforehand to be
possessed by thee. To the 3d. viz. You must go into another world for it.
Consider, 1. It lies more sutably there. 1. Where thine Head is, viz. Christ.


To the third, viz. That this Canaan is beyond Jordan, this Land of promise, in
another World. I answer, Thine Estate lies where it is most suitable, and most
sure for thee.

1. It Is more suitable for thee, then if it lay in the world, and on this side
heaven: for

1. It lies where thine Head is, Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in heaven from
whence we also look for a Savior, which is Jesus Christ the Lord.

Secondly, It lies where thine heart should be, Mat. 6. 2ly, Where thine heart
should be.
20, 21. Lay up treasure in heaven, etc. for where your treasure is, there will
your hearts be also.

Secondly, It Is more sure for thee lying there, 2ly, It l^es more safely there.
then if it were situate otherwhere. There was never any thing that Saints
enjoyed, that was of this World, or in common with the World, but some Saints
or other, at some time or other, have been plundered of it by the World; yea,
so are all Saints at their going out of the world. Were thy happiness on this
side Heaven, thou must forgo it, when thou go under ground. But Mat. 6.20.
Lay up for your selves treasure in heaven, where Moths corrupt not not, neither
can Thieves break through and steal away. The Theives of the world can steal
thine, the moth of death can corrupt thee: but what Christ has for thee in
heaven, it is an inheritance incorruptible, and that fades not away, reserved
in the Heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1.4.

To the fourth, viz. That you must die by the way, To the fourth, viz. That you
must dye by the way.

1. It Is all men's necessity.


as you journey toward your jointure. I answer.

1. It Is all Men's and Women's necessity once to dye, whether married to Christ,
or to the Devil; whether joyntured in Heaven, or in Hell, Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed to men once to die. Sirs, some must die to be dammed, therefore well
may you be contented to die to be saved: some must dye to be actually and fully
possessed of Hell, therefore let it not grieve you to dye, to be actually and
fully possessed of glory.

Secondly, 2ly, It Is thine advantage.
It Is all good Men and Women's advantage (though necessity) to dye before they
are possessed of Heaven. Christ will subdue your Enemies ye Christians, and
bruise Satan, and the last Enemy shall be destroyed, and that is Death. And
when that is done, when there is none to take your joy from you, then shall it
be fully given to you. Yea, when all your Enemies, and those that hated you,
shall be chained up from ever harming you any more; then shall you in their
sight be possessed of all real and glorious enjoyments in the world to come.
Therefore to that soul to whom to live is Christ, surely to die shall be
advantage, Phil. 1.21.

A closing word.
And now for a closing word unto all that I have been sent to speak, to woo
you, or as Paul says, 2 Cor. 11.2. To espouse you to one Husband, that I might
present you a chaste Virgin unto Christ. To make you LOVERS, that you may be
LEANERS upon Christ, which was my great business in this Discourse. Let me
tell you, that as Moses said to Israel, Deuteronomy. 11 27. I have set before you in
this Discourse, a Blessing, and a Curse; for the Lord has set my feet upon
both Mountains spoken of verse 29. Ebal, and Gerizim, the Mountains of Curses,
and of blessings and that upon the Authority of two Scriptures.

To those that are yet out of love with Christ a Curse.
The first speaks from the top of Ebal, the Mount of CURSING, and it is, 1 Cor.
16, 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema, Maranatha:
that is, Let him be accursed in all things, in all places, at all times, with
all Curses truly. Nothing but the perfect experience of the damned in Hell, can
tell you what that word Anathena, Maranatha means. And who must be so
accursed? even whosoever loves not the Lord Jesus. Art thou out of love with
Christ still, notwithstanding all that has been spoken for him? And art thou
resolved to continue so? then let thy Estate, thy Body, Soul, here, and
hereafter; yea, and for ever be accursed. Do thou despise his Port, hate his
Person, abhor his Discourse, contemn his Carriage, disdain his Estate, after
all this; and resolvest thou so to do? Let all the Scriptures of God curse
thee, let all the Saints and Angels of God curse thee, let all the Creatures of
God curse thee, let the blessed mouth of God curse thee, let the blaspheming
mouth of thine own Conscience curse thee; yea, let the mouths of all that are
in the same curse and condemnation with thee, curse thee: let every mouth that
blesses God, and Christ, curse thee: yea, as long as any mouth blesses the
Lord Jesus, let it curse thee, for not loving the Lord Jesus. This is the sad
language of that sad Scripture.

But I had rather pass from these to those that love him, and so from Ebal to
mount Gerizim, To those that are brought into love with this crucified Christ
blessing.
the mount of BLESSING, see Rev. 19.6, 7, 9. Allelujah, let us rejoice and be
glad, and honor him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has
made her self ready. And he says unto me, write blessed are they that are
called to the Marriage supper of the Lamb: and he says unto me, These are the
true sayings of God. Sins, Christ is ready now, if you be ready, truly blessed
are you, for you are called to the Marriage, and to the Supper. If any soul
among you, that have heard all that has been spoken, shall love Christ's
Spokesmen mean as they are, in the name of Prophets, blessed of God be that
soul. If any soul entertain the Message, plain as it is, out of love to
Christ that sent that message, blessed of God be that soul. If any soul be in
love with a crucified, despised, naked, wounded, bleeding Christ, blessed of
God be that soul. If any soul shall account Christ's Convictions, precious
Ointment, and his Terms, Righteousness, if it shall forsake Father and
Mother, and all carnal Counsels, and Relations out of love unto Christ: If it
shall go forth weeping, bearing precious seed: if it shall take Christ's yoke
upon it, and his burden, and his Cross daily, accounting them light because of
love to Christ, and easy, as Jacob did his hard service out of love to Rachel:
If it shall cut off its right hand, and pull out its right eye, and forgo its
own will, and so leave all, and cleave to Christ, and hate all, and love
Christ, or unfeignedly desire so to do, for ever blessed be that soul. If it
shall not despise the Corrections of the Lord Jesus, nor faint when it is
chastised by him, patiently bearing, because it has sinned, and willingly
suffering, that it may be pollished, and fitted for Christ's service, or truly
desire so to do, for ever blessed be that soul. If it shall trust Christ with
what it has, and for what it is to receive, following him unto the
Regeneration, until it shall come unto his Kingdom, continuing steadfast till
death, and willing to be dissolved, that it may be with Christ. In a word, if
it take, or be truly willing to take Christ, as thus tendered upon his own
terms, blessed, blessed, blessed, be that soul. God has blessed it, who can
reverse it? These are the true sayings of God.

CHAP. XX. Discovers positive Hindrances. The two first, viz. leaning to
Sin. Satan,

Second sort of Hindrances, viz. Positive.
THe second sort of Hindrances are positive, viz. The leaning-stocks that we
take unto our selves on this side Christ, do absolutely hinder us from leaning
upon this beloved.

Two Farther Observations from the Text.
Which that I may with more advantage inquire into, I shall take up from my
text, two farther previous Observations, which I think are evidently lodged in
the bosom of this expression, Leaning on her Beloved.

The first is, That as that soul that will have Christ for its beloved, 1. The
soul that leans on Christ must have none other leaning-stock.
must have but one beloved, even Christ: so that soul that will have Christ to
lean upon, must have nothing else to lean upon beside Christ's: For as the Text
mentions but one Spouse, viz. The Church of Christ, so but one Beloved, viz.
Christ, and but one also to lean upon. To this the Apostle speaks clearly, I
have espoused you to one Husband, even Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. So unto us there is
but one Lord, and one God, even Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. But one to set our love as
our Husband; but one also to lean on, as our God; but one to be beloved as our
Husband, but one also to believed on as our Lord and God. But now to
Christlesse souls, there are many lovers and beloveds, Jer. 3.1. Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, Hos. 2.7. She shall not find her lovers. A
great number of lovers, an indefinite number of lovers, until she return
unto her first Husband; and therefore to others also there are Gods many, and
Lords many, 1 Cor. 8.5.

A second Observation is, 2ly, The souls beloved will be the souls
leaning-stock.
That whatever is the souls beloved, that ever will be found the souls
leaning-stock: what ever the soul loves best, on that it will be sure to lean
most: this is a clear intimation from the Text leaning on her beloved. So that
if there be any thing that the soul loves more, and better then Christ, upon
that it will lean, and not upon Christ. Now upon this twofold Account, it is
easy to discern in the general, how lost souls are hindered from leaning upon
Christ, because they have many Gods to lean on, and therefore cannot lean upon
the only true God manifested in the flesh: yea, and they have many lovers and
beloveds instead of Christ, which as they lie in their bosoms, where Christ
only should lie, so stand they under their arms to support them, where Christ
should be to bear them up. When a soul is converted, we must with admiration
sing and say, Who is this that comes out of the wilderness leaning upon her
beloved? but of others we may take up a lamentation, a Jeremies sad song, and
say, Who are all these that go farther and farther into the wilderness leaning
upon their beloveds? And as for those that go down into Egypt, they have
multitudes of Reeds to lean upon, many Gods, and Lords many, even as many as
lusts: Onyons, Fleshpots, Melons, Cucumers, Idols, any thing: but when God
calls his Sons out of Egypt, then thus, says the Lord that brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, etc. thou shall have none other Gods beside me. Many
hands we may have to help us forward (or backward rather) into the ways of
sin: But there is not one arm for a soul to lean unto while it comes from
sin, but the alone arm of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now as we say, the more of
those Gods, the farther from God; so the more of these leaning-stocks, the
farther from leaning upon the Lord Jesus.

The four usual leaning-stocks of lost souls.
There are particularly four things which lost souls do generally more love
and lean upon, then Jesus Christ, Sin, Satan, the World, and self. And it
is to be marked, that scriptures charge our usual carriage toward, and in
respect of these, with Idolatry, which is the setting of any thing up in Gods
room, to love or lean upon as God, which is not God.

1. Sin.
First, As for sin. It is hence evident that sinners place that recumbency on
it, which they should on Christ, because the Apostle enumerating the more
notorious sins of their unregeneracy, sums up all in this one word,
abominable Idolatries: what were those? why? Lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
Wine, revellings, drunkenness, and abominable Idolatries, Wines are the
Drunkards Idols: Women the Wantons Idols: Profaneness the Revellers Idol: Yea,
every new lust, a new Lord; yea, a new God: as he takes up new sin, he has
new dependances upon sin, 1 Pet. 4.3. Hence John writing to those, that it is
to be thought were far enough from gross Idolatry, concludes, Little Children
keep your selves from Idols. Amen. 1 John 5.21.

Now you can never keep your selves from Idols, except you keep your selves
from sin. Sin ever deals as Solomon's strange wives, tempting first from the
trusting in the true God, and next, to trusting in the false.

2. Satan.
Secondly, As for Satan. You have heard him called the God of this world, 2 Cor.
4.4. Therefore this world leanes upon Satan, and trusts in him as their God.

3. The world.
Thirdly, As for the World. It Is plainly that which the worldling leans upon
instead of God. Hence those known passages? Ephe. 5.5. The covetous man who is
an Idolater, and Col. 3.5. Covetousness which is Idolatry, etc. That is; he
loves and leanes upon Mammon more then God.

Fourthly, As for Self. The selfe-pleaser, 4. Self.
that indulgeth his own lustful genius, his belly is his God, Phil. 3.19. The
self-conceited, self-confident, and presumptuous sinner. He sets his heart as
the heart of God, Ezekiel. 28.6. Strange expressions you will say, yet are they
Scripture-expressions: you see they be; and though many things be imported by
them, yet must this be a chief one, that while Saints lean on Christ, as their
one, and only Lord; these lean upon Sin, Satan, Mamnon, and themselves. Of
these in their order.

First Hinderance that does in a positive way keep off sinners from leaning
upon Christ, 1. Souls lean upon sin, and thereby are hindered from leaning upon
Christ. Proof of it.
is their leaning upon sin: for proof.

See Psalm. 52.7. This is the man that made not God his trust, but strengthened
himself in his wickedness. What could be more express for both? sinners make
their wickedness their stay, and therefore it is that they make not God their
stay, so Isai. 30.12. You trust in oppression, and perverseness, and stay
thereon: It follows, verse 15. Thus says the Lord in returning, and rest you
shall be saved, but ye would not: and in quietness and confidence (that is, in
the peace of believing) shall be your strength, and ye would not. No, no, they
could have both a stay and a strength in sinning, and therefore they would none
of Christ's rest in the way of repenting, or of his quietness and peace in the
way of believing. It Is no wonder, if sinners can have Crutches in a sin, that
they neglect to seek legs in a Savior.

Now that sinners make sin their leaning-stock, Convictions of it. 1. The
careful hold that sinners keep of sin.
I shall give you a twofold Conviction.

1. The charie, and careful, and cordial, hold that they keep of sin. Just as
a lame man holds his Crutch, so does a sinner his sin. The head of it is
bolstered, and how near is it to his heart? There art that spiritually sow
pillowes under their own and others arm-holes for wretched limping sinners to
lean upon, Ezekiel. 13.18. The lame man holds his Crutch fast in his right hand,
and will not by any means let it go, as you may see the Lord was David's
leaning-stay, for says David, I have set the Lord at my right hand, therefore
I shall not be moved, Psalm. 16.8. and that Christ was the Spouses leaning-stay,
for she held and would not let him go, Cant. 3.4. And the Apostle requires the
Saints to hold that fast by which they may hold Christ fast, viz. Holy
confidence, and the rejoicing of hope, Heb. 3.6. By which is evinced, that
Christ and nothing else, is the Saints leaning-stock. So sinners have their
lies in their right hand Isai. 44.20. And they hold fast deceit, and refuse to
return, Jer. 8.5. And this is a full Conviction, (your Consciences bear
witness unto it) that sin is the sinners leaning-stock, or that in the
Prophets language, The wicked trust in their wickedness, Isai. 47.10. It is
strange that a man should dare to sin, and then to trust in sin; but oh! that
it were not more true.

2ly, In that they think that if their sin fall, they fall also.
2ly, In this it is too too manifest, that sin is the sinners leaning-stock:
in that the sinner thinks, that if his sin fall, he shall fall too. The reason
which makes lame persons so loath to let their Crutches fall, is because they
know that then they shall fall too. Did they not lean upon them whilst they
stand, they would not be afraid of falling with them when they fall. Verily
sirs, If your Consciences bear you this witness, that the reason why you do
not let your sinful Alehouse-maintaining, or Alehouse-keeping, or Cheating
fall, is because you think that then you shall fall also; it is a plain
Conviction, that your sin is your leaning-stock. That of Diana's silver-smiths,
is a pregnant instance: 'twas a wicked craft that they had, and an hellish gain
that they made, viz. by making instruments of abominable Idolatry, to that
cursed vanity of the Ephesians: Now they make insurrections against the
Apostles, and this lies at the bottom of all, Act. 19.25. that by this craft we
have our living. They thought it could not be that they should live if they
should part with their Idolatry. So say Sinners, how shall we live, if we leave
sinning. We live by selling Malt, and then helping the Alehouses that have it
from us to such Company as may again have it from them. How shall we live if we
leave our lying, dissembling, cheating, flattering, sinful compliance with
sinful men? How shall we live in office, except we be partial, sparing the
great, and pinching the small: sparing our Relations, and pressing others? How
shall we bear up our Interest except we give some Countenance to every sort of
men? Do you wonder the silver-Smiths were angry with Paul? why? his Doctrine
went about to take away their livelihood? Do you wonder a lame man should send
a curse after you, if you come and snatch away his Crutch from under him? Why?
he cannot stand, if you take away his prop from him; do you take Michahs Gods
from him, (as Judge. 18.24.) and then do you ask him what he ailes? Do you go to
take a sinners sin from him which is his prop, his pillar, and support? and
then do you wonder that he rails on you, and reviles you? Why? he thinks you go
the way to undo him, he can neither stand, nor go without his sin; let that
sink, and he sinks with it: And this is the reason that powerful preaching
has many Enemies, few fast friends; and how plain a conviction is this also,
that sin is indeed the sinners leaning-stock.

The second Positive Hindrance that keeps lost souls from leaning to Christ,
is their leaning to Satan. This is, 2. Pos. hind. Sinners lean to Satan. Proof
of it.
I think, the fullest importance of that passage. Isa. 28.15. With Hell are we
at agreement (that is by a Metonymy) with the Devils of hell) when the
overflowing scourge passes thorough, it shall not come unto us: (why? what
shall secure them?) for we have made lies (that is Satan the Father of lies)
our refuge, and under falsehood (that is, under his temptations, though
deceitful ones) have we hid our selves. Had not Eve as this Scripture speaks,
leaned more to the Serpent the Father of falsehood and of lies, then to the God
of truth, it had not been with us, as it is this day.

In two particular, I shall declare how sinners lean upon Satan for their
work, and for their wages.

1. For their work.
First, Sinners lean on Satan for their employment. This our Savior speaks out.
Ioh. 8:44. You are of the Devil, and his lusts you will do: Satan wills and
they work: Satan commands and they obey. As much as the Son leans to the Father
for Counsel, and command in his Employments, so much do you, says Christ, to
Satan: for he is your Father, and his lusts ye will do; therefore he is called
their Prince: on whom else does the subject depend in all his services, for his
Commissions? He is the Prince that rules in the Children of disobedience. Ephesians.
2.2. It would seem a strange Expression, Rules in the Unruly Children. But it
is a true expression; for their being ruled by Satan makes them unruly as to
the things of God, Children of disobedience unto God. What does this mean? Even
that as those that work constantly with some of you Tradesmen, and depend (as
you call it) or lean on you, for their every days work will not be taken off
by any other, unless upon discovery of eminent advantage; so (unless God draw
them in by a thorough discovery of the real gain of godliness) they will not
obey Gods call, or set their hand unto his plough: though we call them, and
pray them, and press hard upon them; yet sirs, to which of these Masters, God,
or the Devil, they do lean for their work, and the management of their
affairs, judge you.

2. For their wages.
Secondly, Sinners lean on Satan for their pay, when according to his lusts they
take pains, and for their wages when they have done his work. Therefore Isa.
28.15. We are at a Covenant with Hell. Now when a man has made Covenants to do
so much work for so much wages, unto whom does he lean for payment but to him
whom he covenanted to serve? You find Satan called the Housekeeper amongst
sinners, when a strong man armed keeps his House or Palace, Mark. 3.27. and
Luke 11.21. Now to whom do all the Soldiers in a Palace of Defense, or
servants in an House lean for their wages and pay; but to him that keeps the
House, or the Palace? And assuredly, if any thing may be drawn from these
scriptures, this may be one thing: That foolish sinners vainly think, that in
doing the work as Satan would have them, Satan will give them such hire as
they would have him; and because they are punctual in performing whatever his
Precepts have been to them, that he will also be as punctual in whatever his
promises have been to them. Oh! foolish people and unwise, lies are your
leaning-stock, and the father of them your support.

CHAP. XXI. Two other positive Hindrances leaning to World, Self.

THird Positive hinderance that keeps lost souls from leaning on Christ, is
leaning upon the world. 3d. Pos. hind. Sinners lean upon the world.
worldly Friends, Conveniences, Comforts, and Estates, etc. That worldlings do
so, I know not whether scriptures, or our own wretched experiences of our own
wretched hearts, do most fully or frequently confirm, some trust in Chariots,
some in Horses, Psalm. 20.7. Proof.
That is in worldly and carnal accommodations. What do they do? use them?
that they should do, or may do; but they trust in them, that they neither
should do, nor may they do: what if they should? the sad inconvenience is
hinted; But we will remember the name of the Lord: as who should say, [they
cannot] you can never trust in the Lord of Hosts, while you trust to Horses,
and unto Chariots for war-provisions; and as for peace-provisions, see Psalm.
52.7. Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the
abundance of his riches. That was the reason he leaned not upon God, because he
leaned upon the incomes of the world. So then as to war or peace, strength in
the former, or wealth in the latter, let the abundance be never so great, there
is no trusting or leaning to either, if you would lean upon this beloved. Hear
Christ himself, Luke 16.13. No servant can serve two Masters, for either he
will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will hold to the one, (what is
that but leaning?) and despise the other, (what means Christ by all this?) You
cannot serve God and Mammon, so Isai. 31.1. Woe to them that stay on Horses,
and trust in Chariots, because they are many, and horsemen, because they are
strong, but look not unto the holy one of Israel, nor seek the Lord. What can
be plainer? let your Riches in peace, or Forces in war, be never so
augmented, the more you lean unto any of them, the less will you lean to
Jesus Christ.

I shall give you a twofold word of Conviction for this, viz. That worldlings
lean upon the World, and therefore not on Christ.

Evidence 1. Because they rise and fall as the world rises and falls with them.
First, Because it appears that worldlings rise and fall, as the world rises
and falls: therefore it is evident, that the world is that they lean upon,
Psalm. 20.7. They lean on Chariots, they are down and fallen; but we remember
thy name, and rise up. They that have nothing but Chariots, etc. but men, and
moneys to trust unto, as their men fall, and moneys fail, etc. so they fall,
and their Spirits fail also; but they that lean upon the Lord are not so; the
remembrance of his name bearer them up, when their enemies seem to bear them
down. If the world rise with sinners, then their hearts rise too, Eze. 28.5, 6.
Thou have by thy wisdom and traffic, increased thy riches, and thine heart
is lifted up, because of thy riches, and thou have set thine heart as the heart
of God. Oh! they take themselves now to be pettie-Gods, as happy as happy may
be, and as high as high may be, and all because that rises which is under
them: Who sees not in this case, but that they lean upon it?

Again, though they said they were Gods, they shall die like men: and though
their heart was set as the heart of God, when the world went with them; yet
when the world goes against them, (as you call it) truly then their heart
grows like Nabals, dead within them, 1 Samuel 25.37. etc. If Worldlings did not
lean upon the world, they would never thus rise and sink with the world, as
you daily see they do.

2ly, It Is hence evident, 2d. Evidence. They can make better shift with the
world without Christ (as they account) then with Christ without the world.
that most lean upon the world, and not Christ, because the most can make (as
they count) a better shift with the world, and without Christ, then with
Christ, and without the world. Many Worldlings are convinced that they have
much need of Christ, but they thinks also that they have more need of Mammon.
Now this is evident, that which we can lest spare is our greatest
leaning-stock: the last things a Creeple forgoes, shall be his Crutches; the
can ill spare many other things, but he can worst of all spare them. It Is
clear in the Rich man, Mat. 19.22. He went away sorrowful, for he had great
possessions. He was persuaded that Christ was to be leaned upon, and that he
had need of support and succor from Jesus Christ, else why went he sorrowful
away? Oh! but for all that, he could make better shift without Christ (of the
two) then without the world, for he had great possessions: And now let the
issue speak, which of these two, Christ or Mammon, was that which he finally
leaned unto.

The fourth and last positive Hinderance from leaning upon Christ, is leaning
upon self. 4th. Pos. Hind. Leaning upon self.
I am now to speak unto such, as I find my master Jesus Christ speaking to,
before, He spak (says the text) unto certain that trusted in themselves. Luke
18.9. I shall reduce to four heads what I shall say hereon. Leaning either to
our own Wisdoms, or Wills, or Righteousnesses, or Lives will hinder us from
leaning upon the Lord Jesus.

1. Self-wisdom
1. It must needs be that leaning to our own Understandings, and to the carnal
Counsels of our own unregenerate hearts must hinder us from leaning upon the
Lord Christ. This I shall evince both from clear Scripture-Testimony,
Scripture-testimony.
as also from clear Scripture-Reason.

Express is that passage, Prove. 3.5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart,
and lean not to thine own Understanding. If you trust in the Lord Christ with
all your hearts, you must not lean to your own Understandings: if you lean to
your own Understandings, you cannot trust in the Lord with all your hearts. So
far as you lean to your own Counsel, you will not lean unto the Lords: and if
you will incline to the dictates of Gods spirit: you must disown the dictates
of your own spirits: Therefore says Wisdom, Pro. 22.17.19. Bow down thine Ear,
and hear the words of the wise (not the voice of thine own heart) and apply
thine heart unto my knowledge (not thine own knowledge) that thy trust may be
in the Lord; I have made known this day to thee, even to thee. Our own
understandings, when most corrupted, can make known unto us to lean to carnal
Confidences, and sensible supports: but it is only the wisdom of the Lord that
can make known unto us to trust in the Lord.

Scripture-reasons.
Secondly, As for Scripture-reasons, I shall assign these two: Our
Understandings unsanctified are foolishness with God, and Enmity against God:
Therefore leaning unto them must needs hinder us from leaning unto Christ.

1. It is foolishnes with God.
1. The Unregenerate mind is foolishness as to the apprehending of this Mystery
of leaning upon the Lord Jesus. Amongst the Highest improvers of the Unrenewed
Intellectuals, we read of many enquiring after their (...) or felicity, and
upon inquiry, one says in one thing, another in another, the best of them say,
that virtue is the way to that felicity; which yet they define not according to
the Scripture-notion of it, or as identical with divine graces: but an Habit
inherent in our selves, the feeds whereof are from our selves also, and the
springing and fructifying and Maturity of the fruits from our own studious
improvement of what is in us; And who amongst the wisest of them ever pointed
at a Jesus, as did that Heaven-taught John Baptist. Io. 1.9. Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the World. Nay, how was it possible they
should so do? When Scripture says expressly, that the Lord has hid the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven from the wise, and prudent of the World, as
Mat. 11.25. and as expressly, that this is one of the great Mysteries of
Godliness, that Christ should be believed on in the world. 1 Timothy 3.16. that
is, that any soul should lean for salvation to the righteousness of another.
1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him. 1 Cor. 3.19. Even as the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God. As the Lord knows thy leaning to the Counsels of
thine own heart to be very foolishness: So do thou naturally think leaning
to the Lords Counsel concerning Christ to be very foolishness. What Is that to
me? (says thy reason) how good another is, what can I be the better? Or how
is it possible that the dying of one man (above sixteen hundred years ago)
shall save so many as expect salvation by it now? And thus do poor hearts
often reason themselves from trusting in Christ. Ah! how witty was the woman of
Samaria in cavilling against Christ. Ioh. 4.11.12.15. Her wit had almost fooled
her for ever; and (as we speak of some that they will save their jest though
they lose their friend) this over-wise woman had in making her jests almost
unhappily lost her Savior, but Christ would not so lose her.

Secondly, 2. Emnity against God.
Our Unregenerate or carnal mind its not only foolishness, and so not able
to receive the things of God, but also Emnity against God, Romans 8.7. therefore
says Paul, is it not subject to the Law of God, neither can it be. Now what is
the great Gospel-Law? why, This is his Commandment that we should believe on
the Lord Jesus, 1 John 3, 23. To this Commandment the Carnal mind neither is,
nor can be subject: Lean upon the Lord Jesus. Tell me what say your Carnal
minds unto this Commandment? It is obvious to every observant eye, that there
is not any Commandment of the Law that is more repugnant to Carnal reason,
then this Law of the Gospel, and Carnal reason unto it. Aristotle, and the
other heathen Philosophers could hit upon an Ens entium, a being of beings, and
that was somewhat like the first Commandment: and upon a Deus est colendus,
and that is somewhat like the second Command: They also could account vows and
oaths sacred, etc. and that was something like the third Commandment; they had
some superstitious feasts in semblance of the fourth, and as for the second
Table of Commandments, Honor Parents, kill not, whore not, steal not, lie not,
they could all with open mouth declaim in that Language, and as for
Covetousness much could they inveigh against it; although the more spiritual
part of there was too sublime for them: But as for this Commandment they were
so far from finding it out themselves, and the best of them despisingly called
the Christians Credentes; as if their faith were their absurdity, whereas God
calls all such unreasonable or absurd that have not Faith. 2 These. 3.2. And
thus they made a mock at Jesus, and that was the very Object of their
despightfull and Opprobrious Opposition, which we know to be the only way of
our salvation, viz. Leaning upon the Beloved. Thus their Wisdom made them
mockers, and their mocking made their Bonds of unbelief so strong (as God
threatens, Isa. 28.22.) that nothing was found a more very Enemy to primitive
Christianity, than that self-taught Reason, and Heathenish Philosophy. So then
it is not only the foolishness of our heats, but the wisdom of our hearts
also that flies in the very face of Gospell-truth, and cries out as Joh. 3.4.
How can these things be? Therefore the spirit says not, that the World through
foolishness knew not God: But after that the World through wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God that by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that
believe. 1 Cor. 1.21. Whence it is evident, that as there is nothing that sets
it self more directly against the Knowledge of Christ then the Carnal,
Worldly, Natural man's wisdom: so neither does that wisdom oppose any thing
more then believing in Christ, and therefore it accounts the preaching of faith
foolishness. What (says Carnal Reason) will you take hold on the Lord with
unwashed hands? stay, stay, till your hands be cleansed, and then it is more
likely that Christ will suffer you to lean upon him. Yea, but what can purify
the heart but faith. And I will lean upon Christ, not because I am holy and
like him: but that I may be holy and pure as he is pure; and believe, and rest
upon him, that I may be sanctified by him, such should the language of faith be.

CHAP. XXII. Contains next the danger of leaning to our own Wills.
Righteousness. Long-lives.

Self-Will.
SEcond leaning to our Carnal Wills must needs hinder us from leaning upon the
Lord Jesus. See Isa. 30.15. The Lord the holy One of Israel said, In returning
and Rest you shall be saved this is the voice of Gods spirit to them: but
what is the frame of their spirits toward him?) But ye would not, But ye said
no, but we will do so and so, ver. 16. They cast aside the stay that the Lord
tenders them, and this is the Reason, they lean to their own Wills. Thus did
those Brethren in iniquity, Simeon and Levi; they had no advice from their
Father, or Word from the Lord to lean unto in that Cruelty, but says the text,
Genesis 49.6. In their self-Will they dug down a Wall. Now it must needs be
that leaning to our own wills must hinder from leaning upon Christ upon a
twofold account.

2. Evid. 1. Because the Self-will leans unto the dictates of self-reason.
First, Suppose the truth of the former, viz. that leaning upon our self-Wisdom
is an hindrance, and you must conclude this also; Because the Will does
necessarily lean to what the Counsel of the understanding leads it to. So that
whatever carnal reason represents to the Will as fit to be Confided in, be it
Sin or Self, or Satan, or the World, that the Will cleaves unto: So that if the
light that be in thee be darkness, if the very understanding be a blind guide,
what shall keep up the blind Will from falling into the ditch? Lean not to
thine own Understanding: Now how do we lean to the Understanding, but by the
Will? When Eve perceived this, and that of the forbidden tree, then she desires
it to make her wise. Genesis 3.6. her Reason leave upon the Serpents Counsel, and
her desire hangs upon the dictates of her reason: if the Intellect did not say
to the Will, that stolen waters are the sweetest, the Robber would never have
so much Will to steal, and so little to live by labor. If the Worldling did
not think it better to gather treasure to himself, he would be richer toward
God. In all cases where the Will closes, the Understanding (I judge) approves
either, that it is good (though it be evil) or at least (as we say pro hic and
nunc) good for thee at this time, thus Abraham thought a lie was a good shift
(although he knew in it self it was evil) to save his life; ad the Lord
says, Isa. 5.20. That they call evil good, and good evil, and put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter: wherein I suppose he relates to the acts of the
Will closing with this, and refusing that, accepting this as good and sweet,
and rejecting that as Evil and bitter: and the reason is that in the middle of
the Verse, viz. they put light for darkness, and darkness for light; which
must be judged the act of the Understanding. When the dark and corrupt Reason
mistakes an Evil, and calls it good (as nothing is more frequent with the
unconverted) then the Will follows it, though it be Evil, and closes with it,
as if it were good. Therefore leaning to self-will cannot but be as very an
Obstruction to this leaning upon the Lord, as leaning to thy own understanding
before spoken of: because it is the self same hindrance only improved to a
farther height, and strengthened by a farther Act of the soul exerted by
self-Will in pursuance of self-wisdom. And

Secondly, As the Will leanes to the corrupt dictates of the Understanding, 2.
Because the whole man leans to the choice of the Will.
so the whole man leans to the choice of the Will; At first the Man would do so
and so, because his judgment (such as it was) advised him to do so and so, but
now he will do it, because he will. And here the man holds, and resolves to
stay by it. Now who sees not how directly this opposes our leaning upon the
Lord? for when we should revolve our Wills, yea, our whole souls and affairs
into the Lords will ultimately, and acquiesce there; we revolve all into our
own, and thus whilst we will flee upon horses (as Isa. 30.16.) and ride upon
the swift: and will die (as Ezekiel. 18.31.) and will not come to Christ, that we
might have life (as Ioh. 5.) 40. and all because we will, and will not, we will
swear, because we will swear: and will be drunk, because we will be drunk, and
will pass away our precious time in wantonness, sport, and vanity; because we
will do so: and will not take pains to hear the word, or sanctify the Lords
day; or pray with fervency, or watch our own hearts with diligence, because we
will not. We make our wills our Gods, and no wonder, (then that they are our
leaning stocks) and therefore says the Scripture, 1 Samuel 15.23. Stubbornness
is Idolatry. What can the high and holy one say more then this? (nay, some have
dared to question whether he can say so much I will have mercy because I will
have mercy, and I will not have mercy on an Esau, because I will not; as God
seems clearly to speak, Romans 9.18. Take heed of stubbornness, you sinners, lest
herein the Great God condemn you as as Idolaters.

3. Self-righteousnesse.
Thirdly, Leaning to self-Righteousnesse cannot but hinder our leaning upon the
Beloved. He that has said, Be not overmuch wise, has also said, Be not
overmuch Righteous. It Is spoken of a wisdom and righteousness by which thou
destroyest thy self, Eccl. 7.16. therefore it is self-wisdom and
self-righteousnesse. That of Christ's is notable to this purpose, Luke 18.8.
When he comes, shall he find faith on the earth? though this may be diversely
rendered, yet sure if it bear respect to that which follows, the Explication of
faith in this place is according to this present truth. Why? what is that which
shall hinder faith? It follows ver. 9. He spoke immediately a parable unto
certain, that trusted in themselves, that they were righteous; When he comes;
he shall find on the Earth so many trusting in themselves, that they are
Righteous, that he shall find but few trusting in the Lord, that they may be
Righteous: He shall find so much self-Confidence on the Earth, that he shall
find little faith on the Earth. The more of the former, the less of the later.
For this leaning to self-righteousnes keeps the soul ignorant of at a distance
from, yea, in open hostility against the righteousness of Christ.

For the first, As being 1. Ignorant of Christ's righteousness.
Self-righteousnesse keeps the soul ignorant of Christ's Righteousness. Romans
10.3. They were ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and did establish their own
Righteousness, these are linked together, I have seen some Country youth (that
never was in any Populous and Gentile City or Town) trickt up with a new suite
of Clothes, and a few gay Ribbons; None in the Parish so gay as he, and he not
using to go out of the Town, has thought that one could not be more spruce
then himself: His own sprucenesse has kept him ignorant of the transcendent
Riches and splendour of Raiment in other places, which when once he comes to
see, he is easily convinced that he knew not what belonged to good Clothes
before. So the self-righteous; they are so fine in themselves, their duties,
their gifts, and especially in their holyday-'parrell, their Temple-prayers,
and Lord's Day Duties and thanksgiving-day alms in the corners of the streets;
and with the sound of the Trumpet, that they know not what belongs to a
righteousness to make it up more complete. And reciprocally the more they are
ignorant of Gods Righteousness, the more they establish their own: and the
more they, establish their own, the more ignorant they are of the
Righteousness of God. Ah! but when they are once come to Jerusalem, the City
of the living God, the place of Concourse, unto holy Saints and glorious
Angels, never did they see the thousandth part of that disproportion between
the glittering of a tinsell Ribbon, and the sparkling of a Diamond in a set of
Gold, which they now behold betwixt self-righteousnesse and the righteousness
of the Saints which is by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, If self-righteousnesse be near meeting with Christ's, if it be
possible it will shun it. Never was Copper more afraid to be compared with
pure Gold, 2. Shunning Christ's.
which when it was alone might go for Gold, then self-righteousnesse to be
compared with Christ's. Oh! what a difficult work was it for John to get the
Pharisees to the righteousness of Christ. 'Twas much more easy (which would
seem strange) to get the unclean harlots, and unrighteous Publicans to come to
Christ's righteousness, that had none of their own, then the Pharisees that
had one already, Says Christ to the Pharisees, Mat. 21.32. John came to you in
the way of righteousness, and you believed him not, but the harlots and
Publicans believed him.

Thirdly, If self-righteousnesse must needs meet with Christ's, 3. Warring
against Christ's.
as long as it is able to stand, it will be sure to fight for it. Romans 10.3.
they establish their own righteousness, and have not submitted to the
righteousness of God. I know not any Engine or weapon that moral, and civil,
especially formal ones war more against Christ by, then this
self-righteousnes. When the strong man armed keeps his Palace, he is the
stronger for this that his goods are in peace. Luke 11.21. What peace so long
as his spiritual whoredoms remain? Why? yes. A self-peace spun out of the
bowels of self-righteousnesse: as true righteousness is the ground of real
peace, so is counterfeit-righteousness of false peace: and this peace is that
which arms Satan to keep garrison in the soul. Therefore the Lord yoaks
trusting in self-righteousness, with committing iniquity Ezekiel. 33.13.

4. Leaning to our own lives.
Lastly, Leaning to the length of our own lives will be exceeding ready to
hinder us from leaning upon the Beloved. You heard Jacob had a staff to lean
upon in his dying hour: and souls that prepare for, or seriously, and
frequently remember death will get a Christ to lean upon in that hour. But
while you read in one scripture of some that put the evil day far from them
(as Amos 6.3.) it is no wonder that you read in others, that some there are that
say unto God, Depart from us (as Job 21.14.) or that Christ should come to his
own (according to the flesh) and they not receive him, (as Joh. 1.11. You have
a notable passage, Isa. 57.10. Thou have found thy life of thine hand,
therefore thou have not grieved. Men find their lives in their own hands,
therefore they have not repented; [therefore] Though all our Times are always
in Gods hand, yet vain men ordinarily think they are in their own hands; as in
time of health and prosperity, etc. but now in sickness they foolishly think
(yet is there something in it) that their lives are in the Physicians hand, if
he (through inconsiderateness or have) mistake a glass, or a Gally-pot they may
die for it: Oh! now they are grieved, how glad would they now be, that they had
but a firm hold upon the Lord Jesus? So I have seen at Sea, when the vainest of
our company have been convicted by a storm, that ours lives were in Gods hand,
and not in our own: When our tacklings have been loosed, and we could not well
strengthen the Mast; oh! how fain would we all of us then have had an Interest
in this Beloved, and hope in this Christ as the Anchor of our souls, when we
could not cast anchor with our ships; to have a Master to lean upon, When our
Mast reeled, and we staggered like drunken men, and were ready to sink in the
deep Waters. Oh! What crying out with Peter; Master! save us we perish; Lord
Jesus, We sink, we sink, we are at our wits ends, Lord save us. But as soon as
we were safe on shore again, though our lives were new given us even for a
prey; yet then fell we to our former course of sin, self-confidence, and vain
conversation, having small care of faith, or holiness; Christ is now little
beloved, little believed: little thought upon, little leaned upon. Thus whilst
we lean upon any thing of SELF, there is little leaning to this beloved. All
this have I spoken to you for the self same end that those sad providence
spoke to Paul and his companions. 2 Cor. 1.9. That you might not trust in your
selves, but in God. Trusting to self, and trusting to God, leaning upon self,
and leaning upon the Beloved are as very Opposits as light and darkness, as
Hell and Heaven: and the Apostles argument is very clear, that the Lord one way
or other must quite remove us from the former, before we come to the later.

Therefore lean not to Self.
By this time (I hope) I have spared my self a labor, as to any set opposition
of such Considerations as might dissuade you from leaning on your selves:
having not been able to convince you that men do so, without conviction also of
the Vanity and Foolishness of all that do so. Well might the wise man say, as
Pro. 28.26. He that trusts in his own heart (that is, he that leans to
self-wit, self-will, etc.) is a fool. So say I, he that trusts in his own
Righteousness, or length of days, or anything of his own is a fool.

Understandings.
Souls consider, how foolish and unwise a thing it is to lean to your own
(natural, carnal, unrenewed) Understandings, which are both foolishness with,
and Emnity against the Lord: What needs more weight of argument to dissuade you?

Wills.
Consider, how desperate a thing it is to lean to your own unsanctified and
unregenerate Wills, which you have seen by scripture light to be both Rebellion
against the Lord, and Idolatry in the account of the Lord; and require, when
you have seriously weighed these, more forcing disswasives, if you can.

Righteousness.
Consider how dangerous a thing it is to lean to your own Righteousness; which
is ever found a stranger to a Runaway from, and a Rebel against the only
saving Righteousness of the Lord Jesus.

Lives.
Consider how vain a thing it is, to lean to your lives, and so not unto the
Lord, which are at all times (as you are forced to confess at some times) (not
in your hands, but) in the hands of the Lord. In this the Bell in your steeple
spares me a labor in turning over the Bible in mine hand. God proves this to
your Ears, to your Eyes, to your hearts, in your Husbands, Wives, Children,
dearest Relations, sometimes every other day to one of you or other; and God
might have proved it upon you unto them, as he has done upon them unto you;
and who of us knows whom of us the Lord will make the next proof hereof unto
the rest of us, or how soon? our life is our lease, our body our house: If you
lean to this house, it shall not stand, Job 8.15. Therefore if any of us have
been staved off from leaning upon this Beloved, by leaning upon our selves, or
any thing of our own: oh! do no more so wickedly.

CHAP. XXIII. Contains disswasives from leaning upon sin or Satan:
I shall only speak three other words, to beat off your elbowes from those
three other leaning-stocks, viz Sin, Satan, and the World; and then I shall
by the help of my Lord, as the close of the discourse, show you the excellent
advantage of leaning upon Christ.

First, Lean not to sin. This is the veriest vanity, Lean not to sin. For 1.
This is the veriest vanity.
and it will be the veriest vexation of Spirit.

First, This is the vreiest vanity. If you do but believe scripture, you may
easily be induced to believe this. What better terms does scripture bestow
upon sin, then such as these, a vain show, or shadow, a deceit, a lie, or
make the most of it, and it is but a Cobweb. Now if you will but take the
Spirit of God to bear a true testimony under these terms unto your sins,
then how vain a thing is it to lean unto them, even your selves being Judges?

Because 1. Sin a lie.
First, He that leans to a known sin (if the Bible be true) leanes undoubtedly
to a known lie. If the Crutch in his right hand be a sin, let Isaiah speak
whether the Crutch in his right hand be not a lie, Isai. 44.20. They that
follow after sin, follow after leasing; and they that hold fast sin, hold fast
deceit, Jer. 8.5. And therefore it is not strange that they that do so, should
be therefore branded to love vanity, Psalm. 4.2. What fool so foolish, as to
trust a known liar, especially in a known lie? And yet alas! what sinner is
there more wise? Will thou lean upon that which is not, but only seems to be?
Sin is not good, sin can bring no good. Sin is not really pleasurable, it
is not truly profitable, when it seems to be such, it is not such, but does
lie: In this case thou must either put the lie upon the Scripture or upon Sin;
I believe thou dare not do the former, and therefore why is it that thou will not do the latter. Or

2ly, At most it is but a Spiders web.
Secondly, If sin have any being at all, make the best of it, it is but as a
Spiders web. A poor thing, you will say, for an House to lean upon, when all it is
support is in very deed, by leaning on the House: Take but down the House, and
you need not take down the Cobweb. My Brethren, if Scripture be true, then the
very best head that sinners can bring their work unto, is but the spinning of a
Spiders web, a poor thing, you will say, and a very vanity for the soul, which
should be an house for God to dwell in, to lean upon, and yet read, Isai.
59.4, 5. They trust in vanity (there is my charge against sinners) they speak
lies, conceiving mischief, and bring forth iniquity: they spin Spiders webs,
there is the proof. Would not he be accounted a foolish one, that would not
yield to the taking down of a Cobweb, for fear least his House should fall?
And what shall we account of foolish sinners, that think that if their souls
be but swept, and their sins; their Spiders webs but taken down, that then
they shall fall also, and that their Reformation would be their ruin?
Miserable madness! why, Sin is not the House, and thy Soul the Cobweb; but
thy Soul is the House, and sin the Spiders web. Thy soul has not it is
dependence, being, and subsistence upon sin, but sin has it is dependence by
hanging upon thy soul. It Is sad that so many cleanly and houswisely for the
world, that cannot endure Spider or Cobweb in their Houses, should to freely
suffer both in their hearts, and think that they go about to undo them, that
would sweep them down. Oh! down with Spider, and Web, and All; down with
Satan and Sin too, and instead of danger, i will warrant thee decency, and that
thy soul shall become a Temple for the Holy Ghost to dwell in. But if thou will still conceit that thou can not be, or subsist without thy sin, when in
very deed it is thy sin that cannot be, or subsist without thee, know from
the mouth of the Lord, Job 8.14. That thy hope shall be cut off, because thy
trust is a Spiders web.

Secondly, 2ly, This will be the veriest vexation of Spirit. 1. If this Reed
bear not up the hand, it will pierce the hand.
This will be the veriest vexation of spirit which will easily appear in these
several particulars.

1. Sin is not of an indifferent nature. If it cannot profit thee to lean upon
it, it will be sure to prejudice thee. This is that very Egyptian Reed, 2
King, 18.21. That staff of Egypt, whereon if a man lean, it will not only
break, and so shrink from under his hand, but it will go into his hand, and
pierce it thorough. Oh! what is that which leaves the deepest marks behind it
in wounded Consciences and distressed Spirits, but this, or the like? I have
sinned, and trusted in my wickedness, and strengthened my self in my sin. When
a man flees the judgments of the Lord, and leanes to his sin, until the
guilt and horror thereof meet him, he is compared to a man fleeing from a Lion,
and going into the House, 2ly, The harder you lean upon sin, the heavier it
will lie upon you.
and leaning his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bites him, Amos 5.19.

2ly, The harder you lean upon sin now, the heavier will sin lie upon you
another day. What is observed of the Irish Nations Genius, that while they are
Underlings, they are fair and flattering, but ever plotting for the Mastery,
and the more they are trusted, or leaned unto, the more easily they attain it,
but their little fingers are as others loins, when they have gotten the upper
hand of those, that by leaning to them, were prevailed upon by them; this may
be verily said of sin, the more you adventure to lean upon it, the harder it
will be sure to lie upon you.

1. In the Commanding power: sin will not long be a servant, when once you
come to trust it: Sin promised to be your servant at the first, but you must
be it is slaves afterward. Though sin will be daily offering its service
(such as it is) to the Saints, as I remember the Irish used to do to the
English, before their massacre in the late Rebellion; yet the way to keep it
from Mastery, is to keep from trusting it. If once you be deceived (so far
as to trust it, for then I am said to be deceive, when I leaned or trusted to a
man, and found him not according to my trust reposed in him) I say, if once you
be thus deceived by sin, sin will be servant no longer, but you shall be
presently found serving diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3.

2ly, In the condemning power of it. Sirs, The more you put stress upon sin
now, the more weight of horror, and guilt, and condemnation sin will be sure
to lay upon you afterward. You will find Scripture more express to this
pupose, then you willingly would have it. I shall give you but one proof, and
think that enough, Isai. 30.12.13. Thus says the holy One of Israel, because
you trust in perverseness, and stay thereupon, therefore this iniquity shall
be as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in an high wall, whose breaking
comes suddenly at an instant. Your sin will not always be your Underling;
but if you make it your wall, and lean upon it, and stay thereupon, it will
quickly get above your head, and grow higher then you; and the more you lean,
the sooner it will swell; and the harder you lean, the heavier it will fall
upon your heads; you shall not need to call to Mountains to fall upon you,
this high wall of your own building, and whereunto you trusted, will be weight
enough upon your Consciences, and vexation enough unto your spirits.

3ly, Lean on sin, and look that God should leave you; 3ly, Lean on sin, and
God will leave you.
he that trusts in sin, has a God on this side God, he makes sin his God,
and then (as Hos. 10.3. What should a King do unto us? so) what should God do
unto him? What will he do? why he tells you, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined unto
Idols, let him alone. When men are joined to sin, that is, hold sin as hard,
as sin holds them, and stick unto sin as close as sin sticks unto them:
God will say, (and they had as good he should say any thing) let such a soul
alone.

Lastly, Though God leave thee for the present, 4ly, The harder you press upon
sin, the harder will God press upon you.
yet will he lean the harder upon thee another day, the harder thou leanest
upon sin now. What a dreadful passage is that, Job 27.20, 22. Terrors shall
take hold upon him, for God shall cast upon him, and not spare, though he would
fain fly out of his hand. You have this dreadful judgment annexed to this
sad sin, Jer. 13.35. This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me,
says the Lord, because thou have forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood: this
is thy lot from me. Oh! that is a killing word: It Is usually the lot of Saints
to suffer from the World, and to have all the loades laid on them, that wicked
men can lay; yea, sometimes it is their lot to lie under all the loads that they
can possibly lay upon themselves, and their own Consciences can press them
down withal, but all this is little to the other; for all this while there is
a God to take off their loads from them. But now when God shall say, this is
thy lot from me, and I will lay much weight upon thee, because thou did trust
in falsehood, and lay as much weight upon thy sin as possibly thou could;
and I the Lord will press hard upon thee with mine own hand of wrath, and
will not spare, because thou did lean hard upon thy sin, and sparedst not;
Heaven and Earth stand astonished, and tremble, O Hell! at the Easelesse,
Endless, and Remediless vexation that will surprise that Spirit.

Lean not to Satan. 1. He is a known liar.
2ly, Lean not to Satan; for

1. If Sin be the web, Satan is the Spider. If Sin be the lie, Satan's the
liar; and which of these is to be leaned unto? As for Satan, he was a liar from
the beginning, he has continued a liar, ever since; he got his Kingdom by
lying, he continues it by lying; he manageth his whole Economy, and
family-dispensations by lying, and therefore he is called the Father of it, Jo.
8.44. And is this thy Counselor? thy friend, thy bosome-friend? Is this he
that so many of the world lean unto? Alas! the foolishness of the children of
men, or madness rather of the children of the Devil! alas, the frequent
bewitchednesse of the children of God!

2ly. A sworn enemy.
Secondly, Satan is not only a known liar, but he is also thy sworn Enemy;
therefore what madness is it, for thy soul to lean to him? Will a man
consult with his Enemy (whose plot it is to take away his life, or his estate)
how he may do to save them? Or will he (which is much more) lean to his
Enemies counsel, if he should entertain a discourse with him? What is said of
the Unicorne, Job 39.11. Will thou trust him, because his strength is great? I
may much more say so to thy soul concerning Satan. Are we ever the more
confident in our Adversaries, because they are the more potent? Strength is the
only thing in Satan, which might induce thee to lean unto those
Principalities and Powers; yea, but that strength is in an Enemies keeping; and
therefore there is less reason for trusting him. Or do thou think that he
will lay down his Emnity, because he takes up a flattery? Let the wise Man
counsel thee, Prove. 26.24, 25. He that hates dissembleth with his lips, and
lays up deceit within him: when he speaks fair, believe him not, for there
are seven abominations in his heart.

Thirdly, You say of knavish Customers, 3ly, The more you lean to him, the
more he will press upon you.
the more you trust them, the more they trouble you; and the more they have of
your Confidence, the more you have of their Company; the way to be rid of
them, is to give them no Credit, neither to trust to their Promises, nor to
their Payments: I am sure it is, and will be thus with Satan. Oh! how he loves
to trade where he may be trusted! you complain, Satan's always troubling
you, and who can help it? you are always trusting him: Trust him less, and
he will trouble you less. In this sort resist him, and in that sort he will
flee from you, Jam, 4.7.

Lastly, Lean unto Satan, and farewell all confederacy and correspondence with
the Lord. They say, 4ly, Lean to him, and God will leave you.
if our State will lean to the Portugal, they must break with the Spaniard,
for these are absolute Enemies. I am sure, if you lean to Satan, God will
break with you; for there is no reconciling Christ and Belial. Thus resting on
the Lord, and covenanting with Hell, are made terms of fullest opposition,
Isai. 28.12, 15.

CHAP. XXIV. Disswasives from leaning upon the World amplified.
Lean not to the world.
THirdly, lean not to the World: Or as the Apostles rule is, where he speaks
of the highest of fleshly things, Phil. 3.3. Have no confidence in the flesh.

1. Not to the worlds promises.
First, Lean not to the Worlds promises; be they never so specious, yet are they
but like Satan's to Christ, when he showed him the glory of the World,
altogether deceitful and treacherous; All these will I give thee; or to our
Parents, you shall be as Gods. What more could be promised? but though the
second Adam was wiser then to be deceived, yet is the first Adam, yea, and all
his posterity a sad and sufficient proof of the slender performance. Much
after the same sort does the World pay what it promises. Therefore as Job
15.31. Let not him that is deceived trust in Vanity, for Vanity shall be his
recompense. Have you not often found this to be true of the World, you very Men
of the World? Is not an high degree in the world a lie, even as a low degree is
vanity? Read Psalm. 62.9. Yea, let great Ones read their own Experiences, in
such, or such a place of worldly profit, or power, etc. (Who were fairly
promised much in it, before they had it) and then tell me.

Nor performances.
2ly, The Worlds performances are no more to be trusted then its promise. Lean
no more unto what the World can do, then unto what the World can say.

1. Not to what the men of the world can do.
First, Lean not to the Men of the World. Jer. 17.5. Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, or makes flesh his Arm.

2ly. Lean not to the Things of the World. 2. Nor the things of the world.
Charge them that be rich in this world, that they trust not in riches. 1 Timothy
6.17.

True may you say, men are not to be leaned to, in whom we have no interest,
but such a man is my friend, my Brother. But trust not in a friend. Mic. 7.5.
And again men will think small friends, small forces are not much to be
confided in: Small means, they that have them may live to wast them, and too
dye beggars notwithstanding them. But think men if our friends, or our Armies
were so great, or our Navies so strong, or our Estates so many Thousands, and
that an Annuity, then might I trust and that with boldness unto these things.
Therefore I will go over again.

First, Lean not to the men of the World, Not the great men of the world.
no not to the Ablest, the Strongest, the Greatest that is in the World. Isa.
31.1. Woe be to them, That stay on horses, and trust in Chariots, because they
are many, and in Horsemen, because they are very strong, Psalm. 146.3. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of man, in whom there is no help. It is
better to trust in the Lord then to put confidence in man. Psa. 118.8. That
you will quickly grant. Yea, but it follwes. ver. 9. It is better to trust in the
Lord, then to put confidence in Princes.

Secondly, Lean not to the things of the Word: Nor great things of the world.
No not to the greatest, to the fullest, to the certainest enjoyment of these
things. Trust not in Riches, boast not of them; lean not to them, no, not to
the multitude of your Riches. Psa. 49.6. If riches increase, set not your
hearts upon them. Isa. 62.10. That is, lean not unto them, for though we ought
not to set our loves upon them, and that may be there forbidden; yet I believe
the special meaning is, that we should not repose the trust of our hearts in
them, which I gather both from what goes before both in the eighth and ninth
Verses, Trust in him at all times; why so? why? Men of high degree are a lie:
therefore if riches increase, set not your hearts upon them: as also from what
follows after ver. 11. This God has spoken, twice have I heard it, That power
belongs only to God. Therefore set not your hearts on riches; the Increase
whereof has no power to support you. And yet wherewithal shall I dissuade
you, worldlings, from leaning to the World? Consider, there is but little in
all the World for your support, should you lean upon it. And that little
strength that these Reeds have, will upon your leaning be sure to break in
pieces, and then what were thy Crutches before, shall then become thy
firebrands. Disswasives. 1. There is but little in the things or men of the
world to support for.


First, There is but little in Worldly things to be leaned unto, which may
easily appear under these Considerations. They are unsuitable, uncertain
unsatisfactory, unserviceable supports to thy poor soul.

1. They are unsuitable supports.
First, Unsuitable: The actings of the soul which I here call leaning, are the
Outgoings of a spiritual substance, therefore how improper an Object are
Carnal things? How unapt a leaning stock is a fleshly Arm for a spiritual
hand? God says, that he spoke like a fool, that said, Soul take thine ease, or
rest O soul, for I have laid up much goods. Luke 12.19, 20. If he had said,
here is a table to refresh my body, here is a bed to refresh my bones, it had not
been such height of folly; But soul, take thine ease! this was the
foolishness, and perhaps is thine. David was wiser then so, Psa. 141.8. O God,
the Lord, in thee do I trust, leave not my soul destitute. Whatever of these
things thou trustest to, yea, whomsoever of these Persons; yet may thy soul be
destitute for all them; the Lord is only my support, let thy soul sing; for
Isa. 49.6, 7, 8. They that trust in their Wealth, and boast in the multitude of
their Riches, none of them can by any means redeem his Brother, nor, give to
God a Ransom for him; for the Redemption of the soul is precious, and cease
for ever. Meat may support the outward man, Money the outward Estate, Physic
may repair the strength of the Body; but the soul is out of the reach of these
things.

Secondly, Uncertain. Such are the things of the world, 2. Uncertain.
therefore not to be leaned unto. 1 Timothy 6.17. Trust not in uncertain riches.
Such are the men of the World. Psa. 73.18. Surely thou did set them in
slippery places. Certainly they are in uncertain places: slippery places; their
heads are a lost to day, their heels as high as their heads to morrow. They
are great men, and thy great friends, and thou leanest confidently on them
great things, and perhaps they intend thee so; but between the writing of the
Will and the subscription, between the draught of the Commission, and setting
of the Seal, he is snatch away, and thou remainest as thou wast. Psa. 136.3,
4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of man, in whom is no help.
How comes that? Why? his breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth, in that
very day his thoughts perish. But as for the beloved, lean on him; for as he
was, so he abides, and so shall he abide for ever. So Psa. 18.2. The Lord is my
Rock, in whom I will trust, the Lord is my high Tower. A strong guard you will
say both in Front and Rear, a Rock before, an high Tower behind, and his
confidence comes marching in the middle. Among all things made by the Art of
man, nothing is more durable, certain, stable, then a Tower of Defense. Among
all things (visible) made by the hand of God himself, nothing more abiding,
steadfast, and unmovable then a Rock. God is as both; therefore will David lean
upon him: here is an unmovable support, a sit leaning-stock for an immortal
soul.

Thirdly, Unsatisfactory. 3. Unsatisfactory.
They that labor for Carnal, or for wicked things lay out their labor for
that which satisfies not. Isa. 55.2. and therefore they that lean upon them,
shall never have any satisfying support from them. Which of you are more
satisfied with your thousands then you were, when you were worth but hundreds?
who of you says, I have enough to sit down upon, and to rest fully contented
with? A Saint may say to another, as Jacob, Genesis 33.11. I have enough my
Brother, yea, I have all (...) for I have the beloved, who fills all in all.
Ephesians. 1.23. but who besides the Saint can say so? Those of you that have much
goods wax unwearied in getting more, and they that have great Estates in
getting greater, and they that have good friends (as to worldly account) in
procuring better, yea, they tire themselves on their beds of rest whereon they
lean; and this their way is their folly, and yet their posterity approves their
sayings.

4. Unserviceable.
Fourthly, And lastly, Unserviceable. When is it that we say such a thing would
do us a great deal of service, but when we have most need of it? And if so,
Then are the men and the things of the World unserviceable supports to the poor
soul. As for worldly men, Isa. 49.7. None of them can by any means redeem his
Brother, etc. And as for worldly things, when we have most need, have they
least help; for Riches profit not in the day of wrath, (but Righteousness
delivers from death) Pro. 11.4. In days of health, and peace and prosperity,
when thou art able to help thy self and friends, thou have many that are
willing to help thee: then Riches will proffer their service to thee; But when
you shall be under the greatest want of help; Then comes that cutting Question
to be stated against thee. Luke 12.20. then whose shall those things be? That
is, if they were thine before, they shall not now be thine, when thou most
need some support. But lean unto the Lord, who is a present help in the time
of trouble, yea, a very present help, therefore let him be thy present refuge,
and thy very strength, as Psa. 46.1. Remember thine own Experiences, and trust
in him, yea, what thy Fathers have said unto thee. Psa. 22.4, 5. Our Fathers
trusted in thee, they trusted, 2. Leaning on them will break their shoulders,
and so they will lose the little strength they would otherwise have.
and thou did deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered, they
trusted in thee, and were not confounded.

Secondly, That proportion of strength that the Lord has given unto any
Creature to serve thee, thou take the most certain and ready course to
despoyle it off, if thou designest that it should support thee. The Lord
intended that these should (in their degree) be thy comforts, but never that
they should be thy Confidences. Ier. 48.7. Because thou trustedst in thy works,
and Treasures, thou shall be taken, and the shall go into Captivity. You may
use them, and still hold them, but if you trust in them, you sink them. Of all
things nothing is more serviceable to man then Bread and Water; yet if you make
bread the staff of your life, and do not make God the staff of your Bread,
the Lord threatens, as Isa. 3.1. That he will take away the stay, and the
staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. He does not say,
he will take away the bread and water, but the stay of them; which he may do,
though he leave them with you. You may eat as Pharoahs lean kine the fat, and
yet be never the more nourished, until you come to know that Man lives not by
bread alone, but by the word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord. Mat.
4.4. Note.
Sirs of all things that I know in the World, I know none so heavy and weighty
as sin, and faith. Sin is such a weight that would sink the whole Creation to
hell and ruin, did not God as well as Man undertake to bear the burden of it.
Faith is such a weight, that if it be not objected upon the Creator, it can not
but sink the most Potent Creature. What is it that has sunk so many Popular
men, and Eminent instruments in the Commonwealth, but that they have been the
Common confidence? Lean upon Parliaments, Armies, or Navies; though the best
accomplished, and most hopeful in the World, and you presently break their
shoulders. There Is not a readier way in the World to sink the Minister in his
abilities, gifts, or success; yea, to sink his life also into the grave, then
to lean upon him. Set thine heart upon thy wife, thy friend, thy child, if thou
would fain love them to death, and kill them with kindness. If thou have a
desire to break thine Estate to pieces, then set thine heart upon thy Riches.
This I have found, and search thou it, and know it for thy good, That I have
never been so near the grant, or continuance of any of these enjoments, as when
the Lord has brought mine heart to a kind (I say not of listlesse careless,
but) of yielding indifferency: Lean thou not upon any of these things which are
but Reeds, lest the harder thou hold, the sooner they break, and the heavier
thy fall be. I have seen an heavy lad slide lightly over an Ice, when a less
weight has broken it by pressing hard upon it. Worldly places (as you heard)
are slippery, or Icy places, and therefore take the Apostles Counsel. 1 Cor.
7.29, 30. Let those that have wives, be as if they had none, and those that buy
as if they possessed not, and they that use the world as not abusing it; for
the fashion of this world passes away.

3. If you make them your Crutches God will make these Crurches your
firebrarnds.
Thirdly, If you make them your Crutches, God will make these Crutches your
firebrarnds. Isa. 30.3. The strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame, and the
trust in the shadow of Egypt your Confusion. Because you have had and have
trusted (for it is not the bare having that shall be thus punished) unto your
own good things here, therefore shall you be tormented, Luke 16.25. and your
Gold and Silver shall eat your flesh as fire, Ja. 5.3. And that which you have
called strong, and made your strength shall be as tow, and you the makers of it
as a spark, and you shall both burn together, and none shall quench you. Isa.
1.31.

Conclusion.
I have been the longer speaking to this last particular, because I find not
only that this is the great sin of our times, but even of Gods own people.
They dare not make Covenants plainly with hell; yet dare they confederate with
Earth, and they that dare not lean to sinful supports, yet are they not so
shie of carnal Confidences. Even gracious Josiah leans to Garchemish, though
he die for it. 2 Chronicles. 35. and good Asah relies on the King of Syria. 2 Chronicles. 16.7. rather then on the Lord, and in his his disease seeks, and trusts
unto Physicians, rather then the Lord. ver. 12. But yet so far forth as the
soul is Married unto the Lord: It Is a widow to the world: and so far as it
is a Widow indeed, it will be desolate (that is, as in a Wilderness in it
self) and therefore trusting in the Lord, 1 Timothy 5.5.

CHAP. XXV. Contains the improvement of the whole by way of Exhortation and
Direction, how to improve Christ as the only Guide.
ANd thus have I done with the Obstructions, Privative, and Positive, having
endeavored to hinder them from hindering leaning upon Christ.

There remains but one Question, the Resolution whereof let it serve as the
Application of the whole.

The fifth and last Question is, 5th. Quest. What advantage is to be had for
lost sinners by leaning on Jesus Christ.


What advantage a lost or bewildred sinner may attain (as to its spiritual
Estate) by leaning on this beloved?

Even as much as heart can wish. The soul that takes hold on Christ, takes
hold on the Way: the soul that leanes upon Christ* leanes upon the Guide, that
goes to God, and leanes to Canaan, and therefore that soul shall never perish
in the Wilderness.

Now therefore for APPLICATION. Application.


Is it so that sin is a Wilderness? that a sinful Estate is a bewildred
Estate? that it is the souls great business, and only needful concernment,
to come up from this Wilderness? and that there is no coming up, but by
leaning upon the Lord Jesus? Oh! Exhortation.

If Christ be a guide, to lean upon him.

If Christ be a way, to walk in him.


then

Let me plead with you, let me earnestly exhort you as you love your souls,
and would not dye in your sins; if Christ be a GUIDE, to lean upon Him, if
Christ be a WAY, to walk in him.

What say thou poor lost soul, that art lost indeed, lost in thy self,
bewildred in thy self, undone in thy self, what would thou have? what
seekst thou for? say thou; Oh! I would have a Guide, I seek a Way: Friend,
God has provided; behold both in one beloved. Lo this I have searched and
found it, and so it is, hear thou, and know thou it for thy good.

1. Christ is a Guide.

1. Isreal's guidances were all Types of Christ, as our Guide.


First, Christ is the Guide, take hold on him.

1. Know, That all the Guidances that Israel had of old to lead them out of
that their Wilderness, were but Types of Christ's spiritual guidance of lost
souls out of the spiritual wilderness of sin.

The principal guidances of the old Israel, were the Pillar of Cloud, the
Angel, Moses, Aaron, and Josuah.

1. The Cloud.
The Pillar of Cloud, you have historified in such language, as plainly enough
speaks this guidance, and Christ in it, Exodus 13.20. You find Israel in the
wilderness, and then it follows, verse 21. And the Lord (Christ) went before
them by day in a pillar of Cloud (there is the Type) to lead (or guide) them in
the way; this Pillar was to guide them (as the Pillar of fire to enlighten
them.) This Cloud is brought down to Christ, as a figure of Gospel-Baptism
into him, 1 Cor. 10.1. etc. Here they are said to be under the Cloud, and verse
2. they were baptized in the Cloud, The Cloud an Old-testament-type, and
Baptism a New-testament-Ordinance, go together in this Text, to show that
Christ and the Cloud went together in the other Text, and by the rule of
proportion; as the Rock in the fourth verse, is said to be a spiritual Rock
that followed them, and that Rock was Christ; so may I say, that that Cloud
that went before them, was a spiritual Cloud, and that Cloud was Christ.

2ly, The Angel.
Their next Guidance that I shall speak of, is the Angel, you have this
mentioned and Christ in it, Exo. 23.20. Behold I send an Angel before thee to
keep thee in the way, and to bring (or guide) thee to the place which I have
prepared for thee. The language of the next words, (verse 21.) speaks this
Angel to be Christ, being not to be attributed unto any mere Creature. Beware
of him, and obey his voice, and provoke him not, for he will not pardon thine
iniquities, for my name is in him. Therefore also is this Angel said to be
their Savior, and he that saved them (which was Christ alone) is said to be
the Angel of Gods presence, Isai. 63.9. This is the Angel that was in the
Church in the Wilderness, who spoke to Moses on Mount Sina, and with our
fathers, Act 7.38.

Farther, That Moses and Aaron were their great Guides, 3ly, Moses and Aaron.
is expressly averred, Psalm. 77.20. He led his people through the Wilderness by
the hand (or guidance) of Moses and Aaron: And that they were manifest types,
is the great subject of the discourse of the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 3.
chapter 5. chapter 8. chapter 9. etc.

Lastly, That Josuah their last guide, 4ly, Josuah. All these were guides to
Israel, and types of Christ
who conducted them to Canaan, is an eminent Type of Christ's guidance, appears
clearly, from his Name (the same with Jesus a Savior) his succession to Moses
(as Christ also came after the Law, Romans 8.3.) His perfecting salvation for the
people (as Christ also saves to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25.) his leading them to
the Land of Rest (as Christ our Jesus is said do, Heb. 4.8, 9, 14, 16.) so
that we may in our spiritual bewildrings, have strong consolation, could we
lean upon Christ under the Types aforementioned, could we study him more, and
understand him better, even under Old-testament-Representations.

So then would thou have a Cloud to guide thee, an Angel to go before thee,
a Moses to lead thee, a Josuah to bring thee into Canaan, and do not find
all these in Christ, it is either thy gross ignorance, or great unbelief;
wherefore beware of Christ, and obey his voice, follow his guidance, walk in
his footsteps, and lean on his Arm, if ever thou intend to come up from the
Wilderness.

2ly, Christ's guidance was the sum of the Covenant.
2ly, If you look into the holy Covenant, the Oath which God swear unto
Abraham, the mercy promised to our forefathers, Luke 1.72, 73. And there find
your souls (in the Wilderness that I have spoken of) in darkness, and in the
shadow of death: you shall also find this to be the sum of the Covenant,
that Christ should thence GUIDE our feet in the way of peace, v. 79.

3ly, Christ was trained up in, and acquainted with the Wilderness.
3ly, As Guides are (as it were) trained up in, and made acquainted with the
dangerous and difficult passages of perilous and desolate ways, so was our
Savior as to all the windings of the Wilderness of sin. Wherefore he that
was given, as you have heard before, to be our Guide, was led of the Spirit
into the Wilderness, (I take it to be a material Wilderness, but it was) that
he might be tempted of the Devil, Mat. 4.1. And in that Wilderness he was
forty days tempted of the Devil, Luke 4.2. And in all that time was Christ
learning out the various windings and entanglings of the ways of temptation,
and paths of sin. Satan shows him the greenness, and pleasant places of the
Wilderness, and glory thereof to entangle him, Luke 4. verses 5, 6, 7. Satan
leads him from way to way, and from turning to turning, from pride and
presumption, verse 3. to covetousness and voluptuousness, verse 6. from
thence to selfe-murther and tempting of God, verse 9. from sinning against
Scripture, to sin with authority from Scripture, verse 10. because Christ
urged Scripture against him: And though the History be but short, yet were
these viewes of the Wilderness so long, that it seems our Savior had a full
sight of all the Wilderness, but never was bewildred in any part of it; for
had he been so, we had been lost to all eternity: Wherefore when the Apostle
had been comparing our state to Isreal's in the Wilderness, Heb. 3. and 4. he
leads us to Christ as our guide, chapter 4.14. and assures us for our comfort, that
he was, (viz. in the days of his temptation in the wilderness) in all points
(mark that) tempted like as we are, yet without sin, and so you have both
together in one Scripture. Heb. 4.15.

Fourthly, For that very end was Christ thus trained up (as it were) in, 4ly,
To the end he might be able to lead us out of the Wilderness.
and acquainted (for some time) with this wilderness, that he might be a
suitable and well-instructed guide to lead us out of the Wilderness of sin and
temptations: For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted. Heb. 2.18. which scripture, if put together with
those before quoted, tells us plalnly, that Christ was led into every part of
the Wilderness (not one corner excepted) yet not all bewildred: in all the
points of temptation, yet without sin, and all this was that he might be able
to succor those that are tempted.

Lastly, 5ly, Christ is in all respects an able Guide.
such a guide is Jesus Christ that whatsoever has concluded thee under an
impossibility of coming up from the Wilderness of thy self, may conclude thee
under fair hopes, yea, full assurance of coming thence, if thou lean upon the
Lord Jesus. As

First, The Wilderness, thou complainest, 1. A great Guide.
is great (and therefore terrible) this Guide is greater, and therefore (if
thou lean on him) thy condition is hopeful: He that is given us for a Guide,
Luke 1.79. is said to be the great Prophet arisen amongst us. Luke 17.16.
where also what is said on the account of this guidance concerning John as
Christ's forerunner. Luke 1.68. is here applied to Christ, The Lord has
visited his people, and so the spring from on high has visited us, to give
light to them that sit in darkness, etc. and to guide, etc. Luke 1.78, 79. And
how great comfort may the thoughts of this great Prophet be unto thee in this
great Wilderness?

Secondly, The Wilderness, thou may complain, 2. A Guide full of eyes.
is full of ways (diverse temptations) but know that this guide is full of
eyes: he has eyes enough to look out into all the Earth. Rev. 5.6. Therefore
if Satan lead Peter into a new way, Christ will follow Satan with a new watch:
says Christ unto Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Luke
22.32.

3. Able to extricate all Satan's wiles.
Thirdly, The Wilderness, thou may complain, is very intricate: but know,
that as this Guide is able to epsy out all the wiles of Satan, so can he make
even thee able (by faith in him) to stand against those wiles of the Devil.
Ephesians. 6.11.

3. A Pioner as well as Guide.
Fourthly, The Wilderness, thou may complain, is crooked, stumbling, and
uneven; but this Guide who led Israel as an horse in the Wilderness, that he
should not stumble. Isa. 63.13. Pioner (to speak scripture language in our own
dialect) as well as Guide, and carries (as I may say with reverence) Word and
Spirit along with him, to make the desert an highway for our God. Isa. 40.3.
and to make crooked things straight, and rough places plain. verse 4. yea to
make them straight and plain before thee. Isai. 42.16.

5. A light as well as Guide.
Fifthly, The Wilderness, thou may complain, is dark and shady; and the
light comes not to thee But this is a Guide that ever carries a light with him,
yea, that is the light as well as the Guide, and to give light, as well as to
guide. Luke 1.79. who has therefore said, I will lead the blind in a way that
they knew not, and will make darkness light before them. Isa. 42.16.

6. A Guide who gathered up the thorns.
Sixthly, The Wilderness, thou may complain, is full of thorns which catch
hold upon thee on the one hand and on the other, but this Guide has gathered
them up and worn them (in their type) in his own Crown, Ioh. 19.2. Insomuch
that though the way of the slothful (that will not, that neglect to come to
Christ is as an hedge of thorns; yet is the way of the (Evangelically)
righteous made plain before him. Pro. 15.19.

7. And will break through the Wilderness.
Lastly, thou may complain, that the Wilderness does shut thee in, and that
thy sin does easily beset thee. But this Guide stands engaged to break his way
through this Wilderness, for he has said, an highway shall be there. Isa.
35.8.

Wherefore upon these accounts let me earnestly exhort you to come to Christ,
and to say unto him as Moses said to Hobab his Father in Law, Numb. 10.31:
Leave us not I pray thee, forasmuch as we are in this Wilderness, and thou
may be unto us instead of Eyes. Thou art in a Wilderness, ready otherwise to
be lost for ever, oh! go to Christ and implore his guidance, that he may be,
yea, and accordingly he will be sure to be unto thy soul instead of eyes.

And thus much of the first, viz. If sin be a Wilderness, Christ the Guide,
take hold on him.

CHAP. XXVI. Contains Exhortation and direction how to Improve Christ as the
only may out of the Wilderness of Sin.
THE second advantage that comes by leaning is this, as it brings bewildred
sinners to the Guide, so it sets them in the way.

And therefore my second Exhortation to lost souls is this. 2d. If Christ be a
way walk in him.


Is sin a Wilderness? Christ is the Way. Wherefore Walk in him, And you shall
find REST to your souls.

This is certain, that the saving Recumbency whereof we have spoken does import
the walking in Christ as well as walking with him: since it is manifest (as you
shall perceive) that this Beloved is a Way as well as a Guide, and to be walked
in as a Way, as well as walked with as a Guide; For if it be evident in
Scripture as it is, that we are both to go with him and in him, it is a plain
case that he is both a Guide and a Way; and if we must lean upon him under each
Notion, it is as plain that we must walk in him as well as with him. Hence it
is that the Saints are said sometimes to follow Christ, ( viz. as their Guide)
as Rev. 14.4. hence those Apostates are taxed for walking no more with him.
Joh. 6.66. And hence also it is, that (as I exhorted you in the first part of
this discourse to labor to find your souls as a Garden of walks unto Christ,
as himself has said, I will walk in them. 2 Cor. 6.16.) we are called here to
walk in him: As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. Col.
2.6. ( viz. as your way.)

Christ though a Guide is also the way.
And this is no novell notion, no paradox to a spiritulized understanding, that
the same should be both the Guide and the way. For thus it is with the Spirit,
and thus with the word of the Lord. David calls the Word a light to his feet, a
Lanthorn to his paths. Psa. 119.105. this is that counsel of God which the
Psalmist makes his Guide. Ps. 73.24. and the same word David calls his way. Ps.
119.32. I will run the way of thy Commandments, and Verse 33. Teach me the way
of thy Statutes.

Thus it is also with the Spirit. Ioh. 16.13. When the Spirit is come, he will
guide you into all truth: there is he expressed to be a Guide. Gal. 5.16. Walk
in the Spirit: there he is supposed to be a way.

In the same manner that Christ whom you have heard the Scriptures declaring to
be a Guide, calls himself (as you shall hear) a way. That is, the Word of
truth shows us both where and how to walk: The spirit of truth shows us both in
what way and according to what Rule we ought to walk. Christ finally (who is
the truth) leads us by himself as he is the Guide, to walk in himself as he is
the way that brings us to the Father.

Where I shall observe unto you: That as Isreal's Guides, so their way to Canaan
was a type of Christ; as our way out of this Wilderness of sin, to out
souls rest.

2. That Christ the guide is also the way.

3. How Jesus the guide came to be the way, And lastly, What manner of way
Christ is unto the soul.

1. 1. Isreal's way out of the wilderness, a type of Christ.
Then Isreal's way out of that Wilderness to that Canaan, was a figure to shadow
forth Christ unto them and Us, as the only true, way unto true Rest. wherefore
when the Apostle to the Hebrews, had largely been discoursing of Israel in the
Wilderness, Chap. 3. to the end; from thence he takes occasion to urge closely
on the Hebrews, the posterity of that old Israel, that they neglect not to
believe on Christ, as being that sin by which they would indeed lose their
way to the spiritual Canaan, and rest of the people of God, as their Fathers
had done, who could not enter in because of unbelief, chap. 3.19. In the next
words, (viz. chapter 4.1.) Let us therefore, says he, fear lest we also come
short: and how are we said at any time to come short of our journey, but when
we come short of our way? and why were they charged to come short of the way,
but because they came short of the faith? read verses 2, 6. And what does he
press these Hebrews to do, to the intent they come not short of that Rest,
but to believe on that Jesus (the great high Priest) who is passed into the
heavens, and so is become our way to the throne of Grace, in whom we may come
(for that is the language of the Text) and that with boldness, that we may
obtain grace and mercy to help in time of need, Heb. 4.3, 11, 14, 16. Nay be
plainly tells them, that if any of their Fathers ever reached that Rest which
remains for the people of God, it was not Jesus (the son of Nun) verse 8.
but Jesus the Son of God, verse 14.15, 16. through whom their way was to come
and appear before God, or that gave them that Rest.

2ly, Now that Jesus is the WAY, 2ly, Jesus the Guide, is also the way.
the One and Only WAY to the Father, in whose presence is the fullness of joy,
and from whose presence are the times of refreshing whereof you have heard, and
so consequently that Jesus Christ is the only way for bewildred sinners to
come to the Saints Rest; take, I pray you, his own witness concerning himself
(whom we know to be the faithful and true witness, Rev. 1.5, 3, 15.) When
Thomas asks the selfsame Question, which (I am persuaded) the poor lost souls
of you would feign be satisfied in: Lord, says Thomas, How shall we know the
way? Joh. 14. verse 5. (that is, the way to the Mansions (or Rest) spoken of
verse 2.) Christ answers his Question fully, and so fully makes good our
present Discourse, ands fully (I am persuaded) satisfies your solicitous
desires, and soul-enquiries, verse 6. I am the way, no man comes to the Father
but by me.

3ly, How Christ the Guide comes to be the way.
3ly, But and if thou demand how Christ the Guide comes to be the Way,
understand it thus.

The are two things to be considered in Christ (which were also both in Moses)
enabling him (as was Moses) to be a Guide.

1. That he be a Prophet; that is, One able to direct the Way, so was Moses.

2. That he be a Prince; that is, One having power to command into that way so
directed, and so was Moses.

In both these Moses was a Type of Christ as a Guide. Christ's Office being
Prophetical to Direct, and Princely to Command souls to walk in the ways
that he shows them. Thus Moses was a fit Guide, and so is Christ.

But then there is another requisite to make Christ the guide, to be the way
also, (and in this Moses came short of typifying Christ, but Aaron by whom they
were also led, Psalm. 77.20. Though short before, makes up that defect now) and
that is, Note.
that he be a Priest. The people were not to offer sacrifices immediately, or by
themselves; but they were to bring them to the Priests, and the Priests were to
be their way unto the Lord, and all as clear Types of Christ our way to the
Father. Now then had Christ been only Prince and Prophet, he might have been
an able guide; but he could not have been a way, but Christ being King,
Priest, and Prophet, the chief of Kings, the chief of Prophets, and the
chief of Priests, must needs be the chief of Guides, and the chief of Ways.
I think the Scripture's very plain, Jo. 14.6. Jesus says, I am the way, the
truth, and the life: I will expound, or paraphrase it thus, I am the King, the
Priest, and the Prophet; for I think those three words in the Text, answer the
Threefold office considerable in Christ. I am the truth, (that is) I am the
Prophet: I am the life, (that's) I am the Prince: I am the way, that is, I am
the Priest. That Christ as he styles himself the Truth, relates unto his
Prophetical Office, none (I think) will deny: that Christ as he styles
himself the life, that is, one giving life to his people, speaks of his
Kingly Office, may as well be granted: for this is the peculiar prerogative of
Christ, as King above all other Kings; other Kings can bid people go, etc. but
Christ by bidding them, can them go; and this is, without all contradiction,
Christ's very Kingly Office, to give such commands in the new Creation, as God
the Lord did in the Old, he said, let there be light, and there was so: so
Christ to Lazarus, Come forth, and he did so: so to the Diseased, Take up your
bed and walk, and they did so: and so Christ to the Spouse, Come with me from
the Lions den, etc. Cant. 4.8. and she does so, as in our Text. Therefore is
the sovereignty of Jesus Christ, (as Truth and Prophet, he shows the way, as
Prince he gives life (the fountain of motion) to walk in that way. Otherwise
he might call and command ten thousand times, and we stir no more then dead
Carcasses. Other Kings can only spare, or take away life where it is, but
Christ can give life where it is not.

There wants yet another word to speak Christ's Priestly Office, and that is the
first, I am the way; for Christ being Priest, is as truly his peoples way unto
the Father, as being Prophet, he does bring truth; or being Prince, life from
God unto them.

How Christ as Priest, comes to be the souls way.
You Will ask, how Christ as Priest comes to be the souls way? I Will tell you.
Christ as Priest has made a Sacrifice of himself before the Lord, which was
the only means to make a way out of the Wilderness, I mean to bring sinners
unto God: So that I may be bold to say unto you, here is a way out of the
Wilderness, paved with the very flesh, and cemented with the very blood of
Jesus Christ. And therefore whatever soul refuses to walk in this way, shall
be found guilty of treading under foot the Son of God, and of counting the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, Heb. 10.29. We must by faith walk in
him, else by neglect, we trample on him: Oh! how great a difference will there
be betwixt those that walk in him, and those that trample upon him in the end?
That Jesus Christ as Priest, has by his own flesh and blood, made his way to
the Father in our behalf, see Heb. 8.12. By his own blood he entered into the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. That Christ as Priest,
has by his own flesh and blood, made a way for us unto the Lord, see Heb.
10.19, 20. Having therefore boldness, Brethren, to enter into the holiest
through his blood, by a new and living way, consecrated to us through the vail,
that is to say, his flesh. Here Is a way, a new and living way, and consecrated,
(that is) by Christ the Priest, made (as I said) of his flesh and blood, who
dyed that we might have life; who came into the Wilderness, that we might come
out of it: This is the way, walk in it.

5ly, What kind of way Christ is.
Lastly, for your encouragement, I shall endeavor to recommend this way unto
you, which I have thus laid before you; yea, the Lord himself has chalked out
unto you.

Tell me what way, poor soul, would thou choose to walk in? A right way, say
all: the highway, say some: a broad way, say others: a pleasant way, say
others: a clean way, say others: a well provision'd way, say others: a
profitable way, say others: a secure way, say others: the way home, say others.
Is all this enough to commend a way unto you, if it be not, call for more. You
shall find all these in this way.

1. Every one that journey'th, is solicitous (or should be) to find, and so to
keep the Right Way. Oh! that my ways were directed, says David, Psalm. 119.5.
Now Jesus Christ is the only right way for bewildred and lost souls to walk
in: for what is true of the Type, ( viz. Isreal's way from the old Wilderness)
is certainly most true (and must needs be so) of Christ the Antitype, 107.7. He
led them forth by a right way. And the truth is, Jesus Christ is so the right
way, that so nothing of Whoredom, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, Drunkenness,
Hypocrisy, etc. I say, Hearing, Reading, Praying, Almsgiving, are all but
wrong ways, wilderness ways without Christ, and this is evident in the
ninety nine persons, just (according to the righteousness of Scribes and
Pharisees (which you know was of that kind) left in the wilderness, Luke 15.4,
7. But what shall I then do, may the Caviller say, I wonder what these
Ministers would have us do? sometimes they bid, and otherwile they forbid; I
had thought these had been right ways indeed, and if I might continue in the
Wilderness for all these, why should I walk in them any more. Say not so, we
forbid not these ways, but in these we press to make toward this way.
Travelers are wont when they are at a muse, to take the ways that are most
hopeful and probable, and in them (as soon as may be) to enquire the way: go
thou and do likewise, Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the ways (that is the ways of
the Ordinances) and see and ask for the old paths (that is to say, of holy
duties that holy men of old have walked in) and ask where is the good way (that
way is Christ) and you shall find rest to your souls. It seems there is in all
those Ways, one peculiar way to be sought out and walked in, and that way is
Christ, for we have just now proved that Christ is the only way to that
soul-rest, whereof the way to Canaan was but a type. So that this truth is not
only Gospel, but according to the Law and the Prophets. Wherefore never tell
me of thy prayers unless Christ be in thy prayers, or of thine Alms, unless
Christ be in them; they are the ways, but Christ it the way; and in them you
must seek him. Thus did the spouse; she had lost her Beloved, and seeks him in
the Ordinances which the Spirit thus expresses. Cant. 3.1. In the broad ways
she sought him whom her soul loved (that it, as Divines understand it, in the
Ordinances) ver. 2. Take heed of resting satisfied in any duty, but only then,
and so far forth as you find Christ in that duty: Thy comforts will be like the
Dove fluttering upon the waters; if they flutter upon thy duties thou never
wilt find rest unto thy soul, until thou find Christ, and walk in him:
Christ is the only right way.

2d. Christ is the Highway.
Secondly, Christ is the high way out of this Wilderness. You see Ghrist is the
performance of that promise to the Wilderness. Isa. 55.8. an high way shall be
there, an high way? oh here is encouragement. An high way is free to all: the
poor may go on foot in it, as well as Nobles ride in Chariots. The poor may
receive the Gospel. and walk in Christ, for he is the high way. An high way?
none may interrupt in it. If men walk in private paths they are trespassers,
and may be arrested; and verily whilst the soul is void of Christ, it commits
daily trespasses, what ever it does, even when its eats its daily bread. I need
not tell you men are trespassers who walk in the ways mentioned before, in
the way of the wicked, the way of lying, the way of Baalam, the way of the
Adulterous, etc. the purblind Conscience may spy that: but know friends that,
even your ways of duty, prayer, hearing, etc. are trespasses, and you walk (as
it is said aggravating the misery of those times, Judge. 5.6.) through bypath
whilst you go Christlese in them. Now when a man walks in a by path, another
comes, and interrupts him, what have thou to do to walk here, in this ground? I
need not tell you that when one whore's, swears, etc. that God, Law and
Conscience will interrupt him, what do thou? whither go thou? but this
i will say, when he reads and prays, and hears, etc. which are, without Christ,
but bypath; that even then God, Law, and Conscience will arrest thee sooner
or later. Ps. 50.16. What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or to take my
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed (to be set right in
the way) and castest my word, (my Christ) behind thy back? But as for you, that
walk in this way ( viz. Christ) if Satan interrupt you in your duties, in your
walking, in your believing, go and complain to God, the King, and he will
right you, for this is the King of glory his highway. And the way faring man,
though a fool is not shut out of it. Isa. 35.8.

Thirdly, Christ is a broad way. 3. Christ is a broad way.
What makes men so mad of going to Hell, but that it is a Broad way? As sure as
can be (whatever you fancy friends) you mistake your selves, and Satan guls
you: For Christ is the only truly broad way. You Will say our Savior calls sin a
broad way. (...) a broad way, Mat. 7.13. Note.
but I would have you know, that Christ only speaks your mind in it, not his
own: the way that you count broad, he calls broad, (there is elbow-room for all
sin, and nature with ease moves in it, therefore ha calls it the broad way) and
there calls his own way narrow, not because it is so, as you shall see, but
because your base carnal hearts think it so; It streigtheneth you in your
lusts, and therefore you call it narrow; yet speaking of the same thing in
other language, he says, his Yoke is easy. Easy in it self, though hard to
flesh and blood. My meaning is this, there is all spiritual and true
enlargement in the ways of Christ: what ever perfection you desire, it is
straight, it is narrow, poor, and scanty, until you come to the ways of
Christ. Psa. 119.96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandment
is exceeding broad. Go thou as fast as thou can, and as far as thou can, in
the ways of Christ, the more way thou go, the more lies before thee; the
more enlargement thou meets with, the more thou yet discoverest, therefore then
only can we run in this way, when God has enlarged our heart. Psa. 119.32.
Surely there is need of a broad way for the heart (which is wider then the world
to stand in) but now for a heart enlarged to run, what breadth and latitude
must be there? And verily to bring up a good report of this way out of the
Wilderness unto Canaan; let me challenge all the world what streightnings can
you (with truth) object unto the ways of Jesus? Does Christ forbid you to eat,
when you are hungry? or to drink, when you are thirsty; to rest when you are
weary; or to marry, when you have not continence, or to rejoice in the wife of
your youth; or to feast upon occasion; or to provide for our family; or to
labor for the things that are honest; or to rejoice in all your labor under
the Sun; Or what is it that Christ streightneth you in; that you should 'count
yours the broad way? Truly sirs, there is nothing more streightning then of the
Child which the mother will (...) ^hrust its finger inno the flame; Christ
would not have you hurt your selves, What reason is here to complain of
streightning? let carnal ones think or speak what they please of the ways of
Christ, (oh then farewell our liberty!) yet will the ways of Wisdom be justified
of her Children, and those that are sons will bear witness to the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. Romans 8.21. indeed Christ's ways are like the Temple
windows, narrow without, but within (that is when your souls are once in them)
exceeding broad; if you find them not always so, it is want of largnesse in
your hearts, but not in them.

4. Christ is a pleasant way.
Fourthly, Christ is a pleasant way; pleasant ways do much delight, and suite
with nost men's phansies. And pray what is it, endears men to the ways of dark
Egypt, but only the pleasures of sin which are but for a season? Now friends,
the ways of Christ are pleasant all, and pleasant ever. Solomon therefore
preaching Christ under the name of Wisdom, tells you, Pro. 3.17. Her ways
(take them all) are ways of pleasantnes; in the abstract: there is a Fountain
(it seems) of pleasures in them (which is the very nature of them, and) which
can never be drawn dry. You know Summer ways are pleasant ways; now Christ's
are all Summer ways. Cant. 2.11. Rise up my love and come away. ver. 12. the
Winter is past, the rain is over and gone (storms of wrath, spirits of bondage,
terrors of the Lord are over and gone) the Flowers appear on the Earth, here is
delight for the eye; thy soul gathers sweetness from the word, the promises:
the time of the singing of birds is come (here is delight for the ear,) and the
voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land (the Holy Ghost, the Turtle, speaks
peace to thy soul, and thou have communion with the Saints) ver. 13. The
figtree puts forth her green figgs, the Vines with their tender grapes give a
good smell. The ground thou go on makes thee also to bud and blossom
pleasantly, wherefore says Christ, Arise my love, my fair one, and come away.
ver. 14. And who would not delight to walk by the beds of spices? since the
Rose of Sharon (Cant. 2.1.) is the way to Sion, and the lilly of the Valleys
to the Lords holy mountain.

Fifthly, Christ is a clean way: 5. Christ is a clean way.
had thou the pleasures of ten thousands Saints, yet if thou find thine heart
polluted (and be indeed a Christian) and can not get rid of thy corruptions,
these pleasures will but little cheer thee. Oh! say thou, wherewithal shall
a poor sold cleanse his way? Oh! who will lead me into clean paths? why? Jesus
Christ is a clean way: and the only way to walk clean, is to walk in him and
with him. They shall walk with me in white. Rev. 3.4. I confess we must wait
for the perfecting of this in glorification, but this is wrought true in
sanctification. You are washed, you are sanctified. This is the accomplishment
of that promise to the Wilderness, Isa. 35.8. This high way shall be called a
way of holiness, and the unclean shall not pass over it. Cease not to improve
that promise, till grace be swallowed up of glory.

6. Christ's is a well-provision'd way.
Sixthly, Christ is a well-accommodated and provision'd way. Say you, I do not
like such a way, for when a man's hungry, there is no good entertainment to be
found; when weary, no good lodging to be had; no good accommodations, no good
way. And truly this, I do believe, is the great scruple of many a soul, Oh! I
would willingly go to Heaven, but it is a great way thither; and I fear if I
should set foot in the way, I should be never be able to hold out, I should
faint by the way, and I have never heard of any good entertainment in the way.
Alas friend! thou judge sure of this way by thy Wilderness; But I tell thee
thou judge unrighteous judgment. Go but with me to one knows the way well,
and hear what he says of the entertainment. Ps. 84.5. Blessed is the man whose
strength is in thee, in whose heart are the ways of them: ver 6. who pass
thorough the vale of of Baca (oh that is a bitter vale, the vale of tears; how
comes it then to be a blessed way?) why, they make it a well, the rain also
fills their pooles (what is that? he tells you, ver. 11. that is, no good thing
is withheld from them. What of this? why?) ver. 7. they go from strength to
strength, every one of that appears before God in Sion. You that travel to
London, weary your selves happily, and grow faintish before you come to such an
Inn: there you bait, and get fresh strength; from thence you travail to your
lodging Inn; there you lie, by morning you are as fresh happily, as when you set
out first; at length riding from Inn to Inn, and from refreshment to
refreshment, you keep your strength, and so come to your journies end. You
travail Christians; toward Canaan, toward Sion; you fear fainting? Bait at
Christ's: Iodge at Christ: go from Inn to Inn, from Ordinance to Ordinance,
and you shall go from strength to strength: you shall renew your strength, you
shall run and not be weary, you shall walk and not faint. Isa. 40.31. at length
you shall come to your journeyes end, that is, appear before the Lord in Sion.

Seventhly, Christ is a profitable way. 7ly, Christ is profitable way.
The world stirs upon that now: Let one tell you never so much of a pleasant,
clean, provision'd, broad, highway; but say you, What is there to be gotten
in it?? why? this way answers these desires, the best, the greatest, surest
wealth is to be traded for in this way, Psalm. 119.14. I have rejoiced in the
way (mark what he calls it) of thy Commandments, as much as in all riches.
This is the way to the rich Pearl, more worth then all thou have, if thou
had ten thousand times as much, Mat. 13.44.

Eighthly, Christ is a peaceable way. If you trade, 8ly, Christ, a peaceable
way.
and get by your journey near so much, and though Robbert are afraid of losing
it all in the bringing home: be the way never so clean, so broad, so pleasant,
this damps all: but Jesus Christ is a secure way, Prove. 3.17. all her paths are
peace, this way is the living way, Heb. 10.20. This is the way of peace, Luke
1.79. In all this Christ is the accomplishment of that promise made to the
Wilderness, Isai. 35. Of a way, verse 8. No Lion shall be there, nor any
ravenous Beast go thereupon, verse 9.

Lastly, Christ is the way home.

And so I draw to a

CONCLUSION.
Our Savior tells us, Jo. 14.2, 3, 4, 6. Christ the WAY HOME
In my Fathers house are many Mansions; if it were not so I would have told
you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye
may be also. And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. I am the way, no
man comes to the Father but by me. And this brings the first and the last
together, in the accomplishment of that to us that God did to Israel, Who led
them forth by a right way, that they might go to a City for habitation,
Psalm. 107.7. And it is the less matter how foul the weather be to such as have
found a Christ, for they have found the way home. When Stephen was traveling
through a storm of stones, he knew how to house himself, he calls upon the
Lord Jesus to receive (that is, to take home) his Spirit to himself; end when
he had thus spoken, he falls asleep, Act. 7.59, 60. You use to say of a
Winter-journey, and stormy weather, it is tedious traveling, but say you, it is
homeward, where we may be bold and shall be welcome: and the wearier we are,
we shall sleep the more sweetly when we come at home, and get into our own
Beds; and in this case say you, Home is home be it never so homely. Art thou
then in Christ? thou shall be taken in out of the Rain, fetched home out of the
streets, from the brow-beatings of those that were mightier then thou. Thou
shall enter into peace, thou shall rest in thy Bed, Isai. 57.2. Thou that
walk in this right way, Thou art hasting homeward, not to an homely home,
but to an heavenly, to thy Fathers house, to Abraham's bosom, to the new
Heaven, the Celestial Canaan, to the Saints Rest, to Jerusalem which is above,
and is free, to the Paradise of God, to the Country of thy kindred, to thine
own people, and to the seat of thy Christ.

Therefore fear not poor penitent, though thou have been a Prodigal. Art thou
in Christ? thou art going homeward, to thy Fathers house, where thy Father will
come forth to meet thee, and thine Elder Brother (so far from grudging, that
he) will come along with him to greet thee; the Angels to welcome thee, will
become ministering spirits unto thee: then shall one go for the meat, another
for the music, a third for the Ring, and a fourth for the Robe, even all that
heaven can afford, mean while Jonathan thy friend, who is in Covenant with
thee, whose soul cleaves unto thee, will put his own Robe upon thee, and his
Garments even to his Girdle; and then shall heaven ring with an All things are
ready, the Spirit shall say, Come, and Christ shall say, Welcome, eat and
drink O friend; yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

Fear not poor Lazarus, whose Raiment is vile, even sores on thy body, and
rags on thy sores. Art thou in Christ? thou art going homeward, to Abraham's
bosom, to a new Heaven, where old things are done away, and all things become
new. Thy vile body shall be there changed, and made a glorious body like unto
Christ's Body, in an heavenly new fashion. Thou shall put off Mortality, and
put on immortality; put off corruption, and put on incorruption; put off
weakness, and put on strength; lay off the Cross, and put on thy Crown: Yea,
let me say more, the Garments that thou had of Gods own making, and which
were well enough to serve thy turn in the wilderness of this world; thou
shall then have outgrown them, and there put them off, and that which is in
part, shall be there done away, and that which is perfect shall come in its
room. Thou shall then know as thou art known, and love as thou art loved: thou
shall put off Hope, and Vision shall succeed it; and put off Faith, and put on
fruition.

Fear not poor Israelite, though thou have been an Underling in Egypt, an
Inhabitant of the Wilderness, who have wrought among the Bricks, and lain
among the Pots, and gone among the Thorns, and trod upon Serpents. Art thou in
Christ? thou and now going homeward, to the heavenly Canaan, the Rest of Gods
people, to the Jerusalem, that is ABOVE, and is TREE. Above Egypt its
Brick-kiln, and Fleshpots, Earth and all its allurements, and all their
embitterments. Above Pharaoh and his Hosts, Satan and his Instruments: above he
Wilderness windings and woundings of sin. And therefore thou shall be FREE
from fears, from falls, from sin, from sorrows, from the Death of the Body,
and from the Body of Death, and from all the evil that is in the World, and
from the world of Evil that is in the heart. The Gulf shall be fixed, and
thou shall be freed; and though these would pass over to thee, they shall not
be able. The Egyptians that followed thee, thou shall see them no more for
ever: They followed thee, but shall never find thee. There Is a Jordan betwixt
thee and them, which though it were dried up before thee, yet shall not be so
for them to pass after thee. Thine old Egypt is on the other side of the Sea,
and thine old Wilderness on the other side of the Flood. The Waters shall
return, and thine Enemies be cut off. Where the Serpent found thee, thou shall
leave Him, even in the Wilderness: and where thou leavest the Serpent, thou
shall leave the poison, and the sting, even Satan, and Sin, and Death
together. The first is a Murderer, the next is a Liar, the last is a Dog
(that will grumble and snarle at thee, but cannot hurt thee) and without are
Murderers and Liars, and Dogs; but within are true Israelites.

Fear not poor Convert, that are crucified with Christ, though a Prisoner
among men, and condemned of the World, where thy legs are broken (thy
supports taken away) the way that thou art in is life as well as Way: and the
sooner men break thy legs, the more have shall thou make to suppe with
Christ in Paradise.

Yea, thou art a stranger (and strangely dealt with) as in a strange Land: Art
thou but in Christ, thou art going homeward to thine own Country, and to the
house of thy friends, to the Spirits of thy dear deceased Relations that are
now made perfect. There is Eunice thy Mother, and Lois thy Grandmother, if thou
be a Timothy. Yea, Jesus himself will do the Right of a Kinsman unto, and
will own thee in the Gates of Heaven, and before the Elders of thy people.
Then shall thou that wast afraid to glean after the Reapers, possess the whole
joys of the Harvest; and thou that wast afraid to uncover his feet, shall lie
then in his bosom, and thou shall be ever with the Lord.

And now who is there among you, that are in Christ as the way to this Rest,
and have Christ in you as the hope of his Glory, can hear of this home without
desire to be dissolved, and to depart (if the Lord would let you) to this rest
in peace. And yet this is but a little of that that may be spoken; and all that
may be spoken, is but a little of that that shall be made good unto you when
you come at home. This is but a short Pisgaprospect of the promised Land, which
your own life keeps you out of possession of. These are but a few of the
clusters of Canaan, that are brought you for a taste by a poor Spy, lest any
of you should have evil thoughts of the good Land, and so take up on this side
Jordan; but who shall reveal unto you what is the fruit of the Vine in your
Fathers Kingdom.

This is but your Provision sent you to support you by the Way, but who can
Divine without Joseph's Cup, what a Land is that Goshen, whence these Provisions
come.

This is but the Rain that filles your Pooles in the Vale of Baca; but who can
tell you how it shall be with you, when you appear before the Lord in Sion?

This is but Mount Tabor, it is Mount Sion that is your dwelling place, and
there is the City of the living God, there are the innumerable companies of
Angels, the Church of the first born, and Jesus the Mediator. And if to think
of these things seriously* (while we are at home in the Body) make this home
an Heaven, sure it will be good for us to be where this Heaven shall be our
home.

This is the Inheritance of the Saints in light, the Inheritance incorruptible,
and that fades not away, but is reserved in the Heavens for them.

This is their Habitation made, but not with hands, and purchased, but not with
money. This is their Rest prepared by Christ's travailes, their life, purchased
by his Death; the joy of the Lord dearly paid for by that Man of sorrows,
their Glory bought by his shame; their true Riches gained through his poverty;
the Kingdom won for them by his subjection, the blessing obtained through
his being made as a Curse for them.

Oh! thanks be to God for his unspeakable GIFT.

This is the HOME whereunto Christ is the WAY, In and By whom, whilst the
Ransomed of the Lord come up from the Wilderness, they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

Wherefore you see dear Brethren, partakers of the heavenly Calling, that
there is a promise left us of entering into his Rest..

Let us therefore fear lest any of us should seem to come short, Heb. 4.1.
The Lord has this day shown you the good way, and has said unto you, Walk
in it, and you shall find Rest to your souls, Jer. 5.16.

But now if any of you shall answer (as they in the next verse) We will not
walk therein. Know of a surety, that every soul that goes Christlesse, goes
both Guidelesse and waylesse, and therefore shall never find this Heavenly
habitation.

I cannot say but Christlesse sinners have got as many Guidles as there are
SATYRS, and as many ways as there are windings in the Wilderness, and they
also make have to their own home; for Judas who hanged himself, is said to go
((...)) to his own place, Act. 1.25. But alas as is the difference of the
Ways, so of the Homes; the ways differ as Darkness and light, and the Homes
as Hell and Heaven.

He that is in Christ goes home to be comforted, but the Christlesse to be
tormented: he to his good things, but thou (O wretch!) from thy good things.
He dies to live, thou die to die. He descends as to his body that he may
ascend; thou ascendest as to thy spirit (which returns to God that gave it, to
give sentence on it) that thou may descend and go down into Hell for ever. He
may complain, Abroad the sword bereaveth; but thou shall lament, At home there
is as death (he cannot say so) As death I say, but worse thou death: Where thou
shall sue for life (like Haman) but it shall be denied thee; and then thou
shall seek for Death but Death shall fly from thee. Thou shall neither live
nor die, but live to die, and that to eternity. This is thine End, but behold
it is endless.

Therefore thou shall cry, yea sadly shall thou cry an end is come, but O that
there were an end. I dye, I perish; But O that I could perish; If thou will not
save me, Lord kill me, but he will do neither, O let the Mountains fall on me,
and let the hills cover me from thy presence, and from the face of the Lamb;
and this is the only Petition that shall be granted thee, but in a sad sense,
for Mountains of wrath shall fall upon thee, and everlasting hills of Gods
displeasure shall hide thee (I will warrant thee) from the face of his pity,
and from the presence of his glory. Then shall call to Abraham for a drop, but
receive a River, not of water to cool, but of brimstone to bridle thy tormented
tongue; then shall thou be thirsty and hardly bestead, and shall curse thy King
and thy God, and look upward. Ah! sad home, and homely entertainment; Oh! sad
welcome? O! take it for a warning, thou wretch, thy Father the Devil is making
a scourg for thee of his own chain, and thou'st find it so when he gets thee
in, though he flatter thee home: thy fellow servants that are in the same
Condemnation with thee, are prepared to smite thee; yea, when thou come home,
then shall thine own Conscience speak home; and because thou have been a
self-Murtherer, therefore shall thou ever be a self-tormentor: Ah Satan! shall
thou say, Is this thy Fatherhood to thy Children; is this the best hire thou
give thy servants, is this thy kindness to thy friend? Ah sirs! are you the
men that I called good fellows, was I thus mistaken in you? am I thus rewarded
by you: Ah! how I spent my Estate, my Time, my Soul upon you; how I lost the
company of Saints to gain yours, the favor of God to gain yours; how I
displeased my Conscience to please your corruptions. And do you thus requite my
poor soul: Oh cruel people and unkind! Then shall thou cry to thy Conscience,
ah, why did not thou speak and warn me, that I might not have come into this
place of torment; but thy conscience shall reply, Ah wretch! Why did not thou
hear? how often did I call but thou gave me no answer, but slightedst all my
Counsel, and would none of my reproof: Thou shall accuse thy Conscience, and
thy Conscience shall accuse thee: Thou shall accuse thy Companions, and they
thee, thou shall accuse the serpent, and the serpent shall accuse thee. Then
shall thou look on the one hand, and refuge fails thee, and on the other, and
there is none cares for thy soul: Thou shall look to thy Merchants with whom
thou have labored from thy youth, but they wander to their Quarters, None of
them save thee. Thou shall look to thy leaning-stocks, but thine hope shall be
cut off, and thy trust shall be as a spiders web, then shall thy sinking soul
cry out to thy shrinking supports, will you also go away? what my riches? and
what my righteousnesses? and what the desire of mine eyes, and the delight of
mine heart! I have treasured you up against the latter days, and will you now
leave my soul in Hell, and suffer one that loved you so dearly to see
corruption? Yet this shall thou have from them because thou trustedst in them;
and it shall be answered concerning thee, Lo this is the man that made not God
his strength, this is the soul that leaned not upon the Beloved.

Wherefore let me earnestly exhort you seriously to ask your souls this one
Question, which is the home that I am hasting to? Hell or Heaven, for there is
not a third beside the grave; and the grave is but thy long home, but these are
the everlasting homes: if thou reply, but how, shall I know? it is soon
answered; if Christ be thy Way, Heaven is thy Home, and if any man be in Christ
he is a new Creature; but, and if the Wilderness be thy Way, the place of
Howling is thy Home; therefore go to now, lament and Howl for the miseries that
shall come upon thee before the, Evil days come wherein thou shall say I have
no pleasure in them.

Other Uses might be made of this point. viz. If there be no salvation for lost
sinners but only by leaning upon the Lord Jesus,

How may this inform us of inavailableness of all their supports, of the folly
of leaning on them.

How may this confute the Popish recumbency on the merits of our own Works, our
leaning to the Angels, to the Virgin Mother of our Lord, or any other of the
Saints; and all reliance on the light of our own Wisdoms, or might of our own
wills; as also any expectancy of salvation in any other Religion that teaches
not Christ to be the only or the all sufficient Savior of lost sinners.

And what terror may this speak to such daring Wretches, as make their sins
their Saviors, and their lusts their leaning-stocks, trusting (as the Lord
complains) in their iniquities?

And on the other hand, how great Encouragement to such as only love and lean
upon Jesus Christ to a fixednesse of heart whilst you trust in the Lord.

And lastly, how might we hence put you upon the trial, what is indeed your
souls leaning-stock? Is it Christ or another that we follow hard after, that
we rejoice most in, that set our love most upon, that we leave others for,
that we cleave, most unto; (for these I take to be true trials (what is it, is
it that we have most recumbency on) but each of these or something Equivalent
has already lain before us in this discourse; and therefore I shall say no
more, but

Consider what has been spoken, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.

