To the High Court of Parliament, of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.
The Humble petition of Katherine Stone, Widow, and Henry Stone, her Son.
Shows,
THat Sir Henry Ferrers, 25. May 1630. mortgaged the Manor of Skellingthorp in
the County of Lincoln to the Petitioners deceased Father John Stone, and his
heirs for 3000 l. and after in 1634. 1900l. more released his power of
Redemption. And the said John Stone dying 1642. the Petitioner Katharine is
entitled to part as a Jointure, and the Petitioner Henry the rest, as heir.

That the Petitioners respective interest past the Examination; and after great
charges and trouble to the Petitioners had allowance both in the Country by
the Committee of Parliament for Sequestrations; and again upon the
re-examination by the Comittee for sequestrations sitting in Haberdashers Hall*
London.

That the Petitioners rested themselves secure of their Estates, being legally
good and allowed by the said Committees. But the said Sir Henry Ferrers being
put into the Bill of Sale as a Delinquent, your Petitioners knew nothing
thereof, and conceiving themselves quiet and secure, by reason of their title,
and the said allowances, did not put in any claim, but as soon as they
understood of any question of their said estate, and before any contract for
sale, claim was lodged in the survey, and application made to the Committee of
Obstructions, but the time being elapsed, the said Committee could not relieve
your Petitioners, as they affirmed.

Since which Nathanael Snape and Samuel Foxley, who knew your Petitioners
undoubted right, and watched for an Advantage, have applied themselves to buy
the said Lands, whereupon your Petitioners have made several Addresses for
Relief to the late Parliament, and to his Highness the Lord Protector, before
any contract in the premises, and upon several references your Petitioners
case being thereupon stated, to be in truth as herein set forth, at last was
referred by his Higness to His Council, but other weightier affairs entervened,
so that your Petitioners have not yet obtained a hearing: and matter of time
and surprise, being the only means and hopes of advantage to their Adversaries
to strip your Petitioners of their estate.

Your Petitioners are enforced humbly to beseech this Honorable House to take
the sufferings and danger of a distressed Widow and Orphan into your pious and
tender considration (the Petitioners being otherwise likely to be ruined and
distroyed without any fault or offense before their cause can be judged) And
that in some such speedy way, as your other great affairs may permit, and the
exigency of the cause in truth requires,

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
The Answer of Nathanael Snape, and Samuel Foxley, to this Petition, which is
false and scandalous in diverse particulars, as follows.
1. THat Release was not absolute but only in Trust for performance of Articles
which Stone did not perform, and note that Stone was never possessed of that
Release to this day, but it was left in the hands of Sir Henry Ferrer's
Trustees where is still remains. Besides at the time of the Release made the
Lands was more than double the value of the whole money lent, and therefore
impossible the Release should be intended to be absolute.

2. Note Stone (to deceive the Commonwealth and produce the absolute deed by
which the Land was conveyed to Stones Trustees, but not the deed of defeazance,
by which the deed was to be void upon payment of the 3000 l. and so) by that
devise Stone got his Claim allowed at the Comittee of Lincoln and Haberdashers
Hall.

3. The Purchasers knew nothing of Stones pretended undoubted Right, nor
watched for any advantage; for the land lay at least three quarters of year
(after it was surveyed) with the Trustees at Drury house before any body came
to buy it, and Stone might have brought it in all that time if he would;
therefore that is false and scandalous.

4. The Purchasors had contracted for the Lands long before Stone made any
address to the Parliament, or his Highness: therefore that allegation in this
Petition is false also.

And Note that the Commissioners for obstructions have not only judged the
cause against the Petitioners twice upon full hearing of him and his many
Council; but also afterward his petition in Parliament upon hearing of him and
his Council was dismissed; and his Highness upon Stones Petition, having stayed
the sale for two months, afterward ordered that there should be no longer
stay in the sale or possession by color of his Highness order.

And note that Stone and his Father have (as they are credibly informed by Sir
Henry Ferrers and others) received the profits of the said lands above ten
years, the lands being surveyed at near 600 l. p. an. which comes to about
8000l. having ploughd up Meadow and Pastures, Stones Father has received
interest money upon the Mortgage 1000l. He has cut down woods, value 2000l. And
has raised other great sums out of the lands, so that he has had his
principal and interest with a great overplus, and therefore need not complain.

Note also the Manner how the Petitioners Katharine and Henry Stone gat the
possession of the premises from Sir Henry Ferrers during his absence in the
time of Delinquency, which was not by legal way of trial, verdict or
Judgment, but by the order of the said Committee of Lincoln only (being
deceived by Stones not producing the said deed of defezance as aforesaid) which
Committee also had then no power to allow Titles or give possessions of
Delinquents Estates, without order from the Commissioners of Sequestrations at
Westminster or Haberdasher's Hall.


