Ten Modest QUERIES, HUMBLY OFFERED To the most serious Consideration of the
Right Reverend Father in God, THOMAS Lord Bishop of Saint David's; AND That they
may be Communicated to the rest of the Clergy, at his Primary Visitation now
held for that Diocese.
By a True and Sincere Member of the Church of England, and a well-wisher to
his Lordship in all things that are good and honest.
QUERY I.

If so, Whether a Bishop or inferior Clergyman, can without incurring the
Guilt of Perjury, disobey his Metropolitan in licitis and honestis.

QUERY II.

QUERY III.

QUERY IV.

If so, whether the 20 Prelates that are eminent for their Piety and Learning;
Or the four which are eminent for neither be guilty of the present Schism,
that is unhappily set on foot by he Enemies of our Church.

QUERY V.

If so, whether our Swearing to observe, the 39 Articles does not oblige every
Clergyman to stick steadfast, and firm to the Faith therein contained; and not
to bring our Religion, which is so Primitive and Apostolical into scorn and
contempt, through any unjust Compliance for Temporal advantage?

QUERY VI.

QUERY VII. Paul gave to his Son Timothy, does not stand good still, That a
Bishop must be sober, of good Behavior, given to Hospitality, apt to Teach,
not given to Wine, no Striker, not Covetous?

QUERY VIII. into it by fair promises and good words to Act contrary to their
Inclinations, are to be looked on at this time, as friends to the Church of
England? Or if they should at another time, when it stands more for their
Interest oblige the same Clergy to read Mass in their respective Churches,
whether the Oaths then of Canonical obedience may oblige such to obey their
Diocesan?

QUERY IX. Jesuit himself would be ashamed to own, being the greatest hypocrisy
that could be offered both to God and Man?

QUERY X. Tenet of the Heathen Emperor (Timeri Mallem quam Amari) be not more
becomeing a primative Persecutor than a Christian Prelate; whose best way to
make his Lawn sit easy is to Merit the love of all good and virtuous Men, and
not to value the hatred of the vicious and profane? For as benefits and
rewards will oblige the one to Reverence and admire his Person; so will
Punishments, and the fear of Justice deterr others from casting any dirt, or
aspersion on him in the discharge of his sacred function.

FINIS.

