THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Importing diverse passages of high and dangerous
consequence.

Written by one Master Tempest a grand Recusant, to his brother Master John
Tempest, likewise a Papist and an Officer in the Kings Army.

Which Letter was intercepted at Manchester, and sent to a Member of the House
of Commons to be made known to the House, and was accordingly read at the
Committee for the safety of the Kingdom.

WITH DIVERSE REMARKABLE passages from Shrewsbury and Coventry concerning the
King, with the proceedings of his Army at this present.

London, Printed for H. Tompson, 1642.

THE COPY OF A LETTER OF Dangerous Consequence: Written by one Master Tempest
a great Recusant, to his brother an officer in the Kings Army.
Brother John,
I Can hear no particulars of your being (by my brother Thomas Medcafes
relations) here in these parts, whom though I have not yet seen, this night
(being to lodge here with us) to interrogate him more fully, only he reports
you are all well, but was not in Prince Rupert his last exploit. I was last
week but one near Chester, in hopes to have found you with His Majesty, but
wholly lost that labor, but for some simple doings, I saw in my return at the
siege of Manchester, a weak Town, a strong Siege of 7* of 8000. Foot, and 6.
or 700. Horse, with Canon enough to no purpose, and the poorest come off that
ever was heard of. Our great affairs at York, not greatly better, young Hotham,
and Sir Edward Rodes plundering up and down without correction. Our
Archbishop, Sir Dovoyne, Sir Andrew Young, Sir Ralph Hansbye, and others more
sufferers I doubt by this, and with the nill doing of our greatest, the base
hearts of Yorkshire lost to the King, but such heroicke ones, as can take no
new impression. All ours are well, and desire extremely to hear of you in more
and particular relations then yet we have, which for Gods sake choose some
oportunities to do, and incite others we would hear of to do the like,
especially Robin Grimshawe, and Stephen, to whom commend me, as I daily beseech
heavens best aid to defend and preserve you body and soul.

Our Priests at Lancaster are all at liberty; Catholic Commanders admitted,
and all well enough that way, God Almighty (as I hope he will the better)
prosper the design.

The brave General Revyne late out of Sweden now come to the King through us
will make a brave conjunction with the bravest Prince Rupert, to advance his
Majesty's just designs, and thus I fill up room with no news to move you
fill the lines with some. Write wherein I may help you and fear no failing; My
brother Tempest is for London this Term, if the great designs may lead you
thither, make best use of the time, to serve the aftertime, and when good
booty befalls you, deposite wisely, or direct us how to befriend you. God
almighty preserve you however.

Your most aeffctionat brother, Geo. Tempest.
Crickle this 10. of Oct. 1642.
REMARKABLE PASSAGES FROM SHREWSBVRY: Concerning the proceedings of his
Majesty's Army at this present.
SIR,
MY Respect unto you. I give you many thanks for your good Remembrance of me;
I could not write to you an Answer by the same Carryer, because they did come
of the latest unto me, and I was mightily employed about the Kings business,
I being an officer of the Mayors. The King did go from hence on wednesday last
to Bridg-north, and some of his foot souldyers did march yesterday to
Sturbridge in Worcester shire. The King is about 16000 strong of foot, besides
Horse, and every day more and more come to him, by reason (as we are informed
about us) the Parliaments forces do so plunder as they go. And the King has
Commanded that noe plundring shall be at all, for he did cause Sir Robert
Heath, who is now made Lord Chief Justice of England, to sit with a Commission
of Oyer and Terminer in our Town where six of the Kings soldiers were cast,
for plundering and stealing.

The Mint is come to our Town, and one Master Bushel does coin every day,
for abundance of plate is sent in to the King from several Counties about us,
and a great deal of Plate comes daily out of Wales and Cornwall to be coined
here. Also the Press for Printing is come to this Town, and this day they are
setting of it up in some vacant rooms in my house.

Sir Richard Newport is made a Lord, he has given the King 10000. pounds. The
King would have Knighted the Mayor of our Town, but he refused it.

The last Sunday the King took a Protestation and the Sacrament upon it in S.
Mary's Church in our Town, to defend the true Protestant Religion, established
by Queen Elizabeth, and his Royal Father.

We hear His Majesty on Tuesday last with his Army were at Brumigham: Prince
Robert demanding 2000. pound, or he would plunder the town; but most of the
Inhabitants were (before) fled to Coventry. Upon Thursday he marched to
Meriden, three miles off Coventry, and intends (as we are informed by diverse
reports) to march toward Banbury, and so to Oxford, for his resolution it is
thought is to march to London, or to Windsor, or thereabouts. God of his mercy
turn all to the good and peace of this Kingdom, and deliver us from the misery
of Civil War. Thus with my love to all our friends, I rest,

Yours to his power, Basil VVaring.
Shrewsbury Oct. 18. 1642.
FINIS.

