BARNSTABLE Agreed to be surrendered to Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX:

With all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, and upon what terms:

With a Copy of seven Articles (of the chief of those) for surrendering of
EXETER;

And the manner of the Armies march toward OXFORD.

These being true Copies of Letters examined, and Printed according to Order of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke at Grays-Inne-Gate, 16. April 1646.

Honored Sir;
ON Friday the 10th of this instant April, the General Himself, with one or
two more of the Generals Officers, with Master Rushworth (his Excellencies
Secretary) went from Tiverton to Barnstable, to send in a summons to Sir Allus
Ashley the Governor, for the delivering up of the Castle, and Fort, and are to
return to Call^mb-Iohn to morrow, being the 12th instant, that so they may be
on Monday at Exeter, to see the performance of the Articles, and after that we
have settled the City, we shall march toward Oxford, which I here will be
about Wednesday next (as is intended) or Thursday at furthest, but the most
part of the foot are this day on their march for Oxford, Mount Raedford, with
Hunkses Fort in Saint Thomas parish was delivered up to the General according
to agreement, I have here sent you the Copy of the seven first Articles; and by
the next Messenger, I will send you a perfect Copy,

From Teverton April 11. 1646. Your servant, T.T.

Articles of Agreement concluded upon by Thomas Hammond Lieutenant General of
the Ordnance, Colo. Sir Flardresse Waller. Col. Edward Harley, Col. Lambert
Commissary General Stan, and Major Watson Scout Master General, Commissioners
on the behalf of the Right Honorable His Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax
General of the Parliaments forces on the one party, And Sir Henry Berkley, Sir
George Parry, Col. Ashburnham, Col. Godolphin, Cap. Fitz Gerate, Mr. John Were,
Mr. Robert Walker, and Mr. Thomas Knot, Commissioners on the behalf of Sir
John Berkley Knight, Governor of the City of Exeter on the other party,
concerning the Rendition of the said City, and Garrison.
1. THat that the City and Garrison of EXETER together with the Castle, and all
the Forts, and Mounts, places of defense, of or belonging to the same with all
Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, Provisions, and furniture of War, belonging
to the Garrison (excepting, what shall be excepted in the ensuing Articles)
shall be delivered unto Sir Thomas Fairfax General of the Parliaments forces,
or to any whom he shall appoint to receive them for the use of the Parliament,
on the 13. of April 1646.

2. That if any Officer or Soldier, or any person (included in these Articles)
wrong, or plunder, in person or goods (in their march away, or before) any
Citizen, or Country man, or any persons whatsoever, shall (as far as he is able)
give satisfaction to the persons so injured at the judgment of his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax.

3. That if any Officer, Soldier, or any person [included in these Articles]
shall after the date of this Treaty, wilfully break, deface, spoil or imbes^e
any Arms or other Provisions of War whatsoever by the precedent Articles to
be surrendered as aforesaid, shall loose the benefit of the ensuing Articles.

4. That the Princes, and Governesse, with his househould, shall have full
Liberty to pass with their plate, monyes and goods within 20. days after the
conclusion of this Treaty (when they shall desire) to any place within the
Counties of England or Dominion of Wales, at the Election of the Governesse,
and there to remain until his Majesty's pleasure be further known, touching
her settling, and the Governesse shall have liberty to send to the King to know
his pleasure herein, and accordingly to dispose of her highness within the
aforesaid limitation of places, and that fit and convenient Carriages be
provided for their passage at reasonable rates.

5. That the Cathedral Church, nor any other Church within the City shall be
defaced, or any thing belonging thereunto spoiled or taken away, by any
Soldier or person of either side whatsoever.

6. That the Governor, together with all Lords Clergy men, Gentlemen,
Chaplains, Officers* Troopers, and Common Soldiers (that will) shall march
out of the City, with their Horses, full Arms bag, and baggage and their
goods, Colors flying, Drums beating, Matches lighted, with sufficient
Convoyes, to Oxford, Pendennis, or the mount in Cornwall, at their several
Elections, and in case those Garrisons shall refuse to receive the Common
Soldiers, they shall deliver up their Arms to the Convoy, and have Passes to
return to their several homes; Provided that all the Troopers, and Common
Soldiers, which march not into the Garrisons aforesaid, shall have liberty
from both parties to go to their own homes, and also all those that shall so
do shall march away without their Arms, enjoying their bag and baggage.

7. That all those that shall march into the Garrisons aforesaid, shall have
free quarter in their march, and shall not be obliged to march above 10. miles
a day, and that such other Soldiers as are inhabitants in the City shall have
liberty to stay, etc.

SIR,
ON friday night the Generals Excellency came before Barnstable, where he
spent not much time before he treated about the surrender thereof, which held
dispute till Sunday, and then the General being resolved not to loose time,
sent in a summons to Sir Allen Apsley the Governor, with a Copy of the
Articles whereupon Exeter was surrendered, requiring the speedy rendition of
Barnstable on the same terms, or else to let them know that he would admit no
more delays, but forthwith fall on, which he was resolved to do, if the
Governor had not sent an Answer of satisfaction. But there was an agreement
made that night, The Articles are the same that Exeter was, only somethings (as
of the Cathedral, and concerning the Princes; and the rest not useful in
that) were omitted, other alterations not much. As Exeter surenders this day
(for the entry into which place our men are now drawing up) so Barnstable
surrenders to morrow, they are to deliver up the Town and Castle with all
therein according as is expressed in the aforesaid Articles, and to remain in
the fort only, and after eight days, they are to surrender the fort also, and
for performance of these articles, they are to give hostages immediately, any
two, whomsoever the Generals Excellency shall make choice of the Governor,
and Deputy Governor only excepted, and they are to have liberty to lend to
Oxford, to know His Majesty's pleasure, and have an answer if it may be within
the eight days, for they are to remain there no longer in the Fort, and for
those who are to march away when they do go, I believe they will not much
exceed one hundred, I can assure you that their hearts are very low, though
they have not hearts to see the hand that makes them so; The General is
returning back to take possession of Exeter full of laborious action, little
rest day nor night; wasting his very spirits to hasten the work, that the
Kingdom may be settled, depriving himself even of necessary refreshments,
that so no opportunity may be lost, I presume that by that time these come to
your hands, that the Van of our Army will be a good way in Dorsetshire, The
General intends himself to hasten after with the Army, By the next I suppose
that I shall be able to give you a List of the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition
in Exeter, till when I rest, and ever remain,

Tiverton 13. of April 1646. Your humble Servant, N. T.

FJNJS.

