THE TESTIMONY OF Our Reverend BRETHREN, Ministers of the Province Of LONDON.
To the Truth of JESUS CHRIST, And our Solemn League and Covenant, etc.
ATTESTED By other MINISTERS of CHRIST in the County of Northampton.

John 8.17. It is also written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is
true.

may.11th. LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley.
1648.

The Testimony of our Reverend Brethren, Ministers of the Province of London,
to the Truth of Jesus Christ, etc Attested by other Ministers of Christ in the
County of NORTHAMPTON.
IT is the Word of God Deuteronomy. 19 15.
alleged, and averred by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ Mat. 18.16.
That in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established;
We therefore (whose names are hereunto subscribed) having seen a Book
(entitled, A Testimony to be truth of Jesus Christ) subscribed by many of our
Reverend Brethren within the Province of London, and considering that Jesus
Christ was borne, and came into the world that he might bear witness to the
truth, John 18.27
and that not only the Apostles in their times, Act. 1.8
but all the Ministers of Christ in the several Ages and successions of the
Churches, are called Witnesses, Rev. 11.3.7.
have thought it our duty, to Artest their Testimony, for as much as the
grounds and motives of that their undertaking (as we conceive) were not
Provincial only, but of a N^tionall, if not an Universal influence. For ought
not Gods glory, and the presence of his grace, the government of Jesus Christ,
and all his standing Ordinances, the authority of Scripture, and power of
godliness to be dear and precious unto all? Are not all the Ministers of
Jesus Christ in every Congregation and County of this Kingdom, set for the
defense of the Gospel? Philip. 1.17.
and bound to mark them which cause divisions, and dissentions contrary to the
doctrine which they have learned, and to avoid them? Romans 16.17.
Are they not charged to Preach the Word, to be instant in season, out of sea
on, to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering, and doctrine; because
the time is come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but (after their
own lusts) will heap unto themselves Teachers, having itching ears, and do
turn away their ears from the truth, and are turned unto fables? 2 Timothy 4.1,
2, 3, 4.
Are not all the Elders of the Church (as well as those of Ephesus) Act. 20.17.
ver. 28 29, 30.
to take heed unto themselves, and to all the flock over whom the Holy Ghost
has made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God; which he has purchased
with his own blood? Especially when they see, that grievous Wolves are entered
in among them, not sparing the flock, and that of their own selves, men do
arise speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them? For though
this Kingdom is not yet formed into Provinces throughout, as London is, yet
are we set in the Church, 1 Cor. 12 28.
and so in the body, Heb. 13.3.
and bound to all endeavors for preventing Schism, 1 Cor. 12 25.
and have upon us the care, not only of our own particular Congregations, but
in some sort likewise, of all the Churches; 2 Cor. 11 28.
And though we cannot but acknowledge, that we have been much provoked, and put
on to what we do, by our Reverend Bretherens zeal, 2 Cor. 9.2
yet are we many other ways engaged and obliged to it; for can our solemn
League and Covenant so lately sworn, and so successefully engaged in by both
the Kingdoms, be so soon laid aside, forgotten, and thought invalid, and out
of date? Is the unquestioned Doctrine of the Church of England contained in the
Creeds, and nine and thirty Articles (wherein the said Errors are adjudged and
discovered) of no authority? Have not our Reverend Brethren, now fitting at
Westminster, by authority of Parliament, in that learned, pious, orthodox,
unparalled Confession of Faith, (presented by them unto the Parliament, and
since published) spoken our very thoughts, and in that, and their Advice
concerning Church Government, and Ordination of Ministers, made an ample,
seasonable, and full supply of those things wherein before this Church and
Kingdom were defective. Wherefore we do not think our Bretherens Testimony,
or this our Attestation of it, to be needless or unseasonable, but a necessary
and proper confession and profession of our former manifold Obligations and
Engagements. We therefore that have hereunto subscribed our names, for the
clearing and acquitting of our selves, the encouraging of our Brethren, who
have gone before us in the work, the supporting of the weak, settling of the
wavering, and reclayming of the wandering; Do assert, and sign this our
Attestation, not doubting but by the blessing of God upon our innocence and
sincerity therein, it may do good: for howsoever Errors are not here
discussed and disproved by way of Argument, yet they are noted, and called
Errors by proper Judges, and of unsuspected integrity and interests: that, as
many have been seduced and led away by the sole authority and practice of some
they valued, so they may be reduced by the concurrent judgment, testimony, and
authority of many others; yet (with our Reverend Brethren) we do not think
all Errors equally destructive and pernicious, but, on some we have compassion
making a difference; others we would save with fear, pulling them out of the
fire, Jude 22 23.
and instruct all with meekness, who oppose themselves; if God peradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
only we are careful and solicitous, that our tenderness and mildness
toward the truly weak, and really conscientious, and scrupulous, encourage
not the wilful and engaged, and expose not our serious and affectionate
endeavors unto contempt and scorn, and therefore would be glad to borrow and
besprinkle this our Attestation, with so much of our Reverend Bretherens
animosity and zeal, as may make our gentle Physic work. Paul does compare
himself, and others of his Fellow Laborers in the work of God, to Nurses, 1
These. 2.7.
and was as tender, compassionate, and fellow-feeling as any other; Who is
weak (says he) and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor.
11 29.
yet when truth staggered, Gal. 2.5 ver. 11. ver. 14.
and men of place and worth began to be engaged in unwarrantable
condescentions, and complyances, his meekness vanishes, and the only jewel
he adornes himself with, is plain dealing, not only withstanding the great
Apostle of the Circumcision to his face, but recording that Encounter, and
Contest to all succeeding Generations; and when he finds an Elymas
withstanding him, and seeking to subvert his Hearers, Act. 10 8 ver. 9, 10.
Joh. 1.^9.
he is impatient, and dips his Pen in Vinegar. Our Savior was the Lamb of
God, before his shearers dumb, Act 8.32
anointed to preach the Gospel to the poor; Luk 4.28
and thought a friend to Publicans and sinners, Mar. 11.19.
yet when he meets with Scribes and Pharisees, disdainful, proud, dissembling,
hypocritical deceivers, and seducers of the people, he is a Lion, Rev. 5.5
and can Mat. 23.13 ver. 33.
thunder woes, and talk of Hell, and of Damnation to them. The Lord in mercy
grant, we may in both endeavor imitation, and being sent forth as Sheep in
the midst of Wolves, we may mingle wisdom with simplicity, Mat. 1^.16.
and so affect the meekness and gentleness of Christ in some cases, 2 Cor. 10
1.
as not to forget his resolution and zeal in other, John 2.15, 16, 17.
wherein as we are assured to approve our selves to him (which is our comfort
and encouragement in what we do) so we hope we shall, and desire we may, to
all who love him in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24.
which is the aim, design, and expectation of

Your Friends, and Servants in the Gospel. John Winston, Pastor of Cannons
Ashby Thomas Whitfield, Minister of Bugbrooke. William Spencer, Minister of
Scaldwel Benjamin Tomkins, Minister of Christ in Harpole. Andrew Perne,
Minister of Wilby Richard Truman, Minister of Brompton Thomas Martin, Minister
of Houghton parva Thomas Ball, Pastor of Alhallows in Northampton Richard
Gifford, Pastor of the Church in Gayton Robert Shilborne, Minister of Grendon
John Bullyvant, Minister of Abbingdon Francis Markham, Minister of Greaton
Francis Atterbury, Minister of Milton John Palmer, Pastor of Ecton Will.
Barlee, Pastor of Brockhall Tho. Buroughs, Minister of Gods Word at
Cottesbrooke Lionel Goodrick, Minister of Overston William Ponder, Minister of
Corten-hall Will. Holmes, Minister of Gods Word at Guilsborough William Gilpin,
Minister of Hardingston Thomas Harris, Minister of Brackley John Baynard,
Minister of Burton Latimer John Bazeley, Minister of Broughton Thomas Templer,
Minister of Weston cum Sutton Thomas Balgaye, Minister of Stoake Albany Robert
Hocknell, Minister of Barton Segrave Moses Hodges, Minister of Isham John
Howes, Minister of Earls Barton Henry VVilles, Minister of Loddington
Frederick Schloer, Minister of Old Edmund Morgan, Minister of Upton Richard
Owsley, Minister of Cottingham William Spadling, Minister of Rothwell Samuel
Aynsworth, Minister of Kelmarsh Will. Cley, Minister of Sywell John Cave,
Minister of Middleton Cheney Robert Allen, Preacher at Norton by Daventry
William Bird, Minister of Morton Pinckney John Warren, Minister of Flower
Vincent Cupper, Minister of Paulisperry Edmund Spinkes, Pastor of Caster Thomas
Andrews, Minister of Wellingborow John Ventris, Minister of Pisford William
Short-grave, Minister of Harlston Jasper Symonds, Minister of of the Gospel
William Pain, Minister of Grafton Regis William Clewer, Minister of Ashton
William Heart, Minister of Dallington Theophilus Heart, Pastor of the Church at
Wapenham Joshua Hall, Minister of great Billing William Tabor, Minister of
Stooke-Bruren. Timothy Perkins, Minister of Evenly John Air, Minister of
Marston Laurence Richard Fisher, Minister of Sulgrave Josias Bunn, Minister at
Turnweston John Price, Preacher of the Word at Towcester Ralph Richards,
Minister of Helmden William Wilding, Minister of Plumpton Richard Hook,
Minister of Rands Samuel Glover, Minister of East Findon Henry Pheasant,
Minister of Higham Ferrers Arch. Symmers William Hensman, Minister of
I^tlingbrough Henry Levit, Minister of Odell in Bedfordshire Simon King,
Minister of Creek Samuel Marshall, Minister de Dodford Thomas Dawkes, Minister
of Badby cum Newnham Anthony Scatter-good, Minister of Gods Word at Winwicke
John Lion, Minister of Gods Word at Barnwell


FINIS.

