Die Mercurii 26. Octobris.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, That Sir Francis Knollis do
return thanks from this House to Doctor Temple for the great pains he took in
the Sermon he preached at the entreaty of the said House, at St. Margarets in
the City of Westminster, this present day of public humiliation; and that he
be desired to print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that no man shall presume to
print it, but he who shall be authorized under the said Doctor Temple's hand
writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint SAMUEL GELLIBRAND to print my Sermon.

THO. TEMPLE.

CHRIST'S GOVERNMENT In and over his PEOPLE.

Delivered in A SERMON Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their late
public and solemn Fast, October. 26. 1642.

BY Thomas Temple D. D. and Minister of the Church of Battersea in Surrey.

Published by Order of that House.

PSALM. 97.1. The Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice: let the multitude of the
Isles be glad thereof.

LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1642.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
BEing called to this service by your command, I could not think of a fitter
subject, and more seasonable to the times and your places then this, touching
the Kingdom of Christ: first, to set before you the chief employment God calls
you to, and the duty lies upon you in it, that is, to study all the ways by
which Jesus Christ may be best settled in his throne, and his government most
spread throughout these parts of the world, where your work lies. Secondly, to
hold out unto you the great encouragement to so great a work, in which you are
sure to meet with so great oppositions; to let you know, God himself will carry
it on, and Christ's government shall be established, notwithstanding the rage of
people, and the plots of Princes against the Lord and his Anointed. If you go
on in this cause with upright hearts, there is no reason your spirits should
faint, or your hands slacken in fear of the issue: you are on a rising side,
and in a work that will improve it self. And indeed you have need of
encouragement, even from heaven, to go on in the work of reformation of the
Chuch, and of establishing Christ's government amongst us, where the endeavors
of many are so mighty to oppose it, and their tongues so malignant to disgrace
it. But while your hearts are faithful with God, resolve to go on with Gods
work, knowing you must pass through evil report as well as good report. 2.
Cor. 6.8.
They who are called to great works, must be willing to sacrifice all, estate,
credit, life, in the cause of God: so we keep faith and peace with God, and do
not shipwreck a good conscience, it matters not much what else we lose. If
Christ carry you through the work here, he is all-sufficient to reward you
hereafter. The Lord make all great mountains that lie in your way, Iac. 4.7.
to the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ, as plains before you: Rev. 2.2.
and in the end, reward your works, and your labor, and your patience; So
prays,

From my Study in Battersea, Nov. 6. 1642. The unworthiest of the servants of
Christ in the work of the Lord, THOMAS TEMPLE.

A SERMON Preached before The Honorable House of COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, At the public Fast, October. 26. 1642.
PSALM. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.


THis second psalm is an exact description of the Kingdom of Christ, as it
was prophesied of by David, who was himself a type and figure of Christ in his
Kingdom, and the Father of him according to the flesh: which, as it appears
out of the frame of the whole psalm, so we find this Psalm clearly expounded
of Christ and his Kingdom by the Apostles in the new Testament. First, where
mention is made of the Heathens rage, and the Kings of the earth bandying
against the Lord and his Anointed, v. 1.2. this is by the whole College of
Apostles and Disciples, expounded of Christ, Act. 4.25.27. Secondly, where it
is said, thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, v. 7. this is also
plainly expounded of Christ, not of his birth, as it seems to be meant upon
the first view, but of his resurrection from the grave, which is as it were a
new begetting, Act. 13.33. A fit subject of our meditations, as in all other,
so especially in these times, Christ, as he stands to us in this relation of a
King. we are all willing to look upon Christ, as he stands in the relation of
a Priest, offering himself in sacrifice for our sins, so desiring him as a
Savior to save our souls: we less delight to eye him as a Prophet revealing
Gods will to us, little careing to know him: but we commonly hate to think
upon him as a King, as not easily subjecting our selves to be governed by him.
I shall therefore crave your attention, while I unfold to you this piece of
Scripture.

The Psalm consists of three main parts: First it sets forth the mad and
furious counsels and attempts of wicked people against Christ, Act 5.39.
affectasse ferunt regnum celeste gigantes.
who fear not to be (...), like the old Giants, fighters against God himself:
their rage and malice is bent even against the God that made and redeemed them:
why do the Heathen rage, Ver. 1.2.
and the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the earth set themselves,
and the Rulers take council together against the Lord and against his
Aancynted. Secondly, it sets forth Gods establishment of Christ in his Kingdom;
notwithstanding all the attempts of wicked men against him, yet nothing shall
overthrow his Kingdom, but on the other side, be shall break his enemies in
pieces: yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. 3. ver. 6.
It conteynes an exhortation, because we cannot overthrow Christ's Kingdom,
therefore to entertain it in our hearts, to serve him and fear him, as we
sear to be destroyed and desire to be blessed: Be wise now therefore, ver. 10.
O ye Kings, be instructed, ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice with trembling.

The words of my text, you see, are the second part of this Psalm, and have
their dependence upon the former, that, notwithstanding all the machinations of
wicked people, God will have a King to rule in his Church, which no power of
man shall ever overthrow. I shall observe to you three particulars out of this
Scripture, the King, his Throne, his Settlement in his Throne. 1 The King, as
ver. 7.
Jesus Christ, God the Son, the second person in Trinity, God over all,
blessed for ever. 2. his Throne, where he sitts, or his Kingdom where he
reigns, with the qualification of it, his holy hill of Sion: Mount Sion was a
high mountain in Jerusalem, on the top whereof was a strong Fort, which the
Jebusites kept by force from Israel till David's days, who after took it and
fortified it and called it David's City. 1 Chronicles. 11.4.
Near unto which was mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 13 1. Neh. 11.1. Isa 52 1. Joel
3.17. Psalm. 78.68. Isa. 2.3. Isa 60.14. Heb. 12.22. Rev. 14.1.
where Solomon after built the Temple. Whereupon Jerusalem was called the holy
City: and Sion named the holy mountain, which God loved: and from which the
the Law should come forth: and thence a type and figure of Christ's Church. 3.
The settlement of this King in his Throne, yet have I set my King, how great
soever the oppositions made by wicked men be, yet his throne is firmly
established. The results of all which are these, which I shall present in this
order.







These are the three mayn branches which spring from this stock, the three mayn
streams which flow from this fountain. The first: Christ the second person
etc.

Dan. 4.35.
as God the Creator, he governs the world and all things in it. The other
special, whereby, as God the Redeemer, he exercises an administration of rule
and government over the elect, by a special name called the Kingdom of
Christ; in which he dispenses to his children both grace and glory. Whence,
though the division be usual into the Kingdom of grace, and the Kingdom of
glory, yet they are not two Kingdoms, but parts of one and the same Kingdom of
Christ. When therefore we speak of Christ's Kingdom, we mean not that which
he has by nature, the government of which is universal over all the world,
and does agree to him as he is (...) God coessentiall with the Father: But
that Kingdom which he has by special designation from his Father, and which
is appropriated to him as he is (...) God and man, God with us, clothed in our
flesh, (...)
Christ the mediator; and which he dispences as he is the governor and head of
that people, which he has by his own blood purchased to be a peculiar people
unto God from the rest of the world. This the Scriptures set forth plentifully
unto us in those several expressions of giving all things into Christ's hand,
of committing all judgment to him, of Crowning him, of putting all things under
his feet. Into whose hand has he given all things that concern the Church?
into the hand of Christ, to be dispensed by him, he loves him, and has given
all things into his hand. John 3.35.
To whom has he committed all Judgment? to the Son; to him he has committed
the dispensing of that power which belongs originally to himself, the Father
judges no man, John 5.22.
but has committed all judgment to the Son. Who is the crowned King of Gods
people? Christ, under him all things are put in subjection, he has Crowned
him, and put all things under his feet. Heb. 2.7.
See what a glorious description of Christ's designation to this Kingdom we
have, Isa. 9.6, 7. unto us a child is borne; unto us a son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called,
wonderful, couneellour, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the Prince of
peace. of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon
the throne of David and upon his Kingdom, to order it and to establish it with
Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever He, who is God the
Son, the second person in Trinity, the child borne for our Redemption, upon his
shoulder is the Government laid: as he first bare upon his shoulder his Cross,
so now he bears the government of his Church upon his shoulder, which he
purchased by his Cross. He is not only Christ the Savior, but also Christ the
Lord, Luke 2.1^
set upon the Throne of his father David for ever.

In the further opening of which point, I shall first show you the quality of
this Kingdom of Christ's. Secondly, the grounds and reasons why God would not
govern his people in the general way, as he governs all the world, but would
have such a solemn administration of a Kingdom by Christ.

First, The quality of Christ's kingdom.
the quality of Christ's Kingdom: as Samuel when he anointed Saul King, told
the people the manner of the Kingdom, so we are here to inquire the manner and
quality of the Kingdom of Christ. The Scriptures set it forth under two
notions: first, that it is a Kingdom in us; Secondly, a Kingdom over us: Christ
reigns in us, Christ reigns over us.

Christ reign in us. Dan. 7.13.
1 Christ reigns in us: this is that which was typified in Daniels vision, I
saw in the night Visions, and behold one like the son of man, and there was
given him Dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people and nations and
languages should serve him. what kind of Dominion and Kingdom was this, in
which all nations and languages should serve Christ? not an earthly Kingdom:
no, that Kingdom which was given to the son of man in that vision, it was a
spiritual kingdom, the seting up of the Scepter of Christ in our hearts; my
Kingdom is not of this world: it is in the world, but not of the world: John
18.36.
it is a government erected in the hearts of Gods people. The Kingdom of God is
within you; every holy heart is Christ's throne where he sits, Luke 17.21
the forces of the Gentiles shall come in unto him. Isa. 60.5.
In former times Christ's Kingdom was confined to Judea; but since Christ's
coming the Gentiles are called the forces of the Gentiles: the maine strengths
and greatest parts of the Gentiles at some time or other shall acknowledge
Christ. That was the voice of the seventh Angel that sounded, Revel. 11.15.
the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of Christ:
those kingdoms which were but kingdoms of this world, earthly kingdoms, that
knew none but an earthly King, and yielded no obedience but an external
obedience, now become the kingdoms of Christ, submit themselves to the Gospel
of Christ, advance his Scepter among them, and yield obedience to his laws; it
is true, all persons of all nations receive not Christ as King: but there is no
nation, but has or shall have Christ's Throne set up among them, Christ shall
have some subjects there: some in the household of Caesar; Phil. 4.22.
all the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household, though
not Caesar himself, yet there were Saints in his household that acknowledged
him. Acts 8.2^.
In the Court of the Queen of Aethiopia one Eunuch that embraced the faith, as
God promised of old, turn, ser. 3.14.
O backsliding children, I am married to you, I will take you one of a City,
and two of a family, and bring you to Sion: so now, if God call not all, yet he
will call some in every place, here one and there one, here one in a family,
and there two in a City, and bring them to Sion. And there are several acts,
wherein this kingdom of Christ's, that is within us, consists.

1. In giving his people laws of life, and governing by them: as there is in
every King a legislative power, a (...), to make and establish, and publish
laws; such a power, but far greater has Christ to make and establish laws
for the government of his people: this is called by the Psalmist, the sending
forth of the rod of Christ's strength out of Sion: Psalm. 110.2.
which the Prophets Esaias and Micah both expound touching the law, which is the
strength of a King, Out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. Isa. 2.3. Mica 4.2.
But further, here is the act and exercise of Christ's government in giving
laws, not that he gives any laws, but that he gives laws of life. Christ might
give us such laws, as God says he gave the rebellious Israelites for their
sins, Ezekiel 20.25.
Statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live:
whether it be meant the ceremonial laws that were unprofitable to lead them to
heaven, or what other laws soever, precepts God gave them that were in some
respect or other not good for them, statutes in which they could not have life:
such Christ might give us now, statutes and precepts that are not good, that
might be burthensom or unprofitable, not leading to life. But the laws Christ
gives, they are laws leading to life, Ezck. 20.11. Levi. 16.5. Gal. 3.12.
statutes and judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them. It Is
true indeed, by the corruption of our natures, the law may prove to our
destruction, Tom. 7.10.
the commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death; for sin
taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me. Though the
law per se of it self leads and is ordained to life, yet the corruption of
nature, stirring up the heart to break the law, does thereby ex accidenti and
occasionally turn the edge of the law against us to condemn us, which would
have been to save us. Romans 7.12.
The law is holy, and just, and good: since Christ's laws are holy laws, the end
of which is to work holiness in us; and just laws, which prescribe nothing but
what is equal for all to obey; and good laws, setting forth the goodness of
God to us in them, and winning us to goodness by them; they must needs be
acknowledged laws of life in themselves, such as lead to life if kept, as for
that end proposed by Christ, not to lead to our destruction.

2. In working graces in the hearts of his people: Christ may give laws, but if
withal he work not grace in our hearts, if he give not power to keep those
laws, we shall never observe them; it is therefore a second part of his Office
as King, to give us grace and strength to do what he proposes to us to be
done. A wicked man, in whose heart Christ has not yet set up his Kingdom,
looks upon Christ's laws as strange things, as God speaks by the Prophet, I have
written to them the great things of my law, Hos. 8.12.
and they were accounted as a strange thing: such a man looks on Christ's laws
as strange things that concerned him nor, things he neither can, neither has
any will to do: but when Christ comes, as a King, to such a man, he puts an
inward love and inclination into his heart to those laws, and a strength to
keep them. That is part of the new covenant, which God makes with us, and
Christ enables to keep, I will put my laws into your minds, I^r. 31.33. Heb.
8.10.
and write them in your hearts. Gods laws are at first out of the minds of
people, they are only written in our books: when Christ comes to us as a King,
those laws he writ with his own finger upon Mount Sinai in tables of stone, he
now writes with the finger of his spirit in the tables of our hearts: those
laws which he put into the Ark, there to be laid up for ever, he now puts into
the Ark of our hearts never to be forgotten. This is the excellency of Christ
above Moses: Moses is but the servant of Gods house, Heb. 3.5.
Christ the Son is the commander in and over the house: Moses sets the laws
before us, Christ over awes and enables the spirit to keep them. Moses
prescribes the fear of God to us, Deuteronomy. 6.13.17.
You shall fear the Lord your God: Christ as a King strikes powerfully a fear
into us, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear into your hearts. Moses commands us to love God, thou
shall love the Lord thy God: Deuteronomy. 11.1.
Christ enables to love him, Deuteronomy 30.6.
the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart to love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul. (...). Romans 2.19.
The circumcision of the heart is Gods work, as the circumcision of the flesh
is man's. Moses commands to walk in Gods statutes, what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
but to fear the Lord, and to walk in all his ways: but when the spirits of
natural men cannot comply with holy laws, Christ enables them, Ezel. 11.29.
I will give them one heart, and put a new spirit within them, that they may
walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, Eze^. ^6.26.
and do them. Christ not only sets the ways before us, but withal causes us
to walk in them, gives us natures suitable and spirits agreeable to those
ways, such as shall delight in them. If we were to do Gods works by man's
strength, we should give but an ill account of our performances: we should
have no strength for them, no delight in them: but Christ strengthens us, Phil.
4.13.
I can do all things through Christ strengthening me: nay Christ, who works the
very works in us, not I, but the grace of God in me. 1 Cor. 15.10.
The new man under the new covenant, has new strengths: as when Samuel went to
anoint Saul King over Gods people, an employment he might well think too great
for himself, Samuel withal told him, that God should turn him into another
man: if God turn us into other men, 1 Samuel 10.6.
and give us strengths suitable, no works God calls us to shall be difficult to
us. God set the Israelites in a troublesome way to Canaan, through the
mountains and deserts; but because he withal gave them his cloud by day, and
his pillar of fire by night to lead them, they were able to break through all
difficulties, and all encumbrances: so long as God gives us his own presence to
go before us, and his strengths to enable us, we need not be troubled at the
greatness or harshnesse of duties. It should be ours, which was St. Augustines
resolution, da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis, so long as God gives
strength for duties, let us not be troubled whatever God requires of us.

3. In cherishing the seeds of grace till they be brought to a further
perfection: grace is but small at first, it is not with the trees of
righteousness, as it was with the trees of Paradise, made perfect at once:
grace is but like the grain of mustardseed, the least of all seeds, easily
killed, like a scintilla, a spark of fire easily quenched. The devil, and the
world, and our own lusts, are the thorns that choke our graces, the stones
that hinder their radication, the birds of prey that devour them, while they
are in the seeds: we have need of an overruling power to draw them forth and
perfect them. This is a work Christ takes into his own hand; as his hand plants
and sowes, so it is his hand that waters and gives the increase. Mat. 12.20.
He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, until he
bring forth judgment unto victory: so far from breaking a bruised sinner, so
far from quenching the heat of grace that once begins to smoke and kindle,
that on the other side he will carry up the work by his own special strength,
he will cherish the seeds of grace, till that holy frame of grace begun in our
souls be brought to such a height and compleatnesse, that Gods Kingdom in us
shall be victorious over all opposite corruptions.

4. In giving new supplies of his spirit, till he bring his people to glory:
it is not enough for us to have grace begun, but there must be new supplies of
grace continued to us: it is not only the sending of an influence from the Sun
to the earth, but the continuing of that influence every day, must continue
life in the creatures: there must be a preserving power of grace from Christ,
as well as a begetting power, Psalm. 73.24.
as David speaks, Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and after receive me
to glory. We have need of a continuance of Christ's counsel and direction here
in the way of grace before we be received to glory. There be many passages of
difficulty and danger we meet with in the course of our lives, in which we
shall stick, if Christ should not be always by us to carry us through. The first
grace given us will not perhaps be sufficient to carry us thorough great
temptations and great afflictions. A child may walk in a smooth way without
help, but not in a rugged: the first measures of grace may enable us to go
thorough smooth ways of Christianity, where little danger or difficulty is:
but when it comes to a rugged way, a great trial, a great temptation, we have
then need of new strength. Christ is like other Kings in this, it is not enough
for him only to conquer, but he must fortify, and continue garrisons to
maintain his conquests. Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
says St. Peter, who has begotten us to a lively hope of an inheritance, and
who are kept by the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5.
through faith unto salvation. Christ does not only beget us, but also keep us
by his own power through faith to salvation.

5. In purifying the heart and subduing our lusts: that is the description of
the coming of Christ in his Kingdom of grace, he shall come as refiners fire,
Mal. 3.2.
and as fullers soap: as the fire refines the silver and takes away the dross,
and as the soap rinses out spots and stains, so shall Christ refine and purge
his people: Mat. 3.11.
he shall baptize with the holy Ghost and fire, and whose fan is in his hand:
wash thoroughly and destroy corruptions even as fire destroys all that stands
before it. Christ's work while he was upon earth, was exercised much in this, in
casting out devils, if I cast out devils by the spirit of God, Mat. 12.28.
then is the Kingdom of God come unto you: so it holds still, when the Kingdom
of God comes unto us, there will be a casting out devils by the spirit of
Christ, sin will be dispossessed of its former holds, lust will be subdued in us.
When Christ comes into the heart, he comes with the power of a King, and the
strongest lusts, the most giant like corruptions shall not stand before him: as
David has an expression, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be lifted up ye
ever lasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in: Psalm. 24.7.
who is this King of glory? the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in
battle. When the King of glory, Christ the glorious King, mighty in battle
comes into our hearts, no doors of our lusts shall be able to keep him out.
Mich. 7.19.
He will subdue all our iniquities; every lust, that it shall not reign in us:
Sin shall not have deminion over you, Romans 6.14.
for ye are not under the law but under grace. If we were only under the law,
we should have no power against our lusts; but because we are under grace,
under the government of Christ, who rules us by the grace of his spirit;
therefore sin shall not have dominion over us, sin shall be subdued under us.
Look how a conquering King comes into an enemies country, he pulls down all
strong holds, and breaks the power of an enemy: such is the entrance of Christ
as King into the heart, there may be some scattering troops, the Cananites may
be left in the land, but all the (...) strong holds are pulled down, 2 Cor. 10.4.
Christ breaks the strength of sin, that it shall not reign in us.

6. In creating inward peace, and joy, and comfort: it is the office of a King
to keep his subjects in a joyful, a peaceable, a flourishing condition. The
Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink (things external) but in
righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost: Romans 14.17.
Christ is first Melchisedec King of righteousness, his government a righteous
government; and then King of Salem, King of peace, a government accompanied
with abundance of inward joy and peace. As peace is that crowns all other
blessings, so Christ knowing the excellency of this, and that none could give
it but himself, did therefore, when he was to leave the earth, promise this as
a fruit of his Kingly office to leave his disciples this legacy of peace, Job.
14.27.
peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, it is Christ's peace, not the
worlds: in me ye shall have peace: Ioh. 16.33.
if Christ speak a word of peace to our hearts, if he give us an answer of
peace, as Joseph said to Pharaoh, God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace;
then though we have tribulations in the world, we shall be of good cheer, we
shall have comfort enough, Christ as King has overcome the world, and will
settle peace in us; that is the expedience of Christ's goingfrom us, that he may
send us the comforter; it is expedient that I go away, for if I go not away,
the comforter will not come; John 15.7.
but if I depart, I will send him unto you: being in the administration of his
kingdom he sends comfort. There is no having peace, nor joy, nor comfort, but
from Christ, who as King is only able to allay all storms and troubles, which
the devil and our own consciences for sin raise within us. It is with inward
peace as it is with the outward, if he give quietness, who can make trouble:
Job 34.29.
if Christ work quietness, if he make a calm in the spirit, if he rebuke the
winds and the sea, Mat. 14.32.
nothing from the world can raise a tempest.

Christ's reign over us. Mic. 4.7. Luke 1.33.
2 Christ reigns over us: the Lord shall reign over them in mount Sion, he
shall reign over the house of Jacob. not only in us, but over us; not only in
us for his glory, but over us also for our good. This is termed by the
Psalmist, a sitting on the right hand of the Father, Psalm. 110.1.
the Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand: a phrase to note the
actual administration of his kingdom, that as a king he sits in great power,
judging among his enemies and governing his people. And there are also several
acts wherein the exercise of this part of his kingdom over us consists:

First, in suppressing the enemies of the Church: that is the power that God
gives to Christ as King of his Church, to rule in the midst of his enemies:
Psalm. 110.2.
and the promise God made to Abraham, Genesis 22.17.
that his seed should possess the gate of his enemies. While Gods people keep
covenant with God, they shall be secure, the lilly shall grow up among the
thorns: Cant. 2.2.
and there shall be no enchantment against Jacob, Numb. 23.23.
no divination against Israel; Christ settles his Church so strong, that the
gates of hell shall never prevail against her, Mat. 16.18.
she may be assaulted and shaken, but never conquered: as the Romans lost some
battles, but they never lost a war; Gods Church may have some foyles, but she
shall be always the conqueror in the end. God commands deliverances for his
people; thou art my King, Psalm. 44.4.
O God, command deliverances for Jacob: it is the comfort of Gods people to
know, so long as Christ stands, 1 Samuel 8.20
his Church shall not fall: the people thought themselves safe when they had a
King to fight their battles; so long as we have Christ to fight our battles,
we need not fear; if Christ be for us, none can be against us.

Secondly, in bestowing all blessings upon us: in him shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed: Genesis 22.18.
all who are blessed, are blessed in Christ, who is the King, commanding blessings
upon his people; blessings spiritual, blessed be God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ephesians 1 3.
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ: he the head and
fountain of all spiritual blessings, blessings temporal; as Joseph was a
type of Gods Church, all those blessings which Jacob prophesied should come
upon the head of Joseph, shall through Christ come upon the head of the Church,
the blessings of heaven above, the blessings of the deep that lie under, the
blessings of the breast, and the blessings of the womb, Gen 49.25.
unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, they shall be upon the head
of Joseph, upon the head of the Church; and at last, the blessing of eternal
glory in heaven, Rev. 1.6.
when Christ shall with himself make all his people who serve him here, Kings
to reign with him there for ever.

Thirdly, In sanctifying all conditions, and ordering and turning all to the
best for his own people: there is no condition, prosperity, adversity, health,
sickness, life, death, but it would be hurtful to us, if Christ did not sit as
King to moderate and sanctify it to us. We know, Romans 8.28.
says the Apostle, all things work together for the good of them that love
God, who are called according to his purpose; how comes it that all things work
together for their good who love God and are the called of God, more then for
theirs who love him not, and are not called of him? that affliction is
sanctified to the one and not to the other? as S. Aug. says, you may observe
in the same fire the gold sparkles and gathers luster, abunoigne aurum rutilat
and palea sumat.
when the stubble consumes and vanishes to smoke? because Christ sits as King
to order every thing for the best of his own subjects, and to turn every thing
for the worst to his enemies; Christ does for us here as he does for us in
heaven; Irgoe to prepare a place for you: Ioh. 14.2.
so here it is Christ's work to prepare places and conditions for his people, to
sanctify every thing to them. As on the one side he curses all to his enemies,
I will curse your blessings; Mal. 2.2.
there is a secret curse goes along with all those things they count their
greatest blessings: so on the other side, he blesses all those things to his
children, which they might conceive to be curses to them and to make most
against them. Jacob when he saw Joseph lost, and Simeon left bound in Egypt,
and Benjamin to be carried from him, he strait concluded, all these things are
against me: Genesis 42.36.
when yet all made for him, and preservation of himself and the life of his
family in Egypt. Genesis 45.5.
Joseph thought his own casting into prison would have proved his ruin for
ever; Genesis 39.20.
when yet God made it the means of his greatest advancement. The Jews thought
the plot of Haman would have bin their confusion, when yet God so ordered it as
the day intended for their destruction, was turned to them from sorrow to joy,
Hest. 9.22.
from mourning into a good day; Moses notes it touching Balaams curse, with
which Balak King of Moab would have had him curse Israel, Deuteronomy 23.5.
the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing to thee, because the Lord
thy God loved thee: if we be such as God loves, Christ will turn all cursings
into blessings, all things shall be blessed to us, nothing cursed to us.

Fourthly, In settling an external ecclesiastical policy: as Christ is King
of his Church, he will have his Church governed in his own way, not according
to the fancies and inventions of man. We must not deny that to Christ in
government of his Kingdom, which we yield to all earthly Monarchs in the
government of theirs, when Christ, after his resurrection continued forty days
upon earth among his disciples, speaking of the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God; (...) 1.3.
we cannot think he would omit the giving of rules for the framing of the
regiment of his Church. And when S. Paul tells the Elders of Ephesus, he had not
shunned to declare to them the whole council of God, Act. 20.27.
we must take it in pursuance of those directions himself and the rest of the
disciples had received from Christ for the government of his Church. What this
frame of Church policy is, which has bin so long in dispute, and is yet sub
judice, will be more proper for a Synod then a Sermon to consider of. I only
hint this, but leave it to that grave consultation you have already designed,
not doubting your honorable care in hastening that work, which must undoubtedly
conduce much to the advancing and settling Christ's Government more exactly among
us.

Reasons of the point.
Let us consider the reasons why God would have such a solemn administration
of a kingdom by Christ:

First, In respect of Glory that might accrue both to Christ the Son, and to
God the father.

In respect of Christ, that he might receive the honor due to his deity, which
the work of humiliation might take from him; though he were the true God, Phil.
2.6.
equal with the Father; yet taking upon him the form of a servant, that he
might be fitted to humble himself to the death of the Cross; this humiliation
made the world, that knew him not, strip him of his glory; they accounted him a
devil, a glutton, a malefactor, crucified him between two thieves, Objiciunt
nos honorem defer homini crucifixo mysterium hujus rei ignorantes, Just. Mart.
put a crown of thorns upon his head in derision, and ever after derided the
Christians, that they believed in a crucified God. Christ must now be repaired
in his honor; therefore God appoynts him to be King of his Church, that he may
be advanced in their eyes who had so much vilified him: the Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment, that is, the dispensation of all
government, to the Son, John 5.22.
that all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father: as the world
vilified him as a malefactor, they might now acknowledge him God equal with the
Father, and honor him with the same honor, wherewith they honor the Father:
greatly exalted because greatly humbled, the stone which the builders refused,
1 Pet. 2.7.
is made the head of the corner.

In respect of the Father, that he might have the more glory from such a solemn
administration of a kingdom by Christ: as God was more glorified by giving
Christ to be a Redeemer, by finding out such a way of saving sinners, where God
became man, and two natures, the divine and humane united together, Christ
taking flesh and suffering, then if he had saved his people any other way
without Christ: so now, it would bring more glory to God, by exalting Christ as
King, and giving him the solemn administration of a Kingdom, then if God should
have governed his people in the general way, as he governs the world. God has
highly exalted him, Phil. 2 9, 11.
and given him a name above every name, that every tongue should confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of the Father. That Is a main end, why Christ
who was first humbled, was after exalted, the glory of the Father; that solemn
administration of the Kingdom by Christ brings more glory to the Father.

Secondly, in respect of Gods people; none so fit to be King to any people as
such a one, who is allied to them, and may be the more tender of them: As God
gave the precept touching a King for the Israelites, they must choose one from
among their brethren: Deuteronomy. 17.15.
so Christ therefore fittest because our brother, he took our nature upon him,
and became Immanuel, God with us, God one of us, of the same flesh and blood
with us, it is the same in this, which the Apostle speaks touching the fitness
of Christ's being made high Priest for us, because having taken our nature,
Heb. 5.2.
and being compast with infirmities, he is likely to be the more compassionate
to us: it is fittest Christ should be our King, that having the same nature with
us, and compast about with our infirmities, he might exercise the more
tenderness toward us, as knowing best our frailties and the weaknesses of our
natures; a King of our brethren is fittest for us.

Thirdly, In respect of Gods enemies and ours; the more to awe them, when they
shall see him reigning over them, whom they derided; see him glorious in the
administration of a kingdom and all power over them, who once crucified, and
yet do daily crucify him, see Christ King of such whom they persecute; and
fight for them and judge their cause, whom they afflict: it is said of the
wicked of the world, when they see the son of man coming in the clouds in the
day of judgment, they shall mourn; fear him as a terrible judge, Mat. 24.30.
ready to take vengeance on them, who have used him so despitefully: it must
needs be the same here, Ipse erit judex, qui sub judice stetit, ut videant
impii ejus gloriam, in cujus mansuetudinem saevierunt. Prosp. Sent. 337.
though in a less degree; what can more awe and terrify wicked people, then
to know, Christ reigns, he sits here as King to observe them, to judge them,
to plague them, whose person they have so much vilified, whose honor they have
so much laid in the dust, whose servants they have so persecuted, whose cause
they have so much opposed.

Fourthly, in respect of a suitableness betwixt the works of redemption and
government: it were unequal Christ should redeem us, and not govern us:
unjust, that we should serve any other, then him who has laid down the ransom
for us. There is jus redemptionis in this, he who ransoms a slave, ought to
have his service: if Christ while we were slaves of the devil, has ransomed
us and bought us with a price, the price of his own blood, 1 Pet. 1 18.
it is equal we should serve him, give him the service, both of our bodies and
spirits, because they are now his, 2 Cor. 6.20.
and no more our own. It were unequal, we should expect redemption from him,
and yet not yield obedience to him: that is the very end of our redemption,
Luke 1.72.
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies should serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
lives. Here we should take St. Peter's rule to Ananias, touching the possession
he had sold: Why have thou kept back part of the price, while it remained
unsold, was it not thine own? it was thine own, Acts 5.3.
thou might have done with it as thou pleasedst: but having sold it to God,
why do thou now keep back that which is Gods? while we were our own, we might
dispose our selves according to our own wills; but now Christ having bought us,
what right have we to keep back from Christ that which is Christ's? if we belong
to God by the right of purchase, why should we defraud God of his due? while we
were Satan's, we might give unto Satan the things of Satan, serve him whose we
were: but now being Gods purchase, we ought to give unto God the things of God,
serve him whose we are.

David makes of this doctrine, Psalm. 97.1.
The Lord reigns, what then? let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the
Isles be glad thereof. We that live here in the Isles, have not we a portion in
this joy and comfort, that we know Christ is King, and reigns among us; let
the earth rejoice, and the multitude of the Isles be glad. Indeed if Gods
people consider, they are but a little flock of kids among many lions, 1 Kings
20, 27. Mat. 10.16. Cant. 2.2.
a few sheep among many wolves, a single lilly among many thorns: if they
consider, what machinations, what pernicious plots are daily contrived against
them: if we had not this to support us, to know Christ is King, that he orders
all for the best for us, subdues our enemies, protects us from plots of
malignant persons, preserves us in the midst of greatest dangers, it might well
cast us into despair of ever holding up our heads with comfort. But when we
remember that Christ sits as King among us, he is above in heaven, and laughs
at the plots of wicked men, Psalm. 2.4.
the Lord has them in derision: men may be busy in contriving, but Christ is
as busy in defeating: here is a glorious beam of comfort breaks in upon us
under this notion of Christ's being King, his reigning in the midst of his
people. Comfortably may we apply that of the Prophet, look upon Sion, the City
of our solemnities: Isa. 33.20.
thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not
be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither
shall any of the cords thereof be broken: but there the glorious Lord will be
to us a place of broad rivers; for the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our law
giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us. When we look up to Christ, and
meditate with our selves, is not Christ our judge, is not he our lawgiver, is
not he our King? he will save us; we may with comfort look upon Sion the City
of our solemnities, and shall see our Jerusalem again a quiet habitation. I
showed you before, it is one of the prime acts of Christ's Kingly office to
preserve his subjects: if we break not covenant with him, he will help us: and
why should we not then boldly say, if the Lord be our helper, Heb. 13.6.
we will not fear what man can do unto us: then we fear when we know we have
many enemies, and few helpers: but if Christ be our King who can help us, why
should we fear what man or devil, or powers of darkness can do unto us.



First, in love, and keeping communion one with another: union with Christ the
head, will produce communion with the members, we have fellowship one with
another. 1 John 1.7.
There be (...) certain things which are common among Christian friends:
Arist. Pol. l. 2. c. 3.
a community in goods, all that believed were together, Acts 2.44. Ex
substantia familiari fratres sumus. Tert ap. adv. gent. c. 39.
and had all things common: a community in counsels, contributing helps of
advice upon occasions offered: a community in intelligences, the Churches in
the Acts held intelligence together, and the Ecclesiastical stories tell us,
at Lions in France the Saints were wont to send to the Saints in Phrygia, Omnia
apud nos indiscreta sunt praeter uxores. Tert. ap. adv. gent. c. 34. Occultisse
notis and insignibus noscunt and amant mutuo pene antequ^m noverint. Man.
Ejusmodi vel maxim dilectionis operatio notam nobis inurit penes quosdam,
vide, inquiunt, ut invicem se diligant Christiani. Tert ibid. (...). Clem. Al.
paed. l. 3. c. 11. (...) ibid. (...). Greg. Naz. de Nonna Orat. 11.
concerning the affairs of the Church: all things they had common; but
especially a communion of conversation, a delight in the society one of
another. 'Twas a saying of a Heathen in the primitive times, what strange
people these Christians are, they are as well acquainted in half an hour as
others are in half a year. We want this communion among us; we keep communion
with any kind of people, rather then with the Saints of God. We every day say,
we believe a communion of Saints, but we make it in our practice rather a
chymera then a thing real; we delight not in it. O this strangeness and
loathnesse to society with good men, it is not agreeable with that heavenly
conversation Christians should have. This should be the ligament of Christians
society, their relation to Christ, as they are fellow Citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem, and the household of God, and knit together under one King. We
should desire to keep the same company here, we shall do hereafter in heaven:
there our company shall be God and the Saints; so it should be here. It Is
true, civil commerce may be kept with all, but we ought to distinguish in
choosing our companions, that when we die we may only change our place, not our
company: if here we enjoy the presence of God, and society of the Saints, our
change will be but easy; when we go hence, we go but to have a nearer
communion with them.

Secondly, in having a fellow feeling with them of their miseries: every member
of the body has a sense of the injuries the other members suffer. There be
certain trees, whose leaves, (...). Clem. Al. Strom. l. 2.
if cut or touched, the other leaves contract themselves, and for a space hang
down their heads: such an (...) a consent of spirits, as Clemens calls it,
(...). Clem. ibid.
there should be betwixt all the children of God. If the man, that is in us, be
spiritual, that humane affection, which is in us naturally, is turned into a
brotherly affection, as being partakers of the same spirit. It Is said of
Hypocrates twins, they laughed together, and wept together: as there will be a
rejoicing with them that rejoice, so there will be a mourning with them that
mourn; a contracting our spirits with sorrow, a hanging down of the head in
sense of our brethrens miseries. It Was the sin of the people for which God
threatens them, that they lay upon beds of ivory, and eat the lambs of the
flock, and chanted to the sound of the violl, Am. 6.6.
and drank wine in bowls, and anointed themselves with chief ointments; but
were not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. What nation deeper drencht in
this sin, then we have been? we have long seen our brethren in France, in
Germany, and now in Ireland wallowing in their blood. Each of those Kingdoms
ready to cry out with the Church, was ever sorrow like my sorrow? Is it
nothing to you, Lam. 1.12.
all ye that pass by? behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. O,
has not the wrath of God gone over those Countries, like waves rolling one
after another, billow upon billow; the famine after the sword, and the plague
after the famine? may not we tell our children, Joel 1.3.
and our children tell their children, and their children another generation:
that which the palmer worm has left, has the locust eaten; and that which
the locust has left, has the canker worm eaten; and that which the canker
worm has left, has the caterpiller eaten: have greater judgments been
recorded to posterity, then have been executed upon these nations? insomuch as
all their plenties are devoured: what the sword has left, the famine has
destroyed; and what the famine has left, the plague has consumed. Are not the
judgments upon our brethren in Ireland, such as may well make our ears tingle
to hear them? Iet. 19.3.
do we not now see them as the afflicted Saints are described, imprisoned,
stoned, sawen asunder, slain with the sword, Heb. 11.3^.
wandering about upon the cold mountains and deserts naked and starving, at best
in sheepskins and goat skins, destitute, afflicted, tormented, lying
comfortless in dens and caves of the earth? wives abused before their husbands
faces, virgins deflowred, women with child ripped up, poor infants snacht from
their mothers breast, and dashed against the stones: here some lying naked
perishing with cold, there others starving with hunger? the land that was as
the garden of Eden, now become a barren wilderness, Joel. 2.3.
that brings forth nothing but thorns to crown Christ with (as St. Chrysostom
speaks of the land of Judea) or nothing but monsters of men, that delight to
have their hands in the bowels, and bathed in the blood of the Saints of God?
everywhere misery, and all the direful effects of the desolations of war?
this, I say, have we not long seen? and yet ubi viscera, where are our bowels
yearning upon these afflictions of our brethren? may I not say, 2 Cor. 6.12.
in the Apostles words, are we not straightened in our own bowels? are not our
bowels shut up against our brethren? how few of us that leave off any pleasure,
or take any the least time more to mourn in private for these afflictions of
Joseph? are we not as wanton and full of jollity and good fellowship as
formerly, as if these miseries we see upon others did not at all concern our
selves? they, who are not sensible of the miseries of their poor brethren, it is
a sign they are not subjects of the kingdom of Christ. Christ himself has
compassion upon us, Heb ^.2.
who are his members, in our miseries: there is no affliction upon Gods people,
but God is afflicted with them, in all their afflictions he was afflicted; Es.
63.9. Non perdit viscera pia matter ecclesia. Aug. ho. 27. Heb. 13.3. 1 Pet. 3.8.
The Church our mother has bowels of compassion toward her children, and
shall we have no sense of our brethrens miseries, not be afflicted in their
afflictions? not remember them that are in bonds as bound with them, and them
which suffer adversity, as being also in the body? Be all of one mind, says
the Apostle, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful:
If we love as brethren, we shall have these (...), these bowels of compassion
and pity one toward another, when it is well with them we shall rejoice, as
the people of Roma did for Germanicus, when they heard he was recovered, they
went about singing, The City is safe, our Country safe, because Germanicus is
safe: Then we shall rejoice and sing, Our City, our Country, our persons, Salva
Roma, Salva patria, salvus est Germanicus.
we are all in a happy condition, when our brethren and our Religion and the
Church of God is in peace, but till that be done, till God make our Jerusalem a
quiet habitation, till God lift up the heads of our brethren again, and give
the Gospel a free progress again, and make Religion flourish again, and set
up the Kingdom of Christ and his Ordinances again in their beauty and power
and purity, in other Nations as well as our own, we must mourn with them that
mourn, and weep with them that weep, and be afflicted in the afflictions of
Gods people, if we be not, it is a sign we are not members of the same body,
nor Subjects of the same King.

3. In relieving their causes and persons with the strength of their own
persons and substance: brethren and fellow subjects must contribute to the
relief and deliverance of those who are of the same blood, and of the same
profession with themselves: We must do here, as Iesse said to David, 1 Samuel
17.18.
Go look how thy Brethren fare: We should be always eying our Brethren, the
people of God, Psalm. 41.1.
to see how they fare, consider the poor, as the Psalmists expression is, that
we may relieve them in their distresses. Genesis 14.14.
Abraham ventured his own person and all his Family, for the redemption of his
Brother Lot. Saul and all the Israelites hazarded themselves for their
fellows; the Inhabitants of Iabes Gilead: In the time of persecution, 1 Samuel
11.8.
the Disciples, every man according to his ability sent relief unto their
Brethren which dwelt in Iudaea: Act. 11.29.
Nay, the Macedonians went in this beyond their ability, 2 Cor. 8.3.
more then their estates would bear; and they that were of the same faith, all
that believed sold their possessions for the supply of the needs of the rest of
the Faithful: Act. 2.44.
and such contributions they used to make in those days, that every man had
sufficient, neither was any among them that lacked, for as many as were in
possession of Lands and houses, sold them, and brought the prices, and laid
them down at the Apostles feet, Act. 4.34.
and distribution was made to every man according as he had need. It Is not
enough to say, we are all subjects of Christ's Kingdom in words, but we must
show it in deeds; otherwise it is but as Saint James speaks, a vain
expression, to say to one that is naked and destitute of food, Depart in peace.
be warmed and be filled, Iam. 2.16.
and yet not give them those things that are needful for them: If we serve
Christ, we must love him; if we love Christ, then as he laid down his life
for us, so must we be content upon a necessity to lay down our lives for the
Brethren; But much more then, whosoever has this worlds goods and sees his brother
has need and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love
of God in him? 1. Ioh. 3.16.
'Twill be a sad evidence against us in the day of Judgment if we neither feed
the hungry nor cloth the naked, Mat. 25.43.
and it is a terrible threatening, Iam. 2.1^.
he shall have judgment without mercy who shows no mercy. Do not delude thy
soul, -- Divitias dispergendo pauperibus abjecerunt, and talimodo in
coelestibus thesauros tutius condiderunt Aug. prob. ep. 121.
in accounting thy self a member of Christ's body, a Subject of Christ's
Kingdom, and yet see another member, another Subject perish before thine eyes
and not relieve him, but shutst up thy bowels of compassion against him.
Clemens tells us of the Elephants, if one fall into a Ditch and cries out, the
next that hears him presently gathers all the Heard and help him out: If any
poor brother be in distress and cannot relieve himself, Strom. l. 1.
Cyprianus Christianus factus omnem substantiam suam pauperibus erogavit. Hier.
the whole Society must do it. Great are the exigences of our poor Brethren at
this time in Ireland, there is Christ naked, and Christ hungry, and Christ in
prison, and Christ ficke, Christ in his poor Subjects: Let us cloth Christ and
feed Christ, -- Reponam hunc thesauru^ universum apud creatorem liberis autem
meis relinqua^ thesaurum ipsum creatorem quod cum dixisset, erogavit omnia
paupetibus. Drus. Haeb. Apo. Mat. 21.3.
and redeem Christ out of the hands of his enemies. Let us not now look upon
our Cold with a covetous eye, nor keep it with a griping hand, nor be nice of
our persons, when Christ has need of us and our wealth, as Christ said, when
he sent for the Ass, say, The Lord has need of him, and they will let him
go: When the Lord has need of our persons, and need of our purses, let us let
them go, be free in the causes of Christ; we are not his Subjects, if we help
not him nor our fellow subjects. I know I shall easily have a pardon from you
(Honorable and Beloved) if I be an earnest Advocate in these causes of Christ,
for which you have showed your selves already so faithful and zealous, the
Lord reward you for your care; but give me leave only to put you in
remembrance of this, as the Vision appeared to Saint Paul, There stood a man of
Macedonia and prayed him, Act. 16.9.
come over into Macedonia and help us: Christ has long appeared to you, and
called for your help for Ireland; the Lord, I say, will reward you for what
help you have already afforded them: but I beseech you, let every Fast day we
keep for them put you in mind of their pressing miseries and their bleeding
condition, which now begins again to be desperate; Let me say to you in the
words of the men of Gibeon to Ioshuah, Josh. 10.6.
Slack not thy hand from thy servants, come up to us quickly and savt us and
help us. As Solomon speaks of a word fitly spoken or spoken in season, Prove.
25.11.
it is a word upon its wheels, as the Original inforces: so it is with a
work, a work done in season, it is a work upon its wheels, an excellent
work, that goes on to purpose.



1. In respect of our selves, to Crown Christ in our own hearts, to set up
his Kingdom within our selves the Kingdom of God is within you, to set it up
in our hearts; we easily desire Christ a Savior to save us, but not a King to
govern us: We are ready to cry out with the Disciples, Mat. 14.30.
Lord save us, we perish; but as ready again to say with the wicked Citizens,
Luke 19.14.
We will not have this man to reign over us. Alas, we must not expect Christ
should be a Savior, unless he be received as a King, as Iephtah answered the
Elders of Gilead, Why come you to me now when you are in distress, Judge.
21.7.9.
if the Lord deliver your enemies before me, shall I be your head? We must not
fly to Christ only in the time of our distress, when our sins press us,
and we see the mouth of Hell open to swallow us up, unless withal, when
Christ has delivered us from our spiritual enemies, we be contented to take
him for our head, for our Lord to rule and govern us as well as for our
Savior to save us: O let us crowue Christ in our hearts: not do as the Jews
did, set a crown of thorns upon his head, but set a Crown of Gold upon his
head, a Crown of Soveraigntie, acknowledge him our Lord and King, fear and
obey him: Crown him as Iehoiada and the people crowned King Ioash, 2 King.
11.11, 12.
they crowned him and compast him about with their swords in their hands, ready
to fight against all his enemies: Set up Christ in the throne of thy heart and
hold thy sword in thy hand to fight against all Christ's enemies, all thy own
lusts, thy rebelling affections that fight against Christ the King of thy soul.

2. To help to advance Christ's Kingdom in others, to help to lift up Christ
and to set up his Scepter over all the World. God has promised to give Christ
the Nations for his inheritance, and the uttetmost parts of the Earth for his
possession: it is a great work to bring people into Christ, to set up his
Kingdom, so as Christ may come to inherit the Nations, and to possess the
uttermost parts of the Earth, every one must come in to help in this work.
When the Tabernacle was to be made, every one that was of a willing heart
brought his offering, some gold, some brass, some scarlet, Exodus 35.5.
some Goats hair; every man according to his ability. When the Temple was to
be built, every one set to his helping hand, Solomon prepared gold, Hyram sent
Cedar Trees, some were hewers in the mountains, some bearers of burdens,
every one contributed according to his quality; it must be so here in the
advancing of Christ's Kingdom, it is the great work God has designed us for,
every one must set to his helping hand according to his ability, and the means
and opportunities God presents to him. Christ is King, yet he has many
enemies labor to keep him out of his Throne: it is our part to help him in.

Christ is ill handled by enemies at home in private contriving plots against
him: Act. 5.39.
O for some Gamaliels to give seasonable counsel to take men off from plotting
against Christ. He is worse handled by enemies abroad in public, there he is
not only plotted against, but already upon the Cross, look into Germany,
look into Ireland; we may easily with Thomas believe him to be there, we may
see the print of his nails in his hands and in his feet, and may put our
fingers into those ghastly wounds are already made in his body and his Members:
Mat. 27.59.
O for some Joseph's of Arimathea to take him down from the Cross. All persons
are called in to this work, People, Ministers, Magistrates, Kings themselves:
As they are Monarchs, they are offended if any thing be done against Monarchy;
let them be careful of Christ's Monarchy, he is King of Kings, they are all
called in to serve Christ in this Psalm. Verse. 10.11.


Give me leave (Honorable and Beloved) to set before you in a few words three
Kingdoms which are maine impediments to the advancement of this Kingdom of
Christ's, the Kingdom of sin, the Kingdom of Satan, and the Kingdom of
Antichrist.

1. Romans 6.12. (...).
The Kingdom of sin: Sin is a King, Let not sin reign in your mortal
bodies: Let it not play the King among us, beware of suffering any sin to be
countenanced among us, suffer not sin to be enacted by any Law nor to receive
countenance from misconstruction of Laws; sins may be committed in secret
and none can prevent them; but it will lie upon the Magistrates, when public
avouched sins are not set against: Idolatry was wont to be in corners and by
stealth; how open of late in England, how much justified by many, how many
things pleaded for it? how tolerated in Ireland, even to the destruction of
that poor land? how, public drunkenness and uncleanness? in Saint Paul's
time: they that were drunk, were drunk in the night: 1 These. 5.7.
that was the modesty of those times, though they went on in a course of sin,
they chose darkness to cover their sins: It is a shame to speak of those
things which are done of them in secret, shameful things, Ephesians. 5.^2.
but yet done in secret. How shameless are people in these days? how are all
principles of common modesty, as well as common honesty extinguished in them?
that they commit sin in the very face of the Sun, and blush not: a
shameless generation, that declare their sins as Sodom and hide them not:
Es. 3.9.
a desperate and hopeless state of people, that are not only past fear and
sorrow, but also past shame. Ier. 8.i3.
Set against this Kingdom of sin; if Laws be wanting, let them be made; if
made see to the execution; let not sin reign among us so open, so
uncontrouled: public sins are in the way of a judgment from God: 'Twas a
judgment upon David and his house, that his wives should be prostituted in the
face of the Sun; 2 Samuel 12.1^. Hos. 4.17.
and that Ephraim should go after idols and be let alone in their idolatry.

There are three things worthy the consideration, how they may be suppressed. 1.
The bacchanalia, that numerous issue of Taverns, and Alehouses, so infinitely
degenerated from their first institution; that they are become the nests and
harbourers of all sin and disorder. 2. The lupanaria, houses of uncleanness,
cages of unclean birds. 3. The theatra, theaters and stages, where profannesse
and vice is thought to be indeed satyrically whipped and presented, that it might
be hated; but is rather so personated and acted, as people become more in love
with it. It Is true, it will be hard to find out ways of suppressing these
public places of drunkenness, uncleanness, profannesse, which are indeed the
seminaries and nurseries of all disorders, and the bane of the Church and
Commonwealth: Yet certainly, there may be a great reformation wrought: let
them have a place in your thoughts in due time: these are mighty enemies to
Christ's Kingdom, and Ministers find unspeakable impediments to the progress
of religion and the course of their ministry from these.

Secondly, Ephesians. 6.12.
the kingdom of Satan: Satan is a king, he is the ruler of the darkness of this
world: that labors to keep all under a spiritual Egyptian darkness, that
labors to blind the minds of people, in whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of those that believe not: 2 Cor. 4.4.
it is a mighty policy of Satan's against Christ's Kingdom, to labor, that
people may be kept in ignorance, that dumb dogs may be set up that will never
open their mouths to teach knowledge: and that the means may be kept from the
Church, that so worthy men may not be brought in, who consider, the Labourer is
worthy of his hire. Look to this, when time shall be, see that there be a
candle in every candlestick that is able to give light, a pastor in every flock
that is able to feed: and let there be such encouragements as may enable men to
go on comfortably and cheerfully in the work: there has been already much said
in this argument by others; I shall not need to say more in it.

Thirdly, the kingdom of Antichrist: he is a King, nay a God, who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, 2 These. 2.4
so as he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God:
the oppositions Christ's kingdom receives from Popery, are notorious to all: as
there was a (...) ver. 6. something that was an obstacle, that hindered the
full revelation of the working of the mystery of iniquity in the Apostles
days, the Kingdom of the Emperors hindering the advancement of the kingdom of
Antichrist: so now Popery, that is a (...) the high and spreading power of the
kingdom of Antichrist is a mighty impediment to the enlargement of the kingdom
of Christ. The way then to set up Christ's Kingdom, is to pull down
Antichrists: there is a promise, that Christ's shall stand for ever, but
Antichrists shall have a fall; and that the raising of Christ's to its highest
pitch, shall be by the ruins of Antichrists. After the prophecy of the fall of
the whore, Rev. 18. Rev. 19. Rev. 20.
and the destruction of the beast, follows the description of the glorious
Kingdom of Christ. It is with those two Kingdoms, as with the scales in the
balance, when the one goes down, the other goes up: or as it was with the
houses of Saul and David, the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, 2 Samuel 3.1.
but the house of David stronger and stronger: the Kingdom of Christ goes up by
Antichrists going down; that waxes stronger and stronger, as this waxes
weaker and weaker. Beware then of the connivence at Popery, tollerations of
Idolatry, false worship, down with these, cast Antichrist out of his saddle,
wherein he has sat too fast among us, that Christ may better get up into his
Stirrup, to ride about conquering his enemies: And let all you do in these
particulars, be done.

1. With faithful resolutions to lay down all your own ends and interests,
and to seek Gods glory: 'twas the Apostles complaint, All men seek their own
things, Phil. 2.21.
but no man the things of Jesus Christ: So it is still, we more seek our own
things then those that belong to Christ and his Kingdom, this should be the
maine aim of every of us, whatsoever falls to our selves, to look to this, to
do our duty to Christ; if that be not proposed first as our main end, we shall
never prosecute it cordially, they are the prime principles of Christianity, to
deny our selves and take up the Cross and follow Christ: Mark. 8.34.
If these things be not first resolved on, to lay down our selves, and to be
contented with Christ's Cross, and Christ's yoke, and that form of Christ's
government, which he has set down in his Word, and not what our selves fancy,
and to suffer what he will have us, and to follow him whether he will carry us,
we shall do little for the setting up of his kingdom, while our thoughts are
turned wholly on our selves and our own interests and raising our own fortunes,
we easily forget Christ and fetting up his Kingdom.

2. With zeal to God; Ratione rerum agendum est, non libidine, Salv. de gub.
Rescu^re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione confligat, Aug. de util. cred. In
causa religionis, nobis nihil ex arbitrio nostro indulgere licet, sed nec
eligere q od aliquis ex arbi rio suo in duxerit. Teri.
not to do things in a formal way only, as willing to comply with the greater
and leading part and swim with the stream, and go with the crowd; but to do
every thing you do out of love and zeal to the cause you take in hand as
being Gods cause. When you go about to reform the House of God, to do it,
not because you are offended with this or that, or this or that pleases your
humor better, but because God is offended with it, or God is pleased with it,
that you may say truly, as David and Christ both spoke, The zeal of thy house
has eaten me up; not my own humor, but zeal to Gods glory, and the glory of
Gods House, that there is in the heart a Ignis quidam flagran assimi amoris,
Aug. Romans 12.11. Nen me d^seret Deus si nihil fing^, si offi^io ducor, si
veritatem amo, si amiciriam diligo, si multum metuo ni fallor. Aug de util.
^red.
fire of burning love kindled and flaming in you to God and his cause: When you
go on in any other service to God, to do it with fervencie, Be fervent in the
spirit, serving the Lord: that will go through with the work, God will not
forsake you in it, when done, not out of formality, but out of zeal and
sincerity to Gods cause.

3. With unity of affections, as minding the same thing; nothing more hinders
the advancement of Christ's Kingdom and Causes, then divisions among his
people: The wicked unite themselves strongly against Christ, Gebal and Ammon,
and Amaleck against Israel; Herod and Pontius Pilate made friends, that they
might oppose Christ: The multitudes, all against the Apostles; the Princes set
themselves and take counsel together against the Lord and his anointed; they
unite themselves that there may be no peace to Gods Church. Vnitatem
procurant, ne pax sit.
How should Gods people unite themselves for Christ, and go on as the
Israelites did to revenge the sin of the Benjamites, Knit together as one man;
as we pretend to have the same head, Judges 20.11.
and the same causes, so we should have the same heart and the same ends. A
Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand; if the Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom be divided, it is the way to ruin the cause and pull down the
Kingdom. All the Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem should be like the
Citizens of an earthly City, that is, compacted within it self, Jerusalem is a
City compacted within it self; Psalm. 12^.3.
stand close to one another in honest causes: Psalm. 133.1. Genesis 45.24. Exodus
2.13. (...) Acts 2.1.
It Is pleasant for brethren to dwell together in unity; Brethren must not fall
out by the way; Fellows must not be at variance: The Spirit of God descended
upon the Disciples, when they were with one accord together in one place. Peace
among our selves is a means to advance righteousness in the world, there is a
sweet conjunction of these noted in Scripture, Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other; follow peace and holiness; Psalm. 85.10. Heb. 12.14. Heb.
7.2. (...). Ciem Al. Str. l. 5
Christ is said to be King of Righteousness and King of peace, as it is said of
Numa, he erected a Temple of Faith and peace; peace among your selves will be a
mean the better to advance faith and holiness in the Church. If we would do
great things for Christ, we must be like-minded, of one accord, Phil. 2.2.
of one mind; as division is a work of the flesh, while one says I am of
Paul; another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3. Conc^rdia res
parvae creseunt discordia magnae dilabuntur. Genesis 15.10, 11. Psalm. 80.6.
so it lays us open to great inconveniences; discord draws ruin upon great
undertakings; the ravenous birds came down upon Abraham's Sacrifices, when
divided. Priam and his sons laughed at the divisions of the Grecians, Thou
make us a strife unto our Neighbors, and our enemies laugh among themselves.
Single Christians may do something toward the discharge of their duty to God:
but there is no noble enterprise to be waded through, so as to do any great
matter for the setting up Christ's kingdom in the midst of so great enemies,
and so great oppositions, if it be not undertaken with united strengths of many.

To close this point, I shall add some few meditations as strong allectives to
draw you up, both to crown Christ in your own hearts and to help to set up
the Kingdom of Christ abroad in the world.

1. The honourablenesse of this subjection to Christ; there is no service to
the service of a King; what then to him, who is King of Kings? but further, God
will make it an honorable service by stamping a special honor upon them, who
in serving God, honor him; Them that honor me, 1 Samuel 2.30.
I will honor, it is a word out of the mouth of God; if any man serve me, him
will my Father honor, it is a word out of the mouth of Christ. Ioh. 12.26.
And if you put the question, which Ahasuerus put to Haman, What shall be done
to the man whom the King will honor? What shall the honor be wherewith Christ
will honor those that be his subjects? Rev. 1 6 Ma. 25. Rev. 2.10.
the Scriptures tells us, he will make us Kings, and there is a Kingdom
provided for them and a Crown to be set on their heads. What subject has such
a Lord? Kings do much for their Servants, but they never set a Crown upon
their heads: Pharaoh made Joseph the greatest in the Kingdom, according to thy
word shall all the people be ruled; yet he reserved the Sovereignty to
himself, Ben 41.10.
in the Throne I will be greater then thou: but Christ casts his own Honor
upon us, makes us Kings, not to reign for a year, or a day, but to reign
with him for ever and ever: Let the force of this motive be that which Balak
put to Balaam, Rev. 22.5.
let nothing hinder thee from coming to me, for I will promote thee to very
great honor: Number. 22.16.
Let nothing keep us from coming in to Christ, for he will promote with very
great honor all those who come into this subjection, to become servants of
Christ.

2. The profitablenes of this subjection; Job. 21.15.
'twas the profane question of wicked persons, What is the Almighty that we
should serve him, and what profit shall we have if we pray unto him? And the
wicked conclusion of a rebellious people, It is vain to serve God, and there
is no profit that we have kept his ordinances. Gods people know, Mal. 3.14.
there is no such service as the service of Christ, no such promises, 1 Timothy
4.8.
no such gain as in godliness, Godliness is great gain, and has promises of
this life and of that to come: If ever we expect things by promise from God,
so as to have a blessing in them and not a curse, we must serve Christ in the
ways of godliness, that has the promise of this life as well as of that to
come. All blessings come, where Christ's Kingdom comes; Mat. 6.33. (...).
First seek Gods Kingdom and his righteousness, and all other things shall
be added to you: they shall be cast in as an overplus to the bargain; Behold,
my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; my servants shall drink, but ye
shall be thirsty; my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; Es. 65.13.
my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of
heart, and howl for vexation of spirit. That's the pre-eminence Gods Servants
have above Gods enemies, they have a greater portion of outward blessings even
in this life, only where God for some particular reasons sees fit to alter the
course of his ordinary dispensations.

But then further in the life to come, he that is the servant of Christ,
receives not only the advantage of his service here, but withal a glorious
reward of it hereafter, he who has his fruit unto holiness, shall have his
end ever lasting life. Romans 6.22.


Let the force of this motive be that which Abner proposed to the men of
Israel, why they should crown David and receive him for their King, because
the Lord has spoken of David, saying, by the hand of my servant David I will
save my people Israel out of the hands of the Philistines, 2 Samuel 3.18.
and out of the hands of all their enemies: So here, crown Christ in thy
heart, receive him as thy King, labor to advance his Kingdom among others,
because God has said by him he will save thee and all the Israel of God from
their sins, from the Devil, from hell. Set a crown upon Christ's head here in
thy heart, he will crown thee with all temporal blessings in this life, and
set a crown of glory, a crown of immortality on thy head in the life to come.

3. The necessity of this subjection to Christ, and of setting in to the work
of advancing Christ's Kingdom in the world, in case we would not be miserable in
this life and that to come.

No blessing upon a Land where Religion and Christ's Kingdom flourish not;
'twas when Obed Edom entertained the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.11.
that God blessed him and all his house. Religion is the mother of all blessings,
like the Heavens, it has an influence upon all things here below; it binds all
blessings together, as it is said of Minerva's Buckler made by Phydias, he
wrought it so artificially, that having set his own name in the midst of it,
it could never be taken out, without breaking the whole frame: All blessings
are bound up in Religion and the Gospel and Christ's government among us: if you
take away these, you break the whole frame of blessings: If the Palladium be
once lost, Troy is lost: steal away Christ and the Gospel and Religion from
us, we are lost and all blessings lost: Without that we shall have a curse in
all we enjoy, I will curse your blessings: Mal. 2.2.
God curses those things to us, which we enjoy not in the blessing of the
Gospel. Woe to them, says God, when I depart from them: Hos. 9.12.
If ever Christ depart from us, 'twill be woe to us. When the Arc of Gods
presence was taken from the Israelites, then Ichabod, the glory of Israel
departed: The Arc of Gods presence, 1 Samuel 4.22.
his presence in his ordinances, in the Gospel, if that be taken from us, the
glory departs from England, no more glory, no more blessing. It Is the reason of
the dissolution of States and Kingdoms, Religion first falls, before the
Commonwealth falls. The Kingdom of Judah lasted longer then the Kingdom of
Israel, because Religion and the worship of God was more carefully preserved
there. 2 Chro. 26.2.
When the messengers of God were mocked, and his words despised, and his
Prophets misused; that is, when Religion was wholly decayed, and Gods Kingdom
of grace cast down; then God brought a desolation upon the State. The four
Monarchies in Nebuchadnezars vision were all to have a fall, because they had
nothing of Christ's Kingdom in them. There is a necessity for Kingdoms to be
subject to the Kingdom of Christ in respect of happiness in this life.

But further, a necessity for all in respect of the life to come: unless we be
Christ's subjects, we must be Christ's enemies, and so shall be miserable
everlastingly; bring these mine enemies and slay them before me. Luke 19 27.
God will slay everlastingly those that are his enemies and will not be his
subjects. The nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish. Isa.
60.12.


Indeed, if we could escape Christ's wrath, it were not so much, if we did not
come under his yoke. But who shall escape his wrath, that lives not under his
law? Ezekiel. 22.14.
Can thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong, says the Lord, in the day that
I shall deal with thee? if Christ come to deal with us in wrath, as with his
enemies, whose hands can be so strong as to grapple with Christ? what will ye
do in the day of visitation and in the desolation, Isa. 10.3.
which shall come from far, to whom will ye fly for help, and where will ye
leave your glory? If Christ look upon us as enemies, who can protect us, what
shall become of all our glories, what good will they do us in the last day?

Think upon this, you that fear not God, you that have not yet taken Christ
for your King: if thou will not suffer him now to rule in thee, he will,
whether thou will or not, rule over thee: and which is best, to choose a King
voluntarily, that will rule thee in love, protect thee, bless thee, crown
thee in heaven; or to have a King serve to thee against thy will, that will
rule thee in wrath, and destroy thee. Certainly, such a one will Christ be unto
thee, if we suffer him not to rule us with a golden Scepter, he will break us
with an iron rod. Rev. 19.15.
Let this work upon us to take David's advice, he was a King himself, and yet a
subject of Christ's; Christ was David's son, and yet he was David's King: Be wise
now therefore, O Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, Psalm. 110.1.
serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling; kiss the son, lest he
be angry, and ye perish from the way when his wrath is kindled but a little:
blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12
This is true wisdom, if Christ will honor us, bless us, save us in case we
serve him, and certainly destroy us in case we serve him not: then serve the
Lord with fear, kiss the son lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way: when
his wrath is kindled but a little, they shall find a blessedness who serve
him and put their trust in him.



First, in the Kingdom of grace within the hearts of Gods people: as
temptations are the devils great batteries, whereby he labors to overthrow our
graces; so God makes those temptations the means of improving and perfecting
our graces. Rev. 3.10.
God not only keeps from the hour of temptation, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and in the hour of temptation, but makes temptations the improvers of grace.
Peter, and David, and Job by their trials, and their falls had an improvement in
their faith, and repentance, and love, and obedience, and their other graces.
It is a general rule for all trials, by temptation as well as affliction, when
Gods children are tried, Job. 23.10.
they come forth like gold, more glorious and beautiful in their graces, and
more fit for the service of their Master.

Secondly, in the Gospel and Gods truths: a great and effectual door was
opened to S. Paul in preaching the Gospel, 1 Cor. 16.9.
though there were many adversaries. The Gospel is the rod of Christ's strength
sent out of Sion; such a strength as whereby his government shall be set up in
the midst of his enemies: we can do nothing against the truth, Psalm. 110.2.
but for the truth, seems to be a strange paradox: 2 Cor. 13.8.
not that morrally a man may not oppose Gods truths, many do; but that no
opposition shall prevail, so as to destroy it: Is. 40.8.
the grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand
for ever. Obscured it may be for a time, like the Sun under a cloud; but it will
in the end break out again, and shine the brighter. Multorum improbitate
depressa veritas emergits Cic.
If the devil raise up a Zedekiah, a falls Prophet, to push at truth with horns
of iron; God will raise up a Micaiah, a true Prophet, to maintain it: if the
devil raise up an Elymas, a sorcerer, to pervert the good ways of God, God
will raise a Paul, a true Apostle, to stand up in the defense of them: if the
devil raise up Arius, and Pelagius, and Nestorius, and other Heretics, to
destroy truths; God will raise up his Athanasius, and Augustine, and other godly
champions for the clearing of them. Popery, and Arminianism, and Socinianisme
may now overspread the world for a time, as Arianisme once did in Athanasius
days, when his complaint was, that the whole world was become Arian: Re. 13.3.
so now the world may wonder for a time after the beast, and worship the beast;
yet if they be not of God, as no errors are, according to Gamaliels argument,
Act. 5.39.
they will not stand: errors will be, like a mist, in time dispelled, and the
Sun of truth stand firm in the firmament of Gods Church. How often has the
Gospel enlarged it self by oppositions? the Rulers forbidding the Apostles to
preach, made them more bold: Act. 4.29. Act. 8.4.
and the dispersion of the Disciples spread the Gospel, they that were
scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word. The three childrens
casting into the fiery furnace brought forth that notable decree for the
worship of God. Dan. 3.29.


Thirdly, in Gods people: the state of the Church is indeed various, O^scura
videtur Ecclesia in tempore peregrination is iuae, Ep 209
like the Moon, sometimes in the full, sometimes in the wane, ofttimes in the
change. The Church, says S. Augustine, is here in her pilgrimage, and is
therefore the more obscure. If at sometimes she seem glorious, as she receives
influence and light from Christ the Sun; as the Moon, the fuller the Sun shines
upon her, the brighter she is; the more the Sun is turned from her, the darker
she is; yet at other times she has many obscurings. But though she may have
less glory, she shall never be wholly destroyed. Mat. 7.25.
The Church is the house founded upon the rock, when the winds blow, and the
floods descend, it shall stand, it shall not fall: and as founded upon a rock,
so upon the rock of rocks, Christ himself; Mat. 16 18.
upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall never
prevail against her. Shake her they may, and give her a wound in some of her
members, as now the Church bleeds at one vein in Germany at another in
Ireland, at several veins in several parts of the world; As Pheti us notes
touching the calumnis cast upon Basil by Philost orgius, (...). Re. 11.11.
yet she shall lift up her head again, and shall be healed in her wounds, and
like the two witnesses slain in the streets, after a time she shall live again,
the spirit of life from God shall enter into her, and great fear shall fall upon
them that see her.

Fourthly, see it in Gods cause: whatever is undertaken in Gods cause, though
sometime it may seem to fail in particular persons, the cause of the poor in
perverting of judgment, the cause of religion by the insolence of persecutors
and tyrants, yet in other respects it does certainly prevail.

1. By a retribution of vengeance upon the heads of those, that set to
overthrow the cause of God: Abel perished in Gods cause: and yet even in the
death of Abel Gods cause prevailed by bringing down vengeance upon Cain the
murderer, the blood of thy brother cries to me from the ground, Gen, 4.10.
and therefore now thou art cursed from the earth. The Martyrs perished in the
cause of God, and yet even in their deaths that cause prevailed by bringing
vengeance upon the persecutors: I saw under the altar the souls of them that
were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, and they
cried with a loud voice, how long, O Lord holy and true, do thou not avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth. Rev. 6.10.
We need not doubt this prevailing of the cause of God in our neighboring
Kingdom, how ever it may seem for the time to go down in the barbarous and
bloody destruction of that poor people, whose blood cries so loud from the
ground, as God cannot but curse the murderers; and whose souls under the
Altar cry so loud, as God cannot but judge and avenge their blood on them who
have so inhumanely and so unmercifully shed it.

2. By way of improvement; that cause prevails that improves it self by the
opposition and violence it suffers under. Gods cause, like Sampson, is
victorious even then when we think it has received its deaths wound; and like
the Camomill, Es. 53.10. Ex. 1.12. Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses. Est.
8.16 Da. 6.26. Ezr. 6.6.
it spreads more by being trampled upon; or like the fire, the more it is
smothered and kept in by violence for the time, the more forcible it breaks out
and heats afterward. In shedding the blood of Christ, the cause of God seemed
to suffer; but you know what an improvement it received by it, that blood was
it, that was the fruitful field of such a seed unto God; 'twas making his soul
an offering for sin that made him see his seed. In Egypt the cause of God
seemed to suffer, when the children were commanded to be destroyed and their
burdens were doubled, yet we know that decree increased the people, and
doubling of their taskes hasted their deliverance. By the oppositions of Haman
the cause of God got better footing: And by casting Daniel into the Lions den,
God came everywhere to be more feared and worshipped by a public decree: By the
oppositions of Tatnai and Shetherboznai the building of Gods house prospered:
In burning and tearing the martyrs in the primitive times, and in Q. Mary's
days, the cause of God seemd to suffer, yet we know how Martyrdom improves it,
the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church, that is, as the Bishop of
Valence To the King of France in a conference at Fountain Bleau. So Tert. ad
Scap. Quisque enim tan tam tole. rantiam spectans, ut aliquo scrupulo percussus
and onquirere accenditur quid sis in causa Et ubi cognoverit veritatem ipse
statim sequitur.
once explained it; people by seeing the sufferings of the Martyrs, came more
to look into and understand that profession then formerly they had done, which
made them with so much patience endure such torments, and so at length to
embrace the same; like the generating of the Phoenix, out of the ashes not the
eggs of the Damme: Out of the ashes of a few Saints multitudes of professors
arise.

I shall present you these few grounds of this truth, reasons of the point.
to be enlarged in your own private meditations.

1. The genius of Religion, it is of a flourishing and improving nature: As one
said of Anthony that was at odds with Augustus, compound with him, for his
genius goes beyond yours: The genius of Religion goes beyond that of all its
opposites. It was first in families, after in Cities, and so by degrees spread
it self over the world. The image in Nebuchadnezzars vision was smitten by a
stone cut out without hands, Dan. 2.34, 35.
and the stone that smote the image became a great Mountain, and filled the
earth: You have the interpretation of this in the following verses, the Image
in its several parts represented the 4. Monarchies of the world: which should
all be destroyed by a fifth Kingdom, which Christ should set up, which should
so improve it self from a small beginning, as quickly to fill the whole earth,
notwithstanding all oppositions made against it.

2. The power of Christ, he is able to set up his colors and his Scepter there
where no earthly King dares set his foot. Pritannotum in accessa Romany Joca,
Christo vero sub aita
'Twas Tertullians observation, Britain was a place which the Romans could
not at such a time possess, and yet it was subdued to Christ. Look by what
motives people are brought in to Christ, you must needs acknowledge a strong
working power above all the strengths of men, done by such contrary ways to
flesh and blood: If we will follow Christ, and be heirs of heaven, We must
deny our selves, and take up our Cross and suffer persecution and be hated for
his name sake, and hate father and mother, etc. and yet by these and the like
motives more are brought in to Christ and submit to his Laws, then by all the
rewards could be proposed to them.

3. The course of Gods providence, which shall still uphold it, so as to give
it footing more and more every day: though the Revelation be obscure in many
things, yet this we may gather out of it clearly, that when the vialls begin to
be powered out, the truth shall grow up to the confusion of its enemies; as on
the other side, we see several effects of Gods providence against the
Kingdom of Satan and Antichrist: that where we see the false Religion has
received some blows, we may assure our selves, a further ruin will certainly
follow, as they said of Haman, If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, Hest.
6.13.
before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but
shall surely fall before him: If Religion be of the seed of Christ, the
daughter of God, false Religions, that once begin to fall, shall not prevail,
but shall surely fall before it.

Job 9.4.
Has any man hardened himself against God, and prospered? I must say to such
as Abijah did to Jeroboam, Ye think to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord: 2
Chr. 13.8.
Let us not think we shall be able to withstand the Kingdom of Christ, he is
able to break through all oppositions, he can crush his enemies, thou shall
break them with an iron rod, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters
vessel: Ps. 2.9.
the Lord at thy right hand shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath,
Ps. 110.5.
Kings that be his enemies. It was part of Moses Song touching the enemies of
Israel, the people shall hear and be afraid, Exodus 15.14.
sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina, the Dukes of Edom
shall be amazed, trembling shall take hold of the mighty men of Moab, the
inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away, fear and dread shall fall upon them,
for the Lord reigns for ever and ever. Because Christ reigns, such shall be
the end of all his enemies, however they may flourish for a time. Oh! fear to
oppose Christ in his Gospel, in his people, in his causes. Isa. 45.9
Woe unto him that strives with his Maker, let the potsheards strive with the
potsheards of the earth. Let man strive with man, and Prince fight with Prince,
that is but dashing one earthen pitcher against another, but let us take heed of
engaging Christ against us, woe to him that strives with Christ; it is dangerous
setting our selves against his Kingdom, or his people, or his causes, lest as
in this mountain, in Gods Church the hand of the Lord shall rest, so Moab, all
the enemies of Christ be trodden down under him, as straw is trodden down for
the dunghill. Isa 2^.10


Rome at as dear a rate, when Hanniball besieged it, as they did before. Prize
Religion as high in times of trouble as in times of peace. We must not look
only at the present proceedings, our spirits must not rise or fall, only as
we see a flood or an ebb in the handling of Gods causes: but consider the
end, as David speaks of the upright man, Psalm. 31.37.
mark his end, the end of that man is peace. Whatever the present condition
should prove to be of Christ's Kingdom, yet the end of it will be peace and
happiness to Gods people. At Cannae the Romans went to congratulate the
Consul that fled from the battle, because he signified thereby, that the
state of things was not yet so desperate, but he durst live: We should not
despair of the state of Gods Church and Religion, though we should see them
brought to great straits. It may be we shall not see the prosperity of Gods
Church in our days: yet here is comfort enough, to know the work shall go on:
It is a work in Christ's hand, and a work God takes pleasure in, Isa. 53 10
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Rev. 1.16
Christ, who holds the stars in his Right hand, the Angels of his Church, to
preserve them, does certainly hold the Church it self, for whose good, his
Ministers are in his right hand, to preserve her, whatever oppositions be made
against her. At Antioch, if I mistake not, the Ecclesiastical story says,
there being an Earth quake, whereby many houses fell, and the people terrified
with it; being ready to forsake the city, one had a vision, that he faw a man
coming to him, who commanded him to write upon every house, Christus nobiscum,
Christ is with us, stay here, and so it ceased: thus we should do, when we
consider the tottering estate of religion, remember Christ is with us, be not
affrighted, forsake it not, if God be for us, who can be against us? if Christ
be in the ship with us, it cannot sink.

But especially it may be high encouragement to you (Honorable and beloved:)
you are they that must help up Christ into his Kingdom in the midst of these
great oppositions that are now made against it: we the Ministers of God can but
encourage and strengthen you, as the Prophet; Haggai and Zachary, Gods Prophets
were with the Princes helping them: Ezr. 5.2.
helping them with their prayers, and helping them with their instructions
touching Gods will, and helping them with their exhortations to stir them up;
but the work is chiefly yours, you are to encounter Christ's enemies, the sword
of justice is put into your hands to cut down all oppositions. If your hearts
be upright with God, that your consciences assure you, you seek Gods glory, and
the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, not your selves, nor your own ends, you
have as much encouragement as can be; you go on in a work that shall be carried
up against all oppositions. Heb. 11.27.
Should visible means fail, yet as there is an invisible God who may be seen
by the eye of faith, so there are also invisible means: the power of Christ
shall rest upon those that work his works, and stand up faithfully in his
causes. Should you be left fewer then you are, yet if you can but resolve, when
others forsake Christ, to say truly, Lord we will never forsake thee, and do
it; not only say it: some have said it, and yet with Peter gone away and
deserted the cause: there is then no reason why you should fear, Christ can
work by few as well as by many: Christ, when men fail, will tread the
wine press alone, when the day of vengeance comes, Isa. 63.3, 4.
and the year of his redeemed ones comes, then, if there be none to help, his
own arm will bring salvation. Do you what you can in a right way for Gods
causes and Christ's Kingdom; and when you can do no more, stand still and look
on with grief, that you can do no more; and if you can contribute nothing
else, yet date lachrymulam, shed a tear: God puts the tears of his people
into his bottle, and in his time tears shall be like the water that turns and
drives the wheel; Gods work shall go on, and your tears shall help to drive
it on, as well as your noblest works. It was Gods word in a work that met with
greater opposition then yours now can: Exodus 14.13.
stand still and see the salvation of the Lord. It may be your strengths of the
arm of flesh may yet be too great for God to work by: the Lord saves, not by
sword, 1 Samuel 17.47.
nor by spear, for the battle is the Lords. Gideon had too many, while he had
above three hundred: Iud. 7.4
greatness of outward strength ecclipses and darkens the glory of Christ's
power in saving: when God sees that his peoples power is gone, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
then he strikes into the work and more shows himself. Let us not limit the
holy One of Israel, neither to means, nor to times: whether there be many or
few that stand up in Gods causes, we are sure of this, Christ shall reign till
he has put al his enemies under his feet. We look too much on the instruments,
1 Cor. 15.25.
and are ready to cry out, if the foundations of the earth be shaken, what
shall the righteous do? you are they that are our foundations, Ps. 11.3.
you the preservers of the fundamental laws of the state and the preservers of
the fundamental laws of the Church; if you be shaken, it will indeed be a sad
time to Gods righteous people; yet let not that affright us neither, we have a
stronger foundation, fundamentum fundamenti, the foundation of the foundations;
the head stone of the corner, the rock upon which the Church is built, which
shall never be shaken. Go you on therefore, and let every one faithfully do
his duty to Christ and leave the issue to God.

To conclude all; this day is a day of humiliation, and therefore a day of
covenanting with God. O that I might now engage you all here present this day
in this covenant, to take Christ for your King into your own hearts, and then
to set faithfully to this work of undertaking his causes against all those
great oppositions which every day show themselves, when Iehojada made the
covenant with the Lord, 2 King. 11.17.
that the people should be the Lords people, 'twas to this end, that they
should undertake the Lords causes against the Lords enemies, for presently they
brake down the house of Baal, and his altar, and his images, and slew Mattan
the Priest of Baal before the altar. Let us make such a covenant to be the
Lords people, and so to undertake the Lords causes, as Scipio once held the
point of his sword to the breasts of many gallants that were flying out of
Italy, and made them swear upon that sword, that they would not desert the
cause: God has great causes now, Christ was never more engaged in great
affairs then at this time: O that I might persuade all that profess
themselves Gods people, to engage themselves to Christ; to make vows betwixt
God and their own souls upon these sacred truths, this book, never to desert
Christ's causes, but as faithful subjects of his Kingdom, do all they can,
notwithstanding all oppositions, to make Christ's Kingdom flourish through the
world, Judge. 5.23.
and remember Meroz curse upon those that come not to the help of Christ
against the mighty. Christ can carry on his work without us: but if we do not
our part, deliverance shall come some other way, as Mord^cai told Queen Hester,
Est. 4.14.
but we shall be destroyed; the curse will be upon every of us, that set not
in every one in his way, and as God calls him to it, to set up Christ in the
midst of his enemies.

FINIS.

