THAT Great Expedition for IRELAND By way of underwriting proposed, by both
Houses of Parliament, and Graciously assented unto by His Majesty is here
Vindicated As

Pious, Charitable, Just, Politic, Profitable.
And Objections to the contra^y clearly answered, by one who heartily wishes
the speedy promotion of this Proposition of underwriting, as almost the only
remedy.

Printed at London for Joseph Hunscort. 1642.

BY how much I was more affectionately apprehensive of the present calamities
and deplorable estate of the Kingdom of Ireland, and whilst the voice of my
friends there seemed to make one Chorus with the fowls under the Altar, of
them which were slain for Rev. 6. 10.
the Word of God, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood. So much the more this proposition was unto me (if I may
without presumption make such an application) honey to my taste, imusick to
mind ears, joy to mine heart: toward which, whilst others offer great
sums, give mo leave to cast my mite into the treasury, and because I cannot
subscribe as a cotracter, permit me yet to subscribe as an insurer.

These Irish Esaus have long expected such a day, though like Lupus est and
tremens and fremens. Aug.
burnt children they dreaded the fire, but a woolfe whether he be fearful or
furious is still a woolfe. Now when they thought they had their opportunity,
(what I write is most certain) and that they had committed us together, like
the Lion and the Bore in the Greek Apollogist, they hoped well that they with
the Vulture might steal away the prey from both parties. But this Contract ^ill
quickly same the courage of the Rebels and abate the triumphs and insultations
of the Popish party. The (...) concurrence of all degrees of men will soon
change their Harp Job 30. 31.
into mourning, and their Organs into the voice of them that weep.

As if there were a revolution of the great Platonicall year, those days
seem to be reinuned wherein the Israelites did present their free will
offerings, toward the making and adoming Exodus 36.
of the Tabernacle; or the Consulate of Le^^^us and Marcellus atter the
overthrow of Cannoe, when the Citizens of Rome emptied their private Coffers,
to supply the pressing necessities of that State. They know that the public
may subsist without the Privare but the private never without the public. This
alone gave that City the advantage of Carthage, and the prehemineace of the
whole world, only the want of this (to forbear nearer instances) was the
ruin of Constantinople, which made the conqueting Turk^ laugh to find such
poor enemies, and rich captives.

It is thought there were two special remorahs which did retarde the
prosperous success of the late Irish wars. The one was slow and short
supplies, coming like Cains sacrifice in process Genesis 4. 3.
of time, and in such a thristy unthristy way, that they lost an hog for an
half penie worth of Tar. It is a great fault in Client to starve his cause, but
worse in a State. I know not whether it have been the fate or fortune of our
late expeditions, that still our wings wanted impinge, just when we should have
made an advantageous flight. Our late renowned Deborah, Q Eliz being much
perplexed with the bad success of her Irish affairs, sent over that expert
Commander Sir Roger Williams to find out the true reason thereof; who returned
her Majesty a true report veiled in this homely story, of an Oxford man that
bought a goose in Dublin for a groat, and a penie faggot to roast his goose, but
his faggot was consumed by that time the goose was well warmed, so of necessity
he was to buy another faggot, which made his goose begin to drop; and after that
a third faggot: but because it cooled between faggot and faggot, his goose was
little better: Then the man grew angry, and bought a whole g^oats worth of
fagots together, and roasted his goose well in the turning of an hand. The
application is easy.

The other rub was conceived to be the too much correspondence between some of
the Commanders and the Earl of Tyrone, who would not stick in private to brag
to themselves, how much they were beholden to him. Surgeons often prolong their
cures, and beggars ordinarily nourish their fores for advantage. It would
trouble a man's mind to hazard his life, and for his reward thrust himself out
of all his employment, unless he might be sure either of triumph at his
return, or a good Dividend out of the spoils: Both these inconveniences will
be removed by this contract; The war will not cool between one supply and
another; the great and inferior Officers will themselves become adventurers,
which is a consideration of great weight, able to inspire valor into a
pale-liverd coward, when (as Tacitus said of Catilines Soldiers) Divitias
decus glorians libertatem patriam in dextris portunt: When men bear their
country, their riches, their portions, and their hopes in their right hands.

In a word, this proposition is a center wherein all the lines of Piety,
Charity, Justice, Policy, and Utilitie do meet together. Hence is a cord not
only threefold, but fivefold, almost as double as Ajax his shield.

First for piety, he that had viewed the beaten ways to their Masse-houses,
and the narrow paths to our Churches, in the most parts of Ireland, might
justly have taken up that of the Prophet Jeremy, The ways of Sion do mourn,
because no man comes Lan^. 1. 4.
to the solemn Assemblies. Of that of our Savior, Wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leads to destruction, etc. Strait is Matthew. 7. 13.
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, etc. But this course
if it be pursued, will spread Religion throughout the whole Kingdom in an
instant, as the lightning which shines in the East, and appears in the West.
Next after the glory of God, hallowed be thy Name, we are taught to pray for
the dilating of Religion thy Kingdom come: When the owner heard that the Lord
had need of his goods, he presently let them go. Matt. 21. 3.
If there were no certain expectation of profit, yet in this case we ought to
offer freely, and bless God who has given us means and hearts to lend unto
him some part of his own store. When Solomon bestowed such an infinite mass of
treasure upon 1 Chronicles. 29. 16. 1 King. 10. 27,
the Temple, yet we read that silver was as common as stones in Jerusalem.

Next for charity. It was not without cause, when the Lord offered David his
choice of three plagues, that he prayed, Let me fall into the hand of the Lord,
but not into the hands of men. Their 2 Samuel 24, 14.
mercies are cruel; sure I am, the Irish mercies have been very cruel, like
the mercies of a prevailing coward, in cold blood to be cruel, without
provocation to be cruel, to be cruel to that sex and that age (women and
little ones) whom God would Deuteronomy. 20. 14.
have spared even after peace, is rejected. To be cruel (extreme cruel) to
that unarmed profession, which should it self be a protection, the Ministers of
the Word of God, yet the garrison of the Philistines did not hurt the college
of the Prophets. But for these butcheries there can be no reparation, Numb. 35.
31. except 1 Samuel 10. 5.
the blood of the murderer, he that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed, without which the Land cannot be cleansed from the guilt of
innocent blood; nay to be cruel Numb. 35. 33.
even to the very fruit trees, which God expressly forbids. To be cruel to
the very walls and roofes, which the civil heathen Deuteronomy. 20. 19.
did abominate. Tully calls it nefarium bellum, a wicked war, which is made
with walls, and roofes, and pillars. And Livy commends the Romans, that having
taken Capua, they did not tirranise over the walls and houses. But it seems
these men despair to hold them themselves, and they would not have them to
become receptacles for us. All this while I speak not of those goods and
movables which they took from the Protestants, which in the space of ten weeks
were stimated by a moderate survey at ten hundred thousad pounds. Then if it be
a blessed thing to them to receive, what a blessing will this be to join with
others in the relief of so many desolate widows, distressed orphans, and
banished persos. That very day that Zacheus made such a proffer, he heard, This
day is divation come to thine house. And this likewise will be a second fruit
of thy subscriptio.

Thirdly, for Justice, There are three grounds of a just war. First, The
defense and protection of the innocent. Secondly, The recovery and repetition
of things wrongfully detained. Thirdly, The punishment and revenge of injuries
received. Here all these considerations or rather obligations do concur; The
persons to be protected, are brethren by Nation, by Religion, and by the same
bond of subjection under a gracious Sovereign. The things detained are their
lands, their goods, their wives, their children, their friends, and whatsoever
a man can call dear in this world: And not detained only, but abused,
famished, starved, and used worse than dogs. The injuries received are of all
sorts, reflecting both upon soul, and body, and estate. So this Contract is
pious, charitable, and just.

In the fourth place, it stands with the rules of good Policy. Is it not one
cause of our distemper, that the head wants a due proportion of aliment, and is
necessitated out of proper course sequi pabulum? Now in respect Vlster is the
lowest rated and most planted, and by consequence the least expectation of
Escheats there, by a probable Medium, which cannot much err, this Million of
money to be contracted for, will not take up above 25 or 2600000 of English
Acres; and out of this will arise to his Majesty a constant yearly Revenue of
23000. l. or thereabout: To which all the rest of the Escheated Lands being
added, and improved in like manner, it will raise such a considerable Revenue
as may in a great part ease the Subject of extraordinary Subsidies.

The poorer sort are yet sensible of the late charge of Subsidies and
Poll-money, This course will free them, and transfer the burden upon such as
are both able and willing to undergo it, this will much quicken and accelerate
the supplies; less bodies are more capable of sudden motions; By this means
Ireland shall be speedily rescued before it be lost outright. If our enemies
had the command of that back-doore, we should not long want them here. When the
Romans had once gotten Sicily, they soon after invaded and gave Laws to
Afric. You remember the old Proverb, He that will England win, with Ireland
must begin. Let us defend Aras and focos, our Region, our Religion, rather at a
distance than at home. This will amplify and extend the power and glory of the
English Nation: whilst trees grow in a throng, on an heap, they cannot spread
out their bows at liberty, as they may do when they are removed and planted
at a greater distance. There are two reasons why Rome did flourish more and
longer than Athens or Sparta; the one by incorporating those whom they
conquered with themselves, as the Sabines and the Albanes, by this means
changing enemies into Citizens, which course succeeded prosperously to Henry
the eighth, in the union of Wales to England. The other was their Colonies
which they sent abroad: when Rome was the Mistress of a great part of the
world, their chiefest strength was in their Colonies, out of which the greatest
part of their Armies were ever raised, Hanum subsidio imperium populi Romani
stetit, says Livie, If this contract Lib. 27.
proceed with effect, I doubt not speedily to find another England in Ireland,
and to see that old saying proved false, Ireland will not be reformed till the
day of judgment. Former Plantations sell by drops here and there, Rari^autes
in gurgite vasto, (that was the reason why so many of the old English
degenerated and turned Irish.) They could not operate beyond the spheere of
their own activity, but this by the blessing of God will presently give a
settlement both to it self, and that Kingdom. Hitherto a great part of those
who have gone over, have been poor Farmers, or necessitous persons, that were
not able to make a considerable improvement. These contracters will be able to
make it a gallant Kingdom forthwith. So you see Religion, Charity, Justice,
and Policy, are four great encouragements to subscribe this Contract.

But yet there is one wanting which is as much looked after in the world as any
of them, that is, the smell of gain, Quid dabitur viro? What advantage shall a
Contracter reap by it? If there be a concurrence of this also, Omne ^ulit
punctum qui miset utile dulci. Yes surely, be it spoken with all due submission
to the All-mighty providence, in whose hand is the event of battles, and by
his grace and blessing upon the just Arms of his Royal Majesty, and his
loyal Subjects, I do not conceive the adventure to be much greater than a
voyage into the Weiles, especially if we begin with speed before they get
foreign aid, and not a velitation but a just war.

It was the Spartane error, that with Skirmishes rather than Battles, they
taught the Thebans to become their Masters. Now if a man would set out one
hundred pounds for the insurance of another, which were a great proportion,
considering the adventure, yet the contract would bear it over and over again.
To speak modestly within my compass, That with might have been sold for six
thousand pounds within this year, a Contracter shall now have for less than
one thousand pounds, besides the expectation of a mighty improvement by this
plantation. So as it is clearly the most gainefull trade that can be driven in
this Kingdom in these dead times, and more secure than that which is
rudentibus apta, which hanges upon Cableropes, where his sacred Majesty, the
honorable members of both Houses of Parliament, and the whole body of this
Kingdom are so deeply engaged in the insurance. So I may twist this fifth
thread of Profit, with the other four, of Religion, Charity, Justice, and
Policy.

But weak eyes are offended with the light of the Sun, Though this Contract
be never so pious, charitable, just, beneficial to the public State, to
private Contracters, yet the tooth of envy will not want something to bite at,
nor the tongue of malice to bark at.

First, they say, Christ never planted Religion in blood, when the Disciples
demanded leave to call for fire from Heaven, to destroy the Cities that did not
receive them, our Savior answered, Ye know not what spirit ye are of. Luk 9.
54.


I answer in the first place, that this war is not merely as they would make
the world believe, a war of Religion, but mixed with other considerations. I
omit the native and hereditary love of the Irish to the Spaniard, as to the
root from whence they spring. I pass by the Spanish Pensioners in Ireland,
among whom the Romish tributary Archbishop of Cashell was not long since
questioned for one, and dismissed merely for his simplicity, as a more
probable enemy to a cup of Usquebah than to a State. Yet I hear and fear that
the party who was employed to apprehend him, has since lost his blood for that
D. S. P.
service. But I cannot omit a Treaty in Spain about two years since, between
some of the greatest instruments of State there and sundry Irish Papists,
wherein it was proposed by the Irish party, what revenue, what provision for
shipping, what other This story is in the Clerk of the Councels books in
Ireland.
advantage Ireland would bring to his Catholic Majesty, and how facile it was
to gain it; how the Irish stood affected to him. It is well known to some
persons of great eminency both in England and Ireland, who were present at this
consultation, what was their resolution, to employ two Friars with Letters of
credence thither, to a great number of the Nobility and Gentry of that
Kingdom as well Irish as old English. (I confess the choice argued no depth
of understanding,) The Friars are known, the persons to whom they were to
address themselves are known, and if it had not been for some accidental
troubles, they had been apprehended, or escaped narrowly. If you ask how I know
this, Suppose one of the Friars was as big with the secret as Midas his Barber,
and forfeare of bursting did vent himself among some roots of reeds, which
after made the discovery. The relation is most true. So you see there is
something more in it than Religion.

I have seen a Letter from the late Earl of Tyrone, and the Earl of
Terconnell, to the now Cardinal Protector Barberino, wherein they profess
that though they did for a time supersede from their right in Ireland, yet they
did not intend to desert it. I have seen another Letter from a company of
mean and contemptible persons, saving that they had some old Irish blood in
them, to the same Cardinal Protector, wherein they style themselves Barons
and Dinastae, Nobles and Peers of the Realm. This showed they had not
forgotten their Progenitors pretenses; but here was nothing of Religion in it.
I have seen two Letters of late dated from Sir Philomy O Neale and his brother
Tirlogh, since they were in rebellion, to two eminent Gentlemen of the Scottish
Nation, wherein they offer and desire not only quarter but friendship,
alleging this reason, that both Nations were one in their original, and
entreating that they might continue so in affection: I urge not this as though
those Gentlemen did credit it, but to show that there is more in their designs
than Religion, otherwise they would have sought other Confederates.

I might add those Prophesies which of late did fly abroad familiarly among
them; as that of the three Cocks, the red Cock and the black, which
continued wounding one another, till the white Cock (whereby they denoted the
Earl of Tyrone) came and destroyed them both. These people had their thoughts
taken up with something else than Religion. Surely if there had been nothing in
it but Religion, they would never have persuaded a Gentleman to go to Mass,
upon assurance of life, and presently when he had done it, have hanged him up,
so far as was in them to kill both body and soul; yet thus we hear from
all hands they used Master Mi^aletor. Surely if it be Religion, it is such a
Religion as that of the Shechemites, Shall not their cattle and their substance
be ours? Shall Religion Genesis 34. 23.
then become a cloak or a stalking horse for those who rob and burn and
ravish and kill unarmed enemies? Were all our houses, Towns, stackyards,
heretics, that they were condemned to be burned?

This is most certain, that every one of the Rebels upon the first
insurrection, did seize all those Lands which his Father, or his grandfather,
or his great grandfather had held before Tyrones Wars, or before the
Artainder of Shane O Neale, although all these were invested in the Crown by
Act of Parliament 1o. Eliz. and have since been quietly possessed builded and
planted by the English. There is no question, but this was the Religion which
they thirsted after. Their debts were great, their fortunes and estates
desperate, even generally. They had no other way left to repair themselves but
this. And yet our old English Gentry in the pale, are so dull as to be fooled
with this gross conceit, that this war is only for Religion. Let them take
heed, their Land is the flower of the whole Kingdom.

The old Irish have the same pretenses to it which they have to the rest, and
if it should come to that, they would find by woeful experience, that the
goodness of the soil would much inflame their devotion. What favor could
they expect in such a case, but that which Polyphemus promised to Ulysses. That
he should be the last devoured?

Though they have an equal appetite unto both, yet we and they together have
been too much for the stomach to digestat one meal. Admit they are confederate
with them, have they not offered the same terms to the Scots? But they were
not so credulous to be gulled by them. My hope is that my Contrymen shall
buy their repentance at a readier market.

But to take their case at the best, admitting, but not granting that it (...)
war of religion. There is a vast distance between these two, to plant
^eligion with the sword, which whether, or how far it be lawful, is no way
pertinent to this present case, and to protect true piety against
superstitious vanity, to defend Orthodox Christians from Heterodox Papists,
^oyall Subjects from rebellious Traitors, To break the jaws of the Job 29.
1^.
wicked, and to pluck the spoil out of his teeth. Shall it be lawful for
them, being but Subjects, to usurp the inseparable rights of the Crown, to
trample upon the Laws of the Land, to pursue the religion established by
Parliament with fire and sword, to overthrow totally the propriety of the
Subject: and shall it not be lawful for his Majesty to vindicate Himself,
Religion, his Laws, his Subjects? It is true, this war may concern Religion
in the consequents, otherwise I should be right ^^rt^e, but antecedently in it
self it is no war of religion.

Secondly, it is objected, that the Protestants beyond seas will smart for
this, that this course will deprive his Majesty of all power to mediate for
them, and take away that correspondence which is observed between Princes in
point of state.

It will not be needful in this case to consider, whether toleration or
connivence in religion may be admitted, or of whom, with what cautions and
conditions, whether it extend to the persons only, or to the practice also, who
are tares in the Lords field, how far these tares may be, or must be suffered.
Whether Iustine the Emperor of Constantinople did well, to surcease from
persecuting the Arrians in his Dommions, upon the humble suit of the Orthodox
Christians in Italy, who groaned then under the persecution of Theodorick their
King, an Arrian Prince, nor how far this history may be applyable to these
times. It is sufficient to answer this objection, to show that the Irish are
not called to an account for religion, but for robberies* rapes, murders,
treasons. If ever Protestants shall make themselves so unworthy, so incapable
of any mediation, Luant peccata let them suffer according to their demerits,
and let no eye pity them.

Thirdly, it is objected, that this course will prolong the war, and harden the
Rebels, when they are excluded from all hope of pardon, that it will hinder all
accommodations whereas now they offer to come in upon terms, that it will make
the conquest more difficult, that it will take away all means of reparation
from the poor Protestants, who are robbed and stripped, and have no hopes of
satisfaction, but out of the lands some of the arch Rebels, that it tyeth his
Majesty's hands from pardoning whom he pleases, and abridgeth the power of the
chief Governer, disabling him from rewarding good servitours; that it were a
safer way to take in the greater part upon submission, and afterward to punish
them insensibly, and by degrees.

This argument is more specious than substantial, in true reason this course
will rather shorten the war, when the enemies shall see that they are not like
to be dallied, or to be trifled withal, it will soon humble them and make
them present themselves with sackcloth upon their loins, 1. Kin. 20 32
and ropes upon their heads, as the Syrians did to the King of Israel. So those
who have been drawn into action, by fear or fained shows, may leave objects
of his Majesty's grace, either for the pardon of their lives, or restitution to
their estates, according to their respective deserts, or the favor they shall
find in his royal eyes; and yet those be left to exemplarie justice, whose
black outrageous villainies have rendered them, even in the judgment of their
own consciences, incapable of all favor. Whose lands being escheated, will be
able to counter-balance this fumme, according to the proportion contracted for.
And yet I think no man will be so vain, to ask how then shall this great sum
be employed, whilst this Crown and Kingdom are so far engaged in debts,
whilst the poor robbed Protestants cry for reparation, and this bloody
rebellion has showed us how necessary it is to have some more places of
strength in Ireland. If they mean any other accommodation than this, I
understand it not, unless they would have us, who have escaped their Butcherly
hands to return among them, and gently to hold out our throats to be cut at
their discretion. Who will not rather choose to forsake his estate there, and
beg an halfe-penny from passengers with Belisarius, than after so evident a
demonstration of their universal rancour, to expose himself and his
posterity to their barbarous cruelty? If they were only thorns in our sides
to vex us, as the Canaanites were to the Israelites, it were more tolerable;
Number. 33. 25.
but to be skenes in our sides to murder us, is worse. No, no, there is no
thought to be had of an English man's abode in Ireland, without the walls of a
City, unless the Kingdom may be reduced to a better temperature and
constitution. We often see a feverish distemper ushers in a better habitude
of the body. Now is the time when it may be affected with justice, but after a
free pardon, that which is justice now would become murder. Now is the time
when their foreign Confederates have their hands full at home, and can afford
them no great store of relief. All wise and flourishing Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, have ever made choice to undergo a present charge, rather than
a future and perpetual inconvenience. Neither will this project either give
impediment to the reparation of those who are robbed and damnified, seeing that
if the Rebels submit, they may be repaired out of the sum contracted for, and
if they stand out, there will be as much more land for them, upon the like
rent; and yet sufficient left over and above both these proportions, to be
disposed unto good servitours.

Fourthly, it is said that this way is cruel, and tends not to a reformation,
but to an utter extirpation, that it does involve the nocent and innocent in
the same punishment, That it were better to offer conditions Deuteronomy. 20. 1^.
of peace, and then let the obstinate suffer. I answer with Saint Ambrose,
Gravissimus nodus, etc. An hard knot must have an hard wedge. When Titus, the
darling of mankind, saw the infinite mortality which accompanied the siege of
Jerusalem, by famine, pestilence, and the sword, he wept, and casting up his
eyes to Heaven, called God to witness, that he was innocent of those
miseries. So his Majesty may justly say, that whatsoever they suffer, they may
thank themselves for it, He and his Kingdom are guiltless of all the blood
that is shed 2 Samuel 3. 28
for ever, especially since they have yet time of grace, the red flag is yet up
of mercy, mixed with justice; the black flag of utter ruin and desolation is
not yet advanced, yet they have time to remove and flit from under the sign of
the Sword, to be under the sign of the Crown, to use Saint Anselmes
comparison. If they fall, they fall wilfully into the pit which themselves have
dug; they have first unsheathed the sword, or rather, they have sheathed it
in the bowels of innocents, and left their carcasses as dung upon the face of
the earth; Can they imagine that these do not cry for vengeance? If the same
sword take his course about, and themselves feel the lashes of Bellona's
bloody whip, whom can they blame? They have maliciously destroyed the good
creatures of God and made wilful wast of his blessings, and offered the come
of whole Countries for a sacrifice to the fire. Now if famine punish excess,
if woeful want follow wilful waste, if others mete the same measure again
into their bosoms, pressed down and running over, if condemnation merciless
light on those that showed not mercy, whom can they condemn? I confess no
virtue makes a man more like his Creator then mercy, but there is a terrible
lenity, a sparing cruelty, a foolish pity, that is, when indulgence to the bad
becomes cruelty to the good. When demerit and necessity do both concur,
there punishment was never yet accounted severity. But that the innocent should
be extirpated, God forbid, be that far from the Throne of my Sovereign.
Reward and punishment (as said Lycurgus) do preserve the Commonwealth. And
these two have two suitable Ojbects, Well-doers, Ill-doers; The Magistrares care
must be not to mistake either the Act or the Object, as Death and Cupid are
fained to have done their Bows, which made so many old doting Lovers; and
young herses, that he inflict not punishment upon good doers (the tears of
Innocents are more dangerous then any deluge) nor fasten rewards upon the
Nocent; He that justifies the wicked is an abomination to the Lord. Nay
rather it is to be wished by all good Christians, that even those who are not
transcendently nocent may find favor, at least for life, and principally those
who (as God pleades for the Ninivites, cannot discern between their right
hand and their left, but always with this caution, so far as it may consist
with the ^nah. 4. 11.
security of the good Subject.

Charity pleades for pardon, except it be where a greater charity pleades
against it. I only propose a quaere (I presume not to apply) why the more
stubborn and refractory sort of guilty persons, and yet not Ringleaders of
sedition, may not be removed from their native soil, as the Romans dealt with
the Ligurians a rebellious people, that if they will be sitting upon the
Cockatrices eggs of mischief and Treason, yet as the Florentine said they may
never hatch them, being so far from their nests. In our memory, the King of
Spain thought fear of danger a just ground to banish all the Moors out of
his Kingdom, here both danger and desert concur to make it lawful. Others who
are more apt to be conformed, may be partly dispersed in England, and partly
continued in Ireland, so as they assume English names, wear English Apparel,
speak the English Language, inhabit English houses, and above all embrace the
Religion protested in England.

Hitherto the Romish Priests have preserved these marks of distinction, as a
wall of separation to prevent an Union; hereafter let it be as capital for a
Priest to come there, as it was for an armed Englishman to be seen in
Callis. I confess some Irish have done good service against the Rebels, these
deserve to be rewarded: I confess in some places the chiefest abuses were
acted and committed by the meaner sort of people. But do we believe it was
ordinarily done without the consent, nay without the command of their
Landlords? It is scarce credible to those who know the absolute power of an
Irish Lord over his dependents, why did they not restrainthem where they could,
Qui desinit obviare cum potest, consentit. The Benjamites refusing to punish
the guilty persons were prosecuted theselves: plotters and contrivers, I add
also concealers and smotherers of Judge. 20. 13.
this horrid Treason, deserve as much to be punished as the Actors and
Executers, or rather more, as being commonly more eminent, and more dangerous.
It was Tarquins silent, but in that case unjust advice to his Son, when with
his Rod he struck off the heads of the Poppies. It was the just practice of
the Romans upon the tumultuous Ardeates, the rebellious Cyprians, and many
others. It would be known what was that good success which was fasted and
prayed for weekly in public, before this plot was discovered, and who were
present at that meeting, or privy to it; where it was questioned how this
business should be managed, some advising that the English should be kindly
used, only their Forts and strengths be seized; others that they should be
stripped and turned out of all; others that they should not only be stripped,
but Massacred: All which were followed in several parts. It brings to my mind
the advice which Heremius gave to Pontius the Captain of the Samnites, when he
had the Romans in a strait, either to dismiss them all with love, which would
produce an honorable peace, or else to kill them to to one man, Dead men bite
not. But Pontius took a middle and most pernicious course to himself, first
to abuse them basely, and then to dismiss them, irritating thereby a powerful
enemy to the ruin of the Samnites. Lastly, conditions of peace are to be
offered to foreign Enemies; but to be petitioned and sued for by domestic
Rebels. If they desire Peace, in the first place let them deliver up to
Justice the heads, and Authors of the Rebellion, as the Citizens of Abell did
Shebah the son of Bickrs, and the Lands, Forts and Goods, which they detain
unjustly, and then come in and submit themselves to his Majesty's Grace. This
is the only way left them to obtain mercy.

There is one Objection more, that the event of War is doubtful, That it is
not comely to sell the Bears skin before the beast is killed.

It is true indeed, it is not good to fish too far before the Net, nor to boast
presumptuously of to morrow, for we know not what a day may bring forth; And
therefore let not him that girdeth on his harnesie, boast himself as he that
puts it off. The eleven Tribes had the bette^ 1 Kin. 10. 11. Judge. 20.
cause, and did much exceed the Benjamites in numerous preparation, yet it was
the Will of God they should be beaten in two Battles. But that was before the
eleven Tribes had humbled themselves before the Lord, so it be done without
presumptuous pride, with a due submission to the Will of God, placing our
chiefest confidence, not in our own strength, but in his blessing: I do not
see what can be taxed in it, for manifesting whereof I only lay down these
two conclusions.

First that spoils in a just War and Escheats of rebellious Subjects were ever
held lawful, it was Isreal's Legacy to Joseph: I give thee one portion Genes.
48. 22
above thy Brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amerites with my
Sword and with my Bow: The Law is general, Thou shall take unto Deuteronomy. 20. 14.
thy self, and thou shall eat the spoil of thine enemy.

Secondly, that the dividing and apportioning of the spoil before hand is
grounded upon the same reason and equity, with the judicial Law of Almighty
God for the dividing of the spoils. Numb. 31. 37. And with those rules for
dividing the land of Canaan, before it was conquered. Number. 34. So I conclude,
notwithstanding all Objections, that this contract is pious, charitable, just,
politic, and profitable; And though I will not make the subscription or not
subscription thereof, to be like Shibboleth, and Sibboleth, a mark to
distinguish between an Ephraimite and a Gileadite: yet as in the body natural,
when any member is ill-affected, all the bad humors flow unto it, and on the
other side when any part needs aliment, the good humors have recourse
thither; so let that union and conjunction which is among the Rebels to destroy
the body of the Common wealth, teach all loyal Subjects with mutual and
reciprocal affection to endeavor the preservation thereof. My heart is
toward the Governors of Israel, which offered themselves willingly among the
people. Judges 5. 9.

FINIS.

