THE Soldiers Commission, CHARGE, and REVVARD, Both of the DECEITFUL and
NEGLIGENT, And the FAITHFUL and DILIGENT in the LORDS Work. Opened in A SERMON
Preached in Christ-Church Dublin, May 14. 1642. Before the State and Chief of
the ARMY, upon occasion of the Interring of Sir CHARLES COOTE Knight, and one
of the Honorable Privy Council in IRELAND.

By Faithful Teate D. D. then Lecturer there, now Preacher of the Gospel in
East-Greenwich in KENT.

Cyprian. Epist. 2. l. 2. Homicidium cum admittunt singuli crimen est, virtus
vocatur cum public geritur.

1 Pet. 4.17. The time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God:
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God?

2 Timothy 2.5. If a man strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he
strive lawfully.

London, Printed by J. H. for T. Underhill, at the Anchor and Bible in Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir CHARLES COOTE Lord President of the Province of
Connaght in IRELAND.
SIR,
THis small Treatise properly belongs to Your Honor, who are Son and Heir
(tam corporis, quam heroicae virtutis) to this eminent and Honorable Person,
whose decease gave occasion to the preaching of this Sermon at as great and
solemn a Meeting, as I have seen in Ireland. It was at the first intended for
the Press, as well as the Pulpit, but till this day has lain dormant, not in
observance of the learned Hor. Art Poetica. Nonum prematur in annum, siquid
olim scripseris.
Poets advice, who counsels that a Poem should be kept in under nine years
private correction, before it be admitted to public view; but here was
something spoken against the cessation, which was then so vigorously
prosecuted, that it might not be further contradicted, whereof I have written
more in another In the Epistle Dedicatory of my True Israelite.
Treatise formerly published.

And indeed had not Your Honor revived it, by giving an invitation to the
publication of it now at last, it had never appeared in this dress; but being
called, it readily obeyed, upon these following accounts.

First, That the righteousness and truth of the Lord might be manifested to
the world, in accomplishing the predictions here ensuing, both against our open
enemies, as also against such as secretly opposed, and subtly retarded this
work of God, which they then pretended to manage and maintain; who, of all
others, have been reputed among wise men in all ages, the worst enemies: For 1.
Their sin is double, hypocrisy being joined unto their hatred, and herein they
are egregious fools, as Solomon terms them, Prove. 10.18. He that hides
hatred with lying lips, is a fool. 2. Of all others they do the most mischief,
having more opportunities then enemies without, and being for a time least
suspected, as Boet. l. 3. de consol. Nulla pestis est efficacior ad nocendum,
quam familiar^s inimicus.
Boethius rightly observes. 3. But in the end, God has threatened to discover
them, Prove. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be
showed before the whole Congregation; and then shall they be punished
answerably to their demerits, as Judas was, who perfidiously betrayed his
Master with a kiss. This have many in our days experimented, and we have seen
the issue: as wave follows wave, so one curse has pursued them after another.

Secondly, That the tender mercies and great kindness of our God toward us
may be magnified, in fulfilling the desires of his servants, when we called
upon him in our distress. For though he deprived us of this great, magnanimous
and successful Commander, and diverse others, upon whom, our eyes (it may be)
were too much fixed; to teach us, not to trust in the arm of flesh, but in him,
who alone does all: yet has he answered our prayers, in raising up continually
in times of need, other valiant, vigilant, and victorious Leaders to carry on
his own work to a blessed period, which seemed sometimes to cease, like the
building of the Temple in Ezra's days. Ezra 4.13.
Time was when these Moabites insultingly cried out unto us, Where is your
English God? But now may we triumphantly answer, You may see, if you shut not
your eyes wilfully against the light, that our God is in the heavens, and has
done whatsoever he pleased in the earth. Now may we truly say, by our own
experience, Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is
in the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth, and keeps truth for ever,
which executes judgment for the oppressed; but the way of the wicked he
turns upside down. And now may we demand of you, Shall not the righteous God
avenge his elect, which cry unto him night and day? Surely he will avenge them
speedily, though he seem to forbear long. What say you? we have found it so,
Can you deny it?

Thirdly, That the outgoings of our God in the dawning of our deiverances may
not be forgotten in the midst of our daily Trophies for victories since
acquired; but the whole series of his wonderful preservations of a small
remnant of us, may be thankefully recorded by us, and our children after us;
for this does the Lord expect from us, as may appear by his strait charge given
to the children of Israel, when he had brought them into the land of Canaan,
not to forget, how he had wrought for them in the land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11.

Lastly, That hereby (as much as lies in a paper Monument) the blessed memory
of this renowned Patriot, after his death, may be preserved, who, under God,
was instrumental to preserve many lives, by the hazard and loss of his own.
Prove. 22.1. Ovid. l. 2. Fastorum. Memorem famam qui been gessit, habet.
A good Name (says Solomon) is rather to be chosen then great riches; for this
follows a worthy person, when riches forsake him. And this is one of the
rewards which God has promised to confer upon his faithful servants, Psalm.
112.6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Besides this, it
affords lasting comfort to surviving friends, and is profitable to others,
who thereby are taught to imitate their good examples, whose Praises are
celebrated long after their Funerals are finished; whereupon holy De bono
viduitatis. Nobis necessaria est vita nostra, aliis fama nostra.
Augustine said, As a good life is necessary for our selves, so our good name is
necessary for others.

These (Right Honorable) be the reasons of this late publication of these
ensuing lines; Now humbly desiring Your favorable acceptance of my endeavors
therein, I commit Your Honor to the protection and direction of him who is
styled a Man of War, and the God of Peace, in whom, I remain*

Your Honors humble servant at command, FAITHFUL TEATE.
From my Study in East-Greenwich. 1657.
TO THE IMPARTIAL READER.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased not to conclude rashly that this subject, The Soldiers Commission,
Charge, and Reward is therefore like an Almanac out of date? because wars in
Ireland are (blessed be God) for the present at an end: but well weigh with me
these following Considerations

1. These truths are all grounded upon, and extracted from the holy Scriptures,
which are always profitable for very good ends and uses, as the Apostle
declares Romans 15.4. 1 Timothy 3.16.

2. They were preached when they were most seasonable; although they passed not
the Press till now, even in the height of war there, when (I suppose) few or
none of our English Divines had handled this Theme; by reason of our long
continued Peace formerly in these Nations.

3. It is wisdom to keep in store by you a Sovereign Receipt; though there be
no present need of it, that it may be in readiness, when need shall require.

4. As long as we have wars elsewhere by Sea and land, directions are
necessary for all such as are or shall be employed therein, how to demean
themselves in this work of the Lord aright.

5. Such as have been actors in these precedent wars now past, have yet need to
look back, and compare all their proceedings from the first to the last, with
the rules which God has prescribed them to walk by; that they may have comfort
in their weldoings, or repent of their failings.

6. Although the Soldiers Commission and Charge were terminated; yet the
Reward of such as have been faithful and diligent in this service of the Lord,
observing his will, and aiming at his glory, shall never have end. To God alone
through Jesus Christ be all Glory world without end. Amen.

A SERMON preached at the Funeral of Sir CHARLES COOTE senior, who Deceased the
7th of May, 1642.
JEREM. 48.10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord deceitfully, and
cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood.


IN this Chapter is comprised Moabs doom, which is the destruction of that
Nation, v. 8. the spoiler shall come upon every City (says the Lord) no City
shall escape, but they shall all be desolate, without any inhabitant; v. 8, 9.
for this end the Prophet enumerateth the sins wherewith the righteous Lord was
incensed to pass this sentence upon them, and these were carnal confidence, in
their riches, v. 7. and in their numbers, might and strength for war, v. 14.
their idolatry, v. 13. contempt of God, v. 26. and derision of his people, v.
27. arrogance, pride and haughtiness of heart, v. 29.

This verse contains the Chaldeans charge, who were to be the executioners of
that judgment on the Moabites, to do their work thoroughly, without sparing one
or other; Cursed be he (says the Lord) that does the work of the Lord
deceitfully, or negligently, as it is in the margin; for the Hebrew word (...)
signifies both: And that all may know what is here meant by the work of the
Lord, he expounds himself in the next words, Cursed is he that keeps back
his sword from blood; that is, from the slaughter of the Moabites. Hence we
clearly gather,

That the right waging of a lawful war, is a work that God will own. Doctrine.


This truth is further ratified by those titles wherewith the Lord styles
himself elsewhere, Jer. 10.16. The Lord of hosts is his name; and Exodus 15.3.
the Lord is called a Man of war; as also the battles that David fought, are
termed the Lords battles, 1 Samuel 1.17. and he is said to go forth against the
Churches enemies in the Name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the Armies of
Israel, 1 Samuel 17.45. This might suffice for proof, but because this truth has
been of old, and is at this day by some much controverted, I shall briefly
annex some other grounds for it.

Vide Ames. de conscion. l. 5. c. 33. sect. 4.
Argument 1. God cannot but allow of that which is done by virtue of his own
command, provided always that it be performed in a right manner. Now God has
commanded, that whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for
in the Image of God made he man, Genesis 9.6. Thus he commanded Gideon to go
against the Midianites to smite them, and promised to go with him, Judge. 6.14,
16. saying to him, Go in this thy might, and save Israel from them, have not I
sent thee? and again, Prove. 20.18. With good advice (says the Lord by the
mouth of Solomon) make war.

2. As he gives a Commission, so he gives his Spirit to some for strength to
turn the battle from the gate, Isa. 28.6. as well as for judgment to him that
sits in judgment; where he shows that a soldier is as necessary in time
of war, as a Judge in time of peace.

3. He furnishes those whom he calls forth for his service, not only with
strength, but likewise with singular dexterity and skill: he teaches their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight, as he did David's, for which he
blesses the Lord, who fitted him for the work, and then employed and blessed
him in it, Psalm. 144.1.

4. We find him highly commending those who have behaved themselves
excellently in this His work, in 1 Chronicles. 11.11 -- 26, etc. where we have a
catalogue of David's Worthies reckoned up, according to their several ranks and
degrees of prowess, and they are called more Honorable then others, who were
more valiant, and slew more then others, v. 20, 21, 23.

5. We find him also distributing large and ample rewards to men eminently
serviceable in this kind; for he made David a sure house, because he fought the
battles of the Lord, 1 Samuel 25.28. Lo here, David's house was surely founded in
the blood of the enemies of the Lord.

6. He disposes (as he pleases) of the events of war, and the Saints have
ever ascribed their victories unto him alone, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. and have
accounted them exceeding great mercies, and blessed him for the same, which
they would not have done, but would rather have confessed themselves to have
been guilty of heinous sins, as of cruelty and murder in obtaining them, if so
be warfar in it self had been unlawful. Our fathers (says the Church) got not
the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them,
but thy right hand (O Lord) and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance,
because thou had a favor to them. Through thee will we push down our
enemies; through thy Name will we tread them under that rise up against us,
Psalm. 44.3, and 5.

7. Lastly, The Lord has sharply taxed such as have been called to this work,
and have refused to come, either through divisions, or employments of their
own, either about husbandry or Merchandise, as you may see in Judge. 5.14, 16,
17. where we have those tribes recorded to their everlasting honor, that came
readily to Barak against Amalek; as Ephraim, Zebulun, the Princes of Issachar,
and Naphtali: and on the other side, those are for ever branded with ignominy
that withdrew themselves. For the divisions of Reuben (says he) were great
thoughts of heart, who abode among the sheepfolds. Gilead abode beyond Jordan,
and Dan remained in ships. Asher continued on the sea shore, in his crooks,
when they should have been all as one man in the Army, in the field against the
enemy. And here in my Text he curses them bitterly who came to the work, but
performed it (...), as the Septuagint render it, negligently, or carelessly.

To these seven grounds others might be added, but it may sufficiently appear
by these, that it is not only lawful sometimes to go to war; but very sinful
in some cases not to do it, and they that do it, may bring a curse upon
themselves, not for doing it, but for doing it remisly, and not with their best
skill and utmost vigor.

This serves, in the first place, to confute all those that hold all war under
the Gospel utterly unlawful: and thus of old did the Photinians, whose opinion
is also revived by some in our days. I shall instance only in one of our
soldiers, who in his sickness was much troubled for killing (as he said) one
of the Rebels in battle, all his sins were not so grievous to his conscience,
as that fact (as he complained to the bystanders) his reason was, because
Christ said unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath; he that takes the
sword, shall perish by the sword. But you will say, perhaps this might be some
temptation, whereby Satan endeavored to perplex a dying man: I shall therefore
show you, Vide Gerhard. loc. Theology.
how that the judgments of sundry ancient and learned Fathers have been
leavened with this error, who have endeavored to hold it forth to others as an
orthodox truth. Tertullian demands thus, Tertul. de corona militis.
Licebit in gladio versari, etc. Can it be lawful to use the sword, since the
Lord pronounces that he shall perish by the sword, that takes it? anne
praelio operabitur filius pacis, cui nec litigare conveniet? How can he fight,
who is not allowed to contend?

l. 6. Divin. Institut. c. 20.
In like manner Lactantius affirms, that in the sixth Commandment, Thou shall
not kill, there ought to be no exception made, Quin occidere hominem sit semper
nefas; but that it is unlawful in any case whatsoever to kill a man.

l. 2. contra Celsum, Hom. 15. in Jos.
I shall add to these Origin, who pleads that Christ has taken away all
wars in the new Testament, and he supposes that the Apostles would never
have delivered the books of the Jewish Histories to the Disciples of Christ,
who came to bring peace, to be read in Churches, Nisi bella ista carnalia
figuram spiritualium bellorum gererent, unless those carnal wars bore the
figure of spiritual wars.

All which well considered, it is very requisite that all men, especially
soldiers, should be well informed in this point: for without knowledge the
heart is not good; and without faith it is impossible to please God; to the
unbeleeving all things are unclean, even their minds and consciences are
defiled. And for your establishing in this truth, first weigh well the former
grounds, and then you shall confess that it is a work very acceptable to God,
to fight against the enemies of Gods Church, and by how much the more difficult
and dangerous it is, by so much the more meritorious is it, Aquin. 2. 2 ae q.
40. artic. 2.
not in respect of God (as Aquinas holds) but in respect of them for whose
sake it is undertaken. How do Deborah and Barak extol Zebulun and Naphtali in
their song, for jeoparding their lives unto death in the high places of the
field?

Mat. 5.39. I say unto you, says our Savior, Resist not evil.

Answ. Here is forbidden self-revenge, but not just self-defence, which the
very law of nature teaches every living creature; as the heathen Orator shows,
Ut se, vitam, corpusque tueatur: Cic. 1. l. offic.
and Christ in the Gospel, Luke 12.39. proclaims to all Christians, what he
would have them to do in case of unjust assault, with a Noverint universi; This
know (says he) that if the good man of the house had known in what watch the
thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house
to be broken up. Yet I have known some, whose consciences for the want of the
knowledge of Christ's mind herein, have suffered thieves to break into their
houses once and again, to wound themselves, and to take away their goods,
without resistance, when they might have hindered them, if they hid pleased; who
alleged for their so doing that prohibition, Resist not evil. But how forcible
the law of nature is, the Apostle declares, when e he argues from it against a
man's wearing long hair, 1 Cor. 11.14. Hieron. in locum. a natura deciderunt,
etc.
Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a
shame to him?

Obj. 2. But Christ goes on in the foresaid place, saying, Whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. How then can it be
lawful to go to war?

Answ. These words are not to be taken simply, as Julian the Apostate perverted
them in a scornful manner, but comparatively; as if our Lord had said, When an
injury is offered, be ye so far from personal revenge, that ye be rather ready
to take as much more wrong in word or deed, than to recompense evil for evil.
For St. Paul being commanded to be smitten on the mouth by Ananias the
High Priest, Act. 23.2, 3.
was so far from turning his cheek to the smiter, that he called Ananias a
whited wall, and told him, that God should smite him for his injustice: Neither
did he sing a palinodia, as if he had offended in so saying (as some would have
it) when he replied to those that stood by, and demanded of him by way of
objurgation, Revilest thou Gods High Priest? v. 4.
I wist not that he is the High Priest, for so it is in the Greek, Joseph. l.
20. c. 6, and 7.
(...), meaning thereby, as Beza proves out of Josephus, that he was no lawful
High Priest, but an Usurper.

Obj. 3. But the New Testament is so far from allowing of war as the Old
Testament does, that Christ flatly forbids it, Matthew. 26.52. where he bids
Peter, Put up thy sword, and renders this reason, for all they that take the
sword, shall perish by the sword.

Ans. Though in this case our Savior forbids Peter to make use of the sword,
and in him all others, without a due calling thereto; yet Aug. contra Faust.
Nulla ergo inconstantia praecipientis, sed ratione dispensantis temporum
diversitate praecepta, vet consitia vel perm ssa mutantur.
elsewhere this Prince of peace does allow his Apostles, and in them all others
upon just occasions to buy, and consequently to use the sword; as you may read
in the Gospel of Luke 22.36. He that has no sword, let him (says he) sell his
garment, and buy one: Which cannot be understood of any spiritual sword, as
some would fain pretend, being otherwise unable to evade this clear Text: For
what spiritual sword can the price of a man's garment purchase? and what got
Simon Magus but a curse, for offering the Apostles money for the gift of
conferring the holy Ghost? in Acts 8.19, 20. when Peter said unto him, Thy
money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be
purchased with money.

Another Gospel proof we have in Romans 13.4. where the Magistrate is said not to
bear the sword in vain, and therefore evil doers should be afraid; for he is
the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon malefactors: and for that
end, if they become numerous, Ames. l. 5. De consci. c. 33. Sect. 9.
he may and ought to levy and prosecute war against them, till they be subdued.

Take a third, that so by the mouth of two or three witnesses, this truth may
be so confirmed, that none that have understanding may scruple at it any more.
In Revel. 12.7, 8. we have war in heaven, that is, the Church, Michael and his
Angels, Constantine with his soldiers, fighting and prevailing against the
Dragon, in the persecuting Emperors, Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licinius, his
instruments. Again, Revel. 17.14. we find the Lamb Christ Jesus, making war
with, and overcoming the Beast; and the Saints on the Lambs side, are said to
be called, and chosen, and faithful. 3. Lastly, in Rev. 19.11, 12, 14. the
Lord Christ, there termed, the Word of God, is brought in upon a white horse,
having his vesture dipped in blood, to show the exceeding great slaughter of his
foes, both past and future, with his Armies following him, who are said to be
in heaven, because the people of God have their conversation there; and these
join in battle with Antichrist, and the Kings of the earth and their Armies,
and vanquish them. Now what better service can the devil possibly devise to do
his eldest son Antichrist, alias the Pope, then to persuade Christians that
they ought not to fight, or at least not for Religion; since he full well knows
that these are they that must give him his mortal blow.

Dionys. Carthus. q. d. Maledicetur exercitus Chaldaeorum, si punitionem
Moabitarum juxta Dei voluntatem non adimpleverit, nec tamen id faciendo
benedicti fuerunt, quia non recta id intention egerunt, sed animo cupido atque
crud^li.
right manner; or else suppose the work be Gods, yet the party shall be
accursed that does it negligently or deceitfully, as my Text affirms. Would you
then be partakers of the benefit of Solomon's prayer, in 2 Chronicles. 6.34, 35. it
is not enough to be of the number of Gods people, nor to go out to war against
Gods enemies, but you must also go by the way which God shall send you, and
then you may be certain that he will hear from the heavens your prayer, and
maintain your cause. Would you be crowned? then must you strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.5. Aquinas extracteth out of diverse parts of Augustines works, some
Rules for direction in this way: But I shall acquaint you with what the great
General of all Armies requires of you, as you may readily find with me, if you
consult with his holy Word.

must be sure that the cause which he undertaketh, is just: For 1. Otherwise it
cannot be the Lords work, who is a God that takes no pleasure in wickedness,
Psalm. 5.4. 2. How can they that take an evil cause in hand, pray to God with
confidence for good success, or expect a blessing upon their enterprises,
since they fight against God? Acts 5.39. 3. He that knows he is upon good
ground, fights manfully, and embraces even death undauntedly; whereas on the
other side, consciousnesse of an evil cause, emasculates the spirits, and
renders death extremely dreadful. Prove. 28.1. The wicked flee when none
pursue, Propert. l. 4. c. 6.
but the righteous are bold as a lion. Frangit and attollit vires in mili^e
causa. 4. If the parties, who either raise or endeavor to maintain an unjust
war, be therein slain, their blood shall be on their own heads; or if they kill
others, they become murderers in the sight of God: Yea, let all Incendiaries,
Ringleaders,
and fomenters of unlawful wars know that they are J Lipsius. Multae body
sunt bellorum faces utinam vel aquis Stygiis resting uendae. de Militia Romans l.
2. dial. 7.
guilty of all the slaughters, rapes, rapines, burnings, and outrages, which be
committed ab ovo ad malum, in such combustions, and one day shall answer for
them; and yet more, if ye will believe the Judge himself, upon such shall come
all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel,
unto the last believers blood, whose death was procured or occasioned by them,
Mat. 23.34, 35. For which cause it is truly affirmed, that in spiritual Babylon
will be found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the earth for righteousness sake, Revel. 18.24. because modern
persecutors justify all that their forefathers, Mat. 23.31.
(as our Savior calls precedent murderers of Saints and Prophets) have
done, by the like facts.

Aug in Psa. 50. Ille Justus punitor qui non habet quod in ipso puniatur.
that cannot otherwise be restrained, ought to repent of his own sins, before
he be fit to punish others for their offenses. For want of this the children of
Israel, though their cause were just, fell twice before the Benjamites, Judge.
20.21. For, he that judges another, and does the same things, condemns
himself, Theophyl. Videtur hic sermonem dirigere ad magistratus praecipue
Romanos, ut qui orbi terrarum praesiderent. Magistratuum enim est judicare.
and shall no ways escape the judgment of God, Romans 2.1, 3. On which place
Theophylact conceives that the Apostle chiefly intends Magistrates: For if it
be a reproveable thing in Ministers of the Word, to reprove their hearers for
such faults as themselves are guilty of, before they themselves have repented
of them; much more heinous is it in the Ministers of Justice to execute
punishments upon delinquents, while they remain guilty of the same, or such
like crimes.

Let God be sought to, by public fasting and prayer: So began Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. when multitudes of Moabites and Ammonites, and others came against
Judah, who had no might against them, neither knew they what to do, v. 12. and
received a gracious answer and aid from above. Be not afraid, said God, nor
dismayed, neither shall ye need to fight: q. d. You have done enough already,
in engaging me in the battle, now only stand ye still, and see the salvation of
the Lord, v. 17. Behold here the wonderful efficacy of fasting and prayer,
whereof we in this City have had very happy and remarkable experience. I shall
relate but one memorable passage for the manifestation of this to all impartial
hearers: After the breaking out of this horrid Rebellion, which began October.
23. 1641. presently the State had information that the enemies design was to
besiege Drogheda, and therefore they sent all the forces which then possibly
could be raised, to the fortification of that Garrison; after whose departure
we had no considerable strength left behind for defense of this City, and some
of those we had were persons little to be confided in. The numerous and subtle
enemies perceiving this, drew together and begirt us round. In this forlorn
condition, some Preachers pressed the Council daily for a public fast, as the
only remedy left; but it could not be obtained (through the averseness of some
who should have been most forward in such a work) till the 12 of November
ensuing; and now mark, on that very evening after our general humiliation, the
Lord gave a gracious return, and taught us that our best weapons were (as
Ambrose speaks) prayers and tears. For as the Spirit of God came upon Othn^el,
and raised him up to deliver Israel in their distress, Judge. 3.9, 10. when they
cried unto him; so did the spirit of magnanimity and strength fall suddenly
upon this deceased Senator, and ancient expert soldier, who had been long
before this day, by age and sickness, almost decrepit, hardly able to set his
foot to the ground, who comes to the Council Table, and tendereth his service
to go forth against the enemy, accounting it (he said) more eligible to die in
the field, than to be slain within doors. This motion was no less acceptable
then seasonable; but some thought it would prove abortive, saying, The good
man's spirit is willing, but his body is weak: Others demanded where he would
have men for the service? but our pressing exigencies would admit of no long
consultations; the State knew his pristine valor, commended his present
resolution, and promised him their best assistance. He goes forth, and with all
speed takes up such men as first came to hand, mostly such as had been
stripped, and were half starved, and had never been trained; these he led
forth, to the number of seven hundred (at most) into the County of Wicklow,
where the strength of the enemy was concentred; he falls on, at the first our
men were disranked, he skilfully rallies them on a sudden, and in fine, routeth
the enemy, and returns without the loss of any one man, excepting one only,
whom he shot himself as he was running away to the Rebels. This mercy seemed to
us no less than a Resurrection from the dead: What matter of joyful
thankfulness did it afford us? How were we animated to continue our weekly
days of humiliation, with exceeding great concourse of our English into our
Congregations; and as Joshua and Israel prevailed against Amalek, Exodus 17.11.
while Moses held up his hand, and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed;
so as long as we here continued in public prayer and supplication, our party
prevailed in the field, till they became masters of the field during the space
of a whole year and half. But now, mark again, I pray, some of the City
Ministers being sore pressed with this so long continued burden of keeping two
weekly Sabbaths, as they said, made their addresses to the Lords of the Council
for mitigation, alleging that our enemies were well brought under, our straits
and fears removed, and we become their superiors, and therefore that a monthly
fast might well suffice. And at length their daily importunity prevailed, and
we were enforced to draw up our nets, before the fish was caught. Now no sooner
had we intermitted one fast day, but dismal news was brought from our Army the
very next day, that Sir Charles Coote, Gods visible instrument of our
preservation from the beginning of these direful wars, was shot at Trim, in
his pursuit of the enemy, by treachery (as some strongly conceive) but that I
leave to the plenary decision of the last day. And now may any easily presage
which way we are going, even back into the wilderness again. Oh! what an
incomparable loss have we all sustained in the fall of this great man? I
cannot express it, but a short time shall discover it. Psalm. 66.5.
How terrible, O God, are thy doings toward the children of men? Return, O
Lord, for thy servants sake, that a small remnant of thy people in this Land of
ire become not like Sodom and Gomorrah, for the Lords sake. Right Honorable
Peers, worthy Commanders, and all dear Christians, would you have the Lord not
to depart from us, but to go forth with our Hosts? you must continue wrestling
with him, with prayers and tears, Genesis 32.28.
and then if you prevail Jacob-like with God, you shall also prevail with men.

Add to prayer, faith. We must all live by faith, and pray in faith; but above
all it is primely necessary in a Christian soldier; for he is not only to
fight against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, Ephesians.
6.12. and suppose you vanquish the former, and be subdued by the latter through
unbelief, it will not be so much as a semi victory. But if you build upon the
Rock Christ by faith, the gates of hell shall not prevail against you, much
less shall the serpents seed, wicked men overcome you. How victorious a grace
faith is, even in wars with men, may be seen in Gedeon, and Barak, Jephtha,
David, and others, who through faith subdued Kingdoms, escaped the edge of the
sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to
flight the armies of the aliens, Heb. 11.33, 34. Wherefore did the Lord deliver
the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many Chariots and Horsemen
into the hands of Asa? not for his multitudes, or skill or power; but because
he relied upon the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 16.8. Therefore although others trust in
their own preparations, numbers, policy, strength, skill, or former success;
let your only confidence be placed in the promise, power, and presence of God,
as David's was, Psalm. 20.7, 8.

God cannot abide cowardlinesse in such as fight his battles; Cic pro Mar.
Certe in armis, militum virtus multum juvat.
for says he to Israel, Deuteronomy. 20.1. When thou go out to battle against
thine enemies, and see horses and chariots, and a people more than thou, be
not afraid of them. And when they approach to battle, he commands the
Officers to speak to the people, saying, What man is fearful and faint-hearted?
let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethrens heart faint as well
as his heart, v. 8. But what heathen Authors can afford you such encouragements
and valid incentives to true valor, as the word of God does? Be strong, and of
a good Courage, says the Lord to Joshua, have not I commanded thee? Chapter 1.9.
Again, Be not afraid nor dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with thee,
whithersoever thou go. The first argument here is taken from Gods
Commandment, and that does not only require, but also infuse courage into the
hearts of all obedient hearers. 2. Mark his promise, I will be with thee
whithersoever thou go, this if it be rightly laid hold on, will so fortify
the Spirit, that if ten thousand should hemme you in, you could not be afraid:
it will also defend you, and repel your stoutest foes, even then when they are
most confident, and all outward helps seem to fail you. Add to these a third,
which Joab uses to Abishai, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, let us play the
men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the Lord do that
which seems good in his eyes. Lo, here a triple coard never to be broken,
let us put them together. God sets you a work, God will be with you in the
work, and for God and Bern Epist. 129 Ecclesiae inimicos expugnare decet.
his Church you fight: Who would desire to die better, than in such service as
this?

Obedience to superiors may well challenge the next place among these
Directions. Mat. 8.9. I am a man, says the Centurion, under authority, having
Soldiers under me: and I say to this man go, and he goes: and to another
come, and he comes. The want of this drove David to greater straits than all
his adversaries could do, 1 Samuel 30.6.

if Justice both Commutative and Distributive might be found in Camps? when as
it has been of old, and still is reported of such places, that there lust
rules in stead of law, Jurisque locum sibi vendicat ensis. 1. Justice requires
that Council. Lateran. Sess. 6. Bellum cum hostibus and arma inf^ramus: cum
nostris beneficiis certemus, and de recuperandis quae nostra sunt contendamus.
innocent persons, especially such as for whose help soldiers pretend to come,
should be defended, and not wronged by them. See John Baptists charge, Luke
3.14. when the soldiers demanded of him, saying, What shall we do? he
answered, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with
your wages.

2. Justice commands that notorious offenders in no case be spared; Agag was
worthy of death, Saul saved his life, and lost his Kingdom for this
indulgence. Foolish pity to Plutarch. Lenitas erga sceleratos est in bonos
crudelitas.
one malefactor is cruelty to your selves, and many others. Ahab let Benhadad
escape, hereat the Lord was displeased, and sent him a tart message by the
Prophet, 1 King. 20.42. Because thou have let go out of thy hand, a man whom I
appointed to destruction, therefore (says the Lord) shall thy life go for his
life, and thy people for his people.

3. There ought to be a distributive Justice among your selves. I beseech you
be not offended with me, for showing you the way of God to your own temporal
and eternal prosperity; and though carnal reason will perhaps suggest other
counsel to you, yet acknowledge you him in all your ways, Pro. 3.6.
and he shall direct your paths. The spoils taken from the enemy should not be
engrossed by some; but by an equal distribution imparted to all: See David's
order in this case, 1 Samuel 30.22, 24. Some of his men were faint, and so were
cast behind, when the rest followed him to battle, wherefore after they
returned back with great spoils, some of them would not allow any share of the
prey taken, unto their fellows so cast behind, for which cause they are termed
wicked men and men of Belial, and David told them, they should not do so, but
they should all share alike, even they that tarried by the stuff, as well as
they that went down to the battle: and he made it (says the text) a statute
and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.

The ends for which war is undertaken and maintained ought ever to be regarded,
and these ought to be Gods glory, the preservation of good men, the punishment
of heinous offenders, and the settling of peace in the Commonwealth: not
covetuousnesse, desire of revenge, or affectation of dominion, or vainglory;
for which Jehoash King of Israel thus reproved Amaziah, Thou have indeed
smitten Edom, and thine heart has lifted thee up: glory of this, and tarry at
home, for why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou should fall, and
Judah with thee, 2 King. 14.10. But Amaziah refused to hear, and therefore he
and Judah were worsted before Israel, v. 11. The end of wars is peace, Aug. de
civitate Dei l 19 c. 12. Pacem constat belli esse finem optabilem.
says August. and in Sermon. de verbis Domini, Apud veros Dei cultores ipsa
bella pacata sunt, quae non cupiditate, aut crudelitate, sed pacis studio
geruntur, ut mali coerceantur, and boni subleventur. Among the true worshippers
of God their very wars are peaceable, being waged not for lust or cruelty, but
with desire of peace, that bad men may be suppressed, and good men aided. These
be the chief directions, to which more might be added, but I proceed.

terror to the enemies of Gods Church; and comfort to such as go forth against
them in this way of God; for although the former may seem for a time to
prevail, yet in due time they shall be subdued, and God will be sure to arise
at last, to maintain his own cause. This is assigned the reason why the
Hagarites and many others fell down slain before two tribes and an half,
because the war was of God, 1 Chon. 5.18, -- 22. Let us not then be troubled
with the multitude of the Rebels, nor their bloody threats and intentions if
they prevail; nor yet with the success now and then attending their
enterprises: but let us weigh their cause with our own in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and then all may see whom God in fine will side with, when he has
truly humbled and fitted his people for deliverance.

The just Causes of war in Scripture are such as these.

1. Men may lawfully defend themselves and friends being unjustly assaulted,
having a Calling from God so to do. Thus Abraham fought for his Nephew Lot, and
rescued him and his Allies, having slain the invaders, and is highly commended
for it, Genesis 14.14, 18, 19. and Exodus 22.2. Multo magis licitum est defendere
propriam vitam, qua^ domum Aquin. 22. q. 64.
he that defends not himself, when he may, is guilty of his own wrongs.

2. The Children of Israel took up Arms against the Children of Reuben, the
Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, and questionless they would have
therewith pursued them; if they had not given them good satisfaction, for
innovation in Religion and Gods Worship, Josh. 22.11, 12.

3. God approves of the punishing of Capital offenders, and such as protect
them by force of Arms, Judge. 20.13.

4. David pursued the Amalekites by the Lords appointment, and smote them for
Council. Lateran. Sess. 4. Publicas injurias, usurpationes injustas, princeps
aequo animo far no^ debet: sed totis viribus, quae sua sunt servare, arrepta
armis recipere.
plundring Ziglag, and so recovered the goods and persons whom in a hostile
manner they had taken away, 1 Samuel 30.8, 16.

5. God proclaimed an irreconcilable war between Israel and Amalek till they
should blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven. Here is an
extirpation of Nation and name commanded; if you demand for what fault? The
Lord gives in their Indictment, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18. Remember what Amalek did to
thee by the way, says God to Israel, how he met thee coming from Egypt, and
smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not God. Thou shall never forget it, v. 19.

6. Wherefore did David destroy the children of Ammon and besiege Rabbah? but
for the Villainy of Hanun in taking David's servants, and shaving off one half of
their beards, and cutting off their garments in the middle, even to their
Buttocks, and sending them away in this guise? 1 Samuel 10.4. and 11.1. Did the
Irish let the English of either sex escape so?

7. King Ahab slew Naboth for his Vineyard, and after his death took
possession: for which reason the Prophet Elijah told him from the Lord that in
the place where dogs licked Naboths blood, the dogs should also lick his blood,
even the Kings, for murdering his honest Subject, which accordingly came to
pass; for after he was slain in battle, he was brought to Samaria, where one
washed his chariot in the pool, and the dogs licked his blood, according to the
word of the Lord, 1 King. 21.19.

Now all these grounds, and other apparent causes have we of the English Nation
to proceed in like sort against our Antichristian and bloody adversaries in
Ireland, who 1. Have been long mancipated to gross Idolatry. 2. Against the
Law of the Land they took the sword. 3. Committed at the first unheard of and
prodigious massacres of men women and children without respect, even of one
hundred and fifty thousand Christians (according to their own reckoning) living
inoffensively and securely among them.

4. Having first entered into a Covenant written with their own blood to
extirpate all the English with their memorial: herein imitating that notorious
conspirator of old, cursed Cataline, who first bound all his fellow-traytors
with a curse, and for confirmation gave them man's blood mingled with wine to
drink; as Salust records, Conjurat. Catilinae. But these miscreants surpassed
them; for the confirmation of this their covenant was the receiving of the
Eucharist or Sacrament. Some of their Articles were these, That they would not
leave in this Island one British man alive, either English, Scotch or Welsh,
no so much as any footsteps of them, but would utterly destroy all, both
Houses, Cattle, Orchards, Hedg-rowes, etc. Item, if any English man should be
found who had married an Irish woman, and had children of her, both he and his
children, because they bore his name, should perish: but if an Irish man had
married an English woman, both she and her children should live.

5. After all this blood-devouring ferity, they grew more and more outrageous
daily, and scornfully See Sr. John Temple of the Irish rebellion.
rejected all terms of peace at any time tendered unto them, while they had
power to do mischief: and therefore cannot expect any favor when the Lord
shall deliver them into your hands, see Deuteronomy. 20.10, -- 13.

6. Since the righteous God has evidently manifested oft-times from Heaven his
great abhorrency of their most savage cruelties, and has shortened their
horns; that they can do no more mischief (as formerly) they still continue
Amalek-like to cut off such as they meet by the way, sick, faint, weak and
wounded persons that are cast behind our Camps.

7. In stead of manifesting repentance for all their blasphemies and
numberless wicked practices, though they have made the land an Aceldama from
one end thereof to another, and in their skirts have been found the blood of
the souls of poor innocents, (as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 2.34.) yet are they
so far from repenting, that they boast much till this day, of what pranks they
have committed, and what tortures they inflicted on the Heretics (as they call
us:) and repent themselves of nothing, but for letting any at all escape alive
from among them, ratifying these and such like assertions with hideous oaths,
because they would have the world to believe them.

8. What was Hanuns villainy to theirs? he cut off the garments of two or three
men by the middle, and so sent them away; these hell-bred monsters ripped up
the bowels of men and women and hung them up like slaughtered beeves, searching
their guts for gold, compelled children to execute their parents, and parents
their children, slew husbands, and ravished the wives, enticed some ignorant
and unstable souls to go with them to their abominable Masses, and then
forthwith hanged them, while they were (as they said) in a good mind, and thus
they endeavored to destroy both their bodies and souls at once.

Obj. But they were not all alike: will you condemn all for some?

Ans. No indeed, The men were more inhumane than salvages: the women were far
worse than the men, and their children surpassed them both. But what have I
called them? men and women? they may fitly be compared to that beast which John
saw in the Revelation, c. 13.2. Like to a Leopard with the feet of a Bear, and
the mouth of a lion, for no one wild beast can half express their malice and
cruelty. The Leopard exceeds all bruit creatures in hatred to man, so that in
his rage he will tear his very picture in pieces, wheresoever he sees it, if he
can possibly come near it: no less have these children of Belial hated the
Image of God in his people, endeavoring to quench the Light of his Gospel in
the blood of the sincerest Professors of it; for against such have they been
most furious, and herein resembled fell Lions, and have been more ravenous
after prey than any wild Bears in the Forest: It has been their holy day work
to hunt Boys and Girls with dogs and spaniels like ducks in the water, till
they have drowned them; and it has been their great delight all the week after
to discourse of their Sundays disports.

O ye enemies of all righteousness, shall not the Lord visit for these things?
shall not his soul be avenged on such a Nation as you? if Cain were so accursed
for killing one righteous Abel, Genesis 4.11. whose blood yet cries against him
and you; how accursed shall you be for ever, who have murdered in a rage
reaching up to heaven, so many thousand souls, innocent quoad vos, howsoever
otherwise they were sinners before the Lord? 2 Chronicles. 28.9, 10.
are there not with you sins, even worse sins also? If they be deservedly
pronounced accursed in my Text that should keep their sword from the blood of
the Moabites, whose iniquities were every way far short of yours; how accursed
must you needs be, for whose sake others shall be accursed; if they spare you?
were you but sensible what masses of wrath are coming upon you for your
butcherings of so many both Saints, Prophets, and Infants, as well as others,
as one day will appear, before your Judge and theirs; would you but take to
heart what terrors and torments shall there arrest you, and for ever abide upon
you in the lowest Hell; it were sufficient to drive you and all your abettors,
(as it has done some of you already) to distraction and desperation.

True it is, judgment began at the house of God, you have beheld it, yea, and
executed it on them: but have the righteous scarcely been saved, what shall be
the end of such impious blasphemers, cursed Idolaters, and desperare infringers
of all Laws both humane and divine, both of nature and Religion, as you?

Repent therefore of all your wickedness, and pray God, if it be possible,
that you may be forgiven, for you are in the gall of bitterness, and fast
bound in the chains of your iniquities, which have begun already to find you
out: and if ye continue to stop your ears at the voice of the charmer, (with
the deaf adder in the Psalm) charm he never so wisely, as ever hitherto you
have done, since I knew you, the wrath of God shall fall upon you to the
uttermost in this world and in the world to come. The worst I wish you is this,
that ye may return, that your souls may live.

for a warning to us and all other people of all Nations to beware of Moabs
sins mentioned in this Chapter, namely, Confidence in the arm of flesh,
Riches, humane force, Policy, Idols, Contempt of God, and Scorning of true
Godliness, Pride and Haughtiness; and if we be guilty of any of them, as
indeed the inhabitants of these Lands are generally most hainously guilty, let
us repent of them with speed; for the bloody revenging sword is drawn, and has
begun here in Ireland to eat our flesh and drink our blood, as long before it
has done in the Palatinate, and in Germany, but we would not take warning by
them; and now except England and Scotland take warning by them and us, and
prevent it in time, the Lord is about to raise up against them also their worst
enemies, with this charge in the Text enjoined under the same penalty of the
curse more dreadful than that in the Poet, Occupet extremum scabies, Horat. de
art Poetica.
Cursed be he that withholdeth his sword from blood; for questionless we and
they are guilty of the forementioned sins of the Moabites, and many worse.
Return, Return, why will you die without remedy.

Antichristian forces, hereafter to be sincere and Leo Imperator in Tacticis.
c. 1. n. 3. 6. Ante omnes res, maxim bellicas consultores adhibe ad
excogitandu^ solertes and fideles: rem vero de qua deliberasti omni studio ac
diligentia contendas ad exitum perducere.
diligent in executing this divine commission, as you and they would desire to
escape his reiterated malediction here denounced against all that shall be
negligent and deceitful in pursuance thereof: How can you spare such as the
Lord has designed to destruction for blood-guiltinesse, unless you be content
that your own lives go for their lives? 1 King. 20.42. If you spare them, the
curse shall not spare you; whether it be for favor or affection, or old
acquaintance, for kindreds or countries sake, or for gain or pleasure of
friends, or any other respect, it shall avail them but for a short time, and
disadvantage your selves for ever: for God shall destroy you with them either
immediately, or by others, whom he shall send to accomplish this his work with
vigor in your steads: and then shall you know, there has been a Prophet among
you. If any shall pretend that pity is to be showed, where God requires justice
to be executed: or that there is a necessity of making a cessation with them,
when God and the world know the contrary; that person whosoever he be, shall
bring upon himself and upon his posterity all the innocent blood that they have
spilt. Now after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespasses, seeing that our God has punished us less than our iniquities
deserve, and has given us such deliverance as this, should we again break his
Commandments, and join in league with the people of these abominations? would
not our God be angry with us, till he had consumed us, so that there should be
no remnant nor escaping? Ezra 9.13.14. Deuteronomy. 7.2. Thou shall make no covenant
with these people, nor show mercy to them. and Judge. 2.2. Make no league with
them.

Obj. But those were Canaanites, these are Christians that you now speak
against.

Ans. It is too good a name to call them Canaanites, they may more fitly be
termed Cannibals. Secondly, unless you be veiled Papists, you must confess
they are as vile Idolaters as ever breathed.

Obj. 2. Your allegations are fetched out of the old Testament: but we live
under the new, which is a better Covenant.

Ans. This makes nothing for them, but much against them: for Gospel vengeance
will be the sorest vengeance of all other, Heb. 12.25. 2. The New Testament
condemns making leagues with Idolaters, as much as the old. Read, 2 Cor.
6.14, 15, 16.

3. The Gospel no ways protecteth wilful murderers, but calls for justice
upon them as the Law requires, Mat. 26.52. and Revel. 13.10. They that take
the sword (says our Savior) shall perish by the sword; he that kills with
the sword (says his Apostle John) must be killed with the sword: and yet the
worst is behind; for after this life ended both Murderers and Idolaters shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: which is the
second death, Rev. 21.8. And is not all this new Testament?

Obj. But you are Ministers of the Gospel of peace, you should preach peace:
bloody preaching and bloody praying should be far from you.

Ans. Parcius ista viris. Shall you plead for rebels and murderers, and
condemn us for crying out for justice to the righteous Judge, and his
substitutes?

2. Do we pray any otherwise than the souls under the Altar even of them that
were slain for the word of God, did, who cried with a loud voice, saying, How
long, O Lord, holy and true do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth? Rev. 6.10. And although you condemn these our prayers,
our Lord Jesus assures us that his father will hear them, Luke 18.6. Where he
is pleased to demand both of you and us, Shall not God avenge his own elect,
which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? I tell you
that he will avenge them speedily.

Obj. 4. But the seven Nations are expressly nominated whom God enjoyneth Israel
to destroy, Deuteronomy. 7.2. You have no such particular rule.

Ans. You have heard Christ's express Command that all that take the sword
shall perish by the sword: and a particular rule is given how Antichrist is to
be dealt with, in Rev. 18.6. Reward her as she rewarded you, and double unto
her double according to her works. See then what these Popish conspirators,
Antichrists limbs, have done to the Protestants, being instigated thereunto by
Romes Emissaries, Priests, Friars, and Jesuits, you may do the like to them,
yea it is just to render to them double; for God has so commanded it should be.

Obj. But what if they had the Kings Commission for what they did.

Ans. So they pretended Sr Phelim Oneale at his execution confessed that they
gave out at their first rising, they had the Kings commission for what they
did; but took it upon his death it was false.
for their own excuse. But were it so indeed, Had not Doeg I pray you, the
Kings command to smite Ahimelech with the City of the Priests? 1 Samuel 22.18.
The King said to Doeg turn thou and fall upon the Priests. And Doeg the Edomite
fell on the Priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did
wear a linen Ephod; yet because this was unjustly done, the Kings warrant
would not excuse him: but the Prophet threateneth him in the name of the Lord,
Psalm. 52.5. saying, God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take
thee away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the
land of the living. Selah.

Obj. But Doeg exceeded his Commission; for he smote not the Priests alone with
the edge of the sword, but men and women also, children, and sucklings, and
Oxen, and asses, and sheep; and therefore was he thus punished.

Ans. Did Doeg exceed his Commission? therein also have these Irish Edomites
exceeded him: their little finger has been heavier than his loins, and
therefore must expect a far heavier punishment.

2. He destroyed only the City Nob, they left but few undestroyed in the whole
Land: and their intent was, if their design had proceeded in surprising this
City of Dublin and the Castle, to have left in this land not one man, woman or
child of our Religion alive. Remember O Lord these children of Edom, who cried
in the day of our Jerusalem, raze it, raze it even to the ground.

Aug. de civit. Dei l. 1. c. 7. Quod innsitata rerumfacie immanitas barbara
mitior apparuit, ut quidam parcetentur, hoc Christi nomini tribuendum. Absit,
Ut prudens quis quam hoc feritati imputet ^arb^^orum.
Obj. 7. If they had been so savage and merciless, as you would render them;
they might have destroyed many more, when they had them in their hands, who yet
survive.

Ans. Blessed be the Lord whose hook was in their nostrils to preserve a
remnant alive, as it is this day: but sure we are, the tender mercies of the
wicked were cruel; for when some being stripped in frost and snow, others being
wounded also thought it impossible to travel 40 or 50 miles in that case, and
so chose death rather than life, these Hamans usual answer was, no, they would
not show them so much favor as to kill them, for then they should put them too
soon out of their pain: whereas on the other side; if they perceived any to be
fearful of death, and to beg for life, such they cut off incontinently, no
entreaties would prevail. Call you this pity, in requital whereof a Cessation
should be granted them upon their first demand? My Lords, till mere necessity
enforced them, they never sought it: when any advantage shall be given them,
they will never keep it. Sad experiments of their former perfidiousnesse from
every quarter can witness this. Say unto them therefore as Jehu did to
Jehoram, what have you to do with peace, so long as your wilful murders and
execrable blasphemies remain? blood defiles the land: and the land cannot be
cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed
it, Numb. 35.33. Now the Lord has armed you with power, put on David's
resolution, and say, we will early destroy all the wicked of the land, Psa.
101.8. He that should punish capital offenders, and does not, when he may,
Corn. a Lapide in locum.
is as guilty before the Lord, as if he himself had perpetrated all that they
have done: Plutarch. in Lacon. moral. Hoc est sceleratos ad malcsicia armare.
Nazianzen. (...).
yea more, he shall be guilty of all the wickedness that ever afterward they
shall commit. I have read how a King of France complained that one man had been
pardoned twice for murder, and yet he had slain a third man: his jester
standing by said to the King, nay, my Liege, he killed but one, and you slew
the other two; for if you had caused him to have been executed for the first
fact, Si primum non condonasses, reliqua non perpetresset. erat Ludovic. XI.
rex Franciae.
he had never lived to have committed the second and third. So may I say to
you, some of these Rebels, and more of their ancestors have rebelled thrice
within these 47 years space, had they then received condign punishments
according to their just demerits, these mischiefs had not now issued from them.
No marvel then that the curse denounced against all partial indulgent and
deceitful workers in this particular be doubled in my text, Cursed be he that
does the Lords work negligently, and again, Cursed be he that keeps his sword
from blood; where the ingemination denotes four things, 1. The suddenness of
the curse. 2. The certainty. 3. The greatness, and 4. the continuance of it.
q. d. If you dally and delay in so weighty a business, God will not dally or
delay with you; if you deal doubly with him, he will send a double curse upon
you; if you slight his work of doing justice, heavy judgments shall light upon
you; either deal truly with him this once, or he will never trust you more; if
you favor his enemies, his fierce and durable plagues shall fall upon you and
your friends, like fire, and there shall be none to quench it. My Lords, the
interpretation be to your enemies, and let the Lords Council be acceptable to
you, as you desire to prevent this curse, 1. It is threatened against the
deceitful. 2. Against the slothful in the Lords work. Be you then, 1.
Faithful therein. 2. Diligent. This was David's Encomium, who is so faithful
as David? 1 Samuel 22.14. Though King Saul ill requited him for it; yet the Lord
the God of truth commends him very highly for the Integrity of his heart. The
faithful man shall abound with blessings, Pro. 28.20. On the contrary, Cursed
be the deceiver either 1. In the things of God, Mal. 1.14. or 2. In
transactions with men, Genesis 27.12. If I seem to my father (said Jacob to
Rebekah) as a deceiver, I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. Or
3. In martial affairs, here in my Text. Shall any think that the Judge of
heaven and earth will tolerate partiality in matters of life and death? will
you hold with the hound, and run with the hare? shall your bodies be on this
side, and your hearts on the other? Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. I will set
before you but one President: Hophni and Phinehas deserved to be cut off, old
Eli spared them (for they were his sons) but God neither spared him nor them,
nor any of his race, because his sons made themselves vile and he restrained
them not: for this iniquity will I judge his house for ever, says the Lord,
and further swears, it shall never be purged with sacrifice, 1 Samuel 3.13, 14.
Must justice then be done upon sons? Judges may not think, that they may put to
death whom they will, and whom they will they may keep alive: They may not
spare a guilty son or brother.

The second word of your Charge is diligence. Motives

1. The work is the Lords.

2. His eye is upon you from one end of the year to the other; therefore
eye-service is not here forbidden, as it is to masters according to the flesh,
Col. 3.22.

3. He is the only Master, Mat. 23.10. therefore what we do for him, it must be
done with all our might, Eccles. 9.10.

4. No service will be accepted of him without diligence, for it cannot be
separated from his love, as the notation of the word in latin imports: and so
much is intimated by the emblem of the firstling of an ass, which was not to
be offered up in sacrifice, but to be redeemed with a lamb, or else the neck of
it was to be broken, Exodus 34.20. showing that God abhors sloth and
sluggishnesse in all undertakings for him.

Heb. 11.6.
5. He gives the best wages, if men be diligent.

6. He punishes the slothful here and everlastingly. Mat. 25.26.


7. Our enemies are vigilant, their feet are swift to shed blood, Isa. 59.7.

8. Our delays and negligence gives them great advantage. By this only
stratagem procrastination Q. Fabius Max. recovered the lost estate of the
Romans; so averreth Ennius, Unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Expedition
as our case now stands will do us as much good.

Lastly, As the treacherous person is accursed, so is Sophoc. (...).
the slothful, being here included under the same word, and involved in the
same twofold curse, to wit, 1. In the life to come; and 2. In this world. 1. He
shall be accursed in soul, and 2. Body, 3. In his undertakings, and 4.
Posterity. This may make the ears of all such to tingle, as send relief to
besieged places, but not till they have intimation they are taken: and of such
as insinuate themselves into our counsels, I had almost said Councils purposely
to inform the enemy, of such also that come to take up arms among us, that they
may fly to the enemy when they meet with the first opportunity, and so use them
against us: or that wilfully desert their fellows, when they have most need,
that they may be surprised by such as they more affect, or that in stead of
shooting at the Rebels, shoot into the air, or into their fellows or
Commanders bodies. Shall not God find out these and all other deceitful
workers? yes, and the curse too. He that is more true than they can be false,
has fore-spoken it, and he will make it good, when he begins, he will make an
end, 1 Samuel 3.12.

Here by the way, before I proceed to the last Use, let me hint unto my
brethren of the Ministry a note of Si jussu Dei sermo Propheticus hic subjicit
eos maledictioni qui negligenter occidunt, quantas nos poenas exolvemus, si
munus spirituale parvi pependerimus? Theod. in locum.
Theodorets upon my Text to this effect, If Soldiers fall under a double curse
through their negligence in sparing the temporal lives of them, whom God has
adjudged to the sword; how many and great curses shall fall upon such Ministers
as through negligence destroy the souls of them whom God has sent them to
save, Ezekiel. 33.6.

Consolation. And so I pass from mount Eball to mount Gerizzim to pronounce
blessings in the name of the Lord upon all those that are, Deuteronomy. 27.12.13.
or shall be active and faithful in this work of the Lord, according to the
directions of his word formerly laid down. This war is just, be well assured
that it is your duty to prosecute the same, and then before you go forth to
battle, repent you of all your sins since you are now called to punish others
for theirs, begin with prayer to him who gives victory to whom he pleases;
proceed in faith, confidently relying upon his mercy and faithful promises;
Cast off all fear of men, and pusilanimity of spirit. Be of good courage, and
fight valiantly for the cause of God and his people against these
Antichristian enemies, and leave the success to God. Be obedient to the
lawful commands of your superiors: and be just among your selves, and toward
all men, wrong no innocent person in the least matter. Let the ends which you
propound to your selves be the glory of God, the punishment of enormous
offenders, the preservation of good men in their lives and estates, and the
happy restoration of peace in the Church and Commonwealth. And as many as
walk according to these Rules peace be upon them and upon the Israel of God.
They shall be blessed in this life in their souls, bodies undertakings, and
posterities, and in the life to come. Christian, Soldiers, we seek not to
bring you into a fools paradise, as So Pope Nicolas the first in his rescripts.
l. concilior. to^. 3. Quisquis in hoc belli certamine fideliter mortuus fuerit,
illi regna coelestia minime negabuntur.
some Popes have used to do their Proselites, by promising them heaven who
should wage their wars strenuously; as if heaven were at their disposing: but
the Lord himself who has all power in heaven and earth, whose servants you
are, shall bless you. He has cursed your enemies already (as you have heard)
and as they have begun to fall, they shall fall before you, but you shall
remain blessings even to others of your own Nation and Religion; yea all the
congregations of the Saints shall bless you, and God for you. As Melchizedek
Priest of the most high God met Abram when he returned from that famous
service, the slaughter of the five Kings, who had before taken his Nephew Lot
prisoner, and spoiled all the countries round about, Genesis 14, 19, 20. and
blessed him, saying, blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessour of
heaven and earth: and blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine
enemies into thine hand. Thus Deborah and Barak having brought in the Angel of
the Lord charging all the world to curse Meroz, yea and again to curse bitterly
the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord against
the mighty. And justly they deserved this curse, this double curse; for if they
be accursed in my Text, that do the Lords work, when they perform it
negligently; how much more cursed shall they be who will do nothing at all for
God, or for his cause and people? Then they pronounce blessings upon Jael the
wife of Heber the Kenite for her manful executing of Sisera, Judge. 5.23, 24.
Saying, Blessed shall she be above women, and again, Blessed shall she be above
women in the tent; where the Blessing is doubled as was the Curse before. And
hence observe with me in the last place, that we read of two women in Scripture
who are pronounced blessed above women, the one is in the New Testament, the
Virgin Mary the mother of our Lord, for bringing forth a Savior into the
world: the other in the Old Testament, namely this Jael for smiting dead that
cursed enemy of Gods Church Sisera. And this brings me vice Coronidis to speak
something of this deceased and blessed Knight, whose Obsequies we are met to
solemnize at this time.

The Testimony given to Sr CHARLES COOTE, who died Honorably in the Churches
and his Countries service, and with exceeding great Lamentation was Interred in
Christ-Church Dublin, the 14th day of May, 1642.
Worthy and Christian Auditors,
THe time being far spent, I shall utter but little of that which might be
spoken of this renowned and blessed instrument of Gods Glory, and his Nations
good, who was well known to us all to be faithful till death in the Lords work,
and in his life a true mirror of Piety, Prowess, and Prudence, and
infatigable Industry both in times of peace and of war.

Before these commotions in Ireland began, it pleased the Lord to visit him
with sickness, and to convince him of his sins: after his recovery he sent for
some spiritual Physicians to whom ingenuously he opened the estate of his soul,
and took their counsel what he might do to procure pardon and reconciliation
with God, heedfully observing what was said, and carefully making use of it
afterward (I doubt not) to his everlasting good. For ever since he has been
observed to be a very due resorter to public ordinances, and a large
contributer toward their maintenance, having in high esteem the faithful
messengers of Jesus Christ, and expressing singular affection to the generation
of Gods people. He was like Cornelius the Centurion frequent in prayer,
abundant in alms-deeds. His prowess rendered him terrible to our enemies round
about, and the Lord of Hosts made him successful; for as David said of
Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.22.
From the blood of the slain, and from the fat of the mighty his sword returned
not empty. His rare dexterity in animating the Soldier, his winning demeanor,
affable and seasonable speeches, and his prudent ordering of his affairs, made
him great among his people, Est. 10.3.
and accepted (with Mordecai) of the multitude of his brethren, for they all
saw he sought the welfare of his Nation, and put his life in his hand to
procure their safety.

Fines Morison
He was a man of war from his youth. The Irish Chronicle relates he came hither
a Captain in Q. Elizabeth's wars, Anno 1601. Sept. 4. And did memorable exploits
against Tirone and his accomplices. As the Lord made him instrumental to
introduce peace, so he was vigilant to preserve it afterward. Many
combinations of theevish Crews, and traiterous conspiracies in the Province of
Connaght and Confines of Ulster has he dissipated, making some most notorious
offenders exemplary to the terror of the rest. Job 29, 12.13, 14.
On the other side, delivering the poor innocent from such as were too strong
for them. He brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of their
teeth. The blessing of them that were ready to perish came upon him: and he
caused the strangers heart to sing for joy. He put on righteousness and it
clothed him, and his judgment was as a robe and diadem. Many years together did
he shine as an eminent Star in our Horizon: nothing danted with false
aspersions of some, Maximus Sermon. 54. In sole ambulantes necessario umbra
sequitur, in honor and dignitate viventes invidia comitatur.
or foolish credulity of others; for he knew that as the shadow follows the
body walking in the Sun, so does envy attend worth and virtue.

Since this new eruption of war, he only was left of all the ancient worthies
in the former wars of Ireland whom time either has worn out, or disabled for
this work, but the Lord renewed his strength as the Eagles; when hearing the
rufull outcries, and beholding the prodigious miseries of our stripped English,
which surpass all expression, he was exceedingly moved in his spirit, and
prayed the Lord to endue him with strength from above, that he might be able
before he died to give three or four defeats to the authors of the great
indignities and numberless sufferings of an helpless people. This prayer the
Lord condescended to; for instantly, of weak he became strong, and to all men's
admiration went forth in confidence of assistance of the most high, and by
Faith put to flight those that rose up against him; and who saw not, that God
was with him? First he discomfited the Rebels in Wicklow: he burned Clantarf, a
place near this City filled with rapine and blood: he took in the Garrisons of
the Naaz, and Trim: he expeld the enemies out of the Navan, and then he
encountered with the whole body of the enemy at Kilrush in a pitched battle, and
routed their vast multitudes, and would have pursued them, if he might have had
his will, with such heat and vigor, that they should have had little leisure or
opportunity to rally any more: but he was called back, and the number of his
desired victories being made up with some overplus, in his last battle near
Trim he was slain, being shot (as it is verily conjectured) by one of our side,
into the body; having a little before with three or four Troops, chased three
or four thousand almost two miles, and left about four hundred dead on the
place; Thus died this honorable Patriot and Champion in the Lords work, and
victorious, in the sixty fifth year of his age, Cic. de Senect.
wherein (as Cato Major says of Q. Maximus, Hic bella gerebat, ut adolescens,
cum plane grandis esset.) he was like Caleb for strength, Jos. 14.11.
as able for the war both to go out and to come in as he was the day when he
was first sent over, having about a quarter of an hour before his fall, slain
with his sword a Rebel of great stature hand to hand. But now as David said of
Abner, may I say of him, A great man is fallen in our Israel; in whom the Lord
has bereaved us at once of the mighty man, and the man of war, the prudent and
valiant Captain, the honorable man, and the Counselor; c. 3.2.
as the Prophet Isaiah speaks.

The greatness of our adversaries rejoycings at his fall, proclaims aloud
the greatness of our loss: but nothing has befallen him or us, but what has
befallen the dearest of Gods Servants. Sampson is reckoned in the Catalogue of
Believers, Heb. 11.
who slew more ar his death than in all his life; yet he perished among the
Philistines: by the Philistines sword gracious Jonathan afterward fell upon
Mount Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.20.
which occasioned much triumph to the daughters of the uncircumcised. Faithful
Uriah was also betrayed by Joab at the Kings Command, and cut off by the sword
of the children of Ammon; Add to these, godly Josiah, to whom there was none
like before or after among all the Kings of Judah; yet was he slain by the
sword of Pharaoh Necho. The sword devoureth one as well as another: and all
things befall all alike, him that fears God, and him that fears him not.
Yea Aristotle calls this kind of death the most beautiful of all other.
Ethic. l. 3. Offic. l. 1. and de somnio Scipionis.
c. 6. The Orator affirms, that no good man will doubt to die for the profit
of his Country: This our deceased Champion accounted to be most eligible; for
such as lay down their lives for the brethren eminently show forth their love
to God and his Church, 1 John 3.16.
as Gods love is apparently seen in his sons laying down his life for us. And
wise men in all ages agree upon this maxim, Decet Imperatorem stantem mori:
And God gave him his option, he was taken from us by this eligible, beautiful,
honorable death; for he deceased on Hors-back, being upheld by his Son riding
behind him, till he had brought him to his quarters. The Lord convince and
humble us all for all our sins, which have brought this judgment upon us. Not
one but many Achans have thus troubled our Israel; for I know no kind of sins
which are not predominant among us. It is the Lords mercy we are not all
consumed.

The Lord help us to look up to Jesus Christ, whom our sins have also pierced,
Isa. 55.4.
for him has God given to be a leader and commander to his people; who once
died, that by his death we may have life, and by his life salvation temporal
and eternal; for now, though other Commanders die, he lives for ever, and when
other helpers may be far off, he is ever present with all his people who alone
can help, when as without him all help of men is in vain; as when the Spirit
departed ttom valiant Sampson, he became weak like other men. This has he
commanded us to do, and promised salvation to all them that so do, Isa. 45.22.
And then shall our sorrows be all turned into joy, and our enemies rejoicing
shall vanish: then shall the Lord who has the residue of the spirit in the
room of this one Heroic Patriot now gone to his rest, raise up many deliverers
endued with wisdom, counsel, and might, and the fear of the Lord, who may
fight our Battles, tread down our enemies as mire in the Streets, restore poor
outcasts to their rightful possessions again, and settle peace and truth in
all the borders of this sinful and bloody Land, to the comfort of all true
Israelites, and his own everlasting glory. Amen.

FINIS.

