A Testimony from the People of God called Quakers, against false Reports. At
our Monthly Meeting in York, the Sixth Day of the Second Month called April,
1694.
WE under Named being (with many other of our Friends and Brethren,) very
sensible of the great Calamity fallen on many Families in this City, by a
sudden and dreadful Fire which happened on the Second Instant at Night, with
much Regret, do say; we are heartily Sorry for it, which did appear by our
Endeavors with the rest of our Neighbors, what in Us lay to put a stop to it;
As likewise the Loss which some of our Friends had in it, two of whom having
almost all they had Consumed, and others driven from their Habitations by it,
amongst their Neighbors: Now for as much as that there is a Report that
Charles Hall Flax-dresser, in whose House or Shop it first broke forth; is a
Quaker, he having formerly come (as many others do) to our Public Meetings;
But in a short time, many of Us had a sense of the falseness of his Spirit, and
un-Godliness of his Conversation: And thereupon Several of Us dealt with him,
first privately by Reproofs and Exhortations; But seeing no amendment, tho for
a time he did Deny, Excuse, or Subtly evade to cover himself, and we are
jealous made lies his Refuge: Notwithstanding a Sense remained amongst Us, that
all our Christian care took no place to reclaim him, from his Scandalous Life
and Conversation; But that he rather abounded in Pride and other Wickedness,
growing still worse and worse, to our great Trouble and Grief, and to the
Scandal of the precious Truth we do profess. And thereupon some Years since,
Friends more publicly dealt with him in our several Meetings, which proving
ineffectuall, and no Remorse or Amendment appearing, but a Scornful rejecting
of Council, etc. A concern lying on Us, for the clearing the Truth, our
Selves, and Profession, to give forth a Public Testimony of our disowning him,
(as one of Us) which was done the Sixth day of the third Month (called May,)
1692. Which Testimony stands Recorded in our Book; and which some time since
(before this sad and to be lamented Fire happened,) was showed to the Lord
Major of this City by two of Us; which we doubt not but he will own, for the
satisfaction of any that may doubt of the truth of it; And further, we hope
that all Sober and moderate People to whom such false and malicious Reports may
come, that is to say, that a Quaker set the City on Fire; will hereby be better
Informed, and judge according to Truth, and not as the prejudiced or Rabble may
Report: And we humbly beg of God Almighty, to keep both You and Us, if it be
his will, from such dismal accidents, and in his fear and Dread all our Days;
is the earnest desires of Us who are welwishers to all Men, notwithstanding the
false Reports we have (or from such as know us not) may lie under.

John Tailor. Thomas Wait. John Todd. Robert Jeeb. Walter Merry. Benjamin
Brown. Edward Moore. John Webster. Zacheus Canby. Michaell Lazenby. Thomas
Hammond. Robert Hillary. William Tuke. Matthew Hargrave.



