PSEYDELEYTHEPIA. OR, Lawless Liberty. SET FORTH IN A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE
THE Right Honorable the Lord Major of London, etc. in PAUL'S, Aug. 16. 1646.

By EDWARD TERRY, Minister of the Word, and Pastor of the Church at
Great-Greenford in the County of Middlesex.

The Law was not made for the righteous man, but for the lawless and
disobedient, for ungodly, and for sinners.

1. Tim. 1. 9. Ye shall keep my statutes and do them, I am the Lord.

Levit. 20. 8. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that
are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well.

1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. Some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of
this matter.

Act. 17. 32. Imprimatur.

Sept. 11. 1646. John Downame.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by Charles Green, at his
shop in Ivy Lane, at the sign of the Gun. 1646.

To the deservedly Honored, Sir GILBERT GERARD, Baronet, and Sir JOHN
FRANKLIN, Knight Knights for the County of Middlesex, in this present
Parliament.
Right Worshipful,
THere is no condition whatsoever, can privilege a folded Arm: For if
Idleness had been better then Labor, our first Parents had never been put
into the Garden to dress it: but they must labor then in their innocent
estate, because they were happy: and so much more must every one of us in his
sinful condition; get up and be doing, that he may be so. The Church of God is
a Garden enclosed, so Cant. 4. 12. otherwise called, the vineyard of the Lord
of Hosts, Isaiah 5. 7. Now, Laberandum in vinea, Laborers are for this
vineyard, where they shall ever find, never want work: they therefore which
dare be idle and loyter here, are worthy to be cast out. The Apostle compares
the Church of God to a building, Ep. 2. 20. the beauty whereof has ever been
such a great eyesore to all ungodly men, that their mouths of wickedness
have still extended themselves wide against it, crying of it, as they of
Jerusalem, Psa. 137. 7. Raze it, raze it; and their hands of violence lifted
up, to down with it, down with it, even to the foundation thereof. The case
being thus, he is not worthy to be esteemed a member of the Church of God, who
labors not with the very utmost of his endeavors, one way or other, to uphold,
defend, maintain, enlarge this building, to keep this vineyard from waste,
this Fabric from ruin, which could not possibly continue, were it in the
power of men or devils to destroy it.

And if ever Distractions, Dissentions, Divisions, threatened the wel-being of a
Church and State (as they always do) the Church of God in this Kingdom, at
this time, is in very much danger; wherein a general liberty is taken, in
matters which concern Religion, by people (of what spirit I know not) to do
what they please, not what they should. Our malady we see, and cannot choose but
complain of; and if there be not a speedy cure thought on to apply unto our
hurt, the whole Kingdom may shortly take up that saying, and make particular
application of it, prudens, sciens, vivus, vidensque pereo.

For my self being lately called to that public place where this Sermon was
delivered, I thought it my duty to fall upon some subject that might have
relation to our present times and distempers. In which you may please clearly
to behold the necessity of Government, as well in Church as State, Then, how
generally it is disaffected, and by whom: esteemed the heaviest of all
burdens: who therefore do what they can to throw it off: which meditations,
as they then passed through the ears (as I fear) of many who then heard them:
(for this I am sure of, that abundance of this spiritual seed every where
miscarries) so they now most humbly desire leave to take the boldness, that
through Yours, they may pass into the hands of others, that may consider them
at leisure and upon better advantage.

Vox audita perit, litera scripta manet. That which we only hear may easily
slip from us; when as that we read, and may read again, in probability may
stick by us. And the Lord in mercy make this thus successeful.

For surely there were never any people under heaven that enjoyed and wanted
more instruction then we do: when we seriously consider how that Almighty God
has laid wide open before us the Books of his revealed will, of his mercies,
of his judgments: yet though we have been taught abundantly by precepts, we
have not learned: been pressed upon by mercies, we have not regarded: and
chastned too by the keenest, the sharpest of all temporal judgments, we have
not been taught* Doubtless, the body of this Kingdom was exceedingly
corrupted, when it could not live, unless it bled, as it has abundantly done,
and yet the cure is not perfect, nor ever shall be, till Reformation make up that
breach, which ungodliness has trodden down. Now there is no Reformation to be
hoped for, without Religion: and no life, no power of Religion, without
Government, to order it, guard it, encourage it. Which Church Government, that
Great Council (of whom your very worthy Selves are a part) have resolved
speedily to establish. The City of London are ready to taste, and like, and
entertain it. We in the Country do exceedingly want it, and the present want
of that most desired issue of your great labors, is ready to fill us with as
much impatiency, as poor Rachel expressed for want of children, Genesis 30. 1.

Now the Lord send it, and settle it throughout the whole Kingdom, and make
all those that shall be called, to act in this great work, like Joshua, who when
he was appointed to be a Leader and a Governor of the people, Deuteronomy. 34. 9. was
full of the spirit of wisdom: And fill them full of the spirit of zeal too,
for the house of God, that Gods glory in the increase of his Church, may be
ever before their eyes, ever in their aim. And the Lord make us who are
Ministers of the Word, in a special manner to apply our selves unto all those,
with whom we shall have to deal in all love, and meekness, and tenderness,
and prudence, that so good and so great a work, be not quite marred by an
ungodly, indiscreet or careless handling. And the Lord give us arguments to
persuade those that have long continued in blindness, and consequently have
been ignorant of the necessary truths of God, now to incline their ears unto
wisdom, and to apply their hearts unto understanding, Pr. 2. 2. that they may
be while they are in a capacity of help, entreated to suffer God through Jesus
Christ, to save their souls: and let God arise and have mercy in building up
his Sion amongst us, that after our Eclipse, he may appear unto us in glory.

There was never yet any good and great work carried on without much
opposition. From which, if that work of Church Government, so seriously and
long debated by You, had been exempted, I should have joined with those that
had most questioned it. But now a great and effectual door is opened unto you;
God having so blessed the way you have resolved to go, that he has given it a
free entrance into the hearts of many of his people; And you have many
adversaries; and it cannot be otherwise, so long as there are such a number
amongst us, who are like bad Wares, which are for Dark shops, or like unto
Bleare-eyes, that cannot endure the Light.

Most worthy Sirs, I dare not flatter you, and I shall not, if I tell you that
it has been ever my thoughts, as the thoughts of very many more, who have best
means to know you, that you have done your parts in this great work. The
advantage of whose prayers, you shall never want to carry you on, in it,
through it: and then whatsoever the success be, you may wash your Hands. The
Lord who only can, most graciously assist, and abundantly recompense the
unwearied pains of you All. I have this only to add, in relation to your
particular Selves, that if my dear and tender respects unto you, cannot, your
pardon may excuse him for this boldness, who is,

Your Worships, Edward Terry.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
EVer since the world has been planted with two different Seeds, all the
words and actions of men have been exposed unto several interpretations, as
this following Sermon expected, and found; (which occasioned this preface) at
which if they who took most exception, could but know, how tender I am of
thinking amiss, much more, of saying or doing any thing that may justly grieve
the spirits of any who truly fear God: He would enter into consideration,
whether I in reprooving, or he in meriting just reproof deserved most blame.

It would trouble any one who has not quite lost himself, to consider how
these present times have distracted a very great number amongst us by variety
of opinions: Many of which though they agree in the maine, (when a great number
go very much further and do not) so quarrel and contend about the list and
fringe of Christ's garment, as if they meant to rend in pieces that seamelesse
coat which must cover our nakedness. Alas Christ has suffered abundantly for
us already; why then deal we so injuriously with him, as to tear open his
wounds afresh by sad oppositions, as if he were now to be divided twixt Paul,
and Apollo, and Cephas, which thing the Apostle reproves and complains of, 1
Cor. 1. 12. amongst whom, some were taken with St. Paul's ministry, some with
Apollo, some with Cephas, admiring one of them to the prejudice of the rest.
And there were some that said I am of Christ. And what were these? But people
of several factions in the Church of Corinth, the last of which (though we may
parallel them all) were of the very self same mind, that many amongst us; are
grown such perfectists, that they esteem themselves above all ordinances, and
therefore shamefully neglect them: So depending (as they say) upon Christ, that
they care not for any Preacher in the world, they regard them not, they refuse
to hear, or pray with them, especially if they be orthodox, or rightly
principled.

God has sent forth abundance of light and truth, Psalm. 43. 3. Truth
sufficient to establish, annd light sufficient to guide us; and it would be
very sad, if an over curious search after new light, should put us out of the
way, the old way, the good way, (...) 6. 16. and so make us to hazard the loss
of old truth.

Alas, what would we have? What do we expect? A new Christ, a new Passion, a
new Resurrection: What would we be? Members of a glorious Church that has
neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, Ephe. 5. 27. we must wait for
that hereafter; Why in the mean time do so many sad quarrels, sharp
contentions arise amongst us? When we have, said and done what we can Knowing,
Believing, Doing, or Faith, and Practice well studied that they may be known,
include in them a Christians whole duty here.

And doubtless a number shall one day find, (if ever they return again unto
themselves) themselves most miserably deluded, that have hoped to find, some
other, some nearer, and more safe and certain way to Heaven, then that by
which all the holy men of God have passed, then that, which has been pointed
out unto us, by the lives of the Saints, and enlightened for us by the flames of
the Martyrs. Yet it is most notoriously manifest, that there are too too many
amongst us, that prescribe a shorter passage to Heaven, then any of those
worthies have sound, by removing all those blocks and rubs which the Law of God
casts in a Christians way thither, to make it more difficult: Which Doctrine if
it were as true as it is plausible, he were worthy to perish without party,
that would not close with it: But this I am sure of, that not any one of those
holy men of God mentioned in the sacred story before the coming of Christ, nor
any since, whose praises are in the Gospel, have made it appear unto the world
that there is any such way to be discovered: That blessed Apostle himself, who
was such a chosen vessel, who had such abundance of Revelations, 2 Cor. 12 7.
was never acquainted with this; if he had, certainly he would never have
complained so much, so often of the Law which gives such a strength to sin and
such a sting to death, 1 Cor. 15 56 He would never have so complained of that
body of sin, of that body of Death which was in him.

And therefore Reader, let me entreat thee now before thou leave me, to have
the patience seriously to consider of, these following particulars.

First, and in a special manner to take heed of spiritual Pride, that great
sin which banes thousands, by sad and several mistakes, in entertaining a
floating knowledge, for true wisdom; a distempered heat, for true Zeal;
Conceits and conceivings about Religion, to be true Religion indeed. Oh how
does this Pride swell, bladder, puff up thousands like empty vessels, to make
a great sound; Putting low and base esteems upon others; Like the people of
China, who boast that themselves only have two eyes; when all the people in the
world beside, have but one. Know thou, that the most excellent Christian in the
world is most humble; And that a good man is first in another man's, last in his
own commendation.

Secondly, know that there is a natural aptness, and propensity in all, to
set up Idols in their hearts and heads, Ezekiel. 14. Where they are hardly
discovered, and whence not easily remooved, which they do not only love, but
dote on, and therefore they hug, and dandle those deformed issues of their own
brains, as women do the Children of their bodies, and esteem, what ever
others think of them, as the Crow their Bird most fair, Woe unto them says
the Prophet, that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for
light, and light for darkness, and woe unto them that are wise in their own
eyes etc. Isaiah 5. 20. 21. because wisdom presumed on, and drawn from the
broken cisterne of a man's own brain, is in the reputation of God, and has as
great an woe before it in that Chapter, as the sins of Covetousness, or
Oppression, or Drunkenness.

Thirdly, take this for granted before hand, that there is very much deceit in
appearance, if not, our blessed Savior had spared that precept in the seventh
Chapter of John v. 24 not to judge of things according to appearance, but to
judge righteous judgment. Because many things that appear, are not what they
appear to be: Because Satan that he may the more certainly deceive, can
transform himself into an Angel of light 2 Cor. 11. 14.

Lastly, in all thy undertakings before thou conclude of any thing, order thy
actions, and thy resolutions by those words in the nineteenth of Judges the
last verse, first, consider, secondly, take advice, thirdly, speak thy mind,
or resolve what to do: Or as that Scripture is rendered in the former
translation 1 consider, 2 consult, 3 give sentence.

First, seriously consider of the thing in question; for Inconsideration, and
Prejudice were never made for competent Judges. Consider of things whether they
be true or false. Now for the trial of truth; Antiquity must ground, and
bottom it: The un-erring word of God must balance and try it: And the lives
and practices of all the holy men of God, whom God has proposed to us for
examples must ratify and confirm it, and this scrutinie must be most
impartially carried.

First, truth is grounded upon Antiquity; it was from the beginning, for there
are no new Divine truths, quod verrum antiquum, quod falsum recens.

Secondly, the word of God must balance and try it, and therefore try before
thou trust. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of
God, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Repair to the Law and Testimony etc. Isaiah 8. 20 Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. Loan not to thine own
understanding, Pro. 3. 5. But believe how that others who labor to get the
knowledge, the right interpretation of Gods revealed will declared in his word;
First, from God by prayer; Secondly, from men by conference; Thirdly, from
Books by reading; And are further able to read the holy Scriptures in that
language wherein they were first written, may be able (to speak no more) to
give the sense of a Scripture as well as thou, that can but, or happily
scarce read it in the English. For thy further and better instruction
therefore:

Secondly, consult not with men only of thine own opinion, but with others
also: for if we will see things aright, we must sometimes make use of other
men's eyes, as well as of our own; for in our own there may be some defect,
and we know that pore-blind, and blood-shot, and squint-eyes cannot see well,
the last looking over, or besides the object, and the other two cannot well
discern things as they are.

And thirdly, when thou have wisely considered, and carefully consulted, then
resolve: And that thou may so do, to the quiet and comfort both of thy
self and others, know that the wisdom which is from above is first pure,
then peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. and therefore follow peace and holiness, Heb. 12.
14. Never think thou art too good, too upright, too holy, too religious, ever
in the right use of all good means, seek, labor, strive, study, covet to be
better, for this is a justifiable covetousness, 1 Cor. 12. 21. and follow
peace too, every one striving to exceed one another in love, for this is a
godly emulation.

Thus have I inserted something by way of Preface before these following
meditations: if this, or they shall prove any way useful, I have my reward: if
otherwise, my very hearty desires to cast in my mite, by offering some word in
season amongst those many (by much more worthy) that have made themselves
public, shall be my comfort.

Thine, as far as thou art a friend Ed. Terry.

PSALM. 2. 3. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from
us.


THis Psalm is David's, for so the Apoostles tell us Acts 4. 25. that God by
the mouth of his servant David said; why do the heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing? etc. And this Psalm was penned by David (as is most
probably conceived) after his victory over the Philistines, who gathered
themselves against him, when the people had made him King in the room of Saul.

And now that we may make as much of this Psalm our own this day as may help
us to the cleerer understanding of this text, I beseech you take notice, that
the three first verses in it, are a narration of the attempts of many wicked
men against the Kingdom of David as the Type, and against Christ too, as the
Antitype, or person typified in this Psalm.

The carriages, projects, attempts of these wicked unruly men, who would cast
off subjection; are expressed here in the first verse by way of interrogation,
why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? etc? the
Prophet admiring their folly, in going about that, which was impossible for
them to effect, why do they rage? Or come tumultuously together as men in an
uproare (for so the original word implies) noting their pride and fierceness,
as in horses from whom the Metaphor is taken, which neigh and rage before they
rush into the battle. But why? to what purpose is all this? when God who can,
will maintain David's right, as he most thankfully acknowledges, Psalm. 9. 4.
thou have maintained my right, and my cause etc. he must be King, though he
have many enemies, not only amongst the meanest, but mightiest to oppose him;
whose attempts, studies, power, policies, rage shall prove to be of none
effect, for when they conceive mischeife, and travel with wickedness, they
shall bring forth a lie, as it is Psalm. 7. 14. for Christ shall confound them,
he shall first scorn and laugh at their attempts v. 4. (God speaking there
after the manner of men) for God will make them to know how that they which
reckon without him, must reckon again. He will speak to them in wrath, vex
them in displeasure, as it is verse 5. or he will handle them roughly (for so
it is in the original) breaking them in pieces like a potters vessel verse 9.
their wound shall be incurable, their ruin irrecoverable, like the breaking of
an earthen vessel, once broken, never to be repaired. Yet notwithstanding this
their associating and leaguing together, their animating and encouraging one
another in this evil way, is positively laid down in the 2* and 3 verse. of
this Psalm. in the 2 verse illustrated from the persons conspiring; Kings and
Princes, I and the people to, as verse 1. And secondly by the persons against
whom they do conspire, the Lord and his Anointed, encouraging one another in
this their rebellion, as if there were no power either in heaven or earth, to
contradict them, as you may observe in the words of my text, they saying let us
break their bands asunder etc. The words I have read unto you are words of
mutiny and discontent, which as they are spoken here, I would have looked upon
and considered, as Mariners behold some sea-markes, not to steer too, but from
them, for fear of Rocks or Sands they discover, for there is nothing directly
held forth in this text for a Christians imitation, but caution. In which there
are two words which need some explication, and they are bands and cords which
here signify the same thing.

Let us break their bands asunder and cast away their cords from us, the word
(...) Musar which signifies bands, comes from (...) Jasar which signifies to
chastise, properly it is put for discipline and correction and so it signifies
bands, by which the unruly are hampered and tamed. Here by a Metaphor it
signifies, and is put for Laws; as the Laws of God, published by David, or
the Laws of Christ, published by himself, and his Apostles; the Laws
published by the Lord and his Ministers whom he uses in his rule and
government.

The words in this text contain in them a resolution, and the thing resolved
on, which you may consider together in this following paraphrase. Let us break
their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, thus encouraging one
another in their rebellious attempts, as if they had said, neither the Lord nor
his Anointed shall reign over us, and howsoever they think to impose upon us
their Laws and Ordinances, that with these, as with strong bonds and cords,
they may fetter us; yet let us, which is the thing they resolve on, bestirre
our selves, and play the men; let us shake off the yoke of such servitude, and
wholly reject their government, for who are Lords over us?

This text is rich and full, and may fitly be compared unto Ezekiels roll,
mentioned in the 2 Chap. of his Prophesies, ver. 10. that was written within
and without, that which is written without, or that which this Scripture by
necessary consequence first holds forth unto us, is this, that.

Obs. 1. Good Laws are as bands, and cords for discipline, to keep people in
obedience. Secondly that which lies within the text, is first for the general
this; that, Obs. 2 Rebellious spirits affect nothing so much as lawless
liberty, to do what they please without control. Hence it is that they here
consult of breaking these bands. For being restrained,

Obs 3. These spirits think themselves in bondage, or as Prisoners in bands
when they are required to yield obedience unto equal and just Laws. Therefore
they would cast away these cords, that they may not restrain them. And lastly
that these rebellious spirits may be loose at liberty, to do what they please,
not what they should. And that they may effect their desires in this

Obs. 4. Rebellious spirits animate, and hearten, and stir up, and encourage
one another, in this ungodly enterprise, to cast off all subjection.

Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Thus for
the groundwork of this Mornings exercise, have I presented unto you, what
this Text holds forth to me. The observations, as I conceive, are proper,
natural, pertinent, and perspicuous from this Scripture. And my discourse
shall be plain to; So that if any be come hither this day, for the vanity and
froth of wit; (as I know how that these quesie times pester every great
Congregation, with some such hearers) if any be come to this place at this
time, as pamperd bellies use to go to feasts, where nothing can please the
wanton palate, but some odd sauce, or new invention: I am not provided for the
entertainment of such. But for you, beloved, that are come hither to hear,
that you may learn, learn, that you may know, know that you may believe and
do; Believe and do, that you may live. Favor me so much, as to afford me your
most diligent attention, while by Gods most gracious assistance, I shall take a
further view of the particulars I have observed; And first of the first,

Obser. 1. Good Laws are as bands and cords for discipline, to keep people in
obedience.

Good Laws are the nerves and sinews of Commonwealths, which hold
altogether; the want whereof, like to great depopulations, lay all things
common. They are as mounds unto vineyards, as bounds to Seas; or as walls and
bulworks unto frontier towns, to keep all in safety. Hence it is, that Princes
and Magistrates, in relation to their places, which are to defend the people in
all their just rights, are called the shields of the Earth. The want of whom,
he that reads the third Chapter of Isaiahs Prophesies, may find in that which
followed, when God threatened to take away the mighty man, and the Judge, and
the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, etc. But what was the
consequence of this? The Text tells us, v. 5. The people should be oppressed
every one by another, every one by his neighbor, etc. For what were those
else, whom God there threatened to remove, but the very stays and strengths of
Jerusalem and Judah? and so of all Cities, and Nations, of all public and
politic Bodies wheresoever. And he which runs, may further read, how that
this people of Israel, as they enjoyed many comfortable, so they were
acquainted to with many sad and dismal times. And if ye seriously consider
their story, ye shall find that it was never worse with them, then when there
was no King in Israel, but every one did that which was right in his own eyes,
Jud. 17. And however it may be true, that the government of man over man, came
first from sin, (as I find it excellently observed) First, because God gave
sovereignty unto Adam over fishes, and birds, and beasts, not over reasonable
creatures made to his own likeness.

Secondly, because the first righteous men we read of, were shepherds and
heardsmen, over beasts, not Kings over Nations. And

Thirdly, because the name of Servant, or underling, was never imposed in
Scripture, till Noah denounced it against his accursed son, Cursed be Canaan,
a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren, Genesis 9. 25. Yet the nature
of mankind standing as it does, corrupted so far, that without the head of
Authority, we could not live, nor converse together; God therefore in infinite
wisdom, has appointed this means for the suppressing of those many, and
those intolerable injuries and violences, which otherwise we should be subject
unto. And therefore

Reason. 1. First, for order sake, there must be government; a superiority and
an inferiority, a command and a subjection, a mastery and a Dominion in every
order of men specially designed. The body Politic is very fitly compared unto
a natural body; which must not be all head, or hand, or foot, but
distinguished into superior and inferior parts, for every member to do its
particular office. The Heart or Soul sitting in the midst of the body, as a
King upon his Throne, and according to the dictates of the heart, the tongue
speaks, the eyes look, the feet move, the hands stir, etc. Now a body
Politic may most fitly be resembled to this Natural body, wherein there are
parts, as the Apostle speaks, more and less honorable, 1. Cor. 12. yet all
tending to the mutual decency, service, and succor of the fame body. The
Egyptians made an Eye and a Scepter, the Emblem, by which they figured their
government: a Scepter for Jurisdiction and power; an Eye for watchfulness and
discretion. And certainly a Kingdom without order and government, is like the
body of that feigned Giant Polyphemus, without an eye, or rather like a body
without an head: or, (which most fitly resembles it) like that confused Chaos
before the Creation, where height and depth, light and darkness were mingled
together. In the beginning therefore when heaven and earth were first made, God
established a superiority and rule, in other creatures after their kind, and
afterward in man. So Genesis 1. 16. God made two great lights, the greater to
rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also.
And one star to differ from another in glory, 1. Cor. 15. 41. And presently
after, when he had created man, he invested him immediately with imperial
authority to subduethe earth and to rule in it, v. 28. And to what other end is
it called the host of Heaven, Genesis 2. 1. but to show, how that Metaphor is
taken from an Army, where there must be superiority and subordination, command
and obedience, without both which, it cannot subsist? For if the spirit and
soul of obedience be taken away, what can follow but Ataxie and Confusion?

Reason 2. Secondly, there must be Government, and Discipline, for necessities
sake, to curb and restrain all tumultuous and heady spirits, all offensive
and disordered persons, whether in Church or Commonwealth. The Laws of God
were first written in the fleshy tables of man's heart; but sin did either blot
or wear them out thence. Then the wisdom of God thought fit to write them
upon tables of stone, that they might be lasting, durable permanent. But these
Laws of God thus written, and commended, and commanded unto man, where
slighted, and neglected, and forsaken by him, and therefore Irenaus well
observes in his first book against heresies, that therefore God appointed
Kingdoms and men to rule in them, because man forsaking God, did wax feirce,
lawless, masterlesse, and being not sufficiently awed by the fear of the
Lord, God therefore put upon them the fear of man, that fearing humane Laws,
they should not devour, destroy, consume one another as the fishes of the Sea,
and the beasts of the wilderness, and the fowls of the air do. And for this
reason there is an absolute necessity of Laws, to curb, and restrain, and to
keep people under obedience: for were it not for these our beds would not be
suffered to lie under us; our meat would be pulled out of our mouths, our
clothes would be torn off our backs; rapine and violence, would destroy us.

Use. Now for application, this being so, as it must needs be granted to be
truth, What just cause have all people, who live under good Laws to bless God
for them. To one who asked the question why the City Sparta had no walls, it was
answered, that the Citizens had good weapons in their hands, unanimity in their
hearts, and to both these good Laws to order them. We want no weapons, and
these sad times, have made almost every one amongst us a man of war. And would
to God that we had just cause to boast of unity, and mutual agreement amongst
our selves. But for good Laws, certainly we of this Nation, have as great
cause to be thankful, as any people under the Cope of Heaven, ever had. And oh
that we had as just cause to praise God for their due execution likewise! But
alas we have not. Oh justice! how faintly do thou draw thy breath, while
thou suffer so many desperate sinners, and so many dangerous seducing
Schismatics, to march boldly by thee, and not bidst them stand? Alas how does
the whole Land stink of that beastly sin of drunkenness, that sin which robs
a man of himself, and leaves a beast in the skin of a man. That sin which is
like the serpent that stings two ways, for it kills the body, and slaies the
soul too, yet how do those Tents of wickedness, those Thrones wherein Satan
dwells, those unnecessary tippling houses, which so multiply Transgressors, and
transgressions amongst men, increase amongst us? How do Pride and Luxury
strive for the upper end of the table? How does the very breath of most
desperate swearers, and blasphemers even poison the very air of the Kingdom
wherein we live? And how does the stone out of the Wall, and the Beam in the
Chamber, cry out aloud against oppression? And how has the Error of Religion
made many amongst us so wanton, that they know not what to have, nor what to
hold? Surely as the Prophet Isaiah complains Isai. 24. 20. The transgression
of the earth (of this earth whereon we live) lies heavy upon it. And now O
justice how do thou degenerate from thy self, while thou suffer thy
sword for want of drawing to rust, or else for fear, or for some other ^ie
respects to be locked up in the scabbard?

I am not come hither to declame against the administration of justice in this
honorable City (this City so renowned for exemplary government the world over)
though I must tell you that if I knew any just cause to invite me hereunto, I
should not spare. But this I am sure of, that there is an intolerable, an
unanswerable fault some where, when so much wickedness goes unpunished, when
so many errors, schisms, heresies, some of which destroy, as the rest do
blast the profession of Religion, are suffered amongst us, though we have
lifted up our hands unto the most high God in a solemn League and Covenant to
the contrary. Or if they meet with any rebuke from some, it is but such a one,
as that too-too much indulgent Ely (who brought up his sons to bring down
his house) gave his sons 1 Samuel 2. 23. saying why do you so, or such things?
A strange thing in Ely to punish the Thefts, Rapines, Sacrilege, Adulters,
Incests of his sons with why do you so? what was this but to shave that head
which deserved to be cut off? Doubtless (as I find it excellently observed to my
hand) it is with sins in the soul as with humors in the body, a weak dose
does but stir, and anger, and more dangerously disperse them, not purge them
out. So that it is certainly a great violation of justice, not to proportion the
punishment to the offense. To whip a man for murder, or to punish the purse
for Adultery or Incest, to burn treason in the hand; or to award the Stocks
for Burglarie is to patronize evil instead of avenging it. Of the two extremes
rigor is more safe for the publique-weale, because the over punishing of one
offense keeps many from committing the same.

Elies sons did thus wickedly while they acted a part in Religion. And are
not there some amongst us, who under specious pretenses to advance, persist in
courses that undoubtedly in conclusion if God prevent it not, will undermine
root out Religion from amongst us? Religion I say then which nothing should be
mor dear unto us, yet this is known, and suffered, and if it receive any
cheeck from some, it it such a one, as does rather encourage, then daunt
offenders, ubi nunc Lex Anglica? dormis? Oh ye Laws of England what do ye?
where are ye? are ye asleep?

I told you even now what great cause we of this Nation have to bless God for
good Laws, and suffer me to acquaint you in the next place, how dearly in many
respects a number in this Kingdom have missed these last few years while
destruction has been amongst us, the benefits which otherwise might have been
enjoyed, by the execution of those good Laws, if their current had not been
more or less obstructed. I cannot deny but that while the sword of war is in a
Land it cannot choose but marvellously clash with the sword of justice; and many
things will be done, and cannot be avoided while it continues under such a sad
condition, and in regard the sword has been in the hands of many of such ill
principled hearts: I speak not of all, for there be many whom God has stirred
up personally to appear in this his great work, who deserve all honor, as
well for their Piety as Valor; but of some, the very refuse and dregs of
Mankind, in whom that old Proverb is verified, Armatis Divum nullus Pudor:
That they fear neither God nor Man, as you may observe in their most debauched
lives, in doing what they please, and in their Hellish language too, whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness, which they belch out, setting their
mouths even against Heaven; for they seldom take that Sacred dreadful Name
of GOD, into their most desperate profane lips, but when they blaspheme that
Name, which should not be once mentioned, but with awful Reverence: or when
they desire God to damn, to refuse them. Now by the way, let me add this,
that if God should ratify that in heaven which they desire (miserable wretches
as they are) against themselves on earth, and say ex ore tuo, from thine own
mouth will I now condemn thee; Oh! how sadly miserable would their condition
be? Nemo miserius misero, non miserante seipsum: Who can be more miserable then
those, which will not be merciful unto themselves? Yet besides all these, give
me leave to speak it, though it be a very sad, a very horrible truth, that
diverse things have been done (or if not, very many in this Kingdom deserve to
be punished for crying and complaining without just cause) by some others of
those, who have most shamefully abused that trust reposed in them by our most
deservedly honored Parliament, that needed not, that ought not, that should not
have been done. Things which no language can excuse; things, which scarce any
act of oppression in former times can parallel. Very horrible things have
been committed in the Land.

-- pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli?
The consideration whereof should put color in our faces, and cover us with
shame, if we be not past, beyond a blush, when we consider that many griping
evils might have been, and have not been prevented, or because boldly acted,
have not been most severely, most exemplarily punished. And therefore it is
high time for us, who are the Lords Remembrancers, to speak by the pound and
talent, to reprove in words of weight, for the gentle spirit of Eli is not
sufficient to amend children that are past grace; and therefore we must cry
aloud, speak out, speak home, speak all, though we lived in times that would
hamper us in those bands and cords in my Text, for our plain and impartial
dealing. Now that things have been so, we may sit down and sadly complain:
but why they have been so, we need not much to wonder, when we consider the
next particular in this Text: that,

Obs. 2. Rebellious spirits affect nothing so much as Lawless liberty, to do
what they please, without control.

Rebellious spirits, who are they? Such as cast off subjection, such as break
the yoke, burst the bands, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 5. 5. The yoke, the
bands, which should restrain, regulate, order them, and all because they
affect nothing so much as Lawless liberty. Lawless liberty, and what is that?
When men do what they please, not what they should; notwithstanding all
restraint of Laws and government to the contrary. This too, too much beloved
liberty, without doubt is marvailously affected by the corrupt nature of man.
It Is a sin of a very ancient growth, for it took its first rise from the very
first transgression. In the garden of Eden, amongst those many plants which God
made, some for ornament, and some for use, some for sight, and some for sent,
and some for taste: not far from the goodliest trees of Life and Knowledge,
grew the bitter root of disobedience: I call it so, because the forbidden fruit
grew on that tree, of which our first Parents took and tasted, though they
were commanded not so much as to touch it, Genesis 3. 3. The taste whereof did not
only infect themselves thorowout, but the corrupt nutriment thereof, did also
convert it self into the whole body of their succeeding lineage. Me thinks
there is very much in that first story of Disobedience, to illustrate this
point: when our first Parents in their estate of Holiness, who had power in
them to Obey, as well as Disobey, and God had told them that of every tree in
the garden they might freely eat, the tree of Knowledge only forbidden, Genesis 2.
16. 17. And though there was no comparison betwixt the Maker, and the murderer
of Mankind, the Father of Truth and the father of lies, betwixt a God and a
devil: and the one had forbidden but one tree, and had fenced it (as it were)
with a double hedge of a double death, temporal, eternal; yet when the
Serpent came to the woman, with a mere contradiction to the voice of God, Ye
shall not surely die, Genesis 3. 4. how credulous and forward was she to
entertain his suggestion? Our first Parents took their fall by their own
wilful Disobedience, and we fell in them, To. 5. 19. Their Persons infected
their Nature, but our nature ever since infects our persons. Ne mali fiant
times, nascuntur: We are borne bad, as well as become so; our sin sticking more
close to our nature, then our skin does to our flesh. And it is no marvel now,
if our nature so marvellously corrupted, be ready to break every branch of the
tree of Good, which God commands, and of the tree of Evil, which God forbids;
this sinful corruption being like a violent stream, which the longer and
further it runs from the fountain, runs with the greater violence. After
the flood when the people began to multiply, they grew heady, exorbitant,
violent, unruly, little less then mad, for they went about an impossible
work, to build a tower whose top might reach to heaven, Genesis 11. And God there
says of them, v. 6. that they would be restrained in nothing they imagined to
do: that is, if they were let alone: therefore Almighty God caused their
tumultuous action, then begun in Pride, to end in Confusion. In whose example
that rebellious spirit which is in every one by nature, is drawn out to the
very life. And doubtless, were it not for these bands and cords in my Text,
and for those hooks and bitts which God has put in the jaws and nostrils of
men, they would be more unruly, more untamed, then all the creatures of the
world beside. Man being estranged from the womb, is ready to go astray as
soon as he is borne, Ps. 58. 3. Being of a disobedient and a gainsaying spirit.

There is a pertinent story to this purpose, which Valerius (as I remember)
relates of a Roman, who had very long, and voluntarily confined himself within
the walls of Rome, and with very much content, but afterward when he was
commanded, not to go forth the gates of that City, that place which before was
his Paradise, now by reason of that word of restraint, became his Prison. And,

Reason. It must needs be thus, because rebellion and disobedience is
^^naturall as kindly to man in general, as the very flesh and bones he carries
about him. Adam left it as a Patrimony, as an inheritance unto all his
Posterity; and Eve gave perverseness in her milk, every one naturally harbors a
Rebel in his breast. Nitimur in verita^, which causes him to think forbidden
fruit most fair; forbidden pleasures most sweet* forbidden ways most secure.
This made the blessed Apostle himself sadly to complain Romans 7. 23. of a law
in his members rebelling against the law of his mind. I see a law in my
members, that is sin ruling like a law in my members, in the faculties of my
soul and body, or like a law governing, and ruling my actions. Rebelling
against the law of my mind, that is against that renewed spiritual part in me,
which like a Law too commands me another way.

Use. I shall not add much by way of inference or use in the application of
this particular, because that which I might here insert, will fall into that
which follows from this text. But I beseech you give me leave before I
proceed, to let fall a very sad complaint; and to leave a most just reproof
behind me. A complaint, and reproof of some particulars which former times
were scarcely acquainted withal. A complaint and reproof of the Preachings,
and Printings and actings of thousands at this time in this Kingdom, a very
lively comment, on this particular in my text. Bo^^ Deus ad qu^ tempora
reservati sumus! Good God in what times do we live, when so much lawless,
unwarrantable, unjustifiable liberty, is taken by men, to do what they please
without control. Oh how has the Pulpit been abused, (since the hedge has
been down about our Church) by a liberty, which without doubt, Posterity will
not believe, could be taken at such a time at this; when he that pleases
consecrates himself, when the lowest among the people, without any lawful
Call, or Commission, take upon them to be public Teachers of others: For an
outward call or commission I am sure they have none, and if they have an
extraordinary and an immediate call from God, which would manifest it self in
more then ordinary gifts, let them make this appear, and we will hold our
peace; and moreover, we will reverence them, and lay our selves at their feet,
as they in the fourth of the Acts and 34. 35. verses when they had sold their
possessions brought the money and laid it down at the foot of the Apostles:
But till they can make this appear, I know not with whom more fitly to compare
them, then with those vagabond Jews, ^^^ists, which took upon them great
matters, to dispossess those which were troubled with evil spirits Acts 19.
13. and there were seven sons of (...) which did so verse 14. and the evil
spirit answered and said to them, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are
ye? The Devils could easily epsy the want of Commission in the sons of
Sc^va; when they adjured him by the name of Jesus whom Paul preached, saying,
Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are ye^? As if he had said, your
warrant is not good, your (...) are not strong enough to remove me. And
doubtless there are no such chains of Authority, no such linkes of iron to
bind the Nobles and Princes of the earth, and to restrain Devils, as in
those tongues, which God has armed from above, and enabled, and set apart, and
sent cut in his service. Or these which before we named are like those mockers
of the true Prophets (for they want no slighting nor reviling terms for them)
those mockers mentioned Jer. 23. 25. who call the people together and tell them
they have dreamed, they have dreamed when they deliver dreams indeed. Now as
Paul's spirit was stirred up at Athens, so should the spirits of all godly,
honest, and Orthodox Ministers and people be now stirred up in England, when we
do further consider how that all those ancient and damnable heresies, recorded
by Irenaeus, and Epiphanius, which we hoped had been long since buried in
forgetfullnesse, are racked up again out of their corruption, and preached by
some, and applauded by others, and defended by more. And no marvel, for they
are a people in general (to give a breife character of them that shall do
them no wrong) of proud, uneven, unquiet, untractable, unpeaceable,
uncharitable spirits differing and dissenting much amongst themselves, carried
away headlong by the violence of their own wills, which they improperly and by
misconceiving call their consciences, whose wills are very much too hard for
their understandings, which makes them so wedded to their own conceivings,
that you may as soon remove Rocks from their places, as these from their
conclusions, and therefore nor fit to be disputed withal; being like
mil-horses, in the evening just there, where they began their morning circuit:
having two general all replies for all objections, as if you prove a thing
plainly by Scripture, their usual answer is, that you interpret this or that
Scripture so, but they conceive of it otherwise, or you apprehend so or so of
such a question in dispute, but they think otherwise. Like Petilian the Rayler
who when Austin had confuted him, from the Authority of all the Ancient
Fathers, answered, Omnes Patres sic, ego autem non sic if all the Fathers
think so, i will think otherwise. So that as Lactantius wrote of some Idolaters
in his time, that they feigned what they pleased, and then feared what they
feigned: So these conceit what they like, and then believe themselves bound to
justify their wild conceivings, which has caused such a multitude of strange
opinions amongst us, that we of this Nation are in very great likelihood to
come into the proverb, that if a man cannot find his Religion in Poland, nor
Amsterdam, let him seek for it in England.

In the second place, oh the boldness and liberty of the Press, if we
consider those odious Pamphlets it often squieseth out. There was a Pamphlet of
ancient date, but, yet in memory, which did bear the name of
Martin-mar-prelate. And we had a Pampleter of late who named that most deformed
issue of his idle and crazed brain, Martin mar-priest, And we have had a
Martin-mar-Prince too, as any one might lately observe, who could have the
patience to read, that greatest pretender to wit, amongst all our penniworths,
now happily silenced as I hope, who in his most odious, and scurrilous Pamplets
would often force in some occasion, to trample upon Majesty. And we have a
Martin-mar-people to, he, I mean, whatsoever he be, who was the Author of that
(I know not what bad enough to call it) entitled by that most desperate
Incendiary, the Author, A Remonstrance of many thousands, which he afterward
calls, Your Sovereigne Lord the People: which damnable and seditious Pamphlet
alone, has enough in it, (if God did not restrain the fury and madness of the
multitude) to set the whole Kingdom on fire. As if the spirit of Nero had
possessed the breasts of some amongst us: encouraging them to fire the Kingdom,
as he did the City of Rome, and then to make themselves mirth before the
flames. And to these, what a number have we had beside, who in several printed
papers, have endeavored to convey unto the people (who want a spirit of
discerning) many most dangerous, lying, and seducing doctrines, to pervert and
undo the simple. But Lions will tear, and Serpents will sting, and Dogs
will bark and bite, and venomous plants will poison, let us say what we can or
please, to the contrary. But as David sometimes asked in the like case, Ps.
120. 3. so will I. What shall be given, or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue? The Prophet answers himself in the 64. Psalm, that their
tongues which they whet and sharpen like swords, shall fall upon themselves. A
fools mouth is his destruction, says Solomon, Pr. 18. 7. And if any of theirs
we have named, be so in conclusion, (which Repentance forbid) they may thank
themselves. In the mean time; Let us not marvel at any thing Lawless
Libertines either say or do, when we seriously consider the third observation
in my Text. That,

Obs. 3. Rebellious spirits think themselves in bondage, or they esteem
themselves as prisoners in bands, when they are required to yield obedience
unto equal and just Laws.

Therefore they will break those Bands that restrain them, cast away those
cords that hamper them. They will break them, if they can, their will shall
not be wanting to do it; so that if they cannot break them at once, they will
unfold their linkes and twistings, (for so the Original word (...) Natha^,
here Englished to break, signifies) so that, as I said, if they cannot break
them at once, they will ravell and untwist them, and so break them by degrees.
Thus violating the civil sanctions of man, and the equal, righteous, just
commands of God. The ordinances of man which contradict not the Laws of God,
to which we are commanded to yield obedience; for so the Apostle exhorts, 1.
Pet. 2. 13. 14. Submit your selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, etc. And the equal, righteous, just commands of God, to which is
required sincere, constant, and universal obedience; I shall not be ashamed
while I have respect unto all thy commandments, says David, Ps. 119. 6. as if
he had said, I shall be ashamed, or I shall come to shame, if I have not.

The glory of any Church or State, is Gods presence in it; for when God is
gone, all is gone, the glory is gone, quite departed. The holy Ordinances of
God manifest his presence, especially where the word and Sacraments are with
all faithfulness offered, and with all thankfulness received, submitted to,
and improved by the people to their particular advantages. This purity of
worship puts an inward beauty upon the Church which is all glorious within; as
administration of good Laws by government, to keep all in safety and order, a
luster and glory which is outward upon it. Now there is nothing more manifests
the truth of Religion, and the excellency of a government, then the general
opposition they both meet withal in the world. These rebellious and refractory
spirits we have named, are sufficient to prove this, if we enlarged no further.
But we will add something more, where first let me remember you of a passage
you have often heard, Act. 28. 22. where the blind Jews call the true
professors of the doctrine of Salvation, a Sect that were every where spoken
against: An hundred false Religions may live together in peace, but against the
truth, the whole world has been stirred up, because that alone beats down the
Empire of the Devil: Many lies may concur and agree together, but never can
falsehood agree with truth.

In Rome at this day all Religions are tolerated but the true, under the shadow
of the Popes own chair. And it was wont to be an ancient proverb in that
City, That is must needs be good which Nero persecuted; he was such a cruel
bloody monster, a very prodigy of mankind: so it may be more truly said of
those most holy commands of God, that they must needs be good, because the
Devil and all wicked men so unanimously oppose them; So, of Government, (for
it is a very great conviction to me) that the Church government resolved on to
be established in this Kingdom, and now establishing, (and the Lord speedily
settle it), is a good government, that has very much of God in it: Many clear
footsteps for it in the word of God, which other ways now contended for have
not; and is the government which God would have, which God will set up and
maintain; because it is so much slandered, contradicted, resisted, by a number
amongst us, who would be left to their liberty; who because, they have now too
too long gone loose, cannot endure to think of being strait laced. This I am
sure is true in experience, that the longer it is before a colt be backed, the
more unwillingly by far, at the first, does he endure his Rider: and the
longer it is before a Bullock comes to the yoke, the more hardly is he
brought to it, and the more at first he struggles and strives with it. And
doubtless, the longer a people go under reins let loose, the harder will it
be by far to curb and restrain them. The law, says the Apostle, was not
made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly
and sinners, etc. 1. Tim. 1. 9. for the lawless and disobedient, says the
Apostle, and because it curbes and restrains them, therefore they esteem
themselves in bondage, or as prisoners in bonds, being required to yield
obedience unto it. For,

Reason 1 This is the principal reason why all rebellious spirits think thus,
because good Laws meet, and cross, and contradict, and oppose them in their
evil ways, in their unjustifiable courses, because they meet them and reprove
them, and set in order before them, the things that they have done, as it is
Ps. 50. 21. In every commission of evil, in every omission of good, in every,
even the least failing in duty whatsoever: they shake the secure man out of his
seat: they disturb the filthy persons upon their beds of lust, who undo one
another by their filthy embracements: all shameless prostitutes, who sell their
souls with their bodies, dealing with all those they pretend to love, as
Monkeys and Apes sometimes do with their little-ones, they kill them with
kindness: they tell these who thus stretch themselves upon the bed of lust, that
though they sleep securely there, their destruction sleeps not, their
damnation slumbers not, ^^ in 2. Pet. 2. 3. They awake the Drunkards, crying
out, Joel 1. 5. Awake ye Drunkards, weep and bowl, etc. They debase proud
ones, foretelling their fall, Luc. 18. 14. Every one that exalts himself shall
be abased: They startle the bold profane swearers, with the weight of their
guilt, Exo. 20. 7: They acquaint Oppressors with those screech owls of woe,
which cry aloud from the beams of their chambers: And they tell the Covetous
who are like the Mole, that bury themselves under every clod of earth, or like
the barren womb, or unsatiable Death, that will never be satisfied, of enough
mould in the grave, and of enough fire in hell: They meet with Formal
professors of Religion, who make Religion nothing but a complement, and they
tell them that of all tempers in Religion, a lukewarm temper is the worst.
Because thou art neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, i will spue thee out of my
mouth, says the Spirit to the Church of Laodicea, Re. 3. 16. That is, I will
make thee who art but a Church in show, to be no Church at all, it being all
one in the account of God, to deny the Faith, and not soundly and sincerly to
profess it: They unma^ke the double faced hypocrites, who only act Religion,
play devotion, who are all for show, and nothing for substance; making Religion
a cloak, and they tell them, that as Religion is the best armor in the world,
so it is the worst cloak; and whosoever put it on for no other end, it shall
in conclusion do them no more good, then that disguise which Ahab put on, in
which he perished, when he fought with the Syrians at Ramoth Gilead, 1. Ki. 22:
They convince blind errors, by clear and orthodox truths: And tell them that
receive not the love of the truth that they might be saved, that for this
cause, God shall send them strong delusion that they might believe a lie, that
they might be damned, who believe not the truth etc. 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12:
They cast down imaginations and every high thing which exalts it self against
God, 2 Cor. 10. 5. In a word, They meet with sinners at every turn, and
because they do so, these cannot away with them; and therefore may be fitly
compared unto that fiery meteor, which causes thunder the more straightly it
is wrapped, and bound up in the cloud, it breaks forth with the greater
violence and noise. Or they are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, to
which the Prophet compares them, Isaiah 57. 20. foming and raging most against
those truths of God which oppose them most; as the tempestuous Sea does against
those Rocks and Banks, and bounds, which hinder its course, and keep it in.

Use. Breifely now for application of this point. I shall address my speech
unto every loose, lawless libertine in the world, and first desire to let him
know, that there is no liberty but servitude in sin; no liberty but in the
freedom from sin, and secondly, they whosoever they be, that cast off Gods
yoke, whose service is freedom, and yield obedience unto the commands of Satan
(for every one in the world serves one of these two Masters) they are mere
bondslaves unto him they serve, for all the services that the Devil imploies
his servants in, are, (whatsoever men may think otherwise of them) no better
then a very toilesome drudgery a very base bondage. Hear the truth of this in
some particulars, as in the sin of covetousness, wherein Ahab may be our
example, who, because he could not possess Naboths Vineyard according to his
coveting desire, it troubled him so, that he was heavy and sad, and spiritlesse
immediately upon it, 1 Ki. 21. we may observe the like in that sin of envy
which Solomon tells us is the rottenness of the bones Prove. 14. 30 a sin that
is plagued by it self, that has much justice in it as one well observes, for
it eats up the heart and marrow of her Master, as he desires to eat up the
heart of another. And again -- Surgunt de nocte Latr^nes. The Theife wakes
while the true man sleeps, and is more troubled to break open, than the true
man is, to guard his house. The not Adolterer, the filthy unclean person uses
the twilight, the evening, the black and dark night, Prove. 7. 9. that he may
compass his lust, while the chaste man sits quietly in his house. How did the
unnatural Lust of Amnon vex him till he had obtained his desire, so that he
fell sick for his Sister T^^^^^r, and after he had satisfied his unnatural
appetite, he was as sick of her as he was before for her: he hated her
exceedingly says the text, his Lust ended in loathing, so that the hatred
wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her 2 Samuel 13. 15. what fruit had ye in th^se things whereof ye are now ashamed
says the Apostle to the Romans? Romans 6. 21. for as sin makes men past shame
that they may commit it, so it brings shame if the sinners conscience awake
after the committing thereof. See this farther in that most beastly sin of
drunkenness, how it causes woe, and sorrow, and contention, and babbling, and
wounds, Pro. 23. 29. Nay who can count the hurts that by drunken distempers
come both to the body and soul? First to the whole body, especially to the
head, and stomach, and liver, and those more noble parts, as also the rheumes,
gouts, dropsies, palsies, apoplexies, inflammations, and other distempers hence
arising. Oh how does the excess of wine, and any other strong liquor, fire the
blood, casting the body into fevers etc? And secondly how does it inflame the
soul too, filling that with lusts as hot as hell? So that drunkards shall one
day be forced to confess what they will not now believe, as it was spoken in
another case 2 Ki. 4. 40. Oh there is death in the pot. And therefore the
Greek Poet spoke wittily, that if the headache were to be before the wine; men
would be sober: if those sad consequences which oftentimes follow beastly
distempers, were to be endured before hand; people would not be drunk. And if
those most filthy and loathsome diseases, the just consequence of incontinency,
were to be suffered before these acts of filthiness were committed, people
would be chaste: ye hear what oftentimes befalls those two brethren, as one of
the Ancients calls them Drunkenness, and Lust, saying, Nunqua^ ego ebrium
putavi castum, drunkenness and chastity being incompatible: ye hear how its
often with these two sworn servants of the Devil, whereas the sober, chaste,
temperate man who desires to possess his vessel in holiness at the Apostle
speaks 1 These 4. 4. to glorify God in his life, feels, knows none of those
things.

You may help me with your meditations herein; for the like may be said of
many other worker of darkness, which the Devil imploies his servants in,
serving divert lusts as the Apostle speaks Tit. 3. 3. (...), being as slaves
to lusts engaging them to every sin; one lust drawing a wretched sinner into
one sinful course, others ha^ing and pulling him into other evil ways,
making poor wretches thus miserably distracted and seduced, as it is Jer. 9.
5. to weary themselves to commit iniquity, or to moile and toil to go to
hell. How have many miserable people been content, merely led by the
instigation of the Devil, and enflamed by him? the Devil who is most
tyrannical, where he is most obeyed, to submit unto commands that have been
most heavy, hateful, yea most unnatural, as those who caused their Sons and
Daughters to pass through the fire to Molach Levit. 20. 3. I could abundantly
enlarge, I Will only ad this, that if Satan have had such power to persuade poor,
misled, seduced creatures to submit themselves unto such unreasonable
imposi^ions, n^^ thinks every one who has not quite lost himself should be
more readily induced to yield a most cheerful obedience unto God his most
holy, righteous, equal, just commands whose Commandments are not grievous 1
John 5. 3. To put their necks under that yoke which rebellious spirits here in
my text throw off, because his yoke is easy, his burden is light, Mat. 11. 30.

And that thy heart may not be hardened, that thou may not be quite undone by
the deceitfullnesse of sin, observe but this one rule when ever thou art
tempted unto any thing that is evil, to view the tentation on both sides, to
take notice as well of the certain bitterness, as of the apparent sweet that
is in sin, which sin is fitly resembled by those Locusts mentioned in the 9 C.
of the Rev. who had the faces of men, and the hair of women, but to these,
they had the teeth of Lions, and the tails of Scorpions, and there were stings
in those tails. The Devil, when he tempts a man unto any thing that is evil,
presents nothing unto the sight of man, but what may please, content his
corrupted nature, those most fearful and sad consequences of sin, as death,
hell, judgment, and everlasting separation from the presence of God, the
Devil keeps out of sight, that the misery of a wretched sinner may not be
known till it be felt, not felt till it cannot be possibly avoided.

And to conclude this point: Let all be exhorted, who wilfully rebel against
the just commands of God, to read their sins acted in the examples, and
smitten too, upon the backs of others. How was it with Ahab who cast off God,
and joined himself to Idols, as the Prophet Hosea phraseth it? Hos. 4. 17. It Is
said of him, 1. Kin 21. 20. That he sold himself to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, but afterward he lives to rue, to repent his bargain. No
sooner had Pharaoh asked that bold blasphemous question, Who is the Lord that I
should obey his voice, to let Israel go? Ex. 5. 2. but presently the frogs, the
lic^, the flies, the caterpillars, which the Prophet calls Gods great Army,
Joel 2. 25. rise up in arms to tell him, and these poor, weak, despreable
creatures, will not give proud Pharaoh over, till they have humbled him, and
magnified their Maker. Pharaoh and all Egypt might heerese^, how weak they
were, and what in impotent power they served, when they could neither resene
themselves, nor yet be delivered from the incursions of frogs, lice, and flies.
There is a very memorable story, which I dare affirm for truth, that many
years since, I brought from the Eastern India, where I lived at the Court of
the Great Mogol, for more then two years. The story is this: There was a great
Cavalier and Nobleman of that Court, that was much in credit with that King;
and that he might keep that favor, esteemed it, the highest point of Religion
to flatter the King, which made him a great neglecter and contemner of God.
Upon a time this wretched man sitting in dalliance with one of his women, she
plucked an hair from his breast, his nipple, in wantonness, I conceive without
the least thought of doing him hurt; the little wound, that small and
unexpected instrument of death made, presently began to foster, and in short
time after, become a Cancer incurable. When the poor wretch saw that he must
needs die, he uttered these words, which are very well worth the recording and
remembering: Who would not have thought, (said he) but that I, who was bred a
Soldier, should have died in the face of mine enemy, either by a sword, or a
lance, or an arrow, or a bullet, or the like instrument of death, but now too
late I am forced to confess, that there is a great God above, whose Majesty I
have ever despised, who needs no bigger a Lance, then an Hair to kill an
Atheist.

Oh, let us further collect out of those many menaces and threatenings denounced
against this sin in the book of God, what their end is like to be, that obey
not the truth, but obey unrighteousnes, that obey not the Gospel of God. And
what in conclusion this sin is like to cost, and when we have cast up our
whole reckoning, we may borrow those words to put at the foot of our account,
which Abner spoke to Ioab, 2. Sam. 2. 26. bitterness in the end.

And lastly, let the resisters of lawful authority, that will not submit unto
Gods deputed lawful substitutes here on earth, read the story of Corah and
his Company, Iud. 16. swallowed up quick by the earth: the earth opening its
mouth wide against them, that had so opened their mouths wide against Moses.
And let them look over the story of Zimri, 1. Kin. 16. who slew the King his
master, and then sat upon his Throne; but he enjoyed his so ill-purchased
honor but a little while. The triumphing of the wicked, says Job, is short,
Job. 20. 5. So this wretched man found it: for when he had reigned not seven
years, nor seven months, nor seven weeks, but seven days: as in the Roman
story there is mention made of one Caninius, who when after much ado hoe had
obtained the Consulship, he then enjoyed it but seven hours: So when this
wicked Zimri had reigned but seven days, he set on fire his usurped Palace,
and burnt himself in the flame. And look upon Absolon, who rose up against
the King his father, against the loins from which he fell, and see how he sped
afterward, 2. Sam. 18. And look upon Achitophel who was guilty of the same
crime, and see what became of him, 2. Sam. 17. In one word, let me remember all
(who cast off subjection, who do their utmost endeavor to break or throw off
those bands and cords here,) of everlasting chains under darkness, which
will hamper them to purpose hereafter. Yet notwithstanding this, and much more
that might be added, to this purpose;

Obs. 4. Wicked men animate and hearten and stir up one another to cast off
subjection. Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from
us.

In that wicked carriage of the sons of Jacob toward their brother Joseph,
you may clearly see this truth. In the 37. of Genesis, Joseph Dreams, and
tells those his night-visions unto his brethren: they interpret them and say,
v. 8. Shall thou indeed reign over us? shall thou have dominion over us? Thou
one of the youngest sons of our father? Shall thou? and for this they hated
him, says the Text. Joseph went forth to seek brethren, in the 14^^. but he
found murderers: for as soon as ever they perceive him coming toward them,
they say one to another, v. 19. Behold this dreamer comes, come now, let us
stay him. So soon as ever they see their brother; all their eyes, and tongues,
and hearts, and hands are against him, and they presently forget themselves,
not only to be brethren, but men; for they take their brother, and they cast
him into an uncomfortable pit (as if they meant to bury him alive) and then sit
down to eat bread, v. 25. with the lamentations of their brother in their
ears, nor once remembering by their own hunger, what it was for their brother
(as he might have done) to famish for want of food. And what was the reason of
this their most unnatural, and more then brutish carriage toward their
brother? you had it before, their great fear of being afterward in subjection
to him.

Thus the Philistines animate, and hearten and encourage one another, 1. Sam.
4. 9. saying, be strong and quit your selves like men, o ye Philistines, that ye
be not servants unto the Hebrews.

The Scriptures are full of expressions to this purpose, so that if we needed
further testimony for the confirming of so clear a truth; I could invite you to
look into the 83. Psalm, from the beginning of the 2. to the 9. verse, where
you shall find a number of people of such unruly spirits, as this observation
in my Text takes notice of, consulting with, or consent, or with one heart,
leaguing themselves together, and making confederacies, a^ Edom, and the
Ishmaelites, Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, the
Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire, etc. But what to do? To take crafty
counsel against the people of God, to consult against his hidden ones, v. 3.
And who are these hidden ones? Gods dear children, whom God hides and will
protect. He hides them as men hide Jewels, and other precious things, keeping
them in the safest places where they may be secured. But, however, first they
consult together against them, and then they speak out their thoughts, v. 4.
saying. Come let us cut them off from being a Nation. And certainly, there were
no living for any good man in the world, if the Devil and his cursed
instruments, could do but half so much mischief as they would. God holds
forth his people as lights to the world; these wicked ones in stead of walking
by their light, do their uttermost to extinguish it. God sets them forth as
examples to the world, by which these men might learn to order their
conversation right: But they are so far from being guided, governed, ruled by
them, that they had rather deny them their being, then make them their example.
Come say they, let us cut them off: Esteeming them unworthy of any place in the
world, for whose sake the world was first made, and for whose sake it has
been ever since continued; for were it not for those few Righteous, that are
intermingled with these many wicked on the earth, the world could not stand.
All wicked and ungodly men in the world owing their lives, their liberties, all
the good things they do enjoy here, unto these few, whom they scorn, oppose,
and persecute.

Now what may be the reason why tumultuous, heady-minded mem, do thus combine
and animate one another in a spirit of opposition, to cast off subjection?

Reason 1. First, because all wicked rebellious spirits are led by the same
evil Principal, to cast off obedience, and therefore keep and flock together,
as beasts of the same herd, or, as birds of the same feather do: And they act
together likewise, like companions in mischief, and brethren in evil. And
therefore the Prophet Michah compares them to Briars, Mich. 1. 4. and the
Prophet Nahum to Thorns, Nah. 1. 10. folded and claspt, and twisted, and
interwoven one within another, to do mischief. Hence that monstrously wicked
Abimelech, who knew not how to obey as he ought to have done: and therefore
drew the blood of seventy of his Brethren to make way for his usurped
government, is compared to a Bramble, Jud 9. 14. A right Bramble he was indeed,
who grew in the base hedge-row of a concubine: A Bramble that scratcht and drew
blood to purpose.

Reason 2. Secondly, because all wicked men who throw off subjection are guided
by the same spirit, the spirit of the Devil, who rules, says the Apostle, in
the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. And ever since the Devil and wicked
men received their doom, to be chayned for ever hereafter under darkness;
they cannot endure to think of Bands or Cords, or any other thing beside, that
may restrain them.

Use. Now to make use of this; and first let me tell you for Instruction, from
that which springs from the bitter root of stubbornness, disobedience, and
refractorinesse in this Text; this honey, this sweet, may be extracted. As, if
it be so that wicked men can thus animate, and hearten, and encourage one
another in the ways of evil; every one here assembled may now prevent me and
say, that what we have hence observed inferres and inforceth upon us a lesson
for our imitation* to follow those we have named, in their diligence, and
eagernes, and joint consent in acting; as to leave them in the evil and
obliquity of their actions, to be as active in good, as they are in evil. To
instance in some particulars: How many Separatists go on violently, in an
unwarrantable course, as Cyprian wrote to Cornelius of five Schismatickes that
had taken shipping, and sailed to Rome, with their mart of lies, as if the Lord
of heaven, who rides upon the Cherubims, could not overtake them. What stone
do these leave unturned, what thing do they leave unattempted? per mare, per
terras, per saxa, per ignes: as Christ spoke of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 15.
Compassing sea and land to make Proselites, or some of their own profession.
The Idolaters at Ephesus, as if they had been the sons of Noise and Tumults,
cry up their baggage Diana, for the space of two hours together, Act. 19.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, quasi vocibus cultum ejus reparaturi, as
Chrysostom on that place: as if they meant with their loud outcries, to hold
up her honor, and to blow up all opposition against her with her very breath.

And thus the Idolatrous Priests of Baal cried long from morning till noone,
and loud too, saying Oh Baal help as 1 Ki. 18. And the inhabitants of Samaria
feared, and mourned, and made much ado for their Idol. Likewise Hoses 10. 5.
To the like purpose Micah complains Judge. 18. 24. ye have stolen away my
Gods; and what have I more? Or what have I more to lose? Let me tell you in a
word by the way, that these were proper Gods to rely on, that could not secure
themselves. O excellent^m insaniam! as Chrysostom observes upon this passage,
were thy Gods such ones that a man might steal them? O notable folly! To rely
upon such helps, Gods per Antiphras^^, for the workman made them and therefore
they are not God, Hoses 8. 6. for if the fire spare them, rust, or rottenness,
or time will consume them. But the moral of Micah his speech is good, for the
loss of God is the loss of all things, who never forsakes us till he be first
forsaken by us; so the enjoying of a sweet communion with God, is the enjoyment
of every good thing beside, but this by the way. The Prophet David makes
mention of some that hasten after another God Psalm. 16. 4. Festinant they
hasten with speed, or as Tremelius and Junius read it from the original,
Dotant, they endow them with gifts, or they give a dowry to them, there is
nothing so costly which they will not bestow, which they will not willingly
cast away upon their Idols, which caused the Israelits being tainted with this
sin, to strip their Wives, and Sons and Daughters of their Earrings to make
a molten Image, Exodus 32. they think nothing too much, too hard to do, to
endure for them, and therefore they did not stick to sacrifice their Children
unto them: what tedious pilgrimages do some Papists trudge barefoot, and how
do they afflict their bodies with whippings, watchings, fastings? And I have
observed this among Heathens that they impose many sharp and voluntary
penances upon themselves, far above all those: the Romanists boast of as some
of them will put massy fetters of iron upon their legs, and then as fast as
they are able, go hundreds of miles barefoot, upon the ground (very hot and
parching in those Climes) to visit the Sepulchers of their deluding Saints.
Others will voluntarily fast till nature be almost quite decayed, and there be
some who sequester themselves from the world, and live remote upon the tops of
Hills, the residue of their lives, sometimes many years: after which
retirement, they never suffer the razor to come again upon their heads, and
they let their nails grow like birds claws, as it is written of
Nebuchadnezzar, when he was driven from the society of men, Dan. 4. 33. and
further these Votaries being thus retired will sterve rather then stir from
their Cells, and therefore they are releeved by some that live nearest to them.
Thousands there be in those parts that will rather chose to dye like the Mother
and her seven Sons mentioned in the 2 Mac. and 7. Chap. then eat or drink any
thing their Law forbids them: Such meat and drink as their Law allows them,
they take only to satisfy nature, not appetite; hating gluttony, and esteeming
drunkenness, as indeed it is, a second madness, and therefore use but one
word in their language for a drunkard and a madman. The Mahumetans, what
occasion soever they have either by pleasure or profit to divert them, will
pray five times every day. And the Pharisee could tell us Lu. 18. 11. that he
was no Extortioner, nor unjust person, nor an Adulterer etc.

Now let us put all this together, and then let us hold up our heads if we can
for blushing, and hear our own shame, receive our just reproof, which is the
second thing I shall infer from hence.

2. Use of reproof I say when we consider the unity, agreement, accord, that
is in wicked men, their teaching, animating, stirring up one another, in whom
there is unitar, contra unitatem, conspiracy, agreement in error, in evil; and
so little unity, agreement amongst us for truth. How dare we in matters of God,
so flag and faint, and dissent as we do, ferventissimi in terrenis, in
coelestibus frigidissimi: showing nothing but heat and earnestness in
earthly, nothing less? in heavenly things! Shall Schismatics, Heretics,
Pharisees, Papists, Turks, Infidels, Idolaters of all kinds, solicit bad
causes with such earnestnes; and we, the cause of God, so faintly? They were
wont to say of cowards in Rome, that there was nothing Roman in them; and may
it not be as fitly applied unto many of us who profess our selves Christians?
There is not that Christianity in us which may bring comfort to us; if there
were, we should be more remiss in our own quarrels, more fierce and forward
in the cause and quarrel of God. Oh how do a number amongst us even shame the
Religion we profess by professing of it! What a sad thing is it to consider,
that a Pharisee should be chaste, and a Christian filthy: That an Heathen should
be temperate, sober; and a Christian drunken: That a Mahumetan should pray five
times every day, and he that professes himself a Christian, scarce
voluntarily go to God in prayer, five times in a week, a month, a year:
that they who profess themselves Christians should come short of them that
come short of Heaven! The morality of millions of Heathens may shame us, their
lives condemn ours: The Nations which call not upon the name of God are more
righteous then we, who have justified the Jews, and Turks, and Heathens. Our
idolatrous and ignorant forefathers shall rise up in judgment and condemn as,
for they followed what they knew, but we know the will of God, and follow it
not. Considerare pudet quantus ferver quae cura etc. was the complaint
sometimes of Jerome that he was ashamed to consider, how solicitous many were in
temporal, and how sluggish we in spiritual things: He was ashamed to think,
how that so many thousands should drive like Jehu furiously in the ways of
evil, Superstition, Error, Idolatry, Profaneness, and the like; and we in the
ways of God, go a snayles pace, like the Egyptians in the sea, when their
Chariot wheels were off, Exodus 14. 25. That evil men of all sorts, should have
their tonguet bent like bows for lies, as the Prophet speaks Jer. 9. 3. and
we not valiant for the truth, showing no courage for it, as if we durst not
own the cause of God. Dormis tu Petre? Was an heavy check our blessed Savior
gave St. Peter, Mark 14. 37. sleep thou Peter? Are the high Priests
consulting? Are the Soldiers ^anding themselves? Is the Son of God near his
betraying? And sleep thou, Peter? And, is there an aiming at the head of
Authority now, an endeavor by some to lay all even and level? Is there a
striking at Religion, in an endeavor after liberty therein? which liberty
threatens us, which liberty has already extremely hurt us; -- saevior armis,
Libertas nocuit; --


Which liberty if it be permitted, continued, will undoubtedly undo us: And
shall any disciple of Christ, that has been taught of him, be now so sleepy,
slothful, sluggish, as if the matter in hand concerned him not? Let us not
believe that any would be ever contented to die for Christ, that will not
speak for him: that they would ever be willing to afford Christ their blood,
who will not do so much as lend him their breath.

Now for a corollary or conclusion. It was an excellent commendation that
Quintilian sometime gave of Vespasian the Emperor, that he was patientissimus
very, most patient in hearing truth: Let his commendation be, ours. The life of
Preaching is application, and the life of Application, is the applying of
truths unto our particular selves. And therefore that we may be now yet more
particular, in bringing home the truths we have heard, into our several
bosoms:

First, do rebellious spirits cast off the Yoke? aim at nothing so much as
destructive liberty? Let us be exhorted to submit unto it, to yield obedience
unto all the holy, equal, righteous, just commands of Almighty God, and say
with the Apostle, howsoever they may seem cross and contradictory unto us;
that the Law is holy, and the commandment is holy, and just, and good, Romans 7.
12. And let us write this truth amongst those things we would most remember,
that Jesus Christ never was, never will be a Savior to any, unto whom he is not
a Lord. Further, Let us submit our selves unto every ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake, etc. as before it was urged from that in the 1. Pet. 2. 13.

Secondly, is there such an unity, an agreeing, a love, a liking amongst many
we have named to compass their evil ends; Let us take up here in the first
place a further sad, and a very just complaint, of the disunion,
mis-agreement, censoriousnesse, uncharitableness, rash judging and condemning,
that so swells up the breasts of many amongst us, who profess themselves
Christians, yet they want charity for them, for whom Christ had blood; who,
because we cannot assent unto them in all their mis-grounded opinions,
therefore they cast us off, away, as filthy rags. Oh love I thou duty and
ornament of Christians, thou glory of Saints, thou delight of God, where art
thou? how art thou gone? how art thou departed from us? where shall we seek
thee? where shall we find thee? Surely in own hearts, or else woe be to us.

And secondly, though difference in opinion has so banished love from many
amongst us, that they cannot afford us a good word; yet we may not deal with
them as they deal with us: but learn to know, that if love be of God, as S.
John speaks, 1. Jo. 4. 7. And every one that loves is borne of God, and
knows God: so he that loves not, knows not God, as it follows in the next
verse. And if love be the fulfilling of the Law, as the Apostle tells us, To.
13. 10. If the whole Law be abridged in that duty of love; then the want of
love must needs be the violating, the breaking of all the commandments of God.

Thirdly, let us learn hence, what the Prophet David exhorts us to in a like
case, Ps. 109. 28. Though they curse, yet bless we. And though they hate, yet
love we. Let us love their persons, and any thing beside we see of God that is
lovely in them, whatsoever they may think of us, though we may not, we must
not, by any means close with them in their opinions. In all our demeanor
toward them, carrying our selves as Joshua did to Achan, Josh. 7. who retained
the affections of a Father, while he was executing the office of a Judge.

Fourthly, let us be exhorted to make much of that most excellent grace of the
spirit, Love: love to God, love to one another. Lets make much of love: for it is
love which conveyes all mercies to us. Let us lay hold on it, as the Patriarchs
did apprehend the promises, most elegantly set out by the Apostle, Heb. 11. 13.
by a Metaphor of saluting, (...) They saluted them, they kissed them, they
hugged them, they embraced them. So let us do this grace, that finds such
little, such cold entertainment from many, from most. This grace of love, which
God himself so likes, that he calls himself by the name of Love, 1. Ioh. 4.
8. (...): Fellow after charity, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 4. 1. The original
word is very emphaticall: for it signifies to pursue, or follow a thing
eagerly; it implies in it a singular love to the thing we follow, which makes
us take any pains about it; to follow a thing as having it in chase, the
Metaphor being taken from Hunters, who will not leave what they pursue, till
they have taken it. Thus must we follow after love and charity, that we may
Have it, and Harbor it, and Exercise And lastly, let us labor after unity, as
first unity and agreement amongst our selves. Secondly, unity in the profession
of the true Religion we profess, as unity in doctrine, and unity in
discipline, which would marvellously unite our hearts together. There is but
one Lord, one Faith, ox Baptism, one God and Father of all, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5. 6. All in unity. And God is the God of order, not the
Author of Confusion, 1. Cor. 14. 33. The body of a Church or State is then
strongest, when the multitude of believers have but one heart, and one soul
amongst them all. As he that observes the carriage of the Primitive Christians,
shall find this word (...), which signifies one consent, one heart, one mind,
in the 4 first Chapters of the Acts, often applied unto them. Which unity in
the truth of Religion, is the firmest band twixt man and man, (...), the very
knot and tie of all communion and consociation. On the contrary, as division of
tongues in the eleventh of Genesis, hindered the building up of Babel, then: so
division of hearts hinders the settling and building up of the Church now. And
as Plankes and Timbers joined together make a ship, but disjoined, shipwreck:
and as connection of stones and timber make an house; dissipation, a ruin: so,
unity and agreement of Christians build up a Church, as dissension pulls it
down. And as they say of Bees, that when there is a stir and strife amongst
them, it is a sign that their King is about to remove and leave the hive; so
strife, schism, dissension in Religion, to the hazard of it, is a sign that
God either has, or is about to leave a people. One of the maine scandals the
Jews take from the carriage of Christians, is their dissension and disagreeing
one with another: which they interpret to proceed from want of unity of truth
in the foundation of Christian Religion, by which they are startled and scared
from the Gospel. And some Papists have said of us, (and I would there were no
truth in it) what one Preaches in the morning, another contradicts after
dinner: and what peace and accord can there be in that house, say they, where
the husband is a Calvinist, the wife a Lutheran, the servant an Oecolampadian?
etc. And what settlement can we expect, while one is a Brownist, another an
Anabaptist, another an Antinomian, another a Seeker? and all these happily
under one roof: another an Everything, another a Nothing. What can we look
for less then confusion, (as a most grave, learned, orthodox, eminent man,
famous in his generation, observed) while we have Doctrine against Doctrine,
Prayers against Prayers, Faith against Faith, Religion against Religion? the
most fearful consequences of which destructive ways were written in the
murders, massacres, tragedies, wastes, sometimes committed in France and both
the Germanies: and the reason, the pretense of all that caused those their so
great miseries, only that which immediately before we named.

The Anabaptists in the upper Germany, as Sleidan reports, framed an
imagination to themselves, that by the will of God, the Ancient Magistracy must
be quite rooted out from the earth. And said (and happily they believed it too)
that they had speech with God, who enjoined them to kill all the wicked in the
Land, and to constitute a new World consisting only of the innocent: What
slaughter and havoc this caused, what profusion of blood betwixt the Nobles
and Commons, Germany then felt, and smarted for; and Histories will relate to
all Posterity. The president whereof may make the World take heed, how they be
drawn by fanaticall spirits, into these or the like desperate and damnable
courses. And if this has been the fruit of such dangerous destroying ways,
let any one be judge that has not lost his understanding, whether it be fit,
for every Subject in a Realm, (for if it be granted to some, it would be in
justice to deny it unto others) to be privileged in his house; to have a God
to himself, a Priest to himself, a worship to himself, as Micah had in Mount
Ephraim, and whether it be fit for people to preach and believe, and obey and
pray, as themselves please.

But what may be done in this case, may some one say? The minds of private men
are as free as Emperors, every one is a King in his own house as Telemachus
said; And nothing is so voluntary as Religion: Ye may shift the bodies of men
from place to place, but ye cannot change their minds, advice may do more
then threatening, and faith comes rather by persuasion, then compulsion; I
answer, first we must speak to the conscience by good Counsel, by fair
means, by forcible-convincing arguments; But if the ear of conscience be
stopped up against us, if persuasions prove unprofitable, if exhortations,
convicting arguments carried on in love and mercy will not serve the turn; we
must then speak to the ear of the body, to their Inheritance, to their
Liberty. Let the body tell the conscience I am afflicted, the Inheritance I am
diminished, Liberty I am restrained for thy sake, I tell ye, that these have
been arguments, which have done much good; as Austin affirms of the Donatists,
and Circum^ellions in Africa, that being terrified by pains, they began to
enter into consideration with themselves, whether they suffered for conscience,
or for obstinacy. But it may be again objected that some have not been
bettered hereby, he answers this objection, Ideo negligenda est medicina, quia
nonnullorum est insanabilis pestilentia? Shall we therefore reject physic,
because the sickness of some is incurable? I confess that a man should not
suffer for a mere default in his understanding, but if the fault be in his
will, it alters the case, and without doubt a number even now among us mistake
their will for their conscience, which may easily be done, for they lodge both
in the same soul, and therefore they may be easily taken one for the other: Now
as the rectified good will of man must not be without fruit: So the stubborn
depraved will of man must not escape without punishment, the voluntary default
of a man's will being the just cause of all his suffering, Clavis sapientiae
frequens interrogatio questioning is the Key of knowledge, he that never asks,
cannot attain to knowledge, and he that ever asks shall never receive
satisfaction. When people are become such scepticks, that they will question
every thing, and receive satisfaction in nothing; doubt whether the Sun have
light, or the fire heat, or the like doubts in other things, which should not
be questioned, such must be regulated. Tertullian is of the same mind with
Austin, that it is meet that Heretics and Schismatics too, should be
compelled to do their duties, if they will not be persuaded to do them. I say
compelled, if allurements and persuasions will not serve the turn, they must
not always be entreated, he that has a Frenzy must be bound; He that has a
Lethargy must be pricked up; And they which strengthen themselves in error or
schism, and diffuse them amongst others, to the prejudice of Church or State,
must be violently pulled out of them. Undoubtedly the sword was never appointed,
for Authority, only to make a show before it, and therefore that Magistrate is
worthy to be disarmed, who bears the sword in vain. And the Keys were never
left unto the Church, to be worn as golden Keys for honor, or ornament, or
to be kept in the pocket, but to let in some, and to lockout others as occasion
is offered. These things command and teach says the Apostle to Timothy 1 Timothy
4. 11. In the beginning of that Chapter, there is mention made of some that in
the latter times should depart from the faith giving heed to seducing spirits,
speaking lies in hypocrisy. Now that which was contrary to this the Apostle
must command and teach; Command (...) the very self same word that is used
Acts 5. 40. which the Captains, and Officers, and High-preists used, when they
commanded the Apostles they should not speak any more in the name of Jesus
(...) they commanded them, it is a word of authority which Judges use upon the
Bench, for men to hearken, or not to hearken to, at their peril. So St. Jude
speaks of some that did separate themselves, not having the spirit, Jude v.
19. and such must be saved with fear (...) save them by fear, discipline,
censures, for so I conceive that place is properly interpreted, for fear is
there opposed to compassion, of some have compassion v 22. putting a difference
twixt them that err of weakness, or unavoydable ignorance, and them that do
it out of wilfulness, and perverseness, the first must be dealt more gently
withal, others must be more roughly handled. Saved by fear v. 23. pulling
them as a brand out of the fire, wherein otherwise they would be unavoydably
consumed.

I beseech you let me not be mistaken, in that I have now delivered, insector
vitia, non homines: I know it is a very great act of injustice, to be angry at
the offender and not at the offense, I assure you therefore it is men's faults not
their persons which here stirs me up to make complaints. I shall ever desire
to be most tender of those in whom I can discern any impressions of God. And I
know it had been better for me that I had never been, then that I should live,
to condemn the generation of the righteous. And for my part, my witnesses are
in Heaven and in my own breast, that so far as I can know my heart, I do
not wish to live a minute longer, then I shall unfainedly desire to honor
those that truly honor God. And ever since it has pleased God to reveal
himself in any measure to me; I could love Religion in russet, in rags, as
well as in the gayest dress: And shall labor, by Gods grace, while I live, to
give most respect, where I find most goodness. But when the error of Religion
turns men's brains, and so makes them to fight against the truth of it; I
cannot choose but complain: I know that Zeal is good, excellent good, and has
its due deserved commendation both of God and man, and cursed be they that goes
about to extinguish that holy fire, that Zeal which is well grounded, well
ordered; grounded upon knowledge, and carried on with discretion. But I know
that there is as much difference twixt Zeal, and Zeal, as there is betwixt
Religion, and Superstition, and therefore to be carried on violently either by
a mis-grounded or a mis-governed Zeal, may be cursus celerrimus, but praeter
viam, a swift violent motion, but quite out of the way.

Fourthly, are those rebellious spirits we have named so resolved in their
ways, that they leave no means un-attempted to bring their devices to pass
(as before we observed;) O let us now labor to be as wise, as active in our
generation as they can be in theirs. And Oh that we had been so, Oh that we
would be so. It Was Jehu's question 2 Ki. 9. 32. who is on my side who? It may be
now the Lords; When the mouth of wickedness is opened so wide, when the mists
of error thicken so much; and when the wings of schism spread so far over us;
and there is not that endeavor which ought to be, which might be, to dispell
those mists, to clip those wings, and to stop that mouth: qui non vetat peccare
cum possit, jubet, we are guilty of every sin, which we might, and do not
prevent. If we had wrought wisely, as we might, as we should have done; we
should have dealt with Schisms and Divisions while they were growing on us,
(which, because we did not, have done us already such apparent mischeife) as
wise men do with Snakes, Vipers, venomous creatures, they stay not till they
have stung or bit them, but they crush and kill them beforehand, that they may
neither bite nor sting. It is a sad thing to dally and fool with dangers,
especially those which are spiritual, till by our connivence they strike
through the life of our Religion. It was therefore very good counsel which
Demosthenes sometimes gave unto the Athenians that they should not expect till
evil came, but prevent it: we should be wary before the wound, and meet with
diseases that we would not have take hold on us: Be apprehensive beforehand of
danger, taking all evils that they may not much hurt us, at the very first
bound, that our providence in this case may prevent our too late Repentance.
Ye know how that it is much easier to quench a firebrand then a great fire;
and to put out a great fire on the hearth, then that which is far less in the
top of a chimney. And the Lord rouse us up out of that spirit of slumber into
which we are fallen, that we may not be like the Smiths dog, whom neither the
hammers above him, nor the sparks of fire falling round about him, can awake.
And

Lastly, let us all resolve to be as active for God as any other in the world
can be against him. They say in Philosophy, that the foundation of natural
life is feeling; so no feeling, no life; and so the want of spiritual feeling
argues a want of spiritual life: in which respect that may be applied unto
many, what St. Paul speaks of the wanton widow mentioned 1 Timothy 5. 6. that
they are dead while they live; being so un-apprehensive, so un-affected, so
insensible of what may trench upon God and his cause. It Is an observation in
nature that the more quick and nimble the sense of feeling is in a man, the
better is his natural constitution: So our tenderness, our sensiblenesse of
Gods honor or dishonor, above all other things, express the goodness of our
spiritual temper. And doubtless it is now high time for all that fear the
Lord, to speak often one to another as they did Mal. 3. 16. To stir up one
another unto a godly jealousy, over Gods whole cause, his worship, his Church,
his Children.

It was a brave resolution of Tully when he was Consul of Rome, which he
uttered in his first Oration against Catiline, Intelliges me acrius vigilare ad
salutem, quam te ad pernici^us Reipublicae. Thou shall know that I will be more
wakefull for the safety, then thou can be, for the destruction of the
Commonwealth: So should every member of the Church, especially those whose
places make them more public, resolve, to be more vigilant for the settling,
flourishing, enlargement of the Church, then others can be malicious for the
ruin thereof.

It Is an high commendation that Moses gives to Levi Deuteronomy. 33. 9. who said of his
Father, and Mother I have not seen them, neither did he acknowledge his
Brethren nor his Children; his nearest natural relations giving place to his
spiritual, and so should ours: And as that was the ground of his; so will it
be a ground likewise of our highest commendation. Vbi de Religione, ibi quoque
de vita agitur, as Philo Judaeus excellently spoke, our very lives (I and our
souls too) hold upon our Religion, and therefore we must act for Religion, for
that which concerns Gods Glory, the Churches and our own eternal good, as we
would act for life: (...) is a word used in the 13 of Luke the 24. which has
very much in it, for it implies thus much, that when we deal either with God,
or for God, we must strive as wrestlers do for mastery, or, as Combitants do
for victory, or else, as a man strives and struggles for life, having the pangs
of death upon him: Pro aris and focis was the ancient proverb; First for Gods
rights, and after, for our own. And therefore it is very well observed of
Aeneas, how that though he were eminently renowned for his dear respects to
his Father; yet when the City of Troy was sacked wherein he then was, he first
rescued, and exported (...) and then (...). First his Gods, and then his
Father. The moral, the Lesson taught from which story is exceeding good: That
we must first, for-most with the neglect of every thing beside, appear for
God. To which Purpose, the carrage of Moses is most observable, a very meek
man, above all the men that were upon the face of the earth, for the spirit of
God gives him that testimony, Numb. 12. 3. which made him not to regard, in not
taking notice of, but trampling as it were upon all injuries done unto
himself, as if they had not been done, as you may observe Exodus 17. and in
other places, yet when God was dishonored; he showed himself to be a man of
another spirit, in vindicating His cause, as you may read at large in the 32.
of Exodus And thus our blessed Savior (of whom Moses was a type) how most
contemptuously was he used while he was upon earth; as we read in his story:
and, how willingly did he give his cheek to the smiters, and his back to the
scourges; and when he was most shamefully reviled, he held his hands, yea and
he held his tongue too, for he reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2 23. But, when he
saw the Temple dedicated to the honor of his Father, profaned; he lays about
him, in overthrowing the tables of the money changers, in casting them out that
bought and sold there, nay whipping and scourging all out thence Joh. 2. 15. Of
which carriage of our blessed Savior, all the Evangelists take special
notice. O now let us look upon their examples, and get this instruction from
them, to be very forward in the cause of God. And let every one of us who
desire the happiness of the Church and State wherein we live; Labor to act
wisely, religiously and boldly in our proper spheres, whether we be
Magistrates, Ministers or People, let us resolve by God his asistance against
all sins, which, if we take not heed, will undoubtedly destroy us: And
against all schisms too, that may, if we be not wary, unavoydably undo us:
and against every evil beside that may hinder either our present, or our
future happiness; To pray them down; To preach them down; To smite them
down, And to live them down. I could abundantly enlarge, but I am in a
Sermon, not in a treatise: And therefore that I may not be farther injurious to
your Patience, I will abruptly break off as in the midst of a sentence.

FINIS.

