SEVERAL PASSAGES CONCERNING THE Declared King of Scots, BOTH BY SEA and LAND,
COMMUNICATED By Letters, to Persons of Credit. ALSO, The Confessions and
Speeches of the Lord Darsey, Major General Hurry, and Colonel Spotswood; made
upon the Scaffold at Edinburgh before their Execution. WITH Some remarkable
Passages concerning the City of London, several Letters intercepted, and the
advance of the two great Generals, the Lord Fairfax and the Lord Cromwell into
the NORTH.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, and
without Cripplegate, 1650.

A LETTER FROM NEW CASTLE, CONCERNING The Confessions and Death of Col.
SPOTSVVOOD, the Lord DARSEY, and Major General HURRY.
SIR,
FRom Scotland we have intelligence, that they have proceeded to execute Major
Genesis Hurry, the Lord Darsey, and Col. Spotswood; these persons (being within
the pale of the Kirk) received more favor at their death then Montross, the
manner I am informed to be thus. A Scaffold was built near the place where
Montross was hanged, on which place was laid a block, and these three one after
the other, were brought thither, and had their heads chopped off by the Hangman.
They had Ministers with them to their end, and were exceeding penitent,
especially Col. Spotswood, who being desired that he would not conceal at his
death, any thing that troubled his mind, or lay heavy upon his Conscience,
(amongst other things which he confessed to be a great grief unto him,) he said
to this effect following.

The substance of the Confessions of Col. Spotsworth, the Lord Darsey, and
Major Genesis Hurry.
THat he was guilty of a most horrid murder, and that he thought many times
that he saw the bloody wounds of Dr. Dorislawes, in whose death himself was an
instrument being present with the rest, acknowledging Gods just judgment upon
him, for this and other many great sins which he had committed with deserved
death, he prayed that others might take warning by what did befall unto him,
That he loved and honored his King, and what he did was to promote his
service, wishing that he might be well dealt with, if he came amongst them;
saying, that it was an ill beginning at this conjuncture of time, to fall so
severely upon such as had so near relation to him, yet did he submit to the
justice of the sentence, in relation to himself. The Lord Darsey showed much
penitency and humility upon the Scaffold, and after a salutation to those of
his acquaintance that were about him, he made a short speech, acknowledging his
misfortune to be brought this way to his end; and after a short prayer in
private, prepared himself for the block: Major Genesis Hurry laid some blame upon
others, as being drawn into that snare, and in his deportment beheaved himself
somewhat like a Soldier then the rest. A great number of people were present,
the objects affording matter of joy to some, and grief to many others: After
execution was done, their bodies were carried away, and buried in Christian
burial. There is brought prisoner to Edinburgh a French Marquess, who was taken
in the North of Scotland, He confesses that he came thither with a resolution
to join with Montross, himself and some others having Commission from their
declared King, and Letters of importance which are likewise taken: He says,
that he heard not that Montross was taken and executed before he came thither,
in which he may easily be believed; for had he known that, he would certainly
have been so wise as to kept away, he is committed to safe custody, and the
report goes, that he will be tried for his life, as an invader of that Kingdom.
Another which would surely have gone to pot, had he been taken, was a Brother
to Montross, who striking in with a small Frigot, thinking also to come to his
Brother, having knowledge as soon as he came to shore, what had befallen to his
Brother, made an escape by another vessel; but the Frigot wherein he came is
taken, and in it several Commissions from their declared King, and a Letter
from him to Montrosse, the contents whereof was, that he should prosecute his
Commission with effect, until such time as he received farther Orders or
directions from him; ascertaining Montross and others with him, that his
affections were ardent toward them, with many such like expressions and
promises, which when he came thither in person should be really observed; but
(says the elivated Presbyterian) this was at a time when our declared Kings
Majesty had no other string to his bow: yet now we hope to find better things
from him, if he comes hither, and has about him such persons as our unerring
Church and State shall appoint: And those of this persuasion are the only men
that long for his coming, and are so confident, that his purposes are real
therein, that I have seen a Letter which one wrote to his Friend, merely upon a
report or noise, which ran as far as Edinburgh, about two days since, that
their King was landed at Sterling, unto which the subscriber gave so much
credit, that to use his own words, he says; that he hoped to attend his
Majesty the next morning. At present all is quiet, not any Letters from his
declared Majesty to the Parliament, since William Murry came, who is returned
back again about 10. days since, with a letter from them in a very submissive
manner, directed To his most excellent Majesty, The matter enclosed is a
covering for their proceedings against Montross, the Lord Darsey, Major Genesis
Hurry, and Col. Spotswood, persuading his Majesty that there is a vast
difference in the case betwixt him and them, for they valued their King to be
worth 10000 such, and that his Majesty may not doubt hereof, they affirm that
they have an Army of 12000 men already in pay, which they promise to be his
Guard, in case he puts himself on that account, and that they have listed 13000
more, to be ready at beat of Drum, to serve him against Sectaries, etc. which
is all at present from

Newcastle 7. Jan. 1650. Your assured Friend S. T.

A Letter from a Gentleman in London, to his Friend in the Country.
SIR,
ACcording to your Request, I shall abreviate from you here, what you have not
leisure to read at large. The first thing considerable in order to time, is, an
Act of Parliament, for settling the Militia of the City of Westminster, Subburbs
of London, and parts adjacent within the weekly Bill of mortality, nominating a
Committee which have power to raise, leavy, and array men; and to appoint
Colonels, Captains, etc. with power to lead and conduct the said forces, as
occasion shall require, into any part of the Commonwealth of England, to
appease all insurrections, etc. The Act for Creditors and Prisoners, ordered to
be debated again the next week.

The Act for the probate of wills read and committed. The Act for bringing in
of a new Representative, committed and ordered to be brought in again on
Wednesday next. The Lord Gerard Scalph, Commissioner from the States of
Holland, has had Audience, the business to be somewhat further considered. The
Lord Cromwell has made report to the house, touching the state and condition of
Ireland, the forces left there, under what mediate Command, as also the
strength of the Enemy, the Towns remaining in their possession, and several
other things in relation to that Country.

This week was a Common-conncel summoned by virtue of a Warrant, signed by
diverse Commoners of the City of London, without the Lord Mayor (a thing not
usual) which they grounded upon an Act of Parliament, dated the 28. of Febr.
1648. which Act inableth any ten of the Common-counce^lmen to call a
Common Counsel, in case the Lord Mayor should refuse; but the Lord Mayor is so
far from refusing, that he acts with them for the good and welfare of the
who^e, and both himself and the Aldermen were at this time present, we have
intelligence that Hurry and some other eminent persons which were taken with
the Marquess of Montross are beheaded at Edinburgh, by which we may see the
condition of earthly things, and that mischance stands next to good fortune,
and how suddenly they that make not conscience of their ways, may fall and
leave nothing behind them, but ignominy and reproach. Much debate has been
this week about the public Affairs of the Nation, and it is agreed that the
two great lights in our horizen, the L. G. Fairfax, and the L. Cromwell, shall
advance Northwards; who both excelling in wisdom and Martial-knowledge, are
deservedly above others to be esteemed and honored: much talk has been within
a day or two, that the declared King of Scotland is taken, somesay by the Scots
with a Breda net, others say by the English Fleet, as he was going thither,
what is of certain time must produce, only at present take what comes from
most assured hands, viz. That he is gone out of Holland, for they were desirous
to be eased of him; and besides, some Ships that attended for him, Vantrump had
about 20. sail, which according to vulger report, were to conduct him: About
10. of these were seen to sail toward Jersey, and if there were more, its
thought they sailed for Scotland, and then its likely he is taken, or else they
that were to be his Convoy, returned back again upon sight of the Parliaments
Ships, which ride on the Northern Coast.

London 15. June, 1650.
FINIS.

