THE Irish Rebellion: OR, AN HISTORY Of the Beginnings and first Progress of
the General Rebellion raised within the Kingdom of IRELAND, upon the three and
twentieth day of October, in the Year, 1641.

TOGETHER With the Barbarous Cruelties and Bloody Massacres which ensued
thereupon.

By Sir JOHN TEMPLE Knight. Master of the Rolls, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council within the Kingdom of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by R. White for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Have here adventured to present unto public view, the beginnings and first
progress of the Rebellion lately raised within this Kingdom of Ireland. And
although I cannot but take notice of such a multitude of imperfections in my
self, as render me very unfit for the performance of this service: As also,
that I shall thereby raise up much malice, and private displeasure, as well
against my person, as my undertakings herein: Yet such is my zeal and most
earnest desire to appear in this cause, as being now laid aside, and for the
present dis-abled in any other way to be further useful to this unhappy
Kingdom, I resolved to deny my self, and wholly departing from my own
interests, to employ my weak endeavors, in setting down the sad Story of our
miseries. I might peradventure with much more advantage to my own particular
have looked back (as far wiser men have done in their troubles) and passed my
time in foreign Collections, or penning some story of times long since past,
where the chief Actors are at rest, and their unquiet spirits so surely laid,
as they are not to be moved with the sharpest charge that can be laid on their
memories: Nulli gravis est percussus Achilles. Most men are great lovers of
themselves, and such constant admirers of their own actions, as they think they
do well to be angry at any thing that shall (though never so truly) be reported
to their disadvantage. They consider not their own natural imbecillities,
their passions, distempers, or ill affections which lead them on to advize or
act things of an ill fame; but are ready to fly in the faces of those who
shall even in the fairest characters represent or leave any impressions of
them. Hence it is that the truth of things comes quite to be overshadowed with
false colors, and so to remain as it were buried alive, or otherways to
appear extremely disfigured through gross errors, base flattery, or wilful
mistakes. For most men that are present adventurers in this kind, are wise
enough to apprehend their own danger, and thereupon departing from the common
interest that every other man has in their story, reflect only upon their own
particular, and suffer themselves to be overawed with the humor of the present
times; or so far transported, either with the benefits or private injuries
received from particular persons, as they transmit very imperfect and weaker
relations, or otherwise fill them up with such counterfeit stuff, as posterity
will owe little to their information.

Monsieur du Plessis, a person of extraordinary abilities and learning, a great
Minister of State under that glorious King Henry the 4th of France, undertook
as it appears by a Letter of his, to Monsieur Languet, to write a Story of
those times wherein he lived. But I cannot find that he ever suffered that work
to come to the Press; whether by just apprehensions discouraged from
publication, or whether it otherwise miscarried, I cannot say. But sure I am,
in the same Letter he bitterly declaims against the humor of the times, and
there plainly tells us, that after one has writ an History, he dares not
adventure the publishing of it. Memoires de Monsieur du Plessie, fol. 45.
Si non qu'il allege pour cause d'un effect ce que n'a pas este, comme une
cause genereuse, au lieu de l'amour d'une femme, and d'une querelle de bordeau.
Such was then the iniquity of those times, so abominable and shameful, the
true causes of the imbrollments in that Kingdom, that those wars (as the Court
was then governed) had for the most part their first beginnings from some ill
placed affection, or a private quarrel in an infamous place. And further
speaking on this subject, he intimates how dangerous it is to set forth the
actions of men in their true colors; and how bitter and corroding to the
conscience of an Historian to disguise or make them appear otherwise to the
world, then they were in their first original.

To speak truth exactly is highly commendable in any man, especially in one
that takes upon him to be a public informer: to raze, to corrupt a Record is a
crime of a very high nature, and by the laws of the Land most severely
punishable. Histories are called Testes temporum, lux veritatis, Cicero de Orat.
vita memoriae: and certainly he does offend in an high degree, who shall
either negligently suffer, or wilfully procure them to bring in false evidence;
that shall make them dark Lanthorns to give light but on the one side, or as
Ignes fatui, to cause the Reader to wander from the truth, and vainly to follow
false shadows, or the factious humor of the writers brain. To be false, to
deceive, to lie, even in ordinary discourse, are vices commonly branded with
much infamy, and held in great detestation by all good men. And therefore
certainly those that arrive at such a height of impudency, as magisterially to
take upon them, not only to abuse the present, but future ages, must needs
render themselves justly odious. They stand responsable for other men's errors,
and whereas in all other notorious offenders, their sin and their life
determines at farthest together: the sin of these men is perpetuated after
their decease, they speak when they are dead, make false infusions into every
Age, and court every new person that shall many years after cast his eyes upon
their story to give belief to their lies. Therefore for my own part when I
first undertook this task, I took up with it a resolution most clearly to
declare the truth. I have cast up my accounts, I have set up my rest, and
determine rather to displease any other man then offend my own conscience. I
have neither private reflections, nor foreign ends; I am now as it were reduced
into my first principles, and have taken this work upon me, merely out of
public considerations. All that I aim at is, that there may remain for the
benefit of this present age, as well as of posterity, some certain Records and
monuments of the first beginnings and fatal progress of this rebellion,
together with the horrid cruelties most unmercifully exercised by the Irish
Rebels upon the British, and Protestants within this Kingdom of Ireland. That
when Gods time is come of returning it into the bosoms of those who have been
the first plotters or present actors therein, and that Kingdom comes to be
re-planted with British, and settled in peace again, (which I have even in our
lowest condition, with great confidence attended, and do now most undoubtedly
believe will ere long be brought to pass) there may be such a course taken,
such provisions made, and such a wall of separation set up betwixt the Irish
and the British, as it shall not be in their power to rise up (as now and in
all former Ages they have done) to destroy and root them out in a moment,
before they be able to put themselves into a posture of defense, or to gather
together to make any considerable resistance against their bloody attempts.

I shall not pretend to entertain the Reader with political Maxims, grave
Sentences, or flourishing Orations: That which I hope will cover over a
multitude of imperfections, is the unquestionable truth of what I shall set down
in a plain and brief narration of all the causes and proceedings held in the
raising, as also in the first counsels and undertakings for the suppression of
this hideous Rebellion.

And that I might in some measure compass my design herein, and give
satisfaction even to the most curious inquisitors after truth, I did with great
care and diligence turn over the very Originals or authentical copies of the
voluminous examinations remaining with the public Register, and taken upon
oath, by virtue of two several Commissions issued out under the Great Seal of
this Kingdom, to examine the losses of the British, the cruelties and horrid
murders committed by the Irish in the destruction of them. I have perused the
public dispatches, acts, and relations, as likewise the private Letters and
particular discourses sent by the chief Gentlemen out of several parts of the
Kingdom, to present unto the Lords Justices and Counsel the sad condition of
their affairs. And having been made acquainted with all the most secret
passages and counsels of the State, I have, as far as I could, without breach
of trust, and as the duty of a Privy Counselor would admit, communicated so
much of them as I conceived necessary and proper for public information. And
setting aside the particulars contained within the first Pages, leading on by
way of introduction to the ensuing troubles, which I have taken up on trust out
of the most approved Authors both ancient and modern, who have written the
story of Ireland, I may confidently avow, that I have been so curious in
gathering up my materials, and so careful in putting them together, as very
few passages will be found here inserted which have not either fallen within
the compass of my own knowledge, or that I have not received from those who
were chiefly entrusted in matter of action abroad; or that came not to my hands
attested under the oaths of credible witnesses, or clearly asserted in the
voluntary confessions of the Rebels themselves.

Every man I believe will easily assent unto me, that out of these Fountains we
may presume with most certainty to draw truth, and that if we bound our
inquiries within this circuit, we may well hope to arrive at the true knowledge
of the main particular passages of this late Rebellion. And therefore though I
shall not obtrude every thing as infallible, which by a strict and most severe
inquisition I have taken up on the grounds before mentioned (considering how
subject men are through forgetfulness and humane imbecility, to err in the
ordinary course of their relations): yet thus much I suppose I may confidently
say, that no man could imagine how to make collections with greater certainty,
and more clear unquestionable probabilities of truth then I have here set down.

Now as for the examinations here mentioned, howsoever they were taken with all
the care and circumspection that could possibly be used in so great a work, yet
are they most commonly decried, and held by the Irish as very injurious to
their country men. Thus much I shall be bold to aver, and shall here speak
it for the better authority and credit of the evidence brought in by them.

First, that as the Commissions for taking those examinations were after mature
deliberation issued out by special order from the Lords Justices and Council;
so they were in great wisdom designed by them for no other ends then to have
some general account of the losses suffered by the British, and the cruelties
exercised by the Irish upon them in the several parts of the Kingdom. And
this course was first set on foot in the very height of our troubles, when the
fury of the Rebels so desperately raged, as they were in no condition to think
of the attainting of their persons, and therefore only aimed at the discovery
of their treason. Out of which respect chiefly the Commissioners made choice of
for the performance of this service, were six of the Clergy, all persons of
known integrity; and such as by reason of their profession, would in all
probability gently proceed on in their inquisitions, and truly set down the
bloody Relations given in unto them. The persons examined were of several
conditions, most of them British, some of Irish birth and extraction, very many
of good quality, and such as were of inferior rank were not rejected if they
were known sufferers, and came freely in to declare what they could speak of
their own knowledge. Few came but such as had been in the hands of the Rebels,
and could with sorrowful hearts make the sad relation of their own miseries.
And so they having been eyewitnesses, their depositions are for the most part
out of their own knowledge; and what is given in by them upon hearsay, they
for the most part depose, that they received it out of the Rebels own mouths
while they were in restraint among them. Lastly, many of these miserable
persons thus examined, came up wounded, others even almost famished; or so worn
out with their sufferings, as they did not long outlive the date of their
examinations: So as these testimonies being delivered in their last agonies, we
are in charity to believe that they would leave behind them with all due
circumstances, a clear attestation of such cruelties as they then bequeathed
unto us with their last breath.

But it is not much to be wondedered, Mr. Creighton in his Examination
deposes, That he heard many bitter words cast out against the City of Dublin,
That they would burn and ruin it, destroy all Records, and Monuments of the
English government; Make laws against speaking English, and that all names
given by English to places, should be abolished, and the ancient names restored.
if they who had it in design to destroy all the public Records and ancient
Monuments in the Kingdom, to banish both the English Law and Government, do so
bitterly declaim against these evidences of their cruelty, and lively
attestations given in to perpetuate the memory of them to their eternal infamy.

If they could imagine which way to silence, or by what means to blast the
credit of these examinations thus solemnly taken, and prevail according to
their most impetuous desires upon the late Treaty of Peace, to have all the
indictments legally put in against the principal Rebels and their adherents,
taken off the file and cancelled, they would not be out of hope, as these times
now are to palliate their Rebellion with such specious pretenses, as that their
barbarous cruelties, acted beyond all parallel being forgotten, it should with
great applause pass down to posterity, under the name of a holy and just war
for the defense of the Catholic Cause.

And now in order to this design, they have taken all occasions to proclaim
the huge pressures which they pretend to have suffered under the late
government in this Kingdom, and spare not to term it tyrannical: they speak
as if their oppressions might be paralelled with the Israelitish envassalage in
the Land of Egypt, and their persecutions for Religion equalled to those of the
Primitive times. And then they further say, That thereupon only some
Catholics, considering the deplorable and desperate condition they were in,
and apprehending the plots laid to extinguish their Religion and Nation, did
take arms in the North in maintenance of their Religion, and for the
preservation of life, liberty, and estate, together with his Majesty's rights.
And that the Lords and Gentlemen dwelling within the English Pale, were
likewise by the great rigor and severity used by the State toward them,
enforced to take up arms for their own defense.

A Remonstrance of grievances presented to his Majesty in behalf of the
Catholics of Ireland, and given in to his Majesty's Commissioners at Trime,
March 17. 1642.
These are the expressions and the language used in the late Remonstrance given
in to his Majesty's Commissioners at Trime, to be presented to his Majesty in
behalf of his Catholic Subjects in Ireland. Wherein there are pieced together
so many vain inconsiderable fancies, many subsequent passages acted in the
prosecution of the war, and such bold, notorious, false assertions, without any
the least ground or color of truth: as without all doubt they absolutely
resolved, first, to raise this Rebellion, and then to set their Lawyers and
Clergy on work, to frame such reasons and motives as might with some color of
justification serve for arguments to defend it. And it is indeed, to speak
plainly, a most infamous Pamphlet, full fraught with scandalous aspersions cast
upon the present government, and his Majesty's principal Officers of State
within this Kingdom. It was certainly framed with most virulent intentions,
not to present their condition and present sufferings to his Majesty, but that
it might be dispersed to gain belief among foreign States abroad, as well as
discontented persons at home; and so draw assistance and aid, to foment and
strengthen their rebellious party in Ireland.

But I do not much wonder they should take thus upon them to abuse the world
with such scurrilous discourses, and thereby endeavor to raise some ground or
belief that they had just cause to enter into so desperate a Rebellion. This
has been an ordinary course ever held in all designs of this nature. And it
is well observed by Polybius, that there are commonly to be found in all such
great undertakings, Causae suasoriae, and causae justificae. The first, such as
are the true natural causes and really first in the intention; the other, such
as are most commonly obtruded to the world by way of cover and justification.
Now as the nature of water is most clearly seen in the first Fountain, where it
remains pure and unmixed, without any dross or soil that it afterward
contracts, as it passes along in the streams derived from it. So certainly the
quality of all humane actions is best understood, and most clearly discerned,
when we look upon them as they appear in their first original, before the
inconveniences and fatal miscarriages which afterward come to be discovered,
awake the first Projectors, and teach them new artifices wherewith to disguise
and color over their abortive, or otherwise unfortunate counsels. Now as for
the true Suasorian causes (if I may so term them) which enduced the Irish to
lay the plot of this Rebellion, and were indeed really first in their thoughts,
they will sufficiently appear in this ensuing Story. And for the justificall
reasons of their rising in arms, if any one has a mind to take them up on
trust from themselves, let him seek no further then the Remonstrance before
mentioned; whereof much more is to be said then I shall give my self liberty to
speak in this place: well knowing that those notorious untruths and wicked
impostures contained in it when they come to the test will be quickly
discovered, and the varnish they have put upon them soon fall away of it self.

If any one has been ignorantly deluded hereby, and desires to be rectified in
his own judgment, let him be pleased to turn over this ensuing Story, Verum
est index sui and obliqui:

There needs certainly no other confutation of their false and virulent
suggestions, then a true impartial relation of the first beginnings and
progress of this Rebellion: which for what was acted within the space of the
first two months after the breaking out of it, I presume I may say without
vanity, he shall certainly find here. It is true, I have principally applied
my self to give an account of what was done about Dublin, the chief City of
this Kingdom, and the place where the Lords Justices and Council continued
using their utmost power and endeavors to oppose the fury of the Rebels. Yet
as all other parts of the Kingdom were under their government, and their care
and counsels (as far as their general distractions would admit) extended to
the whole, what was acted in all other places of the country, comes properly
to be touched upon, and the miserable condition of them to be represented in
this following Story.

I shall not here trouble the Reader with any further Apology for my self, or
with excuses for the multitude of my own imperfections, which will here appear
in large Characters; and will be peradventure looked upon with a Multiplying
Glass by those who are not pleased with what I have here exposed to public
view. I do not at all pretend to silence the bitter expressions of malevolent
spirits: As I shall with great patience compose my self to bear the utmost that
their malice can put upon me: So I shall be always ready with much meekness
to submit to be reformed by any person whatsoever, who can make it appear, that
I have either through ignorance or negligence (for I am sure wilful mistakes
they will find none) miscarried in the relation of any particular here set
down: Sins of ignorance found a very easy expiation under the Old Law, I
will not say they had a pardon of course. But if I have so carried my self, as
that no greater transgressions can be laid to my charge, I shall be much
satisfied, and may peradventure be further encouraged to proceed on to a
continuation of this Story, and therein to transmit down to posterity the noble
achievements and great victories already obtained by small numbers of the
English forces over huge multitudes of these Irish Rebels.

THE TABLE.
THe Oiginall of the Irish, fol. 1. The first enterprise of the English for the
conquest of Ireland, made by private adventurers during the reign of King Henry
the 2d. King of England. fol. 3. Christian Religion settled in Ireland, in the
fourth Age, after the birth of our Savior. fol. 4. The numbers of British and
Protestants murdered, or otherwise destroyed since the beginning of the
Rebellion, unto the time of the making of the first Cessation of arms with the
Irish Rebels. fol. 6. The ancient malice born by the Irish toward the English.
fol. 7. The royal endeavors of Queen Elizabeth for the reducing of Ireland.
fol. 8. The miserable condition of Ireland when King James came to the Crown of
England. fol. 11. The Irish Commissioners present their grievances to King
Charles: His great readiness to redress them. fol. 12. The Earl of Leicester
declared L. Lieutenant of Ireland. fol. 14. The happy condition of Ireland, at
the time of the breaking out of the Rebellion. fol. 16. The manner of the
discovery of the Conspiracy of the Irish, for the seazing upon the Castle and
City of Dublin. fol. 18. The rising of the Irish within the Province of Ulster.
fol. 24. A Letter from the Lords Justices and Council to the Lord Lieutenant.
fol. 28. A Proclamation issued out for the satisfaction of the Lords and chief
Gentlemen of the English Pale. fol. 37. The names of the chief Rebels in
Ulster; several Forts and places of strength suddenly surprised by them. fol.
39 Several policies used by the Irish to prevent the rising of the English
against them. fol. 41. Sir Phelim O Neals proceedings in Ulster. fol. 44. The
second dispatch of the Lords Justices and Council into England. fol. 46. The
Proceedings of the Parliament in England upon the first advertisements brought
unto them of the Rebellion raised in Ireland. fol. 48. Order taken for
victualling the Castle of Dublin, and for the safety of the City. fol. 53. The
sad condition of the City of Dublin. fol. 61. The particulars of the first plot
of the Rebellion. fol. 65. The plot for a general Rebellion in Ireland of an
ancient date. fol. 66. The Plot for this late Rebellion first discovered to the
Lord Mac- Guire, upon Mr. John Bellewes return out of England, with Commission
to continue the Parliament in Ireland. fol. 69 That the Lords of the English
Pale were engaged in the first Plot, is very probable. fol. 73. The Romish
Clergy, and the Irish Lawyers, great instruments in raising the Rebellion. fol.
76. The means used by them to stir up the people. fol. 78. The resolution of
the Irish to root out the British out of Ireland. fol. 84. Upon their first
rising they seize upon all the English men's goods and cattle, next strip them
naked, and so turn them out of their doors. fol. 88. A particular enumeration
of several bloody massacres and horrid cruelties exercised upon the British;
all testified upon oath, and taken out of several examinations, inserted in
the margin. fol. 90. The Remonstrance of the Protestants of Munster. fol. 110.
The examinations of several persons inhabiting within the several Provinces
of this Kingdom taken upon Oath: wherein are deposed several particulars
concerning the murders and cruelties used by the Rebels to the British in all
parts of the country. fol. 116. Several examinations concerning the
Apparitions at Portnedown Bridge. fol. 133. The cruelties acted by the Irish
upon the British, were before any provocation given them. fol. 1. Concerning
the adjournment of the Parliament in Ireland. fol. 4. The approach of the
Rebels to Tredagh, and the defeat of the English forces sent for the relief of
that Town. fol. 16. The defection of the Lords and chief Gentlemen of the
English Pale. fol. 18. The manner of their conjunction with the Northern
Rebels. fol. 19. Their refusal to repair to the Lords Justices and Council.
fol. 24. Their proceedings after they had joined with the Northern Rebels. fol.
29. The Kingdom of Scotland sends Commissioners to treat with the Parliament
of England concerning the relief of Ireland. fol. 32. Their Propositions
debated in the House of Peers. fol. 34. The revolt of the Province of Munster.
fol. 35. A Letter from the Lords Justices and Council to the Lord Lieutenant.
fol. 39
The Irish Rebellion: OR, An History of the beginnings, and first progress of
the general Rebellion raised within the Kingdom of Ireland, in the Year. 1641.
THE Kingdom of Ireland (which has for almost five hundred years continued
under the Sovereignty of the Crown of England) was presently after the first
conquest of it, planted with English Colonies, long since worn out, or for the
most part become Irish. And therefore it has again in this last Age been
supplied with great numbers of people drawn out of England and Scotland, to
settle their habitations in that Country. Now the most execrable plot laid by
the Irish, for the universal extirpation of all these British and Protestants,
the bloody progress of their Rebellion within the compass of the first two
months, their horrid cruelties, in most barbarously murdering, or otherways
destroying many thousands of men, women and children, peaceably settled, and
securely intermixed among them, and that without any provocation, or
considerable resistance at first made, I intend shall be the present subject of
the first Part of this ensuing Story.

The original of the Irish.
The Irish want not many fabulous inventions to magnify the very first
beginnings of their Nation. Whether the Scythians, Gauls, Africans, Goths, or
some other more Eastern Nation that anciently inhabited Spain, came and sat
down first in Ireland, I shall not much trouble my self here to enquire. If
we should give credit to the Irish Chronicles, or their Bards (who deliver no
certain truths) we might find stuff enough for an ancient pedigree, made up
out of a most various strange composure of the Irish Nation. But to let them
pass, there are certainly a concurrence of diverse manners and customs, such
affinity of several of their words and names, and so great resemblance of many
long used rites, and still retained ceremonies as do give us some ground to
believe that they do not improbably deduce their first original from some of
those people. It may very well be conjectured (for infallible Records I find
none) that as the Eastern parts of Ireland, bordering upon England, were first
planted by the old Britains: Tool of the old Britein word Toll a
hil-country. Birne of Brin, woods. Cauvenagh of Cauve strong. The view of
Ireland by Spencer. fol. 33.
Tool, Birne, and Cauvenagh the ancient Septs, and still inhabitants of that
part of the country, being old British words. And as the Northern parts of
Ireland were first inhabited by the Scythians, from whom it was called Ireland
is often called Scotia mayor among ancient writers.
Scytenland, or Scotland: So the Southern and more Western parts thereof were
peopled from the Maritine parts of Spain, being the next continent, not by the
now Spanish Nation, who are strangely compounded of a different admixture of
several people: But as I said, peradventure by the Gauls, who anciently
inhabited all the Sea coasts of Spain, the Syrians, or some other of those
more Eastern Nations, who intermixing with the natural Inhabitants of that
Country, made a transmigration into Ireland, and so settled some Colonies there.

Ireland anciently divided into diverse petty principalities.
The whole Kingdom of Ireland was divided into diverse petty principalities, and
of later times there were five principal Chieftains, viz. Mac Morough of
Lemster, Mac Cartye of Munster, O Neale of Vlster, O Connor of Conaght, and O
Malaghlin of Mead. For such were the Irish denominations, Isti reges non
fuerunt ordinati solemnitate alicuius ordinis, nec unctionis sacramento, nec
iure hereditarto, vel aliqua proprietatis successione, sed vt and armis
quilibet regnum suum obtinuit. The black book of Christ-church in Dublin it is
an ancient Manuscript kept there.
and I do not find they were called Kings till about the time of the coming
over of the English, Giraldus Cambrensis who came into Ireland in the time of
Hen. 2. of England, being the first writer that gives them that Title. Besides,
as they came not in either by hereditary right or lawful Election, so their
investiture was solemnized neither by Unctio^, or Coronation, they made their
way by the Sword, had certain kinds of barbarous ceremonies used at their
Inauguration, kept up their power with a high hand, and held the people most
monstrously enslaved to all the savage customs practiced under their dominion.
And thus they continued until the Reign of Hen. 2. King of England in whose
time the undertakings for the Conquest of Ireland were successefully made by
most powerful, though private adventurers upon this occasion.

Dermott Mac Morough, King of Lemster (being by the Kings of Conaght and Mead
enforced to fly his country) made his repair directly to Hen. 2. King of
England, The first enterprise of the English upon Ireland made by private
adventurers.
then personally attending his Wars in France, and with much earnestness
implored his aid for the recovery of his territories in Ireland, most
injuriously, as he pretended, wrested out of his hands. The King refused to
imbarque himself in this quarrel: yet graciously recommended the justice of
his cause to all his loving Subjects, and by his Letters Patents assured them
that whosoever would afford the said Mac-Morough assistance toward his
resettlement should not only have free liberty to transport their Forces, Se
nostram ad hoc tam gratiam noverit quam licentiam obtinere Gir. Cambren.
expugnata Hib. cap. 1.
but be held to do very acceptable service therein. Hereupon Earl Strangebow
first engaging himself, determined as a private Adventurer to endeavor his
restitution with the utmost forces he could raise, he lying then very
conveniently at Bristol, where Mac-Morough came unto him, in his passage back
from the King into Ireland; There were certain conditions agreed upon between
them, and a transaction made by Mac-Morough of his kingdom of Lemster unto the
Earl, upon his marriage with his only daughter Eva. And so he being desirous to
return speedily into his own country, passed to St. David's in South Wales, from
whence is the shortest passage out of England into Ireland, and there he
further engaged Fitz-Stephen and Fitzgerald, private Gentlemen, in this
service: These, by their power among their countrymen in those parts, having
gotten together a patty of 490 men, Cambr. cap. 3.
transported them in three ships into Ireland, landing at the Banne, a little
Creek near Featherd in the county of Wexford, and there joining with some
Forces brought unto them by Mac-Morough, made their first attempt upon the town
of Wexford, they were gallantly seconded by Earl Strangebow, who followed
presently after with no very considerable forces: and yet by the power of their
arms, within a very short time prevailed so far in the country, as they made
themselves masters thereof, and so gained the possession of all the maritime
parts of Lemster.

King Henry upon the news of their prosperous success in the sudden reducement
of so large a territory by such inconsiderable forces as they carried with
them; desirous to share with his subjects in the rich fruits, K. Henry the 2.
his expedition into Ireland. An. 1172.
as well as in the glory of so great an action, undertook an expedition in his
own person into Ireland the year following. And so strange an influence had the
very presence of this great Prince into the minds of the rude savage Natives,
as partly by the power of his arms, partly by his grace and favor in receiving
of them in upon their fained submissions most humbly tendered unto him, he
easily subdued a barbarous divided people.

The first beginnings of the Conquest of this Kingdom were thus gloriously
laid by this King, in the year of our Lord 1172. Now for the Land it self, he
found it good and flourishing with many excellent commodities, plentiful in
all kinds of provision, the Soil rich and fertile, the Air sweet and
temperate, the Havens very safe and commodious several Towns and little
Villages scattered up and down in the several parts of the country; Rog.
Hoveden calls it Palatium regium miro artificio de virgis levigatis ad modum
patriae illius constructum. fol. 528.
but the Buildings so poor and contemptible, as when that King arrived at
Dublin their chief city, and finding there neither place fit for receipt or
entertainment, he set up a long house made of smoothed wattles after the manner
of the country, and therein kept his Christmas. All their Forts, Castles,
stately buildings and other edifices were afterward erected by the English,
except some of their maritime towns which were built by the Ostmanni or
Easterlings who anciently came and inhabited in Ireland.

Christian religion settled in Ireland.
Moreover, He found likewise by several monuments of piety, and other
remarkable testimonies that Christian religion had been long since introduced
and planted among the inhabitants of the land. It is not certainly without some
good grounds affirmed by ancient writers, That in the fourth age after the
incarnation of our blessed Lord and Savior, some holy and learned men came
over out of foreign parts into Ireland, out of their pious desires to
propagate the blessed Gospel throughout the Kingdom, By Sedulius Palladius
Patricius, in the fourth age after the birth of our Savior.
as Sedulius, Palladius, and besides several others Patricius the famous Irish
Saint, (A Britain borne at a place now called Kirk-Patrick near Glascow in
Scotland, then the utmost boundary of the Britains dominion in those parts) who
out of mere devotion came and spent much of their time among the Irish, and out
of their zealous affections for the conversion of a barbarous people, applied
themselves with great care and industry to the instructing of them in the true
grounds and principles of Christian religion. And with so great success, and
such unwearied endeavors did S. Patrick travail in this work, as (if we will
give credit to some writers) we must believe that the Church of Armagh was by
him erected into an Archiepiscopal See, three hundred and fifty Bishops
consecrated, great numbers of Clergymen instituted, who (notwithstanding the
notorious impiety and continued profaneness of the common sort of people) being
most of them Monks by vow and profession, of great learning very austere and
strict in their discipline were so much taken notice of in those rude ignorant
times, by other Nations, as in respect of them some gave unto the Island the
denomination of Insula Sanctorum. But so quickly did the power of holiness
decay in the land, as the name was soon lost, and even the very prints and
characters thereof among the very Clergy themselves obliterated; the life of
the people so beastly, their manners so depraved and barbarous, as that King
Henry, when he entertained the first thoughts of transferring his Arms over
into Ireland, made suit unto the Pope, that he would give him leave to go and
conquer Ireland, and reduce those beastly men unto the way of truth: Rex
Anglorum. Hen. nuncios solennes Romam mittens rega^it Papam Adrianum ut sibi
liceret Hibernia Insulam intrare, et terram subiugare atquehomines illos
bestiales ad fidem, et viam reducere veritatis. Mat Paris an. 1156.
Answerable whereunto was the tenor of Pope Adrians Bull, as appears at large
in Parisiensis, whereby he gave him liberty to go over and subdue the Irish
nation, A sufficient demonstration of the condition of that people, and what
opinion was held of them, as well by their holy father the Pope, as other
Princes. And the King at his arrival found them no other than a beastly people
indeed. For the Inhabitants were generally devoid of all manner of civility,
governed by no settled laws, living like beasts, biting and devouring one
another, without all rules, customs, or reasonable constitutions either for
regulation of Property, or against open force and violence, most notorious
murders, rapes, robberies, and all other acts of inhumanity and barbarism,
raging without control or due course of punishment, Whereupon, He, without any
manner of scruple or farther inquisition into particular titles, resolving as
it seems to make good by the sword the Popes donation, made a general seizure
of all the lands of the whole kingdom, and so without other ceremony took them
all into his own hands.

And that he might the more speedily introduce Religion and civility, Rex
antequam ab Hibernia redibat consilium congregavit apud Lismore, ubi leges
Angliae ab omnibus gratantur sunt accepta et iuratoria cautione prestita
confirmata. Mat. Paris, an. 1172.
and so draw on toward the accomplishment of that great work which he had so
gloriously begun, he first, in a great Counsel held at Lissemore, caused the
Laws of England to be received and settled in Ireland, then he afterward united
it to the Imperial Crown of England, making large distributions to his
followers by particular grants, allotting out in great proportions the whole
Land of Ireland among the English Commanders, who made estates, and gave
several shares to their friends and commilitants that came over private
adventurers with them. But before I pass further, I shall take the liberty
here to insert one observation out of Giraldus Cambrensis concerning the causes
and reasons of the prosperity of the English undertakings in Ireland. He says
that a Synod, Ireland divided by K. Hen. 2. among his followers, and other
adventurers.
or Counsel of the Clergy, being there assembled at Armagh, and that point
fully debated, it was unanimously agreed by them all, that the sins of the
people were the occasion of that heavy judgment then fallen upon their Nation,
and that especially their buying of English men from Merchants and Pirates, and
detaining them under a most miserable hard bondage, Decretum est itaque
praedicto concilio, et cum universitatis conscensu public Statutum: ut Angli
ubique per insulam servitutis vinculo mancipati in pristinam revocentur
libertatem. Gir. Camb. expug. Hib. c. 18
had caused the Lord by way of just retalliation, to leave them to be reduced
by the English to the same slavery. Whereupon they made a public act in that
counsel, that all the English held in captivity throughout the whole Land,
should be presently restored to their former liberty. If so heavy a Judgment
fell then upon the Irish for their hard usage of some few English, what are
they now to expect? or what expiation can they now pretend to make for the late
effusion of so much innocent English blood, after so horrid, despitefull and
execrable a manner? There being since the Rebellion first brake out, unto the
time of the Cessation made Sept. 15. 1643. which was not full two years after,
above 300000 British and Protestants cruelly murdered in cold blood, The
numbers of British and protestants destroyed since the Rebellion.
destroyed some otherway, or expelled out of their habitations, according to
the strictest conjecture and computation, of those who seemed best to
understand the numbers of English planted in Ireland, besides those few which
perished in the heat of Fight, during the war.

King John came into Ireland during his minority, though to little purpose, The
fruitless expeditions of K. John, and K. Richard 2. into Ireland.
but after, about the twelfth year of his Reign, upon the general defection of
the Irish, he made a second expedition, and during his stay there, built
several Forts and strong Castles, many of which remain unto this day, he
erected all the Courts of Judicature, and contributed very much toward the
settlement of the English Colonies, as also of the civil Government. King
Richard the second made likewise in the time of his Reign, upon the same
occasion two other expeditions into Ireland in his own person. But both those
Princes out of a desire to spare the effusion of English blood, as also the
expense of treasure, being likewise hastened back by the distempers of their
own Subjects in England, were both content to suffer themselves to be again
abused by the fained submissions of the Irish, who finding their own weakness,
and utter disability to resist the power of those two mighty Monarchs, came
with all humility even from the farthest parts of the kingdom, to submit to
their mercy: And yet it is well observed by some that say, they returned back,
not leaving one true subject more behind them, than they found at their first
arrival. Howsoever by the very presence of these Princes, and by the careful
endeavors of the Governors sent over by other of the Kings of England, those
that were Adventurers in the first Conquest, and such other of the English
nation as came over afterward, took possession by virtue of the former grants,
of the whole kingdom, drove the Irish in a manner out of all the habitable
parts of it, and settled themselves in all the plains and fertile places of the
country, especially in the chief Towns, Ports, and upon the Sea coasts. And to
such a height of power and greatness had some of those first Adventuring
Commanders raised themselves here by reason of the addition of new titles of
honor, the unlimited jurisdictions and privileges enjoyed by them, the great
rents they received, the numerous dependence they had; As that they began to
look upon their own possessions as circumscribed within too narrow limits, to
entertain private animosities against each other, to draw in the Irish (whom
they had driven up into the mountains, and ever esteemed as their most deadly
enemies) to take part in their quarrels, being not ashamed to use their
assistance for the enlargement of their own private territories, as also to
curb the too exorbitant power, as they thought, of their opposites, though
their own compatriots and jointtenants in the possession of that good land. The
ancient malice of the Irish to the English.
The Irish were very glad to entertain this occasion and did ever foment by
their utmost power and artifice these unnatural broiles and dissentions among
the English, whom they most mortally hated: For they living in a manner out of
the reach, as well as out of the protection of all the English laws and
government, were always accounted not only as aliens, but mere enemies; And
besides those Septs of Irish which were termed the Quinque familiae, Quinque
familia. O Neale de Vltonia. O Malahglin de Medin. O Conor de Conacia. o Brien
de Thomondia. Mac Morough de Lagenia.
(who notwithstanding the great privileges they enjoyed by the protection of
the English laws, ever showed much averseness both to the English, and their
laws) No other persons of any Irish families, from the very first conquest of
Ireland in the time of Hen. 2. until the reign of K. Hen. 8. were admitted
into the condition of Subjects, or received any benefit by the English laws,
but such as purchased Charters of Denization. It was no capital offense to kill
any of them, the Law did neither protect their life, nor revenge their death.
And so they living upon the mountains in the boggs and woods, though at first
after some sort divided from the English, did take all occasions to declare
their malice and hatred against the English colonies planted near unto them.

But howsoever the English were in all ages infested with their Irish enemies,
yet were they certainly in point of interest and universal possession, owners,
and proprietors of the whole Kingdom of Ireland. They kept themselves in
entire bodies almost for the first hundred years after their arrival, not
suffering the Irish to live promiscuously among them, by which means they
failed not to make good their footing, and by a high hand to keep them under in
due obedience and subjection to the Crown of England. And when afterward they
began to be more careless of their habitation, and to suffer the Irish to
intermingle with them, By the Statutes made at Kilkenny by Lionel Duke of
Clarence, L. Lieutenant of Ireland in the time of Edw. 3. Alliance by marriage,
nurture of Infants, and gossipred with the Irish are high treason. And if any
English man should use the Irish language, Irish name, or Irish apparel, his
lands should be seized on, and if he had no lands, he was to suffer
imprisonment, Archiu in castro Dublin Statutes of Kilkenny.
and their English followers to familiarize themselves into their beastly
manners and customs (for prevention of which mischief, many severe Laws were
enacted in after ages) yet for some time they made good the rights and
possessions they had gotten by conquest, and went on, endeavoring to civilize
the people, introducing the English Laws, language, habit, and customs long
used among them. Now although these, and all other courses were taken by them,
which might reclaim such as seemed any ways inclinable to civility, or would
take out Charters of Denization: yet such ever was, and still is the rough
rebellious disposition of the people, their hatred so implacable, their malice
so unappeaseable to all the English nation, as no Laws or gentle Constitutions
would work, no public benefits attemper, or any tract of time reconcile and
draw them to any tolerable patience of cohabitation; But they have in all times
continued to take all advantages, as well since they were admitted into the
condition of Subjects, as while they were esteemed and treated as enemies, most
perfidiously to rise up and imbrue their hands in the blood of their English
neighbors: So as Ireland has long remained a true Aceldama, a field of blood,
an unsatiated sepulcher of the English nation. In that space of time which was
between the 10. year of Edw. 2. and the 30. year of Edw. 3. all the old English
colonies in Munster, Conaght and Vlster, and more then a third part of Lemster
became degenerate, and fell away from the Crown of England, so as the English
Pale remained only under the obedience of the Law.
For what by reason of their own intestine broiles, after they had (as soon
they did, when they began to admit the intermixture of the Irish) most
barbarously degenerate into all their manners and customs; and what by reason
of the cruel hatred and mischievous attempts of the Irish upon them: We shall
not find that the English, from their first access into Ireland, unto the
beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, (a tract of time containing above
380 years) had any settled peace or comfortable subsistence but were in most
perpetual combustions and troubles, so extremely harassed and overworne with
misery, as they were not long likely to survive the universal calamity that
had overspread the face of the whole Kingdom.

Whereupon that blessed Queen, out of her pious intentions, and good affections
to her people, applied her self with great care to redress the disorders of
her Subjects in Ireland. And in the very beginning of her Reign, sending over
prudent and religious Governors, the work of Reformation was much advanced, by
many wholesome Laws enacted against the barbarous customs of the Irish; The
royal endeavors of queen Eliz. for the reducing of Ireland.
and the execution of Justice (which a long time continued within the limits of
the Pale) began now to be extended into Conaght, Vlster and other remote parts
of the Land at some intervals of quiet times. The Irish countries were reduced
into Shires, and Sheriffs with some other Ministers of Justice placed in them:
The pretended Captainships, and those high powers usurped by the Irish,
together with all the extortions, and other fearful exorbitancies incident to
them, were now put into such a way of declination, as they could not long
continue. Seignories and Possessions were settled in a due course of
inheritance; those most destructive customs of The Lands belonging to the
Irish were divided into several territories, and the Inhabitants in every
Irish country were divided into several Septs or Lineages. -- In every Irish
country there was a Lord or Chieftain, and a Tanist, which was his successor
apparent. None could be chosen Tanist, but one issued out of one of the chief
Septs. -- The Seignory and Lands belonging to the chief Lord, did not descend
from father to son, or upon default of issue to him that was next of kin:
But he that was most active, of greatest power, and had most followers, always
caused himself to be chosen Tanist; and if he could not compass his desires by
gentle means, then he used open force and violence; and so being declared as it
were heir apparent, came into possession upon the death of the chief Lord. --
Now for the inferior Septs, they held their lands at the will of the chief
Lord, after a sort; For after the death of every one of his Tenants which held
any land under him, he assembled the whole Septs, and having put all their
possessions together in hotch-potch, made a new partition among them, not
assigning to the son of him that died, the land held by his father, but
altering every man's possession at his own pleasure, and according to his own
discretion: he, upon the death of every inferior Tenant, made a general
remove, and so allotted to every one of the Sept such part as he thought fit.
And this was the Irish Gavelkind. Sir John Davies Rep. fol. 49.
Tanestry and Gavelkind began to be depressed; The two Presidentiall Courts of
Munster and Conaght were then instituted, and special order taken that
Freeschooles might be erected in the several Diocesses throughout the Kingdom,
for the better training up of Youth. But these acts, and other courses tending
to the advancement of true Religion, and Civility, were highly displeasing, and
most incompatible with the loose humors of the Natives, who apprehended even
the most gentle means of reformation, as sharp corroding medicines; And
thereupon pretending the burden of the English government most insupportable,
began desperately to struggle for their liberty. Several plots were laid,
Nonnulli ex claris in Lagenia familijs et plerique Anglicae originis partim ex
romana religionis studio, partim ex odio recentium Anglorum, conspirare
co^perant ad pro regem, cum familia opprimendum, castrum Dublinense
intercipi^ndum, et A^glos in Hib^^^^ ad unum ^^^edio tol^^ndos Cambden Eliz.
an. 22.
some even by those who were themselves of the old English by extraction:
diverse Rebellions and petty Revolts raised during Her Majesty's most happy
reign: That of Shane O Neale, the Earl of Desmond, Viscount Baltinglas, O
Rurke, and several others at other times, were all set on foot for this very
end, and all timely suppressed, partly by the power of the Queens forces,
partly by her gracious favor in receiving the Chieftains to mercy. And she, as
most unwearied with their never ceasing provocations, still went on with all
gentle applications and lenitives, for the withdrawing of the people from their
barbarous customs: As, several of the great Lords who had been out in
rebellion, were restored to their lands and possessions, others she suffered to
enjoy their Commands in the country, upon others she bestowed new titles of
Honor. And being very unwilling to put the Kingdom of England to such an
excessive charge, as the full conquest of Ireland would most necessarily
require; no fair means were left untryed, that could minister any hopes of
civilizing the people, or settling the present distractions of the Kingdom.

But all was in vain; The Irish not to be reclaimed by gentle means.
the matter then wrought upon was not susceptible of any such noble forms,
those ways were heterogeneall, and had no manner of influence upon the
perverse dispositions of the Irish: the malignant impressions of irreligion and
barbarism, transmitted down, whether by infusion from their ancestors, or
natural generation, had irrefragably stiffned their necks, and hardened their
hearts against all the most powerful endeavors of Reformation: They continued
one and the same in all their wicked customs and inclinations, without change
in their affections or manners, having their eyes inflamed, their hearts
enraged with malice and hatred against all of the English nation, breathing
forth nothing but their ruin, destruction, and utter extirpation.

And that they might at once dis-impester themselves of their unpleasing
company, Tyrones rebellion.
and disburthen the whole Kingdom of them and their posterity, they still
entertained new thoughts, and had now brought unto perfection a design long
meditated in their breasts, whereby they resolved at once clearly to rescue and
deliver themselves from their subjection to the Crown of England. And this was
that desperate Rebellion raised almost through the whole Kingdom, by Hugh Earl
of Tyrone, who after titles of Honor, received a Command given by the Queen
unto him both of Horse and Foot in her Pay, great proportions of Land, and
other Princely favors conferred upon him; Resolving at once to cancel all
those Royal obligations of gratitude and fidelity, broke out and drew along
with him most of all the Irish Septs and famlies, together with many degenerate
English throughout the Kingdom, into rebellion against his most gracious
undoubted Sovereign. And these all, as being universally actuated with the
venomous infusions of his malevolent spirit, uniting their whole interests and
forces into a firm conjuncture with him, raised all their dependants, and moved
in several places according to the several orders and directions they
received from him: And to fill up the full measure of his iniquity, he drew in
a foraigne Nation at the same time with considerable Forces to invade the Land.

The ill effects of the submissions of the Irish.
So as the Queen now found by woeful experience, that Ireland was no longer to
be dallied with, one Rebellion still begot another, and this last was more
dangerous then any of the former, it being more deeply rooted, more generally
spread within the Kingdom, more powerfully fomented from without. She well
discerned how much her great clemency had been abused in suffering former
rebellions to be smothered over and loosely peeced up with protections and
pardons; that the receiving of the Irish upon their submissions, to avoid the
charge of a war, did inevitably redouble the charge, and perpetuate the
miseries of war: therefore she now resolved no longer to trifle with them, but
vigorously to set to the work, and making choice of some of her most renowned
English Commanders, committed to their charge the conduct of an Army royal,
completely armed, and well paid, wherewith they began the prosecution of that
Arch-traitour Tyrone, and with great success in a short time, though not
without the expense of much English blood, and above a million of money, brought
him upon his knees: And howsoever before this glorious work was fully
accomplished, it pleased God to put a period to her days, yet lived she long
enough to see just vengeance brought down upon the head of that unnatural
disturber of the peace of the kingdom, himself in a manner wholly deserted,
his country most miserably wasted, and a general desolation and famine brought
in, mightily consuming what was left undevoured by the sword.

It is very easy to conjecture in what a most miserable condition Ireland then
was, The miserable condition of Ireland when K. James came to the Crown of
England.
the English colonies being for the most part barbarously rooted out, the
remainders degenerated into Irish manners and names, the very Irish themlelves
most mightily wasted and destroyed by the late wars, and thereby much of the
kingdom depopulated, in every place large monuments of calamity and
undiscontinued troubles. King James of blessed memory found it, at his first
accession to the Crown of England, in this deplorable estate; whereupon he
presently took into his care the peaceable settlement of Ireland and civilizing
of the people: And conceiving that the powerful conjunction of England and
Scotland would now overawe the Irish, and contain them in their due obedience,
His lenity toward the Irish rebels, and his endeavors for a civil
reformation.
He resolved not to take any advantage of those forfeitures and great
confiscations which he was most justly entitled unto by Tyrone's rebellion; but
out of his Royal bounty and Princely magnificence, restored all the Natives to
the entire possession of their own lands. A work most munificent in it self,
and such as he had reason to believe would for the time to come perpetually
oblige their obedience to the Crown of England. And in this state the Kingdom
continued under some indifferent terms of peace and tranquillity, until the
sixth year of his reign: Then did the Earl of Tyrone take up new thoughts of
rising in arms, and into his rebellious design he easily drew the whole
province of Vlster, then entirely at his devotion; But his plot failed, and he
finding himself not able to get together any considerable forces, he with the
principal of his adherents, quitting the kingdom, fled into Spain, leaving
some busy incendiaries to foment those beginnings he had laid for a new
rebellion in Ireland, and promising speedily to return well attended with
foreign succors to their aid: But by the great blessing of Almighty God upon
the wise Councels of that King, and the careful endeavors of his vigilant
Ministers the distempers occasioned by the noise of that commotion were soon
allayed, and Tyrone never returning, the peace of the kingdom much confirmed
and settled. King James hereupon being now so justly provoked by the high
ingratitude of those rebellious traitors, caused their persons to be
attainted, their lands to be seized, and those six Counties within the Province
of Vlster which belonged unto them, to be surveyed, and all (except some small
parts of them reserved to gratify the well-affected natives) to be distributed
in certain proportions among British undertakers, who came over and settled
themselves and many other British families in those parts: By this means the
foundations of some good Towns, soon after encompassed with stone walls, were
presently laid, several castles and houses of strength built in several parts
of the country, great numbers of British inhabitants there settled, to the great
comfort and security of the whole kingdom. And the same course was taken
likewise for the better assurance of the peace of the country, in the
plantation of several parts of Lemster, where the Irish had made incursions,
and violently expelled the old English out of their possessions. But howsoever
the King was by due course of law justly entitled to all their whole estates
there; yet he was graciously pleased to take but one fourth part of their
lands, which was delivered over likewise into the hands of British undertakers
who with great cost and much industry planted themselves so firmly, as they
became of great security to the country, and were a most especial means to
introduce civility in those parts: so as now the whole kingdom began
exceedingly to flourish in costly buildings, K. Charles great readiness to
redress the grievances presented unto him by the Irish Commissioners 1640

The Lords L. Vicount Gormanstone, L. Vicount Kilmaloc, L. Vicount Costeloe, L
Vicount Baltinglas. Commons.

Lemster. Nic. Plunket, Digbie, Richard Fitz-garret, Nic Barnewall, Esquire

Munster. Sir Hardresse Waller, Io. Welsh Sir Donnogh Mac Cartie.

Conaght. Robert Linch, Geffrie Brown, Thomas Burke

Vlster. Sir William Cole Sir James Mongomerie.


and all manner of improvements, the people to multiply and increase, and the
very Irish seemed to be much satisfied with the benefits of that peaceable
government, and generell tranquillity which they so happily enjoyed.

ANd now of late such was the great indulgence of K. Charles our Sovereign that
now reigns, to his Subjects of Ireland, as that in the year 1640. upon their
complaints, and a general Remonstrance sent over unto him from both Houses of
Parliament then sitting at Dublin, by a Committee of four temporal Lords of
the upper house, and twelve Members of the house of Commons, with instructions
to represent the heavy pressures they had for some time suffered under the
government of the Earl of Strafford, He took their grievances into his royal
consideration, descended so far to their satisfaction, as that he heard them
himself, and made present provisions for their redress: And upon the decease
of Mr. Wandsford, Master of the Rols in Ireland, and then Lord Deputy here
under the said Earl of Strafford, who still continued Lord Lieutenant of this
kingdom (though then accused of high treason, and imprisoned in the Tower of
London, by the Parliament of England) His Majesty sent a Commission of
Government to the Lord Dillon of Kilkenny west, and Sir William Parsons Knight
and Baronet, Master of the Wards in Ireland, Yet soon after finding the choice
of the Lord Dillon to be much disgusted by the Committee, he did at their
motion cause the said commission to be cancelled, and with their consent and
approbation placed the government upon Sir William Parsons, and Sir John
Borlace Knight, Sir Will. Parsons and Sir John Borlace made L. Justices.
Master of the Ordnance, both esteemed persons of great integrity; and the
Master of the Wards, by reason of his very long continued employment in the
State, his particular knowledge of the kingdom, much valued and well beloved
among the people. They took the sword upon the 9. of Febr. 1640. And in the
first place they applied themselves with all manner of gentle lenitives to
mollify the sharp humors raised by the rigid passages in the former
government, They apply themselves to give contentment to the people.
They declared themselves against all such proceedings lately used, as they
found any ways varying from the Common Law; They gave all due encouragement to
the Parliament then sitting, to endeavor the reasonable ease and contentment
of the people, freely assenting to all such Acts as really tended to a legal
reformation: They betook themselves wholly to the advice of the Council, and
caused all matters as well of the Crown, as Popular interest, to be handled in
His Majesty's courts of Justice, no ways admitting the late exorbitancies (so
bitterly decried in Parliament) of Paper-Petitions or Bills, in Civil causes, to
be brought before them at the Councel-board, or before any other by their
authority: They, by His Majesty's gracious directions, gave way to the
Parliament to abate the Subsidies (there given in the E. of Straffords time,
and then in collection) from 40000 li. each Subsidy, to 12000. li. apeece, so
low did they think fit to reduce them: And they were further content (because
they saw His Majesty most absolutely resolved to give the Irish Agents full
satisfaction) to draw up two Acts to be passed in the Parliament, most
impetuously desired by the Natives; The one was the Act of Limitations, which
unquestionably settled all estates of land in the kingdom, quietly enjoyed
without claim or interruption for the space of sixty years immediately
preceding; The other was for the relinquishment of the right and title which
His Majesty had to the four counties in Conaght, legally found for him by
several inquisitions taken in them, and ready to be disposed of, upon a due
survay, to British undertakers; as also to some territories of good extent in
Munster, and the county of Clare, upon the same title.

Thus was the present Government most sweetly tempered, and carried on with
great lenity and modetation; the Lords Justices and Council wholly departing
from the rigor of former courses, did gently unbend themselves into a happy
and just compliance with the seasonable desires of the people. And his Majesty,
that he might further testify his own settled resolution for the continuation
thereof with the same tender hand over them, having first given full
satisfaction in all things to the said Committee of Parliament still attending
their dispatch, did about the latter end of May 1641. The Earl of Leicester
declared Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, May, 1641.
declare Robert Earl of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant General of the Kingdom of
Ireland. He was heir to Sir Phillip Sidney his uncle, as well as to Sir Hen.
Sidney his grandfather, who with great honor and much integrity long continued
chief Governor of Ireland during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and being a
person of excellent abilities by nature, great acquisitions from his own
private industry and public employment abroad, of exceeding great temper and
moderation, was never engaged in any public pressures of the commonwealth,
and therefore most likely to prove a just and gentle Governor, most pleasing
and acceptable to the people.

The papists permitted privately to enjoy the free exercise of their religion
Moreover, the Romish Catholics now privately enjoyed the free exercise of
their religion throughout the whole Kingdom, according to the doctrine of the
Church of Rome. They had by the over great indulgence of the late Governors,
their titular Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars general, Provincial consistories,
Deans, Abbots, Priors, Nuns, who all lived freely, though somewhat covertly
among them, and without control exercised a voluntary jurisdiction over them,
they had their Priests, Jesuits, and Friars, who were of late years exceedingly
multiplied, and in great numbers returned out of Spain, Italy and other
foreign parts, where the children of the natives of Ireland that way devoted,
were sent usually to receive their education. And these without any manner of
restraint, had quietly settled themselves in all the chief Towns, Villages,
Noblemen and private Gentlemen's houses throughout the Kingdom. So as the
private exercise of all their religious rites, and ceremonies was freely
enjoyed by them without any manner of disturbance, and not any of the Laws put
in execution, whereby heavy penalties were to be inflicted upon transgressors
in that kind.

The good agreement betwixt the Irish and English in all parts of the Kingdom.
And for the ancient animosities and hatred which the Irish had been ever
observed to bear unto the English Nation, they seemed now to be quite deposited
and buried in a firm conglutination of their affections and National
obligations passed between them. The two Nations had now lived together 40
years in peace, with great security and comfort, which had in a manner
consolidated them into one body, knit and compacted together with all those
bonds and ligatures of friendship, alliance, and consanguinity as might make up
a constant and perpetual union betwixt them. Their intermarriages were
frequent, gossipred, fostering (relations of much dearnesse among the Irish)
together with all others of tenancy, neighborhood, and service interchangeably
passed among them. Nay, they had made as it were a kind of mutual
transmigration into each others manners, many English being strangely
degenerated into Irish affections and customs, and many Irish, especially of
the better sort, having taken up the English language, apparel, and decent
manner of living in their private houses. And so great an advantage did they
find by the English commerce and cohabitation in the profits and high
improvements of their lands and native commodities, so incomparably beyond what
they ever formerly enjoyed, or could expect to raise by their own proper
industry, as Sir Phelim O Neale, and many others of the prime leaders in this
rebellion, had not long before turned their Irish tenants of their lands, as
some of them said to me (when I enquired the reason of their so doing) even to
starve upon the mountains, while they took on English, who were able to give
them much greater rents, and more certainly pay the same. A matter that was
much taken notice of, and esteemed by many, as most highly conducing to the
security of the English interests, and plantation among them. So as all these
circumstances duly weighed, together with the removal of the late
obstructions, the great increase of trade, and many other evident Symptoms of
a flourishing commonwealth, it was believed even by the wisest and best
experienced in the affairs of Ireland, that the peace and tranquillity of the
Kingdom was now fully settled, and most likely in all humane probability to
continue, without any considerable interuption, in the present felicity and
great prosperity it now enjoyed under the government of his Majesty that now
reigns.

In August, 1641. The Parliament adjourned August 1641.
the Lords Justices and Council finding the Popish party in both Houses of
Parliament to be grown to so great a height, as was scarcely compatible with
the present Government, were very desireous to have an Adjournment made for
three months, which was readily assented unto and performed by the members of
both Houses. And this was done not many days before the return of the
Committee formerly mentioned, out of England: The Irish Commissioners return
out of England, and land at Dublin.
They arrived at Dublin about the latter end of August, and presently after
their return they applied themselves to the Lords Justices and Council,
desiring to have all those Acts and other Graces granted by His Majesty, made
known unto the people by proclamations to be sent down into several parts of
the country; which while the Lords Justices took into their consideration, and
sat daily composing of Acts to be passed the next Session of Parliament, for
the benefit of His Majesty, and the good of his Subjects, They seemed with
great contentment and satisfaction to retire into the country to their several
habitations, that they might there refresh themselves in the mean season.

The discovery of the Conspiracy of the Irish, to seize upon the Castle and
City of Dublin; and their general Rising at the same time, in all the Northern
parts of this Kingdom.
The happy condition of Ireland at the time of the breaking out of the
Rebellion Octo. 23 1641.
SUch was now the state and present condition of the Kingdom of Ireland, such
the great serenity through the gentle and happy transaction of the public
affairs here, As that the late Irish Army raised for the invasion of the
kingdom of Scotland, being peaceably disbanded, their Arms and Munition, by the
singular care of the Lords Justices and Council brought into His Majesty's
stores within the city of Dublin; there was no manner of warlike preparations,
no relics of any kind of disorders proceeding from the late levies, nor
indeed any noise of war remaining within these coasts. Now while in this great
calm the British continued in a most deep security, under the assurance of the
blessed peace of this land; while all things were carried on with great temper
and moderation in the present government, and all men sat pleasantly enjoying
the comfortable fruits of their own labors, without the least thoughts or
apprehension of either tumults or other troubles, the differences between his
Majesty, and his Subjects of Scotland being about this time fairly composed and
settled: There brake out upon the 23. of October, 1641. a most desperate and
formidable Rebellion, an universal defection and general Revolt, wherein not
only all the mere Irish, but almost all the old English that adhered to the
church of Rome, were totally involved. And because it will be necessary to
leave some monuments hereof to posterity, I shall observe the beginnings and
first motions, as well as trace out the progress, of a rebellion so execrable
in it self, so odious to God and the whole world, as no age, no kingdom, no
people can parallel the horrid cruelties, The first plot for the rebellion
carried on with so great secrecy, as none of the English had notice of it
before it was ready to be put in execution.
the abominable murders, that have been without number, as well as without
mercy committed upon the British inhabitants throughout the land, of what sex
or age, of what quality or condition soever they were.

And first I must needs say, howsoever I have observed in the nature of the
Irish such a kind of dull and deep reservednesse, as makes them with much
silence and secrecy to carry on their business: yet I cannot but consider
with great admiration how this mischievous plot which was to be so generally at
the same time, and at so many several places acted, and therefore necessarily
known to so many several persons, should without any noise be brought to such
maturity, as to arrive at the very point of execution without any notice or
intimation given to any two of that huge multitude of persons who were
generally designed (as most of them did) to perish in it. For besides the
uncertain presumptions that Sir William Cole had of a commotion to be raised by
the Irish in the Province of Vlster about a fortnight before this rebellion
brake openly out, and some certain intelligence which he received of the same
two days before the Irish rise, I could never hear that any English man
received any certain notice of this conspiracy, before the very evening that it
was to be generally put in execution. It is true, Sir William Cole upon the
very first apprehensions of something that he conceived to be hatching among
the Irish, did write a Letter to the Lords Justices and Council, dated the 11.
of October. 1641. wherein he gave them notice of the great resort made to Sir
Phelim O Neale, in the county of Tyrone, as also to the house of the Lord Mac
Gui^e, in the county of Fermanagh and that by several suspected persons, fit
instruments for mischief. As also that the said Lord Mac Guire had of late made
several journies into the Pale, and other places and had spent his time much
in writing Letters, and sending dispatches abroad. These Letters were received
by the Lords Justices and Council, and they in answer to them required him to
be very vigilant and industrious to find out what should be the occasion of
those several meetings, and speedily to advertise them thereof, or of any
other particular that he conceived might tend to the public service of the
State. And for that which was revealed to Sir William Cole upon the 21. of
October. the same month by John Cormacke, and Flarty Mac Hugh, from Brian Mac
Cohanaght, Mac Guire, touching the resolution of the Irish, to seize upon his
Majesty's castle and city of Dublin, to murder the Lords Justices and council
of Ireland, and the rest of the Protestants there, and to seize upon all the
castles, Forts, Seaports, and holds that were in possession of the Protestants
within the Kingdom of Ireland, I find by the examination of John Cormacke,
taken upon oath at Westminster Nov. 18. 1644. That the said Sir William Cole
did dispatch Letters to the Lords Justices and council the same day, to give
them notice thereof. But I can also testify that those Letters (whether they
were intercepted, or that they otherways miscarried, I cannot say) came not
unto their hands, as also that they had not any certain notice of this general
conspiracy of the Irish, until the 22. of October. in the very evening before
the day appointed for the surprise of the castle and city of Dublin. Then the
conspirators being many of them arrived within the city, and having that day
met at the Lion Tavern near Copper Alley, and there turning the Drawer out of
the room, ordered their affairs together, drunk healths upon their knees to the
happy success of their next mornings work: Owen O Conally discovers the
conspiracy of the Irish to the Lord Parsons the very evening before it was to
be executed.
Owen O Conally a Gentleman of a mere Irish family, but one that had long lived
among the English, and been trained up in the true Protestant religion, came
unto the Lord Justice Parsons about nine of the clock that evening, and made
him a broken relation of a great conspiracy for the seizing upon his Majesty's
castle of Dublin: He gave him the names of some of the chief conspirators,
assured him they were come up expressly to the Town for the same purpose, and
that next morning they would undoubtedly attempt, and surely effect it, if
their design were not speedily prevented, and that he had understood all this
from Hugh Mac Mahon, one of the chief conspirators, who was then in the town,
and came up but the very same afternoon for the execution of the plot; and with
whom indeed he had been drinking somewhat liberally, and as the truth is, did
then make such a broken relation of a matter that seemed so incredible in it
self, as that his Lordship gave very little belief to it at first, in regard it
came from an obscure person, and one as he conceived somewhat distempered at
that time. But howsoever the Lord Parsons gave him order to go again to Mac
Mahon, and to get out of him as much certainty of the plot, with as many
particular circumstances as he could, straightly charging him to return back
unto him the same evening. And in the mean time, having by strict commands
given to the constable of the castle, taken order to have the gates thereof
well guarded, as also with the Mayor and Sheriffs of the city to have strong
watches set upon all the parts of the same, and to make stay of all strangers,
he went privately about ten of the clock that night to the Lord Borlacies
house without the town, and there acquainting him with what he understood from
Conally, they sent for such of the council as they knew then to be in the
town. But there came only unto them that night, Sir Thomas Rotheram, and Sir
Robert Meredith, chancellor of the Exchequer, with these they fell into
consultation what was fit to be done, attending the return of Conally. And
finding that he staid somewhat longer than the time prefixed, they sent out in
search after him, and found him seized on by the watch, and so he had been
carried away to prison, and the discovery that night disappointed, had not one
of the Lord Parsons servants expressly sent amongst others to walk the streets,
and attend the motion of the said Conally, come in and rescued him, and brought
him to the Lord Borlacies house. Conally having somewhat recovered himself from
his distemper, occasioned partly, as he said himself, by the horror of the plot
revealed to him, partly by his too liberal drinking with Mac Mahon, that he
might the more easily get away from him (he beginning much to suspect and fear
his discovering of the plot) confirmed what he had formerly related, and added
these farther particulars set down in his Examination, as follows.

The Examination of Owen O Conally Gentleman, taken before us whose names
ensue, Oct. 22. 1641.
Who being duly sworn, and examined, says, that he being at Monimore, in the
County of Londonderry on Tuesday last, he received a Letter from Colonel Hugh
Oge Mac Mahon, desiring him to come to Conaght in the County of Monaghan, and
to be with him on Wednesday or Thursday last, whereupon he, this Examinate came
to Conaght on Wednesday night last, and finding the said Hugh come to Dublin,
followed him hither: He came hither about six of the clock this evening, and
forthwith went to the lodging of the said Hugh, to the house near the Boat in
Oxman town, and there he found the said Hugh, and came with the said Hugh into
the Town, near the Pillory, to the lodging of the Lord Mac Guire, where they
found not the Lord within, and there they drank a cup of Beer, and then went
back again to the said Hugh his lodging. He says, that at the Lord Mac Guire
his lodging, the said Hugh told him that there were, and would be this night
great numbers of Noblemen, and Gentlemen of the Irish Papists from all the
parts of the Kingdom in this town, who with himself had determined to take the
Castle of Dublin, and possess themselves of all his Majesty's Ammunition there
to morrow morning, being Saturday, and that they intended first to batter the
Chimnies of the said town, and if the City would not yield, then to batter down
the houses, and so to cut off all the Protestants that would not join with
them. He further says, that the said Hugh then told him, that the Irish had
prepared men in all parts of the Kingdom, to destroy all the English inhabiting
there to morrow morning by ten of the clock, and that in all the Sea Ports, and
other Towns in the Kingdom, all the Protestants should be killed this night,
and that all the Posts that could be, could not prevent it: And further says,
that he moved the said Hugh to forbear executing of that business, and to
discover it to the State, for the saving of his own estate, who said he could
not help it. But said, that they did owe their Allegiance to the King, and
would pay him all his Rights, but that they did this for the tyrannical
Government was over them, and to imitate Scotland, who got a privilege by that
course. And he further says, that when he was with the said Hugh in his
lodging the second time, the said Hugh swore that he should not go out of his
lodging that night, but told him that he should go with him the next morning to
the Castle, and said, if this matter were discovered, some body should die for
it, whereupon this Examinate feigned some necessity for his easement, went down
out of the Chamber, and left his sword in pawn, and the said Hugh sent his man
down with him, and when this Examinate came down into the Yard, and finding an
opportunity, he, this Examinate leaped over a Wall, and two Pales, and so came
to the Lord Justice Parsons.

William Parsons. Tho. Rotheram. Rob. Meredith. Owen O Conally.

October. 22. 1641.
HEreupon the Lords took present order to have a Watch privately set upon the
lodging of Mac Mahon, as also upon the L. Mac Guire, and so they sat up all
that night in consultation, having far stronger presumptions upon this latter
examination taken, then any ways at first they could entertain. Mac Mahon
taken.
The Lords Justices upon a further consideration (there being come unto them
early next morning several other of the Privy council) sent before day, and
seized upon Mac-Mahon, then with his servant in his own lodging; they at first
made some little resistance with their drawn swords, but finding thewselves
over-mastered, presently yielded, and so they were brought before the Lords
Justices and Council still sitting at the Lord Borlacy's house: where upon
examination he did without much difficulty confess the Plot resolutely,
telling them, His confession.
That on that very day all the Forts and strong places in Ireland would be
taken, That he with the L. Mac-Guire, Hugh Birn, Capt. Brian O Neale, and
several other Irish Gentlemen, were come up expressly to surprise the Castle of
Dublin, That twenty men out of each County in the Kingdom were to be here to
join with them, That all the Lords and Gentlemen in the Kingdom that were
Papists were engaged in this Plot, That what was that day to be done in other
parts of the country, was so far advanced by that time, as it was impossible
for the wit of man to prevent it; and withal told them, That it was true, they
had him in their power, and might use him how they pleased, but he was sure he
should be revenged.

By this time the noise of this Conspiracy began to be confusedly spread
abroad about the Town, and advertisement was brought unto the Lords Justices
then in council, that great numbers of strangers had been observed to come the
last evening, and in the morning early unto the Town, and most of them to set
up their horses in the suburbs: whereupon the Lords having in the first place
taken order for the apprehension of the Lord Mac-Guire, The Lord Mac Guire with
several other of the Conspirators seized on.
removed themselves for their better security unto the castle, where the body
of the Council then in town attended them at the ordinary place of their
meeting there. In the first place they caused a present search to be made for
all such horses belonging to strangers as were brought into any Innes, and by
that means they discovered some of the owners, who were presently seized upon
and committed to the castle of Dublin, having already delivered over to the
custody of the Constable there the Lord Mac-Guire, and Hugh Mac-Mahon; Hugh
Birn, and Roger Moore, chief of the conspirators, escaped over the River in the
night, Colonel Plunket, Captain Fox, with several others found means likewise
to pass away undiscerned; and of the great numbers which came up out of
several counties to be actors in taking of the castle and city of Dublin,
there were not, through the slack pursuit and great negligence of the
inhabitants, above thirty seized upon, most of them servants and inconsiderable
persons, those of quality having so many good friends within the town, as they
had very ill luck if apprehended. The same day before the Lords rose from
council, they took order for this Proclamation which here follows to be made
and published.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. John Borlase.
THese are to make known and publish to all His Majesty's good Subjects in this
Kingdom of Ireland, that there is a discovery made by Us the Lords Justices and
Council, of a most disloyal and detestable Conspiracy intended by some
evill-affected Irish Papists, against the lives of Us the Lords Justices and
Council, and many others of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, universally
throughout this Kingdom, and for the seizing not only of His Majesty's Castle
of Dublin, His Majesty's principal Fort here, but also of the other
Fortifications in the Kingdom: And seeing by the great goodness and abundant
mercy of Almighty God to His Majesty, and this State and Kingdom, those wicked
Conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators committed to
the Castle of Dublin, by Us, by His Majesty's Authority, so as those wicked and
damnable Plots are now disappointed in the chief parts thereof, We therefore
have thought fit hereby not only to make it publicly known, for the comfort
of His Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the Kingdom, but also
hereby to require them, that they do with all confidence and cheerfulness
betake themselves to their own defense, and stand upon their guard, so to
render the more safety to themselves, and all the Kingdom besides, and that
they advertise Us with all possible speed of all Occurrents, which may concern
the peace and safety of the Kingdom, and now to show fully that Faith and
Loyalty, which they have always shown for the public services of the Crown
and Kingdom, which We will value to His Majesty accordingly, and a special
memory thereof will be retained for their advantage in due time. And We require
that great care be taken that no levies of men be made for foreign service,
nor any men suffered to march upon any such pretense. Given at His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, 23. October. 1641.

R. Dillon. To. Digby. Ad. Loftus. I. Temple. Tho. Rotheram. Fr. Willoughby.
Ia. Ware. To. Meredith.

God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin, by the Society Of STATIONERS.

THis Proclamation was presently printed, and several copies sent down by
express messengers unto the principal Noblemen and Gentlemen in several
parts of the country, where they caused them to be diverse ways dispersed,
hoping that when the timely discovery of this conspiracy, and the happy
prevention in a great part, should fully appear abroad, it would prove so
great a discouragement to such of the conspirators as had not yet openly
declared themselves, as that they would thereby be contained within the bounds
of their duty and obedience to His Majesty. The same night the Lord Blaney
arrived with the news of the surprisall of his house, his wife and his
children, by the Rebels of the county of Monaghan: The Irish rise first in the
province of Vlster, and there burn, spoil, and destroy the English.
Next day came advertisement from Sir Arthur Tyringham, of the taking of the
Newry; and then the sad relations of burning, spoiling, and horrible murders
committed within the Province of Vlster, began to multiply, and several
persons every day and almost every hour in every day for a good while after,
arrived like Jobs messengers, telling the story of their own sufferings, and
the fearful massacres of the poor English in those parts from whence they
came. These things wrought such a general consternation and astonishment in
the minds of all the English and other inhabitants well affected within the
city, as they were much affrighted therewith, expecting every hour when the
Irish already crept into the Town, joining with the Papists there, should make
the City a Theater whereon to act the second part of that Tragedy most bloodily
begun in the Northern parts by them.

False rumors spread of the Rebels approach to the City of Dublin.
And it added most extremely to these present fears, that several unhappy
rumors (the great tormentors of the weaker sex) were vainly spread abroad of
the sudden approach of great numbers of Rebels out of the adjacent Irish
counties unto the city: Some would make us believe that they were discerned at
some distance already marching down from the mountain side within view of the
Town; a report so credibly delivered by those who pretended to be
eyewitnesses, that it drew some of the State up to the platform of the castle
to behold those who were yet invisible, though there were there that would not
be persuaded but that they saw the very motions of the men as they marched down
the mountains. It was at the same time also generally noised abroad, that there
were 10000. of the Rebels gotten together in a body at the hill of Tarah, a
place not above sixteen miles distant from the Town, and that they intended
without any further delay to march on and presently surprise the same. These
false rumors being unluckily spread, and by some fomented out of evil ends,
exceedingly increased the present distractions of the people, and raised such a
panick fear among them, as about seven of the clock at night, the Lords
Justices and some of the Council being then in the councel-chamber within the
castle, there came in to them a Gentleman of good quality, who having not
without much difficulty, as he pretended, recovered the gate of the castle,
caused the Warders then attending to draw up the bridge, assuring them that the
Rebels gathered together in great numbers, had already possessed themselves of
a good part of the Town, and came now with great fury marching down the street
that leads directly toward the castle gate. But this fear was quickly removed
by Sir Francis Willoughby, who being that day made governor of the castle,
caused the drawbridge to be let down, and so found this to be a false alarm
occasioned by some mistake fallen among the people, who continued waving up and
down the streets, prepossessed with strange fears, and some of them upon some
slender accident drawing their swords, others that knew not the cause thought
fit to follow the example, and so came to appear to this Gentleman who was
none of their company, as so many Rebels coming up to enter the castle.

These were the first beginnings of our sorrows, ill symptoms, The Lords
Justices and Council consult what course to take for the suppressing this
rebellion.
and sad preparatives to the ensuing evils: Therefore the Lords finding by
several intelligences, though some purposely framed, that the power of the
Rebels was suddenly swollen up to so great a bulk, and likely so fast to
multiply and increase upon them, thought it high time to consider of the
remedies, and in what condition they were to oppose, since they could not
prevent so imminent a danger. The rebellion now appeared without all manner of
question to be generally raised in all parts of the North, and like a torrent
to come down most impetuously upon them: besides, it was no ways improbable
that all other parts of the kingdom would take fire and follow their example,
they had the testimony of Mac-Mahon positive therein. The first thing therefore
which they took into consideration, was, how they were provided of Money, Arms,
and Munition; Then, what Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse of the old Army
they were able to draw presently together, No money in the Exchequer.
as also what numbers of new men they could suddenly raise. For the first, they
had this short account from the Vice-treasurer, That there was no money in the
Exchequer. And certainly it was a main policy in the first contrivers of this
Rebellion, to plot the breaking of it out at such a time when the Exchequer
should be empty, and all the Kings revenues both certain and casual, due for
that half year, as well as the rents of all the British throughout the
kingdom, should be found ready either in the tenants or collectors hands in
the country, and so necessarily fall under their power, as they did to their
great advantage. For Arms and Munition, the Stores were indifferently well
furnished at this time: Besides several Pieces of Artillery of diverse sorts,
most of them fitted for present service, there were Arms for near 10000. men,
1500 barrels of Powder, with Match and Lead proportionable, laid in by the
Earl of Strafford late L. Lieutenant, not long before, and designed another
way, but so opportunely reserved for this service, as the good providence of
God did exceedingly appear therein, but principally in the miraculous
preservation of them out of the hands of the Rebels, who made the surprisall of
these provisions, then all within the castle of Dublin (the common storehouse
of them) a main part of their design. The old standing Army, as appears by
this List, consisted only of 41 Companies of Foot, and 14 Troops of Horse.

A List of His Majesty's Army in Ireland, 1641. Before the Rebellion began.
Foot-Companies consisting of six Officers, viz. Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign,
Surgeon, Sergeant and Drum, and forty four Soldiers each Company.

LORD Lieutenants Guard 45 Sir Robert Farrar 44 Sir Thomas Wharton 44 Sir
George Saint-George 44 Cap. Francis Butler 44 Sir Will. Saint Leguer 44 Lord
Docwra 44 Lord Blaney 44 Sir Robert Steward 44 Lord Viscount Rannelagh 44 Lord
Viscount Baltinglas 44 Sir John Vaughan 44 Cap. George Blount 44 Sir Hen.
Tichbourne 44 Sir Frederick Hamilton 44 Lord Castle-Stewart 44 Sir Lorenzo Carry
44 Cap Chichester Fortescue 44 Sir John Gifford 44 Cap. John Barry 44 Sir John
Neutervile 44 Cap. Thomas Rockley 44 Sir Arthur Tyringham 44 Cap. Philip Wenman
44 Cap. Charles Price 44 Sir Charles Coote 44 Cap. Thomas Games 44 Sir Francis
Willoughby 44 Sir John Borlase 44 Cap. Robert Bailey 44 Sir Arthur Loftus 44
Cap. Will. Billingsley 44 The Lord Esmond 44 The Lord Lambert 44 Sir George
Hamilton 44 Lord Folliot 44 Sir Will. Stewart 44 Cap. Robert Biron 44 Sir John
Sherlock 44 The Earl of Clanricard 44 Cap. John Ogle 44 These Companies contain
Officers 246 In all 2297 Soldiers 2051 In all 2297
Horse-Troopes.
THE Earl of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant general, his Troop consisting of
Captain, Lieutenant, Cornet, and Horsemen 108 The Earl of Ormonds Troop, like
Officers, and Horsemen 107 The Earl of Straffords Troop, like Officers and
Horsemen 58 Lord Dillons Troop, like Officers and Horsemen 58 Lord Wilmots
Troop, like Officers and Horsemen 58 Sir Will. Saint-Leguer, Lord President of
Munster, the like 58 Lord Viscount Moore the like 58 Lo. Viscount Grandison the
like 58 Lo. Visc. Cromwell of Lecale, the like 58 Cap. Arthur Chichester, the
like 58 Sir George Wentworth, the like 58 Sir John Borlase, the like 58 Lo.
Viscount Conway, the like 58 Sir Adam Loftus, the like 58 These Troops contain
Officers 42 In all 943 Horsemen 901 In all 943
These were so strangely dispersed most of them into the remote parts of the
kingdom, for the guard of several Forts and other places, as it fell out to
be in a manner most impossible to draw a considerable number of them together in
any time, either for the defense of the City, or the making head against the
Rebels in the North: and besides it was much to be suspected, the companies
lying severally so remote, and ill furnished with munition, could with little
safety march to Dublin. Yet the Lords sent Potents presently away to require
several companies of Foot, and some troops of Horse presently to rise and
march up from their several garrisons toward the city of Dublin. And now it
was held high time to give an account unto His Majesty, then at Edinburgh in
his kingdom of Scotland, and to the Lord Lieutenant continuing still at London
(the Parliament still sitting there) of the breaking out of this Rebellion,
Letters from the Lords Justices and Council to the Lord Lieutenant.
the ill condition of the Kingdom, the wants of the State, and the Supplies
absolutely necessary for their present defense and preservation. And because
the Letter to the Lord Lieutenant does most clearly represent several
particulars which may much conduce to the knowledge of the affairs, I have
thought fit to insert a true copy of it, which here follows.

May it please your Lordship,
ON Friday the two and twentieth of this month, after nine of the clock at
night, this bearer Owen Conally, servant to Sir John Clotworthy Knight, came to
me the Lord Justice Parsons, to my house, and in great secrecy (as indeed the
cause did require) discovered unto me a most wicked and damnable conspiracy,
plotted, contrived, and intended to be also acted by some evill-affected Irish
Papists here. The plot was on the then next morning, Saturday the 23 of
October, being Saint Ignatius day, about nine of the clock to surprise His
Majesty's Castle of Dublin, His Majesty's chief strength of this Kingdom,
wherein also is the principal Magazine of His Majesty's Arms and Munition, and
it was agreed it seems amongst them, that at the same hour all other His
Majesty's Forts and Magazines of Arms and Munition in this Kingdom, should be
surprised by others of those Conspirators, and further, that all the
Protestants and English throughout the whole Kingdom, that would not join with
them, should be cut off, and so those Papists should then become possessed of
the Government and Kingdom at the same instant.

As Soon as I had that intelligence, I then immediately repaired to the Lord
Justice Borlace, and thereupon We instantly assembled the Council, and having
sat all that night, as also all the next day, the 23 of October, in regard of
the short time left us for the consultation of so great and weighty a matter,
although it was not possible for us upon so few hours warning to prevent those
other great mischiefs which were to be acted, even at that same hour, and at
so great a distance as in all the other parts of the Kingdom. Yet such was our
industry therein, having caused the Castle to be that night strengthened with
armed men, and the City guarded, as the wicked Councels of those evil persons,
by the great mercy of God to us, became defeated, so as they were not able to
Act that part of their Treachery, which indeed was principal, and which, if
they could have effected, would have rendered the rest of their purposes the
more easy.

Having so secured the Castle, We forthwith laid about for the apprehension of
as many of the Offenders as We could, many of them having come to this City but
that night, intending it seems the next morning to act their parts in those
treacherous and bloody crimes.

The first man apprehended was one Hugh Mac Mahon Esquire (Grandson to the
Traitor Tyrone a Gentleman of a good fortune in the County of Monaghan, who
with others, was taken that morning in Dublin, having at the time of their
apprehension offered a little resistance with their swords drawn, but finding
those We employed against them more in number, and better armed, yielded. He
upon his Examination before us at first denied all, but in the end, when he saw
we laid it home to him, he confessed enough to destroy himself, and impeach
some others, as by a Copy of his Examination herewith sent, may appear to your
Lordship, We then committed him until We might have further time to examine
him again, our time being become more needful to be employed in action for
securing this place, then in examining. This Mac Mahon had been abroad, and
served the King of Spain as a Lieu. Colonel.

Upon conference with him and others, and calling to mind a Letter We received
the week before from Sir William Cole, a Copy whereof We send your Lordship
here enclosed, We gathered that the Lord Mac Guire was to be an actor in
surprising the Castle of Dublin, wherefore We held it necessary to secure him
immediately, thereby also to startle and deter the rest, when they found him
laid fast. His Lordship observing what we had done, and the City in Arms, fled
from his lodging early before day, it seems disguised, for we had laid a watch
about his lodging, so as we think he could not pass without disguising
himself, yet he could not get forth of the City, so surely guarded were all the
Gates.

There were found at his lodging hidden some Hatchets, with the Helves newly
cut off close to the Hatchets, and many Skeanes, and some Hammers.

In the end the Sheriffs of the City, whom we employed in strict search of his
Lordship, found him hidden in a Cockloft, in an obscure house far from his
lodging, where they apprehended him, and brought him before Us.

He denied all, yet so, as he could not deny but he heard of it in the
country, though he would not tell us when, or from whom; and confessed that he
had not advertised Us thereof, as in duty he ought to have done. But We were so
well satisfied of his guiltines by all circumstances, as We doubted not upon
further examination when We could be able to spare time for it to find it
apparent: wherefore We held it of absolute necessity to commit him
Close-prisoner, as We had formerly done Mac Mahon, and others: where We left
him on the three and twentieth of this month in the morning, about the same
hour they intended to have been Masters of that place, and this City.

That morning also We laid wait for all those strangers that came the night
before to town, and so many were apprehended whom We find reason to believe to
have hands in this Conspiracy, as We were forced to disperse them into several
Gaols: and We since found that there came many Horsemen into the Suburbs that
night, who finding the plot discovered, dispersed themselves immediately.

When the hour approached, which was designed for surprising the Castle, great
numbers of strangers were observed to come to town in great parties several
ways; who not finding admittance at the Gates, staid in the Suburbs, and there
grew numerous, to the terror of the Inhabitants. We therefore to help that,
drew up instantly and signed a Proclamation, commanding all men, not dwellers
in the City or Suburbs, to depart within an hour, upon pain of death, and made
it alike penal to those that should harbor them; which Proclamation the
Sheriffs immediately proclaimed in all the Suburbs by Our commandment: which
being accompanied with the example and terror of the committall of those two
eminent men, and others, occasioned the departure of those multitudes: and in
this case, all our lives and fortunes, and above all, his Majesty's power and
regal authority being still at the stake, We must vary from ordinary
proceedings, not only in executing martial law as We see cause, but also in
putting some to the Rack to find out the bottom of this treason, and all the
contrivers thereof, which we foresee will not otherwise be done.

On that 23 day of this month, We conceiving that as soon as it should be
known that the plot for seizing Dublin Castle was disappointed, all the
Conspirators in the remote parts might be somewhat disheartened, as on the other
side the good Subjects would be comforted, and would then with the more
confidence stand on their guard, did prepare to send abroad to all parts of the
Kingdom this Proclamation which we send you here enclosed: and so having
provided that the City and Castle should be so guarded as upon the sudden We
could promise, We concluded that long continued consultation.

On Saturday at 12 of the clock at night the Lord Blany came to town and
brought Us the ill news of the Rebels seizing with two hundred men his house at
Castle Blany in the County of Monaghan, and his Wife, Children, and Servants,
as also a house of the Earl of Essex called Carrickmacrosse with two hundred
men, and a house of Sir Henry Spotswood in the same County, with two hundred
men; where there being a little Plantation of British, they plundered the Town
and burnt diverse houses, and it since appears that they burnt diverse other
Villages, and robbed and spoiler many English, and none but Protestants;
leaving the English Papists untouched as well as the Irish.

On Sunday morning at three of the clock We had intelligence from Sir Arthur
Terringham, that the Irish in the town had that day also broken up the Kings
store of arms and munition at the Newry, and where the store of arms has lain
ever since the peace, and where they found fourscore and ten barrels of powder,
and armed themselves, and put them under the command of Sir Con. Magennis
Knight, and one Creely a Monk, and plundered the English there and disarmed the
Garrison. And this, though too much, is all that We yet hear is done by them.

However We shall stand on our guard the best We may to defend the Castle and
City principally, those being the pieces of most importance. But if the
Conspiracy be so universal as Mac Mahon says in his Examination it is,
namely, That all the Counties in the Kingdom have conspired in it, which We
admire should so fall out in this time of universal peace, and carried with
that secrecy that none of the English could have any friend amongst them to
disclose it, then indeed We shall be in high extremity, and the Kingdom in the
greatest danger that ever it underwent, considering our want of men, money, and
arms, to enable Us to encounter so great multitudes as they can make, if all
should join against Us, the rather, because We have pregnant cause to doubt
that the combination has taken force by the incitement of Jesuits, Priests and
Friars.

All the hope We have here, is, the old English of the Pale, and some other
parts, will continue constant to the King in their fidelity, as they did in
former rebellions.

And now in these straits, We must under God depend on aid forth of England for
our present supply with all speed, especially money, We having none, and arms
which we shall exceedingly want; without which, We are very doubtful what
account We shall give to the King of his Kingdom.

But if the Conspiracy be only of Mac Guire and some other Irish of the kindred
and friends of the Rebel Tirone and other Irish in the Counties of Down,
Monaghan, Cavan, Fermanagh and Armagh, and no general revolt following
thereupon, we hope then to make head against them in a reasonable measure if We
be enabled with money from thence, without which We can raise no forces, so
great is our want of money as we have formerly written, and our debt so great
to the Army: nor is money to be borrowed here, and if it were, we would engage
all our estates for it: neither have we any hope to get in his Majesty's rents
and subsidies in these disturbances, which add extremely to our necessities.

On Sunday morning 24. We met again in Council, and sent to all parts of the
Kingdom the enclosed Proclamation, and issued Potents to draw hither seven
Horse troops as a further strength to this place, and to be with us in case
the Rebels shall make head and march hitherward, so as we may be necessitated
to give them battle. We also then sent away our Letters to the President of
both the Provinces of Munster and Conaght: And we likewise then sent Letters to
the Sheriffs of the five Counties of the Pale to consult of the best way and
means of their own preservation. That day the Lord Vice Com. Gormanston, the
Lord Vice Co. Nettervile, the Lord Vice Co. Fitz Williams, and the Lord of
Houth, and since the Earls of Kildare, and Fingall, and the Lords of Dunsany
and Slane, all Noblemen of the English Pale came unto us, declaring that they
then and not before heard of the matter, and professed loyalty to his Majesty,
and concurrence with the State, but said they wanted arms, whereof they
desired to be supplied by Us, which we told them we would willingly do, as
relying much on their faithfulness to the Crown: but we were not yet certain
whether or no we had enough to arm our strength for the guard of the City and
Castle; yet we supplied such of them as lay in most danger with a small
proportion of Arms and Munition for their houses, lest they should conceive we
apprehended any jealousy of them. And we commanded them to be very diligent in
sending out watches, and making all the discoveries they could, and thereof to
advertise us, which they readily promised to do.

And if it fall out that the Irish generally rise, which we have cause to
suspect, then we must of necessity put Arms into the hands of the English Pale
in present, and to others as fast as we can, to fight for defense of the State
and themselves.

Your Lordship now sees the condition wherein we stand, and how necessary it is
first that we enjoy your presence speedily for the better guiding of those and
other the public affairs of the King and Kingdom. And secondly, that the
Parliament there be moved immediately to advance to Us a good sum of money,
which being now speedily sent hither, may prevent the expense of very much
treasure and blood in a long continued war. And if your Lordship shall happen
to stay on that side any longer time; we must then desire your Lordship to
appoint a Lieutenant General to discharge the great and weighty burden of
commanding the forces here.

Amidst these confusions and discords fallen upon Us, We bethought Us of the
Parliament, which was formerly adjourned to November next, and the term now
also at hand, which will draw such a concourse of people hither and give
opportunity under that pretense, assembling and taking new Councels, seeing the
former seems to be in some part disappointed, and of contriving further danger
to this State and People: We have therefore found it of unavoidable necessity
to prorogue it accordingly, and to direct the Term to be adjourned to the first
of Hillary Term, excepting only the Court of Exchequer for hastening in the
Kings money if it be possible. We desire upon this occasion your Lordship will
be pleased to view our Letters concerning the plantation of Conaght, dated the
24 of April last, directed to Mr. Secretary Vane in that part thereof, which
concerns the County of Monaghan, where now these fires do first break out.

In the last place we must make known to your Lordship, that the Army we have,
consisting but of 2000 Foot and 1000 Horse, are so dispersed in Garrisons in
several parts, as continually they have been since they were so reduced, as if
they be all sent for to be drawn together, not only the places whence they are
to be drawn, (and for whose safety they lie there) must be by absence
distressed; but also the Companies themselves coming in so small numbers may
be in danger to be cut off in their march; nor indeed have we any money to pay
the Soldiers to enable them to march. And so we take leave and remain from his
Majesty's Castle of Dublin 25 of October 1641.

Your Lordships to be commanded William Parsons. John Borlase. Richard Bolton.
Can. R. Dillon. Anthony Midensis. John Raphoe. R. Digbie. Ad. Loftus. Ger.
Lowther. John Temple. Tho. Rotheram. Fran. Willoughbie. Ja. Ware. G. Wentworth.
Robert Meredith.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe said Owen Conally, who revealed the Conspiracy is worthy of very great
consideration, to recompense that faith and loyalty which he has so extremely
to his own danger expressed in this business; whereby under God there is yet
hope left us of deliverance of this State and Kingdom, from the wicked
purposes of those Conspirators. And therefore we beseech your Lordship that it
be taken into consideration there, so as he may have a mark of his Majesty's
most royal bounty which may largely extend to him and his posterity, we not
being now able here to do it for him.

W. PARSONS.

To the Right Honorable our very good Lord ROBERT Earl of Leicester, Lo.
Lieutenant Genesis and General Governor of the Kingdom of Ireland.



THe dispatch sent to his Majesty was addressed to Sir Henry Vane, Principal
Secretary, and carried by Sir Henry Spotswood, who went by sea directly into
Scotland: And the Letters to the L. Lieutenant were sent to London by Owen O
Conally, the first discoverer of the Plot.

The Lords now with all care and diligence applied their further endeavors
toward the preventing as much as was possible, the destruction intended
against all the British inhabitants of the Kingdom, The Lords Justices cause
the Proclamations to be dispersed, Letters to be written and other means to be
used for the prevention of the rising of the Irish in the North, but all to no
purpose.
as well as the security of the City and the places round about it. A work of
large extent, and wherein they met with many difficulties, by reason of their
own wants both of men and money. They having formerly sent away and dispersed
the Proclamations into several parts of the Country, now sent Letters by
express Messengers unto the Presidents of Munster and Conaght, and to several
principal Gentlemen in those two Provinces; as also to others within the
Province of Lemster, giving them notice of the discovery of the Plot, and
advising them to stand upon their guard, and to make the best provision they
could for the defense of the Country about them. They sent another express to
the Earl of Ormond, then at his house at Caricke, with Letters to the same
effect; and withal desired his Lordship presently to repair unto them at
Dublin with his Troop of horse. They sent likewise Commissions to the Lords
Viscounts of Clandeboys, and of the Ardes, for raising of the Scots in the
Northern parts, and putting them into arms, as they did also soon after to Sir
William Stewart, and Sir Robert Stewart, and several other Gentlemen of
quality in the North. And as they gave them order for prosecution of the Rebels
with fire and sword, so they gave them power to receive such of them in as
should submit to his Majesty's grace and mercy. But these dispatches they were
enforced to send all by sea, the Rebels having stopped up the passages, and
hindered all manner of intercourse with that Province by land.

The Lords of the English Pale repair to the Council Board, and there declare
their loyal affections to his Majesty. The English Pale is a large circuit of
land possessed at the time of the first conquest of Ireland by the English, and
ever since inhabited by them; it contains several Counties, viz. the Counties
of Dublin, Meth, Lowth, Kildare, etc.
The Lords of the Pale having been at the Council Board, and there declared to
the Lords Justices, with great protestations, their loyal affections unto his
Majesty; together with their readiness and forward concurrence with their
Lordships in this service, came unto them again within two or three days after
with a Petition; wherein they offered unto their Lordships, the deep sense they
had of an expression in the late Proclamation set out upon the discovery of
this great Conspiracy intended, as is there set down, by some evil affected
Irish papists, which words they feared might be by some mis-interpreted, and
such a construction put upon them, as might reflect upon their persons, as
comprehended under them. Whereupon the Lords Justices and Council thought fit,
to descend so far to their satisfaction, as not only to remonstrate the
clearness of their intentions toward them, but that it might appear unto the
world, they entertained not the least jealous thoughts of them, they caused a
new Proclamation to be set out by way of explanation of the former, which I
have thought fit here to insert, that it may appear how far they were from
giving any of those Lords and Gentlemen occasion to break out into those
rebellious courses, they soon afterward took to their own destruction.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. John Borlase.
WHereas a Petition has been preferred unto Us by diverse Lords and Gentlemen
of the English Pale, in behalf of themselves and the rest of the Pale, and other
the old English of this Kingdom, A Proclamation issued for the satisfaction of
the Lords and Gentlemen of the English Pale.
showing that whereas a late Conspiracy of Treason is discovered of
ill-affected persons of the old Irish, and that thereupon a Proclamation was
published by Us; wherein among other things, it is declared that the said
Conspiracy was perpetrated by Irish papists without distinction of any; and
they doubting that by those general words of Irish Papists, they might seem to
be involved, though they declare themselves confident that We did not intend to
conclude them therein, in regard they are none of the old Irish, nor of their
faction, or confederacy; but are altogether averse and opposite to all their
designs, and all others of like condition; We do therefore to give them full
satisfaction, hereby declare and publish to to all His Majesty's good Subjects
in this Kingdom, That by the words, Irish Papists, We intended only such of
the old mere Irish in the Province of Ulster, as have plotted, contrived, and
been actors in this Treason, and others who adhere to them; and that We did
not any way intend, or mean thereby any of the old English of the Pale, nor of
any other parts of this Kingdom, We being well assured of their fidelities to
the Crown, and having experience of the good affections and services of their
Ancestors in former times of danger and Rebellion. And We further require all
His Majesty's loving Subjects, whether Protestants or Papists to forbear
upbraiding matter of Religion, one against the other, and that upon pain of his
Majesty's indignation. Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 29 October. 1641.

R. Ranelagh. R. Dillon. Ant. Midensis. Ad. Loftus. Geo. Shurley. Gerrard
Lowther. I. Temple. Fr. Willoughby. Ia. Ware.

God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin, by the Society Of STATIONERS.

BUt to return now to the Northern Rebels, who so closely pursued on their
first plot, as they beginning to put it in execution in most of the chief
places of strength there, upon the 23 of October. the day appointed for the
surprizall of the Castle of Dublin, had by the latter end of the same month
gotten into their possession all the Towns, Forts, Castles, and Gentlemen's
houses within the Counties of Tyrone, Donegall, The greater part of Vlster
possessed by the Northern Rebels.
Fermanagh, Armagh, Cavan, London Derry, Monaghan, and half the County of Down,
excepted the Cities of London Derry and Coleraigne, the Town and Castle of
Encikillin, and some other places and Castles which were for the present
gallantly defended by the British undertakers, though afterward for want of
relief surrendered into their hands. The chief of the Northern Rebels that first
appeared in the execution of this Plot within the Province of Vlster were, Sir
Phelim O Neale, The names of the chief Rebels in Vlster.
Turlogh O Neale, his brother, Roury Mac Guire, brother to the Lord Mac Guire,
Philip O Rely, Mulmore O Rely, Sir Conne Mac Gennis, Col. Mac Brian, Mac Mahon;
these having closely combined together, with several other of their
accomplices, the chief of the several Septs in the several Counties, divided
their forces into several parties; and according to a general assignation
made among themselves at one and the same time, surprised by treachery the Town
and Castle of the Newry, Several Forts and other places suddenly surprised by
the Rebels.
the Fort of Dongannon, Fort Montjoy, Carlemont, Tonrages, Caricke Mac Rosse,
Cloughouter, Castle Blaney, Castle of Monaghan, being all of them places of
considerable strength, and in several of them companies of foot, or troops of
Horse belonging to the standing army. Besides these they took a multitude of
other Castles, Houses of strength, Towns, and Villages, all abundantly peopled
with British in habitants, who had exceedingly enriched the Country as well
as themselves by their painful labors. They had made for their more
comfortable subsistence, handsome and pleasant habitations, abounding with
corn, cattle, and all other commodities that an industrious people could draw
out of a good inland soil. They lived in great plenty, and some of them very
well stored with plate and ready money. They lived likewise in as great
security, being quiet and careless, as the people of Laish, little suspecting
any treachery from their Irish neighbors. The English well knew they had given
them no manner of provocation; they had entertained them with great
demonstrations of love and affection. No story can ever show that in any Age
since their intermixed cohabitation, they rise up secretly to do them mischief.
And now of late they lived so peaceably and lovingly together as they had just
reason most confidently to believe, that the Irish would never upon any
occasion generally rise up again to their destruction. This I take to be one
main and principal reason that the English were so easily overrun within the
Northern Counties, The great security and confidence of the English in the
Irish, a great cause of their sudden destruction.
and so suddenly swallowed up, before they could make any manner of resistance
in the very first begnnings of this Rebellion. For most of the English having
either Irish Tenants, Servants, or Landlords, and all of them Irish neighbors
their familiar friends: as soon as the fire brake out, and the whole Country
began to rise about them, some made their recourse presently to their Friends
for protection, some relying upon their Neighbors, others upon their
Landlords, others upon their Tenants and Servants for preservation, The English
betrayed and murdered by their Irish friends, servants, and tenants.
or at least, present safety; and with great confidence put their lives, their
Wives, their Children, and all they had, into their power. But these generally
either betrayed them into the hands of other Rebels, or most perfidiously
destroyed them with their own hands. The Priests had now charmed the Irish, and
laid such bloody impressions in them, as it was held, according to the maxims
they had received, a mortal sin to give any manner of relief or protection to
any of the English. All bonds and ties of faith and friendship were now broken;
the Irish Landlords made a prey of their English tenants, Irish tenants and
servants a Sacrifice of their English Landlords and Masters, one neighbor
cruelly murdered by another; the very Irish children in the very beginning fell
to strip and kill English children: all other relations were quite cancelled
and laid aside, and it was now esteemed a most meritorious work in any of them
that could by any means or ways whatsoever, bring an Enlish man to the
slaughter. A work not very difficult to be compassed as things then stood. The
intermixture of the English among the Irish, a main cause of their sudden
destruction.
For they living promiscuously among the British, in all parts having from
their Priests received the Watchword both for time and place, rose up, as it
were actuated by one and the same spirit, in all places of those Counties
before mentioned at one and the same point of time; and so in a moment fell
upon them, murdering some, stripping only, or expelling others out of their
habitations. This bred such a general terror and astonishment among the
English as they knew not what to think, much less what to do, or which way to
turn themselves. Their servants were killed as they were ploughing in the
fields, Husbands cut to pieces in the presence of their Wives, their Childrens
brains dashed out before their faces, others had all their goods and cattle
seized and carried away, their houses burnt, their habitations laid waste, and
all as it were at an instant before they could suspect the Irish for their
enemies, or any ways imagine that they had it in their hearts, or in their
power, to offer so great violence, or do such mischief unto them.

Now for such of the English as stood upon their guard, and had gathered
together, though but in small numbers, the Irish had recourse to their ancient
stratagem; which as they have formerly, so they still continued to make
frequent use of in this present Rebellion. The Irish falsify their oaths and
protestations to the English, and after quarter given them in several places,
murder and destroy them.
And that was fairly to offer unto them good conditions of quarter, to assure
them their lives, their goods, and free passage, with a safe conduct into what
place soever they pleased, and to confirm these covenants sometimes under
their Hands and Seals, sometimes with deep Oaths and Protestations; and then as
soon as they had them in their power, to hold themselves dis-obliged from their
promises, and to leave their Soldiers at liberty to despoil, strip, and murder
them at their pleasure. Thus were the poor English treated, who had shut
themselves up in the great Cathedral Church at Armagh by Sir Phelim O Neale,
and his brother Turlogh. Thus were such of the English used by Philip O Reley,
who had retired themselves to Belterbert, the best planted Town in the County
of Cavan. And after the same barbarous manner were such of the English drawn
out to the slaughter, as had gotten into the Castles of Longford, the Castle of
Tullogh in the County of Fermanagh, or the Church of Newtowne in the same
County, and several other places; as appears by several examinations taken
upon oath, from persons that hardly escaped thence with their lives. And
besides these other policies they used, Several policyes used by the Irish to
prevent the English from rising against, or the Scots to ioyn in their defense.
some to distract and discourage them, others to dis-inable them to stand out
to make any defense. As in several places the Irish came under diverse
pretenses, and borrowed such weapons and arms as the English had in their
houses; and no sooner got them into their hands, but they turned them out of
their own doors, as they did at Glaslough in the County of Monaghan: And by the
same means they very gently and fairly got into their possession all the
English arms in the County of Cavan: The High Sheriff there being an Irishman
and a Papist, pretending that he took their arms to secure them only against
the violence of such of the Irish as he understood to be in arms in the next
County. And that they might the more easily effect the destruction of the
English, and keep off the Scots from giving them any assistance, they openly
professed to spare, as really they did at the first, all of the Scottish
Nation; and pretended they would suffer them, as likewise all English Papists,
to live quietly among them; hoping thereby to contain all of that Nation from
taking up arms, till they had mastered all the English, and that then they
should be well enough enabled to deal with them. Thus were the poor English
prepared for the slaughter, and so exceedingly distracted with the tumultuous
rising of the Irish on all sides about them, as they could never put themselves
into any posture of defense. And although in many places they made small
parties, and betook themselves into several Churches and Castles, some of
which were most gallantly long defended by them, yet did they not draw together
in any such considerable body, as would enable them to make good their party in
the field, The English stand upon the defense of their private houses without
joining together in one body, whereby they gave great advantage to the Rebels.
against the numerous forces of the Rebels. The truth is, they did not very
readily endeavor, or dexterously attempt it in any part of that Province, as I
could hear of; every man betaking himself the best he could to the care of his
own house, and seeking how to save his own family, his goods within, and his
cattle without. And so while they kept singly apart, and singly stood up for
their own private preservation, not joining their forces together for the
common safety, they gave the Rebels a fair opportunity, and a singular
advantage, to work out with great facility their common destruction. Whereas,
if they had deserted their houses upon the first notice of the rising up of the
Irish, and in the several Counties put themselves into several bodies, under
the commands of the chief English Gentlemen round about them, they had
undoubtedly (how ill soever they were provided of arms and munition) been able
to have encountered the Irish, and to have beat them out of many parts of the
country, or at least, to have put them to some stand in their enterprise.
Whereas, by the course they took, they most readily, without almost any
resistance, exposed themselves to the merciless cruelty of the Irish, who at
the very first (for some few days after their breaking out) did not in most
places murder many of them: but the course they took, was to seize upon all
their goods and cattle, to strip them, their wives, and children naked; and in
that miserable plight, the weather being most bitter cold and frosty, to turn
them out of their houses, to drive them to the Mountains, to wander through the
Woods and Bogs; and if they by any means procured any other clothes, or but
even ordinary rags to cover their nakedness, they were presently taken from
them again, and none suffered to give them any kind of shelter by the way,
relief, or entertainment, without incurring the heavy displeasure of their
Priests and chief Commanders. And so they drove such of the English, whose
lives they thought fit at that time to spare, clear out of the country. Some
of them took their journey toward Carigfergus, others toward Colraine, Derry,
and other of the Northern Ports. Many who had gotten together and stood upon
their guards, came to composition with their bloody assailants, and gave them
their goods, plate and money, for leave to come up to the City of Dublin. And
having bought their license at so dear a rate, had Passes and Convoyes assigned
them by the chief Captains of the Rebels, and so came on of their way in great
Troops of Men, Women, and Children. Out of the County of Cavan, as M.
Creighton, (who by his charitable relief of great numbers of them, preserved
them from perishing) testifies in his examination, there passed by his house in
one company 1400 persons, in another 500. from Newtowne in the County of
Fermanagh, in others lesser numbers, all without any weapons, Adam Clovers
examination.
or any thing else but the very clothes on their backs, which they suffered
them not to carry away with them; but many were most barbarously stripped of
them, by those who undertook to give them safe conduct, or perfidiously
betrayed by them into the hands of other Rebels, by whom some were killed,
others wounded: and all in a manner whatsoever they had to cover their
nakedness, taken from most of them; as may appear by the examination of Adam
Clover of Slonosy in the County of Cavan, who being duly sworn, deposes inter
alia, That this deponent and his company that were robbed, observed, that 30
persons or thereabouts, were then most barbarously murdered and slain outright,
and about 150 more persons cruelly wounded; so that traces of blood issuing
from their wounds, lay upon the High way for 12 miles together, and many very
young children were left and perished by the way, to the number of 60 or
thereabouts; because the cruel pursuit of the Rebels was such, that their
parents and friends could not carry them further. And further says, that some
of the Rebels vowed, That if any dug graves wherein to bury the dead
children, they should be buried therein themselves: So the poor people left the
most of them unburied, exposed to ravenous beasts and fowls, and some few their
Parents carried a great way to bury them. And this deponent further says, that
he saw upon the way a woman left by the Rebels stripped to her smock, set upon
by three women and some Irish children, who miserably rent and tore the said
poor English woman, and stripped her of her smock in a bitter frost and snow,
so that she fell in labor under their hands, and both she and her child dyed
there. Thus did their mercy in sparing those miserable souls in this manner
prove by much a far greater cruelty then if they had suddenly cut them off, as
they did afterward many thousands of British that fell into their hands. For
now they starved and perished in multitudes upon the ways as they traveled
along; and to those that outlived the misery of their journey, their limbs
only served to drag up their bodies to christian burial there denied unto
them. For many of the men, and most of the women and children that thus
escaped, either to Dublin or other places of safety in the North, not long
outlived the bitterness of their passage; but either overwhelmed with grief,
or outwearied with travel, contracted those diseases which furthered by
hunger, cold, nakedness, ill lodgings, and want of other necessaries, struck
deeply into bodies that had lived long at ease with much plenty, and soon
brought them with sorrow to their graves.

THese were the first fruits of this Rebellion which now began to dilate it
self into the other Provinces, having covered over the Northern Parts of the
Kingdom with fearful desolations. The first Plotters were yet undiscovered,
but the great active instruments appointed for the execution of this horrid
design fully appeared, and had already deeply imbrued their hands in the
bloody massacres of the English. Sir Phelim O Neale being the chief of that
Sept, Sir Phelim O Neales proceedings.
and now the person remaining of nearest alliance to the late Earl of Tyrone,
assumed to himself the chief power among the Rebels in Vlster; and by his
directions guided the rest of his accomplices on, in the destruction of all the
English there. He was one of very mean parts without courage or conduct; his
education for a great part of his youth was in England; he was admitted a
Student of Lincolns Inn, and there trained up in the Protestant religion,
which he soon changed after, if not before his return into Ireland, lived
loosely, and having no considerable estate, by reason of the great engagement
upon it, became of very little esteem in all men's opinions. Yet such were the
over zealous affections of his Countrymen in this cause, their secrecy in
attempting, their suddenness in executing, as by their forwardness to destroy
the English and get their goods, he quickly overrun that part of the Country.
He had prevailed so far within seven days after he first appeared in this
Rebellion, by seazing most treacherously at the very first upon Charlemont,
where the Lord Caufield lay with his Foot company, the Forts of Dongannon and
Montjoy, as that in his Letter written to Father Patrick O Donnell his
Confessor, bearing date from Montjoy, the 30 of October. he was able to brag of
great and many victories. And presently after he had gotten such a multitude of
rude fellows together, though in very ill equipage, as he marched down with
great numbers of men toward Lisnagaruy, near the chief Plantation of the
Scots; (for that part of their plot to spare them, as they did in the
beginning, they found now too gross to take, therefore they resolved to fall
upon them without mercy) and yet left sufficient forces to come up into the
Pale, to take in Dondalke in the County of Lowth. Which was a Frontier Town in
the last wars against Tyrone, Dondalke taken by the Rebels about the beginning
of November. 1641.
and so well defended it self, as with all the power he had, he could never
recover it into his hands. There lay now a Foot company of the old Army, but
the Lieutenant who commanded it, having neither his men in readiness, nor
arms or munition, made little or no resistance, easily giving way to the
forward affections of the inhabitants who delivered up the Town into the
possession of the Rebels about the beginning of November 1641.

The Rebels presently after their taking in of Dondalke marched on further into
the County of Lowth, and possessed themselves of Ardee, The Rebels march up
toward Tredagh.
a little Town within seven miles of Tredagh, anciently called Drohedagh. So as
it was now high time to provide for the safety of that Town. The Lord Moore had
already retired thither from his house at Millifont, and there remained with
his troop of horse and two companies of foot. One was under the command of Sir
John Nettervile, eldest son to the Lord Viscount Nettervile. He discovered in
the very beginning much virulency in his affections, by giving false frights
and raising false rumors, and making all manner of ill infusions into the
minds of the Townsmen, who as it afterward appeared, were but too forward to
take part with the Rebels. It is verily believed they had in the very beginning
some plot to cut off the Lord Moore and seize upon his Troop; and that Sir John
Netterviles part was to begin a mutiny, which he attempted that night he was to
be upon the watch, by giving ill language, and endeavoring to make a quarrel
with his Lordship, which he very discreetly passed over, and so carefully
looked to the guard of the Town, as they could take no advantage to put on
their design. Howsoever the Townsmen were extremely frighted with the thoughts
of their present danger, and the greater part of them being Papists, were ready
to declare themselves for the Catholic cause; only their desires were, things
might be so ordered, The ill condition of Tredagh, represented by the L. Moore
to the L. Justices.
as would administer unto them specious pretenses of necessity for the same.
The L. Moore gave present advertisement unto the Lords Justices and Council,
of the ill condition and most imminent danger he found the Town to be then in,
that it was not possible to preserve it out of the hands of the Rebels without
further strength both of horse and foot. That in case the enemy should make any
sudden approaches, or attempt to surprise the Town, he found such poor
preparatives for defense within, such apparent signs of disloyalty in the
Townsmen, and all things in such a desperate confusion, as they should not be
able by the best endeavors they could use to give any good account of that
place. Hereupon their Lordships presently resolved, A Regiment raised by the
Lo. Justices at Dublin, and sent down under the command of Sir Henry Tichborne
for the defense of Tredagh. November. 3.
to leavy in the City of Dublin a Regiment of foot, and to place them under the
command of Sir Henry Tichborne for the defense of Tredagh. And for this purpose
there was very oportunely in the hands of the Vice Treasurer 3000 li. in a
readiness to be at that time sent over into England, for the satisfaction of a
public engagement there. This the Lords thought fit to make use of, for the
leavying and setting out of those men which Sir Henry Tichborne got together in
very few days, and having a Commission of government for the Town, with some
other private instructions, he marched away with great alacrity and diligence
the 3 of November, and happily arrived next day at Tredagh.

A Regiment raised by Sir Charles Coot.
The Lords granted another Commission to Sir Charles Coot to levy a thousand men
more, which he most carefully endeavored, and within a very short time made up
his Regiment, wherein very many of the English, who came up stripped and
despoiled out of the North, listed themselves; for most of the men which
escaped from thence with their lives, being better able to suffer then the
women and children, outlived the miseries of their journey, and putting
themselves into several companies, some of them had the contentment to revenge
the barbarous cruelty used by the Rebels toward them.

The second dispatch made by the L. Justices and Council into England, Nov. 5.
Upon the 5. of November, the Lords made their 2d. dispatch unto His Majesty,
still at Edinburgh in Scotland: At the same time they sent several Letters
into England, to the L. Keeper, Speaker of the house of Peers, to the Speaker
of the house of Commons, to the Lo: of his Mties most hon: Privy Council, and
to the L. Lieutenant of Ireland; in all which they did with much earnestness
declare their present dangers, together with the necessity of sending sudden
relief. In their Letter to the Lords of the Council they did more particularly
set down the miserable estate of the whole kingdom, and the large progress
that the Rebellion had in few days made since it broke out. They represented
unto their Lordships the great outrages the Rebels had committed upon the
British inhabitants in Vlster, that they had seized upon all their estates and
houses in five Counties of that Province, possessed their Arms, detained many
of the principal Gentlemen prisoners; That they had already slain many, most
barbarously hewed some to pieces, that they have exposed thousands to want and
beggary, who had good estates and lived plentifully: That the Rebellion began
then to diffuse it self into the counties of Longford and Letrim, and to
threaten the English plantations in the King and Queens county: that the
inhabitants of the counties of Mead and Lowth began to fall upon the English
near about them: that they conceived there could not be less then 30000. who
had already openly declared themselves in this Rebellion, and were assembled
together in several great parties; that they understood their design was,
having got Dondalke, to take in Tredagh, and so to come up immediately to
besiege the city and castle of Dublin: that they gave out publicly, their
purpose was to extirpate the English and Protestants, and not to lay down Arms
until the Romish religion were established, the Government settled in the hands
of the Natives, and the old Irish restored to the lands of their supposed
ancestors. That they held it their duty to acquaint their Lordships with the
lamentable estate wherein the Kingdom stood, that his Majesty and the
Parliament might understand it, and so speedily provide for sending over to
their relief 10000 Foot, 1000 Horse, together with some able Commanders,
100000. l. in money, and further provisions of Arms: That unless these were
presently sent to them (they craved leave to repeat it again and again) the
Kingdom would be utterly lost, all the English and Protestants in Ireland
destroyed, the peace of the kingdom of England disturbed by the Irish from
thence, and so England enforced to make a new conquest of it, for that a
Politic reformation would then be impossible.

But now before I pass further, The proceedings of the Parliament of England
upon the first advertisements brought unto them of the Rebellion raised in
Ireland.
I shall here give an account of the arrival of these and the former Letters of
the 25. of October, addressed by the Lords Justices and Council to the L.
Lieutenant of Ireland. Owen O Conally, the happy discoverer of the first Plot
(who carried the first Letters over) arrived at London the last day of October,
and late in the evening delivered those Letters to his Lordship, who having
read them over, and received from him full information of all other parriculars
within his knowledge, repaired the next morning to the Councel-board, and
having there acquainted the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council with them he
was required by their Lordships to communicate them unto the Lords of the upper
house of Parliament, which he did accordingly the very same morning: And they
considering the high importance of them, as soon as they had perused them,
Ordered that they should be presently sent down to the house of Commons, by the
Lord Keeper, the L. Privy Seal, L. High Chamberlain, L. Admiral, L. Marshal, L.
Chamberlain, Earl of Bath, Earl of Dorset, Earl of Leicester, Earl of Holland,
Earl of Berks, Earl of Bristol, L. Vicount Say, E. Mandevile, L. Goring, L.
Wilmot, all of them being of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council. There
were Chairs provided for these Lords in the house of Commons, and they sat
down there till the Letters were read, and then having informed the house of
such other parciculars as they had received concerning the general Rebellion
in Ireland, they departed without any further conference or other debate upon
them, leaving the house of Commons to consider further of them: Who presently
Ordered,

That the House forthwith should be resolved into a Committee, to take into
consideration the matter offered concerning the Rebellion in Ireland, as
likewise to provide for the safety of the Kingdom of England.

This being done, they fell into a most serious debate of this great business
then before them, they fully considered what means were fittest to be used at
present for the prevention of the further spreading of that hideous Rebellion
in Ireland, as well as stopping of the ill influence it might make upon their
affairs in England, where great troubles even then began to appear within
view. And after much time spent in this debate, they came to these several
Conclusions, which being put to the question, were assented unto by the
Committee, and so resolved as follows:

1. That 50000. l. be forthwith provided.

2. That a Conference be desired with the Lords, to move them that a select
Committee of the Members of both Houses may be appointed to go to the city of
London, and to make a Declaration unto them of the state of the business in
Ireland, and to acquaint them that the leading of moneys at this time will be
an acceptable service to the Commonwealth. And that they propose unto them the
Loan of 50000. l. and to assure them that they shall be secured both of the
Principal and Interest, by Act of Parliament.

3. That a select Committee may be named of both Houses to consider of the
affairs of Ireland.

4. That Owen O Conally, who discovered this great treason, shall have 500. l.
presently paid him, and 200. l. per annum pension, until provision of land of
inheritance of a greater value be made for him.

5. That the persons of Papists of quality within this Kingdom, may be secured
within the several Counties where they reside.

6. That no person whatsoever, except those who are Merchants, shall be
admitted to go over into Ireland, without Certificate from the Committee of
both Houses appointed to consider the affairs of Ireland.

These with several other particulars concerning Ireland, and tending in order
to the safety of the kingdom of England, were resolved upon the question, and
Master Whitlock appointed to report them to the House as heads of a conference
desired with the Lords concerning the affairs of Ireland, which was
accordingly had with their Lordships the same day; At which conference the L.
Keeper did express the very great sense the Lords had of the exceeding great
care taken by the house of Commons for the prevention of the further spreading
of the Rebellion in Ireland, And his Lordship by command of the Lords did
further let them know, that their Lordships did think fit to agree with them in
all those particulars presented unto them by the house of Commons without any
material alteration, only adding such further things as they conceived might
serve to further and expedite their desires in the more speedy putting them in
execution.

The house of Commons having proceeded thus far in the affairs of Ireland, upon
the two first days after the discovery made unto them of the Rebellion there
raised, did notwithstanding their own present distractions, set apart some
portion almost of every day that they sat, during the whole month of
November, for the considering of the affairs of Ireland; and so upon the third
and fourth of the same, resolved upon the question, and accordingly ordered
these particulars following:

1. That the House holds fit that 20000 li. be forthwith supplied for the
present occasions of Ireland.

2. That a convenient number of ships shall be provided for the guarding of the
Seacoasts of Ireland.

3. That this house holds fit that 6000 foot and 2000 horse shall be raised
with all convenient speed, for the present expedition into Ireland.

4. That the Lord Lieutenant shall present to both Houses of Parliament, such
Officers as he shall think fit to send into Ireland, to command any forces to
be transported thither.

5. That Magazines of victuals shall be forthwith provided at Westchester to be
sent over to Dublin, as the occasions of that Kingdom shall require.

6. That the Magazines of arms, ammunition, powder, now in Carlisle, shall be
forthwith sent over to Knockfergus in Ireland.

7. That it be referred to the Kings Council, to consider of some fit way, and
to present it to the House, for a publication to be made of rewards to be given
to such as shall do service in this Expedition into Ireland; and for a pardon
of such of the Rebels in Ireland as as shall come in by a time limited, and of
a sum of money to be appointed for a reward to such as shall bring in the Heads
of such principal Rebels as shall be nominated.

8. That Letters shall be forthwith sent to the Justices in Ireland to acquaint
them how sensible this House is of the affairs of Ireland.

9. That the Committee of Irish affairs shall consider how, and in what manner
this Kingdom shall make use of the friendship and assistance of Scotland in
the business of Ireland.

10. That directions shall be given for the drawing of a Bill for the pressing
of men for this particular service for Ireland.

These particulars, together with several others, being resolved upon the
question, they passed an Ordinance of Parliament, enabling the Earl of
Leicester Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to raise 3500 foot, and 600 horse, for
the present service there. And they further expressed their resolution, not to
make use of the assistance offered unto them by their Brethren of Scotland
further for the present, then for the furnishing them with 1000 foot, which
they desired might be transported out of Scotland into the North of Ireland.
And on the same day they ordered, that the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance
should deliver to the L. Lieutenant of Ireland the number of 1000 arms for
horse, and 8000 arms for foot, and ten Last of powder, to be presently sent
into Ireland. And that the Lord Admiral should suddenly provide shipping for
the transporting of men, arms, and ammunition, and other provisions according
to the former resolutions of the House.

Now while both Houses of Parliament were taking Order for raising men, money,
and sending provisions and other necessaries for Ireland, there arrived those
other Letters of the 5 of November, formerly mentioned, which being addressed
to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, were communicated to both Houses
of Parliament, and after a conference upon them, took further resolutions for
the speedy sending away supplies into Ireland. And such were the forward
affections and zeal of the House of Commons, to promove what concerned the
service of Ireland, as they thereupon voted 200000 li. to be raised for the
suppressing the Irish rebellion, and for securing of the Kingdom of England,
and payment of the public debts.

And that they might facilitate this great work of raising such a sum of
money, upon the credit of an Act of Parliament, before the money could be
collected throughout the Kingdom; they thought fit, for the better
encouragement of the City of London, and for the giving them full satisfaction
in point of security for the moneys formerly lent them, to make this Order
following.

THe Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having a due
regard to the good affections of the City of London, expressed upon sundry
occasions, by the advancing and lending of great sums of money, for the service
of this Commonwealth: and particularly the sum of 50000 li. lent for the Irish
affairs; and the sum of 50000 li. more lent by the said City unto the Peers
attending his Majesty in the Northern parts before the beginning of this
present Parliament, which are not yet paid, or otherwise secured, shall be
fully satisfied and repaid unto the said City of London, with interest of 8 li.
per cent. for one year, out of such moneys as are or shall be raised by
authority of Parliament. And for that purpose an Act of Parliament to be passed
with all expedition. Provided always that this present Ordinance shall not in
any ways be prejudicial to any Members of the said House of Commons, who have
formerly lent any sums of money to this Parliament, nor to the Northern
Counties, nor to any persons whatsoever, to whom both Houses of Parliament, or
the said House of Commons have formerly ordered the payment of any sums of
money, nor to any security given to them, before the making of this Ordinance.

BUt I shall now return to the affairs of this Kingdom, and the serious
consultations and means used here by the Justices and Council for the securing
of the City and Castle of Dublin, which by reason of the present confusion,
weakness, and wants, were in very great, and most apparent danger of a sudden
surprise.

And first for the Castle, Sir Francis Willoughby being made Governor, had a
Company of an 100 men well armed, assigned for the constant guard of that
place, besides the ordinary Warders, who gave their usual attendance there.
And because the Lords conceived it might be dangerous in such desperate times
to admit such a multitude of suitors of all sorts into the Castle, as had daily
occasion to attend the Councell-board, they presently transferred the place of
their meeting in Council to Cork House, where they continued to sit a good
time after, notwithstanding the great danger their persons were continually
exposed unto, by the confident resort in great numbers of several Lords,
Gentlemen and orhers who within few days after declared themselves Rebels, and
so went out among them. It was Gods immediate providence that preserved them,
and suffered not those persons, who soon after became such bloody Rebels, to
lay hold on that opportunity. For certainly, they might with great ease have
taken out of the way the Lords Justices and Council; and so have left all
things in such confusion as would have brought on their long desired ends
without any further contestation or trouble.

The next care was to provide victuals for the Castle in such proportions as
might enable it to endure a siege, in case the Town, either through treachery
within, or by forces from without, should come to be surprised by the Rebels,
who now carried all things so clearly before them in the North, as they most
confidently gave it out they would suddenly come down and make themselves
masters of it. How to compass this, seemed a matter of great difficulty, in
regard there was no money to be had for the performing this work so absolutely
necessary in it self, and at that time so highly importing the safety and
preservation, even of the whole Kingdom. Therefore the Master of the Rolls,
upon whom the Lords were pleased to impose this service of victualling the
Castle; took the advantage of the strange frights, Order taken for victualling
the Castle of Dublin.
fears, and little safety, all the English and Protestants, conceived both
themselves and their goods to remain in at that time. He sent presently for
some of the chief Merchants that were Protestants in the town, and clearly
represented unto them, the high necessities of the State, the great danger of
the town, the public benefit, and their own private security, in laying into
the Castle such of their provisions as they had lying by them, even in unsafe
places of the City. These impressions took, and they rightly apprehending the
common danger, that they could not outlive the ruins of the Castle; partly out
of their own good affections to the service, partly out of a prudent care to
secure their goods, were content to bring in great quantities of Beef,
Herrings, and Corn upon the Master of the Rolls undertaking to see them
satisfied, in case use were made of them, or otherwise certain restitution in
kind to the several owners. So as there were presently laid in by the English
and Dutch Merchants, within the Verge of the Castle, above 2000 barrels of
Beef, 2000 barrels of Herrings, and a good proportion of Wheat; provisions
sufficient, not only to victual the Castle for many months, but which did
serve to maintain the whole Army billeted in the City a long time after, and
their money they received within few months after, by certificate from hence
upon the Chamber of London; according to an Order made by both Houses of
Parliament in England; for present payment to be made to such as laid in any
provisions for the army in Ireland. There was then further Order taken to new
dig and clear an old Well long since stopped up within the walls of the Castle;
and to provide all other necessaries fit for a siege. This was the first step
to the safety of this place, and gave great comfort and security to all the
English, and Protestants.

The Castle being thus happily provided for, The Lo. Justices care to provide
for the safety of the City of Dublin.
the Lords took it next into their care how to secure the City in some sort,
against any sudden attempts. And this proved a work not easy to be effected,
not only in regard of the crazinesse of the walls, the large Suburbs, and
weakness of the place; but much more in respect of the corrupt ill affections
of the popish inhabitants within the City: So strangely were many of them
deluded with the ill infusions of their Priests, as they did certainly (as we
found afterward by woeful experience) do all that in them lay, to promove the
rebellious designs then set on foot (as they believed) only for the
re-settlement of their religion, and recovery of their liberties. They were the
instruments to conveigh away privately most of the chief Conspirators, who
would have surprised the Castle on the 23 of October. They secretly entertained
many of the Rebels that came out of the country, they likewise sent them relief
that were abroad, by secret ways, conveighing as well ammunition, as
intelligence of all passages from hence. And such strong aversions had they
against all contributions for the maintenance of his Majesty's army; as in the
very beginning of the rebellion, when the Lords sent for the Major and
Aldermen, and laying before them the high necessities of the State, together
with the apparent danger of the City and whole Kingdom, desired to borrow a
considerable sum of money for the present, which they undertook to repay out of
the next treasure that should arrive out of England. The popish party among
them was so prevalent, as that after a most serious consultation and very
solemn debate among themselves, they returned this answer, that they were not
able to furnish above 40 l. and part of that was to be brought in in cattle.

There remained at this time imbarqued within the harbor of Dublin four
hundred Irish soldiers, ready, as was pretended, Several Irish soldiers
imbarqued under pretense of being carried into Spain, at the very time of the
first breaking out of the Rebellion.
to set sail for Spain, under the command of Colonel John Barry, who with some
other Irish Gentlemen had procured leave from his Majesty to leavie certain
numbers of volunteers to be transported over for the service of the King of
Spain. And those levied in other parts, as well as at Dublin, were brought
together just at the very time designed for the execution of the great plot.
The pretense was specious, but certainly their intentions how finely soever
covered over, were to have those men in a readiness together, at the very time
appointed for the first breaking out of these unnatural troubles. And as for
those men which lay within the Harbor of Dublin, they were so great a terror
to all the Protestant inhabitants in the City, as it exceedingly perplexed the
Lords how to dispose so of them as might prevent the mischief justly feared, in
case of their landing. Their Commanders had so handsomely ordered the matter,
as though they were designed for a long voyage, yet stay on shipboard any
longer they could not, by reason they had no victuals, not even enough to carry
them out of the Harbor; and no man had order in the absence of Colonel Barry
(who retired himself some few miles out of the town, the very evening before
the Castle should have been taken) to provide for the further supplying of
them. To suffer them to land, was to add so many instruments of mischief to
those already gathered within and about the City. Therefore it was resolved
that the Captain of the Kings Pinace then in the Harbor should by force keep
them from landing, which he did several days together, till it was apparent
they would inevitably starve, if a course were not suddenly taken to afford
them some relief. Whereupon the Lords having no means to victual them aboard,
gave them leave to land, having first taken order they should not come into the
City.

The Lords Justices and Council thought fit within very few days after the
landing of these men, the more to deter them, and all other ill-affected
persons from repairing to the City of Dublin, Several Proclamations issued out
by the Lo. Justices and Council.
to issue out a Proclamation for the discovery and present removal of all such
as did or should come and continue there without just or necessary cause. But
so careful were they in this, and all other their actions, not to give any
distaste to the Irish or other inhabitants of the country, as they forbear to
inflict any punishment upon any that continued in the City contrary to their
Proclamation, sparing several persons whom they had not only just cause to be
jealous off, but who were brought before them, and convinced to have uttered
speeches clearly discovering their ill affections. And having by late
Proclamations prorogued the Parliament, and adjourned Michaelmas Term, that
under pretense of repair to either of them, unnecessary concourse of strangers
might not be brought unto the town, they proceeded on to some other Acts, which
as they conceived would not only render great security to the City, but lessen
the distempers abroad, bring safety to the Pale, and keep the dangers at
distance, and far off from them. And for this purpose they being informed, that
a multitude of the meaner sort of people were ignorantly involved in the guilt
of this rebellion, and by the wicked seducement of the first Conspirators had
been drawn on to dispoile their English neighbors, they issued out a
Proclamation about the beginning of the month of November, declaring unto all
such as were not Freeholders within the County of Mead, Westmeath, Lowth, and
Longford; that if they would come in and submit, make restitution of the goods
so taken, they should be received to his Majesty's mercy, and no further
prosecution held against them.

Much about the time of the sending forth of this Proclamation, some of the
chief of the Sept of the Relyes, A Remonstrance sent up to the Lords Justices
and Council, from the Rebels in the county of Cavan.
and other prime Gentlemen in the County of Cavan sent up a kind of
Remonstrance to the Lords Justices and Council. Whereunto they returned them a
very fair answer, assuring them of their readiness to give them all just
redress of their grievances expressed therein, so they would in the mean time
retire peaceably to their houses, restore as they were able the English men's
goods, and forbear all further acts of rapine and violence. And they did
presently send over their Remonstrance to the Lord Lieutenant, to be presented
to his Majesty, according to their desires. But these ways of moderation and
peaceable persuasions, proved of very little effect, they had no manner of
influence into the resolved minds of the Leaders, or of operation upon the
hardened hearts of the people; they were too deeply engaged, so slightly to
retire. They had now drenched themselves in the blood of the English, and were
greatly enriched with their spoils. It was not possible for them to make
restitution, and they hoped to go through with the work, and by the united
power of the Kingdom to draw the whole management of the affairs into their
own hands.

And now likewiise the Lords Justices and Council, that they might show the
great confidence they had in the Lords and chief Gentlemen of the Pale,
Commissions of martial law granted unto several persons by the Lords Justices.
and give them both opportunity and means to express their loyalty and
affections to his Majesty's service, resolved (according as the constitution of
their affairs then required) to do some such acts as might clearly persuade
them of the great trust they really reposed in them* And therefore first they
gave out several Commissions of Martial law, for executing (without attending
a proceeding according to the ordinary course of the Common law) of such
Traitors and Rebels as should be apprehended doing mischief in any parts of the
country about them. And these they directed to the most active Gentlemen,
though all Papists, inhabiting in the several Counties, As, to Henry Talbot in
the County of Dublin, John Bellew Esquire in the county of Lowth, Richard Dalton
and James Tuit Esquire in the county of West-Meath, Valerian Wesley in the county
of Mead, James Talbot in the County of Cavan. Commissions of government of the
several counties within the Pale, granted to several Lords and Gentlemen,
without distinction of Religion.


Next they made choice of the chief persons of quality residing in the said
Counties of the Pale, and others adjacent to them, to govern and command such
forces as should be raised by them, and armed by the state for the defense of
the Country, and issued out from the Councel-board several Commissions of
government unto them. As, one to the Earl of Ormond and the L. Viscount
Montgarret, for the county of Kilkenny, to Walter Bagnall Esquire for the county of
Cat^rlagh, Sir Iam. Dillon the elder, and Sir James Billon the younger for the
county of Longford, L. Viscount Costeloe for the county of Maio, Sir Robert
Talbot and Garrat Birne for the county of Wiclow, Sir Christopher Bellew for
the county of Lowth, Earl of Kildare for the county of Kildare, Sir Thomas
Nugent for the county of Westmeath, Nicholas Barnewall for the county of
Dublin, L. Viscount Gormanston for the county of Mead. All these were made
choice of without distinction of religion; the Lords holding it fit at that
time to put the chief persons of power in the country into those places of
trust; hoping they might prove good instruments to oppose the threatening
incursions of the Northern Rebels, which they knew them well enabled to perform
if they would really join in the service, or at least be kept by this their
great confidence in them, from giving any entertainment or assistance to their
rebellious designs.

The Commission directed to the L. of Gormanston, I have thought fit here to
insert. It was found afterward in his study by some of his Majesty's army,
when he and all the rest of the Governors that were of the Romish religion,
thus chosen, deserted their houses, and openly declared themselves in actual
rebellion. The other Commissions were all of the same tenor.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
W. Parsons. John Borlase.
RIght trusty and well beloved, We greet you well. Whereas diverse most
disloyal and malignant persons within this Kingdom have traitorously
conspired against His Majesty, His Peace, Crown, and dignity; and many of them
in execution of their Conspiracy, are traitorously assembled together in a
warlike manner, and have most inhumanely made destruction and devastation of
the persons and estates of diverse of his Majesty's good and loyal subjects of
this Kingdom, and taken, slain, and imprisoned great numbers of them. We out of
our care and zeal for the common good, being desirous by all means to suppress
the said treasons and traitors, and to conserve the persons and fortunes of His
Majesty's loving Subjects here in safety; and to prevent the further spoil and
devastation of His Majesty's good people here, do therefore hereby require and
authorize you, to levy, raise and assemble, all, every, or any the forces, as
well Footmen as Horsemen within the county of Mead, giving you hereby the
command in chief of all the said forces, and hereby further requiring and
authorizing you as Commander of them in chief, to arm, array, divide,
distribute, dispose, conduct, lead, and govern in chief the said forces,
according to your best discretion; and with the said forces to resist, pursue,
follow, apprehend, and put to death, slay, and kill, as well by battle as
other ways, all and singular the said Conspirators, Traitors, and their
adherents, according to your discretion; and according to your conscience and
discretion to proceed against them, or any of them, by martial law, by hanging
them or any of them till they be dead, according as it has been accustomed in
time of open rebellion; and also to take, waste, and spoil their, or any of
their Castles, Holds, Forts, Houses, Goods, and Territories, or otherwise to
preserve the lives of them, or any of them, and to receive them into His
Majesty's favor and mercy, and to forbear the devastation of their, or any of
their Castles, Forts, Houses, Holds, Goods, and Territories before mentioned,
according to your discretion: Further hereby requiring and authorizing you to
do, execute, and perform all and singular such other things for examination of
persons suspected, discovery of Traitors and their adherents, parlying with,
and granting Protections to them or any of them, taking up of Carts, Carriages,
and other conveniences, sending and retaining espials, victualling the said
forces, and other things whatsoever conducing to the purpose aforementioned, as
you in your discretion shall think fit, and the necessity of the service
require, further hereby requiring and authorizing you, as Commander in chief,
to constitute and appoint such Officers and Ministers, respectively for the
better performance and execution of all and singular the premises, as you in
your discretion shall think fit. And We do hereby require and command, all and
singular His Majesty's Sheriffs, Officers, and Ministers, and loving Subjects,
of and within the county of Mead, and the borders thereof, upon their faith
and allegiance to his Majesty, and to his Crown, to be aiding, helping, and
assisting to you, in the doing, and executing of all and singular the premises;
This our Commission to continue during Our pleasure only; and for the so doing,
this shall be your sufficient VVarrant. Given at His Majesty's Castle of
DUBLIN, November. 1641.

R. Dillon. Io. Temple. Ia. Ware. Rob. Meredith.


To Our very good Lo. NICHOLAS Vic. Com. Gormanstowne.
IN these Commissions it is very observable, that there was power given to
these Lords and Gentlemen to whom they were directed, not only to use fire and
sword, for the destruction of the Rebels and their adherents, but also to
preserve the lives of any of them, to receive them or any of them, into his
Majesty's favor or mercy. This plainly shows the very great confidence the
Lords were pleased to repose in them; as also their desires to make them
instruments, to deliver those multitudes of people that engaged themselves in
this rebellion, from the power, either of his Majesty's arms, or civil
justice, They intended nothing but the reducing of a rebellious Nation; and
they at the first applied lenitives, which failing in the cure, they were
afterward then enforced to have recourse to more violent medicines.

Arms and munition delivered out to the Lords and chief Gentlemen of the Pale,
by the Lo. Justices and Council.
That these Governors thus constituted, might be the better enabled according
to the authority and power given unto them by their several Commissions, to
undertake the defense of the Country in this high extremity of the near
approaching dangers; The Lords took order to have delivered unto them a certain
proportion of arms, to be employed for the arming of some men to be raised in
each county for the common safety, besides the arms they gave them, and other
Gentlemen, for the defense of their own private houses. As to the Lord of
Gormanstone there were delivered arms for five hundred men, for the county of
Mead. There were also delivered arms for three hundred men for the county of
Kildare. Arms for three hundred men for the county of Lowth. Arms for three
hundred men for the county of West-Meath. Arms for three hundred men for the
county of Dublin. And about the same time there were sent down four hundred
Muskets, to the Lords of the Ardes and Clandeboys, for the arming of the Scots
in the county of Down. All of these had powder, lead, and match,
proportionable to their arms, at the same time delivered unto them.

Several Counties within the Province of Lemster declare themselves for the
Rebels.
But now the poison of this rebellion which had hitherto contained it self
within the Northern counties, and the confines of them, began to be diffused
into other parts of the Kingdom. It had already infected the counties of
Letrim, Longford, West-Meath, and Lowth, lying contiguous unto them. And upon
the 12 of November. the Irish in the County of Wiclow brake out most furiously,
despoiling, robbing, and murdering all the English inhabitants within that
territory. They burnt all their fair well built houses, drove away their
cattle, and laid siege to Fort Carew, wherein was a foot company of the old
army. The news being brought to the Lords Justices thereof, they well
considered the importance of the place, and that if it were in the hands of the
Rebels, and that whole county in their possession, they could expect little
quietness, or even safety in the City, by reason of their near neighborhood.
Whereupon they were most desirous to have sent down forces for the relief of
it. But when they came on the other side to consider their want of means for
the performance of that service, that they had no money, but few men, and many
of them not to be trusted. That it would be very dangerous to divide their
small forces, and so to leave the City in a manner unguarded, they were
enforced to lay aside that resolution, and with great grief to sit still and
suffer the poor English in those parts to be exposed to the merciless
cruelties of those barbarous Rebels who went on furiously with the work, and
quickly cleared all that county of the English inhabitants. Within few days
after, the Irish in the Counties of Wexford and Caterlagh began to rise
likewise, and to follow the bloody examples of their neighbors. There were now
also great apparencies of the disloyalty of the County of Kildare, who with
large protestations under the pretense of doing service had gotten into their
hands the arms and munition designed for them by the State. And so mysterious
and doubtful was the carriage of the Lords and chief Gentlemen of the English
Pale, giving no manner of intelligence to the State of the proceedings of the
Rebels, nor making any kind of preparatives against them, as their affections
began even then to be justly suspected.

So as the City of Dublin being the receptacle of the whole State, The sad
condition of the City of Dublin.
the Magazine of all the arms, munition and other provisions for the army, and
the chief sanctuary of all the English and despoiled Protestants, was now
reduced to a very sad condition, desperately encompassed on every side, the
Northern Rebels being come down in two several parties with great forces,
within 20 miles of it on the one side, and the Rebels of the County of VViclow
infesting it on the other side: which with the great resort of strangers, and
the continual rumors of new plots and devices to surprise the town, possessed
the Protestants with extraordinary fears of their present danger. But that which
made their condition appear much more formidable unto them, was the daily
repair of multitudes of English that came up in troops, stripped, and miserably
despoiled, out of the North. Many persons of good rank and quality, covered
over with old rags, and some without any other covering then a little twisted
straw to hide their nakedness. Some reverend Ministers and others that had
escaped with their lives, sorely wounded. Wives came bitterly lamenting the
murders of their Husbands, mothers of their children barbarously destroyed
before their faces, poor infants ready to perish and pour out their souls in
their mothers bosom: some over-wearied with long travel, and so surbated, as
they came creeping on their knees; others frozen up with cold, The resort of
multitudes of men, women and children to the City of Dublin, in a most
miserable posture.
ready to give up the ghost in the streets: others overwhelmed with grief,
distracted with their losses, lost also their senses. Thus was the town within
the compass of a few days after the breaking out of this rebellion filled
with these most lamentable spectacles of sorrow, which in great numbers wandered
up and down in all parts of the City, desolate, forsaken, having no place to
lay their heads on, no clothing to cover their nakedness, no food to fill
their hungry bellies. And to add to their miseries, they found all manner of
relief very disproportionable to their wants, the Popish inhabitants refusing
to minister the least comfort unto them: so as those sad creatures appeared
like living ghosts in every street. Many empty houses in the city, were by
special direction taken up for them: Barns, Stables, and outhouses, filled
with them, yet many lay in the open streets, and others under stals and there
most miserably perished. The Churches were the common receptacles of the meaner
sort of the^, who stood there in a most doleful posture, as objects of
charity, in so great multitudes, as there was scarce any passage into them. But
those of better quality, who could not frame themselves to be common beggars,
crept into private places; and some of them that had not private friends to
relieve them, even wasted silently away, and so died without noise. And so
bitter was the remembrance of their former condition, and so insupportable the
burden of their present calamity to many of them, as they even refused to be
comforted. I have known of some that lay almost naked, and having clothes sent,
laid them by, refusing to put them on. Others that would not stir to fetch
themselves food, though they knew where it stood ready for them. But they
continued to lie nastily in their filthy rags, and even their own dung, not
taking care to have any thing clean, handsome or comfortable about them. And so
even worn out with the misery of their journey and cruel usage, having their
spirits spent, their bodies wasted, and their senses failing, lay here
pitifully languishing; and soon after they had recovered this town, very many
of them dyed, leaving their bodies as monuments of the most inhumane cruelties
used toward them. The greatest part of the women and children thus barbarously
expelled out of their habitations, perished in the city of Dublin: and so great
numbers of them were brought to their graves, as all the Churchyards within the
whole Town were of too narrow a compass to contain them. So as the Lords took
order to have two large pieces of new ground, one on each side the River, taken
in upon the out-Greens, and set apart for burying places. These were the
memorable spectacles of mercy, and of the great commiseration the Rebels used
to those English, to whom they gave their lives for a prey. But what their
sufferings were, before they could get out of the hands of those bloody
Villains, what strange horrid inventions they used toward them, torturing and
massacring those they there murdered, is reserved to be more fully related in
its proper place. They are left upon record to posterity, under the oaths of
many that escaped, and mentioned here to no other purpose, then to show the
strange horror and amazement the beholding of them bred in all the English and
Protestant inhabitants of the City. They seeing the Rebels prevail so
mightily, expected if they continued here to be undoubtedly exposed to the same
cruelties. And they now understood by those who were come up from among them,
that their design was; As soon as they had taken in Tredagh, to come and seize
upon the City and Castle of Dublin, and so to make a general extirpation of
all the English, root and branch; not to leave them name or posterity
throughout the whole Kingdom.

It is easy to conjecture what a sad confused countenance the City then had:
what fears, terror, and astonishment, the miserable spectacles within, and the
approaches of the Rebels without, raised in the minds of an affrighted,
distracted people. The English inhabitants looked upon all the horrid cruelties
exercised abroad, all the calamities and desolations fallen upon their
countrymen in other parts of the Kingdom, as arrived at these gates, and now
ready to enter: the Avenues all open, The fears and distractions within the
City of Dublin.
neither hope nor means, neither Rampires nor Trenches to keep them out.
Notwithstanding the careful travels and endeavors used by the Lords Justices
and Council to make provision for the common safety, no money could be raised,
few men gotten together: the Papists well furnished with arms closely
concealed, and desperately animated by their Priests to (...) manner of
mischief: no fortifications about the Suburbs, nor any manner of defense for
the City, but an old ruinous Wall, part whereof fe^^ down in the very height of
these distractions. And so careless were the Citizens, and so slowly went they
about the making up that breach, and under pretense of want of money, they let
it lie open till the Lords sent unto them 40 li. toward the reparation. All
things tended to a sudden confusion; the very face of the City was now changed,
and had such ghastly aspect, as seemed to portend her near approaching ruin:
the means of safety appearing very slender and inconsiderable: the applications
by reason of the strange aversions of the Popish party of a very slow and weak
operation. Every man began to consider himself and his own private
preservation. Those that lived in the Suburbs removed, with their families into
the City. The Privy Councillors and persons of quality into the Castle, which
became a common repository of all things of value. The Rolls were by special
order removed thither: the Records of several other Offices were likewise
brought in. But upon the Rebels advance somewhat nearer, and their frequent
alarms, many of those who had there taken sanctuary, began to suspect the
strength of those old crazy walls, and therefore to make sure, resolved to quit
the Kingdom, imbarquing themselves and their goods with all possible speed.
Some who were detained with contrary winds in the Harbor chose rather to
endure all extremities on shipboard, then to hazard themselves ashore again.
The Scottish Fishermen, who lay with their Boats in great numbers within the
Bay, fishing for Herrings, having with much forwardness made an offer to the
State to bring 500 of their men ashore to be put in arms and do present service
(a proposition at that season most acceptable) were so strangely affrighted one
evening with a false alarm, as that in the night, on a sudden, they put to sea,
and quite disappeared on these Coasts till the year following. The Papists on
the other side being most confident that the City would be taken and sacked by
the Rebels, and fearing, lest happily they might be mistaken in the tumult and
fierce execution, removed themselves and their goods with the same speed into
the country. And that which heightened the calamity of the poor English was
their flight in the Winter, in such a dismal stormy, tempestuous season, as in
the memory of man had never been observed formerly to continue so long
together. Yet the terror of the Rebels incomparably prevailing beyond the rage
of the sea; most of those who could provide themselves of shipping, though at
never so excessive rates, deserted the City: and such was the violence of the
winds, such continuing impetuous storms, as several Barques were cast away,
some in three months after their going from hence could recover no Port in
England: and almost all that then put to sea, were in great danger of
perishing. The iniquities of the English Nation, which were very great in this
Kingdom, were now full: Heaven and Earth seemed to conspire together for the
punishment of them. God certainly declared his high indignation against them
for their great sins wherewith they had long continued to provoke him in this
land, and suffered these barbarous Rebels to be the instruments of mischief and
cruel executioners of his fierce wrath upon them. But because they have taken
vengeance with a despightfull heart to destroy them, Ezekiel. 25.15.17.
for the old hatred, He will certainly in His own time execute great vengeance
upon them with furious rebukes, as he threatened the Philistims in the like case.

The Particulars of the first PLOT of the IRISH Rebellion: Together with a
brief Narration of the most notorious Cruelties and bloody Massacres which
ensued in several parts of this KINGDOM.
THUS we see what a great hight this Rebellion was grown up unto, within the
space of less then one month, after the very first appearance of it: What
horrid murders, cruel outrages and fearful desolations it had already
wrought in one Province, Concerning the first plot of the Rebellion.
and what a powerful operation the cruelties there acted had upon other parts.
But before I pass further, or come to declare the universal dilatation of it
throughout the whole Kingdom, and how it pleased God even miraculously to
bless the painful endeavors of the State, in the preservation of the City
and Castle of Dublin, till the arrival of their long expected succors out of
England: I hold it not amiss to look back, and (as far as the late discoveries
and dark glimmerings we have into the first plot will admit) to trace it up to
the first beginnings we find of it within this Kingdom of Ireland.

Concerning the first Original of this great Conspiracy, as likewise the first
plotters and contrivers of it, I must ingenuously confess, that I am my self
much unsatisfied in the first conceptions of this monstrous birth, Who were the
plotters of it not yet clearly discovered.
and therefore shall not not now be able clearly to resolve others therein: I
cannot yet determine who were the very first Contrivers, where the first
debates were entertained, or who first sat in Counsel about it. This, as all
other works of this nature, had its foundation laid in the dark, and sealed up
no doubt with many execrable Oaths, the great engines of these times, to bind
up the consciences as well as the tongues of men from discovery: Besides, they
knew well enough, that the Plot being most abominable in it self, to be carried
on with such detestable cruelty, should it take and be fully executed (which
commonly gives to all other treasons applause and highest commendation) would
certainly render the first authors, as well as the bloody actors, most odious
and execrable to all Posterity: Therefore it is not much to be wondered, that
the first beginnings so mysterious and obscurely laid, remain as yet concealed
with so great Obstinacy: But yet I am very confident, that upon view of
several examinations, any reasonable man will conclude with me, that the very
first principles of this inhumane Conspiracy, were roughly drawn and hammered
out at the Romish Forge, powerfully fomented by the treachery and virulent
animosities of some of the chief Irish natives, and so by degrees, by them
molded into that ugly shape wherein it first appeared: There certainly it
received the first life and motion, whether at Rome, whether in Ireland, or in
any other place, I cannot yet determine; But my meaning is, it was first
hatched and set on foot by those most vigilant and industrious Emissaries, who
are sent continually abroad by the power of that See with full commission, per
fas and nefas, to make way for the re-establishment of the Romish Religion in
all parts where it has been suppressed. Great numbers of these wicked
Instruments (the Laws against all of the Romish Clergy, being of late laid
aside, and tacitly suspended execution) came over into Ireland: The main
groundwork, and first predispositions to a Rebellion in general, were most
undoubtedly with great dexterity and artifice laid by them; their venomous
infusions taking such deep roots in the minds of a blind, ignorant,
supersticious people, as made them ready for a change, the great ones
mischievously to plot and contrive, the inferior sort tumultuously to rise up
and execute whatsoever they should command.

And if we will give credit to several examinations taken, many of them from
those of their own, we must believe the plot for a Rebellion in Ireland, The
general Plot for a Rebellion in Ireland of an ancient date.
of a very ancient date, as well as of a large extent: It had been long in
contriving, and howsoever, peradventure first thought on in Ireland, yet
received large contributions toward consummation out of England and other
Foreign parts.

I have seen an Examination of one, who affirms he heard it confidently averred
by Malone a Priest, one that styled himself Chaplain Major within the Pale,
that he himself had been seven years employed in bringing on this plot to
perfection, and that he had travailed into several parts about it.

Master Goldsmith a Minister in Conaught told me, that he did, a full year
before the Rebellion brake out, receive a Letter from a Brother of his residing
at Brussels, wherein he gave him notice thereof, though so obscurely, as he
well understood it not till afterward.

Patrick O Bryan, of the Parish of Galloom, in the County of Fermanagh, Patrick
O Beians Examination.
affirms upon Oath, that all the Nobles in the Kingdom that were Papists, had
a hand in this Plot, as well as the Lord Mac Guire and Hugh Oge, Mac Mahowne;
that they expected aid out of Spain by Owen Roe O Neale, and that Colonel
Plunket, one of those that was to be an actor in the surprise of the Castle of
Dublin, told him, that he knew of this Plot eight years since, and that within
these three years he has been more fully acquainted with it. Francis
Sacheverel Esquire. Francis Sacheverel Esqu. his Examination.
has deposed, that at several times shortly after the beginning of this
Rebellion, he has heard four several popish Priests, viz. Hugh Rely of the
County of Down, Edmund O Tunnah, of the County of Armagh, Morice Mac Credan of
the County of Tyrone, and James Hallegan of the County of Armagh, say, that the
Priests, Jesuits and Friars of England, Ireland, Spain, and other Countries
beyond the Seas, were the plotters, projectors and contrivers of this Rebellion
and Insurrection, and that they have been these six years in agitation and
preparation of the same, and that the said Priests did then express a kind of
joy that the same was brought to so good effect: He also further deposes, that
at several times Ever Boy Mac Gennis in the County of Down Gentleman, and Hugh
O Hagan in the County of Armagh Gent. did brag and say, that they doubted not
but that they should shortly conquer the English in the Kingdom, and enjoy the
same quietly to themselves, and that they would not rest so content, but they
would raise strong Armies to invade and conquer England. Roger Moore, one of
the prime Conspirators, told Master Colely, then prisoner with him, that the
Plot had been in framing several years, and should have been executed several
times, but they were still hindered. By Letters sent from Rome to Sir Phelim O
Neale and the Lord Mac Guire, which were intercepted and brought to the Lord
Parsons, though the Friar that writ them does not express any certain
knowledge of this very Plot, yet thus much appears by them, that they had long
desired to hear of the rising of the Irish, that the news of Sir Phelim O
Neal's taking arms was very acceptable to the Pope and his two Cardinal
Nephews, assuring him of all assistance from thence, and further desiring him
to send over an Agent to Rome, and to employ several persons of his own Nation,
whom he there named, then residing at Madrid, Paris, and with the Emperor,
they being fit Instruments, and such as he might make use of for the procuring
succors from those Princes, whom he assured him would join to give him all
assistance in this action.

Besides these, we have very many other presumptions that the Irish since they
found their own strength, The Irish have had it long in design to shake off the
English government.
and that they were able to draw together so great numbers of men, as their
several Septs so strangely multiplied during the late peace can now afford,
have long had it in design to shake off the English government, to settle the
whole power of the State in the hands of the Natives, and to re-possesse them
of all the Lands now enjoyed by the British throughout the Kingdom: And that in
this plot they did but go about to actuate those confused general notions, and
to put them in a way of execution. Now they supposed there could never be
offered unto them a fairer opportunity then this most unhappy conjuncture of
the affairs of great Britain, when Scotland lately in Arms, had by their own
power and wise managements, drawn his Majesty to condescend to their entire
satisfaction, as well in their Church discipline, as the liberties of that
Kingdom. And in England, the distractions being grown up to some height,
through the great misunderstanding betwixt the King and his Parliament, Ireland
was at this time left naked and unregarded, the Government in the hands of
Justices, the old Army dispersed in places of so great distance, as it could be
of little advantage, the common Soldiers most of them Irish, and all the old
Commanders and Captains, except some few worn out and gone: This, as the first
plotters thought, was the time to work out their own ends, and masking their
perfidious designs under the public pretenses of Religion, and the defense of
his Majesty's Prerogative, they let loose the reins of their own vindicative
humor and irreconcilable hatred to their British Neighbors.

I will not presume to say, they knew what would fall out in England, or what
miserable embroilments that Kingdom was ready to break out into; for
undoubtedly the first plot was laid, and most exactly formed many months
before the war brake out betwixt the King and his people. But thus much I shall
be bold to affirm, that upon the very first breaking out of this Rebellion,
they did strangely conjecture, and beyond all appearance of reason, even
somewhat positively divine, of the dismal breach and fearful distempers which
afterward followed to the disabling of the Kingdom of England from applying
remedies toward the reducement of Ireland. For the attestation of this truth,
I could produce the general concurrence of several circumstances, many
private discourses and advertisements, as also a particular Letter which I had
long by me, written as it seems, from a very intelligent Papist, a great Zealot
in the cause, unto a Nephew of Sir Toby Matthew's, then in Dublin, who, though
lately converted, retained yet a great friendship among them. He tells him in
the beginning of the Letter, that he was desired from some well wishing
friends, to advise him, as he tendered his safety and security, upon the sight
of those instantly to forsake and abandon that troublesome and most unfortunate
Kingdom, for God and man had speedily resolved to afflict and punish the
overgrown impieties of these profane times, all hearts and hands happily
conspiring to it; and that he should be as speedy in his passage as was
possible, and rather, as the case stood, hazard all dangers by sea, then the
least at land, to be sure not to stop in England, especially at London, that
sink of sin (as he calls it) and center of disorders, for by that time he
arrived there, he should be sure to find nothing but troubles, factions and
desperate distempers; that he should dispatch therefore for Paris, or rather
Brussels, where there should be order taken for the removal of all mistakes
betwixt him and his Uncle. This Letter was written about the beginning of
Novem. 1641. which was some few days after the breaking out of this Rebellion,
and full six months before the taking up of Arms in England.

Now for the very time when this great Plot received its first form, The Plot
for a Rebellion in Ireland first discovered to the Lord Mac Guire and others,
about the time of Master John Bellewes return out of England, with commission
to continue the Parliament in Ireland, which was in Jan. 1640.
though I conceive it of somewhat a more ancient date, yet by all the
examinations I have hitherto seen, I can carry it up no higher then the month
of January 1640. and that it was about that time communicated to some of the
chief Gentlemen of Vlster, the Lord Mac Guire does sufficiently testify as
well in the relation written with his own hand in the Tower, and delivered by
him to Sir John Coniers, then Lieutenant, to be presented to the Lords in
Parliament, as also in his Examination taken before the Lord Lambart and Sir
Robert Meredith Kinght, in Ireland, March 26. 1642. In both these he
acknowledges, that he being in Dublin in Candlemas Term, about the time when
Master John Bellew came out of England with the Commission for the continuance
of the Parliament in Ireland; Roger Moore acquainted him, that if the Irish
would rise, they might make their own conditions for the regaining of their
Lands, and Freedom of their Religion; and further says, that he had spoken
with sundry of Lemster to that purpose, who would be ready to join with them,
as likewise a good part of Conaught, and that he found all of them willing
thereto, if so be they could draw to them the Gentlemen of Vlster.

Now for the manner of putting this Plot in execution, the said Lord Mac Guire
does further testify in his relation aforesaid, that the said Roger Moore
having the next day acquainted Philip O Rely, Turlagh O Neale, Brother to Sir
Phelim O Neale, Master Cosloe, and Mac Mahone herewith, did propose, that first
every one should endeavor to draw his own friends into that act, at least
those that did live in one Country with them, and that when they had so done,
they should send to the Irish in the Low Countries and in Spain, to let them
know of the day and resolution, so that they might be over with them by that
day, or soon after with supply of Arms and Munition, that there should be a set
day appointed, and every one in his own Quarters should rise out that day and
seize upon all the Arms he could get in his own County, and this day to be near
Winter, so that England could not be able to send Forces into Ireland before
May, and by that time there was no doubt to be made, but that they themselves
would be supplied by the Irish from beyond the Seas. Then he told them further,
that there was no doubt to be made of the Irish joining with them, and that all
the doubt was in the Gentlemen of the Pale; but he said, for his own part, he
was really assured, that when they had risen out, the Pale Gentlemen would not
stay long after, at lest they would not oppose any thing; and that in case they
did, that they had men enough in the Kingdom without them: Moreover, that he
had spoken to a great man (who then should be namelesse) who would not fail at
the day appointed, to appear and to be seen in the act, but that till then he
was sworn not to reveal him, but yet that upon their importunity, he afterward
told them, it was the Lord of Mayo, who was very powerful in the command of
men in those parts of Conaught, where he lived: He further says, that in Lent
following, Master Moore, according to his promise, came into Vlster, but that
nothing was done there, but all matters put off till May following, where they
met at Dublin, it being both Parliament and Term time, and that from thence
they dispatched one Tooly Conley, parish Priest to Master Moore, to Colonel O
Neale, in the Low Countries, who within few months after arrived with this
answer from the said Colonel, desiring them not to delay any time in rising
out, but to let him know of the day when they intended it, and that he would
not fail to be with them within fourteen days of that day, with good aid;
also desiring them by any means to seize on the Castle of Dublin if they could.
And further he says, that during the time of these their private meetings,
there landed at Dublin, Colonel Birne, Colonel Plunket, Captain Brien O Neale,
and others, who came with directions to carry men away, and that these were
acquainted with the Plot, and did offer their service to bring it on, and that
they would raise their men under color to carry them into Spain, and then
seize on the Castle of Dublin, and with the arms found there, arm their
Soldiers, and have them ready for any action that should be commanded them. He
further also says, that they had diverse private consultations about the
carrying on of this conspiracy, not only at Dublin, but in several other
places in the Province of Vlster, and that they had set down several days for
the putting of it in execution, but meeting with some obstacles, did not come
to conclude of the certain time till about the beginning of September, and that
then they peremptorily resolved on the 23. of October for the day to execute
this long designed plot in; and that they had respect unto the day of the week,
which did fall on Saturday, being the Market Day, on which there would be the
less notice taken of people up and down the streets; that they then settled
what numbers of men should be brought up out of the several Provinces for the
surprise of the Castle, and what Commanders should lead them on, that seeing
the Castle had two Gates, that the Lemster men should undertake to seize upon
the little Gate, which lay nearest to the place where the arms and munition was
placed; and that the great gate should be undertaken by those of Vlster, and
that Sir Phelim O Neale should be there in person; but that he excused himself,
because he resolved at the same time to seize upon London Derry, and that
thereupon by the impottunity of the undertakers, it was imposed upon him the
said Lord Mac Guire, to be there in person at the taking of the Castle of
Dublin. That it was further resolved what number of Forces should be brought up
out of the other Provinces, to make good those places if possessed by them, and
that Sir James Dillon did undertake to be there with 1000. men within four
days after the taking of the Castle; as also that it was resolved that every
one privy to that matter in every part of the Kingdom, should rise out that
day and seize on all the Forts and Arms in the several Counties; as likewise
on all the Gentry, and make them prisoners, the more to assure themselves
against any adverse fortune, and not to kill any but where of necessity they
should be forced thereunto by opposition. These particulars, together with many
other circumstances very considerable, are set down in the relation given in by
the Lord Mac Guire, while he remained prisoner in the Tower of London; but I
have thought fit to forbear to relate them at large, because I find that
relation published by authority, and so presented to the common view. We shall
find also, that Mac Mahone in his examination taken when he was first
apprehended by the Lords Justices and Counsel here, does testify that all the
chief of the Nobility and Gentry in this Kingdom were acquainted with the first
plot, and particularly, that all the popish party in the Committee sent into
England, as likewise in both houses of Parliament knew of it: In the Examnation
of William Fitz Gerald, it is there affirmed, that Sir Phelim O Neale sending
for him five days after his rising in Arms, told him, what he did was by
directions and consent of the prime Nobility and Gentry of the whole Kingdom;
and that what he had done in the Northern parts, the same was executed at
Dublin, and in all other Forts and Towns throughout Ireland: As being a course
resolved upon among the Lords and Gentry, for the preservation of his Majesty's
Prerogative, their own Religion and Liberties, against the Puritan faction in
England, Scotland and Ireland; and that the Lord of Gormanstone knew of this
plot while he was in England, is testified by Lieutenant Colonel Read in his
Examination, as also by the Lord Mac Guire in his relation; who says, that
Colonel Plunket told him, that he being at London, had acquainted some of the
Irish Committee, and particularly the Lord of Gormanstone, with this plot, and
that they approved it well: Colonel Plunket in his Letter to Father Patrick
Barnwal, Lord Abbot of Mellifont (as he styles him) does seem much to glory in
the means he had used to incite the Lords and Gentry of the Pale to appear in
that blessed cause (as he terms it) and assures him that the Lord of
Gormanstone, whom he there calls Lord General, will go bravely on.

And now it will be no difficult matter to resolve what were the secondary
steps and motions of this great plot, as well as by what persons it was wrought
out in Ireland, and carried on to the very point of execution. And first it is
to be observed, that howsoever Sir Phelim O Neale, the Lord Mac Guire, Philip O
Rely, Colonel Mac Brian, The first contrivers of the Rebellion did not first
openly appear in it
Hugh Mac Mahone, and their adherents, chief of the Irish Septs in Vlster, and
other counties near adjacent, did first appear upon the stage, and by their
bloody execution notoriously declare themselves chief actors in this horrid
tragedy: Yet this Rebellion was either altogether nor originally plotted by
them, most of them had but subordinate notions of it, and they as other of the
chief Nobility and Gentry throughout the Kingdom, had several parts assigned
them to act at several times in several places, and did but move according to
the first resolutions taken, and such directions as they had received from the
first Conspirators: I take it to be most probable, after the general plot came
to be reduced into form, that as the Lord of Gormanstone was one of the first
and chief movers in it, so he and the chief of the Pale joined together to draw
in (as they had done in all former Rebellions) the principal septs of the old
Irish, to engage themselves, and to appear first in the business: That the
Lord of Gormanston and some others of the Engl. Pale were engaged in the first
Plot is very probable.
And after they had joined together, and so finely ordered the matter, as they
had made it a general rising, as Sir Phelim O Neale terms it, of all the
Catholics throughout the Kingdom, with the general consent of the prime
Nobility and Gentry thereof; then, as it were, with one general voice, they
sounded forth from all the four Provinces of Ireland the same language, they
used the same Remonstrances, and made the very same pretenses for their
justification, they began the very self-same course, first in stripping, then
banishing and murdering the British and Protestants, only in the North, they
drove on somewhat more furiously, and spilt much more innocent blood, then in
any of the other three Provinces: They agreed likewise in recalling their
Commanders, all the four Provinces had their particular Emissaries abroad:
Those of Lemster brought back Colonel Preston, a Branch out of the House of
Gormanstone, who had long lived with good reputation in Flanders, and him they
made General of their Forces there; but of Vlster they sent into Flanders
likewise for Owen Roe O Neale, upon whom they conferred the same charge in that
Province: The Munster men brought over Garrat Barry, whom they made General of
their forces: And those in Conaught drew back one of the Burks, to whom they
gave the chief command of such men as they were able to draw together for the
advancement of the common design: All these held a due correspondency, and in
all their actions had a just concurrency toward the main end.

The great instrument chiefly employed in this work of drawing the mere Irish
into a firm combination with the old English (as appears by the Lord Mac
Guire's relation before mentioned) was Roger Moore Esquire, a person of a
broken fortune, Roger Moore the chief Person employed to make a conjunction
between the mere Irish and the English for raising a Rebellion.
by descent merely Irish, and issued out of the chief family of the O Moors in
the County of Leax, but by inter-marriages allied to some of the principal
Gentlemen of the Pale; He Treated with them about the Association; he first
broke the design to the northern Irish, he was the man that made several
journeys in Lemster, into Vlster and Conaught: Sundry messages were
enterchangeably sent and returned the summer before the breaking out of the
Rebellion by his means and intercourse between them; And all things were so
ordered for their agreement, as they were to go hand in hand together; some of
the principal Gentlemen of the Pale, as Colonel Plunket, Captain Fox, and
others, were designed to join with the Lord Mac Guire, Mac Mahone, Brian O
Neale, Con O Neale, Hugh Birne, for the surprise of his Majesty's Castle of
Dublin. Cartan Major Domi to Owen O Neale in Flanders, in his Examination taken
February 1641. tells, among many other remarkable passages, of several
preparatives to this Rebellion; as that Con O Neale, brother to Daniel O Neale,
was sent by Owen O Neale into England, and that while he resided there he
received letters from the President Rosse (which was Sir Phelim O Neale) and
that he assured him he went on very well in his business; for B^abant and
Valence were joined together, which as he affirms, signified in those
Characters Vlster and Lemster, and that he expected the coming of Jews Lenoy,
viz. Daniel O Neale: Besides, as James Talbot Esquire, testifies in his Letter
of the 9. of November 1641. written to the Lords Justices out of the County of
Cavan, that he understood from Phillip Mac Mulmore O Rely, that there were
certain Covenants passed between the Lords of the Pale and the Northern Irish,
for the advancing of the Rebellion; and that the Remonstrance from the
principal Irish in the County of Cavan, unto the Lords Justices and Council
sent by Dean Jones and Master Waldrone, there then prisoner, was framed in the
Pale and brought unto the said Irish by Colonel Plunket, one of their own: And
this was in the very beginning of the Rebellion, long before any jealousies
were entertained by the State of the adherence or conjunction of the old
English with the Irish. What those Covenants or Contracts were, I cannot say,
but it is most certain, some there were, and some Covenants also entered into,
between the Northern Irish, and the Lords and Gentlemen of the chief of both
the other Provinces, as well as Lemster, and these were signed with their
blood, as Doctor Maxwel testifies in his examination, he heard Sir Phelim O
Neale say on the 19. of December 1641. in his own house, and in the hearing of
Master Joseph Travers and others: If the Lords and Gentlemen (meaning the
Papists of other Provinces) then not in arms, would not rise, but leave him in
the lurch for all, he would produce his Warrant, signed with their own hands,
and written in their own blood, which should bring them to the Gallows. And
certainly, had there not been some very strange and extraordinary engagements,
and more then I can well imagine, it had not been possible that so many persons
of quality, having great possessions and many children, should have declared
themselves, after they saw the main part of the plot for the surprise of the
Castle of Dublin to fail, and the power of the Northern Rebels begin to
decline, that the Parliament of England had with great alacrity and readiness
undertaken the War, and not only engaged themselves to his Majesty to send over
powerful supplies both out of England and Scotland, but by their public Order
of both Houses, sent over to the Lords Justices, and printed at Dublin in the
Month of November, fully declared their resolutions for the vigorous
prosecution of the war of Ireland: Nay, the Cities of Galway and Limeric, kept
their designs very covertly, not doing any open acts of hostility, till after
the arrival of some Forces at Dublin out of England, and that the siege of
Drohedagh or Tredagh was raised, and those bold perfidious Traitors beaten back
into the North, the Lords of the Pale banished by force of his Majesty's Arms
out of their own habitations, which were all spoiled and laid waste.

Now that then they should declare themselves, is more then a miracle to me,
and such a mystery, as I should not know what to think of, but that I find in
the Lord Mac Guires relation before mentioned, that they were acquainted with
the first beginnings of this great plot, and had a particular interest from
time to time in the carriage of it on, so as I think I shall not wrong them
positively, to determine, that they were too deeply engaged slightly to retire;
and that howsoever upon the failing of it in the main piece, they at first
stood at a gaze, and were put to take up second Counsels; yet such was the
strength of the conspiracy, and their great confidence in the power of their
arms, as made them appear in due time to entertain their several assignations,
and act their parts with great diligence and iudustry. The wife of Philip O
Rely in the County of Cavan, told James Talbot (as he openly related it to the
Lords Justices at Counsel Board) that she wondered very much the Lords and
Gentlemen of the Pale did not rise and join with them in the very beginning of
this Rebellion, adding these words, or to this effect; that if they would have
let us alone, and not set us on, we were so well at ease, as we would never
have begun this troublesome work. It cannot certainly be imagined, that those of
the English Pale (unless they had been the first projectors, or deep
adventurers) would have yielded that the mere Irish should have seized upon the
City and Castle of Dublin, places of refuge for them in all former troubles,
and which would now have given them protection and safety against the
incursions of the Irish.

But I hold it not necessary to produce further evidence in this particular; I
purpose now to declare how those great Instruments of mischief, that were the
supreme conductors of this wicked design, moved forwards so succesfully in the
beginning, toward the accomplishment of their long intended extirpation of all
the British and Protestants out of the Kingdom. The Romish Clergy and the
Popish Lawyers great instruments in the first Plotting and carrying on the
Rebellion.
I find two sorts of persons who did most eminently appear in laying those main
fundamentals whereupon their bloody superstructions were afterward easily
reared up: And these were such of the popish Lawyers as were natives of the
Kingdom, and those of the Romish Clergy of several degrees and orders. For
the first, they had in regard of their knowledge in the Laws of the Land, very
great reputation and trust, they now began to stand up like great Patriots for
the vindication of the liberties of the Subject, and redress of their
pretended grievances, and having by their bold appearing therein, made a great
party in the house of Commons, The Irish Lawyers draw a great party in the
House of Commons to adhere to them
here then sitting, some of them did there magisterially obtrude, as undoubted
maxims of Law, the pernicious speculations of their own brain, which though
plainly discerned to be full of virulency and tending to sedition, yet so
strangely were many of the Protestants and well meaning men in the house
blinded with an apprehension of ease and redress, and so stupefied with their
bold accusations of the government, as most thought not fit, others durst not
stand up to contradict their fond assertions; so as what they spoke was
received with great acclamation, and much applause by most of the Protestant
Members of the house; many of which under specious pretenses of public zeal
to this Country, they had inveigled into their party: And then it was, that
having impeached Sir Richard Bolton, Lord Chancelour of Ireland, of high
treason, together with other prime Officers and Ministers of State that were of
English birth, some of those great Masters took upon them with much confidence
to declare the Law, to make new expositions of their own upon the Text, to
frame their Queres, challenges fitter to be taken to a long, wilfully,
overgrown misgovernment, then to be made against an authority, that had for
many years struggled against the beloved irregularities of a stubborn people,
and which had prevailed far beyond former times, toward the allaying of the
long continued distempers of the Kingdom: They disdained the moderate
qualifications of the Judges, who gave them modest answers, such as the Law and
duty to their Sovereign would admit. But those would not serve their turn, they
resolved upon an alteration in the government, and drawing of it wholly into
the hands of the Natives, which they knew they could not compass in a
Parliamentary way, and therefore only made preparatives there, and delivered
such desperate maxims, which being diffused abroad would fit and dispose the
people to a change: As they declared it to be Law, that being killed in
Rebellion, though found by matter of record, would give the King no forfeiture
of estate; that though many thousands stood up in arms in a Kingdom, working
all manner of destruction, yet if they professed not to rise against the King,
that it was no Rebellion: That if a man were outlawed for Treason, and his
land thereby vested in the Crown or given away by the King, his heir might come
afterward and be admitted to reverse the Outlawry, and recover his Ancestors
estate. And many other positions of a perilous consequence, tending to sedition
and disturbance, did they continue to publish during that Session, and by the
power and strength of their party, so far did they prevail at last, as they
presumed to attempt a suspension of Poynings Act, and indeed intended the utter
abrogation of that Statute, which remains as one of the greatest ties and best
monuments the English have of their entire dominion over the Irish Nation, and
the annexion of that Kingdom to the imperial Crown of England. They further
assumed power of Judicature to the Parliament in criminal and capital
ofences: A right which no former age has left any president for, neither would
this admit the example.

And thus carrying all things before them, they continued the Session of
Parliament begun in May, till about two months before the first breaking out
of this Rebellion; it being very ill taken, that even then they were adjourned.
And this they have since aggravated as a high crime against the Lords Justices,
and as one of the chief moving causes to the taking up of Arms generally
throughout the Kingdom.

But to let those things pass, how finely soever these proceedings were
carried on, and being covered over with pretenses of zeal and public
affection, passed then current without any manner of suspicion; yet now the
eyes of all men are opened, and they are fully resolved that all these
passages, together with the other high contestations in Parliament, not to have
the newly raised Irish Army disbanded, the importunate solicitation of their
Agents in England, to have the old Army in Ireland cashiered, and the Kingdom
left to be defended by Trained Bands of their own Nation. As likewise the
Commissions procured by several of the most eminent Commanders now in
Rebellion, for the raising men to carry into Spain, were all parts of this
Plot, Prologues to this ensuing Tragedy, Preparatives, such as had bin long
laid to bring on the sudden execution of this most bloody Design, all at one
and the same time throughout the Kingdom.

The means used by the Priests and Jesuits to stir up the people to rebel.
Now for the Jesuits, Priests, Friars, and all the rest of the viperous
fraternity belonging to their holy Orders; who, as I said, had a main part to
Act, and have not failed with great assiduity and diligence to discharge the
same. They lost no time, but most dexteriously applied themselves in all parts
of the Country to lay such other dangerous impressions in the minds, as well of
the meaner sort as of the chief Gentlemen, as might make them ready to take
fire upon the first occasion. And when this Plot was so surely, as they
thought, laid, as it could not well fail, and the day once prefixed for
execution; they did in their public Devotions long before, recommend by their
Prayers, the good success of a great Design, much tending to the prosperity
of the Kingdom, and the advancement of the Catholic cause. And for the
facilitating of the Work, and stirring up of the people with greater animosity
and cruelty to put it on at the time prefixed; they loudly in all places
declamed against the Protestants; telling the people that they were Heretics,
and not to be suffered any longer to live among them; that it was no more sin
to kill an Englishman, then to kill a dog; and that it was a most mortal
and unpardonable sin to relieve or protect any of them. Then also they
represented with much acrimony the severe courses taken by the Parliament in
England, for the suppressing of the Romish Religion in all parts of the
Kingdom, and utter extirpation of all professors of it. They told the people
that in England they had caused the Queens Priest to be hanged before her own
face, and that they held her Majesty in her own person under a most severe
discipline: That the same cruel Laws against Popery were here ordered to be
put suddenly in execution; and a design secretly laid for bringing and seizing
upon all the principal Noblemen and Gentlemen in Ireland upon the 23. of
November next ensuing; and so to make a general Massacre of all that would not
desert their Religion and presently become Protestants.

The Irish revive their ancient animosities against the English.
And now also did they take occasion to revive their inveterate hatred and
ancient animosities against the English Nation, whom they represented to
themselves as hard Masters; under whose government, how pleasant, comfortable
and advantageous so ever it was, they would have the world believe they had
endured a most miserable captivity and envassalage. They looked with much envy
upon their prosperity, considering all the Land they possessed (though a great
part bought at high rates of the Natives) as their own proper inheritance.
They grudged at the great multitudes of their fair English Cattle; at their
goodly Houses, though built by their own industry at their own charges; at the
large improvements they made of their Estates, by their own travails and
careful endeavors. They spoke with much scorn and contempt of such as brought
little with them into Ireland, and having there planted themselves, in a little
time contracted great fortunes: they were much troubled, especially in the
Irish Countries, to see the English live handsomely, and to have every thing
with much decency about them, while they lay nastily buried, as it were, in
mire and filthiness; the ordinary sort of people commonly bringing their
Cattle into their own stinking Creates, and there naturally delighting to lie
among them. These malignant considerations made them with an envious eye
impatiently to look upon all the British lately come over into the Kingdom.
Nothing less then a general extirpation will now serve their turn; they must
have restitution of all the Lands to the proper Natives, whom they take to be
the ancient proprietors, and only true owners, most unjustly despoiled by the
English, whom they hold to have made undue acquisitions of all the Land they
possess by gift from the Crown, upon the attainder of any of their Ancestors.

And so impetuous were the desires of the Natives to draw the whole Government
of the Kingdom into their own hands, The ends proposed by the first plotters
of the rebellion.
to enjoy the public profession of their Religion, as well as to disburthen
the Country of all the British inhabitants seated therein, as they made the
whole body of the State to be universally disliked; represented the several
members as persons altogether corrupt and ill affected; pretended the ill
humors and distempers in the Kingdom to be grown to that height as required
Cauteries, deep incisions; and indeed nothing able to work so great a cure,
but an universal Rebellion. This was certainly the disease, as appears by all
the symptoms, and the joint concurrence in opinion of all the great Physicians
that held themselves wise enough to propose remedies, and prescribe fit
applications to so desperate a Malady. In those Instructions privately sent
over into England by the Lord Dillon of Costeloz, presently after the breaking
out of the Rebellion, the alteration of the supreme power in the government and
settling of it in the hands of the Earl of Ormond, giving leave to the Grand
Council of the Kingdom to remove such Officers of State as they thought fit,
and to recommend Natives to their places, were there positively laid down to be
a more likely means to appease these tumults then a considerable Army. In the
Remonstrance of the County of Longford, presented about the same time to the
Lords Justices, by the same Lord Dillon, as also in the frame of the
Commonwealth, found at Sir John Dungars House, not far from Dublin, and sent
up thither out of Conaught to be communicated to those of Lemster; pieces which
publicly appeared soon after the breaking out of the Rebellion; the main
points insisted upon in them and several others, The true causes of the
Rebellion.
were restoration of the Public profession of the Romish Religion;
restitution of all the Plantation Lands unto the Natives, and settlement of the
present Government in their hands. All the Remonstrances from several parts,
and that came out of the several Provinces of the Kingdom do concur in
these Propositions, with very little or no difference. And therefore that the
desires with the first intentions of those who are now out in Rebellion, may
more clearly appear; I have thought fit here to insert them as I found them,
Methodically digested into certain Propositions, termed

The means to reduce this Kingdom unto Peace and quietness.
1 THat a general and free pardon without any exception be granted to all his
Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom; and that in pursuance thereof, and for
strengthening the same, an Act of Abolition may pass in the Parliament here.

2 That all marks of National distinctions between English and Irish may he
abolished and taken away by Act of Parliament.

3 That by several Acts of Parliament to be respectively passed here and in
England, it be declared that the Parliament of Ireland has no subordination
with the Parliament of England, but that the same has in it self supreme
Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, as absolute as the Parliament of England there
has.

4 That the Act of 12. Henry the seventh, commonly called Poynings Act, and all
other Acts expounding or explaining the same, may be repealed.

5 That as in England there past an Act for a Trienniall Parliament, there may
pass in Ireland another for a Sexenniall Parliament.

6 That it may be enacted by Parliament, that the Act of the 2d of Queen
Elizabeth in Ireland, and all other Acts made against Catholics, or the
Catholic Religion, since the twentieth year of King Henry the eight, may be
repealed.

7 That the Bishoprics, Deanaries, and all other spiritual promotions of this
Kingdom, and all Frieries and Nunneries, may be restored to the Catholic
owners, and likewise all impropriations of Tithes, and that the Scits, Ambits,
and Precincts of the Religious houses of the Monks, may be restored to them;
but as to the rest of their temporal possessions, it is not designed to be
taken from the present proprietors, but to be left to them until God shall
otherwise incline their own hearts.

8 That such as are now entitled Catholic Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, or
other dignitaries in this Kingdom by donation of the Pope, may, during their
lives, enjoy their spiritual promotions; with protestation nevertheless, and
other fit clauses to be laid down for preservation of his Majesty's rights of
Patronages, first Fruits, and twentieth parts in manner and quantity, as now
his Highness receives benefit thereby.

9 That all inquisitions taken since the year 1634. to entitle his Majesty to
Conaught, Thomond, Ormond, Eliogartie, Kilnemanagh, Duheara, Wickloe and
Idvagh, may be vacated, and their estates secured, according to his Majesty's
late graces.

10 That an Act of Parliament may pass here for the securing the Subjects
title to their several estates against the Crown, upon any title accrewed unto
it before sixty years, or under color or pretext of the present commotions.

11 That all Plantations made since the year 1610. may be avoided by
Parliament, if the Parliament shall hold it just, and their possessions
restored to them or their Heirs, from whom the same were taken, they
nevertheless answering to the Crown the Rents and services proportionable,
reserved upon the undertakers.

12 That the transportation of all native Commodities to all places of the
world in peace with his Majesty, may be free and lawful, his customs first
paid, and that the Statutes of 10, 11, and 13. of Queen Elizabeth, for
restraining the exportation of native Commodities be repealed.

13 That all preferments Ecclesiastical, Civil and Martial in this Kingdom,
that lie in his Majesty's gift, may be conferred on Natives of this Kingdom
only, such as his Majesty shall think meet, without any distinction for
Religion; Provided always, that upon the Princes of his blood of England, he
may bestow what places he shall think meet.

14 That a Marshall and Admiral of this Kingdom may be elected in it, to have
perpetual succession therein with the same pre-eminence, authority and
jurisdiction as they respectively have in England, and that the said places be
ever conferred upon Noblemen, Natives of this Kingdom.

15 That there may be Trained Bands in all Cities, Towns Corporate, and
Counties of this Kingdom, armed and provided at the charge of the several
Counties, Cities and Towns, and commanded by the Natives of the same, who
shall be named by the Counties, Cities and Towns respectively.

16 That his Majesty may release all Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service;
in consideration whereof, he shall receive a settled revenue of 12000. li. per
annum, being double the sum which he casually receives by them; Reliefes,
Seismes, Licenses for Alienations, Escuage and Aids nevertheless to remain.

17 That all Monopolies may be for ever taken away by Act of Parliament.

18 That such new Corporations as have not the face of Corporate Towns, and
were erected to give voices in the Parliament, may be dissolved, and their
Votes taken away, and hereafter no such to be admitted to voices in Parliament.

11 That there may be Agents chosen in Parliament or otherwise, as thought meet
to attend continually his Majesty, to represent the grievances of this Nation,
that they may be removable by such as did elect them; and in case of death or
removance, others may be for ever successively substituted in that place, and
that such Agents may enjoy the freedom of their conscience in Court, and every
where else.

These are the means proposed by these Catholic Remonstrants, for reducing of
the Kingdom to peace, these the great obstructions they would have removed, and
the constant Counsel they would have followed, in settling the tranquillity and
present government of this Land; so as we need seek no further evidence, nor
make any more curious enquiries into the secret causes of their first rising:
we have here enough out of their own mouths, to resolve the most scrupulous
unbeleever of their first motives to this Rebellion. The re-establishment of
the Romish Religion only a pretense for the rebellion.
And now for the matter of Religion, howsoever I am very confident they ever
really intended the re-establishment of that of the Church of Rome, with all
the Rites and Ceremonies thereof, together with the utter extirpation of all of
the reformed profession: Yet considering the large indulgence and free liberty
they universally enjoyed at that time in the full exercise of that their
Religion throughout all the parts of the Kingdom; it may be most justly
suspected (how zealously soever they now obtrude it) that this was only the
bare outward couverture, made use of by the principal undertakers, to draw on
a poor ignorant superstitious people to sacrifice their lives in this
quarrel. Neither can it by any reasonable man be ever presumed, that such
persons as made no conscience of committing treason, so many cruel murders,
and all other kind of abominable villainies, not to be paralleld in any other
Country, could be drawn merely out of conscience toward God, to act these for
the regaining of the free and public profession of their Religion.

This certainly was no more the true and main cause of their taking up Arms,
then the redress of their pretended grievances, All the grievances of the
Kingdom redressed before the Rebellion brake out.
whereunto his Majesty had condiscended, and out of his inclinations for their
present relief, had given much more satisfaction to their Agents lately in
England, then ever they could in any other time expect to receive or hope to
enjoy. Yet we see how little effect those great graces brought over not above
two months before this Rebellion brake out, took among them: for presently
after the return of their Agents with them, this most detestable conspiracy,
which had been long in hatching, began to work, and to be put in execution. And
if we shall consider their maine design and chief ends therein, as they
appear in their first principles, or will give credit to the several speeches
and passages that we meet with among the Rebels, in the very beginning of their
breaking out; as also to several other testimonies that have since privately
fallen from some particular persons among them, we must believe that their
design clearly was to destroy and root out all the British and Protestants
planted within this Kingdom, to cut off the Sovereignty of the Crown of
England, and so to deliver themselves from their long continued subjection to
the English Nation.

But to come to one maine particular, taken into debate by the prime Movers and
chief incendiaries in this horrid Rebellion, A Consultation held, whether it
will be best to murder, or only to banish all the British out of Ireland.
they had a most serious consultation what course to take with most safety to
themselves, for the disburthening of the Kingdom of those multitudes of
English, which were in very great numbers dispersedly planted among them. Some
were of opinion that they should spare their lives, not render themselves
guilty of the spilling of so much innocent blood, but that they should seize on
their goods, expel them their habitations, and after banishing them out of the
Kingdom, proceed as the Spaniards did with many hundred thousands of the
Moors, whom, as it were in a moment, they cleared out of their Dominions.
Others there were who much opposed this kind of lenity and moderation,
remonstrating the high inconveniences which would inevitably redound to
themselves thereby. First, that the British were in so great numbers, as they
could not either by disarming, imprisoning, or any other means possible, ever
hope to secure them from mischief: Then that if they only expelled them out
of the Kingdom, they would remain still as so many fit instruments to be
entertained in England, and from thence returned back full of revengefull
thoughts to recover their losses; that by their long experience and knowledge
in the Country they would be better guides, more deeply engaged to prosecute
the War; and having their bodies inured to this Climate, would prove much
more able Soldiers then any new men that could be raised, or any otherwise
brought over. How they determined this particular I shall not undertake to
declare; my intelligence fails me, and I am able to deliver no more of the
result of this great Council then appears in the bloody effects and horrid
executions acted in the first beginnings of their Rebellion. It is most
probable they came to no positive conclusion, but left the chief Actors in
this particular at large, to do as should seem good to themselves. We find
their first proceedings and outrages committed upon the English very various
and much differing in several places; some only stripping and expelling of
them; others, murdering Man, Woman and Child without mercy. But this is
certain, and of most unquestionable truth, that by one means or other, they
resolved universally to root all the British and Protestants out of Ireland.
The Irish resolve to root the English out of Ireland.
And that these were the first thoughts and bitter fruits of the long
premeditated malicious intentions, sufficiently appears by their Actions, as
well as by their virulent expressions uttered upon their first rising, when
they thought the Kingdom their own. They then said openly, that they meant to
destroy the English, and that they had made a Covenant no Englishman. should
set footing among them. Some of the Irish would not endure the very sound of
that language, The Irish in many places killed English Cowes and Sheep merely
because they were English; in some places they cut off their legs, or took
out a piece out of their buttocks, and so let them remain still alive. The Lord
Montgarrat, Master Edward Butlar, the Baron of Logmouth went with their Forces
into Munster about the beginning of the rising of the Irish there, and while
they remained about Callen and Mallow they consumed no less then 50000. others
say 100000. English Sheep, besides a great abundance of English Cattle, and
such as they could not eat, yet they killed and left in great multitudes,
stinking, to the great annoyance of the Country. This testified by Henry
Champart in his Examination taken before Sir Robert Meredith Knight, etc.
but would have penalties inflicted upon them that spoke English, and all the
English names of places changed into the old Irish denominations: others
professed that they would not leave an English man or woman alive in the
Kingdom, but that all should be gone, no not so much as an English. Beast, or
any of the breed of them. James Hallegan the Priest did read an Excommunication
in the Church, which, as he alleged, came from their great Irish
Metropolitan, James Shaw a Minister Deposes, that after the Cessation, diverse
of the Rebels confessed the Priests had given them the Sacrament, upon
condition they should not spare Man, Woman nor Child that were Protestants;
and that he heard diverse of them say, in a bragging manner, that it did them a
great deal of good to wash their hands in the blood of the Protestants whom
they had slain jurat. Jan. 7. 1643.
and terrifying his Parishoners therewith he told them, that from that day
forth, whosoever did harbor or relieve any Scot, English or Welchman, or give
them Alms at their doors, should be excommunicated, whereby as Master
Sacheurell testifies in his Examination many were starved and dyed for want in
those parts. Thomas Johnson Vicar of Tullah, of the County of Maio, deposes,
that he heard Stephen Linoh Prior of Strade, being asked if it were not lawful
to kill this Deponent because he would not go to Mass; answered, that it was
as lawful for them to kill him, as to kill a Sheep or a Dog: and diverse of
the rebellious Soldiers told him to his face, that they would no more care to
kill him, then they would do a Pigge.
We have it from Master Creighton, a reverend Minister, one long detained
prisoner within the County of Cavan, that the Friars exhorted the peopl with
tears to spare none of the English; John Addis of the County of Westmeath,
Deposes, that Robert Magohagan Priest, said to this Deponant, that it was no
more pity nor conscience to take English-mens lives or goods from them, then
to take a bone out of a Dogs mouth, jurat. July 21. 1642.
that the Irish were resolved to destroy them out of the Kingdom; that they
would devour (as their very word was) the seed of the English out of Ireland,
and when they had rid them there, they would go over into ENGLAND, and not
leave the Memorial of the ENGLISH Name under Heaven.

And so fond and vein were their imaginations, and to such a height of madness
were they grown, as they could not terminate their thoughts in the reduction of
Ireland under the power of their own Nation. But as soon as they had begun
their Rebellion there, they spoke confidently in all places of transporting
their Arms into England, that they would send 30000 men over into that
Kingdom, and that they would draw in foraign Auxiliaries thither to join with
them; and so by a high hand establish the free exercise of the Romish Religion
within that Kingdom. A Design certainly which the Priests and Jesuits had
taken up in their own thoughts, and by their correspondencies abroad intended
powerfully to bring about, as soon as they had settled their affairs in
Ireland. And if it had not pleased God in an extraordinay way to bring the
first Plot to light, and so to bless the weak endeavors of the State here, as
to enable them by the assistance of those small Forces they confusedly gathered
together, to hold out till the arrival of the Succors sent out of England; I
leave it to every one to consider with how much advantage they might have gone
on at that time toward the accomplishment of so desperate a Project. And for
my self, I must profess that I am clearly resolved, that had they at first
overmastered the unexpected difficulties and fatal impediments they met
withal at home, and possessed themselves of the Arms and Munition within the
Castle of Dublin, and so flesht and blooded in the slaughter of many thousands
of the English Nation, had transported a numerous Army of Irish Rebels, and
suddenly landed them in some good Port within the Kingdom of England: They
would have prevailed very far toward the miserable desolation and ruin
thereof. It must be remembered in what a most unhappy discomposure the affairs
were at that time there; what a diseased body the State then had, and what high
distempers then strongly working soon after brake out; what a strong party
they might have found within, and with what great reputation they would have
marched on under the glory of their late victories achieved in Ireland,
signalizing the power of their arms with such horrid cruelties and bloody
butcheries, as would have wrought a strange terror among the people.

Thus we see what were the Causes and first Motives to this unnatural
Rebellion; as likewise who were the chief Actors and the great instruments
designed by the first Plotters to predispose the people to a readiness to take
Arms for the rooting out of the British Inhabitants from among them. The
Preparatives being all made, the Plot in all points ripe for execution, it was
carried on to the very evening before the day appointed for the taking of the
Castle of Dublin without discovery. And though it pleased God to bring it then
to light (as has been declared) and so happily to disappoint it in the maine
Piece, yet it took in the Northern parts, being that very day fully executed
in most of the chief places of strength within the Province of Vlster. And
whereas the Priests did long before in their public Devotions at Mass pray
for a blessing upon a great Design they had then in hand; so now, as I have
heard, they did in many places, the very day before the breaking out of this
Rebellion, give the people a dismiss at Mass, with free liberty to go out
and take possession of all their Lands, which they pretended, unjustly detained
from them by the English; as also to strip, rob, and dispoyle them of all their
Goods and Cattle. They had without doubt, by one means or other, either
private or public instructions not to leave to the English any thing that
might afford the least comfort or hope of longer subsistence among them. This
was the main bait used to draw on the common people; The English goods
presented to the Irish as a chief means to raise them up against them.
and this wrought far more powerfully then all other persuasions, fictions or
wild chimeraes that they infused into them. It is most apparent, that the
prime Gentlemen in all parts, as well as the Clergy, pressed them on to
despoyle the English of all their Goods and Cattle, well knowing their
avaricious humor and greedy desires to get them into their possession, and
that they could not possibly find out any other thing that would engage them
more readily to undertake, or more desperately to execute all manner of
villainies, then the hopes of enjoying so rich a prey now presented unto them.
The people made believe by their priests that it was a Meritorious act to kill
the English.


The people being now set at liberty, and prepossessed by their Priests with a
belief that it was lawful for them to rise up and destroy all the
Protestants, who, they told them, were worse then Dogs; that they were Devils,
and served the Devil; assuring them the killing of such was a meritorious act,
John Parry of D^uermosh, in the County of Armagh, deposes, that O Cullan a
Priest, told his Auditors at Mass, that the bodies of such as died in this
quarrel, should not be cold before their souls should ascend up into heaven,
and that they should be free from the pains of Purgatory.
and a rare preservative against the pains of Purgatory, gathered themselves
together in great numbers, assembling in several companies through the
several parts of the Northern Counties, with staves, Margaret Bromley in her
Examination deposes, that some of the Rebels would say, after their cruel
butcheries, that they knew if themselves should now dye, their souls should
go to Heaven, and that they were glad of the revenge they had taken of the
English.
sithes and pitch-forks, for at first they had not many better weapons: And so
in a most confused manner, they began tumultuously to drive away at the first
only the Cattle belonging to the English, The Irish rise and first drive away
all the Cattle belonging to the English.
and then to break into their houses, and seize upon their goods. It is true,
there were some murders committed the very first day of their rising, and some
houses set on fire, but these as I conceive, were for the most part out of
private spleen, or where they had particular instructions so to do, as they
had from the Lord Mac Guire, to kill Master Arthur Champion, a Justice of Peace
in the County of Fermanagh, who with several other of his neighbors were
murdered at his own house upon the 23. of October in the morning. But
certainly that which they mainly intended at first, and which they most busily
employed themselves about, was the driving away the Englishmens Cattle, and
possessing their goods: The Irish Gentlemen possess themselves of the Goods
belonging to the English, under pretense of securing them
Wherein the common people were not the only actors, but even the chief
Gentlemen of the Irish in many placrs, most notoriously appeared, and under
plausible pretenses of securing their goods from the rapine and spoil of the
common sort, got much peaceably into their hands: And so confident were the
English of their good dealing at first, as many delivered their goods by
retaile unto them, gave them particular Inventories of all they had, nay dug
up such of their best things as they had hidden under ground, to deposite in
their custody. Much likewise they got by fair promises and deep engagements to
do them no further mischief, to suffer them, their wives and children quietly
to retire and leave the Country: But others, and especially the meaner sort of
people fell more rudely to work, at the very first, breaking up of their
houses, and using all manner of force and violence, to make themselves masters
of their goods.

The next act was to strip the English, man, woman and child stark naken, and
to turn them out of their own doors. Al manner of relief forbidden to the
English as they passed upon the highways stripped and despoiled of all they
had.
And having thus seized upon all their goods and Cattle, ransackt their houses,
gotten their persons under their power; the next thing they did, was to strip
man, woman and child, many of them stark naked, and so to turn them out of
their own doors, not permitting them in some places so much as to shelter
themselves under bushes, or in the Woods, and strictly prohibiting all the
Irish under great penalties to give them entertainment or any kind of relief,
as they passed on upon the high ways. And certainly their design in this,
most notoriously appears to have bin no othen then that al such as they would
not lay their hands upon, and cruelly murder in cold blood, might miserably
perish of themselves through cold, nakedness and want; and therefore as fast as
any of them so stripped got old rags to cover their nakedness, they
endeavored to strip them again and again; as may appear by the Examination
of John Gourley, who deposes, that some were stripped twice, some thrice, as
fast as they could get any old rags to cover their nakedness, the next
Irishwomen or even the children that met them would take them off: And he and
his Wife further depose, that when their house, together with the Town of
Armagh, were set on fire by the Rebels, she was stripped of her clothes seven
several times after she got other cloths; The manner of stripping the English.
and at length, they left her not so much as her smock or hairlace, and that
she got to a place and hid her self in a hutch for three or four days, and
after went to find out her children, two of which had the small Pox visibly
upon them, Jurat. November. 8. 1642.

How infallibly this course succeeded, and how surely they compassed their
devilish ends hereby, is but too well known; The English leaving sufficient
monuments in the Highwayes as they passed, as well as in the Towns wherein they
arrived of the dismal mortality it bred among them. The miseries and mortality
it brought among them.
And for the fuller satisfaction of any one who shall doubt thereof, I have
thought fit to insert these two ensuing Examinations.

James Redferne, of the County of London Derry, deposes, that in the Town of
Coleraine, since the Rebellion began, there dyed of robbed and stripped people
that fled thither for succor, many hundreds, besides those of the Town who
had anciently dwelt there, and that the mortality there was such, and so great,
as many thousands dyed there in two days, and that the living, though scarce
able to do it, laid the carcases of those dead persons in great ranks, into
vast and wide holes, laying them so close and thick, as if they had packed up
Herrings together.

Magdalen Redman, late of the Dowris in the Kings County, Widow, being sworn
and examined, deposes and says, That she this Deponent and diverse other
Protestants her neighbors, and amongst the rest 22. Widows, after they were
all robbed were also stripped stark naked, and then they covering themselves in a
house with straw, the Rebels then and there lighted the straw with fire, and
threw amongst them, of purpose to burn them, where they had been burned or
smothered, but that some of the Rebels more pitiful then the rest, commanded
these cruel Rebels to forbear, so as they escaped: Yet the Rebels kept and
drove them naked into the wild Woods, from Tuesday until Saturday, in frost
and snow, so as the snow unmelted long lay upon some of their skins, and some
of their children dyed in their arms: And when as the Deponent and the rest
endeavored to have gone away for refuge to the Burre, the cruel Rebels turned
them again, saying, they should go toward Dublin; and when they endeavored
to go toward Dublin, they hindered them again, and said, they should go to
the Burre; and so tossed them to and fro; Yet at length, such of those poor
stripped people as dyed not before they got away out of the hands of the
Rebels, escaped to the Burre, where they were harbored and relieved by one
William Parsons Esquire: And yet there dyed at the Burre of those stripped
persons, about forty men, women and children. And this Deponent and those other
stripped people that survived, lived miserably at the Burre aforesaid, until
they with the rest, had quarter to come from thence to Dublin.

Jur. 7. March 1642. Doh. Watson. Will. Aldrich.

Isabel, the relict of Christopher Porter, late of Dowris in the Kings County,
sworn and examined, deposes and says, in all the particulars above mentioned
as Magdalen Redman before examined, being her Neighbor.



Some of the most notorious CRUELTIES, and barbarous Murders committed by the
Irish Rebels, attested upon Oath as they appear in several Examinations
annexed in the Margin.
WE may in these poor souls, as it were, in large Characters, behold the
miseries of all those multitudes of Men, Women and Children, that were in all
parts of the Kingdom thus inhumanely stripped, and so exposed to the same want,
cold and nakedness. The mercies of the wicked are cruel; how bitter was their
compassion to all those British that thus suffered? A particular enumeration of
several bloody Massacres and horrid cruelties, exercised upon the British, all
testified upon Oath, and taken out of several Examinations, which are inserted
in the Margin.
How horrid, barbarous, and insupportable was the commiseration they thus
expressed toward them? Yet these were as they told them at first, but the
beginnings of their sorrows: For when the Northern Rebels began to find their
own strength, and that partly by treachery, partly by force they had possessed
themselves of all the chief places of strength in Vlster, disarmed the
English, robbed them of their goods and Cattle, stripped them of their
clothes, and had their persons now under their power, and all this without any
considerable resistance made by them; then they could contain themselves no
longer but in a most fierce outrageous manner, furiously broke out, acting in
all places of that Province, with most abominable cruelty, those horrid
massacres and execrable murders, as would make any Christian ear to tingle at
the sad commemoration of them: Then they began to appear in their own colors,
and with great delight to satiate their ancient implacable malice, in their
long wished and often plotted destruction of all the British Inhabitants.
Within the County of Fermanagh multitudes were presently killed in cold blood,
Multitudes killed in cold blood.
some taken at the Plough, others as they sat peaceably in their own houses,
others travailing upon the ways, all without any manner of provocation by them
given, suddenly surprised and unexpectedly cut off. At the Castle of [1] Thomas
Wenslaw and John Simpson, of the County of Fermanagh, Gentlemen, depose and
say, that in the Castle of Lisgoole, there were 152. men, women and children
burnt when the said Castle was set on fire, or smothered; not above two or
three escaped, is appears in their Examinations, jurat, Jan. 12. Anno Dom.
1641.

Lisgool within that County above 150. men, women and children almost all
consumed by fire. At the Castle of [2] Thomas Wenslaw further deposes, that at
the Castle of Moneah, there were ninety Protestants more slain and murdered:
And that from the [3] Castle of Moneah, the Rebels marched to the Castle of
Tullah, where by their own confession, they promised those Protestants that
were there fair quarter: But when they had delivered up their Arms and the
Castle, those Rebels in the Bawne of the Castle, first stripped them all of
their clothes, and then and there most cruelly murdered them.

Moneah, near 100. British there slain altogether: And the same bloody company
of Rebels were no sooner admitted into the Castle of Richard Bourke, Batchelour
in Divinity, of the County of Fermanagh deposes, that he heard and verily
believes the burning and killing of one hundred at least in the Castle of
Tullah, and that the same was done after fair quarter promised, jurat. Jul.
12. 1643.

Tullah, which was delivered up into the hands of Roury Mac Guire, upon
composition, and faithful promises of fair quarter, but that within the very
court they began to strip the peopl, and most cruelly put them to the sword,
murdering them all without mercy. [4] Rowry Mac Guire, upon the 24. of October.
1641. came with his Company unto Lissenskeah, and desired in a friendly manner
to speak with Master Midleton, who had the keeping of the Castle. The first
thing he did, as soon as he was entered therein, was to burn the Records of
the County, whereof Master Midleton was the keeper, being Clerk of the Peace,
which he enforced him to deliver unto him; as likewise one thousand pounds he
had in his hands of Sir William Balfoures; which as soon as he had, he
compelled the said Midleton to hear Mass, swear never to alter from it, and
immediately after caused him, his wife and his children to be hanged up, and
hanged and murdered one hundred persons besides, at least in that Town. These
particulars and several other set down at large in a Relation sent me in by
Sir John Dunbarr Knight, one of the Justices of Peace within the County of
Ferminagh.

At Lissenskeah they hanged or otherwise killed above 100. persons, most of
them of the Scottish nation; for after once they had the English in their power
they spared none of them, but used all the Scots with as much cruelty as they
did the English. This County was very well planted by the British undertakers,
and all of them and their Tenants in a very short space after a most horrible
manner quite destroyed, or utterly banished from their Habitations. In the
Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the British were much more numerous, and
Sir Phelim O Neale and his Brother Turlagh O Neale, the principal actors, the
murders of the British were much more multiplied and committed with greater
cruelty, if it were possible, then in any other places.

1000. men, women and children drowned in one place.
There were [5] This number is deposed in Doctor Maxwels Examination, taken the
22. of Aug. 1642.

one thousand men, women and Children carried out at several times in several
troops, and all unmercifully drowned at the Bridge of Portnedowne, which was
broken down in the midst, and so driving and forcing them on, threw them into
the River: And as other Relations give it in, [6] This number of so many
persons drowned within the County of Armagh, is deposed by Thomas Green and
Elizabeth his wife, as appears by their Examinations taken Nov. 10. 1643.

four thousand persons were drowned within the several parts of that County.
[7] William Clerk of the County of Armagh Tanner, says, that he with 100.
men, women and children, or thereabout, were by the Rebels driven like hogs
about six miles, to a River called the Band: in which space the foresaid
Christians were most barbarously used, by forcing them to go fast with Swords
and Pikes, thrusting them into their sides, and they murdered three by the
way, and the rest they drove to the River aforesaid, and there forced them to
go upon the bridge, which was cut down, and with their pikes and swords, and
other weapons, thrust them down headlong into the said River and immediately
they perished, and those who assayed to swim to the shore, the Rebels stood and
shot at, Jurat. January 7. 1641.

The Rebels in a most barbarous manner drove on many of those miserable
stripped Christians unto the place of their sufferings like Swine, and if any
were slack in their pace, they sometimes pricked them forwards with their
swords and pikes, often hastening on the rest either by killing or wounding
some of their fellows in the way.

[7] Mary the wife of Ralph Corn deposes, that 180. English were taken by the
Irish, and driven like Cattle from Castle Cumber to Athy.

[8] Elizabeth the Wife of Captain Rue Price of the Town and County of
Armagh, deposes, That five of her Children, together with 110. other
Protestants out of the Parishes of Armagh, Laugaule, and other places were sent
away with passes from Sir Phe. O Neale with promise to be safely conveyed over
to their friends in England. That their Conductor was Captain Manus O Cane and
his Soldiers, who having brought or rather driven them like Sheep or Beasts to
the Bridge of Portnedowne, there forced or threw all those poor prisoners into
the water, together with the Deponents five children, and then and there
drowned most of them. [9] And those who could swim and come to the shore, they
either knocked them on the head, and so after drowned them, or else shot them
to death in the water, Jurat. Jan. 29. 1641.

Other companies they carried out under pretense of giving them safe conduct
out of the Country, and so got them to go cheerfully on by virtue of Sir
Phelim O Neales Pass, until they came at some place fit for their execution.
[9] Christian Stanhaw, the relict of Hen. Stanhaw, of the Parish of Laugalle,
in the County of Armagh deposes, That upon the drowning of 140. Protestants
one time at Portnedowne-Bridge, after they had thrown them in, some of them
swimming to the shore, the Rebels with their muskets knocked out their brains,
Jurat. July 23. 1642.

And if they drowned them, then they had some prepared to shoot or knock down
with Poles any such as could swim, or used any other means to escape out of
the water. [10] James Shaw of Merket-hill in the County of Armagh, deposes the
manner of Mistress Cambels pulling the Rebel into the water, and how he was
drowned with her, Jurat. Aug. 14. 1642.

Amongst many others, a Gentlewoman whose name was Mistress Cambell, being
forcibly brought by them to the River, and she finding no means to escape
their fury, suddenly clasped her arms about one of the chief rebels that was
most forward to thrust her into the water, and as I find it credibly related
upon Oath, carried him to the bottom with her, and so they were both drowned
together. [11] Captain Parkine deposes, That Sir Phelim O Neale flying from
Dundalk, went to Armagh, where he began his bloody massacres, causing Manus O
Cane to get together all the Protestants which were left thereabouts, to
conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were scarce a days journey from
him, they were all murdered, and so were several others by special direction
from Sir Phelim O Neale, and his Brother Turlagh, notwithstanding they were
protected by them. All the aged people in Armagh were by the same directions
carried away, but murdered also at Charlmount. And presently after, his
Brother and he with their adherents, maliciously set on fire the goodly
Cathedral Church of Armagh, and Town of Armagh, and murdered and drowned
there 500. persons young and old. At the Parish of Killaman 48 Families were
then murdered by directions from Sir Phelim, who had remained protected by him
three quarters of a year, Jurat. March 8. 1643.

The Cathedral Church and Town of Armagh were burnt, many Towns laid waste,
all the fair Plantations made by the British left desolate; in some Parishes
[12] Jane Grace, the wife of Nicholas Grace late of Kilmore, in the County of
Armagh, deposes, that there were two and twenty English Protestants burned in
one House, within two miles of Kilmore; and that the Rebels stripped, killed,
or murdered all, or the most of the English of that Parish, which consisted of
two hundred Families. That they set many in the Stocks until they confessed
their money, and when they could get no more, that then they murdered them.

two hundred Families murdered and destroyed, the whole County, as it were, a
common Butchery, and thorough all parts of it very many thousands perished in a
short time by Sword, Famine, Fire, Water, and all other manner of cruel
deaths, that rage and malice could invent.

Some horrid inhumain cruelties evercized upon particular persons.
But before I leave this Subject, I shall pass a little further, and out of
some Examination (taken here upon Oath, which I have perused) present a brief
collection of some other horrid inhumane cruelties, which I find were used in
the murdering of many poor innocent souls. To many, these bloody villains
showed so much favor as suddenly to dispatch them out of their pain, Edward
Saltinglasse of the County of Armagh Gentleman, deposes, and says, that
George Laulis a rebel of the said County, resolving to kill John Cowder, told
him he would kill him, but bid him first say his Prayers; whereupon the said
Cowder kneeling down to pray, the said Lawlis instantly cut off his head as he
was upon his knees, jurat. Jun. 1. 1642.
by no means allowing them leave, or [13] Elizabeth Price deposes, that when
as diverse of the English were about to be murdered, and desired the Rebels on
their knees first to admit them to make their prayers to God; the Rebels have
often, in her the deponants hearing, in Irish answered and said, bequeath your
soul to the Devil; and at other times the Rebels would say, why should you
pray, your soul is with the Devil already? and with those words in their
mouths would slaughter and put them to death: jurat ut supra.

time to make their prayyers; for others, they held a sudden death too easy a
punishment: Therefore they imprisoned [14] Edward Banks of Cassell, in the
County of Tipperary, Clerk, deposes, that the Rebels there on the first day
of January killed fifteen men and women, all English Protestants, at Cassell,
and that they entered and took the Town, and having the same, that they took
this deponant and other Clergy men, and then and there forthwith caused them to
be put in the Dungeon, where they continued twelve weeks in most miserable
slavery, jurat. April 21. 1642.

some in most beastly Dungeons, full of dirt and mire, and there clapping bolts
on their heels, suffered them to perish at leizure; others they barbarously
[15] John Cregge in the County of Armagh, Yeoman, deposes, that in the Parish
of Levilegish, there were diverse Englishmen cruelly murdered, some twice, some
thrice hanged up, and others wounded and left half dead, crying out lamentably
for some to come and end their miseries by killing of them, Jurat. Jan. 7. 1641.

mangled, and left languishing upon the Highways, crying out but for so much
mercy as to be delivered out of their pain.

Others they buried [16] William Parkinson of Castle Cumber in the County of
Kilkenny Gent. deposes, That by the credible report both of English and some
Irish, who affirmed they were eyewitnesses of a bloody murder committed near
Kilfeale in the Queens County, upon an English man, his wife, four or five
children, and a maid. All which were hanged by the command of Sir Morgan
Cavanah, and Robert Harpoole, and afterward put all in one hole, the youngest
child being not fully dead, put out the hand and crying mammy, mammy, when
without mercy they buried him alive, Jurat. Feb. 11. 1642.

[16] Elizabeth Price deposes, That Thomas Mason, an English Protestant of
Laugall, being extremely beaten and wounded, was carried away by his wife and
some others; for revenge of which, the Rebels most cruelly hacked, slashed and
wounded them: and that done; dragged the said Mason unto a hole, and then and
there threw earth, stones and rubbish upon him, and with the wait thereof kept
him under, so as the said Masons wife told this Deponent, he cried out and
languished till his own wife, to put him out of his pain, rather then hear
him cry still, tied her handkerchiefe over his mouth, and therewith stopped his
breath, so as he dyed, Jurat. June 29. 1641.

alive, a manner of death they used to several British in several places: and
[17] This particular, concerning the seventeen men buried alive at Clownes, was
testified unto me by Mistress Aldrich, who was then kept prisoner in the Town
by the Rebels, and heard their pitiful cyres.

at Clownis within the County of Fermanagh, there were seventeen persons,
having been hanged till they were half dead, cast together into a Pit, and
being covered over with a little earth, lay pitifully, sending out most
lamentable groans for a good time after. [18] William Parkinson, late of
Castle Cumber in the County of Kilkenny deposes, That he saw Jews O Brenan,
with his sword drawn in the said Town, pursue after an English boy of eight
or nine years of age, or thereabouts, by name Richard Bernet, into an house,
and saw the said Jews lead the said boy forth of the house, the blood running
about his ears, in a Hair rope, and led the boy to his Fathers tentors, and
there hanged him with John Banks another little boy, jurat ut supra.

Some were deadly wounded and so hanged up on Tenterhooks. [19] Edward
Saltingstone, of the County of Armagh Gent. deposes, that Manus O Cane, Bryan
O Kelly, Shane O Neile, Neile Oge O Neile, Gent. did take William Blundell of
Grange, in the County of Armagh Yeoman, and put a rope about his neck, and
threw him into the black water at Charlmount, and drew him up and down the
water, to make him confess his money, who thereupon gave him 21 pounds, yet
within three weeks after he, his wife, and seven Children were drowned by the
Rebels: And further says, that Samuel Law of Grenan, in the Parish of Armagh,
was by the said Neile Oge O Neile, and others, brought to a Wood, and that
then, they there put a With about his neck, and so drew him up and down by the
neck, until he was glad to promise them ten pounds, Jurat ut supra.

Some had ropes put about their necks, and so drawn through the water; some had
Withes, and so drawn up and down through Woods and Bogs; others were hanged up
and taken down and hanged up again several times, and all to make them
confess their money, which as soon as they had told, [19] Margaret Fermeny in
the County of Fermanagh, deposes, That the Rebels bound her and her husbands
hands behind them, to make them confess their money, and dragged them up and
down in a rope, and cut his throat in her own sight with a skeane, having
first knocked him down and stripped him, and that being an aged woman of 75.
years old, as she came up afterward to Dublin, she was stripped by the Irish
seven times in one day, the Rebels bidding them go and look for their God,
and bid him give them clothes, Jurat.

they then dispatched them out of the way. [20] Edward Wilson of the County of
Monaughan deposes, that among other cruelties used by the Rebels to the
English, they hung up some by the arms, and then hacked them with their
swords, to see how many blows they could endure before they dyed, Jurat.

Others were hanged up by the Arms, and with many slashes and cuts they made
the experiment with their Swords how many blows an Englishman would endure
before he dyed. Some had their [21] Anne the wife of Mervin Madesly, late of
the City of Kilkenny, Gent. sworn and examined, deposes, That some of the
Rebels in Kilkenny aforesaid, struck and beat a poor English woman until she
was forced into a ditch, where she dyed, those barbarous Rebels having first
ripped up her child, of about six years of age, and let her guts run about her
heels, jurat.

Bellies ripped up, and so left with their guts running about their heels. [21]
James Gear of the County of Monaughan deposes, That the Rebels at Clewnis
murdered one James Nettervile, Proctor to the Minister there, who, although he
was diversely wounded, his belly ripped up, and his intrailes taken out and laid
above a yard from him, yet he bled not at all, until they lifted him up and
carried him away; at which this Deponent being an eye witness, much wondered;
and thus barbarously they used him after they had drawn him to go to Mass
with them, jurat. April 6. 1642.

But this horrid kind of cruelty was principally reserved by these inhumane
Monsters for [22] Owen Frankland of the City of Dublin, deposes, That Michael
Garray told this Deponent, that there was a Scottish man who bring driven by
the Rebels out of the Newry, and knocked on the head by the Irish, recovered
himself, and came again into the Town naked: Whereupon the Rebels carried
him and his wife out of the Town, cut him all to pieces, and with a skeine
ripped his wives belly, so as a child dropped out of her womb, Jurat. July 23.
1642.

Women, whose sex they neither pitied nor spared, hanging up several Women,
many of them great with child, whose [23] At Ballimcolough within four miles
of the City of Rosse in April 1642. John Stone of the Graige his son, his two
sons in law, and his two daughters, were hanged, one of his daughters being
great with child, her belly was ripped up, her child taken forth, and such
barbarous beastly actions used to her, as are not fit to be mentioned.

bellies they ripped up as they hung, and so let the little Infants fall out; a
course they ordinarily took with such as they found in that sad condition.
[24] Phillip Tailor, late of Portnedowne deposes, that the Rebels killed a
Dyers wife of Rosse trever, at the Newry, and ripped up her belly, she being
great with child of two children, and threw her and her children into a ditch,
and that he this Deponent, drove away Swine from eating one of the children,
Jurat.

And sometimes they gave their Children to Swine; [25] John Montgomery, of the
County of Monaghan, sworn and examined says, that one Brian Mac Erony,
ringleader of the Rebels in the County of Fermanagh, killed Ensign Floyd,
Robert Worknum, and four of their servants, one of which they having wounded,
though not to death, they buried quick. As also, that he was credibly informed,
that the daughter in law of one Foard, in the Parish of Clownish, being
delivered of a child in the fields, the Rebels, who had formerly killed her
husband and father, killed her and two of her children, and suffered the dogs
to eat up and devour her newborn Child, jurat June 26. 1641.

Some the Dogs eat; and some [26] Katherine, the relict of William Coke, of
the County of Armagh Carpenter, deposes, That the Rebels of the said County
robbed; stripped and murdered a great company of Protestants, some by burning,
some by the sword, some by hanging, and the rest by starving, and other deaths.
And this Deponent, to shun their rage, and save her poor life, hid her self
in a ditch of water, and sat there among high rushes so long, as that she was
almost frozen and starved to death, and then crawled away secretly. And further
says, that some of the Rebels that escaped and fled from the battle of
Lisnagaruay, meeting one Mistreis Howard, and Mistreis Frankland, both great
with child, and six of their children with them, those Rebels then and there
with their pikes killed and murdered them all, and after ripped open the
Gentlewomens bellies, took out their children, the one of them being quick, and
threw them into a ditch in the sight of Jane this Deponents daughter, who
escaped because she spoke Irish, and said she was an Irish woman, jurat Feb.
24. 1643.

taken alive out of their Mothers bellies, they cast into ditches. And for
sucking children, and others of a riper age; some [27] James Stevenson, Clerk
of the County of Letrim, deposes, that the Rebels there took Isabel Stevonson,
a young child, left at Fostering, with one Hugh Mac Arran and enquiring whose
child it was, they told him it was a Scottish man's child, whereupon they took
the child by the heels, and run and beat the brains of it out against a Tree,
jurat April 20. 1643.

had their brains knocked out; others [28] Anne Hill, wife of Arthur Hill, in
the County of Caterlagh, deposes, that as she passed through the County of
Wickloe, William the Plasterer, with nine or ten Rebels more, pulled off her
back a young child of one year and a quarter old, threw it on the ground, trod
on it that it dyed, stripped her self and four small children, who by the
cold they thereby got, since dyed, jurat.

were trampled under-foot to death.

[28] John Stubbes of the County of Longford, Gent. deposes, that he heard by
some of the Sheriffs men, that Henry Mead and his wife, John Bigel, William
Stell, and Daniel Stubs the Deponents brother, were put to death by Lisagh
Farrols, and Oli. Fitz Gerrals men, who hanged them upon a Windmill, and when
they were half dead, they cut them to pieces with their skeines, jurat November.
21. 1641.

Some they cut in gobbets and pieces, [29] William Parkinson of Kilkenny,
Esquire, deposes, that the wife of John Harvey, told him, that she being at
Kilkenny, and having there turned to Mass to save her life, was
notwithstanding stripped again, together with her children, and one Purcell a
Butcher, after he had stripped her daughter, of five years of age, ripped up
her body till her intrales fell out, whereof she dyed that night; whereof she
complaining to the Major of Kilkenny, he bid away with her and dispatch her, so
as not only the Butcher, but many other did beat and wound her, so as she
hardly escaped with her life, jurat ut supra.

others they ripped up alive; [30] Elizabeth Champion late wife of Arthur
Champion in the County of Fermanagh, Esquire. deposes, that when the Castle of
Lisgoole was set on fire by the Rebels, a Woman leaping out of a window, to
save her self from burning, was murdered by the Rebels; and next morning her
child was found sucking her breast, and also murdered by them, jurat Apill 6.
1642.

some were found in the fields, sucking the breasts of their murdered Mothers;
others lay stifled in Vaults and Cellars: [28] El. Price deposes, that a great
number of poor Protestants, especially of women and children, they pricked and
stabbed with their Skeins, Pitch-forks and Swords, and would slash, mangle and
cut them in their heads, breasts, faces, arms and other parts of the body, but
not kill them outright, but leave them wallowing in their blood, to languish,
starve, and pine to death; and whereas those so mangled desired them to kill
them out of their pain, they would deny it; but sometimes after a day or two,
they would dash out their brains with stones, or by some other cruel way,
which they accounted done as a favor, of which she has in many particulars
been an eyewitness, jurat June 29. 1641.

others [30] Charity Chapel late wife of Richard Chapel, Esquire, of the
Town and County of Armagh, deposes, that as she has credibly heard the
Rebels murdered great numbers of Protestants, and that many children were seen
lying murdered in Vaults and Sellers, whether they fled to hide themselves,
jurat July 2. 1642.

[30] Thomas Fleetwood late Curat of Kilbeggan in the County of Westmeath,
deposes, that he has heard from the mouth of the Rebels themselves of great
cruelties acted by them: And for one instance, that they stabbed the Mother, one
Jane Addis by name, and left her little sucking child, not a quarter old, by
the dead corpse; and then they put the breast of its dead Mother into its mouth,
and bid it suck English-bastard, and so left it there to perish, jurat March
22. 1642.

[31] Mary Barlow deposes, that her Husband being by the Rebels hanged before
her face, she and six children were stripped stark naked, and turned out a
begging in frost and snow; by means whereof they were almost starved, having
nothing to eat in three weeks, while they lay in a Cave, but two old
Calfe-kins, which they beat with stones, and so eat them hair and all; her
children crying out unto her, rather to go out and be killed by the Rebels
then to starve there, jurat.

starved in Caves, crying out to their Mothers rather to send them out to be
killed by the Rebels, then to suffer them to starve there.

Multitudes of [32] John Duffield of the County of Armagh, Gent. deposes, that
the Rebels wounded John Ward and Richard Duffield, so as they thereof dyed, and
that their wives and the said John's six children, being all stripped, dyed of
want and cold. And further says, that many thousands of Protestants, men,
women and children, being stripped of their clothes, dyed also of cold and want
in several parts of the Country, jurat Aug. 9. 1642.

men, women, and children were found drowned, cast into ditches, bogges and
turfe-pits; the ordinary Sepultures of the British Nation. [32] Catherine
Madeson of the County of Fermanagh, deposes, that they drew some lying sick
of Fevers, out of their beds and hanged them; and that they drove before them
of men, women and children, to the number of sixteen, and drowned them in a
Boggie-pit, knocking such on the head with Poles as endeavored to get out.

Thousands dyed of cold and want in all parts of the Country, being neither
permitted to depart, nor relieved where they were enforced to stay. Jane the
wife of Gabriel Constable, late of Drumcad in the County of Armagh, Gent.
sworn and examined says, that her husband and his mother about 88. years old,
and his Brother being murdered by the Rebels in the Parish of Kilmore, that a
great number of Protestants were about Candlemas 1641. by the means and
instigation of Joane Hamskin formerly a Protestant, but a mere Irish woman, and
lately turned to Mass, and of diverse other her assistants, forced and thrust
into a thatcht house within the Parish of Kilmore, and then and there, the
Protestants being almost naked, covered with rags only, the same house was by
that bloody woman and her barbarous assistants, set on fire in several parts
thereof, the poor imprisoned parties (who were by armed parties kept there
locked in) were miserably burned to death, and at length the house fell upon
them; and the combustible part of the house being consumed before the bodies of
all those miserable wretches were burned to ashes, the bodies of many of them
lay there in holes, to the great terror of the beholders that were
Protestants, three only escaped out of a hole of the house, and the rest that
attempted to escape the flames, were then and there forced and thrown in again,
and so burned to death, jurat June 16. 1642.
Multitudes enclosed in houses, which being set on fire, they were there most
miserably consumed. [33] Katherine Madeson of the County of Fermanagh,
deposes, that they drew some lying sick of fevers out of their bed, and
hanged them, jur. ut supra.

Some dragged out of their sick-beds to the place of execution, [34] Thomas
Green in the Parish of Dumcres in the County of Armagh, Yeoman, and Elizabeth
his wife, sworn and examined, says, That the Deponent Tho. Green hardly
escaped away with his life, but that the other Deponent and six children were
all left among the Rebels, and so stripped of their clothes, and
hunger-starved, that five of the children dyed, and she this Deponent being put
to beg among the merciless Rebels, was at length rescued from them by the
Scottish Army: She further says, that the Rebels did drown in a bog 17. men,
women and children at one time within the said parish; and she is verily
persuaded that the Rebels at several times and places within the County of
Armagh, drowned above 4000. Protestants, enforcing the sons and daughters of
those very aged people, who were not able to go themselves, to take them out
of their beds and houses and to carry them to drowning, especially in the River
of Toll, in the Parish of Loghgall, jurat November. 10. 1643.

children enforced to carry their aged parents to the Places designed for their
slaughter; [35] John Rutledge deposes, that such were the barbarous and
inhumane cruelties of the Rebels, that sometimes they enforced the wife to kill
the husband, the son to kill the father, and the daughter to kill the mother,
and then they would hang or put to death the last blood-shedder. He further
says, that of his knowledge the Rebels in the Town of Slego, forced one Jews
the younger, to kill his father, and then hanged the son; and in Mogne, in the
County of Mayo, the Rebels forced one Simon Lepers wife to kill her husband,
and then caused her son to kill her, and then they hanged the son.

nay, some children compelled most unnaturally to be the executioners of their
own parents, wives to help to hang their husbands, [36] This deposed in Master
Goldsmiths Examination, which is set forth at large in the page following.

mothers to cast their own children into the water; and yet after these
enforced acts, which no doubt were performed out of hopes and assurance to have
their own lives saved, always murdered. And such was the malice and most
detestable hatred borne to the English by the Irish, as they taught their [37]
Anne Read the relict of Helchiah Read, of the County of Letrem, deposes, that
she being stripped out of all she had, some of her children dyed of want and
famine, and that one of her sons called Stephen Read, being about six years of
age, was about the 10. of February, 1641. in the house of James Gray, of the
County of Cavan, and going forth to play, there then gathered about him six
Irish children of that Town, who suddenly fell upon him, and in such manner,
that some with sticks and some with stones put out his eyes and bruised his
body extremely, so that he by means of those children (which were none of them
as she is persuaded above eight years of age) not long after dyed, and had been
killed outright in the place, had not an English woman come thither, who took
up the dying child from them, saying, she wondered they could find in their
hearts so to deal with a poor child; but they answered, they would do as
much for her if they were able, jurat. July 12. 1642.

children to kill English children, [35] Dennis Kelly, of the County of Meth,
deposes, that Garret Tallon of Cruisetowne in the said County, Gent. (as it is
commonly reported) hired two men to kill Anne Hagely, wife to Edw. Tallon his
son a Papist, and at that time absent from home; and the said two men did in
most bloody manner, with skeines, kill the said Anne Hagely and her daughter,
and her daughters two children, because they would not consent to go to Mass,
and after they would not permit them to be buried in a Church or Churchyard,
but they four were buried in a ditch, jurat Aug. 23. 1643.

and the [38] John Grissell of the Queens County, deposes, that the women and
children in those parts, were as cruel and forward as the men Rebels, the
children, though young, being very bold in their robberies, bidding this
Deponent and the rest of the English be gone, or else they should be hanged.

Irish women did naturally express as much cruelty as the chiefest Rebels
among them.

If these be not sufficient, let us over-looke the particular ends of some
particular persons, and we shall yet in them behold more horrid cruelties then
these before mentioned. What [39] This particular deposed by Margaret Perkin,
as also by Elizabeth Bursell, who says, that the child was of twelve years of
age, being the child of Thomas Straton of Newtown, jurat Jan. 19. 1641.

shall we say to a child boiled to death in a cauldron, a [40] The wife of
Jonathan Linne and his daughter were seized upon by the Rebels near the Town of
Caterlagh, carried by them into a little wood, called Stapletowne wood, and
there the mother was hanged, and the daughter hanged in the hair of her
mothers head, as is deposed by James Shaw, Vicar of old Laughsin, Jan. 8. 1643.

woman hanged on a tree, and in the hair of her head her own daughter hanged
up with her; a woman [41] Adam Clover deposes, that he saw upon the high way a
woman left by the Rebels, stripped to her smock, set upon by three women and
some children, being Irish, who miserably rent and tore the said poor English
woman, and stripped of her smock in a bitter frost and snow, so that she fell
in labor in their hands, and both she and her child dyed there, jurat Jan. 4.
1641.

miserably rent and torn to pieces, [42] This cruelty was used to some English
in the Province of Conaught, as was testified by the Lords Justices and
Counsel, as does appear by their Letters.

some taken [38] Elizabeth Baskervile deposes, that she heard the wife of
Florence Fitz Patrick find much fault with her busbands soldiers, because they
did not bring along with them the grease of Mistress Nicholson, whom they had
slain, for her to make candles withal, jurat April 26. 1643.

[38] Martha Culme deposes, that she heard some of the Irish themselves detest
the cruelty of the women who followed their Camp, and put them on in cruelty,
saying, spare neither man, woman, nor child, jurat.

[42] Tho. Fleetwood Curate of Kilbeggan, in the County of Westmeath, deposes,
that the L. President of Conaught, caused an English woman who could speak
Irish, to go toward Dublin with a letter, but she was taken within five miles
of the Town of Athlone, brought back and stoned to death by the women of the
Town, dwelling on the hither side of the bridge, jurat.

by the Rebels, their eyes plucked out, their hands cut off, and so turned out
to wander up and down; (43) James of Hackets town in the County of Caterlagh,
deposes, that an Irish Gentlewoman told him and others, that she turned an
English woman away who was her servant, and had a child, and that before the
poor woman and child were gone half a mile, diverse Irish women slew them with
stones, jurat April 21. 1643.

others stoned to death; (44) John Clerk of Knockback Gent. deposes, that he
heard credibly from Master Litghboune, Minister of the Naas, that the Rebels
shot a parish Clerk near Kildare, through both his thighs, and afterward
dug a deep hole in the ground, wherein they set him upright on his feet, and
filled up the hole in the earth, leaving out only his head, in which state and
posture they left the poor wounded man, till he pined, languished, and so dyed,
jurat October. 24. 1643.

a man wounded and set upright in a hole dug in the earth, and so covered up
to the very chin there left in that miserable manner to perish: a (45)
Katherine, the relict of William Coke, of the County of Armagh, deposes, that
many of her neighbors who had been prisoners among the Rebels, said and
affirmed, that diverse of the Rebels would confess, brag, and boast, how they
took an English Protestant, one Robert Wilkinson at Kilmore, and held his feet
in the fire until they burned him to death: And the same Robert Wilkinsons
own son was present, and a prisoner when that cruelty was exercised on his
Father, jurat February 24. 1643.

man's feet held in the fire till he was burnt to death, his wife hanged at his
door: (46) At Cashal in Munster, beside many Ministers which they there hanged
after a most barbarous manner, they stripped one naked and drove him through the
Town, pricking him forwards with Darts and Rapiers, and so pursuing him till
he fell down dead, jurat ut supra.

a Minister stripped stark naked, and so driven like a beast thorough the Town
of Cashell, the Rebels following and pricking him forward with darts and
rapiers: (47) Christian Stanhaw, the relict of Hen. Stanhaw, late of the County
of Armagh Esquire. deposes, that a woman that formerly lived near Laugale,
absolutely informed this Deponent, that the Rebels enforced a great number of
Protestants, men, women and children, into a house which they set on fire
purposely to burn them, as they did, and still as any of them offered to come
out, to shun the fire, the wicked Rebels witb sithes, which they had in their
hands, cut them in pieces, and cast them into the fire and burned them with the
rest, jurat July 23. 1642.

a company of men, women and children put into a house, and as they were
burning, some children that made an escape out of the flames were taken by some
of the Rebels who stood by, cut them in pieces with sithes, and so cast them
into the fire again.

Neither did these horrible tortures which they put these poor innocent
Christians unto aslack their fury, their malice toward them did not determine
with their breath. But after so many several bloody ways and cruel
inventions wherewith they rent their souls from their wretched bodies, even to
their (48) Adam Clover of the County of Cavan deposes, that he observed thirty
persons to be most barbarously murdered, and about 150. more cruelly wounded,
so that traces of blood issuing from them, lay upon the high way for twelve
miles together, and many very young children were left and perished by the way,
to the number of sixty, or thereabouts; because the cruelties of the Rebels
were such, that their parents and friends could not carry them further. And
further says, that some of the Rebels vowed, that if any dug graves wherein
to bury the dead children, they should be buried therein themselves; so the
poor people left most of them unburied, exposed to ravenous beasts and fowls,
jurat Jan. 4. 1641.

dead carcasses in some places, they denied all manner of burial; some (49)
Edward Saltinstale deposes, that the Rebels killed William Loverden when he
was naked, his wife and children looking on, and cutting off his head held it
up to his wife and children, and his sorrowful wife taking his corpse and
burying of it in a Garden, Patrick O Dally a Rebel, took it up and threw it
into a ditch, jurat ut supra.

they cast into ditches, others (50) Thomas Green and Elizabeth his wife
depose, that the Rebels at several times murdered, killed and destroyed the
most part of the Protestants in the Parish of Dum^res, being about 300. and
indeed most of the Protestants in all the County therabouts did they kill and
destroy by drowning, hanging, burning, the sword, starving, and other deaths,
exposing their slaughtered bodies to be devoured by dogs, swine, and other
ravenous creatures: And this Deponent Elizabeth, saw the dogs feed upon those
dead carcasses, jurat November. 10. 1643.

they left to be devoured by dogs and swine, others by Fowls and ravenous
birds; nay (51) Richard Bourke Batchelour of Divinity deposes, that he was
informed, that Master Lodge, Archdeacon of Killalow, being buried about six
years since, and diverse other Ministers bones were dug out of their graves
as patrons of heresy, by direction of the titular Bishop of Killalaw, and
Robert Jones a Minister was not admitted Christian burial, by direction of
some Popish Priests, jurat July 12. 1643.

several which had been formerly buried, they dug up and left them to
putrify above ground.

And these truly are but some of those ways, among many others which with most
exquisite pains and cruel tortures, were used by these merciless (52) Arthur
Agmoughty deposes, that during the siege of Castle Forbez, the Rebels killed
poor children that went out to eat weeds or grass; and that a poor woman
whose husband was taken by the Rebels, went to them with two children at her
feet and one at her breast, hoping to beg her husbands life, but they slew her

Rebels to let in (51) David Buck deposes, that in the parish of Munrath, in
the Queens County, the Rebels dug up a number of English men's graves, and
left the corpse above ground to be abused by dogs, hogs, or any other ravenous
creatures.

death among an innocent, unprovoking, unresisting people, that had always
lived peaceably with them, [53] Master Creighton deposes in his Examination,
that sometimes the chief of the Irish would make heavy moan for the evils
they perceived were coming on their Country and Kindred, and said, they saw
utter destruction at hand, for that they had covered so great a bitterness so
long in their hearts against the English, and now so suddenly broken out
against them, that had brought them up, kept them in their houses like
children, and had made no difference between them, their English friends and
kindred, by all which the English had so well deserved of them, and they had
requited them so evil, that the English would never trust them hereafter; and
now it remains, that either they must destroy the English, or the English
them, jurat ut supra.

administing all manner of helps and comforts to those who were in distress,
that made no difference betwixt them and those of their own Nation, but ever
cherished them as friends, and loving neighbors, without giving any cause of
unkindnesse or distaste unto them. It is not possible to re-collect or express
the wickedness of their mischievous inventions, or horror of their bloody
executions, [54] Jane the relict of Gabriel Constable deposes, that the Rebels
having half killed one Ellen Millington, and then put her into a dry hole made
for a Well, and made her fast in with stones, whereof she languished and dyed;
the Rebels bragged how many of them went to see her kick and toss in the hole,
her husband being formerly murdered by the Rebels, jurat ut supra.

actuated with all kind of circumstances that might aggravate the hight of
their cruelty toward them. Alas, who can comprehend the fears, terrors,
anguish, bitterness and perplexity of their souls, the despairing passions and
consternations of their mind! What strange amazed thoughts must it needs raise
in their sad hearts to find themselves so suddenly surprised without remedy,
and inextricably wrapped up in all kind of outward miseries, which could possibly
by man be inflicted upon any humane creatures! What sighs, groans, trembling,
astonishment! What schriches, cries and bitter lamentation of wife and
children, friends and servants, howling and weeping about them, all finding
themselves without any manner of hope or deliverance from their present misery
and pain! How inexorable were their barbarous tormentors that compassed them
on every side without all bowels of compassion, any sense of their sufferings,
or the least commiseration and pity, the common comforters of men in misery.

It was no small addition to their sorrows, to hear (54) Francis Harbor of
Dublin Gent. deposes, that at the beginning of the Rebellion, he heard
several of the Rebels publicly say, That now the day was their own, and that
they had been slaves to the English a long time, but that now they would be
revenged to the full, and would not leave before Christmas day, an English
Protestant rogue living, with other like bitter words, jurat Jan. 5. 1643.

the base reviling speeches used against their country and countrymen, some
loudly threatening [55] Elizabeth the wife of Thomas Green deposes, that she
heard the Rebels say, the English were meat for dogs, that there should not be
one drop of English blood left within the Kingdom, and that they would destroy
all, the very English children, whom they called bastards, jurat November. 10.
1643.

[55] Richard Cleybrook deposes, that he heard Luke Tool say, that they would
not leave an English Beast alive, or any of the breed of them, jurat.

[55] Samuel Man, of the County of Fermanagh Gent. deposes, that he heard some
of the Irish say, that there should not be one English man, woman or child left
in the Kingdom, jurat.

[55] Elizab. Dickinson deposes, that she heard some of the company of Roury
Mac Guire say, that the Irish had command to leave never a drop of English
blood in Ireland, jurat November. 17. 1642.

Katherine Madeson of the County of Fermanagh deposes, that she has often
heard the Rebels say, that they would drive all the English and Scottish out of
the Kingdom, and that both man, woman and child should be cut off and
destroyed, jurat November. 17. 1642.

all should be cut off and utterly destroyed that had one drop of English blood
in them; the Irish women crying out to spare neither man, woman nor child that
was English; that the English was meat for dogs, and their children bastards.

How grievous and insupportable must it needs be to a true christian soul, to
hear a base [56] Elenor Fullerton the relict of Will. Fullerton, late Parson of
Lougall deposes, that in Lent 1641. a young roguish Cow-boy, gave out and
affirmed in this Deponents hearing, that his hands were so weary in killing and
knocking down Protestants into a bog-pit, that he could hardly lift his arms
to his head, jurat September. 16. 1642.

[56] Owen Frankland deposes, that he heard Hugh O Cane, late servant to
Mistress Stanhaw calling to his fellows, in a boasting manner, asking them what
they had been doing at home all the day, that he had been abroad and had killed
sixteen of the rogues, and showed them some money, jurat ut supra.

villain boast, that his hands were so weary with killing and knocking down
Protestants into a bogge, that he could not lift his arms up to his head; or
others to say, [57] Elizabeth Champion, late wife of Arthur Champion in the
County of Fermanagh Esquire, says, that she heard the Rebels say, that they
had killed so many English men, that the grease or fat which remained upon
their swords and skeines, might well serve to make an Irish candle, jurat April
14. 1642.

that they had killed so many English men, that the grease or fat which
remained on their swords or skeines, might have made an Irish candle; or to
consider, that two [58] John Birne late of Dongannon in the county of Tyrone
deposes, that he heard some of the native Irish that were somewhat more
merciful then the rest, complain, that two young Cow-boyes within the Parish
of Tullah, had at several times murdered and drowned 36. women and children,
jurat. Jan. 12. 1643.

young Cow-boys should have it in their power to murder 36. Protestants.
Whosoever shall seriously weigh these particulars, will not much wonder that so
great numbers of British and Protestants, should be destroyed in so short a time
after the first breaking out of the Rebellion, as Master Cunningham [59] James
Shaw a Minister deposes, that after the cessation made with the Irish, diverse
of them confessed, the Priests had given them the Sacrament, upon condition
they should not spare man, woman or child that were Protestants, and that he
heard diverse of them say in a bragging manner, that it did them much good to
wash their hands in the blood of the Protestants which they had slain, Jurat
Jan. 7. 1643.

deposes in his Examination: He there says, that the account of the persons
killed by the Rebels from the time of the beginning of the Rebellion, October.
23. 1641. unto the month of April following, was as the Priests weekly gave it
in in their several Parishes, one hundred and five thousand, jurat April 22.
1641.

When the Castle of Lisgoole [60] Elizabeth Champin deposes, that when the
Rebels had set the Castle of Lisgoole on fire upon the Protestants there
enclosed, and saw the said house so burning, they said among themselves
rejoycingly, Oh how sweetly do they fry! jurat ut supra.

was set on fire by the Rebels, and so many British as are before mentioned
consumed in the flames, those mischievous villains that had done that wicked
fact, cried out with much joy, how sweetly do they fry! How did the Inhabitants
[61] William Lucas of the City of Kilkenny deposes, that although he lived in
the Town till about five or six weeks past; in which time he is assured diverse
murders and cruel acts were committed, yet he durst not go abroad to see any
of them: But he does confidently believe, that the Rebels having brought seven
Protestants heads, whereof one was the head of Master Bingham a Minister, they
did then and there as triumphs of their victory, set them up on the
Market-Crosse on a Market Day, and that the Rebels slasht, stabbed and mangled
those heads, put a gag or carret in the said Master Binghams mouth, slit up his
cheeks to his ears, laying a leaf of a Bible before him, and bid him preach,
for his mouth was wide enough, and after they had so solaced themselves, threw
those heads in a hole in Saint James Green, jurat Aug. 16. 1643.

of Kilkenny (a City planted with old English, where civility and good manners
seemed to flourish) solace and please themselves in abusing most unchristianly
the heads of a Minister and six other Protestants, brought in a kind of triumph
into that Town: Certainly it is not to be imagined, much less expressed, with
what scorn and derision they acted these great cruelties upon al British which
they had gotten into their power; with what joy and exultation their eyes did
behold the sad spectacle of their miseries; what [62] Julian Jonson, the relict
of John Jonson of the County of Gallaway deposes, that after the slaughter of
some English, she heard one O Moloy a Friar, say in a triumphing manner, It was
a brave sport, to see the young men (meaning some of the English then slain)
defending themselves on every side, and their two eyes burning in their heads.
And further, that she heard some of the cruel Soldiers then and there brag
and boast of the brave sport they had, by putting fire to the straw which a
stripped English woman had tied about her, saying, how bravely the fire then
made the English jade to dance, jurat Feb. 8. 1643.

[62] Joane Constable, the relict of Gabriel Constable, deposes, that the
outcries, lamentations and speeches of the poor Protestants burned in a
thatcht house in the Parish of Kilmore, in the County of Armagh, were exceeding
loud and pitiful, yet did nothing prevail to mollify the hardened hearts of
their murderers, but they most boldly made brags thereof and took pride and
glory in imitating those cries, and in telling the Deponent and others, how the
children gaped when the fire began to burn them, and threatened and told her,
this Deponent, that before it were long, she and the rest of the Protestants
should suffer the like deaths. And further says, that the Rebels within the
County of Armagh did act and commit diverse other bloody, barbarous cruelties
(betwixt the time of the beginning of the Rebellion and her escape from
imprisonment out of the said County) by burning, drowning, hanging, the sword,
starving, and other fearful deaths: That they did drown at one time betwixt
Tinon and Kinard, sixty British, women and children, their respective husbands
and fathers, all their male friends that were men being murdered before: And
that they did in the same water at another time, drown one Mistress Maxwell,
the wife of Master James Maxwell, when she was in labor, and so forward
therein, as some of those bloody actors told and bragged to her, this Deponent,
that the very child's arm appeared and waved in the water, the child being
half borne when the mother was drowned, jurat ut supra.

greedy delight and pleasure they took in their bloody executions; what [63]
Henry Brinkhurst of the County of Mayo deposes, that after the Massacre of
Shreul, one of the Rebels that had acted his part there, came into a house with
his hands and clothes all bloody, saying, it was English blood, that he hoped
to have more of it, and that his skeine had pincked the clean white skins of
many at Shreul, even to the hilt thereof, and that amongst others, it had been
in the body of a fair complexioned man, whose name was Jones. At which time of
his discourse, the wife of the said Jones with four of her small children, sat
by and durst not cry out, but striving to suppress her extreme grief, fell
into a swoon, and was conveyed out of the room, for fear he should have done
the like by her and her poor children, Hen. Brinkhurst, jurat Mar. 11. 1643.

malice and hatred they expressed toward them, many with the last stroke of
death giving them in their last agony [64] This particular deposed in the
Examination of Doctor Maxwell and Mistress Price.

that fearful valediction, in Irish, Anima duel, thy soul to the Devil.

But it is no wonder that they carried themselves after this barbarous manner to
these poor innocent Christians, when they spared not most fearfully to belch
out their rage against their maker. What open [65] Margaret Stokes the wife of
Hugh Stokes duly sworn and examined, deposes, inter alia, That when the
Rebels, or any of them had killed an English man in the Country, many others of
them would come one after another, and every of them in most cruel manner
stab, wound and cut him, and almost mangle him, and to show their further
malice, would not suffer or permit any to bury them, but would have them to lie
naked, for the dogs, beasts, and fowls of the air to devour them. And further
says, when they had so killed the English, they would reckon up and account
the number of them, and in rejoicing and boasting manner would say, that they
had made the Devil beholding to them, in sending so many souls to him to hell,
jurat coram Sir Gerard Lowther.

[65] Edward Deane of Ocram in the County of Wickloe, Tanner, deposes, that
the Irish Rebels made Proclamation, that all English men and women that did not
depart the Country within 24. hours, should be hanged, drawn and quartered,
and that the Irish houses that kept any of the English children should be
burned. And further says, that the said Rebels burned two Protestant Bibles,
and then said, that it was hell fire that burnt, jurat Jan. 7. 1641.

hellish blasphemies were uttered by these wicked miscreants? [66] Joh.
Kerdiffe, Clerk of the County of Tyrone deposes, inter alia, that Friar Malone
of Skerries, did take the poor men's Bibles which he found in the boat, and cut
them in pieces and cast them into the fire, with these words, That he would
deal in like manner with all Protestant and Puritan Bibles, jurat. Feb. 28.
1641.

[66] Henry Fisher of Powerscourt in the County of Wickloe deposes, that the
Rebels entered the Parish Church at Powerscourt, and burnt up the Pues, Pulpits,
Chests and Bibles belonging to the said Church, with extreme violence and
triumph, and expressing of hatred to Religion, jurat Jan. 25. 1641.

[66] Adam Clover of Slonosie in the County of Cavan, duly sworn, deposes,
that James O Rely, Hugh Brady, and other Rebels, did often take into their
hands the Protestant Bibles, and wetting them in the dirty water, did five or
six several times dash the same on the face of this Deponent and other
Protestants, saying, Come I know you love a good lesson, here is an excellent
one for you, come to morrow, and you shall have as good as Sermon as this; and
used other scornful and disgraceful words unto them: And further says, that
dragging diverse Protestants by the hair of the head, and in other cruel
manner into the Church, there stripped, robbed, whipped, and most cruelly used
them, saying, If you come to morrow you shall hear the like Sermon, jurat Jan.
4. 1641.

[66] Edward Slack of Gusteen in the County of Fermanagh Clerk, deposes,
that the Rebels there took his Bible, opened it, and laying the open side in a
puddle of water, leaped and trampled upon it, saying, A plague on it, this
Bible has bred all the quarrel, and that he hoped within few weeks all the
Bibles in Ireland should be used as that was, or worse, and that none should be
left in the Kingdom, jurat Jan. 4. 1641.

with what indignation and reproach, did they tear, trample under their feet
the sacred Word of God? How despightfully did they upbraid the profession of
the truth to those blessed souls, whom neither by threats nor terrors, pains
nor torments, they could draw to forsake their Religion.

But I shall not here touch any further upon those who dyed thus gloriously;
this will be a worthy work for some more able pen to undertake, and indeed fit
for a Martyrology. If we shall take a survey of the primitive times, and look
into the sufferings of the first Christians that suffered under the tyranny and
cruel persecutions of those Heathenish Emperors, we shall not certainly find
any one Kingdom, though of a far larger continent, where more Christians
suffered, or more unparaleld cruelties were acted in many years upon them, then
were in Ireland, within the space of the first two months after the breaking
out of this Rebellion. And howsoever [67] Alexander Creighton of Glaslough in
the County of Monaghan Gent. deposes, that he heard it credibly reported among
the Rebels aforesaid, at Glaslough, that Hugh Mac O Degan, a Priest, had done a
most meritorious act in drawing betwixt forty and fifty English and Scottish in
the Parish of Ganalley, in the County of Fermanagh, to reconciliation with the
Church of Rome, and after giving them the Sacrament demanded of them whether
Christ's body was really in the Sacrament or no; and they said, Yea: And that he
demanded of them further, whether they held the Pope to be supreme head of the
Church? They likewise answered, He was: And that thereupon he presently told
them, they were in a good Faith; and for fear they should fall from it, and
turn Heretics, he and the rest that were with them, cut all their throats,
jurat March 1. 1641.

some by outward inflictions and tortures were drawn to profess the change of
their Religion, and had presently their reward; for many of those they suddenly
despatched with great scorn, saying, it was fit to send them out of the world
in that good mood; [68] John Glass of Montwrath in the Queens County, sworn
and examined says, that Florence Fitz Patrick, of the said County, Esquire,
having received Master John Nicholson, and his wife Anne Nicholson, under his
protection, did endeavor all he could to turn them to Mass, or the present
Rebellion; but they both professed, that rather then they would either forsake
their Religion, or fight against their Countrymen, they would dye the death;
the husband professing how much they abhorred it, and his wife even showing
greater resolution: They would have had her burnt her Bible; but her answer
was, before she would either burn her Bible, or turn against her Countrymen,
she would dye upon the point of the sword; which was made good by them; for on
a Sabbath day in the morning before Mass, they were cruelly butchered and
murdered, by the command of the said Florence Fitz Patrick: The instrument that
acted the villainy, was one John Harding, who since has been beyond all
expression, tormented in his conscience, and with continued apparitions of them
(as he conceived) in such lively manner as he murdered them; so as he is even
now consumed away with the horror of it, as is most frequently reported among
the Rebels, jurat April 8. 1642.

yet I dare say we shall find many thus cruelly put to death, equal to some of
those ancient Worthies for their patience, constancy, courage, magnanimity in
their sufferings, not accepting deliverance, but triumphing and insulting with
their last breath, over the insolency, rage and malice of their most inhumane
and cruel persecutors.

We shall find in the Roman Story, during the several cruel contestations
betwixt Marius and Scilla, when their factious followers filled the whole City
of Rome with streams of blood, Strange and most incomparable passages of
friendships; one exposing himself to all manner of dangers for the
preservation of his friend of a contrary faction; servants willingly
sacrificing themselves to save the lives of their beloved Masters. But here on
the contrary, what open violation of all bands of humanity and friendship; no
contracts, no promises observed; quarter given in the most solemn manner with
the greatest oaths and severest execrations, under hand and seal suddenly
broken. The Irish Landlords making a prey of their English Tenants; the Irish
Servants betraying their English Masters; and every one esteeming any act
wherein they could declare their hatred and malice most against any of the
British Nation, as gallant and truly meritorious. It is not to be denied, but
that the first and most bloody executions were made in the Province of Vlster,
and there they continued longest to execute their rage and cruelty; yet must it
also be acknowledged, that all the other three Provinces did concur with
them, as it were, with one common consent to destroy and pluck up by the roots
all the British planted thorowout the Kingdom. And for this purpose they went
on not only murdering, stripping and driving out all of them, Men, Women and
Children: but they laid waste their Habitations, burnt their Evidences, defaced
in many places all the Monuments of civility and devotion; the Courts and
places of the English Government; nay, as some of themselus express it, they
resolved not to leave them either Name or Posterity in Ireland.

How they proceeded on in this work, or how far they co-operated each with
other, will be a task of a large size, and more proper for another place in
this Story; I shall here conclude this Discourse concerning the cruelties
exercised upon the British and Protestants with these following Examinations.
There follows several Examinations taken upon oath of several horrid murders
and most abhominaable cruelties acted with in the four Provinces.
They are eight in number, two Witnesses, as it were, taken out of each
Province, to declare their bloody proceedings: I shall begin with Munster, from
whence we have yet very few Examinations brought up, the chiefest of them
having been most unhappily carried another way. Therefore I have thought fit,
for the more full expressing their Miseries, to insert their general
Remonstrance, made upon the conclusion of the late Cessation, in the year 1643.
The two next ensuing are concerning the Province of Conaght, then those of the
Province of Vlster; and lastly, two Examinations taken of some acts of cruelty
committed within the Province of Lemster. I have made choice, for the most part
of them, of such as have been put in by persons of good quality, of known
integrity and credit. They are all upon Oath, as all the other Examinations
concerning cruelties before mentioned likewise are. I shall leave the several
particulars to the consideration of such as shall please to take the pains to
read them over. And I may well say of them, in respect of the former cruelties
inserted, as was said to the Prophet Ezekiel in another case; Turn thee yet
again, Ezekiel. 8.13
and thou shall see greater abominations then these.

A general REMONSTRANCE of the distressed PROTESTANTS in the Province of
MUNSTER.
SEting forth, from the gasping condition of their most sad and distressed
souls, That whereas the Province of Munster, through the vaste expense of
English treasure and blood, was reduced from the height of Barbarism, to such
a degree of Civility, that the power and dignity of the English Crown was much
advanced and extended, by the surest and noblest bonds of a flourishing people;
those of Religion, Civilitie and Profit. Of Religion, witnessed by the enlarged
Congregations both in Cathedral and Parochial Churches. Civility, by the many
costly Plantations, fair and strong Buildings; plentiful Markets, and
bountiful Hospitality. And Profit, by the free Trade and Commerce throughout
Christendom. Lands fully improved, abounding with herds and flocks of all
sorts of the best English Cattle; which enabled us to advance great sums to
his Majesty's Customs, contribute large Subsidyes, and to supply the West of
England with such a considerable proportion of Wool and Cattle, that a great
part of the Trade of those parts subsisted thereby. And this begun at the great
charge of the English Undertakers, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, of famous
memory; since, when few parts of Christendom from their beginning (in so short
space) had such a Rise and growth; which was not alone to our selves, but the
very Natives must confess, that their Estates were hugely augmented by our
improvements. And therefore let it not be wondered at, that when we consider from
what we are fallen, to what we are fallen; if the pain of loss strive to equal
that of sense; and if the depth of our Miseries have not sunk our souls to
stupidity, we may compare our Woes to the saddest parallel of any Story. Our
Temples demolished, or worse, profaned by sacrifices to Idols; our Houses and
Castles become ruinous heaps; our Nation extirpated, destroyed: No quality,
age, sex privileged from Massacres and lingering deaths; by being robbed and
stripped naked, through cold or famine, Passages of a notable piece of Clemency
and Mercy. The famished Infants of murdered Parents swarm in our Streets, and
for want of Bread perish before our faces; and many of our, yet, miserable
remnant, which lived plentifully and relieved others, are forced to ask
relief, and those they ask of, constrained by want to refuse them; So as
undoubtedly our present Miseries are not far distant of those of Samarias
Siedge; and all those cast upon us by this unparalelled Rebellion, at a time
when we were most confident and secure; more and greater Jmmunities and
Bounties being granted by his Majesty that now is, then ever was by his Royal
Progenitors; for what cause, offense, or least seeming occasion of
provocation, our Souls could never imagine (Sin excepted) save that we were
Protestants, and his Majesty's loyal Subjects, and could not endure their
poisonous breaths to belch out such profaneness, as in a deep measure
pierced and wounded the sacred fame of our King; and to color this, we must
go under the notorious names of first Puritans, and later of Roundheads; For
particular instances, time would fail, and length weary the Reader. But we all
together confident to make it manifest, by abundant instances, That the
Depopulations in this Province of MUNSTER do well and near equal those of
the whole KINGDOM. The particulars whereof, as of the multitude of inhumaine
cruelties were collected and reduced to several instances, with ample proof,
by the many Months indevours of a reverend Divine, one Archdeacon BISSE,
thereunto authorized by virtue of a Commission under the Broad-Seale of this
Kingdom; who was most barbarously murdered by the Jrish, expressing that to
be the cause. And because it may be thought requisite to touch something of the
Demeanours of the Jrish since the Cessation, as well as before; many English
have been murdered as they traveled, with other expressions of that utter
detestations of the English, that if any remain (which few do) nor surely
will do, that can but breath but elsewhere; then must they be in a degree
worse then any known slavery: And likewise for other parts of the Cessation,
they have been totally broken, and our Quarters, being of large extent,
universally taken from us, even to the walls of our Garrisons; wherein we have
often called to the chief of them for justice; which being denied (or which is
worse) delayed, want of means to justify our selves, leaves us without
remedy. All which we pour forth our griefs and Supplications, above, to God
alone; and here on earth, to our Dread Sovereign.

The EXAMINATION of Anne the late Wife of John Sherring, late of the Territory
of Ormond, The Province of Munster.
near the Silverworks in the County of Tipperary, aged about 25. years,
Sworn and Examined, Deposes and Says:
THat about Candlemas was two years, the said John Sherring her then husband,
going from his Farm, which he held from Master John Kenedy, Esquire, near to
the Silverworks, one Hugh Kenedy, one of the brothers of the said John Kennedy,
a cruel Rebel, together with a great multitude of Irish rebellious Soldiers,
then and there fiercely assaulted and set upon her said husband, and upon one
William Brock, William Laughlin, Thomas Collop, and eight more English
Protestant men, and about ten women, and upon some children in their company,
and then and there stripped them of their clothes, and then with stones,
poleaxes, skeines, swords, pikes, darts, and other weapons, most barbarously
massacred and murdered her said husband, and all those Protestant men, women
and children: In the time of which Massacre, a most loud and fearful noise and
storm of thunder, lightning, wind, hailstones and rain began: The time being
on a Sabbath day, about an hour before night, the former part of that day being
all very fair, but that thunder, lightning and tempest happening suddenly
after the massacre was begun, much afrighted and terrified this Deponent and
many others, insomuch as those murderers themselves confessed it to be a sign
of Gods anger and threatening of them for such their then cruelty; yet it
deterred them not, but they persisted in their bloody act, until they had
murdered those said English Protestants and had hackt, hewed, slashed, stabbed
and so massacred them, that many of them were cut all to pieces; and her
husband for his part, had thirty grievous wounds then and there given him
(viz.) some through or near his heart, ten mortal wounds in his head, three in
his belly, and in either arm four, and the rest in his thighs, legs, back and
neck; and that murder done, those barbarous Rebels tied wyths about their
necks, and drew them out of the refining Mill (where indeed they slew them) and
threw them or most of them into a deep hole (formerly made) one upon another,
so that none of those 23. men, women nor children did escape death. Howbeit one
Tho. Ladell, a Scottish-man, and one George Kelsie, who then and there endured
and had many grievous wounds and being left on the ground for dead, crawled up
(after the Rebels were gone away) and with much difficulty, escaped with their
lives: And further says, that such was Gods judgment upon the said Hugh
Kenedy for that bloody fact, that he presently fell into a most desperate
madness and distraction, and could not rest day nor night; yet coveting to do
more mischief upon the English, but being prevented and denied to do it, he
about a week after drowned himself in the next River to the Silverworks, but
his barbarous and wicked Soldiers went on in their wickedness, and afterward
bragged how they had killed a Minister and his wife and four children near the
City of Limrick; and this Deponent is too well assured, that those and other
Irish Rebels in that part of the Country, exercised and committed great number
of bloody murders, robberies and outrages upon the persons and goods of the
Protestants, so as very few escaped with their lives, and none at all saved
their goods. And further says, that all the popish Gentry in the Country
thereabouts, especially all those of the Septs and names of the O Brians, and
the Coghluns, the Kenedies, were all actors in the present Rebellion against
his Majesty; and either acted, assisted, incited, or consented to all the
murders, robberies, cruelties and rebellious acts aforesaid. And she further
says, that by means of the said Rebellion, her said husband and she were at
Werinwood about Candlemas 1641. robbed and deprived of their Cattle,
Household Stuff, Corn, Malt, Provision, ready money, debts, the benefit of
their Lease, and other their Goods and Chattels of the value, and to their
loss of one hundred and threescore pounds at the least, and that the said John
Kenedy Esquire, their Landlord, was the man that so deprived and robbed them
thereof, and the other Rebels stripped her stark naked, jurat Feb. 10. 1643.

Henry Jones. Henry Brereton. Anne Sherring.


The EXAMINATION of John Goldsmith Parson of Brashoule, The Province of Conaght.
in the County of Mayo, Sworn and Examined, says:
THat the Lord of Mayo being to convoy all those of Castle Burre to Galway,
viz. Sir Henry Bingham, with all his company, and the Bishop of Killallae with
all his company, with many of the neighboring English, being about threescore
in number, whereof there were some fifteen Ministers, covenanted with one
Edmund Bourk for the safe convoy of the same parties upon a certain day; and
the said Lord of Mayo appointed them all to meet him at Belcharah, having first
separated this Deponent from them to attend his Lady in the work of the
Ministry. At which day, the titulary Archbishop and the Lord of Mayo meeting
with their whole number, went on their journey to Shreul; at which place the
Lord of Mayo left them in the custody of the said last named Edmud Bourk: But,
as one Master Bringhurst told the Deponent, the Lord of Mayo was not gone far
from them, but the said Edmund Bourk drew out his sword, directing the rest
what they should do, and began to massacre those Protestants; and accordingly
some were shot to death, some stabbed with skeines, some run through with pikes,
some cast into the water and drowned, and the women that were stripped naked,
lying upon their husbands to save them, were run through with pikes, and very
few of those English then and there escaped alive, but the most part were
murdered in the place: Amongst the rest, the Bishop of Killalla escaped with
his life, but was then and there wounded in his head; and one Master Crowd a
Minister, was then and there so beaten with cudgels on his feet, that he dyed
shortly after. And this Deponent further says, that in the Town of Sligo,
forty persons of English and Scottish were by the Rebels stripped and locked up in
a celler, and about midnight, a Butcher which was sent unto them on purpose,
with his Axe knocked them all on the heads, and so then and there murdered
them: which Butcher coming afterward to Castle Burre, did there confess his
bloody fact.

In Tirawly within the County of (...) about thirty or forty English (formerly
turned Papists, had their choice given them, whether they would dye by the
sword, or drown themselves: They making choice of drowning, were brought to
the Seaside by the Rebels, who had their skeines drawn in their hands, and
forced them to wade into the Sea: The mothers, with their children in their
arms (crying for drink) having waded to the chin, at length cast or dived
themselves and children into the Sea, yielding themselves to the Mastery of the
waves, and so perished.

The torments the Rebels would use to the Protestants to make them confess
their moneys, were these, viz. some they would take and writh wyths about their
heads, until the blood sprang out of the crown of their heads: others they
would hang until they were half dead, then they would let them down, and do
the same so often over, until they confessed their moneys.

And this Deponent further says, that a young youth of about fifteen years of
age, the son of Master Montgomery the Minister meeting with a bloody Rebel,
who had been his Schoolmaster: This Rebel drew his skeine, and began
furiously to slash and cut him therewith; the Boy cried unto him, Good Master
do not kill me, but whip me as much as you will; nevertheless the merciless
and cruel Rebel then and there most barbarously murdered him.

A Scotchman travailing in the highway, with his wife and children near (...)
were beset by the Rebels who wounded and stabbed him with their pikes, put him
alive upon a Carre, brought him to a ditch, and buried him alive, as the poor
wife afterward (with great grief) told him this Deponent.

The Vicar of Vrras turned Papist, and became Drummer to Captain Bourke, and
was after murdered for his pains by the Rebels.

Another Scotchman near Ballehen was hanged by the Rebels.

Joh. Goldsmith.
Jurat 30. Decembris 1643. Henry Jones. Henry Brereton.


The EXAMINATION of Jane the wife of Thomas Stewart, The Province of Conaght.
late of the Town and County of Sligoe, Merchant, Sworn and Examined before his
Majesty's Commissioners, in that behalf Authorized: Deposes and says;
THat after the present Rebellion was begun, viz. about the beginning of
December 1641. her said Husband living as a Merchant in the Town aforesaid,
with her this Deponent, as for twenty six years he had done, in very good
estate and condition. And having continually furnished the Inhabitants of that
part thereabouts with all sorts of Wares and Merchandise; and by that course
having acquired and gained to himself an estate of good value. He the said
Thomas Stewart, and she this Deponent, then possessing that Estate, were then
at Sligoe aforesaid, by Andrew Creane of Sligoe Esquire, then high Sheriff of
that County, Neile O Heart of Donelly in the said County Gentleman, Roger O
Conner of Skarden in the same County Gent. Donnell O Conner of (...) Gent.
brother in law to Teige O Conner, Sligo Richard O Creane of Tirreragh Gent.
John O Creane Esqu. and a Justice of Peace, Son to the said Andrew Creane,
Anthony Screane of (...) near Ballyshanny Gent. forcibly deprived, robbed and
despoiled of their Houshold-goods, Wares, Merchandise, Specialities, cattle,
horses, plate, money, and other goods and chattels, of the value of one
thousand two hundred pounds Sterling. or thereabouts: Which robbery and outrage
was committed in or about the beginning of December aforesaid, at the very time
of the Rebels surprising, robbing and pillaging of all the English and Scots of
the Town of Sligoe. In the doing whereof, not only the persons, Rebels before
named, but also Teige O Conner Sligo now of the Castle of Sligo, general of the
Rebels in those parts; James French of Sligo aforesaid, Esquire a Justice of the
Peace (a notorious and cruel Rebel) Brian O Conner of Drumcleere Gent.
Captain Charles O Conner a Friar, and Captain Hugh O Conner, all three
Captains, and brothers to the said Teige O Conner Sligo, Captain Patrick
Plunket, near Killoony in the same County (a Justice of the Peace) Captain
Phelim O Conner, Captain Teige O Conner of the Glan, Captain Con O Conner, of
the same, and diverse others whose names she cannot for the present remember,
were most forward and cruel actors; and those Rebels having altogether
deprived and stripped all the British of all their estates they had, she this
Deponent, and her husband, and many other British were left in that Town, and
amongst the rest, there were left there, which she can well remember, viz.
William Braxton, the Deponent and her husband and six children, James Scot and
his son of the age of four or five years, Sampson Port and his wife, Mary
Port and her father (of the age of seventy years, or thereabouts) John Little,
Arthur Martin, William Dowlittle and his wife and children, William Carter, and
John Jews, and Elizabeth his wife, Robert Scyens, Elizabeth Harlow, and one
woman then was great with child, and within a month of her time, Isabel Beard,
who was great with child, and very near her time, and others whom she cannot
name; which British people (although they were promised fair quarter, and taken
into the protection of the said Teige O Conner Sligo, who promised them a
collection, yet they were daily threatened to be murdered, if they would not
turn Papists in one month, then the next after; which for saving of their
lives, they were enforced to do: Notwithstanding which, about the sixth of
January then next following, the said O Conner Sligoe, (having before called a
meeting of his followers and kindred, in the Counties of Sligoe and Letrim, and
considered with them, and with a Covent of Friars of the Abbey of Sligo for
three days together, where they sat in Counsel) all the men, women and
children of the British that then could be found within the same Town (saving
this Deponent, who was so sick that she could not stir) were summoned to go
into the Goal, and as many as could be met withal, were carried and put into
the Goal of Sligo, where about twelve a clock in the night they were stripped
stark naked, and after most of them were most cruelly and barbarously murdered
with swords, axes and skeines, and particularly, by two Butchers, named James
Buts and Robert Buts of Sligoe, who murdered many of them, wherein also were
actors Charles O Conner the Friar, and Hugh O Conner aforenamed, brother to the
said Teige O Conner Sligo, and Teige O Sheile, Kedagh O Heart Labourer, Richard
Walsh and Thomas Walsh, the one the Jailer, the other a Butcher, and diverse
others whom she cannot name: And says, that above thirty of the British which
were so put into the Goal, were then and there murdered; besides, Robert
Gumble, then Provost of the said Town of Sligoe, Edward Newsham, and Edward
Mercer who were wounded and left for dead amongst the rest, and Jo. Stewart
this Deponents son, which four being the next day found alive, yet all
besmeared with blood, were spared to live. All which particulars, the Deponent
was credibly told by those that so escaped, and by her Irish servants and
others of the Town; and says, that some of the women so murdered being big
with child (by their wounds received) the very arms and legs of the children in
their wombs appeared, and were thrust out; and one woman, viz. Isabel Beard,
being in the house of the Friars, and hearing the lamentable cry that was made,
ran into the street, and was pursued by one of the Friars men unto the River,
where she was barbarously murdered, and found the next day, with the child's
feet appearing, and thrust out of her wounds in her sides. And further says,
that on the said sixth day of January there were murdered in the streets of the
Town of Sligo, these British Protestants following, viz. William Sheiles and
John Sheiles his son, William Mapwell and Robert Akin. And the Deponent
further says (as she was credibly informed by the persons before named, that
the inhumane Rebels after their murders committed in the said Goal, laid and
placed some of the dead bodies of the naked murdered men upon the naked bodies
of the women in a most immodest posture, not fit for chaste ears to hear: In
which posture they continued to be seen the next morning by those Irish of the
Town that came into the said Goal, who were delighted and rejoiced in those
bloody murders and uncivil actions: And that they of the Irish that came to
bury them, stood up to the mid-leg in the blood and brains of those that were
so murdered, who were carried out and cast into a pit dug for that purpose,
in the Garden of Master Ricrofts, Minister of Sligo. And she further says,
that whereas the River of Sligo was before very plentiful of Fish, it did not
for a long time after those murders, afford any Fish at all: And this Deponent
saw the Friars in their white habits, in great companies in precession, going
to sanctify the water, casting thereinto holy water: She says also, that the
Pryor of the Covent of Sligo, after the murder of the said woman in the River,
fell frantic, and ran so about the Streets, and continued in that frenzy for
three or four weeks; and says, that of her six children, three were starved
and dyed, after her release of imprisonment, which had been for eigthteen
months amongst the Rebels.

Signum predict. VVV Janae Stewart alias Menize.
Jurat 23. Aprilis 1644. Henry Jones. Henry Brereton.


Captain ANTHONY STRATFORD of Charlmount in the County of Armagh, Esquire, The
Province of Ulster.
aged threescore years or thereabouts; sworn and examined before his Majesty's
Commissioners, by virtue of a Commission in that behalf, directed under the
great Seal of Ireland: Deposes and says,
THat these Protestant Ministers following, about the beginning of the present
Rebellion, were murdered in the Counties of Tyrone, Armagh, viz. Master John
Matthew, Master Blyth, Master Hastings, Master, Smith, Master Durragh, Master
Birge, and eight more, whose names this Deponent has forgotten, by the Rebels,
none of which would the Rebels permit to be buried; the names of such as
murdered, this Examinant knows not; his cause of knowledge of the said
murders is, that some of his, this Deponents servants, who were among the
Rebels, did give him the relation, and he verily believes them; and besides,
this Deponent heard the same confessed and averred by many of the Rebels
themselves, and by some of those Protetestants that had escaped; and that he,
this Deponent, was a prisoner amongst the Rebels at Castle Gaufield near the
place of those murders where he continued fourteen months. And further says,
that in Dungannon, in the County of Tyrone, or near thereunto, the Rebels
murdered three hundred and sixteen Protestants, and between Charlmount and
Dungannon, above four hundred, there were murdered and drowned at, and in the
River by Benburb, the Black-water, between the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone,
two hundred and six Protestants, and Patrick Mac Crew of Dungannon aforesaid,
murdered thirty one in one morning, and two young Rebels, viz. John Begbrian
Harie, murdered in the said County of Tyrone, one hundred and forty poor women
and children that could make no resistance, and that the wife of Brian Kelly of
Loghgall in the County of Armagh (one of the Rebels Captains) did with her
own hands murder forty five. And this Deponent further says, that one Thomas
King, sometimes Sergeant to the late Lord Caulfields Company (which this
Deponent commanded) he being enforced to serve under the Rebels, and was one of
their Provest Marshals, gave the Deponent a List of every householders name so
murdered, and the number of the persons so murdered; which List this Deponent
durst not keep: At Portadowne there were drowned at several times about three
hundred and eight, who were sent away by about forty, or such like numbers at
once, with convoyes, and there drowned: There was a Lawgh near Loghgall
aforesaid, where were drowned above two hundred, of which this Deponent was
informed by several persons, and particularly by the wife of Doctor Hodges,
and two of her sons, who were present and designed for the like end, but by
Gods mercy that gave them favor in the eyes of some of the Rebels, they
escaped; and the said Mistress Hodges and her sons gave the Deponent a List of
the names of many of those that were so drowned, which the Deponent durst not
keep; and says that the said Doctor Hodges was employed by Sir Phelim O Neile
to make Powder, but he failing of his undertaking, was first half hanged, then
cut down, and kept prisoner three months, and then murdered with forty four
more within a quarter of of a mile Charlmount aforesaid, (they being by Tirlogh
Oge O Neile, brother to Sir Phelim, sent to Dungannon prisoners, and in the way
murdered. This Deponent was showed the pit where they were all cast in, at a
Mill-pond in the Parish of Killamen, in the County of Tyrone, there were
drowned in one day three hundred; and in the same Parish, there were murdered
of English and Scottish one thousand and two hundred, as this Deponent was
informed by Master Birge, the late Minister of the said Parish, who certified
the same under his hand, which note the Deponent durst not keep: The said
Master Birge was murdered three months after; all which murders were in the
first breaking out of the Rebellion; but the particular times this Deponent
cannot remember, neither the persons by whom they were committed: This Deponent
was credibly informed by the said Sergeant and others of this Deponents
servants (who kept company with the Rebels and saw the same, that many young
children were cut into quarters and gobbets by the Rebels, and that eighteen
Scottish Infants were hanged on a Clothiers tenterhook, and that they murdered
a young fat Scottish man, and made candles of his grease; they took another
Scottish man and ripped up his belly, that they might come to his small guts,
the one end whereof they tied to a tree, and made him go round until he had
drawn them all out of his body, they then saying, that they would try whether
a dogs or a Scotch man's guts were the longer.

Anthony Stratford.
Deposes March 9. 1643. before us, Henry Jones. Henry Brereton.


The EXAMINATION of Robert Maxwell Clerk, The Province of Ulster.
Archdeacon of Down, sworn and examined deposes and says inter alia:
THat by command from Sir Phelim O Neile, the Rebels dragged the Deponents
brother, Lieutenant James Maxwell out of his bed in the rage and height of a
burning Fever; and least any of his acquaintance or friends should bury him,
they carried him two miles from any Church, and there cruelly butchered him,
when he neither knew what he did or said; and thus Sir Phelim paid him two
hundred and sixty pound which he owed him: And his wife Grissell Maxwell being
in childbirth, the child half born and half unborne, they stripped stark
naked, drove her about an arrows flight to the Black-water, and drowned her:
The like they did to another English woman in the same Parish, in the beginning
of the Rebellion, which was little inferior, if not more unnatural and
barbarous then the roasting of Master Watson alive, after they had cut a collop
out of either buttock. And farther says, that a Scottish woman was found in
the Glinwood, lying dead, her belly ripped up, and a living child crawling in
her womb, cut out of the Cawle; and that Master Starkey, Schoolmaster at
Armagh, he a Gentleman of good Parentage and parts, being upwards of an hundred
years of age, they stripped naked, caused two of his Daughters, Virgins, being
likewise naked, to support him under each arm, he being not able to go of
himself: And in that posture carried them all three a quarter of a mile, to a
turfe pit, and drowned them, feeding the lusts of their eyes, and the cruelty
of their hearts with the self-same objects at the same time. At the siege of
Augher, they would not kill any English Beast, and then eat it, but they cut
collops out of them being alive, letting them there rore till they had no more
flesh upon their backs, so that sometimes a Beast would live two or three days
together in that torment; the like they did at Armagh, when they murdered Hugh
Echlin, Esquire, they hanged and murdered all his Irish servants which had any
way proved faithful or useful to him during this Rebellion: And as touching
exemplary constancy in Religion, this Deponent says, that Henry Cowell,
Esquire, a gallant and well bred Gentleman, was murdered because he would not
consent to marry a beastly Trull, Mary Ny Neile, a near Kinswoman of Sir
Phelim's: He was proffered his life, without the Blouse, if he would have gone
to Mass, but he chose rather to dye then to do either. There was made the
like proffer of life for going to Mass to Robert Eckline, a child of eleven or
twelve years of age, but he also refused it, saying, he saw nothing in their
Religion for which he would change his own. And this Deponent further says,
that very many of the British Protestants the Rebels buried alive, and took
great pleasure to hear them speak unto them as they dug down old ditches
upon them; except those whom they thus buried, they buried none of the
Protestants, neither would permit any who survived to perform that duty for
them: And further says, that the Rebels would send their children abroad in
great troops, especially near unto Kinard, armed with long wattles and whips,
who would therewith beat dead men's bodies about their privy members, until
they beat, or rather thrashed, them off, and then would return in great joy to
their Parents, who received them for such service as it were in triumph. And
further says, that if any women were found dead lying with their faces
downwards, they would turn them upon their backs, and in great flocks resort
unto them, censuring all parts of their bodies, but especially such as are not
fit to be named, which afterward they abused so many ways, and so filthily,
as chaste ears would not endure the very naming thereof.

Many of the Protestants the Rebels would not kill outright, but being half
dead would so leave them, entreating for no better favor at their hands two or
three days after, but to kill them outright, which sometimes were granted,
sometimes denied.

A young youth having his backbone broken, was found in a field having like a
Beast eaten all the grass round about him; the Deponent could not learn that
they killed him out, but that they removed him to a place of better Pasture, so
that in those most bloody and execrable wretches, that of the holy Ghost is
clearly verified, The very mercy of the wicked is cruelty: And further says,
that the Rebels themselves told him, this Deponent, that they murdered 954. in
one morning, in the County of Antrim; and that besides them, they supposed that
they killed above 1100. or 1200. more in that County: They told him likewise,
that Colonel Bryan O Neile killed about one thousand in the County of Down,
besides three hundred killed near Killeleigh, and many hundreds both before
and after in both those Counties.

At Sir Phelims return from Lisnegarvy some of the Soldiers forced about 24.
British into a house, where they burned them alive, whose terrible outcries
they desired very much to imitate and express unto others: And says, that he
heard Sir Phelim likewise report, that he killed 600. English at Garvagh in the
County of Derny; and that he had left neither man, woman nor Child alive in the
Barony of Munterlong in the County of Tyrone, and betwixt Armagh and the Newry,
in the several Plantations and Lands of Sir Archibald Atcheson, John Hamilton,
Esquire, the Lord Canfield, and the Lord Mount Norrice: and says also, that
there were above two thousand of the British murdered for the most part in
their own houses, whereof he was informed by a Scotch man, who was in those
parts with Sir Phelim, and saw their houses filled with their dead bodies. In
the Glenwood toward Dromore, there were slaughtered, as the Rebels told the
Deponent, upwards of twelve thousand in all, who were all killed in their flight
to the County of Down: The number of the people drowned at the Bridge of
Portadowne, are diversely reported according as men staid amongst the Rebels,
this Deponent who staid as long as any, and had better intelligence then most
of the English amongst them, and had best reason to know the truth, says,
there were (by their own report) 190. drowned with Master Fullerton: At
another time they threw 140. over the said Bridge; at another time 36. or 37.
and so continued drowning more or fewer, for seven or eight weeks, so as the
fewest which can be supposed there to have perished, must needs be above 1000.
besides as many more drowned betwixt that Bridge and the great Lowgh of
Montjoy, besides those who perished by the sword fire and famine, in
Coubrassill, and the English plantations adjacent: Which in regard there
escaped not 300. out of all those quarters must needs amount to many thousands.

Near unto the Deponants House thirty six persons were carried to the
Cure-bridge at one time, and drowned. At another time six and fifty, Men, Women
and Children; all of them being taken out of the Deponents House; and at
several other times several other numbers; Besides those that were drowned in
the Black-water at Kinnard. In which Town and the Parish of Tinon (whereof the
Deponent was Rector) there was drowned, slaughtered and dyed of Famine, and for
want of Clothes, about six hundred. The Deponent might add to these many
thousands more; but the Diary which he this Deponent wrote amongst the Rebels,
being burned, with his House, The numbers of British destroyed within the
Province of Ulster.
Books and all his Papers; he refers himself to the number in gross,
which the Rebels themselves have upon inquiry, find out and acknowledged;
which notwithstanding will come short of all that have been Murdered in
Ireland; there being above one hundred and fifty four thousand now wanting of
the British within the very precinct of Vlster.

And this Deponent further says, That it was common Table-talke amongst the
Rebels, that the Ghost of Master William Fullerton, Timothy Jephes, and the
most of those who were thrown over Portadowne-Bridge, were daily and nightly
seen to walk upon the River, sometimes singing of Psalms, sometimes
brandishing of naked Swords, sometimes scrieching in a most hideous and
fearful manner. The Deponent did not believe the same at first, neither does
he yet know whether to believe it or no; but says that diverse of the Rebels
assured him that they themselves did dwell near to the same River, and being
daily affrighted with those apparitions, but especially with their horrible
scrieching, were in conclusion enforced to remove further into the Country:
Their own Priests and Friars could not deny the truth thereof. But as it was
by the Deponent Objected unto them; said it was but a cunning flight of the
Devil to hinder this great work of propagating the Catholic Faith, and
killing of Heretics; or that it was wrought by Witchcraft. The Deponent
himself lived within thirteen miles of the Bridge, and never heard any man so
much as doubt of the truth thereof. Howsoever, he obliges no man's faith, in
regard he saw it not with his own eyes; otherwise he had as much certainty as
morrally could be required of such a matter.

And this Deponent further says; That the degenerate Pale English, were most
cruel amongst the British Protestants, being beaten from their own Lands; and
were never satisfied with their blood, until they had in a manner seen the
last drop thereof; affrighting Sir Phelim O Neale every day with their numbers,
and persuading him, That whilst they (meaning the Protestants) lived, there
would neither be room for them, nor safety for him. It was easy to spur on
the cowardly and bloody Rebel; yet no sooner were the Protestants cut off, but
contrary to their expectation, the mere Irish took present possession of
their Lands and Houses; whereat the Pale English much grumbled; and said, Sir
Phelim had not kept promise with them; howsoever, they were forced to swallow
those and many other injuries.

And further says, that he knew one Boy, that dwelt near unto himself, and
not exceeding fourteen years of age, who killed at Kinnard, in one night,
fifteen able strong men with his Skeine, they being disarmed, and most of their
feet in the Stocks.

Another not above twelve years of age, killed two women at the Siedge of
Augher.

Another that was a woman and Tenant to this Deponent, killed seven men and
women, of her fellow English Tenants, in one morning. And it was very usual in
all parts, for the Rebels children to murder the Protestants children; and
sometimes with Lath-swords heavy, and well sharpened, they would venture upon
people of riper years (cruelties not to be believed) if there were not so many
eyewitnesses of them.

Deposed 22. of August, 1642. Henry Brereton.
William Aldrich.

The EXAMINATION of Dame Anne Butler, The Province of Lemster.
wife unto Sir Thomas Butler of Rathealin in the County of Catherlagh, Knight,
duly sworn; Deposes:
THat after Walter Baggnall of Dunlickny, in the County of Catherlagh, Esquire.
Walter Butler with a great number of men, had in a violent manner entered this
Deponents House, they not able to resist, they set strict guard over this
Deponent, her husband and family, and brought them from their settled dwelling
unto Loghlin-Bridge, where they kept her self, her husband and children in
restraint for two weeks, and from thence conveyed them with strict guard to
the town of Kilkeny; and there were brought before the Lord Mount Garro; where
Walter Bagnall and James Butler, brother to the Lord Mount Garrot did use all
means possible to move the said Lord, to put this Deponent her husband and
family to death and torture; alleging that they were rank Puritan Protestants,
and desperately provoking, used these words, saying, There Is but one way, we or
they, meaning Papists or Protestants, must perish. To which malicious
provocation the said Lord did not hearken: And this Deponent further deposes,
that Walter Baggnall, with his rebellious company, apprehended Richard Lake an
English Protestant, and his servant, with his wife and four children, and one
Richard Tailor of Loghlin-Bridge, his wife and children, Samuel Hatter of the
same, his wife and children, an English-woman, called Jone, and her daughter,
and was credibly informed by Dorathy Renals, who had several times bin an
eyewitness of these lamentable spectacles, that she had seen to the number of
five and thirty English going to execution, and that she had seen them when
they were executed, their bodies exposed to devouring Ravens, and not afforded
so much as burial. Another English-woman who was newly delivered of two
children in one Birth, they violently compelled her in her great pain and
sickness, to rise from her childe-bed, and took the infant that was left
alive, and dashed his brains against the stones, and after threw him into the
River of the Barrow: and having a piece of Salmon to dinner, Master Brian
Cavanaghs wife being with her, she the said Mistress Cavanagh refused to eat any
part of the Salmon, and being demanded the reason, she said she would never eat
any Fish that came out of the Barrow, because she had seen several infants
bodies, and other Carkases of the English taken up in the Wear.

And this Deponent says, that Sir Edward Butler did credibly inform her, that
James Butler of Finyhinch, had hanged and put to death all the English that
were at Gorane and Wells, and all thereabouts. And further Deposes, that she
being in Kilkeny a prisoner in restraint, and having intelligence that some of
her own Cattle were brought thither by Walter Bagnall, she petitioned (being
in great extremity) to the Lord of Mount Garrot, to procure her some of her own
Cattle for her relief; whereupon he recommended her suit to the Major and
Corporation of Kilkeny; who concluded, because she and her family were
Protestants, and would not turn to Mass, they should have no relief. Jane
Jones, servant to the Deponent, did see the English formerly specified, going
to their execution; and as she conceived, they were about the number of five
and thirty; and was told by Elizabeth Homes that there were forty gone to
execution.

Anne Butlar.
Jurat 7. September. 1462. John Watson.

The EXAMINATION of Joseph Wheeler of Stancarty in the County of Kilkenny,
Esqu. Elizabeth, The Province of Lemster.
the relict of Lieutenant William Gilbert, of Captain Ridgwayes Company;
Rebecca Hill, the relict of Thomas Hill, late Lieutenant to the said Captain
Ridgway; Thomas Jews, late of Kilkenny, Gent. Jonas Wheeler of Stancarty
aforesaid, Gent. and Patrick Maxwel of the Graige in the same County Gent.
sworn and examined, depose and say:
THat about Easter 1642. one Richard Phillips and five others, who were old
Garrison Soldiers, then under the command of Captain Farrell, a Captain on
his Majesty's party, were, by the command of the Lord Mount Garrot, at the end
of a house in Kilkenny, hanged to death by that cruel and bloody Rebel and
Provost Marshall Thomas Cantwell of Cantwell-court, Esquire, or some of his
servants or Soldiers in his presence, who would hardly suffer them to say
their prayers after they were taken out of the prison before they were put to
death, those poor men dying very patiently and resolutely, in the maintenance
of the Protestant Faith; but one of them because he was an Irish man, was
offered his life if he would turn Papist, but he chose rather death, which he
quickly had with the other five: And further says, that a little before
Christmas 1641. Master William Hill, of the Abbey of (...) in the Queens
County, Esquire, and the said Lieutenant Thomas Hill his son, coming to
Kilkenny, to fetch home Mary Hill, the wife of him the said William Hill, and
the said Rebecca; one of these Deponents were then and there sent for by the
Lord Mount Garrot, and by him committed prisoners to the Goal of Kilkenny,
where they continued in a dark dungeon bolted for two months, but were offered
freedom if they would join with the Rebels, and become Papists; but they
refused, and after the said Lord Mount Garrot was gone into Munster with his
Forces, (which was an example to call the rest of the wicked Irish there to
rise into Rebellion) one Florence Fitz Patrick of Castletowne in the Queens
County Esquire, a Captain of Rebels, and his Soldiers came to Kilkenny, and
then and there (without resistance of any) broke open the Goal there, and
forcibly took and carried away with them into Ossory aforesaid, the said
William and Thomas Hill, where they kept them in miserable durance for some
time, and then hanged them both; and a poor young Girl being sent from the
Town of Ballinekill to see what was become of them, the said Florence Fitz
Patrick meeting her, caused her to be half hanged, then letten down, and
after to be buried quick: And by report of one Jone Grace (that said she was
an eyewitness) the Rebels threw the dead body of the said William and Thomas
Hill, into a Saw-pit, leaving them so far unburied, that their heads and legs
lay bare, until she came and covered them with earth, about a week after: And
further says, that they have credibly heard and believe, that the said
Florence Fitz Patrick having enticed a rich Merchant of Montrath to his the
said Fitz Patricks house, to bring thither his goods which he promised should
be safely protected, and safely re-delivered; he, the said Florence Fiz
Patrick, possessing those goods, afterward caused the said Merchant and his
wife to be hanged; and they have credibly heard, that the said Florence Fitz
Patrick also hanged Lieutenant Keys and his son, one Hughes a Schoolmaster,
and diverse other Protestants: And these Deponents further say, that Master
Edmond Butler, eldest son to the Lord Mount Garrot, Edward Butler his second
son, Captain Garret Balnckefield, and diverse other rebellious Commanders and
soldiers, to the number of 6 or 700 horse and foot a little before Michaelmas
1642. marched from Balliragget near to the Iron Forge of Ballinekill, and there
met with Lieutenant Gilbert aforenamed Ensign, William Alfrey the younger,
Master Thomas Bingham the Minister, Robert Graves, Richard Bently, and about
sixty more of the English Soldiers, both the same parties joined in battle;
but the English Soldiers, though fighting valiantly, and killing many Rebels
(and one Walter Butler, a Captain among the rest) were at the last so overcome
with multitudes of the Rebels, that then and there they, the said LIEUTENANT
Gilbert, William Alfrey, Thomas Bingham, Robert Graves, Richard Bently, and two
other English Soldiers were absolutely slain, and the heads of all those
seven carried to Kilkenny by those Rebels (their pipes for joy playing before
them on horsback) and on a market day which happened to be on the next day
following, those heads as triumphs of their Victories, there brought out and
set upon the Market-Crosse, where the Rebels, but especially the women there,
and amongst the rest Elice Butler, a reputed mother of several bastards, yet
the daughter of the said Mount Garrot, stabbed, cut and slasht those heads, the
said Elice Butler drawing her skeine, slasht at the face of the said William
Alfrey, and hit him on the nose, and those that could but get a blow or stab at
those heads, seemed to account themselves happy: And the Rebels then and there
put a gag in the mouth of the said Thomas Bingham the Minister, and laying the
leaf of a Bible before him, bad him preach, saying, his mouth was open and
wide enough, and one of those lewd viragoes that had no weapons, struck one of
the heads so with her hand, that the same night her hand grew black and blew,
rankled, and she was extremely lame with it a quarter of a year after, and that
lamenesse and the swelling thereof growing to an issue, is like to continue
till she dye: and another of those women that with great rejoicing went and saw
those heads, did quickly after the sight thereof fell into such an astonishment
and distraction, that for three or four days after she could not sleep nor
rest, but cried out that still she saw those heads before her eyes, which heads
being said by the Rebels to be the heads of Heretics, were not afforded
Christian burial, but buried without the City in a cross highway altogether
in a hole; the buriers chopping and cutting the heads with their Spades as they
threw mold upon them, and to make the manner of their burial, and the heads
themselves yet more contemptible; the Rebels (over the hole where the heads
were laid) set up a long stick, whereto they fixed papers, that all may take
notice of the place: And after and from that time, the rebellious roguish
Boys, took up, and frequently used an Oath, By the Cross of the seven devils
heads buried on Saint James Green: And further say, that upon the testimony of
a roguish Boy, that an English man that was a Maulster to one Richard Shaw of
Kilkenny, had said, He would believe the Devil as soon as the Pope; the cruel
Rebel, the Provost Mashall Cantwell aforenamed, suddenly took and hanged him
up in an Apple Tree till he dyed: And further says, that one Vnsill Grace, and
diverse other Rebels in Kilkenny, broke open the doors of the Cathedral Church
there, and robbed the same Church of the Challices, Surplices, Ornaments,
Books, Records and Writings there being; and made Gunpowder in Saint Patricks
Church, and dug the Tombs and graves in the Churches in Kilkenny, under
color of getting up molds whereon to make Gunpowder: And these Deponents have
credibly heard, and verily believe, that the Rebels at Goran took 25.
Protestants, men, women and children, and pretending and promising to them a
Convoy to Duncannon, hanged them dead in the way, in a Wood near Newrosse, and
that the Rebels half hanged five more Protestants at Balliragget, by the
command of the said Captain Edward Butler, and the said Thomas Cantwell the
Marshall, and letting them down again before they were dead, suffered them
somewhat to recover, and then buried them quick: And these Deponents Thomas
Jews, Patrick Maxwell further say, that, as they have been credibly told by
Walter Archer of Kilkenny a Rebel, that a poor English man's wife that went
out to gather sticks, at a place about two miles from Kilkenny, was taken and
hanged up by the Rebels: And the Deponents Elizabeth Gilbert, Patrick Maxwell
further say, that a poor woman and two children, she being the wife of one
Harvey of Ballinekill, coming to Kilkenny about Candlemas was twelve month,
were then and there assaulted and set upon by the rebellious Inhabitants of
that City, and hunted, baited, and drawn with dogs, cruelly stabbed with
skeines, and so miserably used, that one of the children died presently (having
the guts plucked out,) and the Deponent Patrick Maxwel further says, that there
were taken out of Graige by the Rebels, and hanged to death, one John Stone and
his wife and his son, William Valentine, Robert Pyme and his wife, one of
their children of a year and a half old, and Thomas White a Merchant and his
wife, who being great with child, had her belly ripped up after she was hanged,
so as the child fell out of the cawle alive; Walter Sherley, Mistress Joane
Salter an ancient Widow, one John a servant to Stone aforenamed; the Rebels
that hanged them were Garret Forrestall of Knockive, and Gibbon Forrestall of
Tinyhinch, and the eldest son of Richard Barron, alias Fitz Geraldine of
Knockeen aforesaid, and diverse others whom she cannot name, all of the County
of Caterlagh; which said Robert Pyme after he was hanged up twice, proved alive
in his grave, and stroke his hand upon his breast saying, Christ receive my
soul, and with those words in his mouth was then and there buried quick; and
one of those poor Protestants at Goran, by name Fristoram Robinson, the Rebels
hanged him twice, thrust him through with darts, but he still continuing alive,
and speaking, they buried him quick: And this Deponent Jonas Wheeler further
says, that one old English Protestant, who was a Shepherd, and his wife,
going from Kilkenny toward Ballidownell, the Rebels hanged up the poor old
man, and going a little off, his wife perceiving breath in her husband, said
unto him, Oh joy you are alive yet; which when some of the Rebels over-hearing,
hanged him outright, and dragged him up and down until his bowels fell out,
then his wife desiring them to hang her too, but they refused: And says, that
this Deponent asking the Rebels of Kilkenny, how they durst do what they did,
considering the King was against them? they answered, that if the King would
not hold with them, they could have forty thousand to come to assist them out
of France and Spain, and bring ammunition and arms enough, and all things
necessary, and fight against the King and the English: And the Deponent
Elizabeth Gilbert further says, that she heard one James Eustace, a servant to
the Rebel Colonel Cullen, say publicly in Master Joseph Wheelers house in
Kilkenny, Let the King take heed, for if they (meaning the Irish) had not their
own desires they would bring in a foreign King; and one Tristram Dyer a
Protestant was (as his wife told this Deponent) murdered in a Wood with his
own Hatchet, and covered with Leaves and Moss.

EXAMINATIONS touching the Apparitions at Portnedowne-Bridge, within the
Province of ULSTER.
JAmes Shaw of Market-hill in the County of Armagh, Inne-keeper, deposes, that
many of the Irish Rebels, in the time of this Deponents restraint, and staying
among them, told him very often, and that it was a common report that all those
that lived about the Bridge of Portnedowne, were so affrighted with the cries
and noise made there of some spirits or visions for revenge, as that they durst
not stay but fled away thence; so as they protested, affrighted to Market-hill,
saying, they durst not stay nor return thither for fear of those cries and
spirits, but took grounds and made creats in or near the Parish of Mullabrack,
Jurat. Aug. 14. 1642.

Joane the relict of Gabriel Constable, late of Drumard in the County of
Armagh, Gent. deposes and says, that she has often heard the Rebels, Owen O
Farren, Patrick O Conellan, and diverse others of the Rebels at Drumard,
earnestly say, protest and tell one another, that the blood of some of those
that were knocked in the heads, and afterward drowned at Portadowne-Bridge,
still remained on the Bridge, and would not be washed away; and that often
there appeared visions or apparitions, sometimes of men, sometimes of women,
brest-high above the water, at or near Portadowne, which did most extremely and
fearfully scriech and cry out for vengeance against the Irish that had murdered
their bodies there; and that their cries and scrieches did so terrify the
Irish thereabouts, that none durst stay nor live longer there, but fled and
removed further into the Country, and this was a common report amongst the
Rebels there, and that it passed for a truth amongst them, for any thing she
could ever observe to the contrary, Jurat. Jan. 1. 1643.

Katherine the relict of William Coke, late of the County of Armagh, Carpenter,
sworn and examined, says, that about the 20. of December 1641. a great number
of Rebels in that County, did most barbarously drown at that time one hundred
and eighty Protestants, men, women and children in the River at the Bridge of
Portnedowne; and that about nine days afterward, she saw a vision or spirit
in the shape of a man, as she apprehended, that appeared in that river, in the
place of the drowning, bolt upright brest-high, with hands lifted up, and stood
in that posture there, until the latter end of Lent next following; about
which time some of the English Army marching in those parts, whereof her
husband was one (as he and they confidently affirmed to this Deponent) saw that
spirit or vision standing upright, and in the posture aforementioned; but after
that time the said spirit or vision vanished and appeared no more, that she
knows: And she heard, but saw not, that there were other Visions and
Apparitions, and much scriching and strange noise heard in that RIVER at times
afterward, Jurat February 24. 1643.

Elizabeth the wife of Captain Rice Price, of Armagh, deposes and says, that
she and other women, whose husbands were murdered, hearing of diverse
Apparitions and Visions which were seen near Portnedowne-Bridge, since the
drowning of her Children, and the rest of the Protestants there, went unto the
Bridge aforesaid about twilight in the evening; then and there upon a sudden
there appeared unto them a Vision or Spirit, assuming the shape of a woman,
waste-high upright in the water, naked, with elevated and closed hands, her
hair hanging down, very white, her eyes seemed to twinckle, and her skin as
white as snow; which spirit seemed to stand straight up in the water, often
repeated the word REVENGE, REVENGE, REVENGE; whereat this Deponent and the rest
being put into a strong amazement and affright walked from the place, Jurat
January 29. 1642.

Arthur Culme of Clowoughter in the County of Cavan, Esquire, deposes, that he
was credibly informed by some that were present there, that there were thirty
women and young children and seven men flung into the River of Belterbert, and
when some of them offered to swim for their lives, they were by the Rebels
followed in Cots, and knocked on the heads with poles; the same day they hanged
two women at Turbert; and this Deponent does verily believe, that Mulmore O
Rely the then Sheriff, had a hand in the commanding the murder of those said
persons, for that he saw him write two Notes which he sent to Turbert by Bryan
Rely, upon whose coming these murders were committed: And those persons who
were present also affirmed, that the bodies of those thirty persons drowned did
not appear upon the water till about six weeks after past; as the said Rely
came to the Town, all the bodies came floting up to the very Bridge; those
persons were all formerly stayed in the Town by his protection, where the rest
of their Neighbors in the Town went away.

Elizabeth Price wife of Michael Price, of the Newry, deposes, that Sir Con
Mac Gennis suffered his Soldiers, the Rebels, to kill Master Turge, Minister
of the Newry, and several other Protestants; and he the said Sir Con Mac
Gennis on his deathbed was so much affrighted with apprehension that the said
Master Turge so slain, was still in his presence, as that he commanded no
Protestants from that time should be slain, but what should be killed in
battle; and after his death, Sir Con Mac Gennis his bother, would have observed
his directions, but one John Mac Gennis the young Lord of Evah and Monk Crely
were earnest to have all the rest of the Protestants put to death.

Master George Creighton, Minister of Virginia, in the County of Cavan,
deposes, among other particulars in his Examination, that diverse women brought
into his house a young woman almost naked, to whom a Rogue came upon the way,
these women being present, and required her to give him her money or else he
would kill her, and so drew his sword; her answer was, You cannot kill me
unless God give you leave, and his will be done: Whereupon the Rogue thrust
three times at her naked body with his drawn sword, and yet never pierced her
skin; whereat he being, as it seems, much confounded, went away and left her;
and that he saw this woman, and heard this particular related by diverse women,
who were by and saw what they reported.

UPon the view of these Examinations all taken upon Oath, it may easily be
conjectured how fatally the first plot took, how furiously the Rebels through
out all Parts of the Kingdom proceeded on in their barbarous bloody
executions, and what were the courses they held to bring about so suddenly the
universal destruction of all the British and Protestants there planted. It is
most true that in Lemster and Munster (and yet one would scarce believe it that
considers the horrid particulars related in the fore-recited Examinations of
those two Provinces) they were not generally so bloody, neither did they begin
their work so early as in the Provinces of Vlster and Conaught. The ill
success of the enterprise upon the Castle of Dublin did cool them for a time,
put them to a stand and caused them to take up new councels; But when they had
once declared themselves, they did in very few days strip and despoile all the
English settled among them, and drove great numbers of them even stark naked to
several Ports on the Sea side, there to provide themselves passage for
England, or otherwise most miserably to starve and perish, as many of them
did, being inhumanly denied any kind of relief in those Towns under the
command of the Rebels. And here I must not forget to enterpose this certain
truth, The cruelties acted by the Irish upon the British were before any
provocation given them.
that in all the four Provinces the horrid cruelties used toward the British
either in their bloody Massacres, or merciless despoyling, stripping, and
extirpation of them, were generally acted in most Parts of the Kingdom before
they could gather themselves together, to make any considerable resistance
against their fury; and before the State had assembled their Forces, or were
enabled by the power of his Majesty's Arms to make any inrodes into the
Counties possessed by the Rebels: A circumstance which totally destroys all
those vain pretenses and fond recriminations, which they have since most
falsely taken up to palliate this their most abominable Rebellion. And this is
not to be denied, though it be also true that those British whom they suffered
to live among them either upon condition of change of their Religion, out of
private interest, The cruelty of the Irish in murdering those Protestants which
remaind among them, when at any time they received any loss by the English
Forces.
or such as they kept in prison, were not put to the sword, until the Rebels
in the several encounters they had with his Majestes Forces suffered loss of
their men, and so being enraged therewith at their return home after any
disaster, they fell furiously to take revenge upon such British, whether men,
women, or children, as they held in most miserable Captivity with them. How
far their madness, fury, and most implacabe malice, did after the manner of
bruit Beasts transport them toward the destruction of those miserable
harmless souls they detained among them, does clearly appear by several
particulars expressed in several Examinations. I shall here insert some of
them taken upon trust from persons of good quality and credit, who were long
prisoners among them.

I find in one part of Doctor Maxwels Examination (which I thought not fit
wholly to insert, because it is of great length, and many particulars in it,
nothing tending to that purpose for which it is formerly mentioned) that about
May 1642. when the Scottish Army under the command of General Major Monro had
marched down from Carickfergus, taken in the Newry, beaten the Irish out of
those Parts with the slaughter of many of them; Sir Phelim O-Neale caused 5000
British whom he detained in Armagh, Tyrone, and other Parts of the North, to be
most miserably murdered in the space of three days: James Shaw of Market Hill
in the County of Armagh, deposes and says, that during the time this Deponent
was in restraint, and stayed among the Rebels, he observed and well knew that
the greatest part of the Rebels in the County of Armagh went to besiege the
Castle of Augher where they were repulsed, and diverse of the Rebels of the sept
of O-Neals slain: In revenge whereof, the grand Rebel Sir Phelim O-Neale gave
direction and warrant to one Mulmory Mac Donell, a most cruel and merciless
Rebel, to kill all the English and Scottish within the Parishes of Mullebrack
Logilly and Kilcluney, whereupon the said Rebel did murder 27 Scottish and
English Protestants within Musket shot of this Deponents own house; and further
says that in those three Parishes there have been before that and since, by
killing, drowning, and starving, put to death above 1500 Protestants within the
said three Parishes.

William Fiz-Gerald a Clerk of Irish birth, dwelling near Armagh, and there
residing when this Rebellion brake out, deposes and says, That all places of
the North where Sir Phelim O-Neale under the name of General of the Catholic
Army commanded, were filled with murders of the Protestants: And that when at
Augher, Lisnagarue, or any other places the Rebels received loss of their men,
those that escaped, exercised their cruelty upon the Protestants everywhere at
their return: And that about the first of May 1642. when Sir Phelim O-Neale had
notice of the taking of the Newry by his Majesty's Forces, he retired that
night in all haste to the Town of Armagh, and the next day as well the Town of
Armagh as the Cathedral Church there, and all the Villages and Houses in the
Country round about together with all provisions were fired by the Rebels; and
many men, women and children, murdered as well in the Town as in the Country
round about.

There is much more to be said on this subject, but I shall forbear to rake
further into many other soul circumstances, which would make this Rebellion
appear far more odious and detestable. I shall now return to take up the
public affairs of the State, where I left them in the hands of the Lords
Justices and Council, who finding the City to grow daily more and more
impestred with strangers by reason of the resort of great numbers of
ill-affected persons that daily made repair thereunto: They issued out
several other Proclamations to prohibit the access of all strangers to the
Town, and to require such as remained in the City without calling or settled
habitation, to depart.

Sir Henry Tichborn being dispatched with his Regiment of foot to Tredagh as is
formerly mentioned, Some Troops of horse and Regiments of foot raised by the
Lords Justices and Council.
the Lords Justices took further order for the present raising of other foot
Companies; as likewise some Troops of horse which might serve for the defense
of the City of Dublin, now in most imminent danger by reason of the approaches
made by the Forces of the Rebels. Sir Charles Coot had a Commission for a
Regiment, which he quickly made up out of the poor stripped English, who had
repaired from diverse parts even naked to the Town, and upon the engagements of
the State procured clothes for them. The Lord Lambert to whom a Commission also
was granted for the raising of an other Regiment, began also to get some men
together. The Earl of Ormond was now arrived in Dublin, and brought up with
him his Troop consisting of 100 Curassiers completely armed; Sir Thomas Lucas
who had long commanded a Troop of horse in the Low Countries, and Captain
Armestrong some time after, yet very seasonably came thither: Both of them had
money imprested, Sir Thomas Lucas to complete his Troop already brought out of
England, Captain Armestrong to raise a new Troop; Captain Yarner also arrived
soon after at Dublin, he was sent out of England by the Lord Lieutenant to
raise and command his Troop, which in a very short time he made up about 100
horse, many persons then living in the Town being desirous to put themselves
and their horses into that Troop: Not long after Colonel Craford came over
also, and bringing with him Letters of Recommendations from the Prince Elector
then attending his Majesty in Scotland, under whom he had formerly the command
of a Regiment of Dragoons in Germany: Sir Charles Coot made Governnout of the
City of Dublin.
The Lords Justices thought fit to give him a Regiment which they were then
taking order to raise and arm out of such Townsmen as were fit to bear arms
within the City of Dublin; none were to be admitted into it but Protestants,
and out of them they made choice not only of the Soldiers, but of all the
Officers belonging to the same. And further for the repressing of the disorders
daily appearing within the City, and restraining the ill-affections of the
Papists there inhabiting, they made Sir Charles Coot Governor of the City, and
gave him an allowance of 40 s. per diem for the present. Now while these
Colonells and Captains are bestirring themselves in getting their men together
under their several commands, and in training them up to the use of their
arms; and the Governor of the Town taking strict order for constant Watches
within, and Guards without to restrain the repair of all suspicious and
ill-affected persons; I shall in the mean time give an account of the
adjournement of the Parliament according to the late Prorogation made by the
Lords Justices, which some of the ill-affected members of both Houses
endeavored to make use of for the raising of further troubles.

The adjournment of the Parliament.
In the Month of August before the Rebellion brake out, the Parliament was
adjourned to the 17 of November next ensuing: Now upon the discovery of the
late conspiracy for the surprise of his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the
ordinary place of meeting for both Houses of Parliament; the Lords finding that
the fire was begun in the North, and fearing a general revolt of all other
parts of the Kingdom, resolved as a matter highly tending to the safety and
security of the City and Castle to prorogue the Parliament, which they did by
Proclamation then set out, until the 24. of February. But two or three days
before such of the Lords and Commons then in the Town were to meet of course in
their several House for declaring the said Prorogation, it was generally
noised abroad that the putting off the Parliament was extremely ill taken by
the Popish Members of both Houses. Mr Burk who was one of the Committee lately
employed into England, came to the Lord Dillon of Kilkenny West, and highly
complaining of the injury which (he said) was done thereby to the whole Nation
hindering them from expressing their loyal affections to his Majesty, and
showing their desires to quell this dangerous Rebellion, and that they had
reason to resent it so far as to complain to the King thereof as a point of
high injustice; His Lordship having acquainted the Board herewith, Mr Burk was
presently sent for, and he used the same language in effect there, though with
much modesty.

Hereupon the Lords fell into debate what was fit to be done, and how far it
might be thought reasonable in them to condescend to their desires: The Popish
party much discontented at it.
Some were of opinion that it was fit to disannull the Prorogation, and to give
them leave to continue the Parliament according to the first adjournment made
the beginning of August. They urged the very ill condition of the whole
Kingdom in regard of the Northern Rebellion, and that those of the Counties of
Wiclow and Wexford, as well as some other Counties in Conaght had already
joined themselves to them; that this Prorogation might peradventure so irritate
the Pale, and have such an influence into Munster as might raise them into
Arms, and so put the whole Kingdom into a general combustion. Others of the
Board Voted strongly for the holding of the Prorogation according to the time
prefixed by the Proclamation grounding their opinion upon these reasons: First,
that it would highly trench upon the gravity and wisdom of the Board to alter
a resolution so solemnly taken up, after a most serious debate and publicly
made known thorough out the whole Kingdom by Proclamation; that it would be of
most dangerous consequence to bring so great a multitude of people to the City
in such dangerous times, that the Protestants and well-affected Members of both
Houses were for the most part either destroyed, dispersed, or so shut up as
they could not repair to the present meeting, and that therefore the Irish
would be superior in number and voices, and so wholly carry all things
according to their own humor; that considering the small Forces then in the
City, such great numbers as might take occasion under color of coming to the
Parliament, to repair thither, could not be admitted without apparent danger
and disturbance, and that peradventure they might there find as ill affections
as they brought, and so both joining together they might easily destroy the
state with the poor remainders of the English Nation in these Parts: Whereupon
the Lords thought fit to hold to their Prorogation, yet to endeavor so to
attemper and sweeten it, as those who were most averse, might in some measure
rest satisfied therewith. And therefore after a long debate of all particular
circumstances, they came at length to this resolution that the Earl of Ormond,
the Master of the Rolls, and Sir Pierce Crosby three Members of the Board,
should have a meeting with Mr Darcy, Mr Burk, and some others of the most
active and powerful Members of the House of Commons, and that they should let
them know from the Lords, that they have understood of their good affections
and desires to do somewhat in the House that might tend toward the
suppression of this present Rebellion, that they approved extreme well
thereof: And that howsoever they could by no means remove absolutely the
Prorogation, yet that they would descend so far to their satisfaction as to
limit it to a shorter time, and that at present they would give them leave to
sit one whole day in case they would immediately fall upon the work of making a
clear Protestation against the Rebels: As also, that they should have liberty
if they pleased to make choice of some Members of their own House to send down
to Treat with the Rebels about laying down of Arms: And for their grievances
that their Lordships would with all readiness receive them, and presently
transmit them over to his Majesty for a speedy redress: All this was
accordingly performed; the meeting was in the Gallery at Cork House; Those of
the House of Commons seemed at first to be extremely troubled when they found
there was no possibility of altering the present Prorogation: But upon a
further debate when they came to understand how ready the Lords were to yield
to their satisfaction, and that the time of the Prorogation should be shortened,
they seemed to rest indifferently contented, undertook to make the Protestation
in such full and ample manner as was desired, and that they would fall
immediately upon it and make it the work of the whole day.

Upon the 17 of November, the Lords and Commons met in Parliament which was
held in the usual place of his Majesty's Castle of Dublin: And for the better
security of the place as well as of the persons of those that were to meet,
there was a Guard of Musketeers appointed to attend during the time of their
meeting, but such care taken that they should carry themselves so free from
giving any offense as no manner of umbrage might be taken at their attendance
there. The Houses were both very thin, there were only in the House of Peers
some few English Lords, three or four Lords of the Pale, and some two or three
Bishops. In the House of Commons, they took into their consideration upon their
first meeting the framing of the Protestation against the Rebels. But those of
the Popish party spoke so ambiguously, and handled the matter so tenderly, as
they could not be drawn to style them by the name of Rebels: so as they sent up
unto the Lords a very meager cold Protestation against them, which being in
their House taken into debate, it was strongly contested by the Protestant
Lords that they should be styled Rebels, but that as stiffely opposed by the
others. They therefore fell upon a mean betwixt both which gave a kind of
accommodation, saying they had Rebelliously and Traitorously raised Arms; and
so both parties being reasonably satisfied, the Protestation was drawn up and
returned back to the House of Commons in this Tenor as follows.

The Protestation and Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and
Commons in Parliament assembled.
WHereas the happy and peaceable Estate of this Realm has been of late, and is
still interrupted by sundry persons ill-affected to the Peace and Tranquillity
thereof, who contrary to their Duty and Loyalty to His Majesty, and against the
Laws of God, and the fundamental Laws of the Realm, have Traitorously and
Rebelliously raised Arms, have seized upon some of his Majesty's Forts and
Castles, and dispossessed many of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, of their
Houses, Lands and Goods, and have slain many of them, and committed other
cruel and inhumane Outrages, and Acts of Hostility within this Realm.

The said Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, being justly moved with a
right sense of the said disloyal Rebellious Proceedings and actions of the
persons aforesaid, do hereby protest and declare that they, the said Lords and
Commons from their hearts, do detest and abhor the said abominable Actions,
and that they shall and will to their uttermost power maintain the Rights of
his Majesty's Crown, and Government of this Realm, and Peace and Safety
thereof, as well against the persons aforesaid, their Abettors, Adherents, as
also against all foreign Princes, Potentates, and other persons, and Attemps
whatsoever; and in case the persons aforesaid do not repent of their aforesaid
Actions, and lay down Arms, and become humble Suitors to his Majesty for Grace
and Mercy, in such convenient time, and in such manner and form as by his
Majesty, or the chief Governor or Governors, and Council of this Realm
shall be set down; The said Lords and Commons do further protest and declare,
that they will take up Arms, and will with their Lives and Fortunes suppress
them, and their Attempts, in such a way, as by the Authority of the Parliament
of this Kingdom, with the Approbation of his most Excellent Majesty, or of his
Majesty's chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom shall be thought most
effectual.

Copia vera. Exam. per Phil. Percivall. Cleric. Parliament.

Both Houses of Parliament sat two days, and the time of the Prorogation
being shortened unto the 11. of Ian. The Lords made choice of the Lord Viscount
Costelo to go into England, to carry over their desires to his Majesty,
concerning the means they thought fit to be used for the quenching this
present Rebellion: And besides those instructions formerly mentioned, he had
(as I heard) from the Popish Lords some, more private, which were to negotiate
the staying such Forces as were intended to be sent out of England for that end.

Both Houses joined together to appoint certain Lords and some Members of the
House of Commons to go down to the Northen Rebels, The Houses of Parliament
send to Treat with the Rebels.
to understand the cause of their rising in Arms; and referred them to the
Lords Justices for their instructions, which accordingly they received together
with a Commission under the Great Seal. But the Rebellion having a far
deeper root then was at that time discovered; this Commission was of little
operation, and the intended Treaty soon vanished. The Northern Rebels were
then so puffed up with their late victories over the poor surprised,
unresisting English in those Parts, and had so deeply drenched their hands in
the blood of those innocents, as they thought to carry the whole Kingdom
before them, and therefore would yield to no Treaties, but in a most barbarous
manner tore the Order of Parliament together with the Letter sent unto them,
and returned a most scornful Answer, fully expressing thereby how far they
were from any thought of laying down Arms, or entertaining any overtures
toward an Accommodation.

Within few days after the adjournment of the Parliament, the Lord Dillon of
Costelo accompanied with the Lord Taffe imbarqued for England, but by a most
impetuous storm were driven into Scotland, where they landed and went up to
London. At the Town of Ware, their papers were seized upon by directions from
the Parliament of England, and their persons committed unto safe custody. Mr
Thomas Burk went over much about the same time, and certainly upon the same
errand: When the unhappy breach began first betwixt the King and the Parliament
of England, and that his Majesty thought fit to retire to York, those two Lords
found means to make an escape, and all three constantly followed the Court,
where in those high distempers that afterward happened in England, they easily
found means to ingratiate themselves at Court, and had the opportunity to do
those good offices for their Countrymen which brought on the Cessation of
Arms with them in due time.

The Lords Justices and Council by their Letters bearing date about the 20 of
November, Letters written to the Lord Lieutenant.
gave unto the Lord Lieutenant a more certain and full account of the state of
the Kingdom, then they could any ways do at the first breaking out of the
Rebellion, and thereby making known the very ill condition of their present
affairs they moved that the supplies of men, money, Commanders and Arms,
mentioned in their former Letters, might be with all speed sent over unto them,
and that his Lordship would presently repair hither in his own person to
undertake the management of the war: About the tenth of the Month of
November, their Lordships received an Answer from the Lord Lieutenant to their
former Letters of the 25 of October; whereby he gave them to understand, that
he had communicated their Letters to the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and that by Order from their Lordships, he had acquainted both
Houses of Parliament with them; that he had also sent to his Majesty still
continuing at Edenborough in Scotland, to represent the condition of their
affairs, and that he understood his Majesty had received some advertisements
out of the North of Ireland of the present Rebellion there: His Lordship also
farther let them know, that his Majesty had referred the whole business of
Ireland to the Parliament of England, that they had undertaken the charge and
management of the war, that they had declared they should be speedily and
vigorously assisted, and had designed for their present supplies the sum of
50000 l. and had taken order for making of all further Provisions necessary for
the Service, as may appear by the Order of Parliament made there at that time,
and trans-mitted over by the Lord Lieutenant, together with his said Letters
unto the Lords Justices, by whose command it was reprinted at Dublin, November
12. 1641. as here follows being entitled.

An Order of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament in England,
concerning Ireland.
THe Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, being advertised of the
dangerous Conspiracy and Rebellion in Ireland, by the Treacherous and wicked
Instigation of Romish Priests and Jesuits, for the Bloody Massacre and
Destruction of all Protestants living there, and other his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects of English blood, though of the Romish Religion, being ancient
Inhabitants within several Counties, and Parts of that Realm, who have
always, in former Rebellions, given Testimony of their fidelity to this Crown:
And for the utter depriving of his Royal Majesty, and the Crown of England,
from the Government of that Kingdom, (under pretense of setting up the Popish
Religion) Have thereupon taken into their serious Consideration, how those
mischievous Attemps might be most speedily, and effectually prevented, wherein
the Honor, Safety, and Interest of this Kingdom, are most nearely and fully
concerned. Wherefore they do hereby declare, that they do intend to serve his
Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, for the suppressing of this wicked
Rebellion, in such a way, as shall be thought most effectual, by the Wisdom
and Authority of Parliament: And thereupon have Ordered and Provided for a
present Supply of Money, and raising the number of six thousand Foot, and Two
thousand Horse, to be sent from England, being the full proportion desired by
the Lords Justices, and his Majesty's Council resident in that Kingdom, with
a Resolution to add such further Succors, as the necessity of those Affairs
shall require. They have also resolved of providing Arms, and Munition, not
only for those Men, but likewise for his Majesty's faithful Subjects in that
Kingdom, with Store of Victuals, and other Necessaries, as there shall be
occasion, and that these Provisions may more conveniently be transported
thither, they have appointed three several Ports of this Kingdom, that is to
say, Bristoll, Westchester, and one other in Cumberland, where the Magazines,
and Storehouses shall be kept for the Supply of the several parts of Ireland.
They have likewise resolved to be humble Mediators to His most Excellent
Majesty, for the encouragement of those English, or Irish, who shall upon their
own charges, raise any number of Horse, or Foot, for his Service against the
Rebels, that they shall be honorably rewarded with Lands of Inheritance, in
Ireland, according to their Merits. And for the better inducing the Rebels to
repent of their wicked Attempts, they do hereby commend it to the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, or in his absence, to the Lord Deputy, or Lords Justices
there, according to the power of the Commission granted them in that behalf,
to bestow his Majesty's gracious Pardon, to all such as within a convenient
time, (to be declared by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or Lords Justices,
and Council of that Kingdom) shall return to their due obedience; the
greatest part whereof, they conceive have been seduced upon false Grounds, by
the cunning and subtle practices of some of the most malignant Rebels, Enemies
to this State, and to the Reformed Religion; and likewise to bestow such
Rewards, as shall be thought fit, and published by the said Lord Lieutenant,
Lord Deputy, or Lords Justices and Council, upon all those who shall arrest
the Persons, or bring in the Heads of such Traitors, as shall be personally
named in any Proclamation published by the State there. And they do hereby
exhort, and require all his Majesty's loving Subjects, both in this, and in
that Kingdom, to remember their duty and conscience to God, and his Religion,
and the great and eminent danger which will involve this whole Kingdom in
general, and themselves in particular, if this abominable Treason be not
timely suppressed; and therefore with all readiness, bounty, and
cheerfulness to confer their Assistance in their Persons, or Estates, to
this so important and necessary a Service for the common good of all.

Io. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

About the same time the Lord Lieutenant finding that he could not procure so
speedy a dispatch of all things necessary for the service of Ireland,
Commission granted to the Earl of Ormond, to be Lieutenant General of the
Forces in Ireland.
as would enable him presently to repair thither in his own person; made the
Earl of Ormond Lieutenant General of the Forces there, and sent him over a
Commission for the same. And the said Earl did within few days after receive
a Letter from his Majesty out of Scotland, wherein he was graciously pleased to
let him know it was his pleasure to confer upon him that charge. There was
then likewise brought over the sum of 20000 l. from the Parliament; the coin
which arrived here was all in Spanish pieces of eight, which went for 4 d. in a
piece here more then in England, and this gain the Parliament was content the
Merchants that undertook the transportation should make at that time in regard
of the charge and venture they undertook to stand to: It arrived most
seasonably even when all that little money they had was quite spent in raising
and paying the new Companies, and that they were wholly destitute of all means
to draw in any contributions toward the relieving of their present necessities.

There continued daily to repair unto the City of Dublin, great numbers of
poor distressed English, Commissions issued out for the Examination upon Oath
of the losses of the British, and the cruelties exercised by the Irish upon
them.
who had been most barbarously stripped, robbed, and despoiled of all their
goods and substance, by the Rebels. Now that it might appear what their losses
were, what cruelties were acted, what murders committed, and who were the
chief actors in them through out the several Provinces; The Lords Justices and
Council thought fit to issue out a Commission under the Great Seal, directed
to certain of the Clergy to take upon oath the several Examinations of all
such persons, that having suffered by this present Rebellion would think fit to
repair unto them, as will appear by the Commission it self a Copy whereof I
have thought fit to insert.

CHarles by the grace of God King of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. To our well-beloved Henry Jones Deane of Kilmore, Roger
Puttock, William Huthcok, Randall Adams, John Stern, William Aldrich, Henry
Brereton, and John Watsons Clerks, Greeting; Whereas diverse wicked and
disloyal people, have lately risen in Arms in several parts of this
Kingdom, and have robbed and spoiled many of our good Subjects, British and
Protestants, who have been separated from their several habitations, and
scattered in most lamentable manner; And for as much as it is needful to take
due Examination concerning the same; Know ye that we reposing special trust and
confidence in your care, diligence, and provident circumspection, have
nominated and appointed you to be our Commissioners, and do hereby give unto
you or any two or more of you, full power and authority, from time to time to
call before you, and examine upon Oath on the holy Evangelists (which hereby we
authorize you or any two or more of you to administer) as well all such persons
as have been robbed and despoiled, as all the witnesses that can give testimony
therein, what robberies and spoils have been committed on them since the 22 of
October last, or shall hereafter be committed on them, or any of them, what the
particulars were or are, whereof they were or shall be so robbed or spoiled, to
what value, by whom, what their names are, or where they now or last dwelt that
committed those robberies, on what day or night the said robberies or spoils
committed, or to be committed, were done: what Traitorous or disloyal words,
speeches, or actions were then or at any other time uttered or committed by
those robbers or any them, and how often, and all other circumstances
concerning the said particulars and every of them: And you our said
Commissioners are to reduce to writing all the Examinations which you or any
two or more of you shall take as aforesaid; and the same to return to our
Justices and Counsel of this our Realm of Ireland, under the hands and seals
of any two or more of you as aforesaid. Witness our right trusty and
well-beloved Counselors Sir William Parsons Knight and Baronet, and Sir John
Borlace Knight, our Justices of our said Realm of Ireland: Dublin 23 of
December in the seventeenth year of our Reign.

Carleton.

The Commissioners above nominated, did very seriously address themselves to
this work, employing their pains therein with great diligence and
faithfulness; and have so well performed the charge imposed upon them as that
by several Examinations, many principal Gentlemen of good estates were
discovered to be the chief actors in the depredations of the British, and to
have committed many most horrid murders and other notorious cruelties, which
thorough their industry will now remain upon Record, but had otherwise been
concealed from Posterity, and wrapped up in oblivion. The like Commissions were
in a short time after sent into Munster and Vlster: In the Provine of Munster,
the Commissioners took great care in the Execution of it, many Examinations of
high concernment were taken by virtue thereof, though they remain as yet
concealed and not returned up according as is required by the said Commissions.

Toward the latter end of November, the Lords Justices and Council
considering the miserable desolations brought upon the whole Kingdom, A weekly
Fast appointed by the Lords Justices and Council.
and the further calamities threatened by War and Famine, did by a
Proclamation set forth in print, give strict charge and command; That upon
every friday a public and religious fast should be devoutly and piously
observed, in and through the whole City and Suburbs of Dublin, by all his
Majesty's people therein, and that Divine Service and Sermons be celebrated and
heard upon the said day weekly, in every Cathedral, and other Church and
Chapel in the said City and Suburbs thereof: And this to be performed as is
expressed in the said Proclamation, to the end that the severe wrath and
indignation of Almighty God, may be averted from this Kingdom, his divine aid
and assistance implored, and that some relief in these calamitous times, may
the better be afforded to such miserable persons as these Traitors, by their
rapine and cruelty, have deprived of their fortunes, and sent naked and almost
famished up to this City.

The Lords Justices and Council being advertised of the near approach of the
Rebels to Tredagh, The approach of the Rebels to Tredagh.
prepared to send down supplies both of men and munition, for the
re-inforcement of that Garrison: There were already designed 600 Foot and a
Troop of horse for that service, and they were almost in a readiness to March
when an express from Sir Henry Tichbourn came up to the Earl of Ormond, to
let him know the Rebels had that day being the 21 of November, appeared within
sight of the Town. He conceived they would presently have set down before it,
but they advanced no further that day, only while their Forces made a stand
there, they sent down a Party of 1300 foot to Millifont, the Lord Moors house,
which their design was suddenly to surprise; but contrary to their expectation,
they found there 24 Musketeers and 15 horsemen, who very stoutly defended the
house as long as their powder lasted: The horsemen when they saw themselves
beset so as they could be no further serviceable to the place, opened the gate,
issued out and made their passage through the midsts of the Rebels, and so
notwithstanding the opposition they made, escaped safe to Tredagh: The foot
having refused to accept of the quarter at first offered, resolved to make good
the place to the last man; they endured several assaults, slew 140 of the
Rebels, before their powder failed them: and at last they gave up the place
upon promise of quarter, which was not kept, for some of them were killed in
cold blood, all were stripped, and two old decrepite men slain, the house
ransaked, and all the goods carried away.

Upon the receipt of Sir Henry Tichbourn's Letter, the Lords presently took
order for the marching away of the six hundred men, Supplies both of horse and
foot sent for the relief of Tredagh.
together with a Troop of horse toward Tredagh: They left not the Town till
the 27 of November, and such was the negligence of the Captains and disorders
of the Soldiers, as notwithstanding they had been three days in readiness to
march, they went no further that night then Swoords a Village six miles distant
from Dublin: The command of the foot was committed to Sergeant Major Roper, and
of the horse to Sir Patrick Weames, who was appointed with 50 of the Earl of
Ormonds Troop to march with those six Companies to Tredagh. The very day of
their departure from Dublin, there was an advertizement brought unto the Lords,
that some Forces of the Rebels were drawn on this side the River of the Boine,
and attended with design to intercept their passage: Whereupon the Earl of
Ormond by direction from the Lords dispatched an express to give them now upon
their March notice thereof, and after to pass on to Sir Henry Tichbourn to let
him know as much; and that the Recruits designed for the re-inforcement of his
Garrison being now upon their march, it highly imported him to take special
care for the securing of their passage. And next day his Lordship received an
Answer from him of that Letter, with assurance that he would not fail to march
out with competent Forces to meet them upon the way, which he did that very day
accordingly perform, but they marching no further then Balrudry, and so lying
that night eight miles short of Tredagh, he missed of them, and so went not out
(by what accident or upon what reason I know not) the day following till the
news of the defeat met him at the very gate of the Town where he stood with his
men in a readiness to march toward them: The men being altogether untrained
and unaccustomed to travel, and failing of provision by the way, which for
their money they could not by any means procure from the country people as
they marched along, were very much discontented, and being somewhat tired with
their journey went on next day, but in much disorder, so careless, and so
little apprehensive of any danger, as some had Arms, but no munition about
them; others for their own ease committed the carriage of both to the Carts.
As they passed through Gormanston, the Major went in to give a visit to the
Lord of Gormanston, who told him that there were some Numbers of men lay in the
way with an intent to interrupt their Passage. And this his Lordship knew very
well, for the very night before (as Mr. Creeghton affirms in his examination)
one of his grooms went to Slain where the Rebels were then lodged, and
called them out of their Beds to be in a readiness to come and encounter the
English forces now upon their march. The Major had likewise other
advertisements to the same purpose, which he neglected not so much as
acquainting his Captains therewith, as some of them afterward affirmed; He
only caused three Scouts out of the Troop to be sent abroad to make discovery
whether the passage were clear; two of them returned back a little before he
came to the bridge of Julians Town, assuring him all was clear; the other went
on to a house within one quarter of a mile of the place where the Rebels lay,
and while he attended there for his breakfast, a boy belonging to the house,
took his Horse, and riding to the Rebels gave them notice of the near approach
of our forces: The Horse passed the Bridge, and the Foot following turned up
into a field on the left hand of the Lane, where by reason of a great mist that
suddenly fell, they discovered not the Rebels, till they were almost within
Musketshot of them. The defeat of the forces sent for the relief of Tredagh.
The Major drew his men presently into Battalia, but the Horse (as some of the
foot that escaped affirm) wheeled about without charging any part of the
Rebels forces, who now furiously approached with a great shout; and a
Lieutenant giving out the unhappy word of Countermarch, all the men possessed
as it were with a Pannick fear, began somewhat confusedly to march back, but
were so much amazed with a second shout given by the Rebels (who seeing them in
disorder followed close on) as notwithstanding they had gotten into a ground of
great advantage, they could not be persuaded to stand a charge, but betook
themselves to their heels, and so the Rebels fell sharply on, as their manner
is upon the execution.

Sir Patrick Weames without the loss of one Horse passed on safely unto
Tredagh: The Major with two of the Captains more, and about 100 of their men
made an escape thither likewise: The other three Captains with all the rest of
the Soldiers that were English were there cut off, they spared very few or
none that fell into their hands, but such as were Irish, whose lives they
preserved: The Arms of the whole six hundred they possessed themselves of, as
likewise of all their Munition and Carriages; and so highly were the Rebels
encouraged with this defeat given to his Majesty's Forces, as the whole Pale
began presently to waver, they thought the Kingdom their own, and that the
English would in all parts fall before them, as those poor ill conducted sheep
had unhappily done. And this is a true Relation (as near as I could collect it
from the mouths of those that were present) of that famous victory so much
boasted of by the Irish, whereunto the inexperience of the English Commanders,
and the disorders of the common soldiers, who were then but newly taken up and
had never seen any service, contributed far more then any skill or courage
showed by the Rebels; which they had only opportunity at that time to express
by a loud shout. Besides, they were treble their number, and had for their
leaders Roger Moore, Hugh Birne, and Philip O-Rely, the two last persons who
had been trained in the Wars abroad under the Spanish Discipline, and were of
greatest experience among them: they brought down a great part of those Forces
out of the Counties of Cavan and Monagham, and as soon as they came within the
River of Boyne, great numbers of the ordinary churles of the Pale adjoined
themselves unto their men, and so made up a body sufficient to perform that
service.

The news of this unhappy defeat was brought the very same day being monday
the 29 of November at evening, to the Lords Justices as they sat in Council:
It troubled them very much, and as it was a matter of great rejoicing among the
Popish Inhabitants of the City, so it bred a general sorrow and consternation
among the English and Protestants: It happened in a very ill season, the late
made Colonels were but then in raising of their men: And such Companies as were
completed, were by the Lords the same day of the marching of the 600 men to
Tredagh, Sir Charles Coots Expedition into the County of Wiclow.
commanded out under Sir Charles Coot into the County of Wiclow, for the
repressing the insolences of the Birnes and the Tools toward the poor Engl
sh, whom they began to fall upon most furiously, stripping, murdering, and
driving them all out of that Territory as soon as they had taken in the Kings
Fort, in that County called Carews Fort, and possessed themselves of the chief
places of strength belonging to the English Gentlemen there: He marched to the
Town of Wiclow, where he caused some few men and one woman to be executed, they
being found upon Examination guilty of the late spoils committed most
brabarously upon the English there, and the very clothes of an English woman
that was stripped, being found upon the back of that Irish woman that was there
hanged. In his return Luke Tool with near a 1000 Irish under his command
encountered him, but he quickly made them fly and take to the next Bogge with
the loss of some few of their men: And so he returned with all possible speed
to Dublin, the Lords having sent him notice of the late defeat given to the
Forces sent to Tredagh; As soon as he arrived, he applied himself very
carefully to the securing of the Town, which now began to be more desperately
threatened then ever, by the near approaches of the Rebels: And so great were
the disorders then in the City, so inconsiderable the Forces raised, the
English Inhabitants so strangly dismayed, the Papists so highly raised in
spirit and courage, as had the Commanders of the Rebels drawn those Forces
together as they had in readiness on both sides the River of Boyne for the
siege of Tredagh, and so marching up to Dublin, had taken the advantage of the
present distractions, and forward affections which they would have undoubtedly
found there to assist them: They had in all humane probability made themselves
Masters of the City, and might so straightly have begirt the Castle, as would
within a very short time have endangerd the surrender of it; But it pleased God
to infatuate their Counsels: The strong opinion they had that they should
presently carry Tredagh, and so possess themselves of all the Arms and
Munition they had in that Town, caused them to fix their resolutions there, and
to set up their rest upon the obtaining that place. In this as in many other
wonderful acts of divine providence which I then observed with great
admiration, it pleased God to appear even miraculously in the preservation of
the City and Castle of Dublin with the poor remainders of English and
Protestants, who had there taken sanctuary.

And now the Lords and Gentlemen of the Pale, thought it high time to discover
themselves and their affections to the cause: They certainly had not only long
entertained a defection in their thoughts, but were as the several
forementioned Examinations testify, The defection of the Lords and chief
Gentlemen within the English Pale.
the first contrivers and bringers in of the Northern Rebels into this
execrable Plot; they had now likewise drawn them into the Pale, and therefore
they could not hope now much longer to walk under a mask, and entertain the
state with further professions of their loyalty: They had gotten a competent
proportion of Arms and Munition out of his Majesty's store into their own
possession: They saw now the Northern Rebels advanced within the River of
Boyne, with very considerable Forces to strengthen their Party, and by the late
encounter and successful victory they had therein, they pleased their fancies
with confident conceits of certain prevailing, if they would now declare
themselves by a public conjunction in the common cause, and raising such
numbers of men and quantities of provision, as the plentiful circuit of the
Pale did afford, would prosecute the war so happily begun and so
successefully managed hitherto.

These and several other considerations working very powerfully among the
Lords and chief Gentlemen of the Pale, they did within very few days after
the late defeat solemnly proceed on to the actual consummation of their long
meditated revolt; For the manner, place, The manner of the conjunction of the
Lords and chief Gentlemen of the men of the English Pale with the Northern
Rebels, expressed in the Examination of Edward Dowdall Esquire.
time, and all other circumstances, I shall refer the Reader to this ensuing
Relation given in upon Oath, March 1641. before Sir Robert Meredith Knight,
Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Examination of Edward Dowdall Esquire a
Gentleman of the Pale, one very well esteemed among them, one that was present
at all their meetings, and deeply engaged in all their counsels and actions.

He deposes that some four or five days after the defeat of the English
soldiers at the Bridge of Gellianstown, there issued a Warrant from the Lord
of Gormanston to the Sheriff of the County for a general meeting of all the
County at Dulick: But the place of meeting was afterward changed to the Hill
of Crofty, where all the Lords and Gentry of the Country met, viz. The Earl of
Fingale, the Lord Viscount Gormanston, the Lord of Slain, the Lord of Lowth,
the Lord of Dunsany, the Lord of Trimblestone, the Lord Nettervile: And of the
Gentry Sir Patrick Barnwall, Sir Christopher Bellew, Patrick Barnwall of
Kilbrew, Nicholas Darcy of Plattin, James Bath of Acharn, Garret Ailmer the
Lawyer, Cusake of Gormanston, William Malone of Lesmullin, Sedgrave of
Kileglan, Linch of the Knos, Lynam of Adamstown, Laurence, Doudall of
Athlumney, Nicholas Doudall of Brownstown this Examinates brother, and him this
Examinate with a multitude of others, to the number of a 1000 persons at the
least, whose names he this Examinate cannot for the present call to mind. And
after about two or three hours spent upon the said Hill of Crofty by the Lords
and Gentry aforesaid: There came toward them, Colonel Mahowne, Philip O-Rely,
Hugh Boy-Rely, Roger Moore, Hugh Birne, and Captain Fox, attended on with a
guard of Musketeers: These were some of the chief Leaders among the Northern
Rebels.
And this Examinate says, That as soon as the parties drew near unto the
said Hill, the Lords and Gentry of the Pale rode toward them, and the Lord of
Gormanstone, being one of the first, spoke unto them, and demanded of them,
Why, and for what reason, they came Armed into the Pale; Unto which Roger Moore
made present Answer, That the ground of their coming thither, and taking up
Arms, was for the freedom and liberty of their consciences, the maintenance
of his Majesty's Prerogative, in which they understood he was abridged, and the
making the subjects in this Kingdom as free as those in England were:
whereupon the said Lord of Gormanston, desired to understand from them truly
and faithfully, whether those were not pretenses, and not the true grounds
indeed of their so doing, and likewise whether they had not some other private
ends of their own; which being by all denied, upon profession of their
sincerity, his Lordship the Lord of Gormanston then told them: Seeing these be
your true ends, we will likewise join with you therein: unto which course all
agreed. And thereupon it was publikly and generally declared, that whosoever
should deny to join with them, or refuse to assist them therein, they would
account him as an Enemy, and to the utmost of their power labor his
destruction. And this Examinate says, That after the agreement so made as
aforesaid, There issued another Warrant to the Sheriff of the County of Mead,
to summon all the Lords and Gentry of the County of Mead, to be at the Hill of
Taragh about a week after; and accordingly there met at the same place the
Earl of Fingale, the Lord of Gormanston, and the rest of the Lords and
Gentlemen aforenamed, together with Sir Thomas Nugent, and Nicholas Plunket the
Lawyer, Birford the Lawyer, and a multitude of others; and the work of that day
was first to make Answer to a Summons made by the State for the calling of the
Lords unto Dublin, which Answer was brought ready drawn by the Lord of
Gormanston, and presented by his Lordship, and being perused by the said
Council at Law was signed by the Lords.

In this manner was this great transaction most solemnly consummated betwixt
Lemster and Vlster; Valence and Brabant, as Sir Phelim O. Neale styles them in
his Characteristicall Letter before mentioned, sent to Owen Roe O-Neale in
Flanders, were now publicly united together in that great Assembly. The Lord
Viscount Gormanston on the one side, and Roger Moore on the other, had both
been long tampering about the drawing of this most important work to the form
it now received, they had at length brought it unto perfection, they two had
the glory of it, and appeared the great public instruments of this powerful
union.

The Lords and chief Gentlemen of the Pale, having thus far declared
themselves became so high and presuming* The endeavors of those of the Pale to
strengthen their party against the power of the State.
as they little valued what was done or commanded by the State at Dublin: they
now wholly applied their endeavors to make such preparatives toward the
war, as might strengthen their party, which as it now stood in conjuncture
with the Northern Rebels they beheld as invincible, and their power not to be
resisted by the inconsiderable Forces drawn together by the Lords Justices and
Counsel at Dublin: Several Gentlemen who in the several Counties of the Pale
were made Captains, and had received Arms from the State for their Companies,
departed from their obedience, and addressed themselves and their Companies
wholly to the service of the Rebels. Nicholas White Esquire Son and Heir to
Sir Nicholas White of Lislip, was the first that gave the example about the
second of December; but he carried the matter so handsomely, as his Company
ran away to the Rebels, as he pretended, without his consent or even his
knowledge any longer time before their departure, then to give him opportunity
to come and acquaint the State therewith, and his own disability to hinder the
same: The reasons why the State Summond the grand Counsel of all the Lords of
the Pale, and others then in the City of Dublin.
But before it was possible to use any means of prevention, the men were all
gone with their Arms and Munition to the Rebels: Many of the other Captains
desired no such fine cover for their intentions, but delivered themselves and
their Arms up to be disposed as they should direct without any further scruple
or complement to the State: Whereupon the Lords finding how notoriously they
were abused by the very great confidence reposed in such Gentlemen of the Pale,
as being made Captains, had received Arms from them, and perceiving what
course they began now to stear, and how they were resolved to employ their own
Arms against them, they took such order, and with such celerity and diligence
made stay of several of those Arms, which were delivered out for the use of
the Pale, as of the 1700 Arms distributed among the several Counties thereof
they recovered again into their hands 950.

And now by reason the Northern Rebels had settled their Camp within the River
of Boyne, and so lay betwixt Tredagh and the City of Dublin, all entercouse in
the Pale was interrupted, the passages stopped up, and the Lords Justices and
Council understood very little or nothing of any proceedings held there. They
therefore finding their dangers daily to increase through the near approach of
the Rebels unto the City of Dublin, the continual affronts, and new scorns
the State daily received from them, their own want of strength to repress
their bold attempts, or to preserve the poor English round about them out of
their bloody hands, resolved now in these their high extremities, to try the
effects of those large protestations and great professions of loyalty the Lords
of the Pale had lately made unto them, and to give them a fair opportunity of
rendering a most acceptable service to his Majesty and the state here. For this
end therefore they determined to call a grand Council of all the Lords which
resided within any convenient distance of the City of Dublin, clearly and
freely to represent unto them the ill condition of their affairs, and how
highly it imported them in respect of their own particular safety, as well as
for the preservation of the whole Kingdom, not only to contribute their best
advice and council, but even all the Forces they could any ways raise toward
the beating of the Northern Rebels out of the Pale. Several Letters of Summons
were accordingly writ and sent away to the Earl of Fingale, the Lord Viscount
Gormanston, and the rest of the Lords of the Pale; the tenor of them here
ensues.

AFter our very hearty commendations to your Lordships, for as much as we have
present occasion to confer with you, A Copy of the Letter written by the
Lords Justices and Council to the Lords of the Pale.
concerning the present estate of the Kingdom, and the safety thereof in these
times of danger: We pray and require your Lordship to be with us here on the
eight day of this Month, at which time others of the Peers are also to be here:
And this being to no other end, we bid your Lordships very heartily farewell.
From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the third of December 1641.

Your very loving friends William Parson. John Borlacy. Ormondossory. Ant:
Medensis. R: Dilbon. Ad: Loftus. Ge: Shirley. I: Temple. Rob: Meredith.


To our very good Lord George Earl of Kildare.

The like Letters eodem die, to these several Persons following:
Earl of Ormond. Earl of Antrim. Earl of Fingale. Vis: Gormanston. Vis:
Netervile. Vis: Fitzwilliam. Lo: Trimbleston. Lord Dunsany. Lord Slain. Lord
of Hoath. Lord Lowth. Lord Lambert.
These Letters were presently sent away: But the Lords of the Pale being
otherwise engaged, and having before or much about the time they came unto
their hands (though the Lords knew very little, and that very uncertainly of
it) made that public combination with the Vlster Rebels before mentioned,
durst no more adventure their persons within the City of Dublin: But after
their meeting at the Hill of Crofty, appointed an other meeting at the Hill of
Tarah, and from thence they sent an Answer unto the Lords, which as Mr Dowdall
testifies, was brought thither by the Lord of Gormanston ready drawn up, and
there only signed and so sent away. The Copy of the Letter here follows:

May it please your Lordships,
We have received your Letters of the third of this instant, The Answer of
the Lords of the Pale to the Lords Justices.
intimating that you had present occasions to confer with us, concerning the
present state of the Kingdom, and the safety thereof in these times of danger,
and requiring us to be with you there on the eighth day of this instant, we
give your Lordships to understand, that we have heretofore presented our selves
before your Lordsips, and freely offered our advice and furtherance toward the
particulars aforesaid, which was by you neglected, which gave us cause to
conceive that our Loyalty was suspected by you. We give your Lordships further
to understand, that we have received certain advertisement, that Sir Charles
Coot Knight, at the Council Board, has uttered some speeches tending to a
purpose and resolution, to execute upon these of our Religion a general
Massacre, by which we are all deterred to wait on your Lordships, not having
any security for our safety from these threatened evils, or the safety of our
lives; but do rather think it fit to stand upon our best guard until we hear
from your Lordships how we shall be secured from these perils. Nevertheless,
we all protest that we are and will continue both faithful advisers, and
resolute furtherers of his Majesty's service concerning the present state of
the Kingdom, and the safety thereof to our best abilities, and so with the
said tender of our humble service we remain

Your Lordships humble Servants, Fingale, Gormanston, Slane, Dunsany,
Nettervill, Oliver Lowth, Trimblestown.

To the Right Honorable our very good Lords the Lords Justices and Council of
Ireland.


Dublin, December. 7. Received 11. 1641.

In Answer to this Letter, the Lords Justices and Council, out of their
unfeigned desires to give unto those Lords all due satisfaction, and to remove
those jealousies and great misunderstanding now grown up between them, A
Proclamation issued out by the Lords Justices and Council for the satisfaction
of the Lords of the Pale.
thought fit by way of Proclamation to publish and declare to them and all
others of his Majesty's good Subjects of the Romish Religion, That they never
heard Sir Charles Coot, or any other utter at the Board or elsewhere, any such
speeches tending to a purpose or resolution to execute upon those of their
profession, or upon any other a general Massacre or any Massacre at all, and
that they never intended so to dishonor his Majesty and this State, or wound
their own consciences as to entertain the least thought of acting so odious,
impious, and detestable a thing upon any persons whatsoever; and that if any
proof can be made of any such words spoken by any person whatsoever, that he
shall be severely punished. And therefore that they did pray and require the
said Noblemen to attend them at the Board, on the 17. day of December, that
they might confer with them: And for the security of their repair unto them,
they did thereby give to all and every of those Noblemen, the word and
assurance of the State, that they might then securely and safely come unto them
without danger of any trouble or stay whatsoever, from them who neither had nor
have any intention to wrong or hurt them.

But now it began to appear unto the Lords Justices and Counsel, how far
they were engaged with the Northern Rebels. By the Examinations taken of some
English, who made their escape out of those parts the news of their solemn
contract and Association beforementioned was brought up to Dublin: And they
then well enough discerned the maine obstruction in their coming, the cause of
their tergiversations, and what good reason they had to find out excuses to
palliate their disloyalty. They then expected no other fruits of their
Proclamation then what it produced: Neither indeed had it any other effect and
operation among them, then that they did with great boldness and confidence by
way of Answer thereunto, write back a Letter to the Lords Justices wherein they
pretend themselves so justly affrighted with Sir Charles Coot severity and
deportment, Several pretenses of the Lords of the Pale to color their
refusal to repair to the Lords Justices and Council.
as that they dare not adventure themselves within the confines of his
government: They heavily impose upon him the inhumane acts perpetrated as they
term them in the County of Wiclow, the Massacre of Santry and the burning of
Mr Kings house and his whole substance at Clantarfe, and with a little kind of
cunning, they seem to pretend a breach of the public faith, but would
transfer the blame from the Lords Justices to Sir Charles Coot, and thereupon
desire no sinister construction may be made of their stay, and that they may
have some Commissioners appointed to confer with them, and so conclude with
some professions of their Loyalty and readiness to give their advices for the
advancement of his Majesty's service, and the common peace of the Kingdom.

This was an Answer, such as might justly be expected to come from persons so
deeply now involved in the guilt of so high a Rebellion. The great
indulgence-used by the Lords Justices and Council toward the Lords of the
Pale.
It is no wonder that they were thus put to their shifts, and enforced to take
up such fond excuses, and imaginary pretenses for their disloyalty: For they
could not in their own consciences, but be most sensible of the very great
indulgence used by the Lords toward them: They had not failed in several
particulars to manifest the great confidence they had in their good affections:
They had refrained from giving them any manner of provocation or jealousy.
They had forborne the doing some acts of hostility for a time upon some Rebels
among them, because they would not give them any the least cause of complaint.
And however, it appeared by the Examination of Mac Mahone and several others,
that they were privy to the first plot, yet the Lords proceeded with so much
caution and tenderness toward them, hoping that now the Conspirators had
failed in the maine part of their design which was the surprisall of the Castle
of Dublin, that they might yet reclaim them thereby, and draw them into a just
concurrence with them, for the preservation of the Kingdom out of the hands of
those bloody Northern Rebels, who in the beginning were the only appearers in
the cause: But all was to no purpose, they were too deeply engaged to recede;
therefore they ran now violently on, and drew along all the chief Gentlemen
likewise of the Pale with them.

And now it shall be declared, Luke Nettervile and others of the chief
Gentlemen of the Pale, gather Forces and quarter them within six miles of the
City of Dublin.
how the chief Gentlemen of the Pale began and proceeded on to act their
parts: About the beginning of December, presently after the late defeat given
to the English soldiers in their march to Tredagh, Luke Nettervile second
Son to the Lord Viscount Nettervile, caused a Proclamation to be made in the
Market place of Lusk, requiring all the chief Gentlemen and other Inhabitants
thereabouts, not to fail upon pain of death, presently to repair unto
Swoords, a Town within six miles of the City of Dublin. And within few days
after, did meet there the said Luke Nettervile, George Blackney Esquire, George
King, John Talbot, Richard Golding, Thomas Russell, Christopher Russell,
Patrick Caddell, William Travers, Richard Barnwell, Laurence Bealing, Holywood
of Artaine, and several other Gentlemen who began to gather great numbers of
men about them, and putting such Arms into their hands as they had in
readiness, at the present made their provisions to entertain a settled Camp
within that place. The Lords understanding of this unlawful tumultuous
Assembly, The Gentlemen of the Pale required by the Lords Justices and Council
to repair to Dublin.
and deeply apprehending the mischievous consequences that might ensue
thereupon, sent this Warrant following in a fair manner requiring thereby
their present repair unto them.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
William Persons. Io: Burlace.
WHereas we have received information, that Luke Nettervile Esquire, Blackney
of Rickenhore Esquire, and George King of Clontarfe Gentleman; and other
Gentlemen of the County of Dublin, with great numbers of men are assembled
together in a body at Swoords and there abouts, within six miles of this City,
for what intent we know not, but apparently to the terror of his Majesty's good
Subjects, and although considering the unseasonablenesse of this time chosen
for such an act without our privity (whatsoever their pretense is) a
construction might be made thereof to their disadvantage; yet we being willing
to make an indulgent interpretation of their actions in regard of the good
opinion we have of the Loyalty of those Gentlemen, who (it seems) are
principalls amongst them in that Assembly, and conceiving there may be some
mistaking in that enterprise, we have chosen the rather hereby to charge the
said Luke Nettervile, Blackney, King, and all the persons there Assembled with
them, upon their duties of Allegiance to his Majesty, immediately upon sight
hereof to separate, and not to unite any more in that manner without direction
from us; and that the said Nettervill, Blackney, King, and six others of the
principal persons of those who are so assembled at Swoords or thereabouts as
aforesaid, do appear before us to morrow morning at ten of the Clock, to show
the cause of their assembling in that manner, whereof they may not fail at
their extreme perils. Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin 9. December 1641.

Ormond Ossory, Rob. Dillon, Cha. Lambart, Jo. Temple, Charles Coot.


But they were so far from rendering obedience to the commands they received
from the Board, as they kept the Messenger in restraint a day and a night,
threatening to hang him, and after returned a scornful peremptory Answer,
signifying unto their Lordships, The Answer made by the Pale, to the Lords
Warrant.
That they were constrained to meet there together, for the safety of their
lives, that they were put in so great a terror by the rising out of some horse
Troops and foot Companies at Dublin, who killed four Catholics for no other
reason, then that they bore the name of that Religion, as they durst not as
they pretended stay in their houses, and therefore resolved to continue
together, till they were assured by their Lordships of the safety of their
lives before they run the hazard thereof, by manifesting their obedience due
unto their Lordships. These were the very words and expressions used by those
Gentlemen in their Answer: And accordingly they still continued together,
increasing their numbers of men and threatening to come down and encamp
themselves at Clantarfe, a little Village standing upon the very Harbor of
Dublin; where some of their followers had already at a low water seized upon a
Bark lying there, and carried away all the Commodities they found in her; a
great part whereof they had put into the then dwelling house of the said King,
to whom that Village did belong. This was an act of so high a strain, and so
eminently tending to the present ruin of the City as it required a sudden
remedy; Delays were dangerous in a matter of such perilous consequence; and
the Lords Justices and Council, plainly perceived that if the Rebels were
suffered to come down and lodge there, that they might without much difficulty
make themselves masters of those few Barks then in the Harbor; the State
having at that time no Ships of force to guard them, and so put themselves in a
fair way if they could bring the Wexford Ships about to join with them to
block up the Harbor; and stop the coming in to their relief all such
succors as should be designed in England to Land at that Port. Whereupon the
Lords finding that the said King continued still with Luke Nettervile and those
other Gentlemen at Swoords, that they carried themselves with such high
contumacy, as that disdaining to render any obedience to their Warrant, they
neither made their departure from that place, disbanded their men, nor so much
as pretended to repair to them according to their commands at the time
prefixed therein: It was thought high time to take some other course with them;
And therefore about four days after, the day first set down by the Lords for
their appearing before them, and the very next day after, another Proclamation
published for their immediate separation, the Lords Justices and Council made
this ensuing Order, directed to the Earl of Ormond Lieutenant General of his
Majesty's forces in Ireland.

By the Lords Justices and Council.
William Parsons. Io: Burlace.
A Warrant from the Lords Justices and Council for the suppressing of the
Rebels of the Pale.
FOrasmuch as diverse of the Inhabitants of Clantarfe, Raheny and Kilbarrock,
have declared themselves Rebels, and having robbed and spoiled some of his
Majesty's good Subjects, are now assembled thereabouts in Arms in great
numbers, mustering and training of their Rebellious multitudes, to the terror
and danger of his Majesty's good subjects, as well at Land as at Sea, which
their boldness is acted in such manner as to put scorns and affronts upon
this State and Government, they acting such depredations even before our faces
and in our own view as it were in despite of us: It is therefore ordered, that
our very good Lord the Earl of Ormond and Ossory Lieutenant General of the
Army, do forthwith send out a party of Soldiers of horse and foot, to fall
upon those Rebels at Clantarfe and thereabouts, who in such disdainful manner,
stand to outface and dare us, and to endeavor to cut them off, as well for
punishment as terror to others, and to burn and spoil the Rebels houses and
goods: And to prevent their further anoying of the shipping, going out and
coming in and lying in harbor; those Soldiers are to bring up or cause to be
brought up to the new Crane at Dublin, such of the Boats and Vessels now lying
there as they can upon the sudden, and to burn spoil and sink and make
unserviceable the rest. Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin December 14.
1641.

Ormond Ossory, Rob: Dillon, Cha: Lambart, Ad: Loftus, Jo: Temple, Cha: Coote,
Fran: Willoughby.


According to their Lordships directions, the Earl of Ormond gave present
order to Sir Charles Coot to march out privately with some Forces unto
Clantarfe, which he did without any noise, and meeting there with no
opposition, Sir Charles Coot Marches out with some Forces to Clantarfe.
he only suffered his men to pillage the Town, whereof they burnt some part, as
also part of Mr Kings house, in which much of the goods were found that had
been taken out of the Bark before mentioned: And this was the first expedition
that the Forces newly raised in Dublin, made after the defeat of the 600 men in
their passage to Tredagh: As for the Massacre at Santry mentioned in the Answer
from the Lords of the Pale, The true Relation of the pretended Massacre at
Santry.
and obtruded to the World, as a just pretense to deter them from waiting on
the Lords at Dublin, it was no other then this: Information was given to some
of the Officers of the Army, that there had been a robbery newly committed by
certain Rebels at the house of one Smith called the Buskin, within five miles
of the City: And that if a Party of Soldiers might be sent forth, the Informer
offered to bring them upon those Rebels, as also upon other Rebels, who had
lately murdered one Mr Derick Huberts a Dutch Merchant at the Skirries;
whereupon two Officers with 40 foot, were sent out with direction to fall upon
those Rebels: They went directly to Santry, and there finding some strangers
with weapons lodged in suspicious places, they slew four of them who as was
conceived were criminal Offenders, and one of them after upon further enquiry
found to be a Protestant.

But how fairly soever this matter was carried, The proceedings held by the
Lords and chief Gentlemen of the English Pale, after they had joined with the
Northern Rebels.
yet they resolved to make use of it for the present, by way of justification
of their disloyalty: And having so far publicly declared themselves, they
held it not fit to sit idle any longer, but began to put the whole Circuit of
the Pale into a posture of War, and to make all such preparatives as might
enable them by the powerful assistance they had out of the North, presently to
take in Tredagh, and afterward to march up to Dublin, and there make
themselves Masters of that City and Castle: A work as now it stood represented
unto them not likely to prove less glorious then successful, and easy to be
achieved: They had for this end many public meetings among themselves, as
also with the chief Comanders of the Northern Rebels.

In the first place, they declared the Lord Viscount Gormanstone General of
the Forces to be raised in the Pale, Hugh Birne Lieutenant General, the Earl
of Fingale General of the horse: Then they gave power to those Lords to
nominate Captains in several Baronies to be respectively appointed out of
them, and likewise to raise soldiers in every such Barony, viz. eight
soldiers out of a Plowland land (which contains according to the ancient
estimation 120 Acres) and every Plowland to maintain the Soldiers to be set
out by them: The Barony of Duleek was assigned to the Lord of Gormanston, the
Barony of Screene and Desse to the Earl of Fingale, the Barony of Slain to
the Lord of Slain, the Barony of the Navan to the Lord of Trimblestone, Kells
to the Lord Dunsany, Ratogh and Dunboine to Sir Richard Barnewall of
Crickestown Baronite, and Patrick Barnwell of Kilbrew; and by these persons,
several Captains were appointed, and numbers of Soldiers raised according to
the orders set down at the general meeting: There were also Warranrs issued out
by the Lord Gormanston, whereby those persons appointed to raise the men, and
to furnish them with provisions for their entertainment, were required upon
pain of death to send them out: Other Warrants were likewise sent out to other
persons who were appointed Overseers for the threshing out of all the
Protestants corn, which was assigned generally through the Pale to be applied
toward the maintenance of their Army. The next work was to make a constant
provision of all manner of necessaries for the entertainment of such Forces as
were already brought down out of the North, as well as those raised in the
Pale, and set down at the siege of Tredagh. And for this service they sessed
the whole Country thereabouts, and ordered what proportions of corn and
numbers of cattle should be brought down out of every part for the victualling
of those that lay encamped about the Town: There was allotted to every Company
consisting of a hundred men, for their daily allowance, one biefe, and half a
barrel of corn: And that they might with the more facility bring in the
Country people to furnish their Army with these proportions; they made not only
prohibitions that no corn should be carried to Dublin, but so blocked up the
ways as the poor churles that lived somewhat distant from the City, could not
carry their corn thither without apparent danger; whereby the Market began to
be very ill provided, and great want and scarcity was much feared by reason of
the large accession of people come from several parts of the Kingdom up unto
the City for safety. Whereupon the Lords Justices and Council made
Proclamations to be published, That all such as had corn remaining within some
few miles distance, should as their usual manner was, bring it to the Market
at Dublin, and they should receive ready money for the same; in case they did
not that, they would presently send out Parties and burn their corn as it stood
in the haggards, and so prevent the use the Rebels intended to make of it for
the victualing of their Army. By this means the City was indifferently well
supplied all that winter with corn, the Country people though otherwise very
malicious against the English and Protestants, being content though with much
hazard, to adventure the bringing their corn, where they sold it at a good rate
for ready money, rather then to suffer it to be threshed out by Warrants from
the Lord of Gormanston for the use of the Irish Army then lying before Tredagh.

But while they continue their fruitless and unprofitable attemps there,
having neither skill, courage, experience, The sad condition of the public
affairs of the State.
nor any means to bring about their impetuous desires and fond endeavors for
the taking in of that Town, I shall briefly represent a view of the sad estate
of our affairs in Dublin: It was now almost full two Months since the breaking
out of this Rebellion; The Lords Justices and Council out of their deep
apprehensions of a general revolt of all the Irish through the Kingdom, did
in the very beginning with much earnestness solicit the present sending over
of Succors out of England: And as soon as they began to make a little further
discovery into the strength of this Conspiracy, and found their own wants and
utter disabilities to make any long or considerable opposition against the
universal power of the whole body of the Irish, as it then began to appear
unto them, firmly united with almost all the Old English that were of the
Romish Profession incorporated into their party throughout Ireland, they did
with much more earnestness by their frequent Letters and several Agents,
represent unto his Majesty and the Parliament of England, the very ill even
desperate condition they were in; and therefore desired that supplies both of
men, money, and all kind of warlick provisions, might be sent away with all
speed unto them, declaring that unless they received them presently, and that
in great proportions, they were not able longer to subsist as they stood now
environed on all sides with multitudes of the Rebels, but had just reason to
apprehend their own present ruin, and the inevitable loss of the whole
Kingdom: And because they conceived the Levies in England could not be so
suddenly made, nor the men so easily transported from thence into the North of
Ireland (where the Rebels appeared in greatest numbers, and had by their most
unparalled cruelty toward the English done most mischeife) as out of Scotland:
They made a proposition to the Lord Lieutenant, to move both his Majesty and
the Parliament, The sending of 10000 Scots into Ireland pressed by the Lords
Justices and Council.
that 10000 Scots might be presently raised and sent over into those Parts.
This they pressed with much earnestness, representing the very great terror
the mere Irish had of that Nation, that their bodies would better sort with
that Climate, endure more hardship, and with less distemper undergo the toil
and miseries of an Irish war, that the transportation would be made with much
more facility and less charge, it being not above three or four hours sail
from some parts of Scotland into the North of Ireland, That the Kingdom of
Scotland had been lately in Arms, and so had all provisions necessary for the
furnishing of their men for this expedition in readiness: And lastly, they
having so good a foundation in the multitude of their own Countrymen so
advantagiously settled there already, would no doubt undertake the work with
all alacrity, and vigorously prosecute the war with such sharpness, as might
testify their deep resentment of the horrid cruelties exercised upon so many
thousands of their own Nation by that barbarous people.

Commissioners sent out of Scotland to Treat with the Parliament of England
concerning the relief of Ireland.
These Letters arrived very opportunely about the time of the Kings return from
Edinburgh to the Parliament of England then sitting at Westminster: And there
being even then two Scottish Lords come out of the Kingdom of Scotland, to
Treat with the Parliament of England concerning the sending Forces from thence
for the relief of Ireland. His Majesty sent to the Lords and Commons to give
them notice of their arrival, and withal desired, that certain Commissioners
appointed by himself, and both Houses of Parliament, might be presently named
to Treat with them, and from time to time, give an account of their proceedings
to his Majesty and both Houses. This motion was with very great readiness
yielded unto, and it was ordered, that the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of
Leycester Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the Lord Howard of Estric; nominated by
the House of Peers: And Nathaniel Fiennes Esquire, Sir William Ermin Baronite,
Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, John Hampden Esquire, nominated by the House of
Commons, should Treat with the Scottish Commissioners concerning the affairs of
Ireland, and that there should be a Commission granted unto them to this
effect, under the great Seal of England, together with particular Instructions
to regulate the manner of their proceedings.

In the propositions given in by the Scottish Commissioners, they did in the
first place make offer of 10000 men in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland:
Propositions presented to the Parliament of England for the relief of Ireland.
And that they might be enabled to send them speedily away, they desired an
advance of 30000 l. of the brotherly assistance afforded unto them by the
Kingdom of England, and that what Arms and Munition they sent into Ireland,
might in the same proportions be returned unto them with all expedition.

Next they desired that some ships of War might be appointed to guard the
Seas betwixt Scotland and Ireland, to waft over their Soldiers which they
designed to transport in small vessels.

And then that upon landing of their men in Ireland, there should be a 100
horse ready to join with every 1000 foot that they should send thither: And
that they should receive Instructions and Orders, and in every thing obey the
Scottish General.

These propositions being taken into consideration in the House of Commons,
after they had duly considered of them, and weighed the high necessities of
this Kingdom, that the Scots had 2500 men ready raised, and that they could
not so suddenly make provision any other way for the saving Ireland, as by
sending these Forces out of Scotland, they readily condiscended unto them, and
having voted them severally, they sent them up to the House of Peers, with
their desires for a speedy concurrence in them.

These beginnings gave great hopes of the sudden relief of Ireland, and it was
now generally believed, that considerable Forces would be transported within a
very short time out of Scotland for the defense of the Northern parts of this
Kingdom; especially considering with how much earnestness his Majesty in his
Speech made to the Lords and Commons in Parliament on the 14 of December, in
this present year, had pressed them to take to heart the business of Ireland,
and offered unto them whatsover his power, pains or industry could contribute
to the good and necessary work of reducing the Irish Nation to their true and
wonted obedience.

But alas these great expectations were soon dashed, The Forces designed for
Ireland retarded.
and the Forces designed for Ireland, as well out of England as Scotland
strangely retarded by several obstructions which daily arose in the
transaction of the Irish affairs.

For first, his Majesty in the same Speech, wherein he conjured them, by all
that was dear to him or them, to go on chearefully and speedily for the
reducing of Ireland, did take notice of a Bill for pressing Soldiers for
Ireland depending in the House of Peers, and declaring his dislike of putting
it in that way, told them he would pass it so were there a salvo jure put into
it both for the King and people, but withal, told them that he thought him
self little beholding unto him whosoever it was, that began this dispute so
far trenching upon the bounds of his ancient and undoubted prerogative.

These passages in his Majesty's Speech were deeply resented, not only by the
Lords, who were more particularly concerned in them, but by the House of
Commons: And therefore his Majesty had no sooner ended his Speech and left
their House, but that the Lords fell into consideration of the same, and
resolved that the King by taking notice of the debate in their House of the
Bill, concerning pressing of Soldiers, had broken the fundamental privileges
of Parliament. And presently a Message was brought unto them, likewise by Mr
Hollis from the House of Commons, to desire a conference with their Lordships
by Committees of both Houses touching the Privileges of Parliament: At the
conference they fully expressed the deep sense they had of the high injury
offered unto them, by his Majesty in invading their Privileges, and proceeded
so far as to come not only to Petition his Majesty, and to desire that he
would be pleased to make known that person who had given him information so
unduly of what had passed in their House: but also, to make a Protestation
concerning their Privileges: This took up some time, and the great
misunderstanding even which then began to appear betwixt his Majesty and the
Parliament, had so strong an influence into the business of Ireland, as
notwithstanding the high necessities of this Kingdom, and the great affections
expressed by the Kingdom of England for our sudden relief here, the
resolutions were slow, and the preparations went so heavily on, as it was long
before the House of Commons could find means to enable the Lord Lieutenant to
send so much as one Regiment away out of England, for the defense of the Castle
and City of Dublin, then much distressed by the near approach of the Rebels.

And now for the Forces to be sent out of Scotland into the Northern Parts of
this Kingdom, they meet with several obstructions likewise. The debate of the
propositions presented by the Scottish Commissioners in the House of Peers.
For first, the Commissioners of Scotland had not power given them from the
State there to Treat for the sending over a lesser number then 10000 men, which
the Lords here were very unwilling to condescend unto. But this obstacle was
soon removed by the zealous affections of the House of Commons, who as soon
as the Propositions brought in by the Scottish Commissioners for the relief of
Ireland, were presented unto them, voted their assent to Treat for the sending
of the number of 10000 men out of Scotland, according to the instructions given
to the Commissioners by that Kingdom, and sent up a Message to the House of
Peers by Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, to lay before their Lordships, the
miserable estate of the Kingdom of Ireland* and to let them know that the
House of Commons conceived the best way for the preservation of it out of the
hands of the Rebels, was speedily to dispatch the Scots into the Province of
Vlster, and therefore desired that they would join with them in the
Propositions received from the Scottish Commissioners.

Upon the receipt of this Message, the House of Peers fell upon the said
Proposition, and after a long debate, it was at length agreed that 10000 Scots
should be sent into Ireland, if the House of Commons would condescend that at
the same time there might 10000 English men be as speedily sent likewise
thither, and thereupon desired a conference with the House of Commons, that
they might fully understand their resolution therein, which being yielded unto
by the House of Commons, The Lords at the conference pressed with much
earnestness, that they might be assured of the sending over of 10000 English
at the same time that the Scots were to be sent away: whereunto the House of
Commons replied, that they were not to be capitulated withal, that their
actions were free as well without conditions as capitulations, that they
thought they had given sufficient certainty already of their resolution to send
that number of English into Ireland, and therefore desired that their Lordships
would Vote the sending away of 10000 Scots by it self without any relation to
the English spoken of by them.

This took up a large debate in the House of Peers, and was one maine cause of
the slow proceeding on of the Treaty with the Scottish Commissioners. I shall
not undertake to determine at so great a distance from whence these
obstructions grew, but I am very sure we could here easily find, that there
were some such secret workings underhand against the good affections expressed
by the House of Commons, and by the Lords who were well affected to the service
of Ireland, as that this Treaty was very much retarded thereby, and was not
brought on to any conclusion in many Months after. So as in the mean time,
all the British planted thorough out this Kingdom, were despoiled, driven out
of their habitations, or most cruelly murdered within their own doors: and the
Irish strengthened themselves in all parts of the Country, and prevailing
everywhere, drew many to join with them, that had hitherto kept themselves in
a kind of Neutrality, as supposing that the State here would be altogether
deserted, and no Forces at all sent out of England for the suppressing of the
Irish as had taken up Arms in this quarrel.

The whole Province of Munster about the midst of this Month of December, began
to declare themselves in open Rebellion. The revolt of the Irish in the
Province of Munster.
The Lord President there, had used his utmost endeavors to suppress their
very beginnings, but by reason of his want of strength was now able to contain
them no longer: He did with all diligence and carfulness labor to prevent
the joining together of any numbers of the Irish in any of those parts: And
when he understood how they began in some places of the Province to despoyle
the English, and that they had near Waterford gotten away many of the English
men's cattle, and were carrying them out of the limits of his government, he
thought it not fit longer to sit still, but gallantly pursued those Rebels in
his own person, being accompanied only with his own Troop of horse, and some
few Gentlemen of the Country, who joined with them, and after a long and
tedious march came upon them unawres, slew 200 of those Rebels, restored the
cattle to the English that were owners of them, and took several prisoners
whom he hanged for a greater terror to all such as should adventure afterward
to follow their example: As soon as he had done this service, his Lordship
retired back to Cork, having neither Forces nor means to make any further
prosecution: which the Irish well enough understood, and therefore drew
together in several places of that Province, and though they did not in that
barbarous manner, The misery suffered by the English in Munster.
as they in Vlster, hew down, cut in pieces, hang, drown or presently murder
all the English among them: yet many horrid murders they committed, used
several kinds of cruelty to many particular persons, and for all the rest that
fell into their hands, they robbed and violently deprived them of all their
goods and cattle, most miserably stripped them out of their clothes and
leaving them quite naked, suffered most of them in that lamentable posture to
pass to Cork, Youghall, Kinsale and other Ports there to embarke their
miserable Carcasses for England where few arrived safely, and I am sure I may
well say few, in respect of those multitudes who perished through want, cold
and famine, before they could get to those Towns, or otherwise dyed after
their arrival in them, or were by storms at Sea cast away. And for the
English who stood upon their guard and immured themselves up in several
Castles of good strength in those Parts, they endured many Months siege,
suffered much want and misery, and having bravely resisted all the assaults and
attempts that the Irish made with great multitudes upon them, and in many
places caused them to raise their sieges with great loss and slaughter of
their men: yet they were afterward, finding themselves without all hope or
possibility of relief, enforced to deliver those places together with the
multitudes of English they had received, into the hands of the Rebels, upon
fair quarter solemly promised by them: And in many places no sooner had they
by that means gotten entrance into them, but that they most perfidiously broke
the quarter given, despoyled them of that little remainder of their substance
they had then left, and sent them away in great want and misery to find relief
among other English Garrisons. But the whole Country being wasted and
destroyed, and the poor English that lived in them, despoiled of all their
substance, were become so miserable and poor, as that they were able to afford
them very little relief or comfort, besides pity and compassion which could
not support or keep alive those languishing ghastly Creatures, so as multitudes
dyed, some in ditches, some traveling on the highways, some under hedges,
and so left their Carcasses as fearful spectacles to the beholders, and sad
monuments of the inhumane cruelties exercised on them by those bloody Rebels,
who yet under pretense of mercy spared their lives, but took up a resolution as
they were not ashamed to declare, to put them to a more lingering death, and
therefore left them in such a condition as inevitably brought on their
miserable ends with much more discomfort and sorrow.

But this shall suffice to show the beginning of the rising of the Irish in
Munster; the particulars whereof shall be clearly and at large set down in the
following Relations of their first proceedings within that Province, where it
shall be declared likewise, how all the great Towns in Lemster, except Dublin
and Tredagh, did about the same time begin to strip and expel all the British
and Protestants, that either inhabited in them or fled out of the Country near
about to shelter themselves there, from the barbarous cruelties of their Irish
neighbors.

As for the City of Dublin it began now to be much more straightly encompassed
by the Forces of the Rebels, Dublin distressed.
much increased through their late conjunction with the English Pale. And in
case of their want of power to force it, yet they having made their approaches
so near and having so absolutely stopped up all the avenues, as we had great
reason to apprehend their keeping back of provisions would drive the City into
high necessities; and quickly occasion great want there. And here I cannot
without much grief of heart call to mind the lamentable complaints and bitter
outcries, which until this time, were continually sent up unto the Lords
Justices and Council, while they remained in this posture, out of several
Parts of the Country, where the English Inhabitants being by the Irish driven
out of their habitations, had for their present safeguard put themselves into
Houses or Castles of some strength; they there enduring much want and misery,
made shift though not without great difficulty by several Messages and Letters
to make known their condition to the State, as also that they were resolved as
many of them did, to suffer the utmost extremities out of hope of relief, and
a confident expectation of succors from them.

But alas all was in vain, they were able to afford them no other comfort then
what their pitiful commiseration of their sorrowful condition would
adminster; they were themselves reduced so low, as with the greatest power they
could raise, they durst not adventure to send any ways five miles out of the
City, their supplies out of England were not arrived, they had neither place
nor means to raise men, but only within the virge of the City, and such as
they ordinarily took up there, were either Irish, whereof many ran presently
away with their arms to the Rebels, or poor stripped English and Inhabitants
of this City who were raw men, and though they afterward being well exercised
and trained to the use of their arms, proved very good soldiers; yet for the
present they were very unfit for service: As appeared in that little expedition
Colonel Craford made out with his men to Finglas, Some Forces sent out to
encounter the Rebels, who lodged within three miles of Dublin.
a little Town two miles distant from the City at the same time, when Sir
Charles Coot marched forth to beat Luke Nettervile with his undisciplined
Regiment out of his quarters at Santry, who having timely notice of his coming
saved him the labor, for he presently upon the rumor thereof, dislodged and
fled in so much haste, as he left some of his best equipage, and all his
provisions behind him: But that Party of Rebels Colonel Craford found at
Finglas, having placed themselves with good advantage behind great ditches,
stood better to their work, and carried themselves so stoutly, as our new
raised men began to shrink, and had not the Colonel and some other of his
Officers behaved themselves very well that day, their men had made a most
dangerous and shameful retreat. This was the greatest expedition the Forces in
Dublin were able to undertake at that time, which no man will wonder at, if he
does consider as it has been related, how the Town was in a manner surrounded
on every side by several Parties of the Rebels gathered together; Dublin
surrounded on every side by the Rebels.
all commerce was interrupted, all provisions brought out of the Country for
the supply of it intercepted, as also, that all the chief of the English
Inhabitants had transported themselves, their goods, and their Families into
England, many of the Papists had upon other reasons retired themselves, and
what belonged unto them into the Country, and there taken up their habitations
within the Rebels quarters; no manner of intercouse with any persons whatsoever
that made their abode without the distance of two miles from any part of the
City, no intelligence to be had upon any terms from among the Rebels, all
courses taken for it disappointed, several Messengers hanged up; and yet on
the other side, all our designs disclosed, our weakness discovered, and the
most private resolutions by one means or other communicated unto them. The
Parties of the Rebels that lay near about the City, were these following; Luke
Nettervile being beaten from Santry, lay with near 2000 men at Swoords, a Town
six miles distant, and possessed himself of the Castle of Artaine, and some
other places within two miles of the City: On the West side of the City at
Tassagard Rath-coole, Castle Lions, and other little Villages within the
compass of six miles, there lay 2000 more of the Rebels, who were come down
out of the Countyes of Carterlagh, Kings County, Kildare, and other Parts under
the command of Roger Moore, and Sutton, Eustace of Castle-Martin, and others.
The Clandonells, Birnes and Tools were also come down in great numbers out of
the County of Wiclow, and had lodged themselves in some Castles toward the Sea
side, and in somes Villages at the foot of the Mountain, not above three or
four miles distant from the Town on the South side: How desperately these
Forces threatened our ruin and sudden destruction will appear by this ensuing
Letter bearing date about the midst of December, written from the Lords
Justices and Council, unto the Lord Lieutenant then attending for his dispatch.

A LETTER from the Lords Justices and Council, to the Lord LIEUTENANT.
May it please your Lordship,
BY our Letters of the third of December, we made known to your Lordship, that
Mr Hawtrige was then newly arrived with the Treasure sent us from thence, which
came but to sixteen thousand five hundred fourscore and ten pounds, a supply
of Treasure far short of that which is now become necessary to perform any
considerable service here against the Rebels, whose numbers are increased
wonderfully, insomuch as the Forces they have about Drogheda on all sides it,
and between Drogheda and this place, reaching even within four miles of this
City, are upon very credible report, conceived to be above twenty thousand men,
and besides those numbers who are so united between this and Drogheda and
thereabouts, there are many thousands of them dispersed the whole Kingdom
over, for the meaner sort of people first rise generally; and then those of
better quality follow after; and the fire which was first kindled in Vlster,
and lay awhile smothered in other parts, begins now to break out so generally,
as the defection now appears to be universal throughout the whole four
Provinces; so strangly rooted was the combination, and that strengthened under
the specious show of a War for Religion; for although before and since the
Caution we had from your Lordship, We have on our part endeavored not to give
any apprehension to the Irish, that England does intend to make it a War of
Religion, yet as we formerly made known to your Lordship, the Rebels labor
mainely to have it so understood. Nay, they now go so far as they call
themselves generally the Catholic Army, a Title which has drawn many
thousands to their party, and yet many joined with them for no other reason
then because they saw our Succors expected forth of England and Scotland
deferred, they rightly judging, that without those Succors, we are not able to
defend them our selves; and indeed until those Succors come, they must and
will still increase; but if our men and arms were once arrived, the very
countenance of their coming would draw many from them to us, and give some
stop to the fury, with which they yet carry all before them whithersoever they
come.

They continue their rage and malignity aganst the English and Protestants, who
if they leave their goods or cattle for more safety with any Papist, those are
called out by the Rebels, and the Papists goods and cattle left behind; and
now upon some new Counsels taken by them, they have added to their former, a
further degree of cruelty, even of the highest nature, which is to Proclaim,
That if any Irish shall harbor or relieve any English, that be suffered to
escape them with his life, that it shall be penal even to death to such
Irish; and so they will be sure though they put not those English actually to
the sword, yet they do as certainly and with more cruelty cut them off that
way, then if they had done it by the sword; and they profess they will never
give over until they leave not any seed of an Englishman in Ireland.

Nor is their malice toward the English expressed only so, but further even to
the beasts of their fields, and improvements of their hands, for they destroy
all Cattle of English breed, and declare openly, that their reason is, because
they are English; so great is their hatred, not only to the persons of the
English, but also to every species of that Nation, and they destroy all
improvements made by the English, and lay waste their habitations.

We formerly signified to your Lordship, that to take away all jealousy from
the Papists of the English Pale, we would furnish them with some Arms, and the
rather because we well know that in the last great Rebellion in Ireland, the
English Pale stood firm to the Crown of England; and that the Rebel Tyrone
in the height of his power and greatness, was never able to get into the Pale
with his Forces whilst he was in Rebellion; and upon this occasion, the
Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Pale, making deep professions of their loyalty to
his Majesty, in imitation of their Ancestors, and with expressions seeming to
abhor the Contrivers of this Rebellion here against whom they offered their
power and strength, so as they might have Arms; and we being well assured,
that if we could gain their concurrence with us, it would much facilitate our
work; we did at their earnest suit issue for them Arms for one thousand seven
hundred men, wherewith diverse Companies were armed by them, and some of them
selves were appointed Governors of the Forces of the Counties, and Captains
of their Compaines; but so many of those Companies revolted to the Rebels, and
carried away their Arms with them, as we have recovered back but nine hundred
and fifty Arms; so as those whose loyalty We had reason to expect would help
us, are now through their disloyalty turned against us, and are strengthened
with our own Arms; and without all question, if those of the English Pale had
done their parts as became good subjects with their Arms they had from us, and
those they might gather amongst themselves, they might with our help not only
have defended the Pale against the Rebels, but might also have prevented the
ruin and destruction wrought by their Tenants and Neighbors on the poor
English and Protestants amongst them; for the Noblemen and Gentry sat still
and looked on, whilst the English and Protestants were ruined before their
faces; the Papist in the mean time remaining secure, without the loss of
goods, or any thing else.

When we saw the power and strength of the Rebels still growing upon us more
and more, and approaching by degrees more near to us, and the English and
Protestants robbed and spoiled even within two miles of this City, in disdain
and affront of this State, which are scorns of so high a nature as we could
not endure, if we had strength sufficient to repress their insolences; and
when we observed the retarding of our Succors of men and arms from England or
Scotland, neither of both Succors being yet come, nor as we heard so much as
in view there or in Scotland, and when we found apparently that for want of
those supplies, we became in a manner so contemptible, as we were in danger to
be set upon for taking from us this City and Castle before our aides should
come, we be-thought us of all the means we could of gaining time, being
confident that we cannot be so deserted by the State of England, but that some
supplies may yet come unto us: And therefore on the third of December, we
directed our Letters to diverse of the Nobility of the Kingdom who were nearest
to us, and most of them being of the English Pale, to be with us here on the
eight day of this Month, that we might confer with them concerning the
present state of the Kingdom, and we hoped by their help, to handle the matter
so as we might gain a few days time before our supprisall here, by which time
in all likelihood our Succors might arrive, although it be boldly given out by
the Rebels, that we shall have no Succors from thence, which they divulge to
enbolden their party, and to strike terror and discouragement into the
well-affected, amongst whom there are many so weak, as to apprehend from thence
too much fear, whereby many are fled the Kingdom.

On the eigth day of this Month, the Earl of Kildare, the Lord Viscount
Fitz-Williams, and the Lord Barron of Houth came unto us, but the rest of the
Noblemen not coming deferred our conference, and on the eleventh day of this
Month we received Letters from seven of them, namely, the Earl of Fingale, the
Lord Viscount Gormonston, the Lord Viscount Nettervile, and the Lords of
Slain, Trimblestone, Dunsany and Lowth, dated the seventh day of this Month,
and signed by them, pretending a fear of a Massacre on those of their
Religion, and that therefore they are deterred, to wait on us, but do rather
think it fit to stand upon their guard, and how that resolution of theirs may
stand with the loyalty they profess, we humbly submit to his Majesty's
excellent judgment, for whose royal view we send you here enclosed, a Copy of
their said Letters.

When we received those Letters, we did admire whence their fears of coming
to us should arise, but afterward we heard that they had been in consultation
with the Rebels, which also as to most of them is confirmed by the enclosed
Examination of Christopher Hampton, and indeed we know no cause of fear they
have of us, unless their own guilts begot in them the fear they pretend; and
they spare not though unjustly to charge us with a neglect of their advises,
whereas not one of them to this House offered to us any advice or real
assistance toward Pacification of these troubles.

It became then public (nor could we keep secret that which they had
published to others) that those Noblemen so far sided with the Rebels as they
now stood on their guard; we therefore adjudged it fit for vindicating the
State from the aspersion which we found so publicly endeavored to be laid
upon us, to publish the enclosed Proclamation, as well to satisfy to the world
as those Noblemen, who certainly are abundantly satisfied in their own secret
thoughts, that we never intended to Massacre them or any other; that being a
thing which we and all good Protestants do much abhor, what ever the
practice of their Religion is, and has been found to be by woeful experience
in other parts, whereof we confess we are now in great danger; if our long
expected Succors come not the sooner to us, and it may be gathered from that
unexampled tyranny which the Rebels have already exercised toward those of our
Nation and Religion, who fell into their hands, what we for our parts may
expect from them; but the dishonor and shame which may reflect upon the
English Nation by exposing this State and Kingdom to so apparent ruin, and
with it the extirpation of Gods true Religion, afflicts us more then the loss
of our own lives and fortunes, when all might be saved by sending seasonably
those Succors.

We lately received Letters from the Lady Ofaly, and a Letter containing most
insolent Menaces enclosed therein, sent her from the Rebels, to which she sent
them a noble Answer, Copies whereof we send here enclosed.

One of the Rebels stiling himself Chaplain Major and Overseer of the Coasts
and Harbors, lately sent a Summons in a proud and vaunting manner, to one
Edward Leech, that was entrusted to keep the Island of Lambay, requiring the
delivery up of that Island to the Rebels, which being done, he gave Leech a
Pass, where in he styles the Rebels Forces the Catholic Army: A copy of which
Summons and Pass we send your Lordship here enclosed; and Leech told us that
that mighty Chaplain declared openly to him, That he was Plotter of this
Rebellion, That he had spent in Travel and Prosecution of that design beyond
Seas four thousand pounds; and that all the Kings in Christendom, excepting
the King of England, and the King of Denmark, have hands in this business.

A Castle in the Town of Langford, held by the English, who stood out awhile
against the Rebels, being in the end through want of victuals necessitated to
be rendered up to them upon promise of quarter, a Popish Priest standing with
his Skeane in his hand, watching for the coming forth of a Minister then
amongst the English, did by thrusting that Skeane into the Ministers guts, and
ripping up his belly, give that as a signal to the Rebels, for falling upon
the rest of the English, which they did accordingly, as soon as the Minister
was murdered, killing some, and hanging the rest most perfidiously.

On the ninth of this Month, we received advertisement, that great numbers of
men were gathered together in Warlike manner at Swoords in the County of
Dublin within six miles of us, they having the Army of the Rebels behind them
on this side Drogheda; whereupon we then immediately sent out our Warrant,
commanding them to disperse: A Copy whereof we send your Lordship here
enclosed, which was not obeyed; but a Letter sent us from Luke Nettervile Son
to the Lord Viscount Nettervile and others of them: A Copy whereof we likewise
send here enclosed; whereupon we published the enclosed Manifest, for
vindicating this State from their aspersions also: And it is observable, that
those Gentlemen at Swoords could even on that very Tuesday night, wherein they
allege they were so affrighted at their Houses, assemble twelve hundred men
together in that moment of time, to have in readiness against any attempt from
the State, whereas for many days before, they could sit still and look on,
whilst an Army of the Enemy lay behind them, betwixt them and Drogheda, and
whilst some of them openly declared Rebels, and many of their neighbors, who
doubtless hold underhand intelligence with the Rebels, robbed and spoiled the
English on all parts round about them; and yet those Gentlemen could not in all
that time be either so affrighted by the Rebels, or so compassionate of their
poor English neighbors, as to assemble any men for the defense of themselves,
or those their poor English neighbors; and certainly those Gentlemen might
have been as believing in this State who have always used lenity and mildness
toward them, as in the Forces of the Rebels which lie so near behind them,
and who they know have murdered many of his Majesty's good and innocent
Subjects, and for ought they know (if there were not secret intelligence
between them) might have used them also in like manner.

But the truth is, we conceive those Gentlemen had a mind to join with the
Rebels, and do now take up pretenses to cover their disloyalty, and cast
scandal on this Government.

The Rebels in the Pale as in other parts, have caused Masses to be said openly
in the Churches, expelled the Ministers from Officiating in their Churches, and
forced diverse persons for saving their lives and goods to become Papists,
openly professing that no Protestant shall be suffered to live in Ireland, and
whilst they insult thus over all the English and Protestants, destroying them
for no other reason, but for that they are Protestants and English, we let fall
nothing against them touching Religion, and yet they feign things against us,
tending that way to give some color to their cruel proceedings.

The Rebels of the County of Kildare have taken the Naas and Kildare in the
County of Kildare. The Rebels of Mead have taken Trim, and Ashboy in the
County of Mead, and diverse other places; The Rebels of the County of Dublin,
have possessed Swoords and Rathcoole, and spoiled all the English and
Protestants even to the Gates of Dublin, and now about fifteen hundred of the
Rebels of Wiclow are in and about Powerscait, and about ten miles from this
City; There are also between this and the Naas within six or seven miles of us
a thousand of the Rebels of Kildare, and the Borders of Wiclow and Dublin, so
as we are in this City environed by them on all sides by Land, and they begin
to stop accesses to us by Sea; for the Fishermen on the Sea Coasts being all
Irish and Papists Inhabitants in the Pale, brake out also into Rebellion with
the multitude, and have robbed, spoiled and pillaged even within the Bay of
Dublin several Barks coming hither forth of England. And if to revenge this
villainy on the Fishermen at Clantarfe and thereabouts, so near us, we send
forth a Party of Soldiers to burn and spoil those Rebels houses and corn, the
Gentlemen of the Pale will immediately take new offense; but that we will
adventure upon; for now there is no dalliance with them, who so far declare
themselves against the State, not caring what scorns are put upon the
Government, wherein is observable, that the Landlord of Clantarfe is one of
those Gentlemen risen in Arms at Swoords.

Your Lordship now sees not only the necessity of hastening with all possible
speed our Succors of men and arms, both out of England and Scotland, in
greater numbers then those at first designed, seeing the breach appears to be
far greater, and the defection more general then at first was conceived; and
yet so as such of them as are ready be not forced to stay for the rest, but
that those may be so ordered as to come after, for no flesh can imagine,
unless they saw it as we do the greatness of our danger, who are but a
handful in comparison of the multitudes risen against us: And we desire that
the ten thousand designed to come from Scotland, may be wholly sent away, as
well the five thousand intended to be left there in readiness as the rest,
with direction to land as near Dublin as they may, and wheresoever they land
to march to Dublin if possibly they can; And to send away with all speed the
Ships appointed for guarding these Coasts, is also very necessary to be
hastened, and that two or three Ships of good strength follow after; doubtless
these Rebels expect a very great supply of Arms and Munition from foreign
Parts, either Spain or France.

And although out of the foresight we had of this extremity since these
troubles began, we have endeavored to get in some provisions of victual and
corn, yet we have not been able to provide our selves sufficiently to stand
out any long siege, nor can we now get in any more, our Markets being almost
taken away, and the strength of the Rebels surrounding us so as we can fetch
in no more provisions; wherefore we beseech your Lordship that the Magazins of
Victuals designed to be settled on that side, may be settled wirh all speed, if
it be not done already, whereby we and the Succors we expect, may not be in
distress of Victuals for our selves or them, or oats for our horses. Our want
of Victuals is the more in respect of the daily access of the English spoiled
in the Country.

The necessity of the defense of the Province of Munster, required the
immediate raising of a Regiment of Foot consisting of one thousand men, and two
Troops of Horse of threescore each Troop, which threescore we appointed the
Lord President to raise, and for the payment and arming of of them, we humbly
advise, seeing we cannot do it, that money and arms be sent from thence to
Youghall, with a further supply of Arms and Munition for the stores in that
Province now much wanting there.

And as the Rebels which have be set us and this City on all sides by Land, do
threaten to cut off our Market at Dublin, which we begin to feel already: so
they boldy declare, that they will within a day or two cut off the watercourse,
which brings water to this City and Castle; and that done, that their
multitudes will immediately burn our Suburbs and besiege our Walls, which we
confess we yet want strength to defend, and must want till our Supplies come
forth of England or Scotland or both; for here we have but about three thousand
men, the rest of the old Companies being dispersed in several needful
Garrisons in the Country (excepting seven Companies of them surprised, and cut
off by the Rebels at their first rising in Vlster and other Parts) and about
two hundred horse by pole of the old Army, whereof many are Irish: so as
considering the spaciousness of this City and Suburbs to be defended, the
smalnesse of our number to defend them, and the great numbers of Papists
Inhabitants in this City and Suburbs; and lastly, the very great numbers of the
Rebels, who are so strong as to approach this City with many thousands, and yet
leave many thousands also at the siege of Drogheda, we cannot expect to be
able to defend this City for any long time against them, without the arrival
of our expected Succors.

The Earl of Castle-haven on the tenth of this Month, presented at this board
the enclosed Oath tendered unto him by the Rebels to be sworn by him, which he
says he refused to swear, and we hear they send it to all Parts to be
tendered to the people, pressing them to take the Sacrament thereupon.

We did lately in hope to gain some time until our supplies might come,
listen to an offer made by some Popish Priests to go to the Rebels and Treat
with them, as you may perceive by the enclosed: But since we find there is
little hope of it; for some of the Priests are returned, nothing being wrought
thereby.

However it is fit your Lordship should know what we do; we must now crave
leave to declare to your Lordship, that things being risen here to this height,
threatening not only the shaking of the Government, but the loss of the
Kingdom, as the Supplies of men, Arms and more Treasure, are of great
necessity to be hastened away hither; so is it also needful that we enjoy your
Lordships presence here, for the conduct in your own person of the great and
important affairs of this State, as well in the Martial as in the Civil
Government, which do necessarily require it in this time of great imminent
danger, wherein so far as we may be able to contribute any assistance with
you, we shall be ready to discharge our duties therein, with that loyalty and
uprightenesse of heart which we owe to his Majesty, and the particular respect
due from us to your Lordship; but we hope you will bring that strength with
you, which may befit the greatness of the King our Master to send with his
Leivtenant against so numerous enemies as these Rebels are become, as well for
the honor of his Majesty, as for the terror of those Rebels.

By what we have heretofore and now humbly represented to your Lordship, you
may in part see the greatness of the public danger wherein this Kingdom now
stands, and particularly this City and Castle, the principal piece thereof,
that if those be lost (which we now again assure your Lordship, were never in
so great peril to be lost since the first Conquest of this Kingdom by the
Crown of England) the whole Kingdom must quickly follow, that the danger which
must thereupon arise to the Kingdom of England, is very great in many respects.
There is no possibility to prevent those evils with honor and safety to
England but by Succors from thence or Scotland, or both, and that if those
Succors come not speedily, it cannot be avoided, but the Kingdom must be lost.
And if notwithstanding all this so often and truly made known by us to your
Lordship, we shall perish for want of Supplies, we shall carry this comfort
with us to our graves or any other burial we shall have, that your Lordship
can witness for us to the Royal Majesty and to all the world that we have
discharged our duties to God, to his Majesty, to that Nation, and to this, in
humbly representing to his Majesty by your Lordship, the chief Governor of
the Kingdom, the extremities and dangers wherein his Kingdom and people
stand, and the necessity of hastening Supplies hither, by all possible means
for preservation of both, so as what ever become of our persons, our memory
cannot be justly stained with so wretched a breach of faith and loyalty to the
King our Master, as to forbear representing thither the extremities wherein we
are, whether we have the credit to be believed or no; and that we write truth,
and most needful truth, will be found true, when perhaps we shall perish, and
which is more considerable, the Kingdom also for want of being believed and
succored in time. And so we remain

Your Lordships to be commanded, William Persons. Io: Burlace. Ormand Ossory.
R: Dillon. Char: Lambart. Ad: Loftus. John Temple. Charles Coot. Francis
Willoughby. R: Meredith.

From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 14 December. 1641.
Postscript.
BY our Letters to your Lordship of the 22 of November, We did desire to be
informed from thence, whether the Parliament here being once Prorogued, may not
again be prorogued by Proclamation before they sit, or whether it be of
necessity that they must sit again, and the Parliament to be Prorogued the
House sitting. And now that this Rebellion has overspread the whole Kingdom,
and that many members of both Houses are involved therein, so as the Parliament
cannot sit. We humbly desire to know his Majesty's pleasure therein, and if his
Majesty shall think fit to Prorogue it, which in present we hold expedient,
that then we may receive his commandment for Prorogation, and that the doubt
concerning that be cleared; for to assemble at that time cannot be with safety.

Our Letters of the third of December, have been hitherto withheld on this
side by contrary winds.

In this most miserable condition, the Lords Justices and Council continued
shut up within the City of Dublin, struggling with all their power for a short
preservation from those dismal calamities which had generally over-spred the
whole Kingdom: Their care, travel, and endeavors, had hitherto in some
measure extended to the most remote parts; how they might assuage the swelling
distempers, or yield some relief to the lamentable complaints and bitter
outcries daily brought up unto them. But now the evils abroad were grown past
their cure, and their own dangers so multiplied as they were enforced to spend
their time almost in a perpetual consultation, never at rest, sometimes raised
in the night by sudden advertisements, always in constant perplexity and
trouble, desperately threatened on every side, so as what through treachery
within or from without, they had just reason to apprehend the loss of the City
and Castle wherein they had enclosed themselves, and so consequently the ruin
and destruction of all the British and Protestants throughout all other parts
of the Kingdom. And thus they continued until the most happy and welcome
arrival of that truly valiant Gentleman and gallant Commander Sir Simon
Harcourt, The arrival of Sir Simon Harcourt with Forces out of England.
who being designed Governor of the City of Dublin, was dispatched away by
special Order of Parliament with his Regiment for the preservation of that
place, and landed here on the last of December, 1641, to the great joy and
comfort of all his Majesty's Protestants, and well affected Subject, and to the
terror of those Rebels now in Arms, who had made themselves believe that no
Succors would be sent out of England toward the suppressing of their
notorious Rebellion.

And now my intentions were to have proceeded further on in setting down what
has fallen out within the next four Months, and then to have added a brief
account of all such particular passages as have been acted during the space of
those six Months within all the several Counties of this Kingdom, and so
having recollected and presented as it were at one view the public calamities
and miserable desolations of all the four Provinces there, to have sat down
and made the first period of this Story.

But I must here take up being unexpectly called away; I resolve therefore
patiently to attend the restoring of this Kingdom and the resettlement of our
affairs, and then if I find not this work undertaken and perfected by some
more skillful hand, I shall hope to get the rest of my tailing together, and
make such further provision of all other materials as may enable me to go
through with the same.

In the mean time it will not be amiss to take notice, that the Rebels within
very few Months after their first breaking out, had so ordered their affairs,
as that by their sudden surprises, their sharp and bloody executions, their
barbarous stripping* and despoyling of all sorts that fell into their hands,
they had cleared the Inland Counteys of all the British Inhabitants: And except
some few Castles and other places of strength which they held severally
besieged, and had most of them suddenly after surrendered for want of relief,
they had in a manner made themselves absolute Masters in all those Parts of the
Kingdom. And for the Maritime places, there were only some of the chief
Cities which were held out against them, besides some few other Forts and
places of no great importance: As in the Province of Lemster, the Cities of
Dublin; and in the Province of Munster, the Cities of Cork, Youghall, and
Kinsale; in Vlster, Londonderry, Colraine and Caregfergus: And all these they
held either besieged, much distressed, or they were otherwise so over-pestred
with the multitudes of poor stripped people fled to them for safety, as they
were confident they could not long hold out, but that either open force,
treachery, famine, or sickness would within a short time inevitably put them
into their hands.

Thus it pleased God to humble his own people in this Land, and for their
sins to give them up into the power of their cruel Enemies, who began now to
sacrifice to their own ne^s, to celebrate the memory of their Victories: And
upon the prosperity of their undertakings and late success, they were become
so confident of prevailing even to the total extirpation of all the British
and Protestants out of this Kingdom, as they proceeded to set down a certain
form of Government, nominated the persons whom they intended to entrust with
the management of their affairs, what Laws they would have revoked, what
Statutes newly enectad: And in the mean time they erected a Council which
they styled the Supreme Council, which they invested with absolute Power and
Authority, to order and govern the whole Kingdom. This consisted of certain
Noblemen, Gentlemen, three or four Lawyers, and one Physician, who being
elected unto this charge, had the place of their residence appointed unto them
at Kilkenny, a City in the Province of Lemster, where they sat ordinarily for
the dispatch of all the great and weighty affairs of their State: They there
erected several Courts of Judicature, they made a new broad Seal, appointed
several great officers of State, coined money, settled an excise upon all
kind of commodities, and performed many other acts of regal power.

Now how they proceeded on in the ordering these their great affairs what
Councels they took, what means they used to enable themselves to make
opposition against the Forces sent over by the Parliament of England into all
the four Provinces of Ireland, I shall here forbear to speak of. These
particulars must be reserved for the ensuing part of this Story, where they
will most properly fall in to be related: And where likewise, we shall find so
strange a turn, such a remarkable declination of their power, their hearts
failing them for fear, their Counsels infatuated, their designs blasted,
their Forces routed their sieges raised, such a general defailliance and
inprosperity in all their undertakings, as we must needs give glory to our
Maker, and acknowledge that God has most wonderfully wrought for the
deliverance of the poor small remnant of his people, which were here shut up
and designed to the slaughter.

For after a considerable number of Horse as well as Foot sent over by the
Parliament of England arrived at Dublin, and had in some petty encounters
thereabouts tried the mettaile of the Rebels, and found their spirit of a poor
and base allay, they began extremely to disvalue them, and would be no longer
abused with the fabulous reports of their great strength or numbers which with
much advantage they had long made use of: Therefore now they began to seek them
out in all places, and wheresoever they came to meet with them, they always
prevailed even with small numbers very often against great multitudes of them,
sparing not many times to pursue them into the midst of their greatest
f^^tnesses, and made the very bogges and woods unsafe receptacles for their
broken Troops. And with so great success, was the war prosecuted by the
English from the first landing of their Forces out of England until the Treaty
of that most unhappy Cessation concluded in Sept. 1643. as that in all the
incounters they had with the Rebels during that time, they never received any
scorn or defeats, but went on Victoriously, beating them down in all Parts of
the Kingdom: And so they carried on their work before them without any
assistance either from the mere Irish or the English Irish: For I can not my
self remember any Gentleman of quality throughout the whole Kingdom that was
there born and breed up a Papist that put himself into that service, or
desired to be listed as a member of the English Army. It is true, some of the
common Soldiers there, were of the English Irish that came in, and though they
were not considerable for their number, yet they did good service and still
with much fury and sharpness followed on upon the execution.

FINIS.

