A Voyage to EAST INDIA.

Wherein Some things are taken notice of in our passage thither, but many more
in our abode there, within that rich and most spacious Empire Of the Great
Mogol.

Mix't with some Parallel Observations and inferences upon the story, to
profit as well as delight the Reader.

Observed by Edward Terry (then Chaplain to the Right Honorable Sr. Thomas Row
Knight, Lord Ambassador to the great Mogol) now Rector of the Church at
Greenford, in the County of Middlesex.

In journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils by
the Heathen, in perils in the Sea.

1 Cor. 11. 26. The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters;
yea, than the mighty waves of the Sea,

Psalm. 93. 4. -- Digitis a morte remotus
Quatuor, aut Septem. --
Ju. Sat. 12. Qui Nescit orare, discat navigare* ubique Naufragium.

London, Printed by T. W. for J. Martin, and J. Allestrye, at the Bell in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Reader.
READER,
THere was never age more guilty than this present, of the great expense, and
waste of paper: whose fair innocence has been extremely stubber'd by Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies, and what not, in these bold times: which like so many
(the foulest of all) blots, and blurs, has defiled very much of it, so true is
that of the Poet,

-- Tenet insanabile multos
Scribendi Cacoethes. -- Ju.
Certainly there has been of late abundantly more printed than ought, than
should: and if what follows in this discourse lay under the guilt of any such
just exception, it should feel the fire, not the press.

The sum and substance of what here follows (as a description of that Empire)
I long since composed, shortly after my return from East India, and then
presented it in writing unto the late King, when he was Prince of Wales, in the
year 1622. with this short following Epistle.

Most Renowned Prince,
I Have nothing to plead for this high presumption, but the Novelty of my
subject, in which I confess some few have prevented me, who bv traveling India
in England, or Europe, have written somewhat of those remotest parts, but like
unto poor Tradesmen, who take up Wares on trust, have been deceived themselves,
and do deceive of others.

For my self I was an eyewitness of much here related, living more than two
years at the Court of that mighty Monarch the great Mogol, (who prides himself
very much in his most famous Ancestor Tamberlane) in the description of whose
Empire, your Highness may meet with large Territories, a numerous Court, most
populous, pleasant, and rich Provinces, but when all these shall be laid in the
Balance against his miserable blindness, your Highness shall have more cause
to pity, than envy his greatness.

I am not ambitious to make this my Relation public, and therefore if it
consume more paper, it shall not be my fault: As it is, in a fearful boldness
it is offered to your Princely hands, and if it may be any way pleasing and
useful, I have my reward; if not, my most humble desires to have ministered
something this way unto your Highness, shall be my comfort.


Thus (Reader) thou hear when this Relation was first written, and into what
hands it was then put: And although there be now a very great space of time
'twixt the particulars then observed, and their publication now; which may make
thee look upon that which is here brought forth as an untimely birth, or as a
thing born out of due time. Therefore know (which may give thee some
satisfaction herein) that for the commodities, and discommodities of those
remote parts; for the customs and manners of that people; for their Religion
and policy, with every thing beside (wherein thou may desire information)
which lies within the vast compass of that huge Monarchy expressed in the Map,
and further described in this following discourse (time not making that people
at all to vary from themselves) thou may look upon it now, as if it has
been taken notice of, but immediately before it was here communicated; and if
it prove useful now, I shall be very glad that it was reserved even for this
present time, wherein it might do some good.

Yet notwithstanding this, it should never have been brought by me into this
more open view, (especially in such a scribbling writing age as this) where
there is no end of making many books; (and many of those written to no end, but
what is evil and mischievous) but that the Printer, who had gotten my Original
Copy, presented as before, desired to publish it. And because so, I have
revised, and in some particulars by pertinent, though in some places very long
digressions (which I would entreat the Reader to improve) so enlarged it; that
it may, (if it reach my aim) contain matter for instruction and use, as well as
for relation and novelty. So that they, who fly from a Sermon, and will not
touch sound, and wholesome, and excellent treatises in Divinity, may happily (if
God so please) be taken before they are aware, and overcome by some Divine
truths that lie scattered up and down in many places of this Narrative. To
which end I have endeavored so to contrive it for every one (who shall please
to read it through) that it may be like a well formed picture, that seems to
look steadfastly upon every heholder, who so looks upon it.

But here Reader, let us sit down and wonder that in these days (which are
called times of Reformation) many choice books are often published, which
contain in themselves, and declare unto others very much of the mind of God:
yet are laid aside, as if they were not worth the looking into, and in their
stead Romances, and other Pamphlets, ejusdem farinae, of the like kind, which
do not inform, but corrupt rather the minds of those, which look so much into
them, teaching wickedness while they seem to reprove it, are the books (O
times!) which are generally called for, bought up, read, and liked.

When a Traveller sometimes observed the women in Rome to please themselves in,
and overmuch to play with their Curs, and Monkeys; he asked whether or no the
women of Rome did not bear Children to delight themselves withal. The story
is so parallel to what I before observed; that he who runs may make
Application, and therefore I forbear to do it.

As for that I have here published I know, -- habent sua fata libelli, that
books have their Fates, as well as their Authors; and therefore this Relation
now it is got into the World, must take its chance, whatsoever its success, or
acceptance be: But however I shall never be of their mind, who think those
books best, which best sell, when certain it is that they are not to be valued
by their good sale, but good use.

Which while some may make of this; others who love to carp, and censure, and
quarrel (so as to make a man an offender for a word) may put harsh
interpretation upon some passages they may find in this following discourse.
Mala men's, malus animus, an evil mind in it self, is an evil mind to all
others. 'Twas said of Diogenes that he was tuba convitiorum; the Trumpet of
reproaches; and that when he accused Plato of pride, he beat it down with
greater pride. The Gramarians were laughed at for taking so much pains to find
out the faults of Ulysses, and would not take notice of any of their own. They
are the worst of the Creatures that breed in, and delight to be ever stirring
up and down in corruption. But I would have all, who have an eye standing too
far out of their heads, and are therefore apt to see more in others than
themselves, and consequently may observe more than is meant, from some passages
of this book, to bound all their conceivings a^ to what they may find here
within the compass of it, by that rule, which holds good in charity and law,
and is true in Divinity likewise, in dubiis benigniora, that when any thing
delivered may bear two interpretations, to take the fairest.

And now that this following relation may not appear to be a loss, either of
time or paper, he that shall please to read it, in our passage to East India
may observe very large footsteps of the Almighty in his works of Creation and
Providence. And when I have brought him thither on shore he may find that
there is not one question (as before) of any consequence concerning those parts
I have undertaken to write of, but it finds satisfaction in one part or other
of this discourse. For the Court there, there is so much riches and splendor
sometimes to be seen in it, that it may draw up the meditations of those which
behold it, as the thoughts of Fulgentius sometimes were, (when he beheld the
glory of the Court of Rome) raised up seriously to consider of the glory of
Heaven. And for the soil it is exceeding pleasant, rich, and good, as in some
other parts of the world, where the inhabitants are mere strangers to God; and
if Almighty God has given such sweet places of abode here on the earth to very
many whom he owns not; how transcendently glorious is that place which he has
prepared for them that love him.

Yet for the Inhabitants there, a man may clearly see, the law of Nature to be
so ingraved upon the hearts of very many, both Pagans and Mahometans: as that
it may make multitudes, who profess themselves Christians (if they would but
turn their eyes inward) extremely to wonder, how it comes to be so much
worcester(...) out of theirs.

And then he may further behold, such Temperance, Justice, unwearied devotion
(but in a wrong way) with many other excellent Moralitics so to shine its them;
that by this very light, he may see thousands of those (whom before I named)
that have means to know, and therefore should do better, in many things to come
exceeding short of them, who (themselves are ready to conclude) come short of
Heaven.

But I shall not further anticipate my discourse, in being like a vainglorious
entertainer, who fills the ears of his guests with his dishes, before they see,
or taste them. Which if thou shall please to do, read on, and thou art very
welcome however.

Farewell Edward Terry.

To his worthy friend Mr. Edward Terry, on his Voyage to East India.
I.
WOrth will break prison, though detained awhile
To try its truth; yet lends the World a smile
At last: the glorious all eyed Sun, though late
Defies its cloud, asserts its Native state,
And in a Sovereign Grandeur, does arise
To scorn those mists that aimed it to disguise:
So does thine Indian Voyage after years
In silence buried, please our eyes and ears;
Not with Vtepian tancies, nor with vain
Delusions, brought unto us from the main
Invention, backed with boldness, so set out
As if we must believe, not dare to doubt;
No, thou to those appeal'st, whose knowledge can
Upbray'd thee, if thou over-act the man,
Thou seem to be; thou by his light have gone
Who knows exactly what is wrote, or done.
II.
The World's a Theater, in which each wight
His part does act, The body to the Sprite
But shadow. Faces differ nothing more
Than do the Souls, which flesh has covered ore.
On wedged is to the gain of homestayes; when
Another counts his home a Lazers Denn.
A third man proves so active that he knows
No bounds but his vast pha^fie overflows;
With Alexander he to India flies,
Not it to Conquer, but to please his eyes.
No Sea, no danger, no amazing foe
Gives his brave Emulation overthrow,
Leviathan's a gudgeon; he can vye
With Behemoth, no monster makes him fly.
Hurried he is from East, to West, and thence
North, South to compass earths circumference:
Here picks he up a rarity, anon,
Posts to some new discovered Horizon.
III.
Yet fond they are, who mak't their greatest aim
To rifle earth, only to purchase fame.
But you through hazards Torrid Zones arrive
To bring some Honey to your Countries hive.
No Spices, Orient Peals, no Tysseus are
Thy traffic, these with thee accounted ware
For pedling dolts; thy venture no return
Admits, but what enrich the mental Urne,
And makes thy Readers, at thy pains appear
Acquainted with that South-East Hemisphear.
Wherein rare secrets of Dame Nature lie
Couched, but discovered knowledge multiply.
Welfare thy Noble mind, which gives us cause
To view in it the force of Natures Laws
Read in those Indians: Proceed, and let us know
What other fruits within th^ne India grow.
And tell us what thou know. A man's not born
To see and to observe For's self alone.
But to succession we grow still in debt,
Worth lives, when dead, day lasts, though sun be set.
Edward Waterhouse, Esquire

To my ancient friend Mr. Edward Terry. On his Indian Voyage.
GEographers present before men's eyes
How every Land seated and bounded lies,
But the Historian, and wise Traveller
Desery what minds and manners so journ there,
The common Merchant brings thee home such wa^^
As makes thy Garment wanton, or thy fare.
But this has Traffic in a ^e^ter kind
To please and profit both thy virtuous mind.
He shows what reason finds in her dim night
By groping after God with natures light.
Into what uncouth paths those Nations stray
Whom God permits to walk in their own way.
And how the Sun, a Lamp to seek God by,
Dazles some eyes into idolatry.
Read it and thou w^lt make this gain at least,
To love thy one true God, and Country best.
Henry Ashwood.

To my ingenious friend and dear Kinsman, the Author of these Relations.
THough most Geographers have the good hap
To travel in a safe expencelesse Map,
And while the world to us they represent,
No further yet then Pilgrim Purchase went,
Past Dovers dreadful cliffe afraid to go,
And took the Lands end for the worlds end too*
Spand Countries at the fingers ends at case,
Cracked with their nail all France, turned blots to Seas;
Of whom this strong line we may ridling say,
They travel not, but sit still a great way.
I must applaud whither thy choice, or lot
Which has beyond their lazy knowledge got,
Who only in the Globe do cross the line
There raise the Pole, and draw whole Maps in wine
Spil'd on the Table: measure Seas and Lands
By scale of miles wherein their Compass stands.
But you the truths eyewitness have not been
Homer it'^ dark, but what you write have seen:
A rich and absolute Prince, whose mighty hand
Indus and Ganges solely does command;
A numerous people, wealthy traffic; new
Manners, and men, things wonderful and true.
Some Relics of the ancient Bramins race,
And what religious follies yet take place;
Whose pious eirours, though they want our sense,
Have in less knowledge more of conscience.
Who to condemn ou^ barren light, advance
A just, obedient, humble ignorance.
While vice here seeks a voluntary night
As over-glitter'd with to clear a light,
Neglected love, and the fair truths abuse
Has left our guilty blushes no excuse,
And their blind zeal against us a witness stands
Who having so good eyes, have lost our hands.
This you with pious faithfulness declare,
Nor quit the Preacher for the Traveller.
And though these leaves nothing to Merchants owe
For Spices, Cuchineal, or Indico.
Yet all confess, who weigh the gains you brought,
Your ship was laden with a richer fraught.
While the glad world by you instructed sings,
Wisdom's the noblest ware that Travel brings.
Robert Creswell.

The Printer to the Reader.
IF this whole Relation had been brought unto me at first, as it is here
presented unto thee, it should not have been so crowded together, as here thou
see it, but had found better room where it might have been more decently
lodged, in a fitter Edition: the want of which may make some curious eye behold
it as a bundle, rather then a book.

But the Author revising, and enlarging some of it, while I was printing the
rest, in conclusion it grew much bigger, than either of us supposed it would,
which has put me now upon this Apology, who had proceeded so far in the
printing thereof, as that I thought it great pity to make what I had done waste
paper; and so will thou think, now thou have it all before thee, if thou
read it over.

Fare well.

The Contents of this following Relation.
THe beginning of our Voyage, our Ships and chief Commander page 1. 2. A
Tempest page 2. 3. The grand Canaries, and and Island of Teneriffa. p. 3. 4.
The Turnadoes, or self opposing winds 5. 6. Diverse kind of Fishes 7. etc. The
Bay of Souldania and Cape of good Hope, with the Barbarous people there
inhabiting 13. etc. The great Island Madagascar, and some other parts of Africa
33. 34. A Sea fight with a Portugal Caraque and the issue thereof 35. etc. The
Island Mohilia 53. 54. The Coquer Nut-tree 55. Our arrive at Swally-Road in
East India 57. Some particulars to revive the memory of that now almost
forgotten) English Pilgrim Tom. Coriat. 58. etc.
The large Territories under the subjection of the great Mogol. Where,
Section 1. page 78. etc. Of the several Provinces, the chief Cities, the
principal Rivers, the extent of that vast Empire in its length and breadth.
Section 2. p. 92. etc. Of the Soil there, what it is, and what it produces.
Section 3. p. 111. etc. Of the chief Merchandises, and most staple, and other
Commodities which are bought in this Empire. Section 4. p. 121. etc. Of the
discommodities, inconveniences, and annoyances that are to be found, or met
withal in this Empire. Section 5. p. 127. etc. Of the Inhabitants of
East India, who they are of their most excellent ingenuity expressed by their
curious manufactures, their Markets at home, to buy, and sell in, and of their
trade abroad. Section 6. p. 139. etc. Of the care and skill of this people in
keeping, and managing their excellent good Horses, of their Elephants, and the
ordering, and managing them, and how the people ride and are carried up and
down from place to place. Section 7. p. 158. etc. Of their numerous Armies,
their Ammunition for war; how they lade themselves with Weapons; how terribly
they appear; yet how pusill animous, and low spirited they are. Section 8. p.
170. etc. Of our safe and secure living amongst the Natives there, if we do not
provoke them, of their faithfulness unto those that entertain them as
servants: for how little they serve, and yet how diligent they are. Section 9.
p. 187. etc. Of their buildings in Villages, Towns, and Cities. How their
houses are furnished: Of their Sarraes, or houses for the entertainment of
Passengers: Of their Tankes and Wells, and of their places of pleasure. Section
10. p. 205. etc. Of their diet, and their Cookery in dressing it. Section 11.
p. 212. etc. Of the civilities of this people: Of their compliments, and of
their habites. Section 12. p. 232. etc. Of their Language, their books, their
learning. Section 13. p. 241. etc. Of their Physicians, diseases, cures, when
they begin their year, and how they measure their time. Section 14. p. 248.
etc. Of the most excellent moralities, which are to be observed amongst the
people of those Nations. Section 15. p. 259. etc. Of their Religion, their
Priests, their Detion, their Churches. Section 16. p. 281. etc. Of their
Votaries, where of the voluntary, and sharp penances that people undergo. Of
their Lent, and of their fasts and feasts. Section 17. p. 297. etc. Of the
marriages of the Mahometans, and of their Poligamy. Section 18. p. 305. etc. Of
their burials, and of their mourning for their dead, and their stately
Sepulchers and Monuments. Section 19. p. 318. etc. Of the Hindooes, or Heathens
which inhabit that Empire. Section 20. p. 326 etc. Of the tenderness of that
people in preserving the lives of all inferior creatures. Section 21. p. 342.
Of strange groundless and very gross opinions proceeding from the blackness
and darkness of ignorance in that people. Section 22. p. 363. Of their King the
great Mogol, his descent, etc. Section 23. p. 369. etc. Of the Mogols policy in
his Government exercised by himself and Substitutes. Section 24. p. 389. etc.
Of the Mogol showing himself three times publicly unto his people every day,
and in what state and glory he does oftentimes appear. Section 25. p. 402.
etc. Of the Mogols pastimes at home and abroad, where something of his quality
and disposition. Section 26. p. 410. etc. Of the exceeding great Pensions the
Mogol gives unto his subjects, how they are raised, and how long they are
continued. Section 27. p. 418. etc. Of the Mogols Leskar, or Camp Royal.
Section 28. p. 426. etc. Of the Mogols wives and women, where something of his
Children. Section 29. p. 436. etc. Of the manner of the style, or writing of
that Court. Section 30. p. 440. etc. Of the Jesuits sent thither by their
Superiors to convert people unto Christianity. Section 31. p. 452. etc. The
Corollarie and conclusion.
ERRATA.
Page line Errata. Correct. 3 14 who and he 54 1 but cut. 5^ 12 Fort ^ort. 70
18 Roopus Roopees 80 5 gently. greatly. 111 3 brought into bought in. 150 22
lost this left that 158 23 by any by way 172 9 Huts Tents. 187 5 Tents Tanks
225 7 Numb. Psalm. 235 13 man mad 244 28 into just 250 22 release relief 299 10
Taphat Taphath 305 5 Budda by Budda Bij 325 22 wast roast. 351 15 these those
370 1 (...) (...) 374 6 pity piety ibid 18 came ran 376 20 words work 414 30
Canker Cancer 428 10 Perum Parveen 433 2 presage promise 438 16 ^eceive revive
439 8 the your 444 1^ -- after Paul after

A Description of EAST INDIA Conveyning the Empire of the Great MOGOLL
map of Indostan

A Voyage to East India. With a Description of the large Territories under the
subjection of the Great Mogol.
APologies do more question than strengthen Truth; which Truth has such power
in prevailing, that she does not know, and much less needs the use of Preface,
or words of Persuasion to get her credit; for though she appear simple and
naked unto open view yet dares she encounter with armed falsehood, and is sure
at last to overcome; which Truth being the best ornament of this ensuing
discourse, looks to be credited, in what is here faithfully related.

Veritas est vita Historiae.
Some that in Countries far remote have been
And safe returned, write more than Known, than Seen,
Or Heard, that boldness here disclaim shall I,
Truth is the Life, and Soul of History.
So to make a re-entry upon a long-since finished Voyage; The third of February
1615. Our Fleet consisting of six good Ships, three great, viz. the Charles,
Admiral of that Company, then a New-built goodly Ship of a Thousand Tuns, (in
which I sailed;) the Unicorn; a new Ship likewise, and almost of as great a
burden; the James, a great Ship too; Three lesser, viz. the Globe, the Swan,
the Rose, (all under the Command of Captain Benjamin Joseph) fell down from
Graves-end into Tilbury Hope. where we continued till the eighth day following,
when we weighed Anchor, and by a slow, that we might have the safer passage,
the twelfth came into the Downs, where an adverse wind forced our abode till
the ninth of March, on which day it pleased God to send us, what we had much
desired, a North-East wind, which made us leave that weary Road, and set sail
for East India; and the eleventh about night, we were in the height of the
Lizard in Cornwall, and that day, for that time took our last sight of our
Country.

This wind was favorable to us till the sixteenth day at night, at which time
a most fearful storm met us, we being then in the Bay of Portugal, whose
violence continued five whole days and nights; and that Tempest was the most
lively and real Comment, that ever I observed* on that place recorded in Psalm.
107. 23. verse, etc. thus rendered;

In winged Ships who passage make,
And through vast Seas their journeys take,
See, while their Ships on Billows keep,
God's works, and wonders in the deep;
Who there Commands the Winds to storm,
These mount the waves, on which are born
The tottering Ships on watery heaps,
Now high to the Heavens, then low to the Deep^;
The Sea-mens hearts they melt for woe,
Nor Head, nor Foot their office know;
They reel like to a drunken one,
And stagger, for their wisdome's gone.
Then cry they to the Lord in these
Great streights, who them hears, them frees;
The winds, and waves obey Gods will,
The storme's a calm, the waves lie still,
Then are they glad -- etc.
The 28. day we had sight of the Grand Canaries, and of that Mou^tain in the
Island of Teneriffa, commonly called the Peake.

Qui -- Caput inter nubila condit.
-- so high,
As that it threats the Neighboring sky.
or -- that shrowds
It Is lofty head amongst the Clouds.
This overgrown rise of Earth, is in shape like to a Pyramid or Sugar-loafe,
circled, and wrapped about which many wreaths of clouds, which encompass it by
several distances, as first earth, then clouds, above which the earth appears
again, then clouds, again, then earth, the top of it being of such an immense
height, that it may be as truly said of this, as Virgil. Eclog* 5. writes of
Olympus.

Candidus insuetum miratur limen Olympi,
Sub pedibusque videt Nubes, and sidera. --
So beautiful, it Heavens unwonted spires,
And Clouds, and Stars under its feet admires.
This Peake of Teneriffa, in a clear day, may be seen (if the Mariners report
truth) more than forty leagues at Sea. These Islands lie 28 Degrees of North
Latitude.

The 31. being Easter day, we passed under the Tropic of Cancer; and the
seventh of April the Sun was our Zenith or Vertical, at noon day directly over
our heads, which we found by this infallible Demonstration made by a slender
knife, or long Needle, set upright, and did cast no shadow. The Sun in this
course like the Equinoctial, divides the Globe of the Heavens in two equal
parts; and in this Motion arises so directly or upright, that there is but a
very little time 'twixt the darkness and the appearance of the body of the Sun
in the morning for it is dark immediately before the Sun then appears; and so
it is in the Evening presently after the Sun has left the Hemisphere. Here we
were becalmed fourteen days, enduring extreme heat.

The sixteenth we met with winds, (we being then against, and not far from the
Coasts of Africa) which the Mariners call the Turnadoes* very strange Gusts
indeed, like those in Aeschylus, on the shore Aesc. (...): (ad finem.)

-- (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
-- Whirlwinds around
Hurry the dust: the blasts rebound
Storming on all sides: thus together.
Enraged Gusts oppose each other.
Or like those in Virgil at Sea. Aeneid. 1. v. 85. etc.

Haec ubidicta, Cavum conversa cuspide montem
Impulit in latus: at venti velut agmine facto,
Qua data porta, ruunt, and terras turbine perslant.
Incubuere mari, totumque a sedibus imis
Una Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis
Africus: and vastos volvunt ad littora fluctus.
Thus said, with his spears point the hollow Hill
He turned aside, the winds left to their will
All sally out, and blustering through the world
Fall on the Sea; which from the depth^ is hurld
By the East, and South at once, and stormy North,
Which to the shore, huge wallowing waves roll forth.
Those self-opposing blasts we there had, were so variable and uncertain, that
sometimes within the space of one hour, all the thirty two several winds,
(which are observed in so many points of the Compass) will blow, so that if
there be many Ships in company, you may observe them all to sail so many
several ways, and every one of them seem to go directly before the wind. Now
that it should be so here, and not known so to be in any part of the world
beside I ever heard of, if not in those winds, which they say are sometimes
sold by the Lapland Witches, I can give no reason for it, unless Satan (who is
most Tyrannical where he is most obeyed) that Prince of the Air seems to rule
more here, than he does in other parts. And most certain it is that he rules
very much in the Inhabitants on that Main, the poor, ignorant, and most
miserable Negroes, born for sale* and slavery, and slaughter. These strange
Gusts were accompanied with much Thunder and Lightning and with extreme rain,
so noisome, that it made their cloths who stirred much in it* presently to stink
upon their backs; the water likewise of those slimy, unwholesome, hot, and
unsavorie showers, wheresoever it stood, would presently bring forth many
little offensive Creatures. These Turnadoes met with us when we were about 12.
Degrees of North Latitude, and kept us company ere they quitted us, two Degrees
Southward of the Equinoctial, under which we passed the 28. of April.

The 19th of May being Whitsunday, we passed the Tropic of Capricorn, so that
we were seven weeks complete under the Torrid Zone.

Between the Tropicks we saw (almost every day) different kinds of fishes, in
greater abundance than elsewhere, as the great Leviathan whom God has made to
take his pastime in the Sea; Granpisces, or lesser whales, Sharkes, Turtles or
Torteises, Dolphins, Bonitoes, Albicores, Porpisces, Flying fishes, with many
others. Some Whales we saw of an exceeding greatness, who in calm weather
often arise and show themselves on the top of the water, where they appear like
unto great Rocks, in their rise, spouting up into the Air with noise, a great
quantity of water which falls down again about them like a shower. The Whale may
well challenge the Principality of the Sea, yet I suppose that he has many
enemies in this his large Dominion; for instance, a little long Fish called a
Thresher often encounters with him, who by his agilitie vexes him as much in
the Sea, as a little Be in Summer, does a great Beast on the shore.

The Shark has not this name for nothing; for he will make a morsel of any
thing he can catch, master and devour. These Shark are most ravenous fishes;
for I have many times observed that when they have been swimming about our
Ships (as oftentimes they do) and we have cast overboard an iron hook made
strong for this purpose, fastened to a roap strong like it, bayted with a piece
of beese of five pounds weight* this bayt has been presently taken by one of
them and if by chance the weight of the fish, thus taken, in haling him up,
has broken out the Hooks hold, not well fastened (as sometimes it did) so that
he fell again into the Sea, he would presently bite at an other Bayt, and so
bite till he was taken. Not much unlike many vile men, who think they may
safely take any thing they can finger and get, and having been fastened in, and
escaped out of many Snares will take no warning but be still nibling and biting
at what they like not once considering that there is an hook within the bayt,
that will take them at last, and hamper them to their unavoydable destruction.
This Sea-shark is a Fish as bad in eating, as he is in qual(...)y a very moist
watery fish, yet eaten at Sea (because any f^esh thing will there down) but no
good food. This Fish turns himself on his back to take his prey by which he
gives warning to many other little fishes, who ever swim about him, to avoid
his swollow. Those Fishes that thus keep him company, are called by the
Mariners, Pilate-fishes, who always shape their course the same way the Shark
takes, and by consequence (nature having made them so wary) he becomes their
guard, they not his food. And there are other fishes too they call Suckingfish,
that stick as close to the body of the Shark, as a Tike on the shore does to
the body of a Beast, and so receive their nourishment from him and he must be
contented, for while he is swimming up and down, he cannot possibly free
himself of them* Many of these Sharks grow to a very large greatness; they have
a broad roundhead, in which are three rows of teeth very strong and sharp, by
which they are able to take off the leg of a man at one bite, as some have
found by woeful experience, while they have been carelessly swimming in these
hot Seas, where these Sharks most use and certainly were they as nimble as they
are mischievous, would do very much hurt.

The Turtle or Torteis is one of those creatures we call Amphibia, that lives
sometimes in the Sea and sometimes on the shore, he is marvellously fortified
by Nature dwelling (as it were) continually under a strong roof, which moves
with him, and covers (when he will) his whole body; therefore Testudo which
signifies a Torteise, signifies also the roof or vault of an house, which
covers all within it. Those concave backs (like bucklets, but of an Oval shape)
that cover these creatures, are many of them so exceeding strong, that they
will bear off the weight of a Cart-wheel. These Torteises increase by eggs (as
I have been often told) are very good to eat, the substance within them
(whether you will call it flesh or fish) first boiled, and after minced with
butter, tastes like buttered Veal, Their shell makes (as is very commonly
known) excellent good Combs, Cups, or Boxes, and further it is used by them in
East India, to make or adorn little or great Cabinets.

The Dolphin is a fish called for his swiftness the Arrow of the Sea differing
in this one particular from all other fishes I ever observed, in that he has
many little teeth upon the top of his tongue. He is very pleasing to the eye,
smell and taste, of a changeable color, finn'd like a Roach, covered with many
small scales, having a fresh delightsome sent above other fishes, and in taste
as good as any; these Dolphins are wont often to follow our ships, not so much
I think for the love they bear unto man, (as some write,) as to feed themselves
with what they find cast over board, whence it comes to pass, that many times
they feed us, for when they swim close to our ships we often strike them with
a broad instrument, full of barbs, called an Harping-iron, fastened to a roap,
by which we hale them in; This Dolphin may be a fit Emblem of an ill race of
people, who under sweet countenances, carry sharp tongues.

Bonitoes and Albicores, are in color, shape, and taste, much like unto
Mackrels, and as good fish as they, but they grow to be very exceeding large.

The Porpisces or Hogfish, are like the former; very large and great, but
better to look upon than to taste; they usually appear at Sea in very great
sholes or companies, and are (as if they came of the race of the Gadaren Swine,
that ran violently into the Sea) very swift in their motion, and like a company
matching in rank and file; They leap or mount very nimbly over the waves and so
down and up again, making a melancholy noise, when they are above the water.
These are usually, when they thus appear, certain presagers of very foul
weather.

The Flying fishes have skinny wings like unto Batts, but larger* they are
stifned and strengthened with many little bones, such as are in the back finns
of Pearches, by which they fly* but a little way at a time; they have small
bodies like unto Pilchers, and appear when they fly, in mavelous great
companies, and some of them often fly into our ships, by which we have tasted
that they are excellent good fish. Of all other, these flying Fishes live the
most miserable lives, for being in the water, the Dolphins, Bonitoes,
Albicores, and Porpisces, chase persecute and take them, and when they would
escape by their flight, are oftentimes caught by ravenous Fowls, somewhat like
our Kites, which hover over the water. These flying Fishes are like men
professing two trades and thrive at neither.

I could further enlarge, but my business is not to write an History of Fishes,
yet in those we have named, as in thousands more which inhabit that watery
Main, I desire with David, to admire and say, O Lord, how manifold are thy
works; manifold, and wonderful indeed, as he that will take notice, many
observe every where, but in a special manner (because they are more rare) in
the great variety of strange Creatures, which the Sea, that womb of moisture,
brings forth, in which many things we behold are wonderful, and many things
besides we cannot see, are certainly more full of wonder.

In which unfadom'd, water y deep,
Creatures innumerable keep,
Some small, some great, among the waves,
As if they lived in moving graves.
Through which the ships do plow their way,
In which the Whales do sport and play. Psalm. 104. 24, 25, 26.
But to proceed on our Voyage, the 12. of June early in the morning, we espied
our long-wished for harbor the Bay of Souldania, about twelve leagues short of
the Cape of good Hope, where we came happily to an Ankor that forenoon. In
which Bay we found a Dutch-ship bound for Bantam, which had taken in her
course, and brought thither, a small Portugal bound to Angola, a Colonie
belonging to the Portugals, lying in the skirts of Africa, about ten degrees
South of the Line; in which small ship amongst many rich Commodities (as we
heard) to the value of five or six thousand pounds sterling, there were ten
Portugal Virgins (as they called themselves) sent to that Colonie I suppose for
Husbands. The young women were well-favoured, and well clad in silks, but such
were the courtesies of these Dutchmen toward them, as that they took not only
away all the goods, Artilerie, and good provisions of their ship, but they
robbed these poor captive Maidens of all their apparel, (which they most sadly
complained of) to one poor suit (and I suppose of their honor too, if they
brought it with them) then giving them water for their wine, and a very scant
proportion of all other provisions, turned them with their unarmed, leakie, and
ill-man'd ship, to the mercy of the Seas, the twentieth day following.

This Bay of Souldania lies in 34 degrees and half of South Latitude in a
sweet Climate, full of fragrant herbs (which the soil produces of its self)
pleasing to the sense, where our ships companies, when they have oftentimes
there arrived, with very weak and feeble bodies, usually by that Sea disease
the Scurvy, in which disease (I shall observe by the way) if any that have it,
be not too much overgone with it, as soon as he comes to enjoy the fresh air on
any shore, with fresh water, and fresh food he will presently recover; but if
this disease have overmuch prevailed on him, immediately after he sets his foot
on shore, he usually dies. I say our people when they have come hither with
very crazie bodies, have often found here much good refreshing; for besides a
most delectable brook of pure good water, arising hard by, out of a mighty hill
(called for its form the Table, close by which there is another Hill, which
arises exceeding high like a Pyramid, and called by Passengers the Sugarloaf)
there are good store of Cattle, as little Beeves, called by the barbarous
Inhabitants. Boos; and Sheep which they call Baas, who bear a short coarse
hairie wool, and I conceive are never shorn. These Boos and Baas, (as they
call them) were formerly bought in great plenty, for small quantities of
Kettle-brasse, and Iron Hoops, taken off our Empty Cask; (which are all for
this long voyage hoop'd with Iron.) These Salvages had their cattle which we
bought of them, at a very great Command, for with a call they would presently
run to them, and when they had sold any one of their bullooks to us, for a
little inconsiderate piece of brass, if we did not presently knock him down,
they would by the same call, make the poor creature break from us and run unto
them again, and then there was no getting them out of their hands, but by
giving them more brass, and by this trick now and then, they sold the same
beast unto us, two or three times; and if they had thus sold him more often, he
had been a good penny worth; how ever in this we might observe, the
covetousness and deceit of this brutish people. Here ye must know that this
people of all metals seem to love brass, I think (as you may guess afterward)
for the rankness of its smell; with which they make great rings to wear about
their wrists; yea, so taken are they with this base metal that if a man lay
down before them a piece of gold worth two pounds sterling, and a piece of
brass worth two pence, they will leave the Gold, and take the brass On this
shore there likewise are found excellent good, though small roots for Salads,
which the soil brings forth without husbanding. And in the head of the Bay, may
be taken with netts, great store of fair fat Mullets, of which we took
abundance.

This remotest part of Africa, is very mountainous, overrun with wild beasts,
as Lions, Tygres, Wolves, and many other beasts of prey, which in the silent
night discover themselves by their noise and roaring; to the Teeth and Jaws of
which cruel Beasts, the Natives here expose their old people, if death prevent
it not, when once they grow very old and troublesome, laying them forth in some
open place in the dark night, When the wild beasts (as David observes, Psalm.
104. 20, 21.) do creep forth, and the young lions roar after their prey. One
miserable poor old wretch was thus exposed when we were there, who by his
pitiful cries, was discovered by our Court of Guard, there on shore, and not
far off from him, and by them relieved and delivered for that present time, out
of the jaws of Death; And we asking Coorce one of the Natives (whose story
you shall have by and by) why they did so, he told us, it was their custom,
when their people had lived so long, that they knew not what to do with them,
thus to be rid of them.

We saw in this Bay of Souldania many Whales, and about the shore diverse
party-colored Fowls; And here are Ostriches to be seen. For the soil about
the Bay, it seems to be very good, but the Sun shines not upon a people in the
whole world, more barbarous than those which possess it; Beasts in the skins
of men, rather than men in the skins of beasts, as may appear by their
ignorance, habit, language, diet, with other things, which make them most
brutish.

First for God, the great God of Heaven and Earth, whom generally all the
people in the world, Heathen, as well as Christians do confess, they (as this
Cooree told us) acknowledge none. For their speech it seemed to us inarticulate
noise rather than Language, like the clucking of Hens, or gabling of Turkeys;
and thus making a very strange confused noise, when they walk here or there: if
there be two or three, or five, or ten, or twenty, or very many more in
company, it is their manner to walk in rank one after the other, in small paths
they have made by their thus walking, as Kine in Summer many times do, when
they come home to the Payl; or as wildgeese who fly in ranks, and as they fly
make a noise; so these walking together thus gabble from the first to the last
in company, as if all spoke, but none answered. Their Habits are their sheeps
skins undrest, thonged together, which cover their bodies to the middle, with a
little flap of the same skin tied before them, being naked downward, and when
it is cold keep the woolly, when hotter weather, the fleshy side of those skins
next to their bodies. Their ornaments and Jewels. Bullocks or sheeps-guts full
of excrement, about their necks, and therefore when we bought their Cattle
they would take (and we were content they should) their skins, guts, and
garbage, which plentifully furnished them with that rich attire, and gay
ornaments; and when they were hungry, they would sit down upon some hillock,
first shaking out some of that filthy pudding out of the guts they wore about
their necks, then bowing and bringing their mouths to their hands, almost as
low as their knees, like hungry dogs would gnaw, and eat the raw guts, when
you may conceive their mouths full of sweet green sauce. The women as the men
are thus adorned, thus habited, and thus dieted only they wear more about their
lower parts than the men. And (by the way) these carry their sucking infants
under their skins upon their backs, and their breasts hanging down like
Bag-pipes, they put up with their hands to their children, that they may suck
them over their shoulders. Both sexes make coverings for their heads like to
skull caps, with Cow Dung, and such like filth mingled with a little stinking
grease, with which they likewise besmear their faces, which makes their company
unsufferable, if they get the wind of you. I observed, that some of the rest of
their diet was agreeable to the former, for they would eat any refuse thing, as
rotten and moldy Biskets, which we have given them, fit indeed for nothing but
to be cast away; yea, they will eat that which a ravenous dog in England will
refuse. I once took notice of a Couple of them, who had found on the
neighboring shore a large piece of a dead fish the Sea had cast up, which did
most sufficiently stink, they presently made a little fire with dry Cow Dung,
and with this they warmed it, and then they eat it, with as much seeming
appetite, as an hungry man with us, would feed upon a very choice and savoury
dish, which makes me almost to believe, that those wretched creatures have but
three senses, wanting the benefit both of Smelling and Tasting. They lodge upon
the earth in Hovels, so ill covered, that they keep not out the weather, made
like to those we call Summer-houses, with Boughs and sticks.

Et pecus, and Dominus communi clauditur umbra.
The beast and's master under one shade dwell,
But which the veriest beast, is hard to tell.
These Brutes devote themselves to idleness, for they neither dig nor spin.
For their stature and making they are very straight, and well lim'd, though not
very tall but in their faces very illfavoured, for the noses of most of them
are flat. They have little or no beard; the hair on their heads short black and
curled; their skins very tawny; swift they are of foot, and will throw Darts,
and shoot Arrows, which are their weapons very dangerously.

Me thinks when I have seriously considered, the Dresses the Habitations, and
the Diet of this people, with other things, and how these beasts of Mankind
live all like Brutes, nay worse, I have thought that if they had the
accommodations we enjoy (to make our lives more comfortable) by good dwelling,
warm clothing, sweet lodging, and wholesome food, they would be abundantly
pleased with such a change of their condition; For as Love proceeds from
Knowledge, and liking; and we can neither love nor like any thing we cannot
know: so when we come to a sensible understanding of things we knew not
before; when the Belly teaches, and the Back instructs a man would believe that
these should work some strong convictions. But I shall here insert a short
story; About three years before I went to India, it happened, that one of the
Company ships returning thence, and arriving at this harbor, after a little
stay, when she was ready to set sail for England, and having then two of these
Salvages aboard, her Commander resolved to bring them both home with him,
thinking that when they had got some English here they might discover something
of their Country which we could not know before. These poor wretches being thus
brought away, very much against both their minds, one of them (merely out of
extreme sullenness though he was very well used) died shortly after they put to
Sea, the other who called himself Cooree (whom I mentioned before) lived and
was brought to London, and there kept, for the space of six months, in Sir
Thomas Smith's house (then Governor of the East India Company) where he had
good diet good clothes, good lodging, with all other fitting accommodations;
now one would think that this wretch might have conceived his present, compared
with his former condition, an Heaven upon earth, but he did not so, though he
had to his good entertainment made for him a Chain of bright Brass, an Armor,
Breast, Back, and Headpiece, with a Buckler all of Brass, his beloved Metal,
yet all this contented him not, for never any seemed to be more weary of ill
usage, than he was of Courtesies; none ever more desirous to return home to his
Country than he; For when he had learned a little of our Language, he would
daily lie upon the ground, and cry very often thus in broken English, Cooree
home go, Souldania go, home go; And not long after when he had his desire,
and was returned home, he had no sooner set footing on his own shore, but
presently he threw away his Clothes, his Linen, with all other Covering, and
got his sheeps skins upon his back, guts about his neck, and such a perfumed
Cap (as before we named) upon his head; by whom that Proverb mentioned, 2 Pet.
2. 22. was literally fulfilled, Canis ad vomitum; The dog is returned to his
vomit, and the swine to his wallowing in the mire. From all which we may draw
this Conclusion, that a continued Custom may make many things that seem
strange and loathsome to some, even natural to others, and that the most
brutish life may seem civil, and best to a most brutish man; and he thus
pleading for it.

Custom the Nurse of Nature often is proved,
Like Nurses, than the Mother more beloved.
Thus Bestiall crimes men by their wont excuse,
And love not what is good, but what they use.
So Plutarch's Gryllus argues (turned a Swine.)
Against the Laws that Wit and Arts refine;
Affirms that man too curiously nice,
Bought his poor Reason at too dear a price;
Since all his actions limited must be,
By measured Rules, when beasts have liberty;
And unconfined on Natures Common feed,
No Lawyer, no Physician, Tailor need,
Clothes are but marks of shame, med^cines but show
Diseases, and we Laws to Quarrels owe:
Cooks are the Instruments of Luxury,
Painters of Lust, Builders of Vanity.
Let all then live as Nature them produced,
And frame their manners as they have bin used.
It Is most strange that a Creature who has any thing of Reason in him, should
thus degenerate, thus plead, or thus do, but it is most true in these, as of
millions more of brutish Heathens in the world, who live as if they had nothing
at all of man left in them.

For man the worst of brutes, when changed to Beast,
Counts to be civilized, to be oppressed;
And as he tames Hawks, and makes Lions mild
By Education: so himself grows wild.
After this fellow was returned, it made the Natives most shie of us when we
arrived there, for though they would come about us in great Companies when we
were new come thither, yet three or four days before they conceived we would
depart thence, there was not one of them to be seen, fearing belike we would
have dealt with some more of them, as formerly we had done with Cooree. But it
had been well if he had not seen England; for as he discovered nothing to us,
so certainly when he came home, he told his Countrymen (having doubtless
observed so much here) that Brass was but a base and cheap commodity in
England, and happily we had so well stored them with that metal before, that
we had never after such a free Exchange of our Brass and Iron for their
Cattle. It was here that I asked Cooree who was their God? he lifting up his
hands answered thus, in his bad English, England God, great God, Souldania n^
God.

Now if any one desire to know under whose Command these Brutes live or whether
they have any Superiority, and Subordination amongst themselves, or whether
they live with their females in common, with many other questions that might be
put, I am not able to satisfy them; But this I look upon as a great happiness
not to be born, one of them, and as great, nay a far greater misery, to fall
from the loins of Civil and Christian Parents, and after to degenerate into
all brutishness, as very many do, qui Gentes agunt sub nomine Christianorum;
the thing which Tertullian did most sadly bewail in many of his time, who did
act Atheism under the Name of Christianity, and did even shame Religion by
their light and loose professing of it. When Anacharsis the Philosopher was
sometime upbraided with this, that he was a Scythian by birth, he presently
returned this quick and smart answer unto him that cast that in his teeth; Mihi
quidem Patria est dedecus, tu autem Patriae, my Country indeed is some
disparagement to me, but thou art a disgrace to thy Country, as there be many
thousands more beside, who are very burdens to the good Places that give them
Brea^h and Bread. Alas, Turkey, and Barbary, and these Africans, with many
millions more in that part of the world and in America, and in Asia, I and in
Europe too, would wring their hands into pieces, if they were truly sensible of
their condition, because they know so little; And so shall infinite numbers
more one day born in the visible Church of God, in the valley of visions, Es.
22. 1. have their very hearts broken into shivers, because they knew so much,
or might have known so much, and have known and done so little; for without all
doubt, the day will one day come, when they who have sinned against the
strongest means of Grace and Salvation shall feel the heaviest misery, when
their means to know God, in his will revealed in his Word, shall be put in one
Balance, and their improvement of this means by their Practice in the other,
and if there have not bin some good proportion betwixt these two, manifested in
their lives, what has been wanting in their Practice shall be made up in their
Punishment. But I would not here more digress. I have one thing more which
accidentally relates to this place, and then I will leave it.

In the year 1614. ten English men having received the sentence of death for
their several crimes at the Sessions house in the Old Bailey at London, had
their Execution respited by the entreaty of the East India Merchants, upon
condition that they should be all banished to this place, to the end (if they
could find any peaceable abode there) they might discover something
advantageous to their trade; And this was accordingly done. But two of them
when they came thither were taken thence, and carried on the voyage. One whose
surname was Duffield by Sir Thomas Row, that year sent Ambassador to the Great
Mogol; that fellow thus redeemed from a most sad Banishment, was afterward
brought back again into England by that noble Gentleman, and here being
entrusted by him, stole some of his Plate and ran away; another was carried on
the Voyage likewise, but what became of him afterward I know not. So that there
remained eight which were there left with some Ammunition* and victual, with a
small ^oat to carry them to and from a very little un^^habited Island lying in
the very mouth of that Bay, a place for their retreat and safety from the
Natives on the Main. The Island called Pen-guin Island, probaby so named at
first by some Welshman, in whose language Pen-guin signifies a white head and
there are very many great lazy fowls upon, and about this Island, with great
coleblack bodies, and very white heads, called Pen-guins. The chief man of the
eight there left was surnamed Cross, who took the Name upon him of Captain
Cross, He was formerly a Yeoman of the Guard unto King James; But having had
his hand in blood twice, or thrice, by men (...) by him in several Duels, and
now being condemned to die with the rest, upon very great fute made for him, he
was hither Banished with them, whither the justice of Almighty God was
dispatched after him, as it were in a Whirlwind, and followed him close at the
very heels, and overtook him, and left him not till he had paid dear for that
blood he had formerly spilt. This Cross was a very stout, and a very resolute
man* who quarrelling with, and abusing the Natives; and engaging himself far
amongst them, immediately after himself with the rest were left in that place,
many of these Salvages being go(...) together, fell upon him, and with their
Darts thrown, and Arrows shot at him, stuck his body so full of them, as if he
had been Larded with Darts and Arrows, making him look like the Figure of the
man in the Almanac, that seems to be wounded in every part, or like that man
described by Lucan, totum pro vulnere corpus, Who was all wound, where blood
touched blood. The retaliations of the Lord are sure and just; He that is
mercy it self abhorrs cruelty above all other sins; He cannot endure that one
man should devour another, as the Beasts of the field, Birds of the air, Fishes
of the Sea do, and therefore usually shows, exemplary, signal revenges for
that sin of Blood, selling it at a dear rate unto them that shed it. Every sin
has a tongue, but that of blood our-cryes; and drowns the rest; Blood being a
clamorous, and a restless suter, whose mouth will not be stopped* till it receive
an answer, as it did here. The other seven, the rest of these miserable
Bandi^i, who were there with Cross, recovered their Boat, and go^ off the
shore, without any great hurt, and so rowing to their Island, the waves running
high, they split their boat at their landing, which engaged them to keep in
that place, they having now no possible means left to stir thence. And which
made their condition while they were in it most extremely miserable, it is a
place wherein grows never a tree, either for sustenance or shelter, or shade,
nor any thing beside (I ever heard of) to help sustein nature; a place that
has never a drop of fresh water in it, but what the showrs leave in the holes
of the rocks. And besides all this, there are a very great number of Snakes in
that Island (as I have been told by many that have been upon it) so many of
those venomous worms that a man cannot tread safely in the long grass which
grows in it, for fear of them; And all these put together must needs make that
place beyond measure uncomfortable to these most wretched men. To this may be
added their want of provision having nothing but dry Biscuit, and no great
quantity of that; so that they lived with hungry bellies, without any place fit
for repose, without any quiet rest, for they could not choose but sleep in fear
continually; And what outward condition could make men more miserable than
this? Yet notwithstanding all they suffered, these seven vile wretches, all
live to be made examples afterward of Divine Justice. For after they had
continued in, and endured this sad place for the space of five or six months,
and they were grown all even almost mad by reason of their several pressing
wants and extremities, it pleased God by providence, to bring an English Ship
into that road, returning for England; four of these 7. men being impatient of
anymore hours staythere, immediately after that ship was come in, made a float
with the ruins of their split boat, which they had saved together, and with
other wood which they had gotten thither, and with raveld and untwisted
boat-roapes, fastened as well as they could all together (for there are no such
sudden teachers and instructers as extremities are) These four got upon the
Float, which they had thus prepared, and poysing it as well as they could by
their several weight, hoped by the benefit of their Oars, and strength of the
tide, (that then ran quick toward the ship newly arrived) they might recover
it; but this their expectation failed them, for it being late in the day when
they made this attempt, and they not discovered by the ship, which then road a
good way up in the Bay, before they could come up near unto her, the tide
returned, and so carried them back into the main Sea where they all perished
miserably. The day following, the ship sent a boat to the Island, which took
those three yet surviving into her, as the other four might have been, if they
could but have exercised their patience for one night longer; these survivers
came aboard the ship, related all that had befallen to their fellows; But these
three notwithstanding all their former miseries, when they were taken into the
ship, behaved themselves so l^wdly, as they returned homewar^, that they were
very often put into the Bilbowes, or ship-stocks, in the way returning, and
otherwise many times punished for their great and several misdemenours at last
the ship being safely returned into the Downs, she had not been there at an
anchor above three hours, but these three Willains got on shore, and they had
not been ashore above three hours, but they took a Purse, and a very few hours
after were apprehended and all taken for that fact, and suddenly after that,
their very foul story being related to the Lord chief Justice, and they looked
upon as men altogether incorrigible, and incapable of amendment by lesser
corrections, by his special Warrant were executed upon their former
Condemnation (for which they were banished, not to return hither again, but
never pardoned) near Sandwich in Kent, where they committed the robbery; from
whose example we may learn, that it is not in the power of any affliction, how
heavy soever it light, and how long soever it lie, if it be not sanctified, to
do any man good. That when the rod is upon a man, if he be not taught as well
as chastned; all the stripes bestowed on him are cast away. A man might have
hoped that these wretched fellows had been long enough in the fire to have
purged away their dross. But afflictions, like fire, harden as well as soften;
and experience teaches us, that the winds and waves though they beat with their
greatest violence upon the rocks, yet leave them as they found them unmovable;
It being a most tried truth recorded by Solomon, Prove. 27. 22. That bray or
beat a fool in a mortar, he will not leave his foolishness; But as he was put
in, so will he come out a fool.

The year following we carried three more condemned persons to be left in this
place, but they hearing of the ill success of their predecessors, and that it
was very unlikely for them to find any safe footing here, when we were ready to
depart thence, and to leave them on the shore, they all came and presented
themselves on their knees, with many tears in their eyes unto our chief
Commander Captain Joseph, most humbly beseeching him, that he would give order
that they might be hanged before he departed, in that place, which they much
rather chose, than to be there left; we thought it was a very sad sight to
behold three men in such a condition, that made them esteem hanging to be
mercy. Our Commander told them, that he had no Commission to execute them, but
to leave them there, and so he must do, and so believed he had done; But our
fifth ship the Swan staying in this place after us a day or two, took these poor
men into her, and then took her course for Bantam whither she was bound. And
the Rose our last ship, whose sight and company we lost in that most violent
storm (before mentioned) at the beginning of our voyage was safely preserved,
and happily afterward found her way to Bantam likewise.

We made our abode in this Harbor till the 28th following, on which day we
being well watered, and refreshed, departed. And the 29th we doubled the Cape
of good Hope, whose Latitude is 35 Degree South. Off this Cape there sets
continually a most violent Current Westward, whence it comes to pass, that when
a strong contrary wind meets it (as oftentimes it does) their impetuons
opposition makes the Sea so to rage, as that some ships have been swallowed,
but many more very much endangered amongst those huge mountains of water, and
very few ships pass that way without a storm. We kept on in a circular course,
to gain a South-west wind; for ye must know, that the wind in those parts, and
so in East India, blows (and but with a very little variation) half the year
South-west, and the other half North-East; we sailed here Southerly, till we
had raised the South-Pole almost forty degrees above the Horizon. This Pole is
a Constellation of four stars, the Mariners call the Crosiers, these stars
appear near one another like a Cross, and almost equidistant. And while we had
the view of this Pole, the Sun (as it must needs be) was North at Noon unto us.

The 22. of July we discovered the great M^dagascar, Commonly called St.
Laurence, we being then betwixt it and the African Shore, which Island lies
almost every part of it under, or within the Southern Tropic: we touched not
at it, but this I dare say, from the Credit of others who have been upon it,
that as it is an exceeding great Island (if not the greatest in the known world)
So is it stored with abundance of very excellent good Provisions, though
inhabited by a barbarous and heathenish people, but stout, and warlike, and
very numerous.

Over against this Island, on the main Continent of Africa, are Zef^la, and
Mozambique, whereon the Portugals have got some footing; the places (as may be
strongly supposed) whither Solomon sent his Navy of Ships, built at Eziongeber,
which stood on the banks of the R^d-Sea in Arabia the Happy, the Country of
that famous Queen of the South, who hearing of the wisdom, and renown, took
her journey thence to visit the Court of King Solomon, who had understanding
like a flood. From that place forenamed, Solomon sent his Ships for gold and
Silver, and ^vory, etc. 1 Ki. 10, 22. they Coasting all along the shore of
Africa; for in the days of Solomon the Art of Navigation was not known, and
Seamen then steering without Cart or Compass were necessitated to keep the
neighboring Land always in their sights, as without question those ships did,
and to those forementioned places, stored (as is related) above other Parts of
Africa. with those richest Commodities.

I might have taken notice before, (but yet it will not be unseasonable) of
many sudden, strong and violent Gusts of wind frequently to be observed in
those-South-west Seas which surprise a Ship so suddenly, that if she have many
sails abroad, and the Mariners be not very watchful, and Nimble to strike
them their strength is such, that they will endanger her overturning And to
these there are many strange watery Clouds they Call Spouts, which appear like
a Funnel, or water tankard, very large and big at the one end but small on the
other which hangs lowest and of a very great length; They Contain a great
Quantity of water wrapped together by a whirlwind, that falls within a very
narrow Compass, the abundance whereof by 'its great weight, if it fall directly
(as sometimes it does) upon the body of a small ship, it will much endanger it
and would do much more harm but that these Spouts when they are seen, may be
easily avoided.

From the Island Madagascar we proceeded on in our Course, and the 5 of August
following approached near the little Islands of Mohilia, Gazidia, St. John de
Castro, with some others, whose Names I have not, called in general the Islands
of Comora, lying about 12. Degrees South of the Equator.

The day following being the 6 of August, early in the morning our men looking
out for Land espied a sail which stood directly in our Course. but far before
us; at first sight she appeared, as if there had been some great hill
interposed betwixt us: for first, we had sight only of her Colors in her high
Maintop, after this, of her Masts and Sails, and then of her Hull; after which
manner, ships at Sea do every where appear at great distance one to another,
which proves that that mighty Collection of waters called Seas, have a Unequal,
or Globous and round body placed by Almighty God, as it were in Hills, or
Heaps, and being above the earth, and higher than it, they have set Limits, and
Commanded they are to their Bounas, contrary to their Nature, which they may
not pass, for to says the Psalmist, Ps. 104. 9 Thou have set a bound which
they may not pass over, that they return not again to Cover the earth. But
this is known to all that have been at sea, therefore we proceed. Upon the
first sight of that ship, we were all glad of the object. improving all
endeavors we could to overtake her withal preparing our great ordnance, that
if she were a Friend we might salute her* if an Enemy be in readiness for her.
so eagerly pursuing this unlooked for ship with the wings of the wind, after
that we had given her Chase about five hours, her Colors and bulk discovered
her to be a very great Portugal Caraque bound for Goa, lying in the Skirts of
East India, and principally inhabited by Portugals, the City of Residence for
the Viceroy to the King of Spain, her Commander called Don Emanuel de Meneces,
a brave resolute man, as the sequent will demonstrate. About noon the Globe our
least ship (by reason of her Nimblenesse sailing better than her fellows) came
up with her on her broad side to windward, and according to the Custom of the
Sea, ^ayl'd her, asking whence she was; she answered indirectly of the Sea,
calling our men Rogues, Theev, Heretics, Devils, and the Conclusion of her
rude Complement was, in loud Cannon language, discharging seven great Pieces of
Ar^lrey at our Globe (though she had very little reason so to do, we having
four ships in Company, and she alone) whereof six pierced her through the Hull,
maiming some of her men, but killing none Our Globe replied in the same voice,
and after that fell of.

About three of the Clock in the afternoon, the Charles our Admiral came up with
her so near, that we were within pistol shot, our Commander Captain Joseph
proceeded religiously, in offering them a treaty, before he proceeded to
revenge; So we saluted her with our Trumpets, she us with her wind Instruments,
then we showed our men on both sides aloft; this done, our Commander called to
them requiring Theirs to come aboard to give an account for the injury they had
lately before offered us; they answered, they had never a boat; our Commander
replied that he would send them one, and immediately cansed his Barge to be
manned, and sent off to them, which brought back one of their officers* and two
others of inferior ^ank, with this message from their Captain, how that he had
promised the King of Spain his Master not to leave his Ship, and therefore
forced he might, but never would be Commanded out of her. Captain Joseph
received the message, and used those that brought it Civilly, and then ordered,
that they should be showed (in a broad side of great Guns, that lay all ready
p^im'd to be sir'd against them) how we were prepared to vindicate our selves,
which put the poor Portugals into a fit of trembling, and upon it desired out
Commander to write a few words to theirs that happily with their persuasion
might make him come, Captain Joseph. willing to preserve his honor* and to
prevent blood, consented, and forthwith caused a few lines in Spanish to this
effect to be wrote unto him* That.

Whereas he the Commander of the Carraque had offered violence to our ship that
saild peaceably by him, he wil'd him to come presently, and give reason for
that wrong, or else at his peril.

So he discharged those Portugals* sending one of our Masters Mates back with
them, with those few words* and this further message, that if he refused to
come, he would sink by his side, but that he would force him before he left
him; Mor^entium verb^ sunt prophetica, his words came to pass, for he himself
suddenly after, fell by a great Shot that came from the Caraques side. The
Commander of the Caraque notwithstanding the Message, and Menace sent to him,
was still peremptory in his first answer; So our men returning, Captain Joseph
himself made the three first Shot at them, all which, the mark being so fair,
and near, hit them; this done, the bullets began to fly on both sides, our
Captain Cheering his Company immediately ascended the half- Deck, the place
where Commanders use to keep in those encounters, to show their own galantry*
and to encourage the Company under their Command where he had not been the
Eighth part of an hour, ere a great S^ot from the Caraques quarter deprived
him of life in the twinkling of an eye. For this Captain Joseph, he was
certainly one, who had very much of a Man in him for years ancient, who had
commanded before in Seasights, which he met withal, within the streights in
the Madland Sea, and near death, many times in them, which took others round
about him, while himself went off untouched, and the Reason was, because his
appointed time for dying was not yet come. Certainly there is never a bulle^
flies that carries not a Commission with it to hit, or m^sse, to kill, or
spare, the time the Place, and every Circumstance beside of man's D^ssolution is
fore-determined. That one dies in the field, another in his bed one on the Sea,
another on the Shore, one by Sickness, another by Violence, one in his own,
another in a foreign Nation, is fore decreed in Heaven; the time of every man's
change being set to a minute, which he must not pass. And though we hear it not
vocally, yet Almighty God calls every one by his Name and says to one, dye
thou there; and to another dye thou ^onder; whence it was, that the Place where
our Commander then stood W^vi^g his sword must of necessity be the S^age of his
present mortality. Before* what his purposes were in relation to his enemy with
whom he now encounted I know not, but his thoughts what ever they were, in the
shortest moment of time perished, Death surprising him now swifter than ^ought,
So that in his own Person he could do his enemy now no more hurt. For ^^ad
Lions bi^e not. The Bullet which carried away his life, hit him on the breast,
beating out of his body his Heart, and other of his Vitals, which lay round
about him scattered in his diffused blood. A Runner is tried by a Ra^e, A
Pilate by a ^empest, A Commander, whether at Sea, or Land, by a Battle, and,
Ducem oportet in acie mori. -- A Captain no where dies
Better, than in the face of Enemies.


Yet as Sophocles sometimes spoke of Philoctetes, that he killed others
glorioussy when he was slam himself: So the blood of this resolute Commander
was more than sufficiently revenged, as will appear by the Consequence in the
fall and Ruin of most of his provoking enemies.

After Captain Joseph was slain, the Master of our ship continued the fight
about half an hour, then (knowing there was another to be admitted into that
prime place of Command) the night approaching, for that time gave over, putting
out a flag of Counsel to call the Captain of the vice Admiral (Capt: Henry
Pepwell) who was to succeed, and the other Commanders aboard to consult about
the prosecution of this encounter. The night being come, we now proceeded no
further. The Caraque stood still on her Course, putting forth a light at her
Poop for us to follow her* and about midnight ^ame to an Anchor under the Island
of Mohilia, which when we perceived, we let fall our Ankers to.

The seventh early before it began to dawn, we prepared for a new assault
first Commending our selves in Prayer to Almighty God, who does whatsoever he
pleases in Heaven, and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all places, Ps. 135. 6.
toward the close of which exercise, I spoke some words of exhortation, and
encouragment, to all the people of the ship there together assembled; But was
presently out- Rhetorick'd by our New Commander, who spoke to the Company thus;
My master's, I have never a speech to make unto you, but to speak to the Cooper
to give every one of you a good Cup of Sack* and so God bless us. Here was a
speech indeed that was Short and Sweet* that had something following it* to make
it most savoury, that it might be tasted, as well as heard. Mine was verbal
without any such relish, and therefore I for(...)r to insert it.

The morning come we found the Caraque so close to the Shore and the nearest if
our ships at least a league off that we held our hands for that day expecting
when she would weigh her Ankers and stand off to Sea, a fitter place to deal
wi^h her. And that afternoon, we chested our late slain Commander putting some
great shot with him into it that he might presently sink, and without any
Ceremony of Guns, etc. usual upon such loccasions because our enemy should take
no notice put him overboardgainst the Island* of Mohil^a, whore he made his own
Grave, as all dead bodies do, buried not in dust but water which shall one day
as well as the earth give up its de^d, Rev. 20 13* when all the bodies of men
since the wo^ld began, that have^ tasted Death in their several generations,
however after death they have been bestowed* wheresoever laid up shall be
raised again, And though all would not, yet all must.

A little before night that present day the Caraque departed again to Sea, we
all loosed our Ankers, opened our Sails, and ^ollowed. The day now left us and
our proud Adversary unwilling as it should seem to escape, put forth a light
(as before) for us to follow him, (as afterward we did to purpose) The night
well^^gh(...) spent we commended again our selves and cause to God, when I
observed more seeming devotion in our Seamen that morning, than at any time
before, or after while I kept them company; who, for the generality are such a
kind of people that nothing will bow them, to bring them on their knees, but
extreme Hazads. When this exercise was ended the day began to appear in a red
ma^nt^l, which proved bloud^ unto many that beheld it. And now we entered upon a
second encounter, our four ships resolving to take their turns one after the
other, that we might compel this proud Portugal either to bend, or break.

But before I shall give an account of our further engagement. I will take
notice of two accidents which to me seemed very observable, and exemplary; the
first this, there was one in our ship whose Sir name was Raven (a servant to
our late slain Commander) who immed^ately before we began to engage, came to me
and told me that he had a very great desire to follow his Master; with what
mind he spoke this I know not, but if hea(...)ly and with desire his speech was
very all for if it be an extreme madness for a man to entreat God* to take
away the life of his Beast, much more to request him to take away his own Life.
But whatsoever his Petition was in respect of his inward desire it pleased
Ma^ghev God presently to answer him herein, by the first great Shot that came
from the E(...)my, which struck off his Head. Aman may hope to speed well, that
knows how to Peti^^on well* but by the Righteous ^udgment of God it oftentimes
fall out, that such unadvised requests, meet with a return of most sad, and
unwelcome answers

There was another a Tailor (but not in our ship) who while the Company he
sailed with, were engaged, brought his pressing* iron to one of the Gunners,
and desired him to put it into a Piece of Ordnance already laden, telling him
that he would send it as a token to the Portugals, withal swearing that he
would never work again at his trade; it pleased God immediately after to
sentence him out of his own mouth, and to let his tongue to fall upon himself,
for that great Piece was no sooner discharged, but a great Bullet was returned
from the enemy, which struck him dead.

And now Reader thou may suppose us speaking again to our adversary, and he
to us, in the harshest and lowdest of all Dialects, no arguments being so
strong as those that proceed from the mouths of Guns, and Points of Swords. Our
Charles the Admiral played her part first, and e^e she had been at defyance
with her enemy half an hour there came another great shot from him, which
hitting against one of our iron Pieces mounted on our half Deck, brak into many
little parts, which most dangerously wounded our New Commander, and the Master
of our ship* with three others beside, who received several hurts by it.
Captain Pepwels left Eye, by a glance of a Peec^ of that broken bullet, was so
Torn that it lay like Rags upon his cheek; another hurt by a piece of the same
bullet, he received on his Jaw Bone, and by another, on his Head, and a fourth
hurt he received in his Leg, a ragged piece of that broken shot sticking fast
betwixt the two bones thereof, grating there upon an Artery, which seemed by
his complaining to afflict him so much, that it made him take very little
notice of all the rest of his Hurts, it being most true of bodily Pains, that
the extremity of a greater pain will not suffer a man much to feel and complain
of that which is less, as that tormen^ing pain by the Toot-ach, makes a man
insensible of the a king of his head* and when the Gout and Stone surprise the
Body at once together, the torture by the Gout is as it were lost in the
extremity of the Stone.

And thus was our new Commander welcomed to his Authority; we all thought that
his wounds would very suddenly have made an end of him, but he lived till
about fourteen Months after, and then Dyed as he was returning for England. I
told you before, that this man suffered not alone by the scattered pieces of
that broken shot, for the Master of the Ship had a great piece of the Brawn of
his Arm struck off by it, which made him likewise unserviceable for a time, and
three other of the Common sailers received several and dangerous hurts by it
likewise.

The Captain and Master both thus disabled, deputed their Authority to the
chief Masters mate, who behaved himself resolutely and wisely; so we continued
Alternis vicibus one after the other, shooting at our adversary, as at a But,
and by three of the clock in the after noon had shot down Her Mainmast by the
board her Mizen-masts, her fore top mast, and moreover had made such breaches
in her thick sides* that her case seemed so desperate as that she must either
yield, or perish. Her Captain thus distressed stood in for the shore being not
far from the Island of Gaziaia; we pursued as sar as we durst without hazard of
Ship wrack then we sent off a Boat with a flag of ^^uce to speak with him, He
waved us with another, upon which Mr. ^onnick our chief Merchant employed in
that service came up to them and being invited, entered their ship, where he was
civi^ly used, and there he delivered this Message to the chief Commander, and
his Company, that he had brought them Life, and Peace. if they would accept it,
withal telling them that they had deserved so well by their undaunted valor,
that if they would put themselves into our hands, they should be entertained
with all honor and respect; how, the Ordinary sort in the Caraque were taken
with this profer I know not, yet all this would not work upon that
high-resolv'd Commander, who like Fabr^c^us in (...)ly could not be turned in
the least measure, from his former and firm resolution, But

Duris ut Ilex tonsa bipennibus
Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido,
Per damna, per caedes, ^b ipso
Duc^t opes animumque ferro.
Hor: As the lop't Holm-tree that is made
By two edged Bills to part with shade,
Growing in Algid, fer^il^ grounds,
New life receives and strength from wounds:
So he contemning the Misery he could not prevent; O^ like a pruned hedge which
grows stronger by Cutting answering our meffenger thus that no infelicity
should make him alter his first resolution, and therefore must not be talked
out of the ship; That he would stand off to Sea if possibly he could and fight
us again, and then if fire, or sword forced him, he might unhappily be taken
but he would never yield, and if we took him alive he hoped to find the respect
of a Gentleman, and till then we had our answer. So our Meffenger was
discharged, and shortly after, this distressed Ship wanting her wings, was
forced by the wind and waves upon the adjacent Island of Gazidi^, where she
stuck fast between two Rock^: those that were left alive in her, by their boats
got upon the shore, which when they had all recovered, willing (as it should
seem) to destroy what they could not keep, they set her on fire to make her a
Coal, rather than we should make her a Prize. She was a ship of an Exceeding
great value in Coin and Bullion, besides many other rich commodities* (if
report afterward abused us not) but we got nothing from her but blows, for
which she was repayed by us with Ruin. The poor distres^ed Portugalls after
they had left their Ship were most inhumanly used by the barbarous Islanders,
who spoiled them of all they brought on shore for their succor, some of them
finding Death in the place they chose to escape, it and doubtless they had made
havoc of them all, had they not presently been relieved by two Arabian Junks
(for so their small ill built ships are called) there in Trade; which, in hope
I suppose of some great reward, took them in, and conveyed them safely to their
own City Goa.

In this Sea Fight we lost, out of our four ships but five men; three out of
our Admiral, and two out of the James besides we had about twenty in our whole
Fleet hurt. But of seven hundred which sailed in the Carrague, (for she was a
Ship of an exceeding great bulk and burden our Charles, though a ship of a
thousand Tunns, looking but like a Pinace when she was beside her) there came
not near half her Company to Goa as afterward we were informed.

Our Charles in this opposition made at her adversary for her part, three
hundred seventy and five great Shot (as our Gunners reported) to these we had
one Hundred* Musketeers that plied them with small shot all that while;
neither was our Enemy Idle, for our ship received from him at least one hundred
great shot, and many of them dangerous ones, through the Hull* Our foremast
was peirced through the middle, our Mainmast hurt, our Main-stay almost
spoiled, and many of our Main-shrouds cut asunder.

Thus, Reader, thou have the sum of that seaencounter, which I did the rather
insert, because I believe that of all warlike oppositions there are none that
carry more horror in them than Sea- Fights do, if the parties engaged be both
very resolute, as very many who use the Sea are, who will desperately run upon
the mouth of a Cannon, rush into the very jaws of Death, before they have at
all learned what it was to live; that being most true, which was anciently
observed in the generality both of soldiers, and Seamen, Armatis Divum nullus
timor, that they fear neither God nor Man. And therefore when I seriously
consider of the terrors which usually accompany this kind of fighting, I do
more pity and less wonder at the behavior of a poor Scotch Merchant in such an
encounter, who observing the Bullets to make quick returns, gets into his
Cabin, and there covered himself as close as he could; but being pursued
thither by his own tears, which he could not keep thence, they made his lower
Passages both to open, and then feeling himself in those parts more warm and
moist than usually he was, cried out. Ice slene, Ice slene, Ice all goar blud;
yet when he was searched his hurts proved not mortal. But in good earnest,
there is no opposition in the World so full of dread as this, and no
Contentions 'twixt men and men carry them so far out of themselves, and make
them turn so savage, as these.

Where men act Wolves parts, where their highest skill
Expressed is by knowledge how to kill;
One Bullet throws a Leg into the Main,
An Arm that follows it, as if again
(Like a swife Post) in winged have it meant
To fetch it back toth' parts from which 'twas rent.
In a torn Car^ase one here lodges, crying,
And at his feet there others gasp a dying:
Here goes an Head, and there an Heart is made
Its lodging to forsake, and fly to's shade.
Of all Encounters there are none so fell
As Fights at Sea, where naught but Horrors dwell.
Among all the Arts of Killing none more dire
Than these by Bullets, Wracks, Noise, Sword and fire.
I want words to express the extreme horror that is to be observed in these
Sea Fights, where Fire like Lightning darts into men's Eyes, and the over-loud
Cracks of great Ordnance like Thunder roars in their Ears, besides the Noise
made by Muskets, Drums and Fifes, with men hurrying up and down the Ship* in a
confused tumult, wrapped about in a thick Cloud of suff^cating smoke made by the
Powder. Here a Bullet comes and leaves Death behind it, and there Splinters
kill or ma^m others; so that a man in this Case is many times as if he were
placed in the midst of a Beam holding two Balances, where the one Scale hangs
over the Fire, and over the Water the other: For it often falls out in these
Encounters, that by sinking or firing a Ship a man is put to this most
miserable choice, either to Burn or Drown; and in these extremities there is no
escaping by flight, as in Field-Battels. And therefore though it be easy and
safe to sail in the Harbor, or to sit upon the shore, and there to make these
most sad Conflicts matter of talk, discourse or, merriment as some do, yet I
conceive they should not be seen or heard of without grief and detestation:
Because the very name of a man implies Humanity, which a man forgets to show,
when he sees or hears of the ^uine and destruction of others with Content, who
are men like himself. It is well observed, that Almighty God in Scripture
showing mercy is oftentimes called by the name of a Man, as Genesis 32. 24. and
29* A Man wrestled with Jacob and blessed him. So in many other places. But
when God threatens displeasure and vengeance against a man, he ^aith, I will
not meet thee as a man, I^. 47. 3. that is, he will show no pity, no
compassion. Which implies thus much, that they who at any time are wanting in
this, deserve not the names of Men, they being without natural affections;
Appearing to be such, as if they had been hewn from the Rocks, and not fal^
from Loins of flesh and blood; as if they had sucked the Dragons in the
Wilderness, rather than the Daughters of Men. But to conclude what I have to
say of this; If it be very terrible (as indeed it is) to be in the midst of
such Encounters as these, though a man come off untouched, it is much more to
smart under the sad consequences thereof; It being by much more hard to feel,
than it is easy to talk of them.

And now, Reader, if thou shall be pleased to accompany me further, I shall
carry thee from this sad discourse, where we may be both refreshed upon a near
rich and pleasant Island; And to make way for our entertainment there, take
further notice, that after we saw the Carr^que in a flame (which was about
midnight) we stood off and on till morning, to see if any thing might be found
in her Ashes; of which when we despaired, we sought about to succor and
comfort our wounded and sick men on the shore. The Land there was very high,
against which the Sea is always deep; so that it was the tenth day of that
month ^re we could be possessed of a good Harbor; which enjoyed, we found the
Island called Moh^l^a, very pleasant, full of Trees, and exceeding fruitful,
abounding in Beeves, Kids, Poultrey of diverse kinds, Rice, Sugarcanes,
Plantens (of which Fruit more shall be spoken hereafter) Oranges, Coquer-nuts,
as with many other wholesome things, of all which we had sufficient to relieve
our whole Company, for little quantities of White Paper, Glass Beads, low
prized Looking-Glasses, and cheap Knives. For instance* we bought as many good
Oranges as would fill an Hat for one quarter of a shee^ of white writing-
Paper, and so in proportion all other Provisions.

Here we had the best Oranges that ever I tasted, which were little round ones*
exceeding sweet and juicie, having but a little s^^ng^e skin within them, and
the rind on them almost as thin as the paring of an Apple: We eat all
together, Rind and Juice, and found them a Fruit that was extraordinary well
pleasing to the Taste.

Much of their Fruits the Ilanders brought unto ^s in their little Canoos
(which are long narrow boats, but like troughs out of firm trees) but their
Cattle we bought on the shore; Where I observed the people to be straight, well
limm'd, stout, able men, their color very tawney; most of the men, but all the
women, I saw uncloathed, having nothing about them but a Covering for their
shame. Such as were clothed had long Garments like unto the Arabians, whose
Language they speak, and of whose Religion they are, Mahumetans, very strict
(as it should seem) for they would not endure us to come near their Churches.
They have good convenient Houses for their Living, and fair Sepulchers for
their Dead.

They seemed to live strictly under the Obedience of a King, whose place of
residence was some miles up in the Country; His leave by Messengers they first
craved, before they would sell unto us any of their better Provisions. Their
King hearing of our arrival, bad us welcome by a Present of Be^ves, and Goats,
and Poultrey, and the chief and choice Fruits of his Country, and was highly
recompensed as he thought again, by a Quire or two of white Paper, a pair of
low prized Looking-Glasses, some strings of Glass Beads, some cheap Knives, and
with some other English toys

We saw some Spanish Money amongst them, of which they seemed to make so little
reckoning, that some of our men had from them many Royals of Eight in exchange
for a little of those very low and very cheap Commodities which before I named.

The Coquer-nu^tree (of which this Island has abundance) of all other Trees may
challenge the pre-eminence: for, merely with these Trees, without the least
help of any other Timber, or any other thing (unless a little Iron-work) a man
may build, and furnish, and fit and victual a small Ship to Sea. For the Heart
of this Tree (being very tough, firm and fast wood) growing up straight and
high, will make Timber, and Planks, and Pins, and Musts and Yards; a strong Gum
that issues out of it, with the Rind that grows about it, will serve to calk
the Ship; and that spongie Rind (that looks like our Hemp when it is a little
bruised) will make Cordage and Sails, and the very large Nuts that grow upon it
(of which are made many excellent drinking Cups) when it is newly gathered*
has a milk-white substance that is tender (tasting like an Almond) round about
of a good substance within it; and within that a very pleasant Liquor, that is
wholesome, as well as savoury, which may for a need serve those which sail in
this Ship for meat and drink.

Now well-stored with these Nuts and other good Provisions, after six days
abode there; the breaches our Ship had lately received in fight being repaired,
and our men well refreshed, we put again to Sea the sixteenth day, and a
prosperous gale following us, were carried happily a second time under the
Aequinoctial, without the le^st heat to offend us, the 24 day of the same
Month. Our Course was for the Island of Zocotora near the mouth of the Red Sea,
from whence comes our Aloes Zocotrina; but an adverse gale from the Arabian
shore kept us so off that we could by no means recover it. We passed by it the
first of September.

Missing that Fort we proceeded on our Voyage, and the fourth of September made
a solemn Funeral in memory of our late slain Commander, when after Sermon the
small Shot and great Ordnance made a large Peal to his Remembrance.

On the sixth of September at night, to our admiration and fear, the Water of
the Sea seemed to us as white as milk, which did not appear only so in the
body of the Sea, but it looked so likewise in Buckets of water which we did
then draw out of the Sea. Others of our Narion passing on that Course have
observed the like: but I am yet to learn what should be the true reason
thereof, it being there very far from any shore, and the Sea so deep as that we
could fetch no ground.

The 21. we discovered the main Continent of Asia the Great, in which
East India takes up a large part. The 22. we had sight of Deu and Damon, places
that lie in the skirts of India, principally inhabited and well fortified by
Portugals; and the 25 of September we came happily to an Anchor in Swally-Road
within the Bay of Cambaya, the Harbor for our Fleet while they make their stay
in these remote Parts.

Then after a long, and troublesome, and dangerous passage, we came at last to
our desired Port. And immediately after my arrival there, I was sent for by Sir
Thomas Row, Lord Ambassador, then residing at the Mogol's Court (which was
very many miles up in the Country) to supply the room of Mr. John Hall his
Chaplain (Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford) whom he had not long
before buried. And I lived with that most Noble Gentleman at that Court more
than two years, after which I returned home to England with him. During which
space of my abode there I had very good advantage to take notice of very many
places, and persons, and thing, traveling with the Ambassador much in
Progress with that King up and down his very large Territories.

And now, Reader. I would have thee to suppose me setting my foot upon the
East-Indian shore at Swally before named. On the banks whereof, amongst many
more English that lie there interred, is laid up the body of Mr. Thomas*
Coryat, a man in his time Not us nimis omnibus, very sufficiently known. He
lived there, and there died while I was in those parts, and was for some Months
then with my Lord Ambassador, during which time he was either my
Chamber-fellow or Tent-mate, which gave me a full acquaintance of him. That
Greektravelling-Thomas (they which know his story know why I call him so*)
formerly wrote a Book entitled Coryats ^rud(...)ies, Printed in the beginning
of the year 1611. and then ushered into the World by very many Copies of
excellent Verses made by the Wits of those Times, which did very much advantage
and improve, if not enforce the sale thereof (doing themselves much more honor
than him whom they undertook to commend in their several Encomiasticks) And if
he had lived, he would have written his last Travels to, and in, and out of
East India, for he resolved (if God had spared him life) to have rambled up and
down the world (as sometimes Ulysses did) and though not so long as he, yet ten
full years at least before his return home, in which time he purposed to see
Tartaria in the vast parts thereof, with as much as he could of China, and
those other large Places and Provinces interposed betwixt East India and China,
whose true Names we might have had from him, but yet have not. He had a purpose
after ^his to have visited the Court of Prester John in Aethiopia, who is there
called by his own people, Ho B^ot, The King; and after this it was in his
thoughts to have cast his eyes upon many other places; which if he had done,
and lived to write those Relations, seeing as he did, or should, such variety
of Countries, Cities, Nations, Things, and been as particular in them as he was
in his Venetian Journal, they must needs have swollen into so many huge Volumns,
as would have prevented the perishing of Paper. But undoubtedly, if he had been
continued in life to have written them, there might have been made very good
Use of his Observations; for as he was a very Particular, so was he without
question a very Faithful Relator of things he saw; he ever disclaiming that
bold liberty which diverse Travelers have, and do take, by speaking and writing
any thing they please of remote parts, when they cannot easily be contradicted,
taking a Pride in their feigned Relations, to overspeak things; being resolved
in this case Not only things to do, but or'-do;
Speaking, writing all, and more too:
I therefore for my part, believing this Relaton to be none of those* have
taken some things from his trust and credit in this my following Discourse; And
because he could not live to give an account unto the world of his own Travels,
I shall here by the way make some little discovery of his footsteps and
flittings up and down, to and fro, with something besides of him, in his long
peregrinations, to satisfy very many yet living, who if they shall please to
read this Discourse, may recall that man once more into their remembrance, who
while he lived was like a perpetual motion, and therefore now dead should not
be quite forgotten.

In the year 1612. he shipped himself from London for Constantinople, now called
by the Turks Stombole, where he took special notice of all things there most
observable. In which place he found very great respect, and encouragement from
Sir Paul Pinder, then and there Ambassador, to whose House he had free and
welcome access whenever he pleased. Being there for some time, he took his
opportunities to view diverse parts in Grecia; and in the Hellespont took
special notice of those two Castles directly opposed to each other, called
Sestos and Abydos, which stand on the several banks that bound that very narrow
Sea; which Places Musaeus makes famous in his very ancient Poem of Hero and
Leander.

He desired much to see where those seven Churches sometimes famous in Asia the
Less stood; but since their sin so darkened their light, and God removed their
Candlesticks from them (as before he threatened) those Places lie so in the
dark, that it cannot be well discovered where they once were: Only Smyrna is
famous at this present day for Trade, but not Religion; and Ephesus and some
others of them keep their names still, though they left and lost their Faith,
and profession of Truth, with the rest.

He saw what yet remains of the Ruins of sometimes great Troy, but Jam Seges
est ubi Troia fuit --
That place which was once so populous as if it had been sow'n with People, And
seeded thus, had after born
Millions of men, now is sow'n with Corn. And
-- O jam periere Ruinae, the very Ruins of that place are almost all gone to
Ruin: The most observable thing there yet remaining is part of an exceeding
great House, which is continued by Tradition to have been sometimes a part of
the famous Palace of great King Priamus.

From Smyrna he found a Passage to Alexandria in Egypt, Egypt that is called by
some in regard of the Plenty it produces, the Granary or Storehouse of the
World. And in Egypt near Gran-C^iro (anciently called Memphis) he observed what
remains of the once famed Pyramids. Returning thence back to Alexandria with
one Englishman more, they found a pass by Sea to Jatta* anciently called Joppa,
and there they met some others going to Jerusalem, which is about twenty
English miles distant from Joppa, whence they departed together toward
Jerusalem, and found it a very solitary, rocky, uncomfortable way, full of
danger, by reason of the wild Arabs who keep about those Passages to make poor
Travelers their prey and spoil. But they came safe to Jerusalem, now inhabited
by Turks, and that place called by them Cutts; where he told me, that himself
and his Companion were courteously received by the Father Guardian of the
Convent of Franciscan Friars that keep their residence in Jerusalem, and by
some of them were met at the Gate of the City, where they were compelled by the
Turkish Soldiers who keep those Gates (as all others that bear the names of
Christians, are) at their first coming thither to redeem their heads by paying
each of them the value of five shillings, before they could have admittance
into that place; which they had no sooner ^nt^^d* but they were presently
carried by those Franciscans which met them to their Convent; and then the
first thing they did to or for them, they washed their feet, then set some
comfortable refection before them, and after went in Procession about a little
Cloister they had, praising God that he had brought in safety those two
Votaries (as they called them) to visit that Holy Place. A day or two after
they accompanied them to Bethlehem, the place of our Blessed Saviors birth,
about five English miles distant from Jerusalem; and in the way betwixt those
two places showed them a Rock, on which (as they said) the Blessed Virgin sat
down, as she went on a time betwixt Jerusalem and Bethlehem, to give her Babe
suck; and that the Rock might not feel hard under her, it yielded (as they told
them) to her body like a Cushion, and that impression made by her so sitting
remains unto this day; and is most devoutly kissed by Votaries as they pass
up and down. After this they returning back showed them all that was to be seen
in and about Jerusalem. Many particulars they told them (stories which are
there kept by Tradition) concerning our Blessed Savior and his Mother: Then
they had a sight of as much of Mount Calvarie (where our Blessed Savior
suffered) as could be showed them, that Hill being now enclosed within the Walls
of Jerusalem. They undertook to show them afterward the place wherein our
Blessed Savior was buried; and after that upon Mount Olivet, the very place
whence he after ascended, where upon a Rock there was an impression of the
former part of two feet, such as is seen in soft earth, when a man lifts up his
body to leap thence; and these Franciscans confidently affirmed, and seemed
undoubtedly to believe, that it was so as they showed and told them. Many other
things they affirmed, which being but Circumstantials, (though appertaining to
the best of all stories) were enough for these Pilgrims to believe, and enough
to make doubt of.

At Jerusalem this our Traveller had made upon the Wrists of his left Arm the
Arms of Jerusalem, a Cross Crossed, or Crosslets; and on the Wrist of his
right, a single Cross made like that our Blessed Savior suffered on; and on
the sides of the stem or tree of that Cross these words written, Via, Veritas,
Vita* some of the letters being put on the one side of that stem or tree, and
some of them on the other; and at the foot of that Cross three Nails, to
signify those which fastened our Savior unto it: All these impressions were
made by sharp Needles bound together, that pierced only the skin, and then a
black Powder put into the Places so pierced, which became presently indelible
Characters, to continue with him so long as his flesh should be covered with
skin: And they were done upon his Arms so artificially, as if they had been
drawn by some accurate Pencil upon Parchment. This poor man would pride himself
very much in the beholding of those Characters, and seeing them would often
speak those words of St. Paul written to the Galatians, Gal. 6. 17. (though far
besides the Apostles meaning) I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

Now after that himself and Camrade had seen what they desired in and about
Jerusalem, they took their leave of those Franciscans, leaving with them money
to recompense the curtesy they had received from them; the Friars being very
poor, and consequently unable to entertain them freely without requitals.

From hence they took their way to take a view of the Dead Sea (so called,
either because the water therein is still, and moves not, or because no living
Creature is in it, and nothing thrives on the banks thereof) the place where
Sodom and Gomorrah, and Admah and Zeboim once stood, those Cities which
Almighty God overthrew in anger, and repented not, Jer. 20. 16. Hence they went
to have a sight of the River Jordan, which discharges it self into that most
uncomfortable Lake; and from hence they journied North-east through those ten
Tribes, (which for the sin of Solomon were rent from his son Rehoboam) till
they came to Mount Libanus. Thence back to Sidon, which retains that name
still. And here he told me as his last observation made in that Land of Cauaan,
sometimes (like the Garden of the Lord) flowing with milk and honey, being then
enriched with a very great variety, and abundance of Gods good Creatures; and
in the days of David so populous, that there were numbered in it at one time
thirteen hundred thousand fighting men, 2 Samuel 24. 9. besides Women and
Children, and others unfit to draw swords; which was a most wonderful thing, to
consider that such a spot of ground in comparison, not above one hundred and
sixty miles in length, from Dan to Beersheba, and not above sixty miles in
breadth, from Joppa to Jordan, should be able to bear and feed such a numerous
people; and now the very self-same tract of Earth, either for want of manuring,
or (which is rather to be conceived) for the want of the blessing of Almighty
God which once shined upon it, but now long since withdrawn from it, (For a
fruitful Land the Lord makes barren for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein, Psalm. 107. 34.) is now become unable to sustein one in an hundred of
such a number.

From Sidon they got a passage by Sea unto Alexandretta, now called Scanderoon
(in the extremest bottom of the Mediterranean Sea) which is one of the
unwholsomest places in the World; where I have often heard that no Stranger
(that was born far from it) comes to continue there for the space of one Month,
but is sure to meet with a sickness, which very often proves Mortal. At this
place his English Companion left him, and turned his face toward England, and
he presently took his way toward Aleppo in Syria, about seventy miles or more
distant from Scanderoon, which is as much renowned for wholsomness, as the
place beforenamed for being unwholesome; and therefore it is called, sweet-air'd
Aleppo. Here he being kindly received by the English Consul, stayed a time to
gain the company of a Carava^, which consists of a great mixed multitude of
people from diverse parts, which get and keep together traveling those parts,
for fear of the incursions and violences by Thieves and Murderers, which they
would undoubtedly meet withal, if they traveled single, or but few together.
With these he after set forwards toward, and to that City anciently called
Nineveh in Assyria, which we find in the Prophecy of Jonah was sometimes a
great and excellent City of three days journey, Jonah 3. 3. but now so
exceedingly lessened and lodged in obscurity, that passengers cannot say of it,
this was Nineveh, which now has its old name changed, and is called Mozel.
From hence they journied to Babylon in Chaldaea, situated upon the River
Euphrates, once likewise so great that Aristotle called it a Country, not a
City, but now it is very much contracted, and it is called Bagdat. From this
place they proceeded through both the Armeniaes, and either did, or else our
Traveller was made to believe, that he saw the very Mountain Ararat whereon the
Ark of Noah rested after the Flood, Genesis 8. And from hence they went forward
toward the Kingdom of Persia, and there to Uzspahan, the usual place of
residence for that great King, then called Sha Abbas, or King Abbas. And after
they went to Seras, anciently called Shushan, where the great King Ahasuerus
kept his Royal and most Magnificent Court, Est. 1 From hence they journied
afterward to Candahor, the first Province North east under the subjection of
the Great Mogol and so to Lahore the chiefest City but one belonging to that
great Empire; a place, as I have been often told by Tom: Coryat and others of
very great trade, wealth and delight, lying more temperately out of the
Parching Sun than any other of his great Cities do: And to this City he wanted
not Company, nor afterward to Agra, the Mogol's Metropolis or chief City.

And here it is very observable, that from Lahore to Agra it is four hundred
English miles, and that the Country betwixt both these great Cities is rich,
even, pleasant and flat, a Campania; and the rode-way on both sides all this
long distance planted with great Trees which are all the year clothed with
leaves exceeding beneficial unto Travelers for the shade they afford them in
those hot Climes. This very much extended length of way 'twixt these two places
is called by Travelers the Long Walk, very full of Villages and Towns for
Passengers every where to find Provision.

At Agra our Traveller made an halt, being there lovingly received in the
English Factory, where he staid till he had gotten to his Turkish, and Morisco
or Arabian Languages, some good knowledge in the Persian and Indostan Tongues,
in which study he was always very apt. and in little time showed much
proficiency. The first of those two, the Persian, is the more quaint; the
other, the Indostan, the vulgar Language spoken in East India: In both these he
suddenly got such a knowledge and mastery, that it did exceedingly afterward
advantage him in his Travels up and down the Mogol's Territories, he wearing
always the Habit of that Nation, and speaking their Language.

In the first of these, the Persian tongue, he made afterward an Oration to
the Great Mogol, bringing in that Story of the Queen of Sheba, 1 King. 10. (in
which parts of that Sacred Historic the Mahumetans have some knowledge) and he
told him, that as the Queen of Sheba having heard of the fame of King Solomon,
came from far to visit him, which when she had done, she confessed that though
she had heard very much of him and many things beyond her belief, yet now
seeing what she did, acknowledged that she had not heard half of that which she
now saw concerning the Wisdom, and Greatness, and Re^inue, and Riches of
Solomon: So our Orator told the Mogol, that he had heard very much of him
before he had the Honor to see him (when he was very far off in his own
Country) but now what he beheld did exceedingly surmount all those former
Reports of him which came to his ears at such a distance from him: Then larding
his short Speech with some other pieces of Flattery, which the Mogol liked
well, concluded: And when he had done, the Mogol gave him one hundred Roopus,
which amounts to the value of twelve pounds and ten shillings of of our English
Money; looking upon him as a Derveese, or Votary, or Pilgrim (for so he called
him) and such as bear that name in that Country seem not much to care for
money, and that was the reason (I conceive) that he gave him not a more
plentiful Reward.

After this he having got a great mastery likewise in the Indostan or more
vulgar Language, there was a woman, a Landress, belonging to my Lord
Ambassadors house, who had such a freedom and liberty of speech, that she
would sometimes scould, brawl and rail from the Sunrising to Sunset; one day
he undertook her in her own language, and by eight of the clock in the morning
so silenced her, that she had not one word more to speak.

I shall have occasion to say more of this man in some passages of this
following Discourse, and therefore shall not wrap all I have to speak of him in
this, although it be a very long digression: Yet because I must now shortly
bring you to his journies end, I shall take the freedom to enlarge my self a
little further concerning him here in this place, before I leave him for the
present; and to give thee, Reader, a piece of his Character, it speaks thus:

That he was a man of a very coveting eye, that could never be satisfied with
seeing, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 1. 8. though he had seen very much; and I am
persuaded that he took as much content in seeing, as many others in the
enjoying of Great and Rare things. He was a man that had got the mastery of
many hard Languages (as before I observed) to the Latin and Greek he brought
forth of England with him; in which, if he had obtained wisdom to husband and
manage them as he had skill to speak them, he had deserved more fame in his
generation. But his knowledge and high seize in several Languages made
him not a little ignorant of himself, he being so covetous, so ambitious of
praise, that he would hear and endure more of it than he could in any measure
deserve; being like a Ship that has too much Sail, and too little Ballast: Yet
if he had not fallen into the smart hands of the Wits of those Times, he might
have passed better. That itch of Fame which engaged this man to the
undertakings of those very hard, and long, and dangerous Travels, has put
thousands more (and therefore he was not alone in this) into strange attempts
only to be talked of.

One long ago built a Temple to Diana in hope of Glory, intending it for one of
the Great Wonders of the World; Another after in hope of Fame burnt it. Whither
will not the thirst of Fame carry men! It has made some seek to climb up to
Heaven, though by a wrong way: Thus the Builders of Babel say one to another,
Let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach up to Heaven, and let
us make us a Name, Genesis 11. 4 And it has made others, who are penurious of
their Honor, and prodigal of their Souls, not fear to run down headlong into
Hell. 'Twas Fame, without doubt, that stirred up this man unto these voluntary,
but hard undertakings, and the Hope of that Glory which he should reap after he
had finished his long Travels, made him not at all to take notice of the
hardship he found in them. That hope of name and repute for the time to come
did even feed and feast him for the time present. And therefore any thing that
did in any measure eclipse him in those high conceivings of his own worth, did
too too much trouble him, which you may collect from these following instances.

Upon a time one Mr. Richard Steel a Merchant and servant to the East India
Company, came unto us from Surat to Mandoa, the place then of the Mogol's
residence (of which place somewhat more hereafter) at which time Mr. Coryat was
there with us* This Merchant had not long before traveled over-land from
East India, through Persia, and so to Constantinople, and so for England; who
in his travel homeward had met with Tom: Coryat, as he was journeying toward
East India; Mr. Steel then told him, that when he was in England, King James
(then living) enquired after him, and when he had certified the King of his
meeting him on the way, the King replied, Is that Fool yet living? which, when
our Pilgrim heard, it seemed to trouble him very much, because the King spoke
no more nor no better of him; saying, that Kings would speak of poor men what
they pleased.

At another time when he was ready to depart from us, my Lord Ambassador gave
him a Letter, and in that a Bill to receive ten pounds at Aleppo when he should
return thither: The Letter was directed unto Mr. Libbeus Chapman, there Consul
at that time, in which that which concerned our Traveller was thus: Mr.
Chapman, when you shall hand these Letters, I desire you to receive the Bearer
of them, Mr. Thomas Coryat, with curtesy, for you shall find him a very honest
poor Wretch; and further I must entreat you to furnish him with ten pounds,
which shall be repayed, etc. Our Pilgrim lik^d tho gift well, but the language
by which he should have received it did not at all content him, telling me,
That my Lord had, even spoiled his curtesy in the carriage thereof; so that if
he had been a very Fool indeed, he could have said very little less of him than
he did, Honest poor Wretch! and to say no more of him was to say as much as
nothing. And furthermore he then told me, that when he was formerly undertaking
his journey to Venice, a Person of Honor wrote thus in his behalf unto Sir
Henry Wott^n, then and there Embassodour: My Lord, Good Wine needs no Bush,
neither a Worthy man Letters Commendatory, because whithersoever he comes he is
his own Epistle, etc. There (said he) was some language on my behalf; but now
for my Lord to write nothing of me by way of Commendation, but Honest poor
Wretch, is rather to trouble me than to please me with his favor. And
therefore afterward his Letter was phras'd up to his mind, but he never lived
to receive the money. By which his old acquaintance may see how tender this
poor man was to be touched in any thing that might in the least measure
disparago him. O what pains this poor man took to make himself a Subject for
present and after discourse! being troubled at nothing for the present, unless
with the fear of not living to reap that fruit he was so ambitious of in all
his undertakings. And certainly he was surprised with some such thoughts and
fears (for so he told us afterward) when upon a time he being at Mandoa with
us, and there standing in a room against a stone Pillar, where the Ambassador
was, and my self present with them, upon a sudden he fell into such a swoon,
that we had very much ado to recover him out of it; but at last, come to
himself, he told us that some sad thoughts had immediately before presented
themselves to his Fancy, which as he conceived put him into that distemper;
like Fannius in Martial -- Ne moriare mori, to prevent death by dying: For he
told us that there were great Expectations in England of the large Accounts he
should give of his Travels after his return home; and that he was now shortly
to leave us, and he being at present not very well, if he should dye in the way
toward Surat, whither he was now intended to go, (which place he had not as yet
seen) he might be buried in Obscurity, and none of his Friends ever know what
became of him, he traveling now, as he usually did, alone. Upon which my Lord
willed him to stay longer with us, but he thankfully refused that offer, and
turned his face presently after toward Surat, which was then about three
hundred miles distant from us, and he lived to come safely thither: but there
being over-kindly used by some of the English who gave him Sack, which they had
brought from England, he calling for it as soon as he first heard of it, and
crying, Sack, Sack: Is there such a thing as Sack! I pray give me some Sack:
and drinking of it, though, I conceive, moderately (for he was a very temperate
man) it increased his Flux which he had then upon him; and this caused him
within a few days after his very tedious and troublesome Travels (for he went
most on foot) at this place to come to his Journies end; for here he overtook
Death in the Month of December, 1617. and was buried (as a foresaid) under a
little Monument, like one of those are usually made in our Churchyards: On
which he should have been remembered by this or the like Epitaph, if it could
have been there engraved upon his Tomb.

Here lies the Wanderer of his age,
Who living did rejoice,
Not out of need but choice,
To make his life a Pilgrimage.
He spent full many precious days,
As if he had his being
To wast his life in seeing;
More thought to spend, to gain him Praise.
Some weaknesses appeared his stains:
Though some seem very wise,
Some yet are otherwise.
Good Gold may be allowed its Grains.
Many the Places which he eyed;
And though he should have been
In all parts yet unseen,
His eye had not been satisfied.
To fill it when he found no Room
By the choice things he saw
In Europe and vast Asia,
Fell blinded in this narrow Tomb.
Sic exit Coryatus; Hence he went off the Stage, and so must all after him, how
long soever their parts seem to be: For if one should go to the extremest part
of the World East, another West, another North, and another South, they must
all meet at last together in the Field of Bones, wherein our Traveller has now
taken up his Lodging, and where I leave him. And shall now proceed to give an
account of what I have undertaken, and do principally intend in the description
of the large Territories under the subjection of the Great Mogol. Which
following Discourse (that I may put it into, and after continue it in some due
order) I shall digest into several Parts or Sections: As,

SECTION I.
Of the several Provinces, the chief Cities, the Principal Rivers, the extent
of this vast Empire in its length and breadth.

THE most spacious Monarchy under the subjection of the Great Mogol divides it
self into thirty and seven several and large Provinces, which anciently were
particular Kingdoms, whose true Names (which we there had out of the Mogol's
own Records) with their Principal Cities and Rivers, their Situation and
Borders, their Extent in length and breadth, I shall first set down very
briefly, beginning at the North-west. Yet as I name these several Provinces, I
shall by the way take notice of some particulars in them which are most
remarkable.

1. Candahore, the chief City so called; it lies from the heart of the Mogol's
Territories North-west; it confines with the King of Persia, and was anciently
a Province belonging to him.

2. Cabut, the chief City so called, the extremest part North of this Emperors
Dominions; it confineth with ^artaria; the River Nilob has its beginning in
it, whose Current is Southerly till it discharges it self into Indus.

3. Multan, the chief City so called; it lies South from Cabut and Candahore,
and to the West joins with Persia. This Province is famed for many excellent
Bows and Arrows made in it: The Bows made of Horn; excellently glued and put
together; the Arrows of small Canes or Reeds, both of them curiously set off by
rich Paint and Varnish: They which are made here are more neat and good than in
any part of East India besides.

4. Haiacan, the Province of the Baloches, who are a very stout and warlike
people that dare fight. I insert this, because there are infinite multitudes of
people in the Mogol's Territories who appear as likely as these, but so
lowspirited (as I shall after observe) that they dare not sight. This Province
has no renowned City. The famous River Indus (called by the Inhabitants Skind)
borders it on the East; and Lar, a Province belonging to the King of Persia,
meets it on the West.

5. Buckor, the chief City called Buckor-Succor; that famous River Indus makes
its way through it, and gently enricheth it.

6. Tatta, the chief City so called; the River Indus makes many Islands in it
exceeding fruitful and pleasant, the Main Current whereof meets with the Sea at
Sinde, a place very famous for many curious Handicrafts.

7. Soret, the chief City is called Janagar; it is but a little Province yet
very rich; it lies upon Guzarat; it has the Ocean to the South.

8. Jesselmure, the chief City so called; it joyneth with Soret; but Buckor and
Tatta lie to the West thereof.

9. ^ttack, the chief City so called; it lies on the East side of Indus, which
parts it from Hai^can.

10. Peniab, which signifies five Waters, for that it is seated amongst five
Rivers, all Tributaries to Indus; which, somewhat South of Labor, make but one
Current: It is a large Province; and most fruitful. Lahore is the chief City
thereof, built very large, and abounds both in people and riches, one of the
most principal Cities for Trade in all India.

11. Chishm^ere, the chief City called Siranakar; the River Bhat finds a way
through it, though it be very mountainous, and so creeps to the Sea.

12. Banchish, the chief City is called Bishur; it lies East, somewhat
Southerly from Chishmeere, from which it is divided by the River Indus.

13. Jangapore, the chief City so called; it lies upon the River Kaul, one of
those five Rivers which water Peniab.

14. Jenba, the chief City so called; it lies East of Peniab.

15. Dellee (which signifies an Heart, and is seated in the heart of the
Mogol's Territories) the chief City so called; it lies between Jenba and Agra;
the River Jemni (which runs through Agra, and after falls into Ganges)
begins in it. This Dellee is both an ancient and a great City, the Seat of the
Mogol's Ancestors, where most of them lie interred. It was once the City and
Seat of King Porus, who was conquered about this place by Alexander the Great,
and here he encountering with huge Elephants as well as with a mighty Host of
Men, said, as Curtius reports, Tandem par animo meo inveni periculum, That he
had met with dangers to equal his great mind. I was told by ^om: Cor^at (who
took special notice of this place) that he being in the City of Dellee,
observed a very great Pillar of Marble, with a Greek inscription upon it, which
time has almost quite worn out, erected (as he supposed) there, and then, by
Great Alexander, to preserve the memory of that famous Victory.

16. Bando, the chief City so called; it confineth Agra to the West.

17. Malway, a very fruitful Province; Rantipore is its chief City.

18. Chitor, an ancient great Kingdom, the chief City so called, which
stands upon a mighty high Hill flat on the top, walled about at the least ten
English miles. There appear to this day above an hundred ruined Churches, and
diverse* fair Palaces, which are lodged in like manner among their Ruins,
besides many exquisite Pillars of Carved Stone, and the Ruins likewise at the
least of an hundred thousand stone houses, as many English by their observation
have ghessed. There is but one ascent unto it, cut out of a firm Rock, to which
a man must pass through four (sometimes very magnificent) Gates. Its chief
Inhabitants at this day are Ziim and Ohim, Birds and Wild Beasts; but the
stately Ruins thereof give a shadow of its Beauty while it flourished in its
Pride. It was won from Ranas, an ancient Indian Prince, who was forced to live
himself ever after in high mountainous places adjoining to that Province, and
his Posterity to live there ever since. Taken from him it was by Achabar Padsha
(the Father of that King who lived and reigned when I was in those parts) after
a very long sieg^; which fa^^ished the besieged, without which it could never
have been gotten. Let me digress here a little; and put my Reader in mind of a
sad truth which he must needs know already, how that this Hunger is the most
powerful Commander, the most absolute Conqueror in the World; for though
Nature may be content, and in extremi^ies can make shift with a little, yet
something must be had; Bread being the Staff of Life, the Prop, the Pillar
which next under the Giver hereof keeps up these Houses of Gla^. Earthly
Enemies, be they never so many, never so mighty, may be long opposed, but
Famine is irresistible. A man may flee from a Sword, the Arrow of Pestilence
may misshim; but there is no defense nor resistance against Hunger, against
Thirst; which sometimes made the besieged Bethulians (as their Story relates)
to faint and dye in the streets of their City for want of water. The Widow of
Zarepthah was in a very low condition (in a time of a most miserable Famine)
when she told the Prophet Elias, that she had left for her sustenance but an
handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oil in a Cruse, and she was gathering
two sticks to dress it for her self and son, that they might eat and dye, 1
Kings 17. 12. For when that Provision was gone, all was gone: O how great is
the extremity of Famine! in which some have been threatened to eat their own
dung, and to drink their own piss, 2 Kings 18. 27. In what a sad case were the
people in the siege of Samaria, when one woman said unto another, Give me thy
son and we will eat him to day, and we will eat my son to morrow? 2 Kings 6.
29. So in the siege and streightness of Jerusalem, when the Women did eat the
fruit of their own bodies, their Children of a span long, Lam. 2. 20. when by
reason of Famine the visages of these men were made blacker than coals, and the
hands of pitiful women were forced, by reason of the most grievous extremities,
by the want of all bodily provisions, to boil their own children to be their
meat. Lam. 4. 8. It were well if people in the enjoyment of spread Tables, and
full Cups, would be often thinking of such sad stories, which indeed are much
better apprehended by the empty, than by full and pampered bellies: Ingens
telum necessitas: there is no such strong prevailing weapon as want, as want of
food is; the loss (as it has been of many other places) so of this (sometimes
most famous) City: And thus, gained, as it was, by the command of the
Conqueror, so, now, it is demolished.

19. Guzarat, a very goodly, and large, and an exceeding rich Province; it
encloseth the Bay of Cambaya; its chief City is Amadavaz; besides, it has in
it Cambaya, Brodera, Baroch and Surat, fair Cities; but the first of those I
named, more spacious, and populous, and rich, than any of the other. It is
watered with many goodly Rivers, as that of Cambaya (falsely supposed to be
Indus) with the River Narbodah (passing by Baroch, and so to the Sea) with the
River Taplee, which waters Surat. The Merchants which are the Natives of this
Province trade to the Red Sea, to Achin, and to diverse other places.

20. Chandis, the chief City called Brampore, which is very great, and rich,
and full of people. Adjoining to this Province lived a petty Prince, called
Partapsha, tributary to the Mogol; and this is the most Southernmost part of
all his Territories.

21. Berar, the chief City is called Shapore, the Southernmost part whereof
does likewise bound this Empire.

22. Narvar, the chief City is called Gehud; it is watered by a fair River that
much enricheth it, and discharges it self into Ganges.

23. Gwaliar, the chief City so called, where the Mogol has a very rich
Treasury of Gold and Silver kept in this City, within an exceeding strong
Castle, wherein the Kings Prisoners are likewise kept. The Castle is
continually guarded by a very strong Company of Armed Soldiers.

24. Agra, a principal and very rich Province, the chief City so called, this
great Emperors Metropolis, in North Latitude about twenty eight Degrees and an
half. It is very well watered by the River Jemni. This and Lahore are the two
principal and choice Cities of this Empire, betwixt whom is that Long Walk (I
made mention of before) of four hundred miles in length, shaded by great Trees
on both sides: This is looked upon by Travelers, who have found the comfort of
that cool shade, as one of the rarest and most beneficial Works in the whole
World.

25. Sanbat, the chief City so called: the River Jemni parts it from Narvar;
and after at the City Hellabass falls into that most famous River Ganges, which
is called by the Inhabitants of East India, Ganga.

26. Bakar, the chief City called Bikaneer; it lies on the West side of the
River Ganges.

27. Nagracot, the chief City so called* in which there is a Chapel most richly
set forth, being seeled and paved with Plate of pure Silver, most curiously
imbossed over head in several Figures, which they keep exceeding bright by
often rubbing and burnishing it; and all this cost those poor seduced Indians
are at, to do honor to an Idol they keep in that Chapel. What charge can
Heathenish Idolaters be content to bear for their gross Idolatry! nothing is
too rich, too precious, or too dear for their Idol. And what cost the
Superstitious Israelites were content to bear for their lewd devotion, we may
further see, Exodus 32. 2. they are ready to give their Gold, not out of their
Purses only, but from their Ears too to further their misdevotion; most
willing they were to part with their Jewels to their Molten God. O how do these
Heathens and these Israelites condemn thousands, which call themselves
Christians, who cannot abide to be at any cost for Religion! That service of
God which is most cheap and chargeless, they like best. Those I first named
were ready to give freely to their false Gods, these to take all they can from
the true God, being very Prodigals for their Lusts, very Niggards for their
Souls. The Idol thus kept in that so Richly adorned Chapel, they call Matta,
and it is continually visited by those poor blinded Infidels, who, out of the
officiousness of their Devotion, cut off some part of their Tongues to offer
unto it as a Sacrifice; which (they say) grow out again as before: but in this
I shall leave my Reader to a belief as much suspensive as is my own in this
particular. In this Province likewise there is another famous Pilgrimage to a
place called Jallamakee, where, out of cold Springs that issue out from amongst
hard Rocks, are daily to be seen continued Eruptions of Fire, before which the
Idolatrous People fall down and worship. Both these places were seen, and
strictly observed by Mr. Coryat.

28. Siba, the chief City is called Hardware, where the famous River Ganges
passing through or amongst large Rocks, makes presently after a pretty full
Current: but both this and that other great River Indus have their Rise and
Original out of the Mountain Caucasus, from whence they both first issue. That
principal Rock, through which this River Ganges there makes a Current, is
indeed, or (if not) according to the fancy of the Superstitious Indians, like a
Cowes Head, which of all sensible Creatures they love best (of which more
hereafter) thither they assemble themselves daily in Troops to wash their
bodies, ascribing a certain Divinity to Waters, but more especially to the
Water in the River Ganges. And thither our famous Coryat went likewise to view
this place.

29. Kakares, the principal Cities are called Dekal^e and Purhola; it is a
large Province, but exceeding mountainous; divided it is from Tartaria by the
Mountain Caucasus; it is the extremest part North under the Mogol's subjection.

30. Gor, the chief City so called; it is full of Mountains; the River Sersily,
a tributary unto Ganges, has its beginning in it.

31. Pitan, the chief City so called; the River Canda waters it, and falls into
Ganges in the Confines thereof.

32. Kanduana, the chief City is called Karhakatenka; the River Sersily parts
it from Pitan: This and Gor are the North-east bounds of this Monarchy.

33. Patna, the chief City so called; the River Ganges bounds it on the West.
Sersily on the East; it is a very fertile Province.

34. Jesuat, the chief City is called Ra^apore; it lies East of Patna.

35. Mevat, the chief City is called Narnol; it is very mountaino^s.

36. Udessa, the chief City called Jikanat; it is the most remote part East of
this Empire.

37. Bengala, a most spacious and fruitful Province, but more properly to be
called a Kingdom, which has two very large Provinces within it, Purb and
Patan, the one lying on the East, the other on the West Side of the River
Ganges: It is limited by the Golph of the same name, whereinto the River Ganges
(which at last comes to be divided into four great Currents) discharges it
self, after it has found a way through the Mogol's Territories more than
fifteen hundred miles in length The chief Cities in it are Ragamahat and
Dekaka. It has many Havens and Ports belonging unto it, which are places of
very great trade.

Now these are the several Provinces belonging to the Great Mogol, and all of
them under his subjection, which may be beheld all together at one view in this
most exact affixed Map, first made by theespecial observation and direction of
that most able and honorable Gentleman Sir Thomas Row, here contracted into a
less compass; yet large enough to demonstrate, that this great Empire is
bounded on the East with the Kingdom of Maug; West, with Persia; and with the
Main Ocean Southerly; North with the Mountain Caucasus and Tartaria, South with
Decan and the Gulf of Bengala. Decan, lying in the skirts of Asia, is divided
betwixt three Mahumeran Princes, and some other Indian Rhaiaes, which are
Princes likewise.

The length of these Provinces is North-west to South-west more than two
thousand English miles; North and South the extent thereof is about fourteen
hundred miles; the Southermost part lying in twenty, and the Northernmost in
forty and three degrees of North Latitude.

The breadth of this much enlarged and far extended Empire is North-east to
South-west about fifteen hundred of the same miles.

And here a great error in Geographers must not escape my notice, who in their
Globes and Maps make East India and China near Neighbors, when as many large
Countries are interposed betwixt them; which great distance may appear by the
long travel of the Indian Merchants, who are usually (they going and returning
all the way by Land) in their journey, and return, and some stay there, two
full years* from Agra to China.

Now to give an exact account of all those forenamed Provinces, were more than
I am able to undertake; yet out of that which I have observed in some of them
(by traveling many miles up into that Country* and then up and down with my
Lord Ambassador unto many places there in progress with that King) I shall
adventure to ghess at all, and think for my particular, that the Great Mogol,
considering his most large Territories, his full and great Treasures, with the
many rich Commodities his Provinces afford, is the greatest and richest known
King of the East, if not of the whole World. I shall now therefore fall upon
particulars to make that my observation good: Where

SECTION II.
Of the Soil there, what it is, and what it produces, etc.

THis most spacious and fertile Monarchy (called by the Inhabitants Indostan)
so much abounds in all necessaries for the use and service of man, to feed, and
cloth, and enrich him, as that it is able to subsist and flourish of it self,
without the least help from any Neighbour-Prince or Nation.

Here I shall speak first of that which Nature requires most, Food, which this
Empire brings forth in abundance; as, singular good Wheat, Rice, Barley, with
diverse more kinds of good Grain to make Bread (the staff of life) and all these
sorts of Corn in their kinds, very good and exceeding cheap. For their Wheat,
it is more full and more white than ours, of which the Inhabitants make such
pure, well-relished Bread, that I may say of it, as one sometimes spoke of the
Bread made in the Bishopric of Liege, it is Panis Pane melior, Bread better
than Bread.

The ordinary sort of people eat Bread made of a coarser Grain, but both
toothsome, and wholesome, and hearty; they make it up in broad Cakes, thick like
our Oaten-cakes; and then bake it upon small round iron hearths, which they
carry with them when they journey from place to place, making use of them in
their Tents. It should seem to be an ancient Custom in the East, as may appear
by that president of Sarah when she entertained the Angels, who found her in
her Tent; She took fine meal, and did knead it, and made Cakes thereof upon the
hearth, Genesis 18. 6.

To their Bread they have great abundance of all other good Provision, as of
Butter (beating their Cream into a substance like unto a thick Oil, for in that
hot Climate they can never make it hard) which though soft, yet it is very
sweet and good. They have Cheese likewise in plenty, by reason of their great
number of Kine, and Sheep, and Goats. Besides, they have a Beast very large,
having a smooth thick skin without hair, called a Buffelo, which gives good
milk; the flesh of them is like Beef, but neither so toothsome nor wholesome.
These Buffeloes are much employed in carrying large skins of water (for they
are very strong Beasts) which hang on both sides of them, unto Families that
want it: their Hides make the most firm and excellent Buff.

They have no want of Venison of diverse kinds, as Red-Deer, Fallow-Deer, Elks
(which are very large, and strong, and fierce Creatures) Antilops, Kids, etc.
but their Deer are no where imparked, the whole Empire being (as it were) a
Forest for them; for a man can travel no way but he shall here and there see
of them. But because they are every man's Game that will make them so, they do
not multiply to do them much hurt, either in their Corn, or other places.

To these, they have great store of Hares, and they have plenty of Fowls wild
and tame, as abundance of Hens, Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Turtle-Doves,
Partriches, Peacocks, Quails, and many other singular good Fowl. They have
variety of Fish; all which, by reason of their Plenty. and because many of the
Natives eat no kind of Flesh at all* nor of any thing that has or may have
life, and those that feed on such things eat not freely of any of those living
Creatures they are all bought there at such easy rates, as if they were not
worth the valuing. They do not cut their Chickens when they be little to make
Capons, and therefore they have no Creatures of that name, but men, their
Eunuchs called there Cogees or Capons in their Language: so made, when they be
very young, and then deprived of all that might after provoke jealousy; and
therefore they are put to be attendants on their women, the great men of that
Nation keeping many of them, a soft, tender people, tener Spado, as Juvenal
calls one of them, that never come to have any Hair on their Faces.

But to return again to their Provisions, the Beeves of that Country differ
from ours, in that there are none of them very large; and those they have, have
each of them a great bunch of grisly flesh which grows upon the meeting of
their shoulders. The flesh of their Beeves is much whiter than the flesh of
ours, and very sweet, tender and good. Their Sheep differ from ours by their
great fleshy Bob-tails, which severed from their bodies are very ponderous.
Their Wool is generally coarse, but their flesh is not so.

Now to season all their good Provisions, there is great store of Salt; and to
sweeten all, abundance of Sugar growing in that Country; which, after it is
well refined, may be there had at a very low rate; out of which they make very
pure white Sugar Candy, which may be had there at a small easy Price likewise.

Their Fruits are every way answerable to the rest, the Country abounding in
Musk-Melons (very much better, because they are better digested there by the
heat of the Sun, than these with us) They have many Water-Melons, a very choice
good Fruit, and some of them as big as our ordinary Pompions, and in shape like
them; the substance within this Fruit is spongie, but exceeding tender and well
tasted, of a color within equally mixed with red and white, and within that an
excellent cooling and pleasing liquor. Here are likewise store of Pome-granats,
Pome-citrons; here are Limons and Oranges, but I never found any there so good
as I have seen elsewhere. Here are Dates, Figs, Grapes, Prunelloes, Almonds,
Coquernuts (of which I observed something before) and here they have those most
excellent Plums called Mirabolans, the stone of which Fruit differs very much
from others in its shape, whereon Nature has curiously quartered several
strakes equally divided, very pretty to behold; many of which choice Plums
(they write) are very cordial, and therefore worth the prizing, are there well
preserved, and sent for England.

They have to these another Fruit we English there call a Planten, of which
many of them grow in Clusters together; long they are in shape, made like unto
slender Cucumbers, and very yellow when they are Ripe, and then taste like unto
a Norwich Pear, but much better. Another most excellent Fruit they have, called
a Manggo, growing upon Trees as big as our Walnut-trees; and as these here, so
those Trees there, will be very full of that most excellent Fruit, in shape and
color like unto our Apricocks, but much bigger; which taken and rolled in a
man's hands when they are through ripe, the substance within them becomes like
the pap of a roasted Apple, which then sucked out from about a large stone they
have within them, is delicately pleasing unto every Palate that tastes it. And
to conclude with the best of all other their choice Fruits, the An^anas, like
unto our Pine-Apples, which seems to the Taster to be a most pleasing Compound
made of Strawberies, Claret Wine, Rose Water and Sugar well tempered together.
In the Northernmost parts of this Empire they have variety of Pears and Apples,
every where good Roots, as Carrets, Potatoes, and others like them. They have
Onions and Garlic, and some Herbs and small Roots for Salads; and in the
Southernmost parts, Ginger growing almost in every place: the large Races
whereof are there very excellently well preserved, as we may know by our
tasting them in England. And all these things I have last named may be there
likewise bought at very low rates And lastly, some one kind or other of their
very good and choice Fruits may be there had at every time or season of the
Year.

And here I cannot choose but take notice of a very pleasant and clear liquor,
called Toddie issuing from a Spongie Tree, that grows strait and tall without
Bows to the top, and there spreads out in tender branches, very like unto
those that grow from the Roots of our rank and rich Artichokes, but much bigger
and longer. This Toddie-tree is not so big, but that it may be very easily
embraced, and the nimble people of that Country will climb up as fast to the
top thereof (the stem of the Tree being rough and crusty) as if they had the
advantage of Ladders to help them up. In the top tender branches of those Trees
they make incisions, which they open and stop again as they please, under which
they hang Pots made of large and light Gourds, to preserve the influence which
issues out of them in a large quantity in the night season, they stopping up
those vents in the heat of the day. That which thus distills forth in the night,
if it be taken very early in the morning, is as pleasing to the taste as any new
Whitewine, and much clearer than it. It is a very piercing, and medicinable,
and moffensive drink, if taken betimes in the day, only it is a little windy:
but if it be kept till the heat of the day, the Sun alters it so, as if it made
it another kind of liquor, for it becomes then very heady, not so well
relished, and unwholesome; and when it is so not a few of our drunken Seamen
choose to drink it; and I think they so do, because it will then presently turn
their brains; for there are too too many of the common sort of those men who
use the Sea, who love those brutish distempers too much, which turn a man out
of himself, and leave a Beast in the skin of a man. But for that drink, if it
be taken in its best, and most proper season, I conceive it to be of it self
very wholesome, because it provokes urine exceedingly; the further benefit
whereof some there have found by happy experience, thereby eased from their
torture inflicted, by that shame of Physicians, and Tyran of all Maladies, the
Stone. And so cheap too is this most pleasing Wine, that a man may there have
more than enough for a very little money.

At Surat, and so to Agra, and beyond, it seldom or never rains, but one
season of the year; but yet there is a refreshing Dew during all that time the
Heavens there are thus shut up, which every night falls, and cools, and
comforts, and refreshes the face of the earth. Those general Rains begin near
the time that the Sun comes to the Northern Tropic, and so continue till his
return back to the Line. These showers at their beginning most extremely
violent* are ushered in* and usually take their leave with most fearful
Tempests of Thunder. Lightning, more terrible than I can express, yet seldom
do harm; the reason in Nature may be, the subtilty of the Air in those parts
wherein there are fewer Thunder-stones made, than in such Climates where the
Air is thick, gross, and cloudy. During those three months it rains usually
every day more or less, sometimes one whole quarter of the Moon together,
scarce without any intermission; which abundance of moisture, with the heat of
the Sun, does so enrich their Land, which they never force (if I observed
right) by Soyling of it, as that, like Egypt, by the inundation of Nilus, it
makes it fruitful all the year after. When the time of this Rain is passed
over, the face of the Sky there is presently so serene and clear, as that
scarcely one Cloud appears in their Hemisphere the nine months after.

And here a strong Argument that may further, and most infallibly show the
goodness of their Soil, shall not escape my Pen, most apparent in this, That
when the Ground there has been destitute of Rain nine months together, and
looks all of it like the barren Sands in the Deserts of Arabia, where there is
not one spire of green Grass to be found, within a few days after those fat
enriching showers begin to fall, the face of the Earth there (as it were by a
new Resurrection) is so revived, and throughout so renewed, as that it is
presently covered all over with a pure green Mantle. And moreover, to confirm
that which before I observed concerning the goodness of that Soil, amongst many
hundred Acres of Corn of diverse kinds I have there beheld, I never saw any but
what was very rich and good, standing as thick on the Ground as the Land could
well bear it.

They till their Ground with Oxen and Foot-Ploughs, their Seed-time in May, and
the beginning of June, they taking their time to dispatch all that work before
that long Rainy season comes; and though the Ground then has been all the time
we named before without any sufficient moisture by showers, or otherwise, to
supple and make it more fit for tilliage, yet the Soil there is such a brittle
fat mould (which they sow year after year) as that they can very easily till
it. Their Harvest is in November and December, the most temperate months of all
that year.

Their Ground is not enclosed, unless some small quanty near Towns and
Villages, which stand scattered up and down this vast Empire very thick,
though, for want of the true names, not inserted in the Map.

They mow not their Grass (as we) to make Hay, but cut it off the ground,
either green, or withered, as they have occasion to use it.

They sow Tobacco in abundance, and they take it too very much, but after a
strange way much different from us; for first, they have little Earthen Pots,
shaped like our small Flower-pots, having a narrow neck, and an open round top,
out of the belly of which comes a small spout, to the lower part of which spout
they fill the Pot with water, then putting their Tobacco loose in the top, and
a burning coal upon it, they having first fastened a very small strait hollow
Cane or Reed (not bigger than a small Arrow) within that spout, a yard or ell
long, the Pot standing on the ground, draw that smoke into their mouths, which
first falls upon the Superficies of the water, and much discolours it. And this
way of taking their Tobacco, they believe, makes it much more cool and
wholesome. The Tobacco which grows there is doubtless in the Plant as good as in
any other place of the world, but they know not how to cure and order it, like
those in the West Indies, to make it so rich and strong.

The Country is beautified with many Woods and Groves of Trees, in which those
winged Choristers make sweet Music. In those Woods some excellent Hawks make
their nests, and there are very often to be seen great flocks of Parakeetoes,
or little Parrats, who have their breeding and lodging amongst those Melancholy
Shades. And (in the number of many other Creatures covered with Feathers) there
are some very little Birds less than our Wrens, who are exceeding pretty, for
their neat shape, and their covering, with most curious parti-colour'd
Feathers, full of variety of little spots. I have seen there many of those rare
Creatures kept together in large Cages, who please the Eye with their curious
Colors, and the Ear with their variety of pleasant Notes. The Woods and Groves
in the Southernmost parts of Indostan, have great store of wild Apes, and
Monkeys, and Baboons in them, some of which I have seen as high as our tallest
Greyhounds, which live among the Trees, and climb them at pleasure. Those
Apes, etc. are very terrible to those little Birds, which make their Nests in
those Woods; and therefore Nature has taught them this subtilty (to preserve
their young ones from those Creatures which would otherwise destroy them) to
build their Nests in the twigs, and the utmost boughs of those Trees, where
some of them hang like little Purse-nets, to which those Apes and Monkeys, be
they never so little and light, cannot come to hurt them.

Besides their Woods, they have great variety of fair goodly Trees that stand
here and there single, but I never saw any there of those kinds of Trees which
England affords. They have very many firm and strong Timber Trees for building,
and other uses; but much of their brush, or small wood, I observed to be very
sappie, so that when we brake a twig of it, there would come a substance out of
some of it, like unto Milk, and the sappiness of that underwood may (as I
apprehend it) be ascribed in part to the fatness of that Soil. Some of their
Trees have Leaves upon them broad as Bucklers, others are parted small like out
Fern or Brakes, as the Tamerine Tree, which bears Gods somewhat like our Beans,
in which when the Fruit is ripe, there is a very well tasted pulp, though it be
sour, most wholesome to open the body, and to cool and cleanse the blood.

There is one very great and fair Tree growing in that Soil, of special
observation, out of whose Branches or great Arms grow little Sprigs downward
till they take Root (as they will certainly do if they be let alone) and taking
Root, at length prove strong supporters unto those large Branches that yield
them. Whence it comes to pass, that those Trees in time (their strong and
far-extended Arms being in many places thus supported) grow to a very great
height, and extend themselves to such an incredible breadth, they growing round
every way, as that hundreds of men may shade themselves under one of them at
any time; the rather, because these, as all other Trees in those Southern parts
of East India (as particularly I observed before) still keep on their green
Coats.

For their Flowers, they are for the generality like unto painted Weeds, which,
though their color be excellent, they rather delight the eye than affect the
smell; for not many of them, except Roses, and some few kinds more; are any
whit fragrant: Amongst them that are, there is one white Flower, like to
Spanish Jessamin (if it be not the same) which is exceedingly well sented, of
which they make a most excellent pure sweet Oil, with which they anoint their
heads, and other parts of their bodies; which makes the company of those that
do so very savoury and sweet.

This Empire is watered with many goodly Rivers (as they are expressed in the
Map) the two principal are Indus and Ganges; where this thing is very
observable (for they say there that it is very true) that one pint of the water
of Ganges weighs less by one ounce than any other water in that whole great
Monarchy* And therefore (they say) that the Mogol, wheresoever he is, has
water brought him from that River, that he may drink thereof, by some appointed
for that service, who are continually either going to it, or coming from it:
The water is brought unto the King in fine Copper Jars, excellently well tin'd
on the inside, and sealed up when they are delivered to the Waterbearers for
the King's use; two of which Jars every one carries, hanging upon Slings fitted
for the Porter's shoulders.

Besides their Rivers, they have store of Wels fed with Springs; and to these,
they have many Ponds, which they call Tanques, some of them exceeding large,
filled with water when that abundance of Rain falls (of which more hereafter.)

That most ancient and innocent Drink of the World, Water, is the common drink
of East India; it is far more pleasant and sweet than our water; and must needs
be so, because in all hot Countries it is more rarefied* better digested, and
freed from its rawne^s by the heat of the Sun, and therefore in those parts it
is more desired of all that come thither, though they never made it their drink
before, than any other liquor and agrees better with men's bodies. Sometimes we
boil the water there with some wholesome seeds and after drink it cold, and then
it is by much more cold after an heat. (Like unto some men, who have showed
formerly much zeal and heat for good, and afterward become more chill and cold
than ever they were before) Sometimes we mingle our water there with the juice
of Limons and Sugar, which makes an exceeding pleasant drink, which we call
there Sherbet.

Some small quantity of Wine, but not common, is made amongst them; they call
it Ra^k, distilled from Sugar, and a spicy rind of a Tree called Jagra; it is
very wholesome, if taken very moderately.

Many of the people there, who are strict in their Religion, drink no Wine at
all; but they use a Liquor more wholesome than pleasant, they call Coffee, made
by a black seed boiled in water, which turns it almost into the same color,
but does very little alter the taste of the water; notwithstanding it is very
good to help digestion, to quicken the spirits, and to cleanse the blood.

There is yet another help for those that forbear Wine, by an Herb they have,
called Beetle, or Paune, in shape somewhat like an Ivy-leaf, but more tender;
they chew it with an hard Nut, somewhat like a Nutmeg (but not in taste like
that) and a very little pure white-lime amongst the leaves, and when they have
sucked down the juice, put forth the rest. It has (as they say and I believe
very much of it) many rare qualities, for it preserves the Teeth, strengthens
the Stomach, comforts the Brain, and it cures or prevents a tainted Breath.
This I am sure of that such is the pleasing smell of this Beetle, being chewed
in a close room, that the breath of him so chewing it fills it with a very
pleasing savor.

This Empire further affords very excellent good Horse, curiously made, high
mettled, and well managed by the Natives. Besides their own, they have many of
the Persian, Tartarian, and Arabian breed, which have the name to be the choice
ones of the World. But of these more when I come to speak of the Inhabitants.

Here are a great number of Camels, Dromedaries, Mules and Asses, employed for
the carriage of burdens, or the carrying of the people, to which use also they
employ many of their Oxen, and their Buffeloes likewise. (which before I spoke
of) The Camels, as I often observed there, have one strange quality, who cry and
make a very piteous noise at night, when they take off their burdens; but in
the morning, when they are laid on, the poor Creatures are very still and
quiet, making no noise at all. Many wicked men, who are most fitly called by
the Psalmist, the Beasts of the people, P^al. 68. ^0. (for so it is in the
Vulgar Translation, Beast^ for want of Reason, and for not using Reason well,
worse than Brutes) may be most fitly resembled by those dull Camels, who being
burdened and clogged with a great load of sin already, enough to press them
down into that bottomless pit, seem to feel nothing, nor to complain at all,
but with much quiet and content keep on their burdens* and take up, more
still; as if that wickedness, which the Prophet Zachary, 5. 7. compares to a
Talent of Lead, were as light as a Feather. But when we go about by our
Exhortations, Entreaties, Persuasions of them, and by the strongest Arguments
besides we can invent, press them to suffer God through Christ Jesus to save
their souls, and consequently to get themselves freed from that most
intolerable burden, which will unavoydably sink them into Hell at last, if
they be not freed from it; then these, like those stupid Creatures, cry and
complain, and seem to be much disquieted, as if we did them much wrong, while
we labor to do them the greatest right. The reason is, because their Pride (as
every beloved sin besides) compasses them as a Chain, Psalm. 73. 6. it is their
Jewel, their Ornament (as they think) and therefore they will keep it, they
will not part from it, though it be their greatest shame, because they esteem
it their chiefest Glory. I would entreat my Reader, when he comes to this
digression, to read it over and over again.

The Dromedary is called by the Prophet Jeremy, 2. 23. the swift Dromedary; the
reason may be, because these, like the Camels, have very long legs, and
consequently make long steps, and so traveling rid ground apace; or because at
a pinch, or time of need, they will carry a man exceeding far without rest, and
but with a very little food.

They have some Rhynocerots, but they are not common, which are very large
square Beasts, bigger than the largest Oxen England affords; their skins,
without hair, lie in great wrinkles upon their necks, breasts and backs, which
does not make them seem lovely unto the beholders. They have very strong, but
short Horns, growing upon very firm bones, that lie over their Nostrils; they
grow upwards, toward the top of their head, every one of these Creatures being
fortified with one of them, and that enough to make them so terrible, that they
are shunned by other, though very large Creatures. With these Horns (from which
those Creatures have their Names) are made very excellent Cups, which (as is
conceived) give some virtue unto the liquor put into them, if it stand any whit
long in those Cups.

And now to conclude with the largest and the most intelligent (as we shall
hereafter show) of all the sensible Creatures the Earth produces, the
Elephant, of which this vast Monarchy has abundance; and of them, the Mogol is
Master of many thousands; and his Nobles, and all men of quality besides, in
those large Territories, have more or less of them. But of these much shall be
spoken in my sixth Section.

I observed before, that the Inhabitants of this Empire did carry most of their
burdens upon the backs of their Beasts, and in a special manner this people
employ their Camels and Dromedaries for this use, to carry their Merchandises
from place to place, and therefore I shall let my Reader see

SECTION III.
What the chief Merchandises, and most Staple, and other Commodities are, which
are brought into this Empire.

THE most Staple Commodities of this Empire are Indico and Cotten-Wool; of that
Wool they make diverse sorts of Callico, which had that name (as I suppose) from
Callicute, not far from Goa, where that kind of Cloth was first bought by the
Portugals.

For the Spices brought hither by the East India Fleet they are had more
Southerly; from the Islands of Sumatra, from Java major and minor, from the
Moluccoes, and from other places thereabout: In which, as in the Molucco
Islands, and those other parts too from whence the richest Spices come, the
Low Country Merchants have got such footing, and such a particular interest,
that our English Factors there (for the present) buy those Commodities, as we
sometimes do buy Provisions and Commodities here at home, out of the engrossing
Hucksters hands: So that our English in those parts have a free Trade for no
kind of Spice, but for that, which is one of the lowest prized, namely Pepper,
which they fetch from Bant(...). Which more general Trade of the Dutch, they
have formerly gained, at a very vast expense, by fortifying them^^^ves there,
i^ the places wherever they settle; and then standing upon their Guard, put a
kind of force upon the Natives to fell them their Commodities.

What the carriage of that people has formerly been in those parts toward our
English, (where th(...) Sword has been longest) is sufficiently made known by
other Pens: This I may conclude from their example (and I would that they were
^^ingular and alone in it) that when a people will not be ordered by that Royal
Law, which commands us, Mat. 7. 12. to do nothing, but what we would be content
to suffer: as to do nothing unto other's, but what we would be well content to
suffer from others: But on the contrary when they measure things, not by the
strait and even Rule of Equity, but by the crooked and oblique Line of Power*
arming their In justice to do what they please, because they can do what they
will; This causes many to make very bold with God in cases that seem to give
advantage unto their high Thoughts and Commodities: for what evil cannot
Ambition and Covetousness do, when they are back^ with an arbitrary and
unlimited power here below, if they be not ch(...) by a stronger Arm from
above? Whence we se^ it often come to pass, that when the Laws of Nature and
Nations, yea of God himself, lie in the way of their profit, or earthly
advantages (whatever their sufferings or loss be afterward) they either spurn
them thence, or else tread and trample upon them at pleasure, to compass their
ends for the present. This I can say of the Dutch (something from my own
knowledge, but more from the report of others) that when I lived in those
parts, and we English there were more for number than they, and consequently
could receive no hurt from them, we there used them as Neighbors and Brethren;
but in other places, where they had the like advantage of us, they dealt with
us neither like Christians, nor Men. But I will not here any longer digress,
but return to speak further of the Commodities to be had in East India.

The Indico we bring thence, is a good, and a rich Commodity. It is there made
of little leaves, not bigger than those on our Gooseberry bushes, and the
shrubs that bear those leaves are about their bigness. These leaves they slip
off from the small branches of those bushes, which grow with round and full
heads without pricks. The leaves thus stripped off, are laid in great heaps
together certain days, till they have been in a hot sweat; then are they
removed, and put into very great and deep Ve^sels filled with a sufficient
quantity of water to sleep them in, where they leave their blew tincture, with
their substance! this done, the water is drained out into other exceeding
broad, but very shallow Vessels* or Vats, made of Plaster (like to that we
call Plaster of Paris) which will keep in all the Liquor till the hot Sun in
short time extracts the moisture from it; and then what remains in the bottom,
is a Cream about one quarter of an inch thick, which suddenly becomes hard, and
dry, and that is our Indico; the best sort whereof comes from Biana, near unto
Agra, and a coarser sort is made at Cirkeese, not far from Amadanaz; about
which two places are a very great number of those shrubs planted which bear
those leaves.

For their Cotton-wool, they sow seed, and very large quantities of Ground in
East India are thus seeded. It grows up like small Rose-b^shes; and then puts
forth many yellow blossoms; those afterward falling off, there remain little
Gods, about the bigness of a Man's thumb, in which the substance at first is
moist, and yellow; but as they ripen, they swell bigger, till they break their
Covering, and after, in short time, that within them becomes Wool, as white as
Snow, and then they gather it. Amongst that Wool they find seeds to sow again
as they have occasion; but those shrubs bear that Wool three or four years e're
they supplant them. Of this Cotton-wool they make diverse sorts of white Cloth
(as before I observed) some broad, some narrow, some coarse, some sine, and
very fine indeed, for some that I have seen there I believe was as fine as our
purest Lawn. Much of the coarser sort of that Cloth they dye into Colors, or
else stain in it variety of well-shaped and wellcoloured Flowers or Figures,
which are so fixed in the Cloth, that no water can wash them out. That pretty
art of staining, or printing and fixing those variety of Colors in that white
Cloth, the People of Asia have engrossed to themselves, where the most curious
Pint^daes are made; whither neighboring, as well as more remote Nations, bring
their Moneys to fetch them thence.

In Decan, which bounds upon the Mogol's Territories South (the Princes whereof
are Tributaries unto him) there are many Diamond Rocks, in which are found
those most precious of all other Stones; and they are to be sold in this
Empire; and consequently to be had by those who have skill to buy them and
Money to pay for them. But as all the Stones in East India are not precious* so
those that are, the Natives know very well how to value.

But further, for the Merchandising Commodities the Mogol's Provinces afford,
there is Musk (by reason of their abundance of Musk-Cats) to be had in good
quantity; and there are Bezar-stones, which are not so called from any Beast of
that name, but they grow in the maws of Goats, which when they observe to grow
exceeding lean, they kill them, and find those Stones in them; and if they did
not so, that Stone in them would make an end of them; by which we may observe,
how that precious Bezar-stone, that proves, many times, such a Cordial, and
Preservative to the Life of Man, is destructive and mortal unto the poor
Creature from whence it is taken: Like that precious Word of God, that may
proceed from the lips of him that has a lean soul, and may do others good, but
himself nothing but mischief. The greatest number of those Goats, from whence
those Bezars are taken, feed on the Mountains of Lar in the Persian's
Territories, the West bound (as before) of the Mogol's great Empire.

They have some store of Silk here; but the greatest quantity of that rich
Commodity, that any place in the whole World affords, comes out of Georgia, a
Province belonging unto the King of Persia. Those Georgians* and Armenians,
(both under the Command of the Persian King) are by profession Christians, like
those of the Greek Church. And the Abissins, under the Command of Prester John,
are in profession Christians likewise, but these Abissins circumcise their
Males before they baptize them. Alas poor People! who for want of better
instruction cannot know what they should, and therefore know not what they do.
All those Armenians, Georgians, and Abissins (as I have it from others, but can
relate something of it out of my own knowledge) even all of them see Christ but
in the dark, and by reason of the general ignorance that is in them, cannot
know God as they ought in Jesus Christ. These are the different cases of many
which profess Christ in the World; some cannot know him, some care not to know
him, and some will not know him; Amongst the first of these, they all may be
ranked whom I but now named, as many others of the Greek, and those that
profess Christianity in Russian Churches, with many-many others of the Romish,
who have the Truths of God sealed up in an unknown tongue, to keep, and to
continue them in ignorance; who instead of the two Breasts of the Church, the
Law, and the Gospel, are fed with moldy and finnowed Traditions; and their
case being so, our Charity toward them may lead us thus far, to believe, that
they would do better, if they knew better; and this may speak much in their
excuse. But what plea may be made for us of this Nation, that do not what we
know; or if we be ignorant, it is because we will be so; not because we cannot
know, but because we care not for knowledge, and will not know?

But to return to the place where I began my last digression; I told you that
the People there have some store of Silk, of which they make Velvets, Settins,
Taffat^es, either plain, or mingled, or striped in party-colours; but the best
of them for richness and goodness come not near those which are made in the
parts of Italy.

Many curious Boxes, Trunks, Standishes, Car^ets, with other excellent
Manufactures, may be there had. They have medicinable Drugs, and amongst them
very much Cassia growing there in Canes. They have Gums well sented, and much
Lignum Aloes, which burnt, yields a perfume better than any one thing in the
World that I ever smelled. They have great store of Gum-lac, of which they make
their hard Wax, and that Gum likewise they there employ for many other ^eat
usis. The Earth there yields good Minerals of Lead* Iron, Copper, Brass; and
(they say) that they have Silver-Mines too, which (if true) they need not open,
being so enriched from other Nations of Europe, and other parts (...) who
yearly bring thither great Quantities of Silver to purchase their Com^modities.
Which I collect from our English Trade there; for though we ^ent some quantity
of our Woollen Cloth, with some other things we carry thithe^, yet the greatest
part by far of Commodities brought thence(...) are caught by the Silver hook.
And this is the way to make any Nation of the World rich ^^to bring, and leave
Silver in it, and to take away Commodities. And, as all Rivers run into the
Sea: so many Silver Streams run into this Monarchy, and there stay; the People
of any Nation being there very welcome that bring in their Bull^on, and carry
away the others Merchandises, but it is looked on as a Crime that is not easily
answered, to transport any quantity of Silver thence.

The Coin, or Bullion brought thither from any place, is presently melted, and
refined, and the Mogol's Stamp (which is his Name, and Titles, in Persian
Characters) put upon it. The Coin there is more pure than in any other part of
the World, being (as they report) made of pure Silver without any Allay; so
that in the Spanish Money, the purest of all Eur^pe, there is some loss.

They call their pieces of Money Roopees, of which there are ^ome of dive^s
values, the meanest worth two shillings and three pence, and the best two
shillings and nine pence sterling. By these they account their Estates and
Payments. They have another Coin of inferior value in Guzarat, called
Mamoodies, about twelve pence sterling; both the former, and these, are made in
halfs, and some few in quarters; so that three pence is the least piece of
Silver current in those Countries, and very few of them to be seen. That which
passes up and down for exchange under this rate, is Brass or Copper money,
which they call Pices; whereof three, or thereabouts, countervail a Penny.
Those pices* are made so massy, and thick, as that the baser-metal of which
they are made, put to other uses, is well-nigh worth the Silver they are rated
at. Their Silver Coin is made either round or square, but so thick, as that it
never breaks, nor wears out. They have pure Gold Coin likewise, some pieces of
great value; but these are not very ordinarily seen amongst them.

I have now done with this Section, wherein I have related much of the
Commodities, Riches, as before of the Provisions and Pleasures which are to be
found in that vast Monarchy, and I conceive nothing but what Truth will
justify. And now, lest that place I have described, should seem to be an
Earthly Paradise, I must acquaint my Reader, that the Contents there found by
such as have lived in those parts; are sour'd and sauc'd with many unpleasing
things, which he must needs know, when he takes notice

SECTION IV.
Of the discommodities, inconveniences, and annoyances, that are to be found or
met withal in this Empire.

AS the Poets feigned that the Garden of the Hesperides (wherein were Trees
that bare Golden apples) was guarded by a Serpent: so there are stings here, as
well as fruits; all considered together may not unfitly be resembled by those
Locusts mentioned, Re. 9. 7, 8, 10. verses, who had the Faces of men, and the
hair of women, and Crowns as of Gold on their heads, but they had too, the
teeth of Lions, and the tails of Scorpions, and there were stings in those
tails. Here are many things to content and please the enjoyers of them, to
make their life more comfortable, but withal here are Teeth to tear, and
stings to Kill: All put together, are nothing but a mixture made up (as indeed
all earthly things are) of good, and bad; of bitter, and sweet; of what
contents, and of what contents not.

The annoyances of these Countries are, first many harmfull beasts of prey, as
Lions, Tygres, Wolves, Jackalls, with others; those Jackalls seem to be wild
Dogs, who in great companies run up and down in the silent night, much
disquieting the peace thereof; by their most hidious noise. Those most ra^enous
creatures will not suffer a man to rest quietly in his grave, for if his body
be not buried very deep they will dig him thence, and bury as much of him
again, as they can consume, in their hung^y bellyes. In their Rivers are many
Crocodiles, and -- Latet anguis in herba, on the land, not a few overgrown
snakes, with other vene^^ous, and pernicious creatures. In our houses there we
often see Lyzards, shaped like unto Crocodiles, of a sad green color, and but
little creatures, the fear of whom presents its self most to the eye, for I do
not know that they are hurtful. There are many Scorpions to be seen, which are
oftentimes felt, which creep into their houses especially in that time of the
raines, whose stinging is most sensible, and deadly, if the patient have not
presently some oil that is made of Scorpions, to anoint the part affected,
which is a sudden, and a certain cure. But if the man can get the Scorpion
that stung him, (as sometimes they do) the oily substance it affords, being
beaten in pieces, suddenly applied, is a present help. The sting of the
Scorpion may be a very fit resemblance of the sting of Death, the bitterness
and angu^sh whereof nothing can assuage; and cure so well, as a serious
consideration, and a continual application of the thoughts of Dying. Facile
contemnit omnia, qui cogitat se semper moriturum, that man may trample upon
every thing, whose meditations are taken up with the thoughts of his change. He
cannot dye but well, who dies daily, daily in his preparations for death,
though he dye not presently.

The Scorpions are in shape like unto our Crafishes, and not bigger, and look
black like them, before they are boiled: they have a little round tail which
turns up, and lies usually upon their backs, at the end whereof is their sting,
which they do not put in, and let out of their bodies, as other venomous
creatures do, but it always appears in their tails ready to struck; it is
very sharp, and hard, and not long, but crooked like the talon of an Hawk.

The abundance of Flies (like those swarms in Egypt Ex. 8. 21.) in those
parts did likewise very much annoy us, for in the heat of the day their
numberless number was such, as that we could not be quiet in any place for
them, they being ready to fly into our cupps, and to cover our meat as soon as
it was placed on the table, and therefore we had always some of the Natives we
kept there, who were our servants, to stand round about us on purpose while we
were eating, with Napkins to fright them away. And as in the day one kind of
ordinary flies troubled us; so in the night we were likewise very much
disquieted with another sort called Musqu^etoes, like our Gnatts, but somewhat
less, and in that season we were very much troubled with Chinches, another sort
of little troublesome and offensive creatures, like little Tikes, and these
annoyed us two ways, as first by their biting, and stinging, and then by their
stink. From all which we were by far more free when we lodged in tents (as
there we did much) than when we abode in houses; where in great cities and
towns, (to add unto the disquiets I before named) there were such an
abundance of large hungry Ratts, that some of us were bitten in the night as
we lay in our bedds, either on our toes or fingers, or on the tipps of our
ears, or on the tops of our noses, or in any part of our bodies besides they
could get into their mouths.

The winds in those parts (as I observed before) which they call the Most
soon, blow constantly one way, altering but few points, six months Southerly,
and six months Northerly. The months of April, May, and the beginning of June,
till the rain falls, are so extremely hot, as that the wind when it blows but
gently, receives such heat from the parched ground, that the reflection thereof
is ready to blister a man's face that receives the breath of it, And if God did
not provide for those parts, by sending a breeze or breath, or small gale of
wind daily, which somewhat tempers that hot sulphurous air there were no
living in that Torrid Zone for us English, who have been used to breath in a
te^perate climate; and notwithstanding that benefit, the air in that place is
so hot to us English, that we should be every day stewed in our own moisture,
but that we stir very little in the heat of the day, and have clothing about
us as thin as we can make it. And no marvail, for the coldest day in the whole
year at noon (unless it be in the time when those raines fall) is hotter there
than the hottest day in England.

Yet I have there observed most strange and sudden changes of heat and cold
within few hours, as in November and December the most temperate months of
their year (as before) and then at midnight the air was so exceeding fresh and
cold, that it would produce a thin Ice on the water, and then as we lay in our
Tents, we would have been very glad of the warmth of a Rugg upon us, and the
Noon of that following day would be so extreme hot, as that it was troublesome
then to keep on the thinnest clothing.

Sometimes there, the wind blows very high in those hot and dry seasons, not
long before the rain begins to fall raising up into the air a very great
height, thick clouds of Dust and Sand, which appear like dark clouds full of
moisture, but they deceive like the bro^k in Job 6. 15. that has no water in
it. These dry showers (which Almighty God threatens to send among a people as
an heavy judgment, Deuteronomy. 28. 34. When he will make the rain of a land powder
and dust) most grievously annoy all those amongst whom they fall, enough to
smite them all with a present blindness; filling their eyes, ears, nostrills and
their mouths are not free if they be not also well guarded; searching every
place as well within as without our tents or houses, so that there is not a
little Keyhole, of any trunk or cabinet, if it be not covered, but receives
some of that dust into it, the dust forced to find a lodging any where, every
where, being so driven and forced, as it is, by the extreme violence of the
wind.

But there is no place nor Country under Heaven, nor yet ever has been,
without some discommodities. The Garden of Eden had a Serpent in it, Genesis 3. He
that made all things by his absolute command, has so mixed, and tempered, and
ordered all things here below by his infinite wisdom, that either too much
Heat, or too much Cold; Either the barrenness of the soil, or the
unwholesomeness of the air, or some thing else, ministers matter of exception
more or less against every place, that the sons of men might hence learn, that
there is no true and perfect content to be found in any Kingdom, but in that of
Heaven: For while we are here, trouble and peace, mourning and joy, comfort and
discontent come all of them by courses and successions, so that there is no
weeding up of those tares, no removing of those Annoyances from the life of man.

And so having observed what is truth, and what is enough to be said of the
inconveniences and annoyances, as well as of the commodities and contentments
which are to be found in those parts, I come now to speak of the people that
inhabit there. And because many particulars will necessarily fall within the
compass of this part of my observations, which would more w^ary my Reader if
they should be presented unto him in one continued discours^* I shall therefore
(as I have begun) break this into Sections, and proceed to speak

SECTION V.
Of the Inhabitants of East India, who they are, of their most excellent
ingenuity expressed by their curious manufactures, their Markets at home to buy
and sell in, and their Trade abroad.

THe Inhabitants in general of Indostan were all anciently Gentiles, called in
general Hindoes, belonging to that very great number of those which are called
Heathens, which take up almost two thirds of the number of the people who
Inhabit the face of the whole earth: But of this more hereafter. There are some
Jews (but they are not many) here and there scattered and lost as it were, in
those other great numbers of people; the greatest company of Jews now to be
found together in any one place of the world (as I have been made to believe
from the observation of others) are to be seen at Grand Cairo in Egypt, whither
they are returned, and where settled, to take their fill of their forefathers
Fleshpots. For the Inhabitants of East India, ever since they were subdued by
Tamberlain, they have been mixed with Mahumetans, which though they be by far
in respect of their number less than those Pagans, yet they bear all the sway,
and command all in those Countries.

There are besides these, (now become as it were natives there) a great number
of Persians and Tartars (who are Mahumetans by Religion) that there inhabit,
very many of which the Mogol keeps for Soldiers to serve on hors-back called
there Haddees: There are of both these many daring, stout, hardy and valiant
men. For the Persians there are of them many comely persons, not so swart as
those of East India. But for the Tartars I have there seen, (and I have seen
many of them) they are more to be commended for their valor than beauty, a
square, stout, strong people, having pla^ter faces, and flat Noses. There are
many Armentans and some Abissins amongst them, who wear the Livery of Christ in
being called Christians, the greatest part of whose Christianity lies in their
Name. Those Armenians there make some wine to sell, of Reysons, Sugar, and
other ingredients, that is strong and heady, and luscious, tasted too much by
many Christians that Come thither, as by those too that make it. Of the green
grapes there, though they have abundance and they great, and sweet, and good,
yet they make no wine at all: The Mahumetans (in obedience to a precept of
Mahumets which forbids wine) neither make, nor drink it, and others are not
suffered there to make it of those green grapes, for fear (as I suppose) they
should make, and drink too much of it.

To those I have named of other nations, (that are to be seen in East India)
there are besides some few almost of every people in Asia, and many Europeans
of diverse parts (that use to stir from their own fires) to be found amongst
them; and among that great variety of people and nations there to be observed,
I have taken special notice of diverse Chinesaas, and Japanesaas there, and
those I have seen of them for the generality, are a people of no large stature,
with little eyes, and noses something flatted, de tribus Capillis, with a few
black hayres that stand scattered on their upper lips, which make them as
handsome beards as are to be seen on our Hares, or Catts.

There are some Jews here (as before I observed) whose stubbornness and
Rebellion, long ago, caused Almighty God to threaten them, that they should be
after sifted, and scattered aamong all the Nations of the world. So the Prophet
Jeremy speaks Jer. 24. 9. That God would deliver them, to be removed into all
the Kingdoms of the earth, for their hure, to be a reproach, and a Proverb,
and a taunt, and a curse, in all places whither he should drive them. And Jer.
42. 18. they were threatened to be made an execration and an astonishment, etc.
and so after it came to pass, For, there is no word of the Lord that shall fall
to the ground, unfulfilled. And since those prophesies, that ancient
imprecation of their own spoken against themselves in derision of our Blessed
Savior, Mat. 27. 25. His Blood be on us, and on our Children* follows them
close all the world over, they being every where strangers, but no where
beloved, though they be a people that get wealth wheresoever they come, yet
this frees them not from being a Proverb (as was long before prophesied) of
contempt and reproach.

Those ancient Satyrists Persius, and Juvenal, after that most horrid act
committed by them in Crucifying our B. Savior (though not in respect unto that
most cruel action, for they were Heathens) yet they call them Verpos, that is
circumcised, Worms, vermin. Tacitus after gives the^ a most unsavory Epit^ite,
calling them foetentes Judaeos, stinking Jews. Marcus the Emperor observing
them well, concluded that they were a generation of men worse than savages or
Canibals, to be even the worst of men, as if they were the very refuse and
dreggs of mankind.

How usual is that Proverb, that when men are suspected to do otherwise than
they should, to answer, what, am I Jew, that I should do so, and so? I have
observed something to this purpose, from the people of East India, who are very
valiant at tongue-fights, though not so with their weapons (as you will hear
afterward) that people I say, who have a very nimble but a base quality in
railing at, and miscalling one another, and their language is so full, and
significant, that they can call a man in it, two or three base things in one
word; But when they come to call him, whom they miscall, Judeo Jew, they
believe (as I have been often told) that they can go no higher, esteeming
that, above all other terms, the heighest name of obloqu^.

Yet we do believe, (because the Lord has promised it) that he will find a
time to call home this people again to himself, when they shall receive honor
above all the contempt they have been long under, after they shall see with
sorrow, and with the eye of faith, Him, (...) their Forefathers, out of
ignorance, a(...) and unbelief Pierced.

For the stature of the Natives of East India they are like us, but generally
very straight, for I never observed, nor heard of, any crooked person amongst
them. And one reason may be, because they never lace nor g^rt in their b^dyes,
and when they sleep, they accustom themselves to stretch out their bodies at
their full length without any thing to raise up their heads. And further
amongst many other things I take special notice of there, I never observed any
deformed person, nor Idiot, or natural fool in those parts.

Now for the complexion of this people, they are all of them of a sad tawney or
Olive color, their hair black as a Raven, very harsh, but not curled. They
like not a man or woman that is very white or fair, because that (as they say)
is the color of Lepers common amongst them. Most of the Mahumetans except the
Moola^s (which are their Priests) or those which are very old and retired, and
have (as it were) given the world quite over, keep their chinns continually
bare, but suffer the hair on their upper lipp^ to grow very long; and they keep
it in its natural color by combing it continually with black-lead combs,
till they be of good years; but afterward, when time has so snowed upon them,
that they can no longer keep in nor conceal their gray hairs, (...) use the
Rasor (as they did) no more but let (...) of their chins to grow long and
large, which makes many gray-beards amongst them, and I conceive that there are
of those, many old men.

And further it is the manner of the Mahumetans to shav^ all the hair from off
their heads, reserving only one lock on the crown of them for Mahume^ to pull
them up to heaven (as they fondly conceit). The Hindooes shave their heads
likewise, but cut all off, and both of them, shave thus and that very often,
but however their baldnes appe^res not at all, because their Heads are
continually covered with a shash, or a wreath of narrow* Callico-cloth many
times wrapped about them (usually for the color white, or red) which they never
pull off as we do our hatts in complements. Their much and often shaving makes
many excellent Barbers amongst them, who besides their Sizers and Rasors use a
little instrument about the length of a short bodkin, very sharp, made like a
chizell, but not broader at the cutting end than the shank of a six-penny nayl,
with which they pare and cleanse the nails on their fingers, and toes. Every
Barber carries always about him, a round looking-glass made of steel, about
the compass of a large tr^ncherplate, made somewhat hollow, and kept by them
exceeding clean and sleek, so that it will represent the face of him that
beholds it on the unequal side very well. These Babers, as they walk up and
down, often present these glasses unto men whom they find sitting still, which
is a tender of their service if they shall please to make use of them.

The people there often wash their bodies, and keep their feet as clean and as
sweet as their hands. The better sort anoint themselves very much with sweet
oils, which makes their company (as before I observed) very savoury.

The Natives there (of which there is something before in my third Section)
show very much ingenuity in their curious manifactures; as in their silk stuffs
which they most artificially weave, some of them very nearly mingled either
with silver or gold, or both. As also in making excellent quilts of their
stained cloth, or of fresh colored Taffata lined with their Pintado^t, or of
their satin lined with Taffata, betwixt which they put Cotton wool, and work
them together with silk. Those Taffata or Satin quilts, are excellently
stitched by them, being done as evenly, and in as good order, as if they had
been drawn out to them, for their direction, the better to work them. They make
likewise excellent carpetts of their Cotten-wool, in fine mingled colors, some
of them more than three yards broad, and of a great lenghth. Some other Richer
Carpets they make all of Silk, so artificially mixed, as that they lively
represent those flowers, and figures made in them. The ground of some other o
their very Rich Carpets is Silver or Gold, about which are such silken flowers,
and Figures (as before I named) most excellently and orderly disposed
throughout the whole work.

Their skill is likewise exquisite in making of Cabinetts, or Boxes, or Trunks,
or standishes, curiously wrought, within, and without; inlaid with Elephants
tooth, or Mother of Pearl, or Ebony, or ^ortoyse shell, or wire; they make
excellent Cupps, and others things of Agate, and Cornelian, and curious they
are in cutting all manner of stones Diamonds as well as others.

They paint staves, or bedsteads or cheasts of Boxes, or Fruit dishes, or large
Chargers, extreme neatly, which, when they be not inlayd (as before) they cover
the wood (first being handsomely turned) with a ^hick Gum, then put their
Paint on, most artificially made of liquid silver, or gold, or other lively
colors, which they use, and after make it much more beautiful with a very
clear varnish put upon it.

They are excellent at Limning, and will coppie out any picture they see to the
life: for confirmation of which, take this instance; It happened that my Lord
Ambassador visiting the Mogol on a time, as he did often, He presented him
with a curious neat small oval Picture done to the life in England. The Mogol
was much pleased with it; but told the Ambassador withal, that happily he
supposed that there was never a one in his Country that could do so well in
that curious Art, and then offered to wager with him a Leck of Roopies (a sum
which amounted to no less then 10000 l. sterling.) that in a few days he would
have two Coppies made by that presented to him, so like, that the Ambassador
should not know his own. He refused the great Wager, but told the King he would
adventure his judgment on it: Two Coppies taken from that Original were within
few days after made, and brought and laid before the Ambassador, in the
presence of the King; the Ambassador viewing them long, either out of
Courtship to please the King, or else unable to make a difference 'twixt the
pictures being all exquisitly done, took one of them which was new made, for
that which he had formerly presented, and did after Profess that he did not
flatter, but mistake in that choice. The truth is, that the Natives of that
Monarchy are the best Apes for imitation in the world, so full of ingenuity
that they will make any new thing by pattern, how hard soever it seem to be
done, and therefore it is no marvel, if the Natives there make Shoes, and
Boots, and Clothes, and Linen, and Bands and Cuffs of our English Fashion,
which are all of them very much different from their fashions and habits, and
yet make them all exceeding neatly.

They have Markets, which they call Bazars, to sell and buy their commodities,
in all their great Towns twice every day, a little before, and an hour after
Sun rising in the morning, and so a little before and a little after Sunset at
night. The other parts of the day being too hot for those great confluences of
people to meet together; and those are the seasons we Englishmen there make
use of, to ride abroad and take the air, the rest of the day we usually spend
in our houses. The people there ^ell almost all their provisions, as very many
other things, by weight.

For the foreign Trade of this people, it is usually once a year into the Red
Sea to a City called Moha in Arabia the happy, about thirty leagues from the
mouth of it; It is a principal Mart for all Indian commodities, but the staple
and most principal there vented is their Cotten-cloth, either white, or
steyned, and their Cotten-wooll. Hither they come from grand Cairo in Egypt, as
from many other parts of the Turks Dominions to trafique; Hither they come from
Prester John's Country which lies on the other side of the Arabian Golfe (for
so the Red Sea is there called) and not above fourteen leagues over at the City
Moha.

The Ship or Junk (for so it is called) that usually goes from Surat to Moha is
of an exceeding great burden, some of them I believe fourteen or fifteen
hundred Tunns, or more, but those huge vessels are bery ill built, like an
overgrown Liter, broad and short, but made exceeding big, on purpose to waff
passengers forward and backward: which are Mahumetans, who go on purpose to
visit Mahomets sepulcher, at Medina near Mecha, but many miles beyond Moha. The
passengers, and others in that most capacious vessel that went and returned
that year I left India, (as we were credibly told) amounted to the number of
seventeen hundred. Those Mahumetans that have visited Mahumets Sepulcher, are
ever after called Hoggees, or holy men.

This Junk bound from Surat to the Red Sea, as she has many people in her, so
has she good Ordnance, but those Navigators know not well how to use them for
their defense. She begins her voyage about the twentieth of March, and
finisheth it, about the end of September following. The voyage is but short,
and might easily be made in less than three months, but the ship is very slow,
and ill-built to abide foul weather, and in the long season of the rain, and a
little before and after it, the winds upon those coasts are commonly so violent
that there is no coming but with much hazard into the Indian Sea. This Ship
returning is usually worth (as I have heard it faithfully reported and if my
credit given to that report make me not to abuse my Readers two hundred
thousand pounds ster(...)g, and most of it brought back in good Gold and
Silver; some fine Chamlets they bring with them home likewise, but that huge
mass of wealth thus brought home into India, is another especial thing, and
might have been added to that I spoke of before toward the continual
enriching of this great Monarchy: where, in the next place I shall speak

SECTION VI.
Of the care and skill of this people in keeping and managing their excellent
good Horses. Of their Elephants and their ordering and managing them. And how
the people ride and are carried up and down from place to place.

THe Souldery here, and so many of the Gentry, and better sort of the people,
who live at Court, show excellent good skill in riding and managing of their
well turned, high metald, choice horses, which are excellent good at mounting
up, bounding and curvetting, and when they run them at their full swiftest
speed will stop them at a foots breadth; for the scantling of those creatures,
they are in proportion like ours, but excellently well eyed, headed, limn'd;
for their colors there are some of them Raven black, but many more of them
white, curiously dapled; and a very great number Pied and spotted all over, and
there are some of other bright colors. But it is a usual custom there amongst
Gallants who ride upon the bright colored horses, to have their legs and
lower parts of their Bellyes and Breasts died into a Saffron color (of which
they have much there) which makes them look as if they had stood in some Dyars
vate, just up to such an height of their bodies.

The hair upon their Horses (whom they keep plump and fat) is very short, soft,
and lies sleek upon them, and I wonder not at it, they are kept so daintily,
every Horse being allowed a man to dress and feed him, and to run by him when
he is rode forth, and this is all his work.

They tie not down their horse heads when they stand still (as we do) with hal
ets, but secure each horse by two ropes, fastened to their hind feet, which
ropes are somewhat long to be staked down behind them in tents, or other places
wherein they are kept.

They cut grass for them green or withered on the earth as they have occasion
to use it, never mowing their ground and making hay as we do. But that which
keeps their Horses in heart, and in flesh, is the provender they eat which is a
kind of round grain they call Donna, somewhat bigger than our Tares, which
they give not unto them dry but boiled. and mingled with some corse sugar
amongst it and when it is cold give it them, made up in round Balls, which they
put into their mouths, as if they cramb'd them; and sometimes they put a little
Butter into these bals to scour their bodies.

Their choice good horses are valued there at as dear if not an higher rate,
than those we esteem most of in England are prized with us. They make excellent
Sadles, and some of them of great value adorned with handsome and rich
trapings, all of them very easy both for the horse, and his rider. They manage
their horses with strong snafles, whose reigns and head-stalls are made
suitable to their Saddles and Trapings.

The Elephants in this vast Monarchy are very numerous, and though they be the
largest, and that by far, of all the Creatures the earth brings forth, yet are
they so tractable, unless at some times when the Males are mad (of which more
afterward) as that a boy of twelve years old is able to rule the biggest of
them, in which we may in a special manner read a Comment on that truth which
tells us how that the Lord has put the fear of man upon all the creatures here
below; even upon the greatest of them, as well as the least. Thou make him
says David Psalm. 8* 6, 7. to have domixion over the works of thy hands; thou
have put all things under his feet; all sheep and Oxen, yea and the beasts of
the field, etc. Now if Almighty God should let loose the Creatures upon man, if
he should let go those reigns by which they restrained, and suffer the
Creatures to renounce their obedience to man, when man throws off his yoke of
obedience to God, what mischief might not those vast overgrown Creatures do in
those parts where there are so many of them? nay, What mischief might not any
other Creatures do, even the least of them, as the Locust, and Canker-worm, and
Catterpillar, etc. which are called Gods great Army, Joel 2. 25. If God should
give them Commission to put themselves in Battel-aray, and to march forth, to
vex and annoy the Nations of the earth?

We may read Ex. 8. how that all the Power that Pharaoh and Egypt were able to
make, could not guard and defend them from the incursions made upon them, and
mischiefs done to them, by Froggs, and Lice, and Flies. There are spirits which
are Created for vengeance (says Syracidos) etc. as the teeth of wild beasts,
and Scorpions, and Serpents, punishing the wicked to destruction, they rejoice
to do Gods Commandment, etc. If Almighty God should free the Creatures from
their subjection, they would be able with their Horns, and Hoofs, and Fangs,
and Teeth, and Beaks, and Claws, and stings, (which are their natural
Artillery) exceedingly to annoy, if not to destroy man from the face of the
Earth.

But for the Elephants (I have begun to speak of) they are very huge vast
overgrown Creatures, some of whem which I have seen, I conceive at the least
twelve foot high, but there are amongst them (as they say) fourteen or fifteen
foot in height. The color of them all is black; their skins thick, and smooth
without hair; They have full eyes, but not proportionable to their great bodies,
they have ears like our Oxen, but not exceeding large, and those ears edged
(as it were) about with a short hair-fringe; and at the end of their tayls
(which are slender and not very long) there grows some hair likewise, and a
little on their eyelids; but no where else about their bodies.

The feet of the Elephants look like the trunks of small trees cut square off
from their roots, round about which there are thick, and short, and broad claws
growing.

Some that write of them have abused the world with this tradition that they
have no joints in their legs, and therefore stand when they sleep against
trees to hold them up, which is all very false, for they ly down and arise
again at their pleasure as other beasts do.

Their motion is not swift, a walking rather than a pace, about three miles at
the most an hour, but of all heasts that carry burdens, they are most sure of
foot, for they never fall, nor yet stumble to endanger their Rider.

They are most docile creatures, and of all those we account merely sensible
come nearest unto reason.

Lipsius in his Epistles Cent. 1. Epist. 50. out of his observation from
others, writes more of them than I can confirm, or any, I persuade my self,
believe; yet many things most remarkable, which seem indeed to be acts of
reason rather than sense, I have observed in them, for instance, an Elephant
will do any thing his keeper Commands him, as if he bid him to affright a man,
he will make toward him as if he meant to tread him into pieces, but when he
is come at him do him no hurt at all; so if he would have him, to abuse or to
disgrace a man, he will take dirt or dust, or kennel-water into his Trunk, and
dash it on his face.

Their Trunks are grisly snouts of a great length, hanging down betwixt their
long teeth, which teeth nature has given them for their defense, otherwise
they are of little use to them. In their Trunks they have such mavelous
strength, that by them they can do very much mischief, for if they strike an
Horse, or Camel, or any other the like beast with them, (as sometimes they do
when as they are mad) they will so break their bones, as that they will spoil,
nay kill them at one blow, and much more a man if he chance to come in their
way.

Those Trunks of the Elephants are to them as an hand by which they ^eed
themselves, and make great use of them otherwise upon all occasions, for with
those Trunks they tear off bowghs from trees, by winding them about them, and
after, with them, put boughs into their mouths, and eat the tenderest parts of
them. With these they pull up green corn (if they be suffered) and grass by the
roots, and then against their legs beat off the earth and dust that hangs
about them, before they eat thereof. Thus they deal with sedgs, or weeds which
they find in the water, first washing off the dirt which hangs on the roots
thereof, and then down they go into their vast bellyes.

The Elephants delight much to bathe themselves in water, in which, when they
find depth enough, they swim as well as any other Creatures.

I observed before, that the male Elephants when they grow lusty are sometimes
mad for their Femals, but in few days come again in temper; before which time
they are so mischievous, that they will strike any thing, but their Keepers,
that comes in their way; and their strength is such (as before I observed) that
there is no blow they give which lights either upon men or beast, but carries
death with it. At those times to prevent mischief they are kept apart from
Company, fetterd with strong chains unto trees; but if by chance in their
frenzy they get loose (as sometimes they do) they will make after every thing
they see stir, in which case they have no means to stop them in their violent
course, but by firing of Crackers made of Gunpowder, whose sparkling, and noise
makes them to stand still and tremble. When those creatures are in that mad
distemper, they sweat much, which makes their savor exceeding rank and filthy
like that ill smell of a Boa^ when he is fatting in his Stye, but by much more
strong, and more offensive than that.

An English Merchant there, of good credit upon his own knowledge, reported
this thing which follows, and is very observable, of an Elephant in Adsmeer,
(the place then of the Mogols residence) who being brought often through the
Bazar or Market place, a woman who usually sat there to sell herbs, was wont to
give this great Elephant an handful, as he many times passed by; this Elephant
after, being mad, brake his fetters, and took his way through that Bazar; the
people being all of them much affrighted, made have to secure themselves by
getting out of his way, amongst whom was this herb-woman, who, for fear and
have, forgot her little Child which she had brought thither; the Elephant came
to the place where this woman usually sat, stopped, and seeing a little Child
lying there about her herbs, took it up gently with his Trunk, not doing it the
least harm, and presently after laid it down upon the stall of an house that
was hard by; and then proceeded on in his furious course. Acosta, a Jesuit,
relates the like of an Elephant in Goa from his own experience.

The Elephant, though he be vast, and terrible, yea and cruel too, when he is
set to do mischief, or when he is mad, yet otherwise is a tame gentle Creature,
so that the dread of this huge beast, most appears to the eyes. But
notwithstanding his terribleness, I once there saw a Creature compared with an
Elephant, not much bigger than a small Fish compared with a Whale, boldly to
encounter one of them. The occasion by which this so came to pass offers it
self thus; that year I went for East India, the Merchants here (as from the
King of England, in whose name they sent all their presents) amongst many other
things, then sent the Mogol some great English Mastives, and some large Irish
Greyhounds, in all to the number of eight, dispersed in our several ships; one
of those high spirited Mastives in our voyage thither, upon a day seeing a
great Shoale or company of Porpisces (before described) mounting up above the
waves, and coming toward that ship wherein he was, suddenly lept overboard to
encounter with them, before any did take notice of that fierce creature, to
prevent that engagement, wherein he was irrecoverably lost, the ship then
having such a fresh gale of wind, that she could not suddenly slack her
course, whereby that poor creature might have been preserved. Another, one of
the Irish Greyhounds had his head shot off in our fight. The Mange was the
destruction of four more of them, only two of the Mastives came alive to
East India, and they were carried up, each of them drawn in a little Coach,
when I went up to the Ambassador, that he might present them to the Mogol. The
fiercest of these two, in our way thither, upon a time breaking loose, fell
upon a very large Elephant that was hard by us, fastening his teeth in the
Elephants Trunk, and kept his hold there a good while, which made that huge
beast extremely to roar; and though the Elephant did swing the Mastive up and
down above ground many times (as not feeling his weight) that he might throw
him off; yet he could not suddenly do it, but at last freeing himself from the
dog by throwing him a good space from him, the^e came a Mungrill Curr of that
Country toward our Mastive, who then lost this his most unequal match, fell
upon that dog and killed him, by which means we recovered our Mastive again into
our custody, he having not received any apparent hurts; by which we may see how
much Courage and Mettle there is in those right fierce Mastives.

This story pleased the Mogol very much when the dogs were presented to him,
and he allowed each of them four attendants of those Natives to wait upon them,
who by turns two and two together carried them up and down with him in
Palankees, (after described) to which they were tied, and the other two went by
them, fanning the flies from off them; and the King caused a pair of silver
^ongs to be made on purpose, that with them when he pleased, he might feed
those dogs with his own hand. But this story by the way.

The Mogol has many of his great Elephants trained up for the war, who carry
each of them one iron gun, about five foot long, lying upon a strong frame of
wood, made square that is fitted to a thick broad Panel fastened about him;
with very strong and broad Girses or Girts. The gun like an Harquebush has a
piece of iron like a Musket-rest fastened on the sides thereof, made loose to
play up and down. The bottom of that Iron Rest so fixed, is long, to be let
through that frame of wood on the foreside, and so to be keyed in at the
bottom. At the four corners of this frame are small flags of silk, with sundry
devices painted on them, put upon little neat colored staves; upon the neck of
the Elephant sits a man to guide him, and within the frame a Gunner, to make
his shot as he finds occasion. The piece thus mounted, carrves a bullet about
the bigness of a Tennis Ball.

Some Elephants the King keeps for the execution of Malefactors, the manner
how, follows in Section 23. And some he keeps to carry himself, and women; and
some Elephants are kept for State (of which more when I shall come to speak
more particularly of the great Mogol.) Other Elephants are there employed for
the carrying of burdens* their strength being so great as that they will bear a
marvailous weight.

The Elephants are all governed with a small rod of steel about half a yard
long, made sharp on the lower end, and toward that end there is an hook
returned, life a fish-hook, that is very sharp likewise, by which their Riders
sitting on their necks, pull them back, or prick them forward at their pleasure.

These vast Creatures, though the Country be exceeding fruitful, and all
provisions in it cheap, yet by reason of their huge bulk, if they be well kept
and fed, are very chargeable in keeping; they are kept usually under the shade
of great trees, where by a strong chain of iron upon one of their hind legs
they fasten them. And as they stand, the abundance of flies vex them, and
therefore with their fore-feet they make dust, (the ground usually being very
dry) and with their Trunks cast the dust about their bodies to drive away those
flies from them.

The King allows every one of those great male Elephants four femals, which in
their language they call their wives. These brutes (as they say) will not
endure any to behold them when they are coupling together; which may condemn
many who call themselves men and women, but have so lost all modesty, that they
are not ashamed when they commit any act of filthiness, no they are not
ashamed, neither can they blush. The Female Elephants (as they further say)
carry their young, one whole year ere they bring them forth, Thirty years
expire ere they come to their full growth, and they fulfill the accustomed age
of men ere they dye. And lastly, notwithstanding the great Number there of
those vast Creatures, and the excessive charge in keeping them well, they value
them at exceeding high rates.

For this people, when as they journey from place to place, the men of the
inferior sort go all on foot, their women that cannot so travel, ride on
little Oxen, inured to carry burdens, or on Asses, which carry their little
children with them; the women like the men astride. Others that are of better
quality ride on Horses, Mules, Camels, Dromedaries, or else in slights Coaches
with two wheels covered on the top and back end, but the forepart and sides
open, unless they carry women. Those Coaches will carry four persons beside the
driver, but two may lie at ease, and at length in them upon quilts, that ly in
the body of them, upheld by girt-webb, with which they are bottomed, which
makes them by far more easy These Coaches are covered for men of qualityr with
some thing that is costly; much of ou English broad cloth that is dyed red, is
there bought from us and employed for that use. At the back end of this coach
they have a long round bolster, that reaches both sides, stuffed with
Cotten-wool, and covered with Velvet or Satin, or with some other thing that
is rich. These Coaches are drawn by Oxen, one yoke to a Coach, some of which
Oxen have their short horns neatly tipped with silver plate, and some others
with brass; and they have each of them a fine Collar of large round bells,
some of them made of Silver. They are P^r^d and suited as our Coach-horses for
stature and color; most of them thus employed are white, and some pide, or
spotted all over with several colors. They are guided with small cords which
go through the parting of their Nostrils, and so twixt their horns into the
Coach man's hand who by these restrain them when, and guides them how he
pleases, and when he would have them go on, pricks them forward with a s^^al
and short staff he keeps in his hand pointed like a goad. These Oxen there are
very neatly made, slender, strait limbed and not very large, but naturally very
nimble, and by daily use made so fit to perform that labor, (being kept well
shod) as that they go 20 miles a day and more, with good speed. They keep those
Oxen for this service, as their horses, well dressed, and so well fed, that
they be plump and fat, and consequently very handsome to behold.

The men there of the greatest rank and quality, ride sometimes in those
Coaches, and sometimes on their curious Horses, and sometimes on their brave
Elephants but however they are carried, they have their horses which wait upon
the^, when they go abroad, that they may bestride them when they please And at
other times they ride on men's shoulders, in a slight thing they call a
Palankee, made somewhat like a couch or standing Pallat, covered with a
Canopie, wherein a man may lie at his full length, as many of those Grandees
do, when they are removed from place to place, giving themselves up to ease,
and over unto those sins which follow it; and while they are thus carried, they
make the shoulders and joints of those that feel their heavy weight, to bow and
buckle under their burdens. This as it should seem was an ancient, but a base
effeminacy sometimes used in Romans Juvenal in his first Satire, describing a fat
Lawyer thus carried.

Causidi^i, nova cum veniat Lectica, Mathoni^.
Plena ipso. --
Matho the pleader comes in his new Chair,
Filled with himself; when he takes the air.
It had been well, if such carriages as these had been never heard of, but in
then heathen Rome, or amongst poor blinded Indians. But, Vae nobis miseris ad
quos Paganorum vicia transterunt. Woe to us wretched people of this Nation, unto
whom the vices of Pagans are derived. It was a curse that the old Cretans were
wont to wish might fall upon their greatest enemies, that they might fall in
love with evil customs. This doubtless is one amongst many more, fallen upon
us of this Nation, when some, not out of necessity, but choice, make other men
their Pack-horses to ride upon them, a thing (as I conceive of it) most
unworthy of a man, as he is a man, so to do.

I am no Leveller, I hate the thought of it, as a wild fancy, and frenzy that
is most destructive; knowing, that there is an absolute necessity amongst men
of superiority and subordination, where some must command, and others obey. An
head alone without inferior members, is a monster, not a body. Yet however, I
would have all those who are Masters and Superiors, so to demean themselves
toward their underlings and servants in all things, as always remembering that
they have a Master in Heaven, with whom there is no respect of persons, Ephesians. 6.
9.

For men, let them exalt themselves never so high, if they will not for the
present learn, they shall one day be made to know, that there are higher than
they. All great ones therefore, who overlook those of low degree, believing
themselves taller than all of them by head and shoulders, had need of such a
daily remembrancer as Symonides was to Pausanias; or that Page to Philip King
of Macedon, who, by that Kings special commandment, was to cry every morning
in his ears, (...). Remember O King, that thou art but a man. I say, very many
have need of such remembrancers, (who exalt themselves too much above others)
to tell them, that they are but men. Homo sum, humanum a me nil alienum puta.
And being but men, should do nothing but what well becomes humanity. Therefore
though many which are very poor, who to gain bread are content to submit
themselves unto any Low Conditions; yet others (twixt whom and them nothing so
much as an inequality of estate makes the maine difference) should not thus
employ them, if not for the man's, yet for his manhood sake; not put such a vast
distance, such a maine difference betwixt others and themselves, made of the
very selfsame mould, and happily more graciously beheld by that invisible eye
than themselves are, before whom they must first or last all appear, and that
upon equal terms.

But I shall here degress no further; but return again to that people (I mean
those of quality amongst them) who out of Pride, or Idleness, or both, are thus
carried up and down, or by some other means I named before, though they remove
never so little way from one place to another, accounting it very dishonorable
for them to go on foot. And so much of this. I shall now proceed, (having made
mention of their huge multitudes of Horses, and Elephants) etc. to take notice,

SECTION VII.
Of their numerous Armies; Their Ammuniton for war; How they lade themselves
with weapons; How terriribly they appear; yet how pusillanimous, and low
spirited they are.

WHere first, for their numerous Armies, it will appear to be no strange thing,
if we consider the Great Mogol to be what he is, an overgrown Prince, (as
before described) in the vast extent of his large territories, being like a
huge Pike in a great Pond, that preys upon all his neighbors, who therefore
purchase, and keep his favor by very great Presents given him by any of
homage, and a submiss acknowledgment of his mighty Power. And besides, the
Mogol is a master of unknown treasure, having Silver as it is written of
Solomon, 1 K. 10. 27. Like stones in the streets. And certainly in far greater
abundance than ever Solomon had. Though I must tell my Reader, that all metals
there, are not silver and gold, nor all stones precious. Now he that can
command what treasure he will, may likewise command what men he please, as the
Mogol does besides his own people. Many Persians and Tartars (before spoken of)
very valiant men, who serve him as Soldiers on horseback, and so the major
part by far; whether Natives, or strangers, are mounted for his service in his
wars.

Hence it is that the Armies there consist of incredible multitudes; they talk
of some which have exceeded that mighty Host which Zerah King of Ethiopia
brought against King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14. 9. but they having not well learned that
horrid bloody art of war, as the Europeans have; and wanting Commanders, and
other Officers to manage their great Companies, are not so skillful to destroy*
as otherwise they might be: it is a phrase most properly and fitly applied unto
savage, and absurd, and brutish, and unreasonable man, to the Enemies of God,
and of his Church by the Prophet Ezekiel, 21. 31. Where Almighty God threatens
that he will deliver them into the hands of brutish men, and skillful to
destroy.

The weapons they use in their Wars are Bows, and Arrows, Swords, and
Bucklers, short Lances, having excellent good steel-heads, and short pieces
like unto Carbines, besides those carried upon Elephants (before described)
some footmen in their wars carry those lesser Guns, with Bows and Arrows,
Swords and Bucklers, and they are excellent Marks-men. They make good
Gunpowder for their own use, and fire their Guns with March, or Touch-wood.
Their swords are made crooked like Falchons, and are very sharp, but for want
of skill in those that temper them, will easily break, but not bend. And
therefore we sell at good rates our English Sword-blades that will bow, and
become strait again. They have, (and they say that for many generations past
have had) great Ordnance, though they seldom make use of them in their Wars.

Their warlike music are some Kettle-drums carried on horseback, with long
wind Instruments, which make not Music, but noise so harsh, and unpleasing,
that it is enough to fright away their enemies.

They say, that in their military engagements, they make at the first very
furious onsets, which are too violent long to continue, for the Scale quickly
decides the Controversy, when that side which happens first to be worsted, and
to be put into disorder, knows better to Run than to Rally again.

There are some of the Mogols own subjects which are men of courage; those of
note among the Mahometans are called Baloches, inhabiting Haiacan, adjoining
unto the Kingdom of Persia, (spoken of before) and there are others called
Patans, taking their denomination from a Province of that name in the Kingdom
of Bengala. These will look an enemy boldly in the face, and maintain with
their lives, their reputation and valor. Amongst the many Sects of Hindooes or
Gentiles (after spoken of) which are subject to this King, there is but one
race of fighters called Rashboots, a number of which live by spoil, who in
troops surprise poor passengers, for the most part murdering those whom they
get under their power. These excepted, the rest of the Mogols, natives for the
generality of them had rather eat than quarrel, and rather quarrel than fight.
I say quarrel, for I have several times observed there, that when two of them,
have been both well armed, and have most shamefully abused one another, in
baser language than I can express, yet durst not draw their weapons; in
conclusion, when one of them has caught the other by the throat, and forced
him up against some wall, the sufferer would cry out pitiously, and the
standers by would admire the other for his valous, saying Sha-Abas; a
proverbial speech amongst them relating to the late King of Persia, called
Sha-Abas, a Prince much renowned for valor; and when any man did a thing they
thought gallantly, they cried Sha-Abas, as much to say, it was done as well as
the Persian King could have done it.

Yet, however the people here in general are Cowardly they appear men of very
terrible aspects, having great long Mustachos upon their upper lips, their
Chins continually kept bare by the rasor, which makes them all to look like the
Pictures of our old Britains; or like those our rude Painters daub upon
clothes, and call them the Nine-worthies. And further, to make them the more
formidable, they will appear on horseback as if they were surrounded with an
Armorie, or carrying an whole Armorie about them, thus appointed; At their left
sides swords hanging on belts, under them sheaves of many arrows; on their
left shoulders broad Bucklers fastened, and upon their backs small Gunns like to
Carbines fixed likewise; at their right sides Bows hanging in cases, and
Lances (about two yards and an half long) hanging in loops near their stirrops
(when they carry them not in their hands) yet for all this Harness the most of
them are like those Ephramites, Psalm. 78. 9. Who being armed, and carrying
bows, turned their heads in the day of battle. For they dare not look a man
of courage in the face, though they be thus fortified, with such variety of
weapons for their defense. Nay, a man of resolution will beat one of these out
of all his weapons, with a small stick or cane. So that I shall do the Natives
of that Country no wrong, if I say of them, that they are Sola Libidine
fortes, most strong and valiant in their base lusts, and not otherwise.

The base Cowardice of which people, has made the great Mogol sometimes to use
this Proverb, that one Portugal would beat three of his people; and (because
the English there have many times prevailed much at Sea against those
Portugals) he would further add, that one Englishman would beat three
Portugals.

The truth is, that the Portugals, especially those which are born in those
Indian Colonyes, most of them a mixed seed begotten upon those Natives, are a
very low, poor-spirited people, called therefore Galijnas del^ Mar, the Hens of
the Sea.

One notable instance to prove this, it happened that the East India Company
had a very little Pinnace they called the Coaster, which they kept in those
parts for discoveries; manned she was but with ten men, and had only one small
murdering-peece within her. She upon a time met with a Portugal ship, going
then toward Ormos, which had one hundred and thirty men aboard her, and Guns
answerable to her burden, and Company; Our petty Pinnace came up with her,
discharged her murdering piece, which slew one of her chief Officers, upon
which, without any further resistance, she presently struck her Sails and
yielded. Our English presently commanded her Gunners, and some other of her
Chief Officers, to come aboard them, which immediately they did, and there kept
them bound, till they had taken what they ^leased out of their Ship, and then
let them go being most deservedly used in that their suffering, they being
thirteen to one, and yet such beasts they were, as that they durst not make any
resistance.

But take some stories of valiant Portugals before I leave them, and these you
shall have from some of that Nation themselves, whom, we not seldom met in
Ind^a and would there beg relief of us; but I never knew any come to us upon
those terms, but his pride would excuse his Poverty thus, that he was
Challenged into the field, and there in single combat had fairly slain a man,
how that he durst not return again any more into the Portugal Colonyes, for
fear of the law, and it was that which put him at present into that sad exigent
to ask relief, and this was their usual plea there, when in truth and in deed,
we did believe them to be such pitiful wretches, or men of such a strange
resolution, as that, (as it was written of one called Pisander) they would be
made to fear their own shadows.

However, upon this account there came upon a time at my first coming into
India, unto the factorie at Surat, where I then was, a most valiant Portugal
(if you will give him leave to tell his own story, and believe it when he has
done) who first for his person was a Quantus tantus, tantillus, a very poor,
little dwarfish man, whose person promised as little valor as any that I ever
saw, though I know that high Courage is not tied to an huge bulk, for (if
stories abuse us not) Alexander the great was But a little man; but what ever
Alexander was, I am sure, that this was a poor little thing, but however he
told us, that he was by birth an Hidalgo, which signifies in Spanish the Son of
somebody, or no ordinary man, but a Gentleman of Spain, and that he came from
thence as a Companion to the King of Spains Viceroy, sent to Goa, and himself
was called the Knight with the Golden Rapier, and that suddenly after his
coming to Goa, he was honorably invited into the field, there to fight a single
Combat with a very gallant man of that place, but he soon left him there dead;
and having done so, the Viceroy prevented him with a pardon for that fact,
before he asked it, but willing him withal, now he had been sufficiently
tried, to confine his Rapier to its scabard. But he told us further, that he
could not long after live quietly there, but was provoked again by a man of
high resolution, unto a second encounter, when he had the like success as
before, in killing his Adversary. The Viceroy now was very angry with him, but
upon much entreaty, as he said, pardoned him a second time; upon the receipt of
which favor he told us that he was then resolved to throw away his Rapier, to
get into a Religious house, and there to remain the residue of his days, a
Convertado or Penitent. But the Viceroy could not be long without his Company,
and therefore to gain it, restored him again into his former favor: But for
himself he was still so unhappie (the fame of his great valor being spread
abroad) as that he could not long enjoy that Peace, and quiet, which he now so
much desired, but received a third Challenge from a very gallant, and very
valiant man, as he described him, a man big enough to beat a Goliath, and then
he further told us, that his honor was ever more dear unto him than his life,
and therefore notwithstanding the loss of the Vice-Royes favor, and what else
might happen, he entered the lists with him, and though he found him the
stoutest adversary that ever he opposed, yet after a long conflict this little
Knight killed that great Giant, and left him there dead likewise, which done, He
(not daring to return any more unto Goa) told us, that he came naked out of the
field as we then saw him with no ornaments (I assure you) about him, fit to
make him a Vice-Royes companion, nor any weapon fit to Dub him Knight of the
Golden Rapier. He further added, that he was now resolved not to live any
longer amongst the Christians, but that he desires to live amongst the
English; but when we replied that we were Christians, he cried Jesu Maria! as
wondering at it, and further told us that, he never heard so before.

When this Rhadomantadist had ended his perilous story, it was dinner time,
and the Merchants bid him to sit down with us and eat, and so he did, where
certainly he laid about him more valiantly than ever he had done before in the
field, giving our meat many a cut, and eating, as if he had been more than half
starved. He continued with us there for some few days, and after, when his
hunger was well satisfied, and his spirits well refreshed, he began to take
some exception against his place at the Table, because he eat at the lower end
thereof, saying, that the company there were but Factors, Servants, but he was
a Gentleman, and therefore his due place was higher at the board, but then
corrected himself, saying, that it was not to be much considered where he sat,
for his place made the upper end of Table where ever he was placed, and
suddenly after, this Don Quixet being weary of his stay with us (though he was
but too well used) and having a great mind to ramble further, told our
Company, that he being an Hidalgo, it was very dishonorable for him to take
entertainment upon the Terms he had it, and therefore desired us to make a
little Purse for him, on which he would live as long as he could, and then
Creep into some Desert place, and there repent and die. And now our great Ghest,
having spent all his humor, and told us all his Dream, had his desire granted
in some money that was given to him, and so we parted with our Knight Errant,
who lived longer than he told us he would live, for half a year after I took
notice of him at the Mogols Court, and there I leave him.

I will now shortly relate a story of another of his Nation (and I do believe
as good a Gentleman as himself) who called himself Antonio de la Valla. It
happened, that a little before our coming thence, my Lord Ambassador going
from his own house to dine at the English Factory in Surat, and I waiting on
him, there appeared then to us a walking Skeliton, most miserably clothed, the
poorest, and leanest creature that ever mine eyes beheld, who faintly begged of
him some relief, telling (what was true) that he was almost quite starved; the
Ambassador pitied, and relieved him, and as we returned back, found this poor
Creature eating with so much greediness, as if he could not have been
satisfied. He was then willed to come to our house, and he did so, and there
was fed, and hear^ned up again, and then when he was come to himself, told us,
that he had endu^ed there abundance of misery which, as he acknowledged, did
most justly befall him because he had there renounced his Religion, and become
a Mohammedan, which when he had done, no care was taken of him there (for they
regard not a man that will not be constant in his Religion, believing, that if
that bond cannot tie him, nothing will) He told us further, that he was very
sorry that he had so done, and desired a passage for England, which was granted
him; and he was put unto me as my servant, and therefore I fitted him with
clothes, etc. fit for his return, but afterward (we being at Sea) he would
often Curse and Ban, and cry out, O Mal v^ntura! O his hard hap! and that of
all the miseries which he had endured, this was the greatest, that he an
Hidalgo, a Gentleman of Spain, should live to become a servant, and which was
worse, to serve an Heretic. I would when I heard this of him (for he spoke not
so to me) tell him of it, and further mind him of that most sad condition in
which we found him, how that he had starved to death, if our pity, in the
relief he found from us, had not even then prevented it. He would reply, that
he knew not what he said; telling me that his many miseries had turned his
brains; (not to bestow any more ink and paper on him) we brought him afterward
to Plimmouth and immediately after our arrive there, he desired his liberty,
which was very easily granted him, and from thence (having some money given him
more than he deserved) took his course whither I cannot tell, neither will my
Reader desire to know. And therefore I will return again, as swift as
meditation or thought can carry me, unto East India, where I shall in the next
place speak

SECTION. VIII.
Of our safe and secure living amongst the Natives there, if we do not provoke
them. Of their faithfulness unto those that entertain them as servants: for how
little they serve, and yet how diligent they are, etc.

WHere first for our living in East India, it is with as much freedom and
safety, in our journeys, and Tents, when we travel; in our houses when we are
more fixed, as if we were in an army of Banners appointed for our guard; or as
if the Vines and Fig Trees under which we there sit were our own.

But there are spoylers sometimes met withal, in those Provinces, that live by
their swords, and bows, having nothing for their subsistence (because they
will take no other course) but what they get by rapine and spoil; of whom
somewhat more afterward.

And now by the way for those villains who thus live, wherever they be, and
those sturdy rogues who are next to them in guilt, by eating up the bread of
the poor, having able limbs to carry them, that they may beg from house to
house, and hands to receive Alms, but none to labor; both thief being the
very vermin of those Commonwealths wherein they are suffered to breath, it were
very well if such of these as have not deserved to be cut off by the hand of
Justice, were all served as Philip King of Macedon dealt with two Rogues,
alterum e Macedonio fugere, alterum persequi jussit. He made one of them to
whip the other out of his Country, and so he was rid of both of them.

But to return unto the place from whence I am now digressed. I traveled from
Surat with four Englishmen more, and about twenty of the Natives in our
Company, we beginning our journey the first of January toward Sir Thomas Row,
at the Mogols Court, then above four hundred miles distant from Surat. We had
six wagons drawn with Oxen, in our Company, laden with rich English goods (the
principal part whereof was English broad cloth) assigned to an English Merchant
at the Court, and some other Carriages we had, of all which we made a ring
every night near some large Town or Village, where we resolved to stay, and
pitched our Huts within that Circle, some of us watching, and the Natives with
us, every night; we went on that long journey very safely, only in some places
where there was any suspicion of danger, we had a guard of horse appointed to
go with us for our defense, by the Command of Sultan Caroon the Prince, and now
King, (who had his revenue out of those parts we then traveled thorough) who
sent a Footman, that continually kept us company, with his letters to command a
Company of Soldiers that were horsemen, to guard us where he thought good, who
as they did not expect, so they would take no recompense for their pains,
though we freely offered it them. But the providence of God did so order it,
that though we had their company in several places, we never had need of their
help for our defense. The truth is, that the people there in general are very
civil, and we never had any affronts or ill usage from them, if we did not
first provoke them.

But if we did, they would not well bear it, for twice in one week at my first
coming to Surat the whole town in general were in an uproar, and surrounded
our house there, both times some of our English Provoked those Natives to stir
against us, but by our speedy addresses unto the Governor of that place, we
excusing the fault of those that ministered the occasion of their discontent,
they being newly come thither, and altogether unacquainted with their customs,
he presently commanded that wild Assembly to depart from our house, and so
immediately they did, we receiving no hurt at all from any of them.

When my Lord Ambassador at first arrived at Surat, it so was, that an English
Cook he carried with him, the very first day of his coming thither, found a
way to an Armenian Christians house, who sold wine in that place, they call
Armenian Wine. But (by the way) I do believe that there was scarce another in
that populous City of that trade; the greater shame for those whosoever they be
that suffer so many unnecessary tipling-houses (in the places where they have
power to restrain them) which are the Devils nursery, the very Tents wherein
Satan dwells, where Almighty God receives abundance of dishonor, drun keness
being a sin which has hands and fingers to draw all other sins unto it; For a
drunkard can do any thing, or be any thing but good. That Armenian Wine I speak
of is made of Reysons of the Sun and Sugar, with some other things pur and
boiled in water, which Wine, when it is ripe and clear, is in Color like to
our Muscadels, pleasant enough to the taste, but heavy and heady. The Cook had
his head quickly over-freighted with it, and then staggering homeward, in his
way met the Governors Brother of Surat, as he was riding to his house, the Cook
made a stand, staying himself up upon his sword and scabbard, and cried out to
the Governors Brother, Now thou Heathen dog. He not understanding his foul
language, replied civilly in his own Ca-ca-ta, which signifies, what say
thou? the Cook answered him with his sword and scabbard, with which he struck
at at him, but was immediately seized on by his followers, and by them
disarmed and carried to Prison; the Ambassador had present intelligence of the
misbehaviour of his drunken servant, and immediately sent word unto the
Governors Brother, that he was not come thither to patronize any disorderly
person, and therefore desired him to do with him what he pleased, upon which
he presently sent him home, not doing him the least hurt. But before I leave
this story, it will not be amiss to enquire who was the Heathen dog at this
time, whether the debaucht drunken Cook who called himself a Christian, or that
sober and temperate Mohammedan who was thus affronted.

In our journey toward the Court (after we had been in our way about seven
days from Surat) we rested at a place called Ditat, where many of the
Inhabitants offered to guard us and our goods, though we (observing there no
danger) desired it not, but they would do it, and in the morning expected and
asked something of us, by way of recompense. One of our Company (who had been
in East India a year or two before) told them, that what they had done they did
without ou^ desire, and therefore they should have nothing from us, but some
ill language which he then gave them. We set forward in the morning according
to our wonted custom they followed after us, to the number at the least of
three hundred men (for the place was great and populous) and when we were gone
about a mile from that Town, stopped our carriages; he of our Company who told
them they should have no recompense, was presently ready to shoot at them with
his Musket, which made them all to bend their Bows at us, but I happily and
suddenly stepping in, prevented his firing at them, and their shooting at us,
which if I had not by Gods good Providence done, but we had madly engaged such
a great multitude, there could not have been less expected in the sad issue
thereof, than the loss of all our lives, and goods, but having a little Parlee
with them, for the value of three shillings of English money given amongst
them, they were all quieted and contented, and immediately left us, wishing us a
good journey.

After this, when we had gone forward about twenty days journey (which daily
remooves were but short, by reason of our heavy carriages, and the heat of the
weather) it happened, that another of our Company, a young Gentleman about
twenty years old, the Brother of a Baron of England, behaved himself so ill, as
that we feared it would have brought very much mischief on us.

This young man being very unruly at home, and so many others that have been
well born, when their friends knew not what to do with them, have been sent to
East India, that so they might make their own Graves in the Sea, in their
passage thither, or else have Graves made for them on the Indian shore, when
they come there. A very cleanly conveyance (but how just and honest, I leave to
others) for Parents to be rid of their unruly Children; but I never knew any
who were thus supposed to be sent thither, but they outlived that voyage.

For the young Gentleman I spoke of, his employment was to wait upon our chief
Commander in his Cabin, who very courteously when he came to Sea, turned him
before the mast amongst the common saylors [a great preferment for a man of his
birth,] but for all this he outlived that harsh usage, and came safely to East
India, and my Lord Ambassador hearing of him, and being well acquainted with
his great kindred, sent for him up to the Court, and there entertained him as a
Companion for a year, then giving him all fit accommodations, sent him home
again as a passenger for England, where after he safely arrived.

But in our way toward that Court, it thus happened, that this hot-brains
being a little behind us, commanded him [then near him] who was the Princes
servant [before spoken of] to hold his horse, the man replied, that he was none
of his servant, and would not do it. Upon which this most intemperate mad
youth, who was like Philocles that angry Poet; and therefore called Bilis, and
Salsigo, Choler and Brine, [for he was the most hasty and choleric young man
that ever I knew] as will appear by his present carriage, which was thus; first
he beat that stranger, for refusing to hold his horse, with his horse-whip,
which I must tell you, that people cannot endure, as if those whips stung worse
than Scopions. For of any punishments that carry most disgrace in them, as that
people think one is to be beaten with that whip, where with all they strike
their beasts; the other to be beaten [and this they esteem the more
disgraceful punishment of the two) about the head with shoes. But this
stranger (being whipped as before) came up and complained to me, but to make him
amends, that frantic young man (mad with rage, and he knew not wherefore)
presently followed him, and being come up close to him, discharged his Pistol
laden with a brace of bullets directly at his body, which bullets, by the
special guidance of the hand of God, so flew, that they did the poor man no
great hurt, only one of them first tearing his coat, bruised all the knucles of
his left hand and the other brake his bow which he carried in the same hand. We
presently disarmed our young B^dlam, till he might return again to his wits.
But our greatest business was how to pacify the other man whom he had thus
injured: I presently gave him a Roopee; in our money two shillings and nine
pence; he thanked me for it, and would have taken it with his right, but I
desired him to take it with his maym'd hand, and so he did, and could clinch it
very well, which I was glad of. Then we did show (as we had cause) all the
dislike we could against that desperate act of him, from whom he received his
hurt, telling him, that we were all strangers, and for our parts had done him
no wrong at all, and therefore hoped that we should not be made any way to
suffer for the faults of another, and we further told him, that if he would be
quiet till we came up to the Con^t, he should have all the satisfaction he
could desire. He told us, that we were good men, and had done him no wrong, and
that he would til then rest contented; but he did not so, for about two hours
after we met with a great man of that Country, having a mighty train with him,
(as all the Grandees there have when they travel (of whom more afterward) He
presently went toward him, that to him he might make his complaint; and so
did, telling him, that he was the Princes servant, why he came to us, and how
he had been used by us, showing him his hand and his other breaches. The great
man replied, that it was not well done of us, but he had nothing to do with it,
and so departed on his way. That night, after we came to a strong large Town,
and placing our selves on the side of it, he did what he could (as we imagined)
to raise up that people against us, some of them coming about us to view us,
as we conceived, but putting on the best confidence we could, and standing then
upon our guard, and all of us watching that night, but (in a special manner) by
the good providence of God, who kept us in all our journey, we here felt none
of that mischief we feared, but early in the morning quietly departed without
the least molestation. After which, with a little money, and a great many good
words, we so quieted this man, that we never after heard any more complaining
from him. So that (as before I observed) we were not at any time in any dangers
of suffering by that people, but some of our own Nation were the procuring
causes of it.

For the people there, they are generally very Civil, and usually keep
themselves so within the bounds of command received from their superiors, over
which they do not pass, as that they are not apt to take fire, and to throw off
their voak, that they might do mischief; They happily considering, that as in a
natural, so in a body Politic, there must be hands and feet, as well as head
and shoulders, all parts as well as any, the defect of the least being so
prejudicial to both those bodies, that they know not how to want it; But for
both, when they are fitted with all their integral parts, all members must do
their several offices, the foot not meddling with the business of the Head,
further than to receive Commands from it. And therefore that precept of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 5. Servants be obedient unto them that are your Masters
according to the flesh etc. though they never learned it from S. Paul, yet
having found that lesson clearly written even in the Law of Nature, with all
carefulness they remember, and with all diligence they practice it, as well
knowing the absolute necessity of superiority, and inferiority amongst men,
that some must give, others must take command; for were it not for those cords
to lead some, and to hamper and restrain others, there were no living for men
amongst men, but one would destroy another, as the Beasts of the field, the
Fowls of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea do; were it not for those ligaments
and ties, the very sinews and nerves of every Kingdom and Commonwealth would
crack asunder, and all would run into confusion.

I have often heard it observed of the Welsh, that they are Optimi servi, but
Pessimi Domini, ill Masters, but good servants. I shall not further enquire
into the truth of that proverbial speech; but, for this people, this I can
affirm; that they are excellent servants, who are as much at the command of
their Masters, as the people of Israel, after the death of Moses, were unto
Joshua, Josh. 1. 17. there telling him, all that thou command us we will do,
or whithersoever thou sendest us we will go; Or as the Centurions servants in
the Gospel were at the word of command to their Captain, Matthew. 8. 9. who, if
he bad them go, they went, if come, they came, if do this, or that, they did
it: So these, if they be commanded to carry letters of a sudden many miles
distant, from one place to another, they yield obedience in this, as to all
other the commands of their Masters, without regret or dispute, not objecting
against, but doing the wills of those that employ them.

Before I observed, that for the generality of this people they have very low
and timorous spirits, but there are some I named in my last Section, who are
stout daring men, as the Baloches, Patans, and Rashbootes, who, as they have
the honor above all the rest of the people in those large Provinces to be
accounted valiant; so, as occasion is offered, they will show themselves so to
be: and therefore they are much hired as Convoyes to secure men's Persons and
goods, from place to place.

For those Provinces, they are not without Mountains of prey, and Tabernacles
of Robbers, as David and Job speak, where desperate men keep in some woods and
deserts, which are not far from great road-wayes, most frequented and used, and
there, like the wild Arabs, in Companies meet, and spoil, and destroy poor
passengers, when they expect them not; it being the cursed manner of those
spoylers, if they prevail against; them whom they surprise, to kill them before
they rifle them, and therefore the first thing heard from them is, Mor, mor,
mor, that is, Kill, kill, kill, which they all speak out as loud as they can.
We were often told of them as we traveled sometimes in the night, by reason of
the extreme heat of the day, after we had taken leave of the King; and so were
jour journeying toward Surat, that we should meet with those cruel villans,
but, through Gods mercy, we were never in danger of them but once, and that was
about midnight, near a large City called Brodera, but we being a competent
number of English men together, about twenty, and all of us resolved to fell
our lives at as dear a rate as we could, and having twice so many Indian
servants with us, which are very nimble with their Bows and Arrows, we with
our Pistols and Carbines, which we presently discharged amongst them, and our
Indians plying them with their arrows, made them suddenly to retreat, we
receiving little hurt from them, but after this we made no more night marches.

Those Indians I named before, are so faithful to their trusts unto whomsoever
they engage, to the English as well as to any other, that if they be at any
time assaulted, they will rather dye in their defense, than forsake them at
their need. So that I am very confident, that if an English Merchant should
travel alone with a very great treasure in gold, and Jewels, both, or either,
from Surat to Lahor, which is more than one thousand English miles, and take
those Indian servants only for his company, and guard, and all they knew what
be carried with him, He paying them their wages, they would be so far from
injuring him of the least penny of his wealth, that whosoever besides should
attempt his spoiling, must make a way through their blood, before they should
be able to do it

Here is a great and good example of Faithfulness, and it is very true. But I
much doubt, that if a great Indian Merchant, I mean a native of that Country,
should come for England with the like treasure, with a desire to pass through
this whole nation, and should for his more safe passage take a guard of
swordmen here, and pay them well for their service, they might lie under such a
strong tentation, as might make them to spoil the Egyptian, by shortning his
journey, dividing his substance, and by disposing so of his person, that it
should never tell tales.

But for that people, as their faithfulness is very remarkable, so is their
diligence very exemplary likewise; for they keep continually within the call of
their Masters, and will not at any time depart thence without special leave.
And the plenty of all provisions being very great throughout the whole
Monarchy, they serve at very low rates, which I never knew them to raise, not
requiring more than five shillings sterlings every new Moon, paid the next day
after its Change, which is all the recompense they do desire, or expect from
their Masters, to provide themselves with all necessaries

-- quibus hinc toga, Calceus hinc est,
Et Panis, fumusque Domi. --
Juvenal-sat. 1. Their coat, their shoes, their bread, their fire,
And all besides, bought with this hire.
And for this do as good service, as if they had ten times as much wages.

They stand to be hired in the Bazar or Marketplace, an ancient custom, as may
appear, Matthew. 20. 3. where some of them may be at all times had.

But it is their manner, when they are hired to receive advance-money, that is,
one months pay before hand, and to have their pay thus in hand every month so
long as they serve, and so honest they are, that if they be bidden to provide
themselves of other Masters, they will serve out the time for which they have
received pay, to an hour before, they depart.

Now these who are so exact in performing their duty by their faithfulness and
diligence, must be exactly paid their Salary at the time they expect it,
otherwise they will be ready to quit their service, as one of them whom we thus
hired, left us as we we were traveling up to the Court, the reason, because
our money was almost quite gone (though we were supplied again a day or two
after) and we could not punctually pay him at his day, as we had formerly done.
This fellow led one of our Camels, and had been with us two months before, but
upon this little failing him, would needs leave us, but before he departed he
made a speech to his Camel, telling him, that he had led him thus long, and had
during that time lived by him, but now our money (as he supposed) quite
failing, he told him that he must begone, desiring God to bless him, and that he
might have some other to lead him that might not be less careful of him than
he had been. So he took leave of his Camel, though not of us, and departed. All
the rest of his company were persuaded to continue with us, and had their pay a
day or two after, and so we proceeded on our journey, and so shall I further in
this discourse. And now I have spoken something of the people, I shall speak

SECTION IX.
Of their buildings in Villages, Towns, and Cities. How their Houses are
furnished. Of their Sarraes or houses for the entertainment of Passengers. Of
their Tents, Wells, and of their places of pleasure, etc.

I Observed before the Richness of their Soil, and how those Provinces are
watered by many goodly Rivers, fed with abundance of Springs and how their
fields are clothed with very much plenty of Corn of diverse kind, sold there at
such low rates that every one may there eat bread without scarceness.

Now I come to take notice of their buildings; and here I must tell my Reader,
that this people are not much taken or infected with that plague of building
(as the Italians call it) wishing the love of it as a Curse to posses the
thoughts of them they most hate; and therefore, as the stones in India are not
all precious, so the houses there are not at all Palaces; the poor there cannot
erect for their dwellings fair Piles, and the Grandees do not cover their heads
under such curious Roofs, as many of the Europeans do; the reason, first,
because all the great men there live a great part of the year, (in which their
Months are more temperate, as from the middle of September, to the midst of
April) in Tents, Pavilions, or moveable habitations, which, according to their
Fancyes, they remoove from place to place, changing their air as often as they
please. And secondly, because all the great men there have their Pensions and
whole subsistence from the King, which they hold upon very fickle and uncertain
terms; for as they are settled upon, and continued unto them by the Kings
favor, so are they forfeited and lost by his frown. Of which more afterward.

Yet though they make not much use of them, they have in plenty, excellent good
materials for building, as Timber, Bricks, stone and marble of diverse kinds and
colors, of which I have seen some very good Vaults and Arches, well wrought,
as in their Mosquits or Churches, so in some of their high erected Tombos, (of
which more afterward) and so in some other places likewise.

For their buildings in Cities and Towns, there are some of them handsome,
others fair, such as are inhabited by Merchants, and none of them very
despicable.

They build their houses low, not above two stories, and many of their topps
flat, and thick, which keep off the violence of the heat, and those flat topps
supported with strong Timber, and coated over with a plaster (like that we call
plaster of Paris) keep them dry in the times of the Raines.

Those broad ^arases, or flat Roofs, some of them lofty, are places where many
people may stand (and so they often do) early in the morning, and in the
evening late, like Camelions, to draw, and drink in fresh air; and they are
made after this fashion, for prospect, as well as pleasure.

After this manner (as it appears in the sacred story) the Jews were wont to
build, for David from the Roof of his house, 2 Samuel 11. 2. espies an object,
etc. such a one, as if God had not been very merciful, was sufficient to have
undone him for ever, as they write of the Basilisk, that it kills by sight.

By the way, let me here further add, that David's eyes thus wandered to fetch
home a temptation, immediately after he had risen from the bed of idlleness and
ease; for while he was employed in business, he was innocent and safe. The
industrious have not such leisure to sin, as the idle have, who have neither
leisure, nor power to avoid it. Exercise, as it is wholesome for the body, even
so for the soul. The remission whereof breeds diseases in both.

David from the roof of his house sees Bathsheba, when probably she saw not
him; lust is quick-sighted. David had no sooner seen that object, but his eyes
presently betray, and recoyl upon his Heart, smiting it with sinful desires,
which made him to covet her; and presently to send for her, that he might enjoy
her.

That which David here did, (and afterward grievously repents for so doing,)
shall one day be the woeful song of many a wretched soul; as the Lascivious
man's song; the Covetous man's song, the song of Thieves, Idolaters, Gluttons,
Drunkards, as of others. I saw, I coveted, I took, for all these receive their
death, by their eye.

There Bathsheba was washing herself from her uncleaness, and presently after
in an Adulterous bed, became more unclean than ever she was before; never was
Bathsheba more foul than when she was newly washed, the worst of nature being
cleanliness to the best of Sin. But I proceed.

Those houses of two stories, have many of them very large upper rooms, which
have many double doors in the sides of them, like those in our Balconies, to
open and let in fresh air, which is likewise conveyed in unto them, by many
lesser lights made in the walls of those rooms, which are always free and
open; The use of glass windows, or any other shuttings, being not known there,
nor in any other very hot Countries.

Neither have they any Chimneyes in their buildings, because they never make
any use of fire but to dress their food, which fire they make against some firm
wall, or without their Tents against some bank of Earth, as remo^e as may be
from the places where they use to keep, that they may receive no annoyance from
the heat thereof.

It is their manner in many places, to plant about, and amongst their
buildings, trees which grow high and broad, the shadow whereof keeps their
houses by far more cool; this I observed in a special manner when we were ready
to enter Amadavar, for it appeared to us, as if we had been entering a Wood,
rather than a City. That Amadavar is a very large and populous City, entered by
many fair Gates girt about with an high and thick Wall of Brick, which mounts
above the topps of their houses, without which wall there are no suburbs. Most
of the houses within the City are of Brick, and very many of them ridged and
covered with tiles.

But for their houses in their Aldeas, or Villages, which stand very thick in
that Country, they are generally very poor and base. All those Country
dwellings are set up close together, for I never observed any house there to
stand single, and alone. Some of their houses in those villages are made with
earthen walls, mingled with straw, set up immediately after their Raines, and
having a long season after to dry them thoroughly, stand firm, and so continue;
they are built low, and many of them flat: but for the generality of those
Country Villages, the Cottages in them are miserably poor, little, and base;
so that as they are built with a very little charge, set up with sticks rather
than Timber, (if they chance to fire, as many times they do) for a very little
they may be reedified.

Those who inhabit the Country Villages, are called Coolees, these till the
ground, and breed up Cattle, and other things for provision, as Henns etc.
These they who plant the Sugar, the Cotten-wooll, and Indico etc. -- for their
Trades and manifactures they are kept in Cities and Towns, about which are
their choicest fruits planted. In their Cities and Towns, without their
dwellings, but fixed to them, are pendhouses where they show and sell their
provisions, as bread, and flower-Cakes made up with Sugar, and fruits, and
other things, and there they show their manifactures, and other Commodities,
some of which they carry twice every day to sell in the Bazar or Market.

I saw two houses of the Mogols, one at Mandoa, the other at Amadaver, which
appeared large and stately, built of excellent stone well squared and put
together, each of them taking up a large compass of ground, but we could never
see how they were contrived, within because there* are none admitted, strangers
or others, to have a sight of those houses, while the Kings wives and women are
there, which must not be seen by any but by himself, and his servants the
Eunuchs.

The Mogols Palace Royal is at Agra his Metropolis (of which more afterward)
but for the present I shall take a little notice of a very curious Gro^ I saw
belonging to his house at Mandoa, which stood a small distance from it, for the
building of which there was a way made into a firm Rock, which showed it self
on the side of an Hill, Canopied over with part of that Rock. It was a place
that had much beauty in it by reason of the Curious work-manship bestowed on
it; and much pleasure by reason of its cooleness.

That City Mandoa I speak of, is situated upon a very high mountain, the to
whereof is flat, and plain, and specious. From all parts that lie about it but
one, the ascent is very high, and steep; and the way to us seemed exceeding
long, for we were two whole days Climbing up the Hill, with our Cariages,
which we got up with very much difficulty; not far from the bottom of which
Hill, we lodged at a great town called Achabar-pore, where we ferried over
a broad River (as we did in other places) for I observed no bridges made
there, over any of their Rivers where their high-vvayes lie. That Hill on
which Mandoa stands, is stuckround (as it were) with fair trees, that keep
their distance so one from and below the other, that there is much delight in
beholding them either from the bottom or top of that Hill.

In those vast and far extended woods, there are Lions, Tygres, and other
beasts of Prey, and many wild Elephants. We lay one night in that wood with our
Carriages, and those Lions came about us discovering themselves by their
Roaring, but we keeping a very good fire all night, they came not near enough
to hurt either our selves, or cattle; those Cruel Beasts are night-walkers, for
in the day they appear not.

After (when through Gods most gracious assistance) we had overcome those
difficulties, and dange^s, we came into a plain and even Country in which
traveling a few days more we first met with my Lord Ambassador marching
toward Mandoa with that great King, with whom I then settled, and continued
with him, till he was returned home.

We were in our journey to the Court from the beginning of January (...)ill the
end of March, we resting a while at Brampore, which is a very spacious and
populous City, where we had a Factorie. And after that, we were violently
detained in our journey by Sultan Caroon the Prince, whom we met in his march
toward Brampore, and a very marvelous great retinue with him. The reason why
he interrupted us in our course was, that he might see the presents we had for
his Father the King; but we having command from the Ambassador to tell him,
that we durst not open them, till we came to the King, we most humbly craved
his pardon to spare us in that; so presenting him with a pair of Rich Gloves
(though they be things they wear not in those hot Countries) and a rich
embrodered bag for perfume (which amongst many other things of the like kind
were brought from England to be given away for presents, after that he had
carried us back three days journey, he let us go, taking further order for our
safe Convoy.

And now Reader, thou may suppose us almost settled in Mandoa, the place then
of the Mogols residence, not much inhabited before we came thither, having more
ruins by far about it, than standing houses. But amongst the Piles of building
that had held up their heads above Ruin, there were not a few unfrequented
Mosquits or Mohammedan Churches; yet I observed, that though the people who
attended the King there, were marvailously straightened for room, wherein they
might dispose of very great numbers of most excellent horses, which were now at
that place, they would not make stables of any of those Churches, though before
that time, they had been forsaken, and out of use.

One of those deserted Mosquites, with some large Tomb near it, both vaulted
over head (which shall be after described) were the best places there to be
gotten for my Lord Ambassador and his Company to lodge and be in, we carrying
our bedding, and all things appertayning thereto, all necessaries belonging to
our Kitchen, and every thing beside for bodily use, from place to place, as we
occasionally remooved. Here we stayed with the Mogol from the middle of April,
till the twentieth of September following and then began our progress with him,
toward the City Amadavar.

Our abiding place at Mandoa, was very near one of the sides of that vast
wilderness, out of which, some of those wild beasts ofttimes in the night came
about our habitation, and seldom returned back without a Sheep or a Goat, or a
Kid, some of which we always kept about us for our provision. And it was a
wonderful great mercy, those furious, and ravening, and and hungerbit
Creatures, did not make their prey sometimes, in the dark and silent nights,
while we were sleeping, on some of our bodies, the forepart of our dwelling
standing upon pillars, and there was nothing in those open distances, that had
any strength in it to keep them from us.

One night, early in the evening, there was a great Lion which we saw, came
into our yard, though our yard was compassed about with a stone-wall, that was
not low.) And my Lord Ambassador having a little white neat shock, that ran
out barking at him, the Lion prefently snapt him up, leapt again over the wall,
and away he went.

But for a ravening and roaring Lion, as I believe that he cannot be made tame
when he is old; yet certainly he may be bred tame, being kept full, and high
fed. For the Mogol, at my being there, had a very great Lion (I often saw)
which went up and down, amongst the people that frequented his Court, gently as
a dog, and never did hurt only he had some Keepers which did continually wayt
upon him.

For those wild and Cruel Beasts, one of our Englishmen watching in a tree by
night; (that stood not far from our dwelling) with a fire-lock charged with
some small bullets, shot a Tygre, and killed him stone* dead, as he was coming
toward us. It was a large Beast, higher than an Irish-Greyhound, with Grizled
hayr, a long head, and sharp and short picked ears, having a mouth filled with
cruel teeth; after which (we usually keeping a little fire without our house
every night) were not so much troubled with those night-walkers.

Now to return to that from which I am occasionally digressed. I told you
before what their buildings are. And now for the furniture that the greatest
men have in them, it is Curta supellex, very little; they being not beautified
with hangings, nor with any thing besides to line their walls, but where they
are best adorned, they are kept very white, and set off with a little neat
painting and nothing else; for they have no Chaires, nor stools, nor couches,
nor tables, nor bedds, enclosed with Canopies, or Curtains, in any of their
rooms. And the truth is, that if they had them, the extreme heat there would
forbid the use of many of them; all their bravery is upon their sloores, all
which are made even with fine earth, or plaster, on which they spead their most
excellent Carpets in their Tents, as well as in their dwelling houses, laying
some Coarse thing under to preserve them; on which they sit as ^aylors on their
shop-boards, when they meet together, putting off their shoes (which they
usually wear as slippers and their feet bare in them) when they come to tred
upon those soft Pavements, and keeping them off till they remoove thence, this
helps to keep cool their feet, and is very pleasant in those hot Countries. On
those Carpets they sleep in the night time, or else upon an hard quilt, or
lying upon a slight and low bed-stead they call a Cot, bottomed with broad
girt-web made of Cotten-Wool. But where ever they lie, they stretch themselves
out at their full length when they go to sleep, usually upon their backs,
without any pillow, or bolster, to raise up their heads. Very many of the
meaner sort of people (as I have often observed) lie thus stretched out to take
their rest upon the ground, in the dry season of the year, with a white Callico
Cloth spread all over them, which makes them to appear like so many dead corpse
laid forth for burial. This lying so even, and at length with their bodies thus
extended, may be one reason why the people there are all so straight lim'd,
having none crooked amongst them, and another, because they never girt, nor
lace in their bodies (as before was observed). Some of those slight bedsteads,
they call Cotts, in their standing houses hang by rops, a little above ground,
which are fastened to the four corners thereof; moved gently up and down, by
their servants, to lull them asleep

They have no Inns in those parts for the entertainment of strangers, but in
some great Towns large Houses they call Sarraas very substantially built, with
brick, or stone, where any passengers may find house-room and use it without
any recompense; but there is nothing to be had beside room, all other things
they must provide and bring with them, as when they lodge in Tents.

Amongst their buildings I must take special notice of their Wells and Tankes,
upon both which in very many places they bestow exceeding much cost in
stone-work; for their Wells which are fed with Springs, they make them round,
but very wide and large. They are wrought up with firm stones laid in fine
Plaster; they usually cover those Wells with a building over head, and with
Oxen draw water out of them, which rises up in many small Buckets, whereof
some are always going down, others continually coming up, and emptying
themselves, in troughs, or little rills, made to receive, and Convey the water
whither they please.

Their Tanks are made in low places, and many of them very deep and large, one
mile, and some of them much more in compass, made round or four square, or in
more squares, about which there is a low stone-wall, that has many doors in
it, and within that wall steps, made one below the other round about it, that
go down to the bottom thereof, (which is paved likewise) those steps are made
of well squared lasting stone, laid firm, and even in very good order, for
people that have not plenty of water otherwise, to go down and take it. These
great receptacles of water, are made near places that are very populous, filled
when that long season of rain (before spoken of) comes, immediately before which
time, they cleanse them, that the water may be more clear, and wholesome. They
hold water all the dry season of the year.

For their places of pleasure, they are in their Groves, where their curious
fruit trees (before described) grow; but especially in their Gardens, wherein
they plant little vineyards that afford marvailous fair and sweet Grapes, which
they cut green, for their eating, or make Reisons of them. But for Wine, they
make none, because their Mahomet forbids the drinking thereof. In those Gardens
likewise, they have many Pome-Granat-trees, with all other of the choysest
fruits and flowers their Country affords; to which nature daily yields such a
supply, as that there is beauty to be seen in those trees, and plants, and that
continually. In the middle of those Gardens, they have such Wells (as before
are described) the topps whereof stand a good deal higher than the planted
ground, which lies even, and flat below them, from whence water is conveyed in
narrow open passages, (they knowing not the use of leaden Pipes) to all the
parts of them in the dry season of the year. In those Gardens likewise they
have little round Tanks to bath in; whose sides and Bottomes are made firm and
smooth with that plaster before named; they are filled by aquaducts from those
Wells, and they can empty them when they please, as well as fill them. The
water that is conveyed into those small Tanks, usually runns down broad stone
Tables, that have many Hollowes made in them, like to scollop-shels, with water
in its passage, makes such a pretty murmr, as helps to tie their senses with
the bonds of sleep, in the hot seasons of the day when they constantly keep
their houses, and then they lie down near them on their Carpetts, to be lul'd
asleep. Those Bathing places are within, or very near their Garden-houses,
which usually are by far more neat, than any other of their dwelling.

In such a Garden-house, with all those accommodations about it, my Lord
Ambassador lay with his company at Surat, the last three months before he
left East India.

And further, in those hot seasons of the day; the people of better quality
lying or sitting on their Carpets, or Pallats, have servants standing about
them, who continually beat the Air upon them with Flabellas, or Fanns, of
stiffened leather, which keeps off the flies from annoying them, and cool them
as they lie. Thus taking their ease, they call for Barbers, who very gently
gripe their arms, and shoulders, and other parts, they can in any measure
grasp, and they strike likewise very softly those parts with the sides of their
hands; it is very pleasing as they do it, and causes their blood to stir in
their veins, it is therefore very much used in those parts, to such as do not
heat their blood by bodily motion.

For their pastimes within doors, they have Cards, but much different from
ours in the figures made in them, and in their greater number of suits. Those
Cards I have often seen and have been more often told, that they have very good
skill in that most innocent and ingenious game we call Chests.

They delight themselves sometimes with the Company of Mountebanks, and
Juglers; for their Mountebanks, they keep venomous Snakes in baskets, and will
suffer themselves to be bitten or stung by them; which part thus bitten, or
stung, presently swells, and immediately after that, they cure themselves again
by Oils and Pouders, which they apply unto the place, and then offer to sell
them unto the people standing by.

Their Juglers are the cunningst that ever I saw, to do strange things by sleight of hand; as in this trick I shall here name, where I have observed them
to lay down scu^tles or broad open wicker Basketts upon the ground, three or
four one upon another, all which appeared empty, as they laid them down; but
taking them up again one after the other, in the bottom of them there would
appear, three or four living Turtle-doves: which they would cover again with
the same scuttles, and tossing and turning them as they took them off, and up
the second time, none of those pretty creatures were to be seen any more. But
how they first conveyed them thither, and how after thence, we could not
possibly discover.

For their Pastimes abroad they have Hawks of diverse kinds, greater and less,
and Partridges, and other choice Fowl grear store to fly at. They have Hares,
and Antilops, with other wild Beasts to hunt, and these not a few. Their dogs
for chafe are made somewhat like our Greyhounds, but much less, who never open
in the pursuit of their game. They hunt likewise with Leopards trained up and
made fit for their sport, who by leaping seize on that they pursue; but by
reason of the heat of the Country, those sports are not there much used. The
Mogol when he hunts, carries Hawks and Dogs, and all things beside with him,
to make him Pastime, that if one sport fail, he may be pleased with another.

They say, that they have a curious devise to take wild fouls that use the
water, into which a fellowgoes, with a foul of that kind he desires to catch,
whose skin is stussed so artificially, as that with a noise he counterfets of
that foul, it appears to be alive, the man keeps all his body but head under
water, on which he fastens that counterfeit foul to stand foreright on the top
thereof, and thus coming amongst them, he plucks them (as they say) by their
legs under water at his pleasure. But this I have only by tradition.

For other Pastimes abroad, this I am sure of, that when the weather is more
temperate, they shoot much in their Bows, and are very excellent Marks-men,
somewhat like those lefthanded men spoken of Judge. 20. 16. And with their Gunns
in which they shoot single bullets (for they have not the use of small shot)
they are somewhat long in taking their aim, but they will come very near the
mark.

Others delight themselves very much in managing their excellent Horses; But so
shall not I delight my Reader, if I dwell too long in particulars. And
therefore having spoken of their buildings, I shall now invite him, though not
to eat, or taste, yet to take notice

SECTION. X.
Of their Diet, their Cookery in dressing it, etc.

AND though this Country affords very much variety of excellent good
provisions, yet the Mahometans feed not freely on any flesh, but on that which
is strange, and forbidden (of the Hindooes diet I shall speak afterward) but
for the Mahometans they are a people, as I conceive, not much given to their
Palate, but are very careful of, and temperate in their diet, as having
learned by experience, that full bellyes do more oppress, than strengthen the
body, that too much of the Creature does not comfort but destroy Nature. It
being a tried truth, that Gluttony reaches, and kills those whom swords cannot
touch. All diseases of the body for the most part being contracted to it by
sur^etts, in one kind or other, and therefore they keep themselves to a thin
diet, and eat not to pamper and please their appetite, but to satisfy and
support nature, which is contented with a little every where, but with less in
hot Countries, where men's digestion of food is not so quick and good; this
being further a tried truth, that those bodies are most strong, active, and
healthy, which are most temperate.

Therefore though they have abundance of flesh and foul, and have fish too, yet
are they temperate in all of them. For Swines flesh it is an abomination unto
the Mahometans, and therefore they touch it not. And for other kind of flesh,
they eat very little of them alone, to make their full meals of them, for they
dress no kind of flesh in great pieces, or whole joints, nor scarce any of
their Fowls whole.

For boiling of flesh in water, or Baking or Rosting any flesh, are pieces of
Cookery (if I observed well) they know not; but they stew all their flesh as
their Kid, and other Venison, etc. cut into sippets, or flices, or little
parts, to which they put Onions and Herbs and Roots, and Ginger (which they
take there Green out of earth) and other Spices, with some Butter, which
ingredients when as they are well proportioned, make a food that is exceedingly
pleasing to all Palates, at their first tasting thereof most savoury meat,
happily that very dish which Jacob made for his Father Isaac, when he got the
blessing Genesis 27.

With their flesh and herbs, etc. they sometimes stew Henns and other foul cut
in pieces, which is like that the Spaniards call an Olio, but more toothsome.

But their great common standing dish there is Rice, which they boil with more
art than we: for they boil the grain so as that it is full and plump and
tender, but not broken in boiling: they put to it a little green Ginger, and
Pepper, and Butter, and this is the ordinary way of their dressing it and so
it is very good.

Sometimes they boil pieces of flesh, or Hens, and other foul cut in pieces in
their Rice, which dish they call Pillaw; as they order it, they make it a very
excellent, and a very well-tasted food.

Once my Lord Ambassador had an entertainment there by Asaph Chan, who invited
him to dinner (and this was the only respect in that kind he ever had, while
he was in East India) That Asaph Chan was a man made by his great alliances,
the greatest subject and favourit in all that Empire; for his sister was the
Mogols most beloved wife, and his daughter was married unto Sultan Caroon the
Prince, and very much beloved by him, but of all these, more afterward.

This Asaph Chan entertained my Lord Ambassador in a very spacious and a very
beautiful Tent, where none of his followers besides my self, saw, or tasted of
that entertainment.

That Tent was kept full of a very pleasant Perfume; in which sents the King
and Grandees there take very much delight. The floor of the Tent was first
covered all over with very rich and large Carpets, which were covered again in
the places where our dinner stood, with other good Carpets, made of stich't
Leather, to preserve them which were richer; and these were covered again with
pure white and fine Callico Clothes, and all these covered with very many
dishes of silver, but for the greater part of those silver dishes they were not
larger than our largest trencher-plates, the brimms of all of them gilt.

We sat in that large Room as it were in a Triangle; The Ambassador on Asaph
Chans right hand a good distance from him, and my self below; all of us on the
ground, as they there all do when as they eat, with our faces looking each to
the other, and every one of us had his several mess. The Ambassador had more
dishes by ten, and I less by ten, than our entertainer had, yet for my part I
had fifty dishes. They were all set before us at once, and little paths left
betwixt them, that our entertainers servants (for only they waited) might come
and reach them to us one after another, and so they did. So that I tasted of
all set before me, and of most did but taste, though all of them tasted very
well.

Now of the provision it self, for our larger dishes, they were filled with
Rice, dressed (as before described) And this Rice was presented to us, some of
it white, in its own proper color, some of it made yellow with Saffron, and
some of it was made green, and some of it put into a purple color, but by what
ingredient I know not, but this I am sure, that it all tasted very well; And
with Rice thus ordered several of our dishes were furnished; and very many more
of them with flesh of several kinds, and with Hens, and with other sorts of
foul cut in pieces, as before I observed in their Indian Cookery.

To these we had many Jellie, and Culices; Rice ground to flower, and then
boiled, and after sweetened with Sugar Candy and Rose Water to be eaten cold.
The flower of Rice mingled with sweet Almonds, made as small as they could, and
with some of the most fleshy parts of Henns, stewed with it, and after, the
flesh so beaten into pieces, that it could not be discerned, all made sweet
with Rose Water and Suger-Candy, and sented with Amber-Grec^e; this was another
of our dishes, and a most luscious one, which the Portugals call Mangee Real,
Food for a King. Many other dishes we had, made up in Cakes, of several forms,
of the finest of the wheat flour, mingled with Almonds, and Sugar Candy,
whereof some were sented and some not. To these Potatoes excellently well
dressed; and to them diverse Salads and the curious fruits of that Country,
some preserved in Sugar, and others raw, and to these many Roots Candied,
Almonds blanched, Reysons of the Sun, Prunellas, and I know not what, of all
enough to make up that number of dishes before named; and with these quelque
chose, was that entertainment made up.

And it was better a great deal, than if it had consisted of full and heaped up
dishes, such as are sometimes amongst us provided, for great and profuse
entertainments. Our bread was of very good excellent wheat, made up very white
and light, in round Cakes; and for our drink, some of it was brewed for ought I
know, ever since Noah his flood, that good innocent water, being all the drink
there commonly used (as before) and in those hot Clymates (it being better
digested there than in other parts) it is very sweet, and allayes thirst better
than any other liquor can, and therefore better pleases, and agrees better
with every man, that comes and lives there, than any other drink.

At this entertainment we sat long, and much longer than we could with ease
cross legged, but all considered, our feast in that place was better than
Apicius, that famous Epicure of Rome, with all his witty Gluttony (for so
Paterculus calls it, ingeniosa Gula,) could have made with all provisions had
from the Earth, and Air, and Sea.

My Lord Ambassador observed not that uneasy way of sitting at his meat, but
in his own house had Tables and Chayres etc. served he was altogether in Plate,
and had an English, and an Indian Cook to dress his dyer, which was very
plentiful, and cheap likewise; so that by reason of the great variety of
provisions there, his weekly account for his housekeeping came but to little.

The meaner sort of people there eat Rice boiled with their green-Ginger, and a
little Pepper, after which they put Butter into it, which is their principal
dish, and but seldom eaten by them: but their ordinary food is made (not of the
flowr of wheat*) but of a course well tasted grain, made up in round broad and
thick Cakes, which they bake upon their thin iron plates (before spoken of)
which they carry with them, when as they travel from place to place; when they
have baked those cakes, they put a little butter on them, and doubtless the
poor people find this a very hearty food* for they who live most upon it, are
as strong as they could be, if they had their diet out of the Kings Kitchen. I
shall here say no more of this, but proceed to speak

SECTION XI.
Of the Civilities of this people; Of their Complements, and of their Habits.

AND here the people in general (as before was observed) are as civil to
strangers, as to their own Contrymen; for they use when they meet one
another, or when they meet strangers, to bow their heads, or to lay their right
hands on their breasts, and to bow their bodies as they pass, saluting them
further with many well-wishes.

They use not to uncover their heads at all, as we do in our salutes, (from
which custom of ours, the Turks borrow this imprecation for their enemies,
wishing their souls no more rest after death than a Christians hat has, which
^s always stirred) but the meaner sort, instead of uncovering their heads to
their superiors use these abject ceremonies, by putting their right hand to
the earth, and then laying it on their head, or by falling down on their knees;
and then bowing their heads to the earth, both signifying, that those unto whom
they show these reverences, and respects, may tread or trample on them, if they
pleased.

When we visit the people there, of better quality, they entertain us with
much humanity, first rising up to us, they bow their bodies, and then entreat
us to sit with them on their Carpets, where they are free in their discourse,
which we usually exchange with them by an Interpreter. If we have any business
with them, they return very civil and fair answers, and for our further
entertainment give us Beetle or Paune to chew (before spoken of)

In their near, and more close and hearty Salutes, they do not join hands as
we, but do that which is hateful to the Spaniard, and not at all in use with
us; for they take one another by the Chin, or Beard, and cry. Bobba, which is
Father, or Bij, which is Brother: and this appears to be a very ancient
Complement, for thus Joab long ago saluted Amasa, 2 Samuel 20. 9 but this they do
in love, not as Joab did there, in treachery.

In their Complements they express many good wishes to one another, as Salam
Allacum, God give you health; the reply, Allacum Salam, the same health God
give you. And Greb-a Nemoas, I wish you the prayers of the poor. And Tere gree
gree kee Bulla door, which made English speaks thus, I wish one good to come,
unto you after another every Gra, (which is a space of time a little more than
a quarter of an hour) and they have many more Complements like these, handsome,
and significant. As inferior people (who have their dependence on others) use
to say unto them, I eat your Breat and Salt (as much to say) I am your servant,
I live by you, and you may do with me, or to me, what you please.

Now as this people of East India are Civil in their speeches, so are they
Civilly clad, for there are none who wear their own skin alone for their
covering, as very many in the Western India do.

For the Habites of this people, from the highest to the lowest, they are all
made of the same fashion, which they never alter, nor change; their Coats
sitting close to their bodies unto their wastes, then hanging down loose a
little below their knees, the lower part of them sitting somewhat full; those
close Coats are fastened unto both their shoulders, with slips made of the some
cloth, which for the generality, are all made of courser, or finer white
Callico; and in like manner are they fastened to their wast, on both sides
thereof, which Coats coming double over their breasts, are fastened by like slips
of cloth, that are put thick from their left armeholes to their middle; The
sleeves of those coats are made long and somewhat close to their Arms, that
they may ruffle, especially from their elbowes, to their wrists. Under this
Coat they usually wear another slight one, made of the same cloth, but
shorter than the other, and this is all they commonly wear upon the upper part
of their bodies. But some of the greater sort in the cooler seasons of the day
there, will s^ip on loose Coats over the other, made either of quilted silk, or
Callico, or of our English Scarlet Broad-cloth (for that is the color they
most love). Under their Coats they have long breeches like unto Irish-Trouses,
made usually of the same Cloth, which come to their Ankles, and ruffle on the
small of their legs. For their feet they keep them (as was before observed)
always bare in their shoes.

Some of their Grandees make their Coats and Breeches of striped Taffata of
several colors, or of some other silk stuff all of the same color, or of
slight cloth of Silver or Gold, all made in that Country. But pure white and
fine Callico-Laune, (which they there make likewise) is for the most part the
height of all their bravery; the collars, and some other parts of their upper
coats, being set off with some neat stitching.

Upon their heads they wear a long wreath of cloth, about half a yard broad,
usually white, but sometimes of other colors. Which cloth worn for their head
covering, is sometimes inter-woven in spaces with threads of colored silk, or
silver, or gold, and when not so, one end of that wreath of cloth worn by
Gallants is usually thus interwoven, and so put upon their heads, that its
gayness may appear. This head-covering of theirs, they call a Shash, which
incircles their heads many times, and does mervailously defend them from the
violence of the Sun. And because this covering must needs keep their heads hot*
they provide for this, as well as they can, by shaving the hair continually
from off them. And they have girdles made of the same wreaths of cloth for the
better sort, thus interwoven* which come twice at least about them, made very
trim with that kind of weaving, especially on both ends, which hangdown
directly before them.

And thus have I presented a Mohammedan there in his proper dress, whose habit
will more visibly appear together in the Mogols Picture, portrayed and after
put into this discourse.

Now for the Mohammedan* women; (because I had never sight of those of the
greatest qualiquality) I cannot give such an account of them in respect of the
Habits; for these, unless they be dishonest, or poor, come not abroad; but for
the fashion of their garments, they do not differ much from those the men
wear, for they wear Coats, and Breeches one very like the other, only women
bind their long hair with Philets, which hang down behind them. They wear
likewise upon their heads Mantles or Vailes (usually made of white Callico, or
of their Pintadoes) which hang down over their other garments. Further, the
women have their Ears boared, not only in their flapps, but round about them,
wherein they wear very little Pendants; those of the richer sort are made of
flat, narrow and thin pieces of Gold or Silver; those worn by the poorer sort
made of Brass, or Iron kept bright, so that all are in the same fashion; they
bestow some work upon the edges and ends of those Pendants. And those women
have the lower part of their left nostrils pierced, wherein they wear a Ring
(when they please) of Gold, or Silver, or of some other baser metals. Those
Rings of Gold have little pearls fastened to one end of them* and that Pearl
is dril'd through, that both ends of the ring may meet in it. And doubtless,
the women of the greatest quality, (though I saw it not) are bedeck't with many
rich Jewels. This I have observed in some of those of the better sort I there
saw, that they did wea^e great broad Hollow Rings of Gold enameled; and some
made of Silver, or Brass, upon their wrists, and upon the small of their legs,
to take off and on; two or three of them upon each Arm, and Leg, which make a
tinkling noise, very probably such Ornaments as the Jewish women were threatened
for, Esaiah 3. where Almighty God tells them, that he would take away their
tinkling Ornaments about their feet, the Bracelets, and the Ornaments of their
legs, their Rings, and Nos^-Jewels.

For my Lord Ambassador, and his Company, we all kept to our English Habits,
made as light and cool as possibly we could have them. His wayters in Red
Taffata Cloakes guarded with green Taffata, which they always wo^e when they
went abroad with him, my self in a long black Cassock; and the Colors and
fashion of our garments were so different from theirs, that we needed not,
wheresoever we were, to invite spectators to take notice of us.

And now, the Constancy there observed by the Natives of both sexes, in keeping
to their old fashions in their habits, exampled to them by their predecessors
in many foregoing Generations, and by them still continued, is the great praise
of this people, as the Commendation of every Nation in the world almost,
besides ours, still constant to their ancient fashions in the^r apparel.

The consideration of this might shame, and make us to blush at it (if we were
a people whom shame in this case could take) shame I say, and condemn too, the
lightness, and wantonness, the want of sobermindedness, and inconstancy of our
people here in this case, who most justly deserve, even for this very thing, ^o
be made Bare and Naked, because they are never long pleased, scarce at all
contented, with the fashion of that they wear for their covering, continually
varying and multiplying their vanities, expressed by their habits. So that what
the Prophet Hosea 5. 5. speaks of Israel, may be applied to England that the
pride thereof does testify to its face.

It is an Observation in Heraldry, that the richer the Coat is, the fewer are
the Colors in it. But whatsoever many Gallants of these times bear in their
Scutcheons, I am sure they want no colors in their clothing, as if they were
created Knights of the Sun, and engaged to wear about them every Color in the
Rainbow.

Unto what a shameful and unjustifiable length is the Hair of very many grown
to, fitter to be measured by a Carpenters Rule, than by a Comb, when men's
hair hangs about their shoulders like Manes on the necks of Horses. A wild and
strange fashion never taken up till these rylate times (almost in the memory of
Children) which puts such strange disguises upon many, that when it first took
its rise here in this Nation, if then a man had met a few of them (who now thus
bury, and loose their heads in their hair) he would have then conceived that
he had met with Furies, rather than men. Since which time that evil custom
has so prevailed amongst us, as if the commonness thereof, were a sufficient
excuse for its undecency.

And (by the way) I should be exceeding glad, if I could exempt and wholly
separate from their Company, all those whose business it is to be the teachers
and instructers of others, yet in this particular deserve that blame which
gives very much offense unto many of those who are sober, minded. Thou which
teach another, teach thou not thy self? says the Apostle, Romans 2. 21.
the very coal^s of which Scripture burns out against them, who do not labor to
live up unto every rule they prescribe to others, who dare without blushing to
do that themselves, which they are bound to reproove in others.

If these would but consider, how much gravity there is required in a Minister
of the Gospel, and look but a little with other men's eyes, they would presently
see a long hair (I had almost said a s^agpoule) to become a Pulpit so ill,
that they would never presume to ascend that place again in that shameful
disguise.

I might hereunto add the many trickings and trimmings of some likewise which
appear in that place, very much unbecomming the gravity of their profession; In
which respect, the decency and comeliness which has appeared in others, in
those particulars I named, may be a strongwitness against them; in others, who
have been thought fit to be removed from their places, and to be thereby laid
aside; In others, who have made room for those, either by their death, or
otherwise. Now those great undecencies (as I apprehend them) are faults,
whatsoever is said in their justification, which, as former times could not
parallel them, so the times present cannot excuse them.

But for others whom before I named, rather than they will not come up unto
this height of vanity, they make the hair of Women, which before was dead, to
live again (as it were) upon their heads. Concerning whom, if you put that
question in the Prophet Jeremy 18. 13. and ask among the Heathen, who has
heard or done such things? It will be answered, none there, none of them; yet
this unnatural sin makes many amongst us, even to pride themselves in this
their shame. For does not Nature it self teach, that if a man wear long hair,
it is a shame unto him, 1 Cor. 11. 14.

And for the other Sex amongst us, they are so carried on by the foot of Pride,
as they come never a whit behind, of whom there are too too many, when God has
bestowned upon them a very large portion of outward feature, and beauty, more
than upon many others, it is very strange, that those, not yet content with his
most excellent workmanship, should go about to amend it, as they think, by
spending many precious hours to varnish a little Rottenness, spotting and
painting themselves, as if beauty could be increased by deformities, thus
presenting themselves to the view of others, as if they had received many
skarres and wounds, etc. so they have by the rod of pride (to take those words
in a borrowed sense) which they cover with their black patches.

For outward beauty, without doubt it is an excellent gift of God, and so to be
esteemed; but when the Soul answers not the face, in not being beautiful like
it, it leads to a Curse. And experience teaches us, that many of the foulest
Souls in this respect dwell fairest. There are no two things help to people
Hell more, than wanton wits and beautiful faces; that beauty therefore is
worse than any deformity, when it abuses the Soul; when the Soul is made worse
by it in making the party on whom it is bestowed, either proud or filthy.

In the one and thirtieth of the Proverbs, 3. 14. a woman is compared to a
Merchants ship, which as it is there spoken of a good woman, so it may be
applied to a bad one likewise, that she is like a ship, always ready for
trade, and therefore setts off herself as much as possibly she can with all
variety of rigging. And further, concerning both Sexes in this case, I shall
borrow something from another to speak of them, which I long since observed in
these following verses, but a little varied.

Our women here in Gauds excel,
And in their loose attires do swell
More light then sails when fresh gales play:
Yet are our men more loose than they,
More Kemb'd and poudred, Rubbed and trimmed,
More bathed, and sleek'd, and slacker limm'd;
Grown so, effeminate in their Mind.
As if resolved to loose their kind.
Both swell in plenty, wealth, and Ease,
And health abused, made their disease.
Now much of all this proceeds from Fashions, one fashion bringing in another,
and the fashion must bear out, and excuse all; This Fashion [as it should
seeme] is the best Preacher and Orator in our Nation. It were well if our
preachings, exhortations, and reproofs were in fashion too, for then I am sure
they would gain a great party, win a great many both men and women unto them,
that now of all things cannot abide them; for they leave these, and still
fashion themselves after the world, in every Garish devise, disguise, and
dress; or rather after the Devil himself, for they are Satanae ingenia, as
[Tertullian calls them] inventions of the Devil, and not of men. And both may
justly fear, that when Almighty God shall come to judge the quick, and dead, he
may not own these, who have so deformed that simple fashion, in which he first
Created them, but may say as Cyprian observes, Opus hoc meum non est, haec mea
non est imago, This is not my workmanship, nor this the similitude I first
made. When God shall say otherwise of their Garments, then Jacob sometimes did
of Joseph's, Genes. 37. 33. Haec non est tunica silii mei, This is not my Sons
Coat. When their own clothes, [to take that of Job in a literal sense] Job. 9.
33. shall make them to be abhorred.

Little do these consider, that Almighty God can give them a rent, instead of a
Garment, and and can cover them with Leprosy, instead of Clothing; that when
he pleases, he can put a vizard upon their faces, and can strike as well the
daughters of England, as those of Sion, with a scab Es. 3. 17. And cover them
with blackness and deformity, instead of beauty.

Pardon [good Reader] my length and language in this digression, for I am not
bitter, but Charitable. Infector vitia, non homines. They are the vices and
vanities of people, not their persons I reproove. -- Librum
Si malus nequeo Laudare. -- Ju.


I cannot like to praise ildle Pamphlets, nor yet honor and esteem vain
persons, whatsoever their outsides be. It is a mark, amongst others, of a good
man, that he is one in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, Number. 15. 4. in
whose eyes, or before whom, and in whose judgment, a vile person [whatsoever he
may otherwise be] who makes himself vile by his irregular course, and carriage,
is contemned, or little or nothing set by, or regarded.

They were wont to cry out against the Court, for bringing forth and nursing up
many strange and new Fashions. Now in respect of this, the whole Nation is an
enlarged dissipated Court; and the great City in it, as it shares very much in
this National sin, so it must bear a very great part of blame for this, and if,
even for this very thing, it escape a, signal judgment, it will fare much
better than it deserves.

When Augustus the Emperor sometimes rode in Triumph through Rome, and then
observed the state and bravery of that City, he said, se tot vidisse Reges,
quot Cives, that he beheld as many Kings, as Citizens: the like may be said of
our great City London, wherein a very great number appear, by reason of their
strange excess in apparel, Princes, and Princesses! rather than Citizens.

Which varied and multiplied Pride in Clothing there, took a very great Rise in
that greatest visitation by the plague of Pestilence that ever that City felt,
in the year 1625. When very many of that populous City left their houses, and
shops, and went into the country, putting themselves, and wives into the
dresses then in fashion (a thing never done by them before) which were worn by
the Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen of the best rank, and ever since have kept in,
if not exceeded them in their Habits. A sad use made of such an extraordinary
judgment. And ever since, he that strictly viewes that place, may observe a
great contest twixt Pride and Luxury for the upper end of the Table. Before
which time, none but the principal sort of women there were clothed in silks;
now very many even ordinary servants are thus clad. That City then began to
lead the way into this bravery; since (evil examples being easily imitated)
all the populous places in this Nation follow them. So that we may take up a
general Lamentation against the pride of this whole Nation, but of that City in
a more special manner, wherein so many thousands are like the Sinamon-tree,
whose bark is much better than its body. How may we complain against the
garnish, glittering dresses, of very-very many even of the inferior rank of
people throughout this whole Land, when Sackcloth and Ashes would become them
much better.

I cannot deny but that things which are rich, and of the greatest value that
are made, may be worn, yet doubtless this is a truth too, that all who can
find money to pay for them, are not fit to wear them. For (as it is well
distinguished) there is, necessitas Naturae and personae. The bodies of all
require covering, to defend them from cold, and mean cloth may warm as well as
a rich Plush: yet such as are of high Birth, and Place, are fit to wear rich
garments, which will not become others, the consideration of their persons
gives them liberty herein, which it does not to other people, who would find
much more comfort in frieze, or cloth, or stuff, then in velvet, or in any
other Rich thing infected by the pride or fashion of those that wear them,
whosoever they be.

But here I might borrow the words of the, Prophet and cry, How is our silver
become dross? here take up further complaint, when I do consider how much pride
and vanity (like worms) bread in Greatness, more by far (as I conceive) in the
present, then in those foregoing ages; when so many amongst us of great Birth,
have tainted and corrupted their blood, and quite ruined their manners by
strange exorbitancies, which have forfeited that honor and respect they might
otherwise challenge, and be sure to receive from all people of sober minds.

When the rude Soldiers saw the Senators of Rome sit gravely, and demeaning
themselves as became their places, they held them to be Gods; but as soon as
they discovered the failings and passions of men, they presently took them to
be men and despised and spoiled them. It will be thus with all men of honor,
and birth, and place, while they do things becoming themselves, in expressing
Noblenes, and honor, and virtue in their lives and courses, they cannot choose
but be highly esteemed; but if they discover in themselves the passions, the
pride, the vanity and vileness that is in the worser sort of people, if they
make themselves. Cheap, they will grow into contempt; as the horrid vices of
Tiberius the Emperor, made him to be hated even of his greatest flatterers.

A good heart knows not how to reverence, and put an high esteem upon any
thing it observes in man besides, Gods Image; and when that appears not, but
the contrary, men's tongues and penns will make bold with the greatest.

But why do I spend so much time, and ink, and paper, in such a seeming
impertinent, unplausible, and unprofitable reproof? for though that which I
have named be such a fault in this Nation, as no language can ever excuse, and
no time, I fear, will reform; because the people of this Land by a long
custom, and continuance, do challenge such a propriety in new fashions, are so
habituated to them, that in probability nothing which can fall, either from the
tongues, or penns of men shall ever be able to reform it.

Yet before I leave this just reproof, I shall add a few words more, for those
that invent, and urge arguments in the defense thereof; as first, some say that
these new invented things, which multiply fashions, serve to keep, and maintain
many poor people in work: To these I answer, as it was spoken of Judas, when he
grumbled at the expense of that oynment bestowed on our Blessed Savior, John
12. 5. 6. saying, This might have been sold for three hundred pence, and given
to the poor; but this he said (says the text) not that he cared for the poor,
etc. So, this some speak, not that they love the poor, but the fashion; which
poor doubtless might find as comfortable a subsistence, if they were not thus
employed. And Secondly, whereas others pretend, and say that their hearts may
be good and humble, whatsoever their habits be, I dare conclude, that it is as
impossible for a good, and humble, and modest heart to dwell under a vain and
fantastic habit, as for evil to be good.

I know that it is a very strange Case which can find no Advocate; A poisoned
pill may be gilded over, as well as that which is wholesome. Favorinus long
ago wrote in the Commendation of a Quartan Ague. That ^oul and filthy disease,
has not wanted a pen to excuse, and commend it. Fools, says Solomon, make a
mock at sin. Prove. 14. 9. Others have made a very bad wife the subject of their
Commendation, because (they say) she brings a man to repentance. What is it not
that the Luxuriancy and ranknes of wit cannot put a varnish on? when men, like
the silly Fly, play with fire till they sindge their wings, and fall into it.
Let me speak therefore as a Divine to all those which plead for new fashions,
and therefore think they may be, because they are generally taken up, and
followed. That sins are by so much the greater, by how much they are more
general and universal, and that sin is so far from being extenuated by the
multitude of offenders, which live under the guilt thereof, that nothing can
more aggravate it.

With men, commoness pleads for favor; with God, it pleads for judgment; the
Leprosy of the whole body being by far more loathsome, then that which appears
but in a part thereof; and so much of this, I will now proceed to take notice
of other particulars, which follow in this relation, As,

SECTION XII.
Of their Language, their Books, their Learning, etc.

THE Language of this Empire, I mean the Vulgar, bears the name of it, and is
called Indostan; it has much affinity with the Persian, and Arabian tongues,
but the Indostan is a smoother language, and more easy to be pronounced than
the other, a language which is very significant, and speaks much in few words;
They write it (as we) to the right hand. It is expressed by letters, which are
very much different from those Alphabets, by which the Persian and Arabian
tongues are formed. The Persian there is spoken as their more quaint and
Court-tongue. The Arabian is their learned language, both written backward to
the left hand like the Hebrew, from whence they borrow many words, which come
so near it, as that he who is a good Critic in the Hebrew may very well guess
at the meaning of much in both those languages. The Persian is a language, as
if it consisted all of Guttur all letters, (as some in the Hebrew Alphabet are
called) filling the mouth in the Pronunciation of them; for as the words in
that language are full of sense: so in their speaking they are full of sound.

For the Latin and Greek, by which there has been so much knowledge conveyed
into the world, they are as ignorant of them both, as if they had never been;
and this may be one great reason why there is so little learning amongst them.
But for the people themselves, they are men of very strong reason, and will
speak ex re nata, upon any offered occasion, very exceeding well; and doubtless
they are a people of such strong Capacities, that were there literature amongst
them, they might be the Authors of many excellent works; but as the case stands
with them, all that is there attainable toward learning, is but to read and
write.

And here by the way let me insert this, that I never saw any Idiot or natural
Fool, nor any deformed person amongst them, in any of those parts.

For Logic and Rhetoric which are so instrumental, the first to enlarge, and
the second to polish discourses, they have none but what is Natural. They say,
that they write some witty Poems, and compose many handsome Annals and Stories
of their own, and other adjacent Countries.

They delight much in Music, and have some stringed, but many more wind
Instruments; They have the use of Timbrils likewise; but for want of pleasing
Airs, their Music in my ears never seemed to be any thing but discord.

Their Books are not many, and those are Manuscripts. That rare and happy
invention of Printing, which has been the advancement of so much learning
within Christendom, is not known without it.

They have heard of Aristotle, whom they call Aplis, and have some of his books
(as they say) in the Arabian tongue, in which language (they further say) they
have many books written by Avicenna, that ancient Physician, who was born in
Samarchandia, one of the most famed places within the Tartarian Empire, the
Country (as they believe) where Tamberlain, the Mogols great Ancestor, drew
his first breath.

Some parts or fragments they have of the old Testament; of which more, when I
shall come to speak of their Religion.

Many amongst them profess themselves to have great skill in judicial.
Astrology, that great Cheat, which has been very anciently, and often put
upon (as the Sacred Story witnesses) the people inhabiting the East, and
South parts of the world. I call it a Cheat, because there is, and must needs
be, so much uncertainty in it, all things here below being ordered, and
overruled, by the secret, and unerring providence of Almighty God, which
frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad, that turns wise
men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish, Esaias 44. 25. First, these
Diviners are mad when things fall not out according to their bold predictions;
And secondly, they have been, and not without cause, esteemed as madmen, in
foretelling things which they could not know, and much less bring to pass.

And therefore I have heard a great Master in, and a public Professor of
Astronomy, who could see as far into Constellations and observe as much from
them as, any other, often say, that he would go by the very selfsame rules
that others did, to predict things to come, and would write that which was
quite contrary to what they observed, yet what he wrote should as often fall to
be as true as what they (...)old.

Yet notwithstanding the truth of these premises, the great Mogol puts so much
confidence in his Astrologers, that he will not undertake a journey, nor yet
resolve to do any thing besides of the least consequence, unless his wizards
tell him it is a good and a prosperous hour, to begin, and set upon such an
undertaking, and at the very instant he has his directions from them* he sets
upon the thing he undertakes, and not before.

It is strange to consider what ignorance or despair in this ^case may not put
men upon, may not put men into: ignorance in that King thus besotted with an
high opinion of his Astrologers. So despair in Saul another King long before
him, who after he had lost the favor of God grew desperate, and resolved that
if God would not answer him, Satan should. And therefore he said in his
distress unto his servants, 1 Samuel 28. 7. Seek me out one that has a familiar
spirit. The condition of Saul was at this time exceeding sad, as appears by his
complaint, v. 15. The Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from
me, and answers me no more either by Prophets, or Dreams, and what shall I do?
I confess that the loss of God is the greatest of all losses. For, as his
favor to a believing Soul, in the want of every thing besides, is enough,
because his loving kindness is better than life it self) Psalm. 63. 3. So, the
gaining of every thing the world can afford with the loss of Gods Countenance,
makes profit loss, a Chair of State uneasy, an hereditary, (and much more) a
usurped Scepter so unweildy, as that it cannot be managed with comfort.

Here Saul, a King, is so perplexed in his thoughts, when as Almighty God had
taken his loving kindness from him, that he asks the question, what shall I do?
Not what thou did (wretched Saul) against the stream of thine own
Conscience, to seek unto those whom thou had but of late condemned, and
punished, to take a course which thou know to be divellish. Miserable Saul,
how could thou hope to find God at thy Command, that would not be at His!
How could thou look that God should regard thy voice in trouble, that would
not regard his in Peace? Saul had now forfetted Gods favor, and God takes the
forfeture; and therefor it was not to be wondered at, that he walked so
irregularly, when he had put himself out of Gods Protection.

Thus before (Numb. 22.) when all help failed Moab, the Magician was sought
unto. If there be any one Project worse than another, a wicked heart will find
that out; though it be a sign of a most desperate cause, when Satan is made
either a man's Counselor or Refuge.

What men may do by the help of Astrology, and do it safely and without sin,
deserves Commendation, not blame, nor Censure. But certainly to conclude of
future events, is above Art or, Man; because those things Almighty God has
locked up among his secrets, far above all reach, or search. Nay, the most
intelligent Spirits know nothing of future Events; or could those evil Spirits
truly foretell things to come no way pre-existent, they could not without great
danger and sin be consulted withal; for the evil of their Nature debarrs all
the benefit that can come by their information; for they never do a man an
apparent good one way, but they do him a Real mischief another.

The Devil (as we may conceive) knows things past, and as he animates and
encourages a man to theft by his suggestions, telling him, that he is poor, and
must live, and therefore may steal; that if he cannot support himself by
warrantable, he must live, and therefore may take other courses. Now that
Devil which courts a man to Theft, can certainly tell what he steals, and
therefore can discover goods stolen: wherein the Devil makes a double
advantage unto himself; first, in making the Thief his own, and secondly, the
other, who leaves God, and repaires to him in his instruments for a discovery
of goods thus stolen.

Now for a Mohammedan who lives in the dark to consult Southsayers, and Wizards,
it is no great marvel, because his ignorance of God puts him upon those mad
shifts and conceits to have recourse unto Satan: But for such as profess
themselves Christians, who live under that clear light, which strictly forbids
all such courses; for these in their losses to repair unto cunning men, and
women (as they call them) who cannot possibly help them, but by some secret
compact with the Devil, is certainly a very grievous sin, an undertaking most
horribly impious. So then, they whosoever they be who to find out their stoll'n
goods, hazard the loss of their Souls, however they speed shall gain nothing by
that enquiry.

Yet this has been a sin very ancient in the world, and undertaken for more
ends, than I have named. When

Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos. The naughty Children, of as bad
Parents, have sought out to have the Nativity of their Fathers Calculated, that
they might be told (if such a thing could be discovered) how long they had to
live, thinking every minute a month till they see them kneeling in Brass, or
stone, or more cheaply buried; that so they might be setting that abroach with
profuse Luxury which their parents had been long barrelling up with great
Avarice. It falling out many times by the righteous judgment of Almighty God,
that when wickedness getts, wickedness shall consume that estate so gotten;
according to that in the Prophet Micha. 1. 7. She gathered it of the hire of an
Harlot, and to an Harlot it shall return. But I proceed to speak,

SECTION. XIII.
Of their Physicians, Diseases, Cures. When they begin their year. How they
measure their time, etc.

HEre are those which pretend unto much skill in Physic, though (for ought I
could ever there observe) the people make but little use of them, they fearing
more Medicum quam Morbum; and therefore do believe the Physician to be the more
dangerous disease.

The common diseases of that Country are bloody fluxes, with others that come
not to blood, hot- Fevers, Calentures, which ceise on and fire the head and
brain, more than other parts. These, many times put our men at Sea into very
high distempers, especially while they are under the Torrid Zone, which makes
the poor creatures visited with them, sometimes to conceit the spacious Sea and
Waves therein to be great Fields full of Heycocks; and if they were not
sometimes happily prevented, would leap overboard to tumble in them.

For ordinary Agues, such as are so common among us, and for those two torments
rather than diseases (when they are selt in extremity) the Gout and the Stone,
they have the happiness to be ignorant of them.

But sometimes they are visited with an inflammation, or an extreme burning,
such as is spoken of, Deuteronomy. 28. 22. or rather with a most grievous Pestilence,
which on a sudden sweeps away many thousands when it comes into great Populous
Cities. This Pestilence makes the bodies of men there which are visited with
it, like an house, which on a sudden is covered all over wi^h fire at once. The
City Amadavar (at our being there with the King) was visited with this
Pestilence, in the Month of May, and our family was not exempted from that most
incomfortable visitation, for within the space of nine days, seven persons
that were English of our family were taken away by it, and none of those which
dyed lay sick above twenty hours, and the major part well, and sick, and dead
in twelve hours. As our Surgeon (who was there all the Physician we had) and
he led the way, falling, sick at Midday, and the following Midnight dead. And
there were three more that followed him, one immediately after the other, who
made as much have to the grave as he had done, and the rest went after them;
within that space of time (I named before.) And (as before I observed) all
those that died in our family, of this pestilence, had their bodies set all on
fire by it, so soon as they were first visited; and when they were dying, and
dead, broad spots of a black and blew color appeared on their breasts; and
their flesh was made so extreme hot by their most high distemper, that we who
survived, could scarce endure to keep our hands upon it.

It was a most sad time, a siery trial indeed. But such is the goodness of
Almighty God, that he makes the miseries of men here, Aut tolerabiles, aut
breves, either sufferable, or short; so that if the thing imposed be extreme
heavy to be born, it continues not long, as this most grievous visitation; most
violent for the time, like a mighty storm, and then blown away. For here the
mercy of God suddenly stepped in, betwixt the living and the dead; so that not
only in our family, but also in that great City, the Plague was stayed.

All our family [my Lord Ambassador only excepted] were visited with this
sickness; and we all, who through Gods help and goodness outlived it, had many
great blisters, filled with a thick yellow watery substance, that arose upon many
parts of our bodies, which when they brake, did even burn and corrode our
skins, as it ran down upon them.

For my part, I had a Calenture before at Mandoa, which brought me even into
the very Jaws of Death, from whence it pleased God then to rescue and deliver
me, which amongst thousands and millions of mercies more received from him,
has, and shall for ever give me cause to speak good of his Name.

There are very few English which come thither, but have some violent sickness,
which if they escape, and live temperately, they usually enjoy very much health
afterward. But death made many breaches into my Lord Ambassadors family, for of
four and twenty wayters, besides his Secretary and my self, there was not above
the fourth man returned home. And he himself by violent Fluxes, was twice
brought even to the very brink of the Grave.

The Natives of East India, in all their violent hot diseases, make very little
use of Physicians, unless in be to bre^th a vein sometimes, after which they
use much fasting as their most hopeful remedy.

That foul disease [a most into consequence of filthy incontinency] is too
common in those hot climates, where the people that have it are much more
affected with the trouble it brings, than with the sin or shame thereof. As
many amongst us, who care not for issue, but lust; and after pay dear for their
filthiness, which many times rotts, or else makes bare the bones of them that
are thus filthy. For as virtue and goodness rewards it self: so to it self
wickedness is a punishment, poena peccati peccasse: says Seneca, this is clear
in the sad consequences of many other sins, cui ^hu? cui vae? who has woe? who
has sorrow? Solomon asks the question, and resolves it too, Prove. 23. 29.
they that tarry long at the wine, etc. for it will bite like a Serpent, and
sting like an Ad^er. How many sad diseases are contracted to men's bodies by
this kind of intemperancy? who can recount the hurts that by this means come to
the whole body, especially to the Head, Stomach, Liver, and the more noble
parts? who can recite the Rheumes, Gouts, Dropsies, Appoplexies, Inflammations,
and other distempers hence arising? Drunkenness being like that Serpent
Amphisbaena, which has a sting in the mouth, and a sting in the tail, for it
kills two ways, first the Body, and after that the Soul.

How were the thoughts of Amnon rackt about the compassing of that incestuous,
unnatural and brutish lust with his Sister Tamar? for first he is sick for her,
and after he had reaped the bitter fruit of his beastly desires, (his lust
ending in loathing) he was sick of her, and hated her exceedingly, and said
unto her, arise, be gone, 2 Samuel 13. 15.

Brutus, and Cassius were traitors which Julius Caesar feared, Macilenti and
pallidi, men pal'd with Anger, whose thoughts to do mischief, drank up all
their own sap and moisture. Envy (^aith Solomon) is the rottennes of the bones,
Prove. 14. 30. hence the heart of the malicious and envious man, is never
without torment, for it boyles continually, as it were in Brine; And therefore
this sin is said to have much justice in it self, Justius invidia nihil est,
because it eats the heart and marrow of her master, as he desires to have
the heart of another to be eaten up. And thus may it be said of Anger, when it
boyles up to rage (as many times it does) in se s^mper armatur furor, that it
is always in Arms against it self.

The people in East India live up to our greatest ages; but without all
question they have more old people than we; a thing not to be wondered at* if we
consider the great Temperance of that people in general in their eating and
drinking.

But to proceed. The Hindooes or Heathens there begin their year the first day
of March. The Mahometans begin theirs, the tenth, at the very instant as the
Astrologers there ghess that the Sun enters into Aries, their year as ours is
divided into twelve Months, or rather into thirteen Moons, for according to
them they make many payments. They distinguish their time in a much different
manner from us, dividing the day into four, and the night into as many parts,
which they call Pores; which again they subdivide each of them into eight
parts, which they call Grees; measured according to the ancient custom, by
water dropping out of one vessel into another, by which there always stands a
man appointed for that service, to turn that vessel up again when it is all
dropped out, and then to strike with an hammer (upon the brim of a concave
piece of Metal, like the inner part of a large platter, hanging by the brim on
a wire) the number of those Pores, and Grees as they pass. It has a deep
sound, and may be heard very far; but these are not common amongst them.
Neither have they any Clocks, or Sun-Dials to show them further how their time
passes.

We lived there some part of our time a little within, or under the Tropic of
Cancer, and then the Sun was our Zenith, or Verticle at noon day directly over
our heads, at his return to his Northern bounds. (of which I have spoken
something before) The Sunrising there, was about six hours in the Morning
before its appearing here, so that it is twelve of the clock with them, when it
is but six with us. We had the Sun there above the Horizon in December, when
the days are shortest near eleven hours, and in* June when they are at their
fullest length, somewhat more than thirteen hours; which long absence of the
Sun there from the face of the earth, was very advantageous to cool both the
Earth, and Air. I proceed to speak.

SECTION. XIV.
Of the most excellent moralities which are to be observed amongst the People
of those Nations.

NExt to those things which are Spiritually good, there is nothing which may
more challenge a due and deserved commendation, than those things which are
Morally and Materially so; and many of these may be drawn out ^o life, from the
examples of great numbers amongst that people.

For the Temperance of very many, by far the greatest part of the Mahometans
and Gentiles, it is such, as that they will rather choose to dye, like the
Mother and her seven Sons mentioned in the second of Machabees and seventh
Chapter, then eat or drink any thing their Law forbidds them. Or like those
Rechabites, mentioned Jer. 35. Where Jonadab their father commanded them to
drink no wine, and they did forbear it for the Commandment sake. Such meat and
drink as their Law allows them, they take only to satisfy Nature, (as before)
not, appetite, strictly observing Solomon's Rule, Proy. 23. 2. in keeping a
knife to their throats, that they may not transgress in taking too much of the
Creature; hating Gluttony and esteeming drunkenness, as indeed it is, another
Madness, and therefore have but one word in their language, (though it be very
Copious) and that word is Most, for a drunkard, and a madman. Which shows
their hatred of drunken distempers; for none of the people there are at any
time seen drunk, (though they might find liquor enough to do it, but the very
offal and dreggs of that people, and these rarely, or very seldom.

And here I shall insert another most heedfull particular to my present
purpose, which deserve a most high commendation to be given unto that people in
general, how poor and mean soever they be; and that is, the great exemplary
care they manifest in their piety to their Parents, that notwithstanding they
serve for very little (as I observed before) but five shillings a Moon for
their whole livelihood and subsistence; yet if their Parents be in want, they
will impart at the least half of that little toward their necessities,
choosing rather to want themselves, then that their Parents should suffer need.

I would have this read, and read over again by many who call themselves
Christians, yet most shamefully neglect those loins from which they fell,
looking upon their Parents, if they be in need, either with a scornful, or a
grudging eye. Whence we have this saying amongst us (which that people would
spit at) that one Father and Mother will better provide for ten helpless
Children, then so many Children make fitting provision for one poor Father and
Mother, as if they were not the Sons and Daughters of men, but rather Children
of the Horseleeches, who are ever Crying, Give, give, never returning ought, or
any thing proportionable to answer that love and care they have received from
their Parents.

It is the Precept of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 2. (which is often repeated before
in the sacred story) Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is the first
Commandment with promise, with promise of a blessing unto all those who
perform that duty as they ought. Now this honoring of Parents must be
expressed by all ways that manifest Childrens duty, not only in an outward
respect and distance, but also in a free release of them, if Children be able,
and Parents stand in need.

It Is well observed, that when Noah once surprised by wine, had laid open his
Nakedness in his Tent, Genesis 9. and by one hours drunkenness had discovered
that, which more then six hundred years sobriety had modestly concealed, (for
drunkenness does both make imperfections, and prefents them thus made to others
eyes) that his Sons Shem and Japhet, out of duty and respect unto their Father,
took a garment and went backward, that they might cover, not behold their
Fathers nakedness. Which act of Duty and respect unto their Father, was largely
repayed unto them in their posterity; whereas Cham their brother for his
undutifulnes in this case, bears his Fathers curse, and lives under it, and is
plagued in his children. We may conclude it as a rule, that there have not been
any very neglectfull of, or rebelliously undutifull unto their Parents, that
have prospered in themselves and seed. Absolon lifts up his hand against his
Father David, and his head is after lifted up, and hanged in an Oak, where he
dyed miserably. 2 Samuel 18. I could instance further, if it were the business of
this discourse. But I return again to the place from whence I am digressed, and
must say

Further for this people, (which is not the least commendation of them) they
are in general a Nation that do never pride it in any new Fashions; for as they
are very civilly clad, so I am confident, that they keep to the very self same
Fashion, that their Ancestors did wear, many hundred years ago (as before I
observed)

And certainly if a man should take his journey from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down of the same, he should not find a people in all the world so
overrun with an Itch after a new fashion, as the French and English are, [of
which likewise something before.]

For the Mahometans [who live much upon the labors of the Hindooes, keeping
them under, because they formerly conquered them] there are many of them Idle,
and know better to eat than work, and these are all for to morrow, a word very
common in their mouths, and the word is Sub-ba, which signifies to morrow, and
when that day comes, to morrow, and so still to morrow, they will set down upon
their businesses to morrow, will do any thing you would have them to do to
morrow, they will bestow any thing upon you Sub-ba, to morrow. Pollicitis
divites, most rich in promises, in performances not so. That being true of many
of those Mahometans, which Livie sometimes spoke of Hannibal, that he stood
most to his promise, when it was most for his Profit [though to do the
Mahometans in general right, such as are Merchants and Traders* are exact in
their dealings] or, as Plutarch writes of Antigonus the King, who was called
(...) as being ever about to give, but seldom giving. Or as Martial of his
Posthumus.

Cras te venturum, Cras dicis Posthuma semper:
Dic mihi cras istud Posthume quando venit.
To morrow still thou say thou't come to me:
Say Posthumus when will that morrow be.
But for the Hindooes or Heathens, the ancient inhabitants of East India, they
are a very industrious people very diligent in all the works of their
particular callings, believing that bread sweetest, and most savoury, which is
gained by sweat. These are for the generality the people that plant and till
the ground; These they which make those curious Manifactures that Empire
affords; working [as we s^y with tooth and nail] employing their ears and
toes, as well as their fingers, to assist them [by holding threads of silke] in
the making of some things they work. These are a people who are not afraid of
a Lion in the way, of a Lion in the streets, as the slothful man is, Prove. 26.
13. but they lay hold on the present time, the opportunity, to set upon their
businesses which they are to do to day, they being very laborious in their
several employments, and very square and exact to make good all their
engagements.

Which appears much in their Justnes manifested unto those that trade with
them; for if a man will put it unto their consciences to sell the Commodity he
desires to buy at as low a rate as he can afford it, they will deal squarely,
and honestly with him; but if in those bargainings a man offer them much less
than their set price, they will be apt to say, what, do thou think me a
Christian, that I would go about to deceive thee?

A salt, a sharp, a biting Sarcasme, or rather an horrible truth to be put upon
the Score of many who call themselves Christians, yet resolve, quocunque Modo
Rem, to get what they can gain, however they get it. It therefore concerns
all, and that most highly, who trade in those parts, and are called by that
Name, if they will trade for Heaven as well as Commodities (which if they do
not, their returns will be sad and poor, and all their labor lost) to look
about them, and to be very circumspect, in all their doings and dealings, that
the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed, and Christianity it self
made to suffer, by any of their unjustifiable carriages.

I never observe that place, Genesis 20* 18. where Abimelech reprooves Sarah, but
methinks it is sad for Sarah, the wife of Abraham, of Abraham the Father of the
Faithful, to do that for which she might be reprooved by Abimelech. It was a
shameful reproof indeed for a woman of her sort to be taught her duty, and
upbraided with her faults by an Heathen man. Surely, it cannot but grieve every
good heart, to hear that which is too often, and truly spoken, to the shame and
reproach of the Gospel; that there is more Truth and Fidelity, more just
dealing and moral honesty, more care of their word, more good neighborhood and
kindness, more Charity and mercifulnes, among a number of mere natural men, nay,
among Turks and Infidels, than amongst a great many, who are of chief note for
the profession of the Gospel.

When the Canaanites and Perizzitos had seen what the Sons of Jacob, Symion and
Levi, had done unto the Shechemites, how that they had broken their promise and
Covenant with them, how cruelly and barbarously they had used them, this made
Jacob to say (though alas he was far from approoving and consenting to that
they did) that it would make his Religion to stink among the Inhabitants of
the Land. Genesis 34. 30.

Surely for Moral Honesty it is most true, (that even those Heathens I have
named) marvailously exceed us in it; and Oh! that Christians would be made to
blush at the Consideration thereof. Christians, that have the Book of God for
their direction, where they may run and read their duties, besides that Book of
Nature, which is the only guide that people have to walk by; yet that these who
live in darkness and in the shadow of death, should perform many of the
strictest things of the law of bondage, and Christians who li^^ under a Law of
Liberty, Liberty in and though Christ Jesus, Liberty (I say) for all those that
do not abuse it, should be so blinded with light, that they perform not the
things, no no^ of Nature.

It is a most sad and horrible thing to consider, what scandal there is brought
upon the Christian Religion, by the loosenes, and remisnes, by the exorbitances
of many, which come amongst them, who profess themselves Christians, of whom I
have often heard the Natives [who live near the Port where our ships arrive]
say thus, in broken English, which they have gotten, Christian Religion, Devil
Religion, Christian much drunk, Christian much do wrong, much beat, much abuse
others.

The unmatcht extremities of Tyranny and Cruelty [to which nothing could be
added to make it more cruel] practiced by the Spaniards upon the people of West
India, is above all example, and almost belief. When their bloody outrages were
such, as made those wretched Natives to submit unto any kind of death, which
they would voluntarily impose upon themselves, rather than endure the Spaniards
Tyranny. Benzo in his story of West India, writes strange things of them.
First, of their cruelty, that they destroyed more than twenty Millions of
people amongst them, and then that those Indians would say of them, En
Christian, quid sunt Christian (...) etc. O Christian, what are Christians?
and thus they answered themselves by defining them. Christians are such as
thirst after innocent blood, Christians such as desire other men's Lands, other
men's Wives, other men's Gold, and Silver, and would hold out little wedges of
Gold, and say, En Deus Christianorum, behold the God of the Christistians! They
would further add, that the Christians said, that they were the Children of
God, and that after death they went to Heaven, upon which they gave this
judgment. Qualis Deus iste, qui tam impuros and sceleratos filios habet? What
kind of God was the God of the Christians, which had such impure and wicked
sons? And if he were like them, there could be no goodness in him. And if those
Christians went to heaven, they would not desire to go thither, for they would
not be where the Christians were. And thus was the honor of God, the Name of
Christianity, by their most lewd and most cruel behavior, derided, defamed,
reproached by those which were Infidels and Paynims.

But to return again unto the people of East India, though the Christians which
come amongst them do not such horrible things, yet they do enough to make
Christianity it self evil spoken of, as a Religion that deserves more to be
abhorred, than embraced. For truly it is a sad sight there to behold, a Drunken
Christian, and a sober Indian; a temperate Indian, and a Christian given up to
his appetite. An Indian that is just and square in his dealing, a Christian not
so, a Laborious Indian, and an Idle Christian, as if he were borne only to fold
his Arms, or fruges tantum Consumere natus: to devour Corn, and wear out
wool. Oh what a sad thing is it for Christians to come short of Indians, even
in Moralities, to come short of those, who themselves believe, come short of
Heaven.

Now if any ask whence those moral virtues flow that so much adorn Heathens;
I answer in those words of our Savior spoken to Peter in another case, Mat:
16. 17. that flesh and blood has not revealed this unto them. But certainly it
proceeds from more then these, and that is, from those Remnants and Remains,
from those common impressions and norions, which are sealed up in the minds of
every one that has a reasonable Soul, a part of Adams first integrity before
his fall, a substance or blessing in a tree that seemed to be dead. Little
sparks raked up (as it were) under many ashes, which can never die nor be
utterly extinguished so long as the Soul lives. Hence the Apostle speaks this
of the Gentiles, To: 2. 14, 15. that they having not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, which shows the works of the law written in their
hearts, etc. But so much be spoken of the Moralities of that people. I come now
to take notice

SECTION. XV
Of their Religion, their Priests, their Devotion, their Churches etc.

ANd now I come to speak of their Religion I shall first take notice of the
Mohammedan Religion there professed. That of the Hindoes or Heathens shall find
a place wherein I may speak of it afterward.

But first of the Mohammedan Religion, because the great Mogol with his
Grandees, and allother of quality about him are Mohometans; which Religion (if
it deserve that name) took its first Rise, and began to be professed in the
world about the year of Christ 620, as has been observed by many writers.

The Ringleader to it, and chief founder of it was Mahomet, an Arabian by
birth, born (as is said) in a very obscure place, and of very mean and low
Parentage, but a man filled with all subtilty and Craft; who, (as they write)
after that he had much enriched himself by wives, came to be the Commander of
a Company of Arabian Volunteers that followed Heraclius the Emperor in his
Persian wars; but not long after himself and Soldiers, f^lling first into
Mutiny, and after that to Rebellion, which was an excellent prepara^ve to put
an innovationor change on Religion, and his Soldiers standing close unto him,
he himself, with the help of Sergiues a Christian by profession, but an
Heretical Nestorian Monk, and of Abdala a Jew composed a Religion that has
nothing in it, or that savours of nothing so much, as of rude ignorance, and
most palpable imposture; it being a Monster of many heads; a most damnable
mixture of horrid impieties, if it be considered altogether.

Yet because it conteins much in it very pleasing to flesh and blood, and
soothes up, and complies exceedingly with corrupt nature, it wanted no
followers presently to embrace, and assert it; so that in a little time, like a
Gangrene, it spread it self into many parts of Asia, and since that has
enlarged it self like Hell; so that, at this present day it has more that
profess it in the world, then those which profess Christanity, if we take in
all collectively that do but bear the Names of Christians, the world over.

The poor people, that are so much abused by the strong delusions of that
great Impostor, say for themselves thus, that God has sent three great
prophets into the world, first Moses, and after him Christ, and then Mahomet,
and further add that when Christ left the world he promised to send a
Comforter into it, and that Comforter w Mahomet, and therefore they close with
him.

I shall not need amongst men professing Christianity to write any thing in
answer to those their frantic assertions, neither will Imake it my business to
enlarge my self in the discovery of the Mohammedan Religion, because that has
been done by so many hands already; only this I will say of it, and not much
more, that it has Will Worship for its Foundation, Fables and Lies for its
support, and a groundless presumption for its super-structure.

For its Foundation, first, abundance of will worship, manifested in many
outward performances, which are not hard to be performed, because the depraved
will of man, is ready pressed and bent to perform things of that kind with
readiness, Cheerfullness, and delight. The works of your Father the Devil you
will do, says our Savior, of the obstinate Jews, do them, be they never so
hard, with content and willingness.

Secondly, the Mohammedan Religion has abundance of strange, monstrous, fables
and Lies for its support, their Alcoran (for the substance of it) being a
fardle of foolish impossibilities, fit to be received by none but fools, and
madmen; for they can gain no more credit with those that are judicious, then
what is related in the ryming story of that ancient Knight Errant, Bevis of
Southampton; or in the Poems of Orlando the furious, where may be found some
like such parallel fictions, as of Astalpho who mounted a Griffin, which carried
him up immediately into the Moon, where (they say) Mahomet sometime was, the
reason I conceive which made himself, and his followers ever since so full of
Lunacy, or madness.

Thirdly, it has a groundless presumption for its superstructure, which
presumption draws that mis^-ed people into a carless security, they esteeming
themselves the only true believers of the world, and none true belivers but
themselves

Yet it cannot be denied, but that there are some things in the precepts which
Mahomet has prescribed to be received and observed by his followers, that are
good; laid down in eight commandments which are these.

First, that God is a great God, and the only God, and Mahomet is the Prophet
of God.

Second, that Children must obey their parents, and do nothing to displease
them either in word or deed.

Third, that every one must do to another that, and only that which he would
have another do to him.

Fourth, that every man five times every day must repair to the Mosquit or
Church, to pray there, or wheresoever he is, he must pray every day so often,
if not in the Church, then elsewhere.

Fifth, that one whole moon in every year, every man, come to years of
discretion, must spend the whole day, twixt the rising, and setting of the
Sunne^ in fasting.

Sixth, that every one out of his store, must give unto the poor liberally,
freely, and voluntarily.

Seventh, that every one (except those Votaries which renounce marriage) must
marry, to increase and multiply the Sect, and Religion of Mahomet.

Eight, that no man must kill, or shed blood.

Now much in these commandments agrees with the word of truth; and we need
not wonder at it, when we consider, that even the Devil himself (as we may
observe in the Gospel) has sometimes had a Scripture in his mouth. So have
Heretics, and so did Mahomet and his assistants mix some Scripture in their
Alcoran, to put a fairer gloss upon their irreligion. But what Scriptures they
all urge, are for the most part, if not ever, wrested, by their mayming, or
perverting, or misapplying of them. Thus the Devil quotes a Scripture Mat 4.
6. but one part is left out, and the rest miss* applied. Those therefore who
wrest or mangle scripture to serve their own turn, we may see from whose
school they have it. Thus Mahomet cites scripture to do more mischief by it;
let no man content himself, and think all is well, because he can sometimes
speak good words, have a scripture in his mouth; when he considers that
Heretics, Hypocrites do so, that Mahomet, nay Satan himself has done as much.

Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, and seem holy to do
mischief. Thus Simeon, and Levi (out of conscience pretended) could not give
their Sister to an uncircumcised man. Genesis 34. there was God in their mouths,
but Satan in their hearts, they hide their Cruelty with Craft, and cover their
Craft with Religion. Of all mischiefs, those that smile most, are most deadly.
the uglyest and vilest of all projects well make use of Religion as a Foil, to
set them off; Poisoned Pills can find Gold to cover them; because the worse
that any thing is, the better show it desires to make.

But to proceed; the Mohammedan priests are called Moolaas who read some
parcells out of their Alcoran, upon Frydays (which are their sabboths, or days
of rest) unto the people assembled in their Mosquit or Churches, and then
further deliver some precepts, which they gather out of it, unto their
miserably deluded hearers.

These Moolaas are they which join those of that Religion in marriage; and
these employ much of their time as Scriveners to do businesses for others; or
to teach their young Children to write and read their language in written hand,
for (as before) they have no Printing. Those Moolaas are more distinguished
from the rest of the Mahometans by their Beards (which they wear long) then by
any other of their habits. Their calling gains, and gives them very much
reverence and esteem amongst the People; as another sort of priests there
have, of an high order or rank* which live much retired; but when they appear
openly are most highly reverenced; they are called Seayds who derive themselves
from Mahomet.

The Mahometans have fair Churches which (as before) are called Mosquits;
their Churches are built of Marble or Courser stone, the broad side toward the
West is made up close like a firm wall, and so are both ends, in which there
are no lights; the other broad side toward the East is erected upon Pillars
(where a man may take notice of excellent workmanship both in vaults, and
arches) the spaces betwixt them pillars stand open. Their Churches are built
long and narrow, standing North and South which way they lay up the bodies of
their dead, but none of them within their Churches.

At the four Corners of their Mosquits which stand in great Cities or in other
places much peopled, the^e are high and round, but small Turrets, which are
made open with lights every way, wherein a man may be easily seen, and heard;
their devout Moolaas five times every day ascend unto the tops of those high
Turrets, whence they proclaim, as loudly as they can possibly speak, their
Prophet Mahomet, thus in Arabian, La alla illa alla, Mahomet Resul-alla that
is, he re is no God but one God, and Mahomet the messenger from God, That voice
instead of Bells, (which they use not in their Churches) puts the most devout
in mind of the hours of their devotion, those Priests being exceedingly
zealous to promote the cause, and to keep up the honor of their Mahomet, as
the men of Ephesus sometime were, when they feared that the credit of their
baggage Diana was like to be called into question, they took up a Cry which
continued for the space of two hours, Crying out with one voice, greaet is
Diana of the Ephesians Act. 19. 24.

When a man's Religion is right, he ought to be very zealous in the maintenance
of it, very fearful of the hazard, or loss thereof. And therefore if these
Mahometans, or those men of Ephesus had had truth on their side, they would
both have deserved much commendation for what they did. And so Micha too who
thus complained when he had lost his jmages, Judge. 18. 24. they have stolen
away my Gods, and what have I more? I confess that the loss of God is the
greatest of all losses, but those were proper Gods which Micha there bewailed,
that would be stolen, that could not save themselves; who if the fire spare
them, rust or rottenness, or time will consume them. But those Mahometans
though they do not endure either Idols or Images, in their houses, or
Churches, yet are they very forward to cry up their irreligion and to show much
zeal for it.

Zeal, is derived from a word that signifies to burn, it is a compound made
up of many affections, as of grief, joy, love, anger, well tempered together,
and when it is so, it has its due commendation both of God and man; and cursed
is he that goes about to extinguish that holy fire, that holy fire (I say)
which has light in it as well as Heat, and heat as well as light. The truth
of Zeal may be further discovered (of zeal that is good) if we confider first
the Root from which it springs, and that's the knowledge and Love of God;
Secondly the Rule by which it is carried on, and acts, and that is the word, and
will of God, and lastly the end it aims at, and intends, and that is the honor
and glory of God; and zeal thus ordered cannot be too violent: but when for
want of these it becomes irregular, and shows it self over much in bad causes
(such as before were named) it is, Cursus celerrimus, sed praeter viam, a swift
violent motion but quite out of the way.

And if it be good to be zealous in a good cause, then it is better to be
zealous in the best: and the best cause to show zeal in, is the cause of God,
Pro Aris and Focis was the old good Proverb; first to stand up for Gods rights,
and afterward for our own: and to believe that that vnum necessarium, which
our Savior commends unto us, Lu. 10, 42. is that one thing principally and
especially necessary, though the Devil, and our own corruption will tell us,
(if we will believe them) that there is nothing more needless. When Moses and
Aaron came to Pharaoh and spoke unto him about sacrificing unto the Lord their
God, Pharaoh replies, ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say let us go
and sacrifice unto the Lord, Ex. 5. 17. the same Devil that there spoke in
Pharaoh, speaks in all ignorant and profane people, who call Religion idleness
and hypocrisy; a strict and even walking with God, singularity or a doing more
then God requires us to perform.

But however that is most true which was spoken by Philo judeus, ubi de
religione, ibi quoque de vita agitur, we must act for religion as we would
strive for life. Philosophy tells us that Tactus est fundamentum animae
sensitivae, that the very foundation of natural life is feeling; so then no
feeling no life, and the want of spiritual feeling argues a want too of
spiritual life. The poor seduced Mahometans, and many others in the world are
very keen, and sharp and forward to maintain that which they call Religion;
the more shame for those who profess themselves Christians, and have a sure
word to build their hope upon, yet are ferventissimi in terrenis, in
coelestibus frigidissimi, as hot as fire in earthly, as cold as ice in heavenly
things. A sad thing to consider that so many should have their tongues bent
like Bows for lies, (as the prophet Jeremy complains Jer. 9. 37.) and
Christians not valiant for the truth; that others should drive like Jehu,
furiously, madly, and that in the ways of error, injustice, oppression,
profaneness, as in all other kinds of wickedness; and Christians in the cause of
God more heavily, slowly, like the Egyptians in the Red Sea when their chariot
wheels were off. Shall Turks and Infidels solicit bad causes so earnestly; and
Christians those actions which are good so faintly! Acrius ad p^rniciem, quam
nos ad vitam; make more have to destruction then Christians to life, and
happiness! It was St. Jeromes complaint, considerare pudet quantus feruor, quae
cura, etc. That he was ashamed to consider how solici^ous some men were in
earthly, and how sluggish others in heavenly things, as if they durst not so
much as to own the cause of God* they were wont to say of cowards in Rome,
that there was nothing Roman in them; it may be applied to Christians who show
no resolutions for Christ that there is nothing Christian in them, they even
betraying the cause of Christ while they so faintly maintain it. Hardly would
they dye for Christ, who dare not speak for him; certainly they would never be
brought to afford him their blood, that will not for the present afford him
their breath.

But to return again to those Mohammedan Priests, who out of zeal do so
often proclaim their Mahomet. Tom Coryat upon a time having heard their Moolaas
often (as before) so to cry got him upon an high place directly opposite to one
of those Priests, and contradicted him thus. La alla illa alla, Hasaret Eesa
Ben-alla, that is, no God, but one God, and the Lord Christ the Son of God, and
further added that Mahomet was an Impostor: and all this he spoke in their own
language as loud as possibly he could, in the ears of many Mahometans that
heard it. But whether (circumstances considered) the zeal, or discretion of
our Pilgrim were more here to be commended, I leave to the judgment of my
Reader. That he did so, I am sure, and I further believe how that bold attempt
of his, if it had been acted in many other places of Asia, would have cost him
his life with as much torture as cruelty could have invented. But he was here
taken for a madman, and so let alone.

Happly the rather, because every one there has liberty to profess his own
Religion freely and if he please may argue against theirs, without fear of an
inquisition, as Tom Coryat did at another time with a Moolaa, and the Question
which of these two was the Mussleman or true Believer, after much heat on both
sides, Tom Coryat thus distinguished, that himself was the Orthodox Mussleman
or true true believer, the Moola the pseudo Mussleman or false true believers;
which distinction, if I had not thought it would have made my Reader smile had
been here omitted.

The Mahometans have a set form of prayer in the Arabian tongue, not
understood by many of the common people, yet repeated by them as well as by the
Moolaas, they likewise rehearse the Names of God and of their Mahomet certain
times every day upon Beads, like the miss-led Papists, who seem to regard more
the Number, then the weight of prayers.

Certainly Will Worship is a very easy duty, and if Almighty God would be as
much pleased with it, as man is, so much of that service would not be quite
lost: But in those services wherein God is highly concerned to rest in the
performance of any duty, when it is done, or any other way to fail in the manner
of doing it, makes those services which some may esteem holy, no better then
Sins; Prayers, an Abomination: there being a vast difference twixt saying of
prayers, and praying of prayers; twixt the service of the head, and that of the
heart; prayer, and prayer (heedefull circumstances considered) differing as
much as Religion, and Superstition.

But for the carriage of that people in their devotions, before they go into
their Churches they wash their feet, and entering into them put off their
shoes. As they begin their devotions they stop their ears, and fix their
eyes, that nothing may divert their thoughts, then in a soft and still voice
they utter their prayers, wherein are many words most significantly expressing
the Omnipotency, and Greatness, and Eternity, and other Attributes of God. Many
words likewise that seem to express much Humiliation, they confessing in
diverse submissive gestures, their own unworthiness, when they pray casting
themselves low upon their Face, sundry times, and then acknowledge that they are
Burdens to the Earth, and poison to the Air, and the like, being so confounded
and ashamed as that they seem not to dare so much as to lift up their eyes
toward Heaven, but after all this, comfort themselves in the mercyes of God,
through the mediation of Mahomet.

If this people could as well conclude, as they can begin and continue their
prayers, in respect of their expressions, and carriages in them, they might
find comfort; but the conclusion of their devotions marrs all.

Yet this, for their commendation (who doubtless, if they knew better would
pray better) that what divorsins, and impediments soever they have arising
either from pleasure or profit, the Mahometans pray five times a day. The Mogol
does so, who sits on the Throne; the shepherd does so that waits on his flock
in the field, (where by the way, they do not follow their flocks; but their
flocks, them) all sorts of Mahometans do thus whether fixed in a place or
moveing in a journey, when their times, or hours of Prayer come, which in the
morning are at Six, Nine, and Twelve of the clock; and at three and six in the
afternoon.

When they pray it is their manner to set their Faces that they may look
toward Medina near Mecha in Arabia where their great Seducer Mahomet was
buried, who promised them after one thousand years, to fetch them all to
Heaven; which term, when it was out, and the promise not fulfilled, the
Mahometans concluded that their Forefathers misstooke the time of the promise
of his coming, and therefore resolved to wait for the accomplishment of it
one thousand years more. In the mean time they do so reverence that place
where the body of Mahomet was laid up, that whosoever has been there (as
there are diverse which flock yearly thither in Pilgrimage) are for ever after
called, and esteemed Hogg^es, which signifies holy men.

And here the thing being rightly and seriously considered, it is a very great
shame that a Mohammedan should pray five times every day, that Paganes and
Heathens should be very frequent in their devotions, and Christians (who only
can hope for good answers in Prayer) so negligent in that great prevailing
duty. For a Mohammedan to pray five times every day, what diversions soever he
has to hinder him, and for a Christian to let any thing interrupt his
devotion; for a Mohammedan to pray five times a day, and for one that is called
a Christian not to pray (some believing themselves above this and other
ordinances) five times in a week, a month, a year.

But this will admit less cause of wonder if we consider how that many bearing
the Names of Christians cannot pray at all, those I mean which are profane
and filthy, and who live as if there were no God to hear, or to judge, and no
Hell to punish. Such as these can but babble, they cannot pray, for they
blaspheme the Name of God, while they may think they adore it.

I shall add here a short story, It happened that I once having some
discourse with a Mohammedan of good quality, and speaking with him about his
frequent praying I told him that if himself, and others of his profession who
did believe it as a duty to pray so often, could conclude their Petitions in
the Name of Jesus Christ, they might find much comfort in those their frequent
performances, in that great duty: He answered, that I needed not to trouble my
self with that, for they found as great comfort as they could desire in what
they did. And presently he would needs infer this Relation.

There was (said he) a most devout Mussleman who had his habitation in a great
City where Mahomet was zealously professed, and that man for many years
together spent his whole day in the Mosquit, or Church, in the mean time, he
minding not the world at all, became so poor that he had nothing left to buy
bread for his family, yet notwithstanding his poor condition he was resolved
still to ply his devotions, and in a morning (when he perceived that there was
nothing at all left for the further subsistence of himself and household)
took a solemn leave of his wife and Children resolving for his part to go
and pray and dye in the Mosquit, leaving his family (if no relief came) to
famish at home. But that very day he put on this resolution, there came to his
house in his absence a very beautiful young man (as he appeared to be) who
brought and gave unto his wife a very good quantity of Gold bound up in a white
Napkin, telling her, that God had now remembered her husband, and sent him his
pay for his constant pains taken in his devotion, withal charging her not to
send for her husband, for though he had taken such a solemn leave of her that
morning, yet he would come home to her again that night, and so he departed
from her. The woman presently bought in some necessaryes for her house (for
they had eaten up all before) and further made some good provision for her
husband against his coming home in the evening, (for so he did) and finding all
his family very cherefull and merry, his Wife presently told him, that there
had been such a one there (as before described) and left so much gold behind
him, with that fore mentioned message delivered with it. Her husband presently
replied that it was the Angel Gabriel sent from God, (for the Mahometans speak
much of that Angel) and he further added that himself had nothing to bring
home unto her but a little grett, or sand which he took up in his way
homeward, and bound it in his girdle, which he presently opening to show her,
it was all turned into precious stones, which amounted unto a very great value
in Money. The Seventh part of which as of his gold likewise he presently gave
to the poor, (for, said he, a Mussleman is very charitable) and then inferrd,
that if we do not neglect God, God will not forget us, but when we stand most
in need of help will supply us. Unto which conclusion we may all subscribe,
leaving the premises which are laid down in that story, unto those that dare
believe them.

The Mahometans say, that they have the Books of Moses, but they have very
much corrupted that story, in ascribing that to Ishmael which is said of Isaac
Gen: 22. as if Ishmael should have been sacrificed, not Isaac. (of which more
afterward) They say that they have the Book of David's Psalms; and some
Writings of Solomon, with other parcels of the old Testament; which, if so, I
believe a made much to vary from their original.

They speak very much in the Honor of Moses whom they call Moosa Calim-Alla;
Moses the publisher of the mind of God. So of Abraham whom they call Ibrahim
Carim-Alla Abraham the Honored, or Friend of God.

So of Ishmael whom they call Ismal, the Sacrifice of God. So of Jacob* whom
they call Acob the blessing of God. So of Joseph, whom they call Eesoff* the
betrayed for God. So of David, whom they call Dahood the Lover, and prayser of
God. So of Solomon, whom they call Selymon the wisdom of God, all expressed,
as the former, in short Arabian words, which they sing in ditties unto their
particular remembrances.

And, by the way, many of the Mahometans there are called by the names of
Moosa, or Ibrahim, or Ismal, or Acob* or Eesoff or Dahood, or Selymon: so
others are called Mahmud, or Chaan, which signifies the Moon; or Frista, which
signifies astarre, etc. And they call their women by the Names of Flowers or
Fruits of their Country, or by the names of Spices or Odours, or of pearls, or
precious Stones, or else by other Names of pretty or pleasing signification. As
Job named one of his daughters Jemimah, which signifies, Clear as the day, the
second Keziah, which signifies pleasant as Cassia or sweet spice. And the name
of the third Keren-happuch, signifying the Horn or strength of beauty, Job 42.
14.

But I Will return again to that people that I may acquaint my reader with one
thing of special observation and it is this: That there is not one among the
Mahometans (of any understanding) which at any time mentions the name of our
blessed Savior called there Hazare^ Eesa the Lord Christ, but he makes mention
of it with high Reverence and respect. For they say of Christ that he was a
good man and a just, that he lived without sin, that he did greater miracles
than ever any before or since him nay further they call him Rha-how-Alla, the
breath of God, but how he should be the Son of God, cannot conceive, and
therefore cannot believe.

Perhaps the Socinians first took that their opinion from these, which bids
them to have every thing they receive as truth, to be cleared up unto them by
the strength of Reason, as if there were no need of the exercise of faith.

And truly (I must needs confess) that to believe the Incarnation of the Son of
God, is one of the hardest and greatest taskes for Faith to encounter withal
that God should be made a Man, that this Man Christ should be born of a Virgin,
that Life should s^ring from Death, and that from Contempt and Scorn, Triumph,
and Victory should come, etc. But Christians must bind up all their thoughts,
as to these, in that excellent meditation of Picus Mirandula, saying, Mirandam
Dei Incarnationem, etc. concerning that admirable, and wonderful Incarnation
of Christ the Son of God, I shall not say much, it being sufficient for me, as
for all others that look for benefit by Christ, to believe, that he was
begotten, and that he was born. These are Articles of our Faith; and we are not
christians if we believe them not.

It may seem very strange therefore, that the Mahometans (who understand
themselves better) should have such a very high esteem of our Blessed Savior
Christ, and yet think us who profess our selves Christians to be so unworthy,
or so unclean, as that they will not eat with us, any thing that is of out
dressing, nor yet of any thing that is dressed in our vessels.

There are more particulars which challenge a room in this Section as their
proper place: but because I would not have it swell too bigg, I shall here part
it, and speak further.

SECTION. XVI.
Of their votaries, where of the voluntary and sharp Penances, that people
undergo. Of their Lent, and of their Fasts, and Feasts etc.

AMong the Mahometans there are many Votaries they call Derve^ses who
relinquish the world, and spend all their days following in solitude, and
retiredness, expecting a recompense (as they say and are very well content to
suffer and wait for it) in that better life. Those very sharp and very strict
Penances which many of this people for the present voluntarily undergo, far
exceed all those the Romanists boast of; for instance, there are some who live
alone upon the tops of Hills (which are clothed or covered with trees, and
stand remote from any Company) and there spend the whole time of their
following lives in Contemplation, stirring not at all from the places they
first fix on, but ad requisita naturae, crying out continually in these or the
like expressions Alla Achabar. etc. that is, God Almighty look upon me, I love
thee, I love not the world, but I love thee, and I do^ all this for thy sake,
look upon me, God Almighty.

These, after they thus retire, never suffer the Razer or Scissers to come
again upon their heads, and they let their Na^les grow like unto Birds Claws,
as it was written of Nebuchadnezzar. D^n. 4. When he was driven out from the
society of men.

This people after their retirement, will choose rather to famish then to stir
from their Cells: and therefore they are relieved by the Charity of others, who
take care to send them some very mean covering for their bodies (for it must
be such otherwise they will not accept of it) when they stand in need thereof,
and something for their bodily sustenance, which must be of their courser food,
otherwise they will not take it, and no more of that at one time then what is
sufficicnt for the present support of nature.

Some again impose long times of fasting upon themselves, and will take no
food at all, till the strength of Nature in them be almost quite spent.

And others there are amongst them they call religious men, who wear nothing
about them but to hide their Shame, and these (like the mendicant Friars) beg
for all they eat. They usually live in the skirts or out sides of great
Cities, or Towns, and are like the man our blessed Savior mentions Luk: 8.
27. about the City of the Gadarens, which had Devils, and wore no cloths
neither abode in any house but in the Tombs. And so do these, making little
fires in the day* sleeping at night in the warm ashes thereof, with which they
besmear and discolor their bodies. These Ash-men will sometimes take
intoxicating things which make them to talk wildly, and strangely (as some of
our Quakers do in their strange distempers) and then the foolish common people
will flock about them, and (believing they then Prophecy) hearken unto them
with all attention.

A very great difference twixt that people and ours, for there they call
madmen Prophets, and amongst us there are many prophets which are accounted
but mad men.

There are another sort among them called Mende^, carried on likewise merely by
miss-takes and miss-conceiving in Religion; who like the Priests of Baal
mentioned 1. K. 18. often cut their flesh with knives and launcers.

Others again I have there seen, who merely out of Devotion put such m^ssie
Fetters of Iron upon their legs as that they can scarce stir with them, and
then covered with blew mantles (the color of mourners in those parts) as fast
as they are able, go many miles in Pilgrimage barefoote upon the hot parching
ground, to visit the sepulchers of their deluding Saints: thus, putting
themselves upon very great Hardships, and submitting unto extreme sharp
penances, and all to no purpose. O what pains will superstition put men unto!
It is said of Idolaters, that they hasten after another God. Ps. 16. 4. or they
make post-hast after him. The Philistims flock't early, and in troops to the
Temple of their Dagon; A shame that Christians should go singly and slowly,
and many times late (as they do) unto the house of God, dealing with religious
duties, as school-boyes do very often with their lessons, in minding every
thing more than the business they are about. What pity it is to see people so
industrious in their miss-devotion in doing things very hard to be done which
God never required at their hands! which may make us to believe that if they
were rightly made acquainted with what God would have them to do, they would
be careful in doing it.

Further it is very sad to consider, if we think of many others borne in the
visible Church of Christ that might be happy, and Gods Freemen; yet make
themselves the drudges and slaves of Satan, who leads them Captive at his
will. For the works of their Father the Devil, they will do, though never so
full of trouble and difficulty. The way of transgressors is hard. Pr: 13. 15.
Thus the heart set upon covetousness disquiets it self in vain; is early up,
late at rest, fares hard and labors hard, to get a little wealth, and it knows
not for whom. So it may be further said of many other gross sinners, who engage
themselves far, and deeply in other services or rather drudgeries of the
Devil, even wearying themselves to commit iniquity. As of starved beggars who
make that a calling, which God makes a curse, to be fugitives and vagabonds;
who are so in love with their Rags, and Scabs, and Lice as that they will set
themselves in no good way, wherein they might live comfortably; certainly
abundance of these, as of others I before named (their present state and
condition rightly considered) endure two Hells, one here, and the other,
hereafter.

But to return again to those Indian Votaries who undergo such hard things
and out of this gross miss-take that they doeGod good service in the things
they do. Concerning which actings, Lucretius (though accounted an epicurean
and an Atheist) in his first book, speaks to purpose about the Error of
Religion.

-- Saepius olim
Relligio peperit scelerosa atque implafacta*
often of old,
Religion bred acts impiously bold.
And presently after he instances in Iphigenia sacrificed to Diana by her own
Father, to procure a wind for the Grecians more safe, and more speedy passage
to Troy.

Nam sublata virum manibus tremebundaque ad aras
Deducta est, non ut solenni more sacrorum.
Perfecto, possit claro comitari Hymenoeo:
Sed Casta inceste nubendi tempore in ipso.
Hostia concideret mactatu moesta Parentis:
Exitus ut classi felix faustusque daretur.
Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.
For in men's arms born to the Altar she,
Was trembling brought; not with fair rights to be
To famous Hymen led: but the Chaste maid,
Now ripe for Marriage, foully thus betrayed,
Fell a sad Sacrifice by her own Sare,
So a safe voyage might the Fleet acquire;
To that dire fact persuaded on,
By error of Religion.
When Dionysius the Tyrant had a safe and a prosperous voyage by Sea, as he was
returning home from the spoil of a rich Temple, he presently concluded that
the Gods loved Sacriledg.

Honesta quaedam scelera successus facit, Sen. Trag. Thus good success
Could Rapine bless.


Tamberlaine, the Mogols great Ancester (of whom more afterward) might have
drawn as good arguments from success as ever any before or since him. And who
so is acquainted with the History of the Turks, as with many other people who
have been great in the world, (yet not owned at all by Almighty God) might from
their stories draw the like conclusions. But such as have learned Christ, and
consequently know better, are taught to conclude better, they having learned of
Wisdom to make Demonstrative Syllogismes a Priori from Causes, and not from
folly to make Parallogismes a Posteriori, from events and successes.

If I enlarge any more on this argument, I must further add, that to judge any
cause good because the success is so, is to conclude besides, and against, the
rule of Christ, who commands us to judge not according to appearance, but to
judge righteous judgment, Joh. 7. 24. For there is very much deceit in
appearance.

The appearance or face is of things as of men, Fronti nulla fides (is an old
proverb) we see men's faces, we cannot see their hearts, and therefore there is
no certain judgment to be drawn from their Countenances. No more can we make a
judgment from the face of things, till we look further into them; because,
vitia virtutes mentiuntur, vice too often makes a Mask of the skin of virtue,
and looks lovely, like some houses o^ entertainment that have Angels for their
signs, and Devils for their Ghests.

A man is naturally apt to think that God is with him while he prospers though
in evil. And it is observed of wicked men that they have enjoyed as much, nay
more than their hearts could wish. The posterity of Cain before the Flood, were
the mighty men, the men of Name, the men of renown, the triumphing men in that
old world, and ever since that spurious race have been the great ingrossers of
outward prosperity: behold, (says the Psalmist, 73. 12) these are the ungodly
that prosper in the world; But many of the mercyes they receive, if not all,
come out of Gods left hand, not in love but anger, as the mutinous Israelites
had Qvailes in the wilderness not to feed them so much, as to choke them; they
being dealt withal herein much like as the Old Heathens dealt with their
Sacrifices, first they fed them, and then they crowned them, and then they killed
them, the substance of which I find thus rendered; Thus Beasts for sacrifice
they feed, First they are crowned, and then they bleed.

Thus God advanced and lifted up Pharaoh not in Mercy, but Displeasure, that he
might first show his Judgments before him; and then upon him. Thou have lifted
me up and cast me down, lifted me up very high, that my fall might be greater.

It is most true, that nothing comes to pass, neither can be done without the
Knowledge and Permission of Almighty God; thus Good things are done by his
Privity, Assistance and Approbation; things that are Evil, by his Privity,
Permission, but not Liking. The wicked are called the sword of God. Ps. 17.
etc. They do his will in executing his vengeance, so Babylon was called the
Hammer, and Assyria the Rod of the Lord; But these Swords, and Hammers, and
Rods when they have done the service which was appointed for them to do, are
thrown into the fire, and meet with greater Vengeance afterward, then they had
formerly executed. They did the secret Will of God, in doing what they did; as
no doubt but the Devil did in afflicting of Job; in winnowing of Peter; in
buffetting of Paul; but his recompense for these and all other his works, is
Chains under darkness and that for ever and ever. And thus Judas did the will
of God in betraying his innocent Master, the Son of God; and consequently
furthering the Redemption of Mankind, but his Reward was sad for so doing; his
End, Perdition.

And therefore in all our undertakings, we must learn wisely to distingvish
twixt God's approving and permiting will, the first of these must limit us in
all the things we set about, his signified, declared, approved will laid down
in his Word; We may do the Will of God otherwise as it were against his Will;
do the will of God and have little thanks for our labor in doing things which
God permits but approves not,

It must needs be therefore a sin transcendently wicked, for any who know God
and his Truth, to entitle God and Religion unto actions that are Evil, by
fathering prosperous wickedness upon them, as if they did at all countenance
such things as Reli(...)ion flatly forbids, and Almighty God professedly abhors.

Religion is the best Armor in the World, but the worst Cloak, and all they
who thus put it on, shall, first or last, find no more comfort in it than Ahab
found in the Harness he put on him as a Disguise, as well as for his Defense. 1.
K. 22. which he had no sooner don, but immediately an Arrow (though shot at
random) found a passage through the Joints thereof, and so carried away his
Life.

But to return again to these Mohometans; They keep a solemn Lent, they call
the Ram-jan, or Ramdam, which begins the first Newmoon, which happens in
September, and so continues during that whole Moon. And all that time, those
that are strict in their Religion, forbear their Women: and will not take
either Meat or Drink any Day during that time, so long as the Sun is above
their Horizon, but after the Sun is set they eat at pleasure. The last day of
their Ramjan, they consecrate as a day of mourning to the memory of their
deceased friends, when I have observed many of the meanner sort, seem to make
most bitter lamentation. But when that day of their general mourning is ended,
and begins to dye into night, they fire an innumerable company of lamps, and
other lights; which they hang or fix very thick, and set upon the tops of their
houses, and all other most conspicuous places near their great Tanks, that are
surrounded with buildings, where those lights are doubled by their Reflection
upon the water, and when they are all burnt out; the ceremoy is done, and the
people take food.

The day after this Ram-jan is fully ended, the most devout Mahometans in a
solemn manner assemble to their? Misquits, where by their Moolaas, (some
selected parts of the Alcoran) are publicly read unto them, which book the
Moolaas never touch without an expression of much outward reverence.

For their works of charity, there are some rich men that build Sarraes in
great Cities, and Towns (spoken of before) where passengers may find house-room
and that freely, without a return of any recompense, wherein themselves, and
goods may be in safety.

Others make wells and Tanks for the public benefit; Or maintain servants,
which continually attend upon road-wayes that are much traveled, and there
offer unto Passengers water for themselves and beasts, which water they bring
thither in great skins hanging upon the back, of their Buttelos, which as it is
freely given, so it must be freely taken by all those, who desire to refresh
themselves by it.

There are some which build rich Monuments to preserve the memories of those
whom they have esteemed eminent for their austerity and holiness, these they
call Paeres or Saints, amongst whom some of those (before mentioned) help to
fill their Number, who sequester themselves from the world (as they think) and
spend their life alone upon the tops of Hills, or in other obscure corners.

Now lastly for a close of this section. I shall entreat my Reader to call to
mind, and to take a second, and a very serious view of the reverence and a we
which seems (so far as eyes can judge) to be in that people; Reverence and awe
(I say) of the Majesty before whom they appear when they are in their
devotions.

Whose most submissive carriage in that duty, does very much condemn infinite
numbers of those. who profess Christ while they are in Religious services,
rushing upon, and continuing, in those holy duties, without any seeming
reverence or regard at all of the dreadful Majesty before whom they appear,
as if God were not, or as if he were not worth the regarding; As if Death, and
Hell, and judgment, an everlasting separation from the prelence of God for
evermore, were terms merely invented to affright people withal, and as if
there were no such places and no such things.

I confess it is true that external Ceremonies, by bowing the body in the
performances of Religious duties and the like may be found in the falsehood of
Religion, and when a man rests in these alone easy performances, it is to
complement with Almighty God, and not to worship him, yet as he looks for more
than these in our humble addresses to him: So he expects these likewise, for
without all doubt the most submissive gesture of the body in this case may both
express and further the piety of the soul.

And therefore though the God of spirits, does most regard the soul of our
devotions, and looks most at the heart, while holy duties are performing, yet
it is true likewise that it is not only unmannerly, but most irreligious, to be
misgestured in them, the carless and uncomly carriage of the body in this case,
making the soul to be profane and signifying it so to be. To him will I look
even to him, that is poor and of a contrite spirit, that trembles at my words
Es. 66. 2. I shall therefore never be of their mind in this case, who think the
heart may be devout, when the outward man shows no regard.

Sancta Sancte, holy duties must be done in an holy manner, great reverence
must be used in them, and therefore when the hands, and knees, and mouth, and
eyes, and tongue forget to do their offices as they should, they discover an
ungodly, as well as a negligent heart, that should command them to do
otherwise, for as God will be worshipped in spirit; so in the outward man
likewise; otherwise St. Paul might have spared that precept, which commands
thus 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirit which are
Gods, as if he had said, both are bought with a price, the body redeemed as
well as the soul, and therefore God looks for, and expects reverence from both.

In all our addresses to God, he expects at once familiarity, and fear;
familiarity in the expression of our prayers, for we speak not to an implacable
an inexorable judge, but to a tender Father, and there fear and reverence to
accompany those expressions; hence it is said that God is greatly to be feared
in the assembly of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that are about
him Ps. 89. 7* and serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice with trembling Ps. 2.
11. and again, let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the
world stand in awe of him Ps. 33. 8. in awe of him at all times, and in all
places, but especially there, where he is in a more special manner present, as
he has promised to be in his ordinances. The Lord is in his holy Temple, Heb.
2. 20. when Jacob was in his journey to Padan-Aran, he had a vision in the way,
which signified and showed unto him nothing but love, mercy, and comfort, and
peace, yea, he cried out how dreadful is this place, etc. Genesis 28. 17.
Almighty God is altogether as awful to his own in his mercies, as he is in his
judgments. Great is thy merci^, O Lord, that thou may be feared, not
slighted, not neglected, but feared. For to them who have a through
acquaintance with God, there is no less Majesty shines in the favors of God,
than in his judgments and justice, the wicked heart never fears God, but
thundering, or shaking the eartl; never but then when he appears most terrible,
but the good can dread him in his Sunshine, when he appears most gracious, and
so they do, and so they must.

Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor, -- it is a saying that has much truth in it,
though spoken by a Heathen, because the foundation of Religion is fear, without
which there can be no Religion; as Lactantius wisely argues, saying, quod non
metuitur contemnitur, quod contemnitur non colitur; that which is not feared is
contemned, and that which is contemned cannot be worshipped, from whence it
comes to pass, that Religion and earthly power must needs be very much
supported by fear. First Religion expressed in all our duties to God, if I be
your father where is my honor? if your master, where is my fear, Mat. 1. 6.
Secondly obedience manifested in our subjection to men, unto the powers here
below, whom God has appointed to bring, and to keep men in order, is very much
regulated by fear, for were it not for this prop that holds up governments, it
would presently be dissolved: were it not for this curb to restrain men, for
that cord to lead some, and to compel and bind others, all societies of men
would presently run into disorder, Kingdoms and Commonwealths would
immediately come to confusion.

I shall conclude this digression with a most remarkable example, when Ehud
came to Eglon (though an idolater, and a Tyrant) and told him that he had a
message to him from God, Judge. 3. 20. he arose presently out of his seat or
Chair of state, and though the unwildiness of his fat body was such, that he
could not arise with readiness and ease, yet no sooner does he hear news of a
message from God, but he rises as fast as he was able from his Throne (that he
might not show himself unmannerly in the business of God) and reverently attend
to the tenor thereof; though it proved as sharp a message as could be
delivered, or received. Now

How shall those Mahometans before mentioned, and this Heathen man's carriage
condemn thousands, nay, most of those which call themselves Christians, that
show no more reverence nor regard at the hearing of messages from God
whatsoever they be, than if they heard an old wives fable; that neither when
they speak unto God by the mouth of their Mininisters, nor when God speaks to
them by the same mouth, show any outward regard, reverence, or respect, such an
Atheism for the generality possesses their hearts. But I return again to that
people, and in the next place shall speak.

SECT. 17.
Of the Marriages of the Mahometans, and of their Poligamy, etc.

AMongst many other things that confirm the Mahometans in their irreligion,
this certainly is not the least, the indulgence which Mahomet gives them to
take more wives than one (for they may take four if they please) and that
further promise which that monstrous Seducer has made unto his followers of a
fleshly Paradise hereafter, wherein he will provide for them all wives which
shall have large rolling eyes, which they look upon in that sex as a great
beauty. And it is a very suitable comfort for such as walk so much after the
flesh.

For Poligamy, or the having of more wives than one, Lamech a great Grandchild
of Cain, was the first that brought it into the World, Genesis 4. 19. And it was
first brought into the Church by Abraham: which act of his, as of others after
him (good men in their generation) though it found permission, never had
approbation from Almighty God. And further, though under the times of the Law
it found some connivence, yet since the Gospel there has been no such custom
in any of the Churches of Christ.

And in those former times it was the charge of Almighty God to the Kings of
Israel, even before they were, that they should not multiply wives, Deuteronomy. 17.
17. Yet Solomon (who in this discovered a great deal of folly, as in other
things abundance of wisdom) went further beyond the bounds of that Law, than
any other whom God owns in Scripture. The poor man in his later age lost
himself amongst an house full of wives. For the story says, that he loved
many strange women, 1 King. 11. 1. Every word had nothing but Bane in it. He
loved women, many women, outlandish, idolatrous women, and these not only had,
but doted on, he being so taken with their persons, that he humored them in
their sins. And if one woman in the beginning undid all mankind: it is no
great marvel, if so many women did so much mischief to one Solomon.

The Abissins say, that when the Queen of Sheba came to visit Solomon, that
she returned back with Child by him, from whose issue (they further say) have
come the race of their Kings ever since. But here I leave my Reader to believe
in that as much, and no more than he please. This is clear in the sacred
story, that Solomon, though he had a thousand wives and Concubines, he had but
three Children, Rehoboam his only Son, and Taphal, and Basmah his two
Daughters, 1 King. 4. 11. 15. an evident sign that God never approved of his
multitude of wives, when by his blessing on the single and holy wedlock of
others, he has multiplied them in a very happy and numerous issue.

In the old World when the Sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they were
fair, they took wives of all that they liked, Genesis 6. 2. and these multiplied
not Children so much as iniquities.

Sampson in the choice of his wife, had no other guides and counselors but
his own eyes. He went down to Timnah, and saw a Daughter of the Philistines,
and presently he speaks to his Father get her for me to wife, for she pleases
me well, Judge. 14. 1. 2. He who follows nothing but his eyes in the choice of a
wife, that marries a beauty, or a face, or a portion, may after find a
Philistine in his bed, and be as unhappy in his choice as Sampson was.

Sampson sees a woman (and we will suppose her beautiful) and as soon as ever
his eyes fix on her, he must presently have her to wife. Wisdom and Passion
cannot dwell under one roof, for a man cannot love, nor desire, nor mourn, nor
grieve, nor rejoice over much and be wise, for when the heart is taken up very
much with the later, there is no room left in it for the former.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. and love, that
reciprocally settles upon this inward beauty, must needs be lasting. Magnes
amoris Amor. Love in this case is the Lodestone of love, so attractive that it
draws love to it, and holds it fast, when as he who marries a portion, or a
face finds it often otherwise. The portion that flies, and the beauty that
decays; tres veniunt rugae. -- Ju. the forehead begins to be wrinkled whereon
love was first settled, and in those wrinkles, or surrows it is immediately
buried.

But yet for all this, as men are generally valued amongst men by the pound and
acre, -- Quot possidet agri Jugera:
Ju. Sat. 3.

So in the choice of wives virgins are usually thus rated, Protinus ad censum;
de moribus ultima fiet Quaestio. --
Ju.

Men commonly asking the question at the wrong end, as first, what has she?
and then, what is she? concerning which a Gentleman of this age wrote wittily,
but it is good earnest* Who wooes a wife for state, or face:
May win a Mare to loose a Race.


The truth is, that many a Child has been cast away upon riches, and
therefore wealth in peoples matches should be as some Grains, or Scrupses in a
Balance, superadded unto the Gold of virtuous qualities, to weigh down the
Scales. For when it is made the substance of the weight, and good qualities but
the appendants, there is one earth poysed with another, which whenever it is
done, it is a wonder if either the Children prove not the Parents sorrow, or
the Parents theirs.

It was Balaams most damnable Counsel, to make the men of Israel wantons by the
beauties of Moa^, that then they might be soon made Idolaters, and so they
were, Numb. 25. Sin commonly enters in at the eye, and so creeps down to the
heart, and therefore that Soul lies open unto very much hazard, when a Covenant
is not made and kept with the eyes: which if Sampson had done, he that had so
much strength, had not discovered so much weakness, and Solomon (whom before I
named) so much renowned for wisdom, had not manifested so much folly in
miscarrying so fearfully by wives, which turned away his heart from God; and
therefore when he was come again to himself, he freely confesses to all the
world, Eccles. 7. 28. that he found more bitter than death the woman, whose
heart is as snares and nets, and her hands as bands, who so pleased God shall
escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.

But the Mahometans trouble not themselves with these thoughts for though some
of that people, as the strict votaries there, marry not at all; and the Moolaas
content themselves with one wife, and so do some others: yet they that please
may have four wives, and as many women beside as they can get, and keep; whom
they command as wives, and this liberty there is denied to none that will make
use of it.

I remember that my Lord Ambassador had a servant of that Nation, who de(...)d
leave to be absent one day and being asked why, he told us, that he was then to
marry a wife, though he had three living then, a man would think enough for his
means but five shillings a Moon (the usual pay of servants there (as before I
observed) to maintain himself, and all the rest of his family.

Often have I heard this question put how these Mahomitans can do with so many
wives, some of which they keep pent up in little Cottages, or Tents, and in
other places and parts of the World, where men's dwellings are very large and
spacious, there is scarce room enough to be found for one wife, in a great
house.

The Mahometans, who have most wives, and women, are most jealous, and their
jealousy such, as that they will not suffer the Brothers, or Fathers of their
wives to come to them, or to have any speech with them, except it be in their
presence. And a continued custom by this restraint has made it odious for such
women, as have the reputation of honesty, to be seen at any time by any man,
besides their own husbands, or by those before named, and by them but very
seldom. But if they dishonor their husbands beds, or being unmarried are found
incontinent and filthy, professing chastity, rather than they shall want the
severest punishment, their own Brothers hands will be first against them to
take away their lives, and for so doing, shall be commended, but nor questioned.

The women there of the greater quality have Eunuchs in stead of men to wait
upon them, who in their minority are deprived of all that might provoke
jealousy.

Here is a free toleration for Harlots, who are listed and enrouled (as they
say) before they can have liberty to keep such an open house. Which Creatures
in general there, and so all the World over whosoever they be, embrace those
they pretend to love as Monkies and Apes do their little ones, for they kill
them with kindness, those base prostitutes are as little ashamed to entertain,
as others are openly to frequent their houses.

Other Creatures (as they say) are there kept for base, and abominable ends,
many of those Nations being deeply engaged in those sins of the Gentiles, Romans
1. in doing things which should not be named, and make no scruple at all for
their so doing, ut honest peccare videantur, (as Lactantius speaks) as if they
might sin honestly.

Some of the finer sort of those base strumpets before named, at certain times
appear in the presence of the Mogol, before whom they sing their wanton songs,
playing on their Timbrels.

The Marriages of all the Mahometans are solemnized with some Pomp, for after
the Moolaa has joined their hands, and performed other ceremonies, and
bestowed on the parties some words of Benediction, (which is done in the
evening) immediately after the night coming on, they begin their jollity, the
man on horseback, be he poor, or rich, with his kindred and friends about him,
many lights before him, with drums and wind instruments, and some mixed
pastimes to increase the merriments. The Bride she follows with her women
friends in Coaches covered, and after they have thus passed the most eminent
places of the City, or Town they live in, return to the place of the married
couples abode, (where (they say) if the parties be able they make some slight
entertainment for them, immediately after which, they all disperse, and the
show is over.

Women there have a very great happiness, above all I have heard of, in their
easy bringing forth of Children into the world; for there it is a thing very
common, for women great with Child, one day to ride, carrying their infants in
their bodies, and the next day to ride again, carrying them in their arms.

How those of the greater quality, order their little Children when they are
very young, I could not observe, but those of the meaner sort keep them naked
for some years after they are born, covering them only, and that but
sometimes, with slight Callico Mantles.

The Mahometans (as I have before observed) who please so to do, may take to
themselves each four wives, and that filthy liberty given unto them by their
fleshly Mahomet allows them in it. I have heard of some in this Nation of late
times, who have been married here to more than so many at once, but that
wickedness here is not (as amongst them) committed by a Law, but by Law made
Capital, and so punished.

Yet there are amongst us of the greater sort (and made so by their luxurient
estates) which though they take but one wife whom they marry (as they say) for
convenience, that they may have Heirs to inherit (if their sin consume not all
their Patrimony.) But, some of these believing the bonds of Wedlock to
straight, must have one other at the least whom they call a Mistress (too good
a name for such a creature) and though in this case the wife bears the man's
name, the Prostitute has the greatest share by far of his affection, who will
sometimes say that he cannot love his wife, be she never so amiable and lovely,
and only for this reason, because she is his wife, and if she were not so,
could he at any expense to gain her company. To what an height of wickedness
can licentiousness raise up a man, in making him to urge such a relation as a
wife (and because a wife) to be the only reason of his dislike, or
disaffection; which should be the firmest bond of his love. A strange
expression, which cannot possibly come out of the mouths of any but of such
(who if they think as they speak) are so forward in their journey, as that they
are come very near unto the very brink of Hell.

The eldest Son they have by any of their married wives, has a prerogative
above all the rest, whom their other Children call Budd^, By their great
brother. And so much of their marriages of their Children, and of their births.
In the next place I shall speak.

SECT. 18.
Of their burials, of their mourning for their dead, and of their stately
Sepulchers and Monuments.

FOr the Mahometans, it is their manner to wash the bodies of their dead before
they interre them. An ancient custom as it should seem among the Jews, for it
is said of Dorcas, that after she was dead, they washed her body, as a
preparative to her burial, Act. 9. 37.

They lay up none of the bodies of their dead in their Misquits, or Churches
(as before) but in some open place in a grave, which they dig very deep and
wide, a Jewish custom, likewise to carry the bodies of their dead to bury them
out of their Cities and Towns, Luke 7. 12.

Their mourning over their dead is most immoderate, for besides that day of
general lamentation at the end of their Ram-Jan, or Lent, (before mentioned)
they houl and cry many whole days for their friends departed, immediately
after they have left the world and after that time is passed over, many foolish
women, so long as they survive, very often in the year, observe set days to
renew their mourning for their deceased friends, and as a people without hope,
bedew the graves of their husbands, as of other their near relations, with
abundance of (seemingly) affectionate tears; as if they were like those
mourning women mentioned, Jer. 9. 17. who seemed to have tears at command, and
therefore were hired to mourn and weep in their solemn lamentations.

And when they thus lament over their dead, they will often put this question
to their deaf and dead Carcasses, why they would die? They having such loving
wives, such loving friends, and many other comforts, as if it had been in their
power to have rescued themselves from that most impartial wounding hand of
death.

Which carriage of theirs deserves nothing but censure and pity though if it be
not Theatrical, we may much wonder at it, and say of it as it was said of the
mourning in the floor of Atad, Genesis 50. 11. that it is a grievous mourning, or
as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, Zech. 12. 11. if we
take those lamentations only in a literal sense.

But to speak unto this as a Christian; certainly the Apostle, who forbids
immoderate mourning for friends departed, 1 shef. 4. 13. imployes and allows of
that mourning which is moderate.

To behold a great Funeral, where there are abundance of mourning garments, and
no weeping eyes, is not a good sight; for a man to die as Jehojakim (a very bad
Son of an excellent good Father) of whom it was sadly prophesied, that he
should die without lamentation, non plangent eum, Eheu frater, they shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! his Ashes should not be moistened with
one tear, and to be buried as Jehojakim was with the burial of an Ass, Jer. 2.
18, 19. is very sad. And doubtless it had been better for a man never to have
been born, than to live undesired and to die unlamented. For a man to run a
long race through the world, and to leave no token of good behind him but to
be like an Arrow shot by a strong arm up into the air; wherein it flies a
great circuit, yet immediately after it is fallen, it cannot be discerned that
it was ever there, I may say of such a one, that he was born out of due time,
or rather that it had been good for him if he had not been born at all.

But now further concerning their places of Burial, many Mahometans of the
greatest quality in their life time provide fair Sepulchers for themselves and
nearests friends compassing with a firm wall, a good circuit of ground near
some Tank, (before spoken of) about which they delight to Bury their dead, or
else they close in a place for this use, near springs of water, that may make
pleasant fountains, near which they erect little Misquits, or Churches, and
near them Tombs* built round, or four square, or in six, or eight squares, with
round vaults, or Canopies of stone over head, all which are excellently well
wrought, and erected upon P^llars, or else made close to be entered by doors
every way, under which the bodies of their dead lie interred, the rest of that
ground thus circled in, they plant with fruit Trees, and further set therein
all their choicest flowers, as if they would make Elysian fields (such as the
Poets dreamed of) wherein their Souls might take repose.

Thus to bury (as it should seem) was an ancient custom, for it is written of
Manasseh King of Judah, that he was buried in the garden of his own house so of
his Son Amon, that he was buried in that garden likewise, 2 King. 21. 18. and
26. verses, thus I seph of Arimathea had his Sepulcher in his garden, and it
was well placed there, that when he was in the place of his greatest delight,
his meditations might be seasoned with the thoughts of his death.

There are many goodly Monuments which are richly adorned; built (as before was
observed) to the memory of such as they have esteemed Paeres, or Saints (of
whom they have a large Calendar) in which are Lamps continually burning,
attended by votaries, unto whom they allow Pensions for the maintaining of
those lights; and many (transported there with wild devotion) daily resort to
those monuments, there to contemplate the happiness those Paeres (as they
imagine) now enjoy.

And certainly of all the places that Empire affords, there are none that
minister more delight, than some of their burying places do, neither do they
bestow so much cost, nor show so much skill in Architecture in any other
structures, as in these.

Now amongst many very fair Piles there dedicated to the remembrance of their
dead, the most famous one is at Secandra, a Village three miles from Agra; it
was begun by Achabar-sha the late Mogols Father, who there lies buried, and
finished by his Son, who since was laid up beside him. The materials of that
most stately Sepulcher are Marble of diverse colors, the stones so closely
cemented together, that it appears to be but one continued stone, built high
like a Pyramid with many curiosities about it, and a fair Misquit by it, the
Garden wherein it stands very large planted (as before) and compassed about
with a Wall of Marble, this most sumptuous Pile of all the structures that vast
Monarchy affords, is most admired by strangers. Tom. Cor^at had a most exact
view thereof, and so have many other English men had, all which have spoken
very great things of it.

And if we here step aside, to look into other Countries and stories, we may
observe much to this purpose, (though none that I have ever heard of like that
I last named) where many, whose foregoing lives, have little deserved those
following remembrances, yet after death have had their bodies lodged in rich
Monuments, when others of great worth^ and most deserved memory have been very
obscurely buried.

Varro writes of Licinius, or Licinus, but a Barber to Augustus Caefar, who
getting wealth, was after his death honored with a fair Monument of Marble,
when grave and wise Cato had but a small mere stone to cover him, and renowned
Pompey had in this kind no remembrance at all, of all whom Varro briefly
writes thus:

Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo. --
Licinus entombed under rich Marble stone:
Cato a small one had: Great Pompey none.
When Julius Caesar had vanquished Ptolomey, and the distressed King hoped to
preserve his life by flying into a Boat, there were so many of his Soldiers
which followed him, that they lost their lives by that very means they hoped to
preserve them; for their too much weight sunk the Boat, and they all with their
most unhappy King drowned together. Concerning whom, I have what here follows
(but a little varied) thus observed to my hand.

Mixed with Plebeians there a Monarch lies,
The last o'th race of Egypts Ptolomeys.
Under no covert but his Niles cold waves:
No Pyramids, nor rich Mansolian graves,
Nor Arched vaults whose structures do excel
As his forefathers Ashes proudly dwell.
And dead, as living do their wealth express,
In sumptuous Tombs, or gorgious Palaces.
This was the Fate of that last Egyptian Monarch, and it is sad to consider,
that an Egyptian Monarch should be buried under water and mudd, and a Roman
Barber covered with Marble.

The like has been the condition of many others, who have deserved in their
generation lasting remembrances in this kind, but have not found them, when
others, who have merited nothing at all, have had much said, and (in that
respect) much done for them after death. And therefore one of this age, very
eminent for great parts, writing of a great man, by place, and deserts, but
obscurely buried; and observing rich Monuments set off with large and
undeserved Encomiums for others, which deserved them not, first blames -- The
flattering stone
Which often belies the dead when he is gone.


And after writes further in relation to him before mentioned; thus

Let such, as fear their rising, purchase vaul^s,
And statues, only to excuse their faults.
While, thou shall rise thorough thy easy dust
At the last day, these would not, but they must.
And truly if we consider, and impartially read many Hyperbolical expressions
engraven upon some Monuments, we may make a pause at the two first words, which
are commonly these. Here lies, and write them thus, hear lies, and there make a
stop, because little, or nothing that follows has any truth in it. And
therefore though many great and rich men, have their bodies after death covered
with stately Piles, which hold forth many, and high commendations of them, yet
these cannot keep their names from putrefying and rotting as much above ground,
as their bodies do under it. The name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10. 17.
His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in the
street, Job 18. 17. or if their names survive, and be remembered, they shall but
continue their shame, as here lies, or there dwelt such an oppressor, such a
cruel, or such a covetous Muck-worm, or such a filthy, or such a profane
ungodly person, or such an intemperate drunken sot; whom many times such an
inscription would fit, (if it were written over their doors) as Diogenes
sometimes caused to be written upon the door of a like intemperate person, who
had written before that his house was to be sold, under which that Cynick wrote
thus, I thought this house would surfeit so long, that it would spue out its
master, for God shall take such away, and pluck them out of their dwelling
places, and root them out of the land of the living, or as the Prophet Jeremiah
speaks, their dwellings shall cast them out.

But however they which deserve true honor, should have it both alive and
dead. The memory of the just shall be blessed. Abel was the first that ever
tasted death, and he died by violence, he died for Religion. Oh how early did
Martyrdom creep into the world! yet Abol, who has been so long dead, yet
speaks, Heb. 11. 4. or the Testimony which Almighty God gave of that
righteous Abel is yet spoken of, and so shall be, till eternity has swallowed
up time.

The remembrance of Josiah is like a composition of the perfume that is made by
the art of the Apothecary, sweet in all mouths etc. and so shall remain; when
stately Monuments erected to preserve the memory of others, shall be so
defaced, that it will not appear where they once were.

In a word, all Kings and Potentates of the earth of what Nation soever they
be, must first, or last lay down their swords and Scepters, and Trophies at the
gates of death. No earthly King shall ever carry his Crown further, than Simon
the Cyrenian did the Cross, to Golgotha, to the grave, which narrow compass
of earth, shall at last put a confinement to all their great thoughts, who have
believed (as Alexander sometime did* the whole world by much to little, to
bound their desires.

Unus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit Orbis:
Aestuat infelix angusto limite mundi,
Ut Gyarae clausus scopulis, parvaque Seripho.
Cu^ tamen a figulis munitam intraverit urbem,
Sarcophago contentus erat. Mors sola fatetur
Quantula sint hominu^ corpuscula. --
Ju. Sat. 10. One world the youth of Pella cannot hold,
He sweats as crowded in this narrow mold.
To close Seriph's and Gyara's Rocks consigned,
But when into the Towns with brick-walls lined,
He entered once, there must he rest content.
In a straight Coffin, and slight Monument.
For death alone is that which will confess
(Though great men's minds) their bodies littleness.
Ecce vix totam Hercules implevit urnam. Behold great and victorious Hercules,
the subduer of the Monsters of the World, when he was dead, and his body
resolved into aslies, scarcely filled one earthen Pitcher.

Death is the great Loveller which cuts down, and then lays all people flat
before God. Oh if sickness and death could be bribed how rich they would be!
this death makes all men to appear as they are men upon even ^erms in the sight
of God. The great men there shall not be offered a Chair and Cushion to sit
down while others stand and wait. I saw the dead both small and great stand
before God, Rev. 21. 12. The small and the great are there, and the servant is
free from his master, Job 3. 19. The distinction then in that day shall not be
't wixt poor and rich; 'twixt mean, and mighty, 'twixt them that are nobly
born, and those of low parentage: But good and bad shall be the only Terms to
distinguish one man from another before that great Tribunal, when every one of
what degree, or condition soever he has been, shall receive from the hands of
God according to that which he has done in the flesh, be it good, or evil.
When the two Cups, the two reward^, the two recompenses shall be impartially
distributed, and none but those which shall be found in Christ accepted,
rewarded, in the mean time, as it is in natural rest, it is much better to
lodge in a very poor base and mean cottage, upon an hard open pallat, and there
to have sweet, and quiet sleep, than in a most sumptuous. Palace upon a bed of
down, enclosed with the richest Curtains that cost can make, and there to have
no sleep at all: so for that rest which is eternal, it matters not how meanly
and basely the body is laid up, while the Soul rests in peace. But if the body
be embalmed with all sweet Odors and Spices, if chested in, or covered with
Marble, or with any thing that is richer, and the Soul all this while in
torments, condemned to everlasting burnings, what comfort can it take; no more,
nay, not so much as a man who has a curious Crimson Silk-stocking, drawn over
a broken, or a Gouty and tormenting Leg.

For the Saints departed hence non tumulos curant, when their Souls are bound
up in a; bundle of life, and they enjoy the company of all the blessed spirits
made perfect, they care not what becomes of their earthly parts. As before they
went into their Chambers to undresse themselves: so now they go down into their
graves to put off their nasty and dirty rags, that when they arise thence they
may be invested with Roabs that are rich and glorious, well knowing that Christ
at the last day will change their vile bodies, and make them like unto his
glorious body. While a man's Soul is safe it is not at all to be heeded what
becomes of his body: That may be slain, but cannot be hurt, as bold and good
Ignatius told his persecutor occidere potes, laedere non potes, thou can kill
me, but thou can not hurt me. The good man may be stripped of all his
temporal riches, but that long enduring substance laid up for him in the
Heavens, is above all his enemies reach. They may be degraded here from all
their worldly honors, but not of this honor to be the servants of God. They
may be deprived of their lives, but not of their salvation. The executioner
that cut off Saint Paul's head, could not take away his Crown. And therefore
whither they breath forth their lives out of the mouth of the body, or the
mouth of a wound, it is all one -- vivit post funer a virtus; the virtuous man
out-lives his life, and after finds, that there are no such lasting monuments,
as to be entombed in the hearts of the good who will be ever showing forth the
praises of those, which have deserved them. And as for earthly* Monuments made
to continue in the remembrances of the dead. Quandoquidem data sunt ipsis
quoque fata Sepulchris.


These shall have their periods as well as men, and when time shall crumble and
consume them all into dust and forgetfulness, the righteous shall be had (in a
lasting) and everlasting remembrance.

And now Reader I have done with this, and shall proceed to speak more
particularly.

SECT. XIX.
Of the Hindooes, or Heathens which inhabit that Empire, etc.

ANd for these, the first that I shall take notice of, is, that they agree with
others in the world, about the first Roots of mankind Adam and Eve, and the
first of them they call Babba Adam, or Adamah, Father Adam, and the second
Mamma Havah, Mother Eve. And from Adam they call a man Adams.

For Adam they further say, that when his wife was tempted to eat the forbidden
fruit, she took it and chaud it, and then swallowed it down, but when her
husband was swallowing it, the hand of God stopped it in his Throat, and from
hence (they say) that every man has there an hollow bunch which women have not.

The names they give to distinguish one man from another are many, and amongst
them these following are very common. As Juddo, or Midas, or Cooregee, or
Hergee, and the like. Casturia and Prescotta, are Women's names amongst them,
but whither these, as those names they call their men, or women by, are names
of signification, or only of sound I know not.

Those Hindooes are a very laborious, and an industrious people: these are they
which till and plant the ground, and breed the Cattle, these are they which
make and sell those curious Manufactures, or the Cloth and stuff which this
Empire affords.

This people marry into, and consequently still keep in their own Tribes,
Sects, Occupations, and Professions. For instance all Bramins (which are their
Priests, the Sons of all which are Priests, likewise) are married to Bramins
daughters, so a Merchants son marries a Merchants daughter, and so men of
several trades marry to the same trade. Thus a Coolee, (who is a tiller of the
ground) marries his son to a Colees daughter; and so in all other professions
they keep themselves to their own Tribes and Trades, not mixing with any other,
by which means they never advance themselves higher than they were at first.

They take but one wife, and of her they are not so fearful and jealous as the
Mahometans are of their several wives and women, for they suffer their wives to
go abroad whether they please. They are married very young, about six, or seven
years old, their Parents making Matches for them, who lay hold of every
opportunity to bestow their Children, because confined to their own Tribes,
they have not such variety of choice as otherwise they might have* and when
they attain to the age of thirteen, or fourteen, or fifteen years at the most
they bed together.

Their marriages are solemnized (as those of the Mahometans) with much company,
and noise, but with this difference, that both the young couple ride openly on
Hors-back, and for the most part they are so little, that some go on their
Horse sides to hold them up from falling. They are bedeckt, or strewed all over
their Clothing, with the choice flowers of that Country, fastened in order all
about their Garments.

For their habits they differ very little from the Mahometans, but are very
like them civilly clad, but many of their women were Rings on their Toes, and
therefore go bare foot. They we^r likewise broad Rings of Brass, or better
Metal upon their Wrists, and small of their Legs, to take of and on.

They have generally (I mean the women) the flaps, or tips of their ears boared
when they are young, which holes daily extended and made wider, by things put
and kept in them for that purpose, at last become so large, as that they will
hold Rings (hollowed on the outside like Pullies) for their flesh to rest in
that are as broad in their circumference, some of them (I ^dare say) as little
Sawcers. But though those fashions of theirs seem very strange at first sight,
yet they keep so constantly to them, as to all their other habites without any
alteration, that their general and continual wearing of them makes them to seem
less strange unto others which behold them.

And for their Diet very many of them (as the Banians in general (which are a
very strict Sect) will eat of nothing that has had, or may have life. And
these live upon Herbs, and Roots, and Bread* and Milk, and Butter, and Cheese,
and Sweetmeats, of which they have many made very good by reason of their
great abundance of Sugar. Others amongst them will eat fish, but of no living
thing else. The Rashboots will eat Swines flesh, which is most hateful to the
Mahometans, some will eat one kind of flesh, some of another (of all very
sparingly) but all the Hind^os in general abstain from Beef, out of an high and
over-excellent esteem they have of Kine, and therefore give the Mogol yearly,
besides his other e^actions, great sums of money as a ransom for those
Creatures; whence it comes to pass, that amongst other good provisions, we
meet there but with little Beef.

As the Mahometans Bury ^o the Hindoos in general (not believing the
resurrection of the flesh) burn the bodies of their dead near some Rivers (if
they may with convenience) wherein they sow their ashes.

And there are another Sect, or sort of Heathens living amongst them called
Persees, which do neither of these; of whom, and how they bestow the bodies of
their dead, you shall hear afterward.

The Widows of these Hindoos (first mentioned) such as have lived to keep
company with their Husbands, for (as before) there is usually a good space of
time 'twixt their wedding and bedding. The Widows (I say) who have their
Husbands separated from them by death, when they are very young, marry not
again, but whither, or no this be generally observed by them all I know not,
but this I am sure of, that immediately after their Husbands are dead, they cut
their Hair, and spend all their life following as Creatures neglected both by
themselves, and others, whence to be free from shame, some of them are
ambitious to die with Honor (as they esteem it) when their fiery love carries
them to the flames (as they think) of Martyrdom, most willingly following the
dead bodies of their Husbands unto the fire, and there embracing, are burnt
with them.

A better agreement in death than that of Eteocles and Polynices, the two
Theban brothers, of whom it is said that they were such deadly enemies while
they were alive, that after, when both their bodies were burnt together in the
same fiery Pile, the flame parted and would not mix in one, of which Statius
thus:

Nec furiis post fata modus; flammaeque rebels
Seditione Rogi. --
Whose rage not death could end, rebellious ire
Inflamed to civil War their funeral fire.
-- Nec mors mihi finiit iras.
Mine anger with my body shall not die,
But with thy Ghost, my Ghost shall battle try.
But those, which before I named, agree so well in life, that they will not be
divided by death, where their flames unite together. And although the Woman,
who thus burns with her Husband, does this voluntarily, not by any compulsion
(for the love of every Widow there is not thus fired) and though the poor
Creature, who thus dies may return and live if she please, even then when she
comes to the Pile, which immediately after turns her into ashes: yet she who is
once thus resolved, never starts back from her first firm and settled
resolution, but goes on singing to her death, having taken some intoxicating
thing to turn or disturb her brains; and then come to the place where she will
needs die, she settles her self presently in the midst of that combustable
substance provided to dispatch her, which fuel is placed in a round shallow
trench, about two foot deep, made for that purpose near some River, or other
water (as before) and though she have no bonds but her own strong affections to
tie her unto those flames, yet she never offers to stir out of them. But

Her breathless Husband then she takes
In foulded arms; this done she makes
Her humble suit to 'th flames to give
Her quick dispatch, she cannot live
Her honor dead. Her friends there come
Look on, as if it were, Martyrdom;
And with content are hit her led,
As once to view her marriage bed.
And thus, she being joyfully accompanied unto the place of her dying by her
Parents and other friends, and when all is fitted for this hellish Sacrifice,
and the fire begins to burn; all which are there present shout, and make a
continued noise so long as they observe her to stir, that the screeches of that
poor tortured Creature may not be heard. Not much unlike the custom of the
Ammonites, who, when they made their Children pass through the fire to Molech,
caused certain Tabrets, or Drums to sound, that their cries might not be heard,
whence the place was called Tophet, 2 King. 23. 10. which signifies a Drum, or
Tabret.

Now after their bodies are quite consumed, and lie mixed together in ashes,
and those ashes begin to grow cold, some of them are gathered up by their
nearest friends, and kept by them as choice Relics, the rest are immediately
sown by the standers by upon the adjacent River, or water.

Alas poor wretches! what a hard Master do they serve, who puts them upon such
unreasonable services in the flower of their youth and strength, thus to become
their own executioners; to burn their own bones when they are full of marrow,
and to waste their own breasts, when they are full of milk. Now Almighty God
requires no such thing at his peoples hands, and therefore it is by far the
more strange to consider that the Devil should have such an abundance of
servants in the World, and God so few.

But for those poor silly Souls, who sing themselves into the extremity of
misery, and thus madly go out of the World, through one fire into another,
through flames that will not last long into everlasting burnings, and do it not
out of necessity, but choice, led hereunto by their tempter and murderer, and
consequently become so injurious and merciless to themselves* certainly they
deserve much pity from others, who know not how to pity themselves. For nemo
miserius misero non miserants scipsum. There are none so cruel as those, which
are cruel, and pitilesse to themselves. But though (I say) there are some which
thus throw away their own lives, yet if we consider those Hindoos in general we
may further take notice.

SECT. XX.
Of the tenderness of that people in preserving the lives of all other
inferior Creatures, etc.

FOr they will not (if they can help it by any means) take, but on the contrary
do what they can to preserve the lives of all inferior Creatures, whence (as
before I told you) they give large money to preserve the lives of their Kine (a
reason for this you shall have afterward) and I have often observed, that when
our English boys there have out of wantonness been killing of Flies (there
swarming in abundance) they would be very much troubled at it, and if they
could not persuade them to suffer those poor Creatures to live, they would give
them money, or something else to forbear that (as they conceived) cruelty.

As for themselves (I mean a very great number of them) they will not deprive
the most useless, and most offensive Creatures of life, not Snakes, and other
venomous things that may kill them, saying, that it is their nature to do
hurts, and they cannot help it, but as for themselves they further say, that
God has given them reason to shun those Creatur^s, but not liberty to destroy
them.

And in order to this their conceit, the Banians (who are the most tender
hearted in this case of all that people) have Spittles (as they say) on purpose
to recover lame birds and beasts.

Some ground for this their tenderness happily proceeds from this
consideration; that they cannot give life to the meanest of the sensible
Creatures, and therefore think that they may not take the lives of any of them:
for the poorest worm, which crawleth upon the face of the earth, tam vita
vivit, quam Angelus, (as one of the ancients speaks) live for the present as
much as the Angels, and cannot be willing to part with that life, and therefore
they imagine that it is most injurious by violence to take it.

But (as I conceive) the most principal cause why they thus forbear to take the
lives of inferior Creatures, proceeds from their obedience unto a precept
given them by one of their principal, and most highly esteemed Prophets and
Lawgivers they call Bremaw; others, they have in very high esteem, and the
name of one of them is Ram, of another Permissar. I am ignorant of the names of
others, and I conceive that my Reader will not much care to know them. But for
him they call Bremaw, they have received (as they say) many precepts, which
they are careful to observe, and the first of them. This

Thou shall not kill any living Creature whatsoever it be, having life in the
same, for thou art a Creature, and so is it, thou art endued with life, and so
is it, thou shall not therefore spil the life of any of thy Fellow Creatures
that live.

Other precepts (they say) were delivered unto them by their Lawgiver about
their devotions, in their washings and worshippings where they are commanded.

To observe times for fasting, and hours for watching, that they may be the
better fitted for them.

-- Other directions they have about their festivals wherein they are required,

To take their food moderately, in not pampering their bodies.

-- Concerning Charity they are further commanded.

To help the poor as far as they are possibly able.

-- Other precepts (they say) were given them likewise in charge; as

Not to tell false tales, nor to utter any thing that is untrue.

Not to steal any thing from others, be it never so little.

Not to defraud any by their cunning in bargains, or contracts.

Not to oppress any, when they have power to do it.

Now all those particulars are observed by them with much strictness; and some
of them are very good, having the impression of God upon them, but that scruple
they make in forbearing the lives of the Creatures made for men's use, shows how
that they have their dweling in the dark, which makes them by reason of their
blindness to deny unto themselves that liberty, and Sovereignty which Almighty
God has given unto man over the beasts of the field, the fowls of the Air,
and the fishes of the Sea, appointed for his food, given unto him for his
service and sustenance, to serve him, and to seed him, but not to make havoc
and spoil of them.

However, the tenderness of that people over inferior Creatures shall one day
rise up in judgment against all those, who make no scruple at all in taking
the lives, not of sensible Creatures, but men, not legally to satisfy good and
known Laws, but violently to please their cruel and barbarous lusts.

Histories are filled with many inhumane, and strange examples of this kind.
Valerius writes of Lucius Sylla (whose cruelty and thirst after blood, made him
a Monster of mankind, a very Prodigy of Nature) that when he had caused some
thousands of men to be put to death, or (more properly) to be murdered in one
day, he presently gave command that this monstrous fact of his should be
recorded, least the memory of so honorable an action (for so he called in)
might be forgotten.

He killed a Gentleman of Rome at the same time for not enduring the sight of
an innocent man of quality, whom he saw causelessly murdered. Never (says the
Author) was it heard of before, that pity should be punished, and that it
should be thought a Capital offense to behold a Murder with grief.

For that Sylla, it might have been said of him as it was afterward of Nero,
that he was a Creature made up of dirt and blood, a Monster set upon mischief,
who had so much malice and cruelty in his Nature (as any other may have left in
his blood) that Valerius writes thus further of him, ut in dubio esset Syll^ne
prior, an iracundia Syll^ sit extinct^, that it was a question whither himself,
or anger were first extinguished, most strange and turbulent perturbations and
storms, o anger, and malice, and mischief, quando ir a mortalium debet esse
mortalis (as Lactantius well spoke) when the anger of mortal men should be
mortal like themselves.

And so most barbarous and cruel are all they whatsoever they be, who have
their hearts (so bound and confirmed as it were with sinews of iron) that they
delight in nothing so much as in the slaughter of men whatsoever they be,
whither strangers, or brethren, and then make their boasts and brags, I have
knocked so many on the head, says one, and I have killed so many says another,
and I so many says a third, and others so many, and so many, which clearly
shows that they are Children of their Father the Devil, who was a murderer from
the beginning: for his language is ever in their mouths, ure, seca, occide,
burn, cut, kill, do execution, and take no pity, spare not, sparo none, whether
strangers, or known persons, old, or young, men, women, children, brethren, or
whosoever else comes and crosses them in their way, as it was in the days of
that monstrous Sylla before named, when Gray-heads, young Orphans, Virgins,
pregnant wives,
All died: 't was crime enough that they had lives:


That Empress was of a far better mind, who wisely advertised her husband,
sitting and playing at Tables, and minding his Game more than the Prisoners
before him, on whom he pronounced the sentence of death: his wife (I say) thus
spoke unto him as Aelian reports, non est vita hominum talorum ludus, etc. the
life of man is not as a Game at Tables, where a woodden-man is taken away by a
blot, and thrown aside, and after taken again into the play, and there is no
hurt done; but the life of a living man, once lost is irrecoverable.

When Vedius Pollio a Roman, at a Supper provided for Augustus the Emperor,
would have drowned his servant, because he had broken a cup of Crystal, the
Emperor (though an Heathen) withheld him, and controuled him in these words
(as Plutarch reports) saying, Homo cujuscunque conditionis quatenus homo, etc.
a man of what condition so ever he be, if for no other cause, yet because he is
a man, is more to be valued than all the Crystal cups in the world. And
doubtless he deserves not the name of a man, who knows not how to value a man.

But how is mankind in these last ages of the world become degenerate, and
wild from that which Nature first shaped it unto. For man was made in the
beginning to man, as Moses was made to Aron, Ex. 4. 16. in some sense a God,
for succor and comfort: but how contrary to this rule do most men walk; so
that we may justly complain with that noble and virtuous Frenchman Philep
Morney, saying, what is more rare amongst men than to find a man, that is, (as
he interprets himself) amongst men, how many beasts are there for want of the
use of reason, and for not using reason well, how many Devils. Lions, (says
Plini^) fight not against Lions, Serpents bite not Serpents, but the most
mischief man sustains comes from man.

Thou art deceived (says Seneca) if thou give credit unto the looks of those
that meet thee, who have the faces of men, but the qualities of wild beasts.
Some like the Crocodiles of Nilus that can flatter and betray, weep and murder,
cry and kill. Oh how has mankind in these latter ages justified the madness
of the most savage and untractable beasts, and steeled their affections with
more cruelty, than ever Lions, or Serpents could learn in the wilderness.

But certainly that crying clamouring sin of blood, or murder, unless it be
washed away with a flood of tears, issuing from a bleeding, and a broken heart,
and died into another color by the blood of Christ, will in conclusion bring
woe and misery enough upon them that shed it. For there was never any drop of
innocent blood spilt upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to this
present hour, or that shall be shed so long as there are men, and malice, and
mischief in the world, but it swells as big as the Ocean Sea in the eyes of
God, and cannot be washed away by all the waters therein. And further, neither
the heat of the Sun, nor the dust of the ground shall ever be able to dry, and
drink it up till it be either avenged* or pardoned; unless the earth and
heavens, and all that are therein can be bribed to keep silence, and to take no
notice thereof.

Without all doubt, when God shall make inquisition for blood, he will
remember: for he that bottles up the tears of his poor people, cannot forget
their blood. Whence it comes to pass by the righteous judgment of Almighty
God, that they, who delight in blood, have usually enough of it before they
die, or if blood do not touch blood for the present, it will deny a man (...)
peace after the fact committed. Had Zim^^ peace; who slew his Master? 2 King. 9
31. no he had no peace, no more have any guilty of that sin, if their
consciences be not for the present ^oof'^ over: if the mouth of them be not for
the present bung'd up. But as it was in that first plague of Egypt, wherein
Pharaoh and the Egyptians were smitten, all their waters in their Rivers,
Ponds, and Pools, as in their Vessels of wood and stone were changed into
blood: So in the mind and conscience of a murderer, there usually remains a
plague of blood; His eyes shall behold no other color but Sanguine, as if the
air were died into it; The visions of his head in the night shall cast a boul
of blood in his face, all the cogitations and thoughts of his heart shall
overflow with the remembrance of that blood he has spilt. The consideration of
which, (methinks) should be enough to trouble and affright men that lie under
the guilt of this sin, if they fear either guilt, or conscience, which will
first, or last fly in their faces.

Plutarch writing de sera numinis vindicta of the late but sure revenges
executed upon men by divine justice, has this story of the Delphians, who made
no scruple to murder Aesop amongst them, but after this when they were most
grievously plagued by variety of heavy judgments, they, who had imbrued their
hands in his blood, walked up and down in all the public assemblies of Greece,
and caused this to be proclaimed by noise of Criars, that whosoever would,
should be avenged on them for Aesops death. They believing themselves, the
procurers of those plagues which were then upon them. Deus patiens redditor,
God is a patient rewarder, whose revenges are slow, but sure. Fortis* ^st Deus,
Deus retributionum. Jet. 51. 56. the Lord God of recompenses shall surely
requite, who is many times long before he strike, but, tarditatem supplicii
gravitate compensat; the severity of his justice shall at last make a full
amends for the slownesse thereof.

It Is sad to consider that Heathens (as before was observed) should have so
much tenderness in their Nature, and any bearing the names of Christians so
much cruelty: that Heathens should make so much scruple in taking away the
lives of base inferior Creatures, of those which are not only useless but
offensive, and men called Christians so forward by ways of violence to cut off
the lives of men, never* enquiring into the justice of their quarrel, but the
rate of their pay, and (as if their own lives, and the blood of others were not
worth the valuing) will adventure to kill, or be killed for a days wages. Thus
making havoc of men as fearfully made, as dearly redeemed, as tenderly
cherished, and brought up as themselves yet occidendi causa occidunt, they
kill, because they take pleasure in killing, and are no more troubled at the
death of a man, than if a Dog had fallen before them.

It Is true that Lions will tear, and Dogs will bark and bite, and Serpents will
sting, because it is in their nature so to do; yet men, Christians must do
otherwise; and not make the slaughters of men, of multitudes of people
professing Christ, delightful arguments of their ordinary discourse, or Table
talk, as if it were a relation that had pleasure in it, as if there were no
difference 'twixt the cutting down of men, and the mowing of Straw and Stubble.

I confess that when men have an immediate commission from God, to execute
vengeance on those he would have destroyed, they may do execution with
boldness, without pity, or regret: for it is as great a fault to spare when
God bids destroy (for he wrongs the innocent, who spares the gu^lty) for which
very thing Saul pays dear, 1 Samuel 15.) as to destroy when God bids spare. The
Israelites had such a Commission often granted, and renewed, for the rooting
out of those Nations, which God would have grubb'd up root and branch, and then
they were to destroy without pity. But afterward that people, because they did
so much abuse their prosperity, and success, and after both, their peace, they
perish themselves by the Sword of War. Jerusalem had many-many warnings; but
would not take them, before the woe took hold of it. And therefore after all
those monitions, Titus the Son of Vespatian the Emperor was made instrumental
to fulfill those many Prophesies, which threatened Jerusalems (...) overthrow.
But that Commander, and Conqueror, though a stranger^ an adversary, and a
professed enemy to the Jews, and sent to destroy them, when he saw (as Josephus
reports) the spoil and slaughter which fell upon that woeful, and most
miserable City, he calls his Gods to witness that he was exceedingly troubled
at it. He that is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished, Prove. 17. 5. And if
an Heathen, a foreign enemy sent to destroy, could take no pleasure in
executing of punishment, though upon enemies, but the contrary: men which enjoy
the light, should be by much more troubled, in the beholding of slaughters,
which happen among themselves, or brethren. And therefore Tully writing to
Atticus speaks exceeding wisely in telling him thus, extremum est malorum
omnium bells civilis victoria. His reason, because men having done much
mischief already in those unnatural engagements, are flesh't and heartened to
go on, and to do more mischief still. Hence it was that the very Heathens were
not wont to make any triumphs for victories gained in their Civil Wars, as
Lucan speaks. Bella geri placuit nullos habitura Triumphos.


And there is very much to this purpose in that sad, but very remarkable story
of the Israelites and Benjamites, as we may observe in the of Judges, Chapters
20. and ^1. Some Benjamites there at Gebiah had committed an abominable
wickedness, the rest of that Tribe, instead of punishing, did patronize it,
and chose rather to die in the resisting of justice than live, and prosper in
the furthering thereof.

It is one of the mad principles of wickedness, that when men have once
resolved to do a thing, be it never so bad, and to say they will do it, it is
very great weakness to relent, therefore they will choose to suffer, to die
rather then yield, or go back from their resolutions, thinking that causes,
whatsoever they be when they are once undertaken, must be upheld, although with
blood. And from this false ground, the Benjamits there put themselvesin Arms,
and will be Champions to defend the leud^^ss^ of their brethren, and make
themselves worse by the ab^tting of a monstrous sin, than the others were by
the commission thereof. Because the last was done upon resolution, and so
probably was not the other. Now that no man may conclude a cause therefore
good, because the success is so, the Tribes of Israel that went against the
Benjamits had by far the better of the cause: But the Benjamits for the present
the better in their success, for the wickedness of Benjamin sped better for a
time, than the honesty of Israel. Twice was the better part foiled by the less
and worse, the good cause was sent back with shame: The evil returned with
victory and Triumph. But wickedness could never brag of any long prosperity.
The triumphing of the wicked is short. And wickedness cannot complain of the
lack of payment, for still God is even with it at the last, as we may observe
in the story of those Benjamits, who in conclusion were made to pay extremely
dear for their sin. In whose example we may take notice, that the retaliations
of the Lord are sure and just. But after all this, when the rest of the Tribes
of Israel (being so highly provoked) had slain such a very great number of the
Benjamites, almost to the utter ruin of their Tribe, for acting and abetting
such a monstrous wickedness, observe how the rest of Israel behaved themselves
toward their Brethren, they did not rejoice, and make Triumphs for that their
victory* but they weep over their dead bodies, Judge. 21. 2. and study how that
breach a mong the Benjamites (which their sin and provocation had enforced the
rest of Israel to make) might be made up again.

The Prophet Oded gave good counsel (in a case which was something parallel to
this) and it was well followed, 2 Chr. 28. for when they of Samaria had taken a
very great number of their brethren of Judah and Jerusalem Captives* two
hundred thousand, and much spoil, and were carrying it, and them to Samaria;
the Prophet (I say) gave this counsel, that they should not strip, and starve,
but put clothing on their loins, and shoes on their feet, and meat, and drink
in their bellies, and send them home again; and so they did.

There are very many who walk quite contrary to these rules, and dare do as
those wicked ones (mentioned in the second Chapter of the book of wisdom)
saying, let us oppress and let our strength be the rule of Justice, as if
there were no power, either in Earth, or Heaven to contradict them. But however
let others, who observe the courses of Gods Providence, and withal see the
oppression of the poor, and the violent perverting of judgment and justice in
a Province, not marvel at the matter: for he that is higher than the highest
regards, and there be higher than they.

In that Parable, Luke 16. Dogs are mentioned, and why so? that their tongues
might condemn the merciless bowels of their Master, who showed pity in their
kind. When their Master had no Compassion on the poor Lazar, he not
considering that there is a mercy, a pity, and a care due unto the most
despicable piece of humanity. Frustra misericordiam petit, qui misericordiam
non facit; in vain shall they one day hope for mercy and pity that will not now
exercise it.

Undoubtedly there is nothing becomes power and greatness better than bowels,
and inwards of pity and mercy. These make the faces of men in power to shine,
and themselves to resemble God, who is most properly called optimum, maximum,
first by the name of his goodness, and then by the name of his greatness,
first by the name of his mercy, and then by the name of his might.

But the ignorance of those Indians (before spoken off) makes them more
pitiful than they need to be: and if they had knowledge to make doubt of) and
to scruple other things as they should, I might have spared my next Section,
which will acquaint my Reader by telling him further.

SECT. XXI.
Of other strange and groundless, and very gross opinions, proceeding from
the blackness, and darkness of ignorance in that people.

ALl error in the World proceeds either from ignorance (commonly joined with
pride) or else from wilfulness. This is most true as in natural, and moral, so
in spiritual things. For as knowledge softens and sweetens men's manners: so it
enricheth their minds: which knowledge is certainly a most divine, a very
excellent thing, otherwise our first Parents would never have been so ambitious
of it. This makes a man here to live twice, or to enjoy here a double life in
respect of him that wants it. But for this knowledge it certainly must be
esteemed better, or worse, by how much the object of this knowledge is worse,
or better. Now the best object of this knowledge is a right understanding, and
knowledge of the true God, which that people wants.

For there is scientia contristans (as Bernard speaks) a sad, an unquiet, an
unpeaceable, and an unsatisfying knowledge, as to know that there is a God,
(for so this people do) and to be ignorant, (as this people, and ^^llions more
are) to serve him aright, and how to make him their God. As for men to know
that they are sinners, and not to know this unto amendment of life: as to know
that there is an Heaven and not to know how to attain it. As to know that there
is an Hell, and not to know how to avoid it. And more particularly for such as
profess Christ, to know that Jesus Christ died for sinners, and to be ignorant
how to apply a Plaster of his blood, and merits unto the hurts of their poor
wounded Souls and further, though knowledge be so excellent; for any, to seek
after the Tree of knowledge more than the Tree of life, is a most uncomfortable
search.

Now touching this people, they are altogether ignorant of God, as they ought
to know him, and they have no learning amongst them, but as much as enables
them to write and to read what they have written and they having no insight
into the reasons and causes of things (I mean the ^uder sort, both of the
Mahometans and Gentiles) when they observe things which are not very ordinary,
as when they see any Eclipses, but especially of the Moon (happily some of them
sacrificing to her, and calling her the Queen of Heaven, as those Idolaters
did, Jer. 44. 18.) they make a very great stir and noise, bemoaning her much,
which helps (as they conceive) to free, and bring her out of it. Juvenal
observing that custom, (which appears to be very ancient among the Heathens)
re^roves a very brawling clamorous Woman in his sixth Satyr thus: Una,
laboranti poterit succurrere Luna.


That she made noise enough to deliver the Moon out of an Eclipse.

Their ignorance in this, as in many many other things is much to be pitied: as
the knowledge and learning of many others, which (by their not improving of it)
is to them as the letters which Uriah sometimes carried against himself, it
condemns the bearer.

But though the Hindoos, or Heathens there have no learning, yet they want not
opinions, for their divided hearts are there distracted into four-score, and
four several Sects, each differing from others, very much in opinion about
their irreligion, which might fill a man, even full of wonder, that does not
consider, how that Satan, who is the author of division, is the seducer of them
all.

Those many Sects (as I conceive among them) consist of people there of several
trades, occupations, and conditions of life, which several sorts of people (as
before I observed) marry into their own tribes, and so unite and keep together
amongst themselves, that they had not much correspondency with any other
people. These without doubt have several ways of worship within themselves,
which makes them so separate from others, as that they will not eat with any,
but those of their own Tribes.

For Heathens, that have neither light nor guide to be thus divided, and to
live in darkness has not so much wonder in it, but for Christians, who have
been in the valley of visions thus to separate, ministers matter of wonder, or
pity, nay, of both. And for us of this Nation, if we still continue to multiply
opinions in Religion as we have begun* which God forbid) we shall enlarge the
proverb, that if a man have lost his Religion and cannot find it, either in
Poland, nor yet in Amsterdam, let him seek for it in England.

The illiterare Priests of all that people for the generality of them are
called Bramins, who derive themselves from Bramon, whom (they say) was one of
the first men that inhabited the World, and after the sin of that first World
brought the Flood: the race of that Bramon (whose very name they highly
reverence) was continued in Bremaw, who (as they say) outlived that deluge,
and is honored by them likewise as one of their great Prophets and Lawgivers.

Those Bramins (as I conceive) are they, which the ancient stories call
Brachmanes, but with this difference, that those Brachmanes were accounted
learned men, for the learning of those times wherein they lived: But those
Bramins are a very silly, sottish, and an ignorant sort of people, who are so
inconstant in their principles, as that they scarce know, what the particulars
are which they hold, and maintain as truths.

As anciently amongst the Jews, their Priesthond is hereditary, for all those
Bramins Sons are Priests, and they all take the daughters of Bramins to be
their wives. (Of which something before.)

They have little Churches they call Pagode, standing near, or under their
green Trees, built round; But as their ancient Brachmanes were said not to
endure, these on the contrary have Images in their Pagods made in monstrous
shapes, but for what end they have them, I know not.

Now, from the manner of those Heathens, which I believe has been for
many-many years retained in their Idolatrous worships. I conceive that the Jews
long ago borrowed that unwarrantable custom of worshipping God in Groves, or
under green Trees.

Both men and women before they go to their devotions (which are very
frequently performed) wash their bodies, and keep off all their clothes, but
the covering of modesty till they have done, led hereunto by a precept (as they
say) commanded them to be performed by their Lawgiver Bremaw, which requires
them daily to observe their times of devotion expressed by their washings, and
worshippings, and prayer to God; which must be all done with purity of hearts.

And it is the manner of this people before they take their food to wash their
bodies, then (which I much observed while we lived in Tents) they make a little
Circle upon the ground, which they seem to consecrate, after which they sit
down within that Compass, and eat what they have provided; and if any come
within that Circle before they have ended their meal, they presently quit the
place, and leave their food behind them.

That outward washing (as this people think) avails very much to their
cleansing from sin, not unlike the Pharisees, who were all for the outside of
Religion, and would not eat with unwashen hands, Marc. 7. 2. unless they
washed themselves up to the Elbows, (as Theophi^act observes) hence those
Hindoos ascribe a certain Divinity unto Rivers, but above all to that Famous
River Ganges, whither they flock daily in Troops, that there they may wash
themselves; and the nearer they can come to the head of that River, the more
virtue they believe is in the water. After they have thus washed, they throw
pieces of Gold, or Silver (according to their devotion and ability) into that
River, and so depart from it.

Thus Reader thou have somewhat of the carriages of this people in life. Now
after death some of them talk of Elyzian fields (such as the Poets dreamed of)
to which their Souls must pass over a Stix, or Acheron, and there take new
bodies. Others of them think that ere long the World will have an end, after
which they shall live here again on a new earth. Some other wild conceivings
of this people follow afterward.

Some Bramins have told me that they acknowledge one God, whom they describe
with a thousand eyes, with a thousand hands, and as many feet, that thereby
they may express his power, as being all eye to see, and all foot to follow,
and all hand to smite offenders. The consideration whereof makes that people
very exact in the performances of all moral duties, following close the light
of Nature in their dealings with men, most carefully observing that Royal Law,
in doing nothing to others, but what they would be well contented to suffer
from others.

Those Bramins talk of two books, which no^ long after the Creation, when the
World began to be peopled (they say) were delivered by Almighty God to Bramon
(before spoken of) one of which books (they say) containing very high and
secret, and Mysterious things was sealed up and might not be opened; the other
to be read, but only by the Bramins, or Priests. And this book, thus to be
read came after (as they further say) into the hands of Br(...) (of whom
likewise something before) and by him it was communicated unto Ram, and
Permissar, two other famed Prophets amongst them, which those Heathens do
likewise exceedingly magnify, as they do some others, whose names I have not.
Now that book which they call the Shester, or the book of their written word,
has been transcribed in all ages ever since by the Bramins, out of which they
deliver precepts unto the people.

They say that there are seven Orbi, above which is the seat of God and that
God knows not small and petty things, or if he do, regards them not.

There have been Philosophers of the like mind, who madly thought that
Almighty God had no regard of humane affairs. For which very thing Tully,
though an Heathen, does most highly condemn them.

The Peripateticks housed the Providence of God above the Moon, and thought
that it had no descent beneath the Circle thereof, to intend inferior things
and businesses.

The Atheists in the Psalm, who say that there is no God, infer from hence,
how can God see? what do the Epicures in Job say less; or Eliphaz speaking in
their names, Job 22. how can God know? can he judge through the dark clouds?
the clouds hide him that he cannot see, and Chap. 24. 14, 15. he brings in the
murderer and adulterer, acting their parts with much boldness, confidence, and
presumption, and upon this false ground that no eyes see them, for if they did
believe the contrary, then certainly they would not dare to do what they do,
which shows that there is a very Atheism in the hearts of most men, which
makes them not afraid to do that in the presence of an allseeing God, which for
fear, or shame they durst not do in the sight of a little Child.

Averroes, a Spanish Phisician (that he might seem to be mad with reason) by
reason goes about to exempt, and withdraw smaller things from the sight and
providence of God, as if it were most injurious to bring down the Majesty of
God so low, thinking that the knowledge and understanding of God would become
vile, if it were abased by taking notice of mean and inferior objects.

A very strange opinion, as if a looking-glass were deformed, because it
represents deformities: Or the Beams of the Sun defiled, because they fall upon
dunghils and other filthy places, or the Providence of God vilified, who though
he has his dwelling so high, yet he abaseth himself to behold the things in
heaven and in earth, Psalm. 113. 6.

As he spoke the word in the beginning, so all things were made, Genesis 1. thus
ever since he sustaineth, and bears up all things by the power of that word,
Heb. 1. His Creation was the Mother to bring things forth; his Providence the
Nurse to bring them up. His Creation a short Providence, his Providence a
perpetual Creation; The first setting up the frame of the house, the second
looking to the standing* and reparations thereof.

And therefore I will bring in Tully again to gainsay, and condemn those
forenamed mad opinions, who (in his first book de natura deorum) tells us, that
the Providence of God reaches, usque ad Apium, For(...)que perfectionem, to
the husbanding of Bees and Pis(...)ir^s. And in his eight book on the same
subject, (where speaking against the Epioures and Atheists of that age) he
says, curiosus, and plenus negotii Deus* that God is a curious God, exquisite
in all things, and full of business, So far he an Heathen could see, and so
much say.

But a Christian that knows more, can speak further, that God is not a
careless, an improvident God, or a God to halves and in part, above and not
beneath the Moon, as the Syrians dreamed, upon the mountains, and not in the
valleys; but he is a God in lesser, as well as in greater matters: Who beholds
at one view all places, and all persons, and all things. And as our times are
in Gods hands: so he takes notice of every thing done by us in every minute and
moment of our time; He knowing all things not as they appear, but are, simplici
notitia, (as the Schools speak) with a sure, certain exact knowledge. Thus he
takes notice of every sin that is committed, and of every circumstance in
sinning. He saw the ^ins of the whole World in the book of his eternity, long
before the foundations of the World were laid. He sees them in every man's
breast before his hands commit them. I knew thee (says God) before thou came
forth of the Womb; Jer. 1. 5. And God tells Israel, that he knew what they
meant to do long before they came out of the land of Egypt: the consideration
whereof may curb, and confound all those that say God shall not see.

This Providence of God did reach to the handful of Meal, and the cruise of
Oil in the poor Widows house, 2 King. 4. And so it reaches to the Calving of
Hindes; to the feeding of young Lions and Ravens; to the falling of Sparrows on
the ground; to the numbering of our hairs, as to every thing beside.

But to return again to that people, the Hindoos I spoke of, and these
circumscribe God to place, and further conceit that he may be seen, but as in a
m^st afar off, but not near.

They further believe that there are Devils, but so fettered and bound in
chains, as that they cannot hurt them.

I observed before the tenderness and scr^ple, which is in very many of that
people in taking the lives of any inferior, and mee^ly sensible, I and of
hurtful Creatures too. And those which are most tender hearted in this case
are called Banians, who are by far more numerous than any other of those Indian
Sects, and these hold Pythagoras his Metempsycosis, as a prime Article of their
Faith, and from hence it is that they cannot abide to kill any living
Creatures, and from this ground, that Philosopher disswades from eating of
flesh, by many arguments laid down in the fifteenth book of Ovids Metamorphosis.

Heu! quantum scelus est in viscere viscera condi,
Congestoque avidum pinguescere corp^re corpus:
Alt^riusque animantem animantis viver^ Letho!
Ah sinful! who in Bowels Bowels hide,
And flesh, by greedy eating flesh do breed:
That Creatures life, by Creatures death may feed!
And after this, that Philosopher places the Souls immortality in its
Transmigration, from one Creature to another, saying:

Morte car^nt animae: semperque priore relict^
Sede, ^ovis domibus vivunt habitantque receptae,
Ipse ego (nam memeni) Trojani tempore belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram. --
Souls are immortal, and when ere they leave
Their former houses, new ones them receive.
In The Trojan War, (I well remember) I
Was Panthos Son Euphorbus. --
And a little after he thus speaks:

Omnia mutantur, nihil interit, errat, and illinc
Huc venit, hinc illuc, and ^u^slibe^ occupat artus
Spiritus eque feris humana in corpora transit,
Inque fer as noster, nec tempore deperit ^llo.
Utque novis facilis signatur cera figuris,
Nec manet ut fuerat, nec formas servat easdem.
Sed tamen ipsa eadem ^st* animam sic semper ^andem
Esse, sed in varias doceo migrare figuras.
Ergo ne pietas sit victa cupidine ventris,
P^rcite (vaticinor) cognatas c^de na^anda
Exturbare animas, ne sanguine sanguis alatur.
Things are not lost, but changed, the Spirit strayes
Hence thither, hither thence nor lodged stays
In any limbs: to humane bodies flies
From beasts, from these to these, nor ever dies.
And as new prints in easy wax we make,
Which varying still several impressions take,
Yet is it self the same: so the same Soul
(I teach) does into several fashions roll.
Then let not piety by lust subdued,
Suffer your hands in Parricide imbrued
Dislodge the souls, or nourish blood with blood.
Thus much from Ovid of that Pythagorian fancy, which that untaught people come
up very near unto, thinking that all the Souls, both of men and women after
they leave their bodies make their repose in other Creatures, and those Souls
(as they imagine) are best lodged that go into Kine, which (in their opinion)
are the best of all sensible Creatures; and therefore (as before) they give
yearly large sums of money unto the Mogol to redeem them from slaughter. And
this people further conceit, that the Souls of the wicked go in^o vile
Creatures, as the Souls of Gluttons and Drunkards into Swin^. So the Souls of
the voluptuous and incontinent into Monkies and Apes. Thus the Souls of the
furious revengefull cruel people into Lions, Wolves, Tygres, as into other
beasts of prey. So the Souls of the envious into Serpents, and so into other
Creatures according to peoples qualities and dispositions, while they lived
successively from one to another of the same kind, ad infinitum for ever and
ever, by consequence they believing the immortality of the world. And upon that
same mad and groundless fancy, probably they further believe, that the Souls
of froward, peevish, and teachy women go into Waspes; and that there is never a
silly Fly, but (if they may be credited) carries about it some Souls (happily
they think of light women) and will not be persuaded out of their wild
conceivings, so incorrigib ^are their sottish errors.

The day of rest which those Hindoos observe as a Sabbath is Thursday, as the
Mahometans Friday. Many Festivals they have which they keep solemnly, and
Pilgrimages, the most famous briefly spoken of before in those short
descriptions of Nagraiot, and Syba observed in my first section.

Now there are a race of other Heathens (I named before) living amongst those
Hindoos, which in many things differ very much from them, they are called
Persees, who (as they say) originally came out of Persia, about that time
Mahomet and his followers gave Laws to the Persians, and imposed a new Religion
on them, which these Persees not enduring left their Country, and came and
settled themselves in East India, in the Province of Guzarat, where the most
part of them still continue (though there are some of them likewise in other
parts of India) but where ever they live they confine themselves strictly to
their own Tribe, or Sect.

For their Habits, they are clad like the other people of that Empire, but they
shave not their hair close as the other do, but suffer their bea^^s to grow
long.

Their profession is for the generality all kinds of husbandry, employing
themselves very much in sowing and setting of Herbs; in planting and dressing
of Vines, and Palmeeto, or Toddy, Trees, as in planting and husbanding all
other Trees bearing fruit, and indeed they are a very industrious people, and
so are very many of t(...) Hindoos (as before observed) and they do all very
well in doing so, and in this a due, and deserved commendation belongs unto
them. For,

There is no condition whatsoever can privilege a foulded arm. Our first
Parents before their fall were put into the Garden of Eden to dress it.
Certainly if idleness had been better than labor, they had never been
commanded to do work but they must labor in their estate of innocence, because
they were happy, and much more we in our sinful lost estate that we may be so.
It was a Law given before the Law, that man should eat bread by the sweat of
his brows, and it is a Gospel-precept too that he, who will not work, should
not eat. The sluggard desires and has nothing (says Solomon) because he does
nothing but desire, and therefore his desires do him no good, because his hands
refuse to labor. That body therefore well deserves to pine and starve without
pity, when two able hands cannot feed one mouth.

B^t further for those Persees they use their liberty in meats and drinks, to
take of them what they please, but because they would not give offense, either
to the Mahometans, or Banians, or to other Hindoos amongst whom they live, they
abstain from eating Beef, or Swines flesh.

It is their usual manner to eat alone, as for every one of them to drink in
his own Cup, and this is a means (as they think) to keep themselves more pure,
for if they should eat with others, they are afraid that they might participate
of some uncleanness by them.

Alas poor Creatures that do not at all understand themselves, and their most
miserable condition, for to them that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing
pure.

Yet I observed before, the Mahometans and Gentiles there are very strict in
this particular; so that they will not eat with any mixed company, and many of
the Gentiles not eat with one another. And this has been an ancient custom
among Heathens. It is said, Genesis 43. 32. that the Egyptians might not eat bread
with the Hebrews, for that was an abomination to the Egyptians, for this very
reason it was, that the women of Samaria spoke thus unto our blessed Savior,
John 4. 9. how is it that thou being a Jew ask water of me, which am a woman
of Samaria, for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritanes. But without
doubt that forbearance, or shy-ness to eat, one man with another can fetch no
ground, either from religion, or reason, if it could, Peter would never have
eaten with the Gentiles, Gal. 12. Nor our blessed Savior with Publicans and
sinners, at which the Scribes and Pharisees take very much exception, Marc. 2.
16. No man as a man is to be accounted common, or unclean, Act. 10. 28. and a
man shall do much better, who eats and drinks with a sober Heathen, than to
keep company with a debaucht drunken sensual man, though he call himself a
Christian, eating and drinking with him such things as please him, by being his
companion in his Riot and excess.

For those Persees, further they believe that there is but one God, who made
all things, and has a Sovereign power over all. They talk much of Lucifer, and
of other evil Spirits, but they say, that those and all Devils besides are kept
so under, and in awe by two good Angels, that have power over them, as that
they cannot hurt or do the least mischief, without their leave, and license.

As many of the Hindoos ascribe to much unto water, (as before) so these to
fire and the reason of it is this, because they have had this tradition from
many ages and generations past, that their great Lawgiver, whom they call
Zertoost was rapt up into Heaven, and there had fire delivered unto him, which
he brought down thence, and he ever after commanded his followers to worship it
and so they do, and further they love any thing that resembles fire, as the Sun
and Moon, and therefore when they pray in the day time they look toward the
sun, and so toward the Moon in their night-devotions, and from that so
over-high esteem they have of fire, they keep fires continually burning in
their Eggarees, or Temples in Lamps fed with Oil, which are always attended by
their Priests, and they talk of many of these which have burned without
extinguishment from many foregoing generations.

And by the way, that wild and mad fancy of theirs, that their Zertoost did
fetch fire from Heaven is as certainly true, as that ancient fiction and fable
of Prometheus, that he did steal fire thence.

But to proceed, their Priests they call Daroos, or Harboods above both which
they have a Chief, or High Priest they call the Destoor, who not often appears
openly, but when he does, he meets with much reverence and respect given unto
him by the common people, and so do those other Churchmen which are his
inferiors: unto all which they allow free maintenance for their more
comfortable subsistence.

Those Churchmen by their Law are commanded to dwell near, and to abide much
in their Eggar^^s, or Temples to give advice, or direction unto any that shall
repair unto them for it. They observe diverse Feasts, and immediately after,
each of them a Fast follows.

That living sensible Creature, which they first behold every morning (that is
good and serviceable) is to them (as they say) a remembrancer all the day
after, to draw up their thoughts in thanksgiving unto Almighty God; who has
made such good Creatures for man's use and service.

There are good things (as I have been informed) in that book of their Religion
delivered them in precepts, which their Lawgiver has left unto them for the
direction of their lives.

As first, To have shame and fear ever present with them, which will restrain,
and keep them from the committing of many evils.

Secondly, when they undertake any thing, seriously to consider whither it be
good, or bad, commanded, or forbidden them.

Thirdly, To keep-their hearts and eyes from coveting any thing that is
another, and their hands from hurting any.

Fourthly, To have a care always to speak the truth.

Fifthly, To be known only in their own businesses, and not to enquire into,
and to busy themselves in other men's matters.

All which are good moral precepts, but they have another which mars and spoils
all the rest, and that is upon the greatest penalties they can be threatened
withal.

Sixthly* Not to entertain, or believe any other Law besides that which was
delivered unto them by their Lawgiver.

This people take but one wife, which has liberty, as the wives of the
Hindoos, to go abroad. They never resolve to take Wives, or Husbands without
the advice of their Churchmen, and when they come to be married, they stand
some distance one from the other, there being two Churchmen present on in the
behalf of the Man, and in behalf of the Woman the other. The first of these
asks the Woman whither, or no she will have that man to be her Husband, and the
other asks the Man whither, or no, he will have that Woman to be his Wife, and
they both consenting, the Priests bring them together and join their hands,
praying that they may live in unity and love together, and then both those
Churchmen scatter Rice upon the married couple, entreating God to make them
fruitful in sending them many Sons and Daughters, that they may multiply as
much as that seed does in the ears that bear it. And so the Ceremony being thus
performed, which is about the time of midnight, the whole company depart,
leaving the married couple together.

At the birth of every Child, they immediately send for the Daroo, or
Churchman, who comes to the parties house, and there being certainly enform'd
of the exact time of the childbirth, first undertakes to calculate its
Nativity* and to speak something of it by way of prediction, after which he
confers with the Parents about a name whereby it shall be called, which when
they have agreed upon, the Mother, in the presence of the company there
assembled, gives it that name.

And now lastly, touching the Burials of that people, they incircle pieces of
ground with a round Wall, that is of a good height, set apart for that purpose.
These burying places stand remote from houses and road ways the ground within
them is made smooth, or else paved on the bottom, in the midst whereof they
have a round pit, made deep like a draw* well: The bodies of their dead, both
men, women, and children are carried to those places, upon a Beer made of
slight round Iron bars (for they will not have dead bodies touch any wood,
least they should defile it, because that is fuel for their adored fire) and
thus brought thither are laid round about near the inside of that Wall upon the
ground, or pavements. Covered with a thin white Cloth; the Daroo, or Harboode
accompanies the dead body near unto the door which enters that place (always
kept fast shut, but when it is opened upon this occasion to let in their dead)
and come thither, speaks these words in the audience of all those which are
thither assembled, That whereas the party deceased consisted of all the four
Elements, he desires that every one of them may now take his part. And this is
the form they use, when they there thus dispose of the bodies of their dead.
Which being there so left in that open place, are presently laid bare by the
Fouls of the Air, who in short time after pick all their flesh clear from their
bones, by consequence their fleshly part having no other Sepulchers, Graves, or
Tombs, but the Craws and Gorges of those ravenous Fouls. And when upon this
occasion they enter that round stage of Mortality, the bare Skelitons they
there find, which have parted with all their flesh, are by those bearers of
the dead cast into that deep round pit, where they mix promiscuously together,
and so make room for other dead bodies.

But now that my Reader may not ^onceive that I have endeavored in some of
these strange relations to write a new Romance, I would have him to think, that
for my part I do believe that there is very much of truth in the particulars I
have inserted, if there be any credit to be given to some men of much integrity
that lived amongst them, who made it a great part of their business to be
satisfied in many of the particulars here spoken of, or if I might trust mine
own eyes and ears that saw and heard much of it, which could have enabled me to
have written a great deal more concerning the Rites, Ceremonies, Customs,
wild conceivings; and mad Idolatries of this people, as of the Hindoos spoken
of before, if I durst have thrown away more time upon them; all which would
have made my judiciour Reader thus to have concluded with me, that those
Mahometans and Heathens ground very many of their opinions upon custom,
tradition and fancy not reason, much less upon safe rules that might lead
them into and after keep them in the way of truth. They esteeming it a very
great boldness, a very high presumption to be wiser in their Religion th^n
their forefathers were (as many of the more ignorant sort of Papists will often
say, though it be directly against themselves) and therefore are desirous to
do, and to believe as their Ancestors have before them; to fare as they have
fared, and as they have sped to speed, though they perish everlastingly with
them, never considering of, or ruminating on those things which they hold and
maintain for truths, being like unto unclean Beasts, which chew not the Cudde.

So much of that people in general: I come now more particularly to speak.

SECT. XXII.
Of their King the great Mogol, his descent, etc.

NOw those Mahometans and Gentiles I have named, live under the subjection of
the great Mogol, which Name, or rather Title (if my information abuse me not)
signifies circumcised, as himself, and the Mahometans are; and therefore for
his most general title he is called the great Mogol, as the chief of the
circumcised, or the chief of the circumcision.

He is lineally descended from that most famous conqueror, called in our
stories Tamberlane, concerning whose birth and original Histories much differ,
and therefore I cannot determine it; but in this, all that write of him agree,
that he having got together very many huge multitudes of men, made very great
conquests in the South-East parts of the World, not only on Bajazet the
Emperor of the Turks, but also in East India, and elsewhere; for what cannot
force by multitudes do? This Tamberlane in their stories is called Amir Timur,
or the great Prince and Emperor Timur, who (as they say) toward his end,
either by an hurt received in his thigh, or else by an unhappy fall from his
Horse, which made him halt to his grave, was ever after that called Timur lang,
or Timur the lame, from whence he is corruptly in our stories, named amberlane,
the late Mogol, at whose Court we lived, was the ninth in a direct line, from
that his great Ancestor.

And now that my Reader may see the great Mogol in a Portrature (which was
taken from a Picture of his drawn to the life) I have caused that to be here
inserted, which presents him in his daily unvaried Habit, as he is bedeckt,
and adorned with Jewels, he continually wears; for the fashion of the Habit,
in which he is here presented, it is for the fashion the Habit of that whole
vast Empire; so that he who strictly views this; may see the dress of the men
throughout that whole great Monarchy.

After this I have set up the Royal standard of the great Mogol, which is a
Couchant Lion shadowing part of the body of the Sun.

And after that I have caused his Imperial Signet, or great Seal to be laid
down before my Readers eyes, wherein nine rounds, or Circles, are the Names and
Titles of Tamberlane, and his lineal successors in Persian words, which I shall
make presently to speak English, and (as I conceive) no more in English, than
what is fully expressed in those original words.

This Seal (as it is here made in Persian words) the great Mogol, either in a
large, or The Royal Signet of ye great MOGOL.
lesser figure causes to be put unto all Firmaunes, or Letters Patents, the
present Kings Title put in the middle, and larger Circle that is surrounded
with the rest, the impression whereof is not made in any kind of Wax, but Ink,
the Seal put in the middle of the Paper and the writing about it, which Paper
there is made very large, and smooth, and good, and in diverse colors, beside
white, and all to write on. And the words on the Mogols Seal being imboss't,
are put upon both sides of his Silver and Gold Coin, (for there is no image
upon any of it.) And the like little Signets, or Seals are used by the great
men of that Country, and so by others of inferior rank, having their Names at
length engraven on them with which they make impressions, or subscriptions by
Ink put on them, to all their acts and deeds, which round Circle is their hand
and Seal to.

For Timar-lang, or Tamberlane, he was famous about the year of Christ 1398. in
the last year of the Reign of Richard the Second, King of England. And he the
first of the Race of those great Monarchs has a Title, which speaks thus:

1. Amir, Timur, Saheb Ceran, that is the great Conqueror, or Emperor, Timur,
or Tamberlane, Lord possessor of the Corners, or of the four Corners of the
World.

2. The second his Son was called Mirath-Sha, the King and inheritor of
Conquests, (...) the inheritor of his Fathers Conquests.

3. The third his Son was called Mirzae, Sultan, Mahomeds, the Prince and
Commander for Mahomet; or the Desender of the Mohammedan Religion, for this King
(as it should seem) was the first Indostan Emperor that professed Mahometisme,
which Tamberlane his Grandfather was a great enemy too, and therefore ever
strongly opposed it. But this third Monarch of that line, and all his
successors since have been Mahometans.

4. The fourth his son was called Sultan Abusaid, the Prince and Father, or
fountain of Beneficence.

5. The fifth his son was called Mirzee Amir Sheick, the Imperial Princely Lord.

6. The sixth his son was called Baba Padsha, the King the Father, or the King,
the Father of his Country.

7. The seventh his son was called Hamasaon Podsha, the King Invincible.

8. The eight his son was called Achabar Padsha, the great King, or Emperor
that is most mighty* or the King most mighty.

9. The ninth his son was called Almozaphar, Noor, Dein, Gehangeir, Padsha,
Gaze, the most warlike and most victorious King, the Light of Religion, and the
Conqueror of the World.

Here are very high titles taken by Tamberlane and his successors, and the
lower we go, the greater still they are, but the last of them swells biggest of
all, calling himself amongst other phansies the Conqueror of the world, and so
he conceits himself to be; As they write of Thrasyllus the Athenian, who
believed that all the ships on the Sea were his own, and therefore he would
call them, my ships, when ever he saw them floating on the waters; and thus the
great Magol imagines all the Kings, Nations, and people of the world to be his
Slaves and Vassals.

And therefore when the Grand Signiour, or great Turks sent an Ambassador to
the great Mogol, who came unto him attended with a great train and retinue, and
after when he was ready to take his leave, desired of the Mogol to know what he
should say to his Master when he was returned; tell thy Master said the Mogol
that he is my slave, for my Ancestor Conquered him.

The Mogol feeds and feasts himself with this conceit, that he is Conqueror of
the world, and therefore (I conceive that he was troubled upon a time, when my
Lord-Ambassador, having business with him, and upon those terms; there is no
coming unto that King empty handed without some present, or other (of which
more afterward) and having at that time nothing left, which he thought fit to
give him, presented him with Mercators great book of Cosmography (which the
Ambassador had brought thither for his own use) telling the Mogol that that
book described the four parts of the world, and all several Countries in them
contained, the Mogol at the first seemed to be much taken with it, desiring
presently to see his own Territories, which were immediately shown unto him,
he asked where were those Countries about them, he was told Tartaria, and
Persia, as the names of the rest which confine with him, and then causing the
book to be turned all over, and finding no more to fall to his share, but what
he first ^aw, and he calling himself the Conqueror of the world, and having no
greater share in it, seemed to be a little troubled, yet civily told the
Ambassador that neither himself, nor any of his people did understand the
language in which that book was written, and because so, he further told him
that he would not rob him of such a Jewel, and therefore returned it unto him
again.

And the truth is, that the great Mogol might very well bring his action
against Mercator and others, who describe the world, but streighten him very
much in their Maps, not allowing him to be Lord and Commander of those
Provinces, which properly belong unto him.

But it is true likewise that he, who has the greatest share on the face of
the earth, if it be compared with the whole world, appears not great. As it was
said of the Lands of Alcibiades that compared with the Glob of the whole earth,
they did not appear bigger than a small tittle. The Mogols Territories are more
apparent, large, and visible, as any one may take notice, who strictly views
this affixed Map, which is a true representation of that great Empire in its
large dimensions. So that although the Mogol be not master of the whole World,
yet has he a great share in it, if we consider his very large Territories, and
his abundant riches, as will after more appear, whose wealth and strength makes
him so potent, as that he is able, whenever he pleases to make inroades
upon, and to do much mischief unto any of his Neighbors, but I leave that, and
come now to speak.

SECT. XXIII.
Of the Mogols policy in his government exercised by himself and substitutes,
etc.

ANd it is that indeed, which is the worst of ^ll governments, called by
Aristotle (...). Arbitrary, illimited, Tyrannical, such as a most severe Master
uses to Servants, not that which a good King administreth to Subjects.

Which makes it very uncomfortable for those that live as subjects there, under
the command of others, taller than themselves by their swords length, or so to
be fixed in any part of the World. -- Where no Laws resist
The sword, but that it acts what it lists.


As in that Empire where the King measures his power by his sword, or Lance
in making his will, his guide, and therefore any thing lawful that likes him;
which carriage of his might very well become that Emblem of ill^mited power,
which is a sword waved by a strong arm and hand, and the word si^ volo, sic
jubeo, or thus will I have it; and if any there be so far discontented as to
make any the least question at what he does, he has a far stronger argument
still in readiness, than all the force of Logic can make, and that is very
many thousands of men that are ^^ou^ and able Soldiers, whom he keeps
continually in arms, and pay, that can make any thing good, which he shall
please to command.

There are no Laws for Government kep^ in that Empire upon record (for ought I
could ever learn) to regulate Governors there in the administration of
Justice, but what are written in the breast of that King and his Substitutes,
and therefore they often take liberty to proceed how they please, in punishing
the Offender rather than the offense, men's persons more than their Crimes,
aegrotum potius, quam morbum.

Yet ever they pretend to proceed in their ways of judicature (which is the
right progress in judgment) secundum allegata and probata, by proofs and not
by presumptions.

The great Mogol will sit himself as Judge, in any matters of consequence that
happen nere unto him. And there are no Malefactors that lie more than one night
in prison, and many times not at all, for if the party offending be apprehended
early in the day, he is immediately brought before him that must be his Judge,
by whom he is presently either acquitted, or condemned; if he be sentenced to
be whipped, he has his payment, and that (usually with very much severity) in
the place (often,) where he received that sentence. If condemned to dye, he is
presently (which as I apprehend it is a very hard course, though used anciently
among the Jews) carried from his sentence to his execution, which is done
usally in the Bazar, or Marketplace. And this round and quick Justice keep,
the people there in such order, and awe, as that there are not many executions.

Murder and Theft they punish with death, and with what kind of death the
Judge pleases to impose, for some Malefactors are hanged, some beheaded, some
impaled, or put upon sharp stakes (a death which has much cruelty, and extreme
torture and torment in it,) some are torn in places by wild Beasts, some
killed by Elephants; and others stung to death by Snakes.

Those which are brought to suffer death by Elephants (some of which vast
Creatures are trained up to do execution on Malefactors) are thus dealt
withal. First if that overgrown Beast be commanded by his Rider to di^patch
that poor, trembling Offender presently, who lies prostrate before him, he will
with his broad round foot immediately press him to death, but if that wretched
Creature be condemned, it(...) mori, ut se mori sentiat, so to dye as that he
may feel tortures, and torments in dying (which are as so many several deaths.)
The Elephant will break his bones by degrees, (as men are broken upon the
wheel) as first his Legs, then his Thighs, after that, the bones in both his
Arms, this done, his wretched Spirit is left to breath its last out of the
midst of those broken bones.

But it is a very sad thing, and very much unbeseeming a man, as he is a man,
to seem to take pleasure in executing of punishment, as those appear to do, who
make it their business to study, and invent tortures to inflict on others.

Thus those Monsters of men did (in the primitive times of Christianity) devise
new torments (for the exercise of the Faith, and patience of Christians) which
in their relations are extreme hard and sad to read of, much more in their
suffering of them were they to be endured. Yet almighty God did then so support
his people in the midst of all those grievous extremities they were made to
suffer, that their Tormentors were more troubled to invent, then they were to
endure tortures, so that they overcame, while they were overcome, and were (not
more than men) but more tha^ Conquerors, over those, who seemed to conquer them.

I cannot deny but that the strength of pride may carry men very far, the
strength of del^sion much further, as we may observe from the examples of the
ancient Stoics, and since them from others, whose Frantic opinions have made
so prodigal of their limbs and lives, as that they would seem very little to
regard extremity of tortures and sufferings, yea death it self.

When one told Theodorus, (Seneca the Philosopher reports the stories) that he
would hang him up alive in the Air, he answered thus, minitare istud purpuratis
tuis, etc. threaten this to thy Carpet Knights, Theodoru^ cares not whither his
body rot in the Air, or in the Earth, and that when others were upon the Rack,
they would cry, o quam suave, etc. Oh what pleasure is there in racking. Now
what pity wrought in others, pride and delusion wrought in these.

The truth is, non p(...)a, sed ^ausa facit Martyr^m, it is not a man's
suffering, but the reason of it, which made a Martyr, and therefore (however
others bear things ou^) they, and they only to whom it is given not only to
believe, but also to suffer, can behold their sufferings so with a clear eye of
Faith, that though they be intolerable in themselves, and seem so to others,
yet are they made easy to them. Ignatius came to the stake and kissed it, at
which he was presently burnt. Others have inimbraced those flames which
immediately af^^r ^^^n'd them into ashes, whence Tyrants and persecutors have
often served, though much against their wills to build and enlarge the Church
of Christ. As the persecution of Stephen served to spread the Doctrine of
salvation, in the Countries thereabouts, and to raise up a number of Churches,
that happening to persecutors, which might happen to a man, who to put out a
quick fire of burning Coals should scatter them all over his Chamber, and so
set on fire his whole House. The Church of Christ has ever gained in
persecution what it has lost in prosperity. Therefore those Christians in the
primitive Church when they were tortured, would not except of deliverance, Heb.
11. 35. that is a^^^pt of it upon any sinful terms, and in the 138. of the
same Chapter, they received, or took possession of the promises which they had
only in hope a far off, and embraced them, as if they had had them in hand
(...), they hugged them, they kissed them as resting abundantly satisfied, with
the hope and expectation of them.

If in thi^ life only the people of God had hope, then were they of all m^n
most miserable, for they are here as some chief and tender plants of another
Country, who have much ado to live, and grow, whereas the wicked like weeds
th^ive without watering. The Devil is called the Prince of the World, and
therefore it would be very strange, if any of Gods people should find very
much content where Satan has so much to do. Here in this World optimi pissim^
agunt, the best usually fare worst and the righteous have most wrong. But it
will not always be thus, a time of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord, and then all tears shall be wiped from his peoples eyes, and all
sadness shall be removed from their Spirits. Nec Malleus Tyrannorum, nec secur
is p^rsecutionis, and (as one of the ancients sweetly comforts) when the Hammer
of Tyranny cannot touch, nor the Ax of persecution hurt them, for they shall be
out of the reach of all fears, troubles, annoyances which make their lives
here, sometimes for the present seem bitter unto them.

Without doubt the services of Gods people would be very ill rewarded, if they
should continue here in this life still. But God (who lends them to the world)
^owes them a far better turn than the whole earth can pay them, and therefore
when he sees good removes them hence, because it is for their preferment, in
the mean time though the miseries of Gods people be great, their days are
short. And although Almighty God do not say it vocally, yet secretly he speaks
to all his people, as sometimes he did to Moses; after he had done all the
words, which he appointed him to do here; he bids him go up to Mount Nebo, and
dye there, Deuteronomy. 32. 50. go up and dye; as if he had said, go up and eat. So
Joseph before him, said unto his brethren, I dye, Genesis 50. 24. as if he had
said, I eat, I drink, I sleep. It is neither news or strange for any dear
servant of God to think of dying: because he knows that he shall part with
nothing by death, but what is a burden to him, his sin: loose nothing by dying,
but what he would fain be rid of, his corruption.

Hence the ancient Fathers naming the death of the faithful their birth, and
the day of their Martyrdom the day of their Nativity, showed what great
satisfaction and content they had, in the thought and hope of the life to come.
In the mean time they beheld their sufferings whatsoever they were so with the
eye of Faith, (as before) that it made them easy to be endured, while they
looked not at things which were seen, or did not much regard them, but at the
things which were not seen: for the things they saw, or felt here, how bitter,
or sharp soever they were, were temporal, transient, would have an end, but the
things they saw not, but assuredly expected were eternal, where they should
find weight of glory for lightness of affliction, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. And
therefore said the same Apostle, Romans 8. 18. I reckon that the sufferings of
this present time are not worthy to be compared unto the glory which shall be
revealed. I reckon (...), it is a Metaphor, either taken from accountants that
put many particulars into one entire sum; or else from Logicians, who draw
certain, or infallable conclusions from foregoing premises, Thus, I reckon, or
I conclude when I compare profit and loss together, as what I shall certainly
gain, and what I may happily loose by the profession of the Gospel; when I have
put all crosses and encumbrances in the one Scale, and the recompense of the
reward in the other, it amounts all to this, that the eternal w^ight of the
Crown does exceedingly outweigh the momentary weight of the Cross.

Thus it is with all men, who in their greatest pressures can see further than
earth, as that first Martyr, professing the Gospel, Stephen did, (who died not
upon a bed of Down, but under a shower of stones) yet could out of that
terrible and thick storm look* into Heaven; and so do others, who can behold
whatsoever they feel with the eye of Faith, and this is like that Tree which
Moses cast into the bitter waters of Marah, and it made them sweet, Exodus 15.
But as for others I have named, and shall further name, to behold their
sufferings and torments, only with the eye of sense, it must needs make their
tortures (however they bear them out) out of measure to torment.

I have been told by some, who were eyewitnesses (whom I dare credit, and
therefore I dare relate it) of strange kinds of death executed by the command
of the King of Japan upon his subjects, where some are Crucified, or nailed to
a Cross: Others rather roasted, than burnt to death; Thus, there is a stake
set up, and a Circle of fire at a pretty distance, made round about it; the
condemned person being naked, is so fastened to that stake, as that he may move
round about it, and so does as long as he is able to stir, till his flesh
begins to blister; then he falls down, and there lies roaring till the fire,
made about him puts him to silen^e by taking away both his voice and life.

Now they say that one great reason, why they put men there unto such exquisite
torments, is, because they hold it a thing of the greatest dishonor there for
any man to dye by the hand of an Executioner: therefore they are usually
commanded, when they are sentenced to dye, to rip up, or cut open their own
bellies, and those who will not so do are tormented in dying. Hence most of
that people, when as they have received that hard command to prevent death, by
dying; call for their friends about them, eat, and seem to be merry with them,
and then in the close of the meal, and in their presence, commit this sad
slaughter upon themselves, as first those poor wretches make themselves naked
to the middle, he, or they, who are to dye, then the most wretched
self-murderer, who is to act that bloody part, strikes a sharp Knife into the
bottom of his belly, then rips himself up, and after gives himself one other
cut cross his belly, and when he has done both these, if after he can but wipe
his bloody knife upon a white paper, or Napkin that is laid by him, he is
believed to part with his life with a very great deal of honor, and
immediately (as he is made to believe) goes to Fakaman, whom they say is the
God of War. So much power the Devil has in those dark places of the World, to
make the people there do what he please. Oh it is a misery of all miseries here,
to be a drudge, a bondman, a slave to the Devil! as those, and so infinite
multitudes more professing Christ are, by obeying Satan in his most
unreasonable commands, and yet will not be made sensible of that, their basest
bondage.

But to return again to the place from whence I have made some excursion, when
I was in India there was one sentenced by the Mogol himself, for killing his
own father to dye thus; first he commanded that this Paricide should be bound
alive by his heels, fastened to a small iron Chain, which was tied to the hind
leg of a great Elephant, and then that this Elephant should drag him after him
one whole remove of that King, from one place to another, which was about ten
miles distant, that so all his flesh might be worn off his bones, and so it
was, when we saw him in the way following that King in his progress, for he
appeared then to us a skeliton, rather than a body.

There was another condemned to dye by the Mogol himself, (while we were at
Amadavar) for killing his own Mother, and at this the King was much troubled to
think of death; suitable for so horrid a crime, but upon a little pause, he
adjudged him to be stung to death by Snakes, which was accordingly done. I told
you before that there are some Mountebanks there, which keep great Snakes to
show tricks with them; one of those fellows was presently called for to bring
his Snakes to do that execution, who came to the place where that wretched
Creature was appoin^ed to dye, and found him there all naked (except a little
covering before) and trembling. Then suddenly the Mountebank (having first
angered and provoked the venomous Creatures) put one of them to his Thigh, which
presently twined it self about that part, till it came near his Groin, and
there bit him till blood followed, the other was fastened to the outside of his
other Thigh, twining about it, (for those Snakes thus kept are, long and
slender) and there bit him likewise, notwithstanding, the wretch kept upon his
feet nere a quarter of an hour, before which time the Snakes were taken from
him; But he complained exceedingly of a fire that with much torment had
possessed all his Limbs, and his whole body began to swell exceedingly, like
Nasidius, bit by a Lybian Serpent, called a Prester, of whom Mr. May in his
Translation of Lucan, the ninth Book thus writes:

His face and cheeks a sudden fire did roast;
His flesh and skin were stretched, his shape was lost.
His swelling body is distended far,
Past humane growth, and undistinguished are
His limbs, all parts the poison does confound,
And he lies hid in his own body drowned.
Now much after this manner did the stinging of those Snakes work upon that
wretch, and about half an hour after they were taken from him, the Soul of that
unnatural Monster left his growing Carcass, and so went to its place. And
certainly both those I last named so sentenced, and so executed, most justly
deserved to be handled with all severity, for taking away the lives of those
from whom they had received their own* Some of our family did behold the
execution done upon the later, who related all the passages of it, and for my
part I might have seen it to, but that I had rather go a great way not to see,
then one step to behold such a sight.

After the example of that King, his Governors deputed and set over Provinces
and Cities proceed in the course of Justice, to impose what punishment and
death they please upon all offenders, and malefactors.

That King never suffers any of his Vicegerents to tarry long in one place of
Government, but removes them usually (after they have exercised that power,
which was given unto them in one place, for one year) unto some other place of
Government, remote from the former, wherein they exercise their power, and this
that King does, that those, which be his Substitutes, may not in any place grow
Popular.

I told them before that this people are very neat, shaving themselves so
often, as that they feel the Rasor almost every day; but when that King sends
any of them unto any place of Government, or upon any other employment, they
cut not their hair at all, till they return again into his presence, as if they
desired not to appear beautiful, or to give themselves any content in this
while they live out of the Kings sight; and therefore the King, as soon as he
sees them, bids them cut their hair.

When the Mogol by Letters sends his commands to any of his Governors, those
papers are entertained with as much respect as if himself were present; for the
Governor having intelligence that such Letters are come near him, himself with
other inferior Officers ride forth to meet the Patamar, or messenger that
brings them, and as soon as he sees those Letters* he alights from his horse,
falls down on the earth, and then takes them from the messenger and lays them
on his head, whereon he binds them fast, and then returning to his place of
public meeting, for dispatch of businesses, he reads them, and answers their
contents with all care and diligence.

The King often times in his own person and so his substitutes appointed
Governors for Provinces and Cities, Judge in all matters Criminal that concern
life and death. There are other Officers to assist them, which are called
Cut-walls (whose Office is like that of our Sheriffs in England) and these have
many substitutes under them, whose business it is to apprehend, and to bring
before these Judges such as are to be tried for things Criminal, or Capital,
where the Offender (as before) knows presently what will become of him. And
those Officers wait likewise on other Judges there, which are called Cadees,
who only meddle with Contracts and Debts, and other businesses of this Nature
'twixt man and man. Now these Officers arrest Debtors, and bring them before
those Judges, and their sureties too, bound as with us in Contracts confirmed
(as before) under their hands and seals, and if they give not content unto
those which complain of them, they will imprison their persons, where they
shall find and feel the weight of fetters; nay, many times they will sell
their persons, their Wives and Children into bondage, when they cannot satisfy
their Debts; And the custom of that Country bears with such hard and pitilies
courses, such as was complained of by the poor widow unto the Prophet Elisha;
who when her husband was dead, and she not able to pay, the Creditor came and
took her two sons to be bond men, 2 King. 4. 1.

The Mogol looked to be presented with some thing, or other, when my Lord
Ambassador came to him, and if he saw him often empty handed, he was not
welcome, and therefore the East India Company were wont every year to send many
particular things unto him, in the name of the King of England, that were given
him at several times, especially then when the Ambassador had any request unto
him, which made a very fair way unto it.

Amongst many other things, when my Lord Ambassador first went thither, the
Company sent the Mogol an English Coach, and Harness for four Horses, and an
able Coachman, to suit and manage some of his excellent Horses, that they
might be made fit for that service. The Coach they sent was lined within with
Crimson China velvet, which when the Mogol took notice of, he told the
Ambassador that he wondered the King of England would trouble himself so much,
as to send unto China for Velvet to Line a Coach for him, in regard that he had
been informed, that the English King had much better Velvet near home, for
such, or any other uses.

And immediately after the Mogol caused that Coach to be taken all to pieces,
and to have another made by it, for (as before) they are a people that will
make any new thing by a pattern, and when his new Coach was made according to
the pattern, his workmen first putting the English Coach together, did so with
that they had new made, then pulling out all the China Velvet which was in the
English Coach, there was in the room thereof put a very rich Stuff, the ground
silver, wrought all over in spaces with variety of flowers of silk, excellently
well suited for their colors, and cut short like a Plush, and in stead of the
brass Nails that were first in it, there were Nails of silver put in their
places. And the Coach, which his own workmen made was lined and seated
likewise with a richer stuff than the former, the ground of it Gold, mingled
like the other with silk flowers, and the Nails silver and double guilt; and
after having Horses and Harness fitted for both his Coaches, He rode sometimes
in them, and contracted with the English Coachman to serve him, whom he made
very fine, by rich vests he gave him, allowing him a very great Pension;
besides, he never carried him in any of those Coaches, but he gave him the
reward of ten pounds at the least, which had raised the Coachman unto a very
great Estate, had not death prevented it, and that immediately after he was
settled in that great service.

The East India Company sent other presents for that King, as excellent
Pictures which pleased the Mogol very much, especialy if there were fair and
beautiful Women portrayed in them. They sent likewise Swords, Rapiers,
excellently well hatched, and pieces of rich imbroidery to make sweet baggs, and
rich Gloves, and handsome Looking glasses, and other things to give away, that
they might have always some things in readiness to present both to the King,
and also to his Governors, where our Factories were settled, for all these were
like those rulers of Israel mentioned, Hosea 4. 18. who would love to say with
shame, give ye. They looked to be presented with something, when our Factors
had any especial occasion to repair unto them, and if the particular thing they
then presented did not like them well, they would desire to have it exchanged
for something else, happily they having never heard of our good and modest
proverb, that a man must not look into the mouth of a given Horse. And it is a
very poor thing indeed which is freely given, and is not worth the taking.

The Mogol sometimes by his Firmauns, or or Letters Patents, will grant some
particular things unto single, or diverse persons, and presently after will
contradict those Grants by other Letters, excusing himself thus, that he is a
great, and an absolute King, and therefore must not be tied unto any thing,
which if he were, he said that he was a slave, and not a free man: Ye what he
promised was usually enjoyed, although he would not be tied to a certain
performance of his promise. Therefore there can be no dealing with this King
upon very sure terms, who will say and unsay, promise and deny. Yet we English
men did not at all suffer by that inconstancy of his, but there found a free
Trade, a peaceable residence, and a very good esteem with that King and people;
and much the better (as I conceive) by reason of the prudence of my Lord
Ambassador, who was there (in some sense) like Joseph in the Court of Pharaoh,
for whose sake all his Nation there, seemed to fare the better. And we had a
very easy way upon any grievance to repair to that King, as will appear now in
my next Section which speaks.

SECT. XXIV.
Of him, showing himself three times publicly unto his people every day, and
in what state and glory he does oftentimes appear.

FIrst, early in the morning at that very time, the Sun begins to appear above
the Horizon, He appears unto his people in a place very like unto one of our
Balconies, made in his houses, or Pavilions for his morning appearance,
directly opposite to the East, about seven, or eight foot high from the ground,
against which time a very great number of his people* especially of the greater
sort, who desire as often as they can to appear in his eye, assemble there
together to give him the Salam, or good morning, crying all out as soon as they
see their King with a loud voice Padsha Salamet, which signifies, live o Great
King, or O great King, health and life, (as all the people cried, 1 King. 1.
39. God save King Solomon: and thus they clapped their hands for joy when
Jehoash was made King, crying, God save the King, or let the King live, 2 King
11. 12.) At noon he shows himself in another place like the former, on the
South Side, and a little before Sunset, in a like place, on the West Side of
his house, or Tent, but as soon as the Sun forsakes the Hemisphear, he leaves
his people ushered in and out with Drums and Wind instruments, and the peoples
acclamations.

At both which times likewise very great numbers of his people assemble
together to present themselves before him: And at any of these three times, he
that has a suite to the King or desires Justice at his hands, be he poor, or
Rich, if he hold up a Petition to be seen, shall be heard and answered.

And between seven and nine of the Clock at night, he sits within his House, or
Tent, more privately in a spacious place, called his Goozalcan, or bathing
house made bright, like day by abundance of lights, and here the King sits
mounted upon a stately Throne, where his Nobles and such as are favored by him
stand about him, others find admittance to, but by special leave from his
Guard, who cause every one that enters that place to breath upon them, and if
they imagine that any have drunk wine, they keep him out.

At this time my Lord Ambassador made his usual addresses to him, and* I often
waited on him thither, and it was a good time to do business with that King,
who then was for the most part very pleasant, and full of talk unto those which
were round about him, and so continued till he fell a sleep, (often times by
drinking) and then all assembled immediately quitted the place, besides those
which were his trusted servants, who by turns watched his Person.

The Mogol has a most stately, rich and spacious house at Agrae, his
Metropolis, or chief City, which is called his Palace Royal, wherein there are
two Towers, or Turrets about ten foot square covered with massy God (as ours
are usualy with Lead) this I had from Tom. Coriat, as from other English
Merchants, who keep in a Factory at that place. And further they told me, that
he has a most glorious Throne within that his Palace, ascended by diverse
steps, which are covered with plate of silver, upon the top of which ascent
stand four Lions upon pedestals (of curiously colored Marble) which Lions are
all made of Massy silver, some part of them gilded with Gold, and beset with
precious stones. Those Lions support a Canopy of pure Gold, under which the
Mogol sits, when as he appears in his greatest state and glory.

For the beauty of that Court it consists not in gay and Gorgious apparel, for
the Country is so hot, that they cannot endure any thing that is very warm, or
massy, or rich about them. The Mogol himself for the most part is covered with
a garment (as before described) made of pure, white, and fine Callico Laune,
and so are his Nobles, which Garments are washed after one days wearing. But
for the Mogol, though his clothing be not rich and costly, yet I believe that
there is never a Monarch in the whole world that is daily adorned with so many
Jewels as himself is. Now, they are Jewels which make men's covering most rich,
such as people in other parts sometimes wear about them, that are otherwise
most meanly habited, to which purpose I was long since told by a Gentleman of
honor sent as a Companion to the old* Earl of Nothingham, when he was
employed as an extraordinary Ambassador by King James, to confirm the peace
made 'twixt himself and the King of Spain, which Ambassador had a very great
many Gentlemen in his train, in as Rich clothing as Velvets and Silks could
make, but then there did appear many a great Don, or Grandee in the Spanish
Court, in a long black bays Cloak and Cassack, which had one Hatband of
Diamonds, which was of more worth by far, than all the bravery of the
Ambassadors many followers.

But for the Mogol I wonder not at his many Jewels, he being (as I conceive)
the greatest, and richest Master of precious stones that inhabites the whole
earth. For Diamonds (which of all other are accounted most precious stones)
they are found in Decan (where the Rocks are, out of which they are dug) the
Princes whereof are the next Neighbors and Tributares to the great Mogol, and
they pay him as Tribute many Diamonds yearly, and further, he has the refusal
of all those rich stones they sell, he having Gold and Silver in the greatest
abundance, (and that will purchase any thing but heaven) and he will part with
any money for any Gems beside, that are precious and great, whither Rubies, or
any other stones of value, as also for rich Pearls.

And his Grandees follow him in that fancy, for one of his great Lords gave
our Merchants there, twelve hundred pounds sterling for one Pearl, which was
brought out of England. The Pearl was shaped like a Pare, very large,
beautiful, and Orient, and so its price deserved it should be.

Now the Mogol having such an abundance of Jewels, wears many of them daily,
enough to exceed those women, which Rome was wont to show in their Starlike
dresses, who in the height and prosperity of that Empire -- Were said to wear
The spoils of Nations in one ear.


Or, Lollia Paulina, who was hid with Jewels. For the great Mogol, the
Diamonds, and Rubies, and Pearls, which are very many, and daily worn by him,
are all of an extraordinary greatness, and consequently of an exceeding great
value. And besides those he wears about his Shash, or head covering, he has a
long Chain of Jewels hanging about his Neck (as long as an ordinary Gold Chain)
others about his wrists, and the Hilts of his Sword and Dagger are most
curiously enriched with those precious Stones, besides others of very great
value, which he wears in Rings on his fingers.

Ventilat aestivum digitis sudantibus aurum,
Nec sufferre queat majoris Pondera gemmae.
Ju. Sat. 1. He airs his sweaty fingers with rings freight,
And Jewels, as if burdened with their weight.
The first of March the Mogol begins a royal Feast, like that which Ahasuerus
made in the third year of his Reign, Esth. 1. wherein he showed the riches of
his glorious Kingdom. This feast the Mogol makes, is called the Nooroos, that
signifies nine days, which time it continues, to usher in the new year, which
begins with the Mahometans there, the tenth day of March.

Against which Feast, the Nobles assemble themselves together at that Court in
their greatest Pomp, presenting their King with great gifts, and he requiting
them again with Princely rewards, at which time I being in his presence, beheld
most immense and incredible riches, to my amazement, in Gold, Pearls, Precious
stones, Jewels, and many other glittering vanities. This Feast is usually kept
by the Mogol while he is in his Progress, and lodges in ^ents.

Whether his Diet at this time be greater than ordinary I know not, for he
always eats in private among his Women, where none but his own Family see him
while he is eating; which Family of his consists of his Wives and Children, and
Women, and Eunuchs, and his boys, and none but these abide and lodge in the
Kings houses, or Tents, and therefore how his Table is spread, I could never
know, but doubtless he has of all those vanities that Empire affords, if he
so please. His food (they say) is served in unto him in Vessels of Gold, which
covered, and brought unto him by his Eunuchs, after it is proved by his Tasters
he eats, not at any set times of the day, but he has provision ready at all
times, and calls for it when he is hungry, and never but then.

The first of September (which was the late Mogols birth day) he retaining an
ancient yearly Custom, was in the presence of his chief Grandies weighed in a
Balance, the Ceremony performed within his House, or Tent, in a fair spacious
Room, whereinto none were admitmitted but by special leave. The Scales in which
he was thus weighed were plated with Gold, and so the beam on which they hung,
by great Chains made likewise of that most precious Metal, the King sitting in
one of them was weighed first against silver Coin, which immediately after was
distributed among the poor, then was he weighed against Gold, after that
against Jewels (as they say) but I observed (being present there with my Lord
Ambassador) that he was weighed against three several things, laid in silken
Bags on the contrary Scale, when I saw him in the Balance I thought on
Belshazzar, who was found to light, Dan. 5. 27. By his weight (of which his
Physicians yearly keep an exact account) they presume to guess of the present
estate of his body, of which they speak flatteringly, however they think it to
be.

When the Mogol is thus weighed, he casts about among the standers by thin
pieces of silver and some of Gold, made like flowers of that Country, and some
of them are made like Cloves, and some like Nutmegs, but very thin and hollow.
Then he drinks to his Nobles in his Royal wine (as that of Ahasuerus is called)
Esth. 1. 7.) who pledge his health, at which solemnity he drank to my Lord
Ambassador, in a Cup of Gold most curiously enameled, and set all over the
outside with stones (which were small Rubies, Turkesses, and Emeralds) with a
Cover, or Plate to set it in, both of pure Gold, the brims of which plate, and
the cover were enameled, and set with stones as the other, and all these
together weighed twenty and four ounces of our English weight,, which he then
gave unto my Lord Ambassador, whom he ever used with very much respect, and
would moreover often ask him why he did not desire some good, and great gifts
at his hands, he being a great King, and able to give it, the Ambassador would
reply, that he came not thither to beg any thing of him, all that he desired
was that his Contrymen the English might have a free and safe and peaceable
trade in his Dominions, the Mogol would answer that he was bound in honor to
afford them that, we coming from the furthermost parts of the world to trade
there, and would often bid the Ambassador to ask something for himself, who to
this would answer, that if that King knew not better to give, then he knew to
ask, he must have nothing from him, upon these terms they continually both
stood, so that in conclusion the Ambassador had no gift from him, but that
before mentioned, besides an horse, or two, and sometimes a Vest, or upper
Garment made of slight Cloth of Gold, which the Mogol would first put upon his
own back, and then give it to the Ambassador. But the Mogol (if he had so
pleased) might have bestowed on him some great Princely gift, and found no
greater miss of it, than there would be of a Glass of water taken out of a
great Fountain; yet although the Mogol had such infinite Treasures, yet he
could find room to store up more still, the desires of a covetous heart being
so unsatiable, as that it never knows when it has enough, being like a
bottomless purse that can never be filled, for the more it has, the more
still it covets.

See an image hereof in Alcmaeon, who being willed by Craesus to go into his
Treasure house, and there take as much Gold as himself could carry away,
provided for that purpose a long Garment that was double down to his ankles,
and great boots, and filled them both; nay, he stuffed his mouth, and tied
wedges of Gold to the locks of his head, and doubtless, but for killing
himself, he would have filled his skull and bowels therewith. Here was an heart
set upon Gold, and Gold over-lading an heart, for the Man stowing so much about
him, as that he could not stir with it, forfeited what he might have had, and
was turned out of the Treasury, as poor and empty as he came into it. He is a
rich man whatever he has (be it more, or less) that is contented. He is a
poor man, who still wants more, in becoming poor by plenty, wanting what he
has, as well, as much, as what he has not, and so do very many, who are the
greatest engrossers of the worlds wealth.

But certainly there is no heart more poor and barren than that which is set
upon abundance, and as a the ground wherein there are Mines of Gold and Silver,
and the most precious Stones is most barren; so the hearts of such as are most
violently carried on after the desire of these things are most barren likewise.
Therefore almighty God in wisdom has laid up Treasures in the bowels of the
earth secretly, and basely, secretly that they should not be to much sought
after, and basely, that they should not be too much desired nor valued. Hence
the Prophet Habak. 2 6. speaks thus to covetous men, woe be to him that lades
himself with thick clay, how long? where riches are compared to thick clay,
because they are but the very self-same earth we tread on, better hardened and
colored; and because they are many times a burden unto him that has them, how
long? says the Prophet is there no end of increasing? how long? has the Sea
bars and bounds. and the desires of man in this case without all moderation?
how long? can any ever hope to fill and satisfy their hearts with this? let
them know that the barren womb, and the unmercifull grave, and unsatiable death
will sooner be satisfied, than the hearts set upon riches find satisfaction
from them, for he that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver,
Eccles. 5. 10. and therefore they who can come up to a right understanding of
themselves in this case, will have a far greater cause to fear, than to desire
abundance.

Which that great Emperor has, yet still would have more. This covetousness
carries men very far; and ambition (which is a refined, or rather an heightened
covetousness) still further.

I have observed much of the Riches, and Pomp, and Greatness, and Glory of the
great Mogol, So in the book of Esth. Chap. 1. we may read of the goodly
Tabernacle of King Ahasuerus, in the Garden of his Palace, where were white,
green, and blue hangings, fastened with Coards of fine linen, and purple, and
silver rings, and pillars of Marble! the Beds were of Gold and Silver, upon a
Pavement of Porphyre and Alabaster, and Stone of blue-colour; and he gave those
(whom he there feasted) drink in changes of vessels of Gold, and royal wine in
abundance, according to the state of the King. We may further read there of his
hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, and his Princes, and Captains thereof,
his Throne and his Palace at Shushan, etc. So of the Treasures of Hezekiah,
Esa. 39. his Silver and Gold, his spices and precious Ointments, and Armory,
and all the store of his house, which he and his Fathers had laid up, etc. So
of Belshazzar his thousand Princes, Wives and Concubines, Dan. 5. O what
shadows do these hundreds and thousands cast over the heads of men, to give
comfort unto them for the present, and to make them say under these coverts
will we sit and be at rest, and forget, that some sudden messenger from the
Lord, either sickness, or death, or the like can presently deprive them of all
their present enjoyments and comforts.

But the Mogol takes a course to put the remembrance of death as far from him,
as possibly he can, and therefore there is no man that at any time wears any
blue thing in that Kings presence, which is there the color of mourners,
neither is the name of death at any time mentioned in that Kings ears, but when
any one is dead, of whom his Majesty must have intelligence, the message is
delivered unto him in mild, soft, flattering terms to this purpose, such, or
such a one has made himself a Sacrifice at your Majesty's feet. o Mors quam
acerba est memoria tua homini Pacem habenti in Possessionibus suis.

O death, how bitter are thy thoughts to one
Who ^ase enjoyes in his possession!
No loss he deemes so great, as loss of breath,
Death it is to such a one, to think of death.
Certainly if death, when it comes to strike would take money and be gone, it
would in short time engross the wealth of the whole world, but it will not, for
no wit, nor wisdom, nor wealth, nor policy, nor strength, nor any thing beside
can keep off the impartial wounding hand of death. That mighty Prince (we speak
off) who did all he could to stave off the thought of dying, and since dead,
though while he lived he denied himself nothing that might please his corrupted
nature, not high and richly compounded wines, not strange flesh, nor any thing
beside that might for the present give some seeming content to his brutish
sensual appetite, ut ipsum voluptas potius quam ipse voluptatem, etc. that
pleasures did possess him, rather than he pleasures; which will further appear
if we consider more.

SECT. XXV.
Of his pastimes at home and abroad, and where something of his quality, and
disposition.

NOw what he does, and how he behaves himself amongst his house-full of Wives
and Women cannot be known, and therefore not related; but when he shows himself
(as before) thrice openly to his people, every day he had always something* or
other presented before him to make him sport, and to give him present content.

As sometimes he delighted himself in seeing Horses ridden, the Natives there
(as before) being very excellent in their well managing of them. Sometimes he
saw his great Elephants fight. And at other times he pleased himself in seeing
wrestling or dancing, or juggling, and what else he liked.

And it happened that (but a few years before our abode there) a Juggler of
Bengala (a Kingdom famous for Witches, and men of that profession) brought an
Ape before the King (who was ever greedy to please himself with Novelties)
professing that he would do many strange feats, the Mogol was ready presently
to make a trial of this, and forthwith called some boys about him (which he
was conceived to keep for such a use as I dare not name,) and plucking a Ring
from his finger gave it one of them to hide, that he might make a trial
whither, or no the Ape could find it out; who presently went to the boy that
had it. The Mogol made some further trials like this, where the Ape did his
part as before. And before the Ape was taken out of his presence, this strange,
following, and unexpected thing came into the Kings thought. There are (said
he) many disputes in the World about that true Prophet which should come into
the World. We said the Mogol are for Mahomet. The Persians magnify Mortis Hale
(but they are Mahometans for Religion likewise.) The Hindoos, or Heathens
there, have many whom they highly extol and magnify, as Bremaw, and Bramon,
and Ram, and Permissar; The Parsees are for Zerto^st, the Jews for Moses, the
Christians for Christ, and he added three more whose names I have not, who make
up the number of twelve, who have all their several followers in that part of
the World, and then he caused those twelve Names to be written in twelve
several Scrolls, and put together, to see if the Ape could draw out the Name of
the true Prophet, this done the Ape put his paw amongst them, and pulled forth
the Name of Christ. The Mogol a second time, caused those twelve Names to be
written again in twelve other Scrolls, and Characters, and put together, when
the Ape as before pulled forth the name of Christ.

Then Mahobet-Chan, a great Noble man of that Court, and in high favor with
the King, said, that it was some imposture of the Christians (though there were
none that did bear that name there present) and desired that he might make a
third trial, which granted, he put but eleven of those names together,
reserving the name of Christ in his hand; the Ape searching as before, pulled
forth his paw empty, and so twice, or thrice together, the King demanding a
reason for this, was answered, that happily the thing he looked for was not
there, he was bid to search for it, and then putting out those eleven names one
after the other, in a seeming indignation rent them, then running to
Mahobet-Chan caught him by the hand where the Name of Christ was concealed,
which delivered, he opened the Scrolle, and so held it up to the King, but did
not tear it as the former, upon which the Mogol took the Ape, and gave his
Keeper a good Pension for to keep him near about him, calling him the Divining
Ape, and this was all that followed upon this admirable thing, except the great
wonder and amazement of that people.

There was one some years since wrote this story (but somewhat varied from that
I have here related) in a little printed Pamphlet, and told his Reader that I
had often seen that Ape while I lived in those parts, which particular he
should have left out; but for the Relation it self, I believe it was so,
because it has been often confirmed there in its report unto me by diverse
persons, who knew not one another, and were differing in Religion, yet all
agreed in the story, and in all the circumstances thereof.

This I am sure of that Almighty God, who can do what he will do (for all
things are so far from being impossible to him, that nothing is hard) can do
wonderful things by the weakest means, that the weaker the instruments are,
the more glory moy be ascribed unto him while he acts by them.

In the sacred story Pharaoh had no sooner asked, who is the Lord? Ex. 5. but
presently some of the weakest of the Creatures rise up, and appear (as it were
in Arms) to tell him, who the Lord was; so that he who formerly thought that
there was no power, either in heaven, or earth, to master, or contradict him,
is presently confuted, and conquered by Frogs, and Flies, and Lice, and
Caterpillars, by those poor, infirm, silly, and most despicable Creatures, who
when they had entered the lists, would not give proud Pharaoh over, till they
had humbled him, and magnified their maker, virtus Dei in infirmitate. Balaams
Ass had more discovered unto him than unto his Rider, and so had this Ape (as
it should seem) more, than to his beholders, or to his keeper.

Now for the disposition of that King, it ever seemed unto me to be composed of
extremes, for sometimes he was barbarously cruel, and at other times he would
seem to be exceeding fair, and gentle.

For his cruelties, he put one of his women to a miserable death, one of his
women he had formerly touched and kept Company withal, but now she was
superannuated, for neither himself nor Nobles (as they say) come near their
wives, or women, after they exceed the age of thirty years, though they keep
them, and allow them some maintenance. The fault of that woman, this the Mogol
upon a time found her, and one of his Eunuchs kissing one another, and for this
very thing the King presently gave command that a round hole should be made in
the earth, and that her body should be put into that hole, where she should
stand with her head only above ground, and the earth to be put in again unto
her close, round about her, that so she might stand in the parching Sun, till
the extreme hot beams thereof did kill her, in which torment she lived one
whole day, and the night following, and almost till the next noon, crying out
most lamentably while she was able to speak in her language, as the Shunamites
Child did in his 2 King. 4. Ah my head, my head! which horrid execution, or
rather murder was acted near our house, where the Eunuch by the command of the
said King was brought very near the place where this poor Creature was thus
buried alive, and there in her sight cut all into pieces.

That great King would be often overcome by Wine, yet (as if he meant to
appropriate that sin to himself) would punish others with very much severity,
who were thus distempered.

I have long since heard a story which is somewhat pararel to this, that in
former times when this land, in which we live, did not so much stink of that
beastly sin of drunkenness, which robs a man of himself, and leaves a beast in
the skin of a man, I say, when drunkenness in England was not so common: There
was a Justice of Peace in this Nation (and I believe that the story is very
true) which laid a poor Butoher by the heels for presuming to be drunk, telling
him that he was but a poor beggarly fellow, and he presume to be drunk, and
therefore he would punish him, saying further, that it was enough for his
eldest Son so to be, etc. but this by the way.

Sometimes for little, or no faults, the Mogol would cause men to be most
severely whip't, till they were almost ready to dye under the rod, which after
they must kiss in thankfulness.

He caused one of his servants of the higher rank, to be very much whipped for
breaking a China Cup he was commanded to keep safe, and then sent him into
China, (which is a marvelous distance from thence) to buy another.

Sometimes in other of his mad distempers he would condemn men to servitude,
or dismember, or else put them to death, as sacrifices to his will and passion,
not Justice. So that it might be said of him quando male nemo pejus, that when
he did wickedly none could do worse, as if it had been true of him which was
spoken of that monster Nero observed before, who was called Lutum sanguine
maceratum, dirt soaked in blood.

For his good actions he did relieve continually many poor people; and not
seldom would show many expressions of duty and strong affection to his Mother,
then living, so that he who esteemed the whole World as his Vassals would help
to carry her in a Palankee upon his shoulders, and in this he did exceedingly
differ from that most unnatural and cruel Nero, who most barbarously killed his
own Mother Agrippina, causing (as they write) that Bed, in which he was
conceived, and from whence born, and wherein he took up his first lodging to be
ripped up and spoiled.

The Mogol would often visit the cells of those he esteemed religious men,
whose persons he esteemed sacred, as if they had been Demigods.

And he would speak most respectively of our blessed Savior Christ, but his
Parentage, his poverty, and his cross did so confound his thoughts, that he
knew not what to think of them. (As Bernard complained of some in his time,
that they took offense at the clowts and rags of our blessed Savior, at the
humility and meannesse of his birth) believing that it could not stand with the
Majesty of the Son of God to appear in the World, in such meannesse as he did;
though he had been told that Christ Jesus came into the World in that low
condition that he might beat down the pride thereof. And that at his first
coming he came for sinners, and then he came in great humility but at his
second coming he shall come against sinners, and then will he appear in power,
and great glory.

Lastly, the Mogol is very free and noble unto all those which fall into, and
abide in his affection, which brings me now to speak.

SECT. XXVI.
Of the exceeding great Pensions the Mogol gives unto his Subjects, how they
are raised, and how long they are continued, etc.

WHich great revenues that many of them do enjoy, makes them to live like great
Princes rather than other men. Now for those Pensions, which are so exceeding
great, the Mogol in his far extended Monarchy allows yearly pay for one
Million of horse, and for every horse and man about eighteen pounds sterling
per annum, which is exactly paid every year, raised from Land, and other
Commodities which that Empire affords and appointed for that purpose. Now some
of the Mogol's most beloved Nobles have the pay of six thousand horse; and
there are others (at the least twenty in his Empire) which have the pay of
5000. horse, exceeding large Pensions above the revenue of any other Subjects
in the whole World, they amounting unto more than one hundred thousand pounds
yearly unto a particular man. Now others have the pay of four thousand horse;
others of three, or two, or one thousand horse, and so downward, and these by
their proportions, are appointed to have horses always in readiness well
manned and otherwise appointed for the Kings service, so that he who has the
pay of five, or six thousand, must always have one thousand in readiness, or
more, according to the Kings need of them, and so in proportion all the rest
which enables them on a sudden to make up the number, at the least of two
hundred thousand horse, of which number, they have always at hand one hundred
thousand to wait upon the King wheresoever he is.

There are very many private men in Cities and Towns, who are Merchants, or
Tradesmen that are very rich, but it is not safe for them that are so, so to
appear, least that they should be used as filled sponges.

But there is never a Subject in that Empire, who has Land of inheritance,
which he may call his own, but they are all Tenants at the will of their King,
having no other title to that they enjoy besides the Kings favor, which is by
far more easily lost than gotten; It is true that the King advances many
there, unto many great honors, and allows them as before, marvelous great
revenues, but no Son there enjoyes either the Titles, or means of his Father
that has had Pensions from that King, for the King takes possession of all
when they are dead, appointing their Children some competent means for their
subsistence, which they shall not exceed, if they fall not into the Kings
affection as their Fathers did, wherefore many great men in this Empire live up
to the height of their means, and therefore have a very numerous train, a very
great retinue to attend upon them, which makes them to appear like Princes,
rather than subjects.

Yet this their necessary dependence on their King binds them unto such base
subjection, as that they will yield with readiness unto any of his
unreasonable and wilful commands. As Plutarch writes of the Soldiers of
Scipio, nullu^ est horum, qui non conscensa turri semet in mare
praecipitaturus, si jussero, that there was never a one in his Army, by his own
report, that would not for a word of his mouth, have gone up into a Tower, and
cast himself thence headlong into the Sea, and thus the people here will do
thing the King commands them to do; so that if he bid the Father to lay hands
of violence upon his Son, or the Son upon his Father, they will do it, rather
than the will of their King should be disobeyed. Thus forgetting Nature, rather
than Subjection.

And this tie of theirs (I say) upon the Kings favor makes all his Subjects
most servile flatterers, for they will commend any of his actions, though they
be nothing but cru^lty, so any of his speeches, though nothing but folly. And
when the King sits and speaks to any of his people publicly, there is not a
word falls from him that is not written by some Scr^veners, or Scribes that
stand round about him.

In the year 1618. when we lived at that Court, there appeared at once in the
Month of November in their Hemisphear two great Blazing-stars, the one of
them, North, the other South, which unusual sight appeared there for the space
of one Month. One of those strange Comets in the North, appeared like a long
blazing Torch, or Lance fired at the upper end, the other in the South, was
round like a pot boiling out fire. The Mogol consulted with his flattering
Astrologers, who spoke of these Comets unto the King, as Daniel sometimes did
of Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan. 4. 19. My Lord, the dream is to them that hate
thee, and the interpretation thereof unto thine Enemies. For his Astrologers
told him that he needed not trouble himself with the thought thereof, for it
concerned other places and people, not him nor his. But not long after this,
their season of Rain, (before spoken of) which was never known to fail till
then, failed them, and this caused such a famine and mortality in the South
parts of his Empire, that it did very much unpeople it, and in the Northern
part thereof (whether the Mogol then repaired) his third Son Sultan Caroom
raised, and kept together very great forces, and stood upon his guard, and
would not disband, till his Father had delivered his eldest Son Sultan
Coobseroo into his hands, and how, when he had him in his power he used him,
you shall after hear.

In the mean time, take one admirable example of a very gross flatterer, but a
great favorite of that King, who was noted above others of that Nation to be a
great neglecter of God, believing it Religion enough to please the Mogol his
Master. This man was a Soldier of an approved valor: But upon a time he
sitting in dalliance with one of his Women, she plucked an hair from his breast
(which grew about his Nipple) in wantonness, without the least thought of
doing him hurt. But the little wound, that small, and unparalleled instrument of
death made, presently began to fester, and in short time after became a Canker
incureable; in fine, when he saw that he must needs dye, he uttered these
words, which are worth the remembering of all that shall ever hear them, saying:

Who would not have thought but that I, who have been so long bred a Soldier,
should have dyed in the face of mine Enemy, either by a sword, or a Lance, or
an Arrow, or a Bullet, or by some such instrument of death: But now (though too
late) I am forced to confess that there is a great God above, whose Majesty I
have ever despised, that needs no bigger Lance than an hair to kill an
Atheist, or a despiser of his Majesty, and so, desiring that those his last
words might be told unto the King his Master, died.

Till sin into the world had made a breach,
Death was not heard of: ever since in each
Poor creature may it, does it couchant lie,
The kernel of a Grape kills one; a fly
Another choaks; by a c^rrupted breath
Of air one dies; and others have found death
In a small bit of meat; or by a Corn
Too closely cut, or by a prick of Thorn.
When death comes armed with Gods imperial word,
An hair can pierce as deep as sharpest sword.
The Mogol never advances any, but he gives him a new name, and these of some
pretty signification; as Pharaoh did unto Joseph, when he made him great in his
Court, Genesis 41. 45. the new names (I say) that the Mogol gives unto those he
advances and favors are significant. As Asaph Chan, the gathering or rich
Lord, whose sister the Mogol married, and she was his most beloved wife, and
her brothers marvelous great riches, answered his name, for he died worth many
Millions (as I have been credibly informed) the greatest subject (I believe)
for wealth that ever the world had: so another of the Mogols Grandees was
called Mahobet-Chan, the beloved Lord. Another Chan-Jahan, the Lord of my
heart. Another Chan-Allaam, the Lord of the world. Another Chan-Channa, the
Lord of Lords. He called his chief Physician Mocrob-Chan the Lord of my health;
and many other names like these his Grandees had, which at my being there
belonged to his most numerous Court.

And further for their Titles of honor there, all the Kings Children are
called Sultans, or Princes; his daughters Sultanaus, or Princesses, the next
title is Nabob equivalent to a Duke, the next Channa, a double Lord, or Earl.
The next Chan, a Lord. So Meirsa signifies a Knight that has been a General,
or Commander in the Wars. Umbra, a Captain; Haddee, a Cavalier, or Soldier on
horseback, who have all allowed them means by the King (as before)
proportionable for the supports of their Honors, and Titles, and Names.

His Officers of State are his Treasurers, which receive his revenues in his
several Provinces, and take care for the payment of his great Pensions, which,
when they are due, are paid without any delay: There his chief Eunuchs (which
command the rest of them) take care for the ordering of his house, and are
Stewards and Controulers of it; his Secretaries, the Masters of his Elephants;
and the Masters of his Tents are other of his great Officers, and so are the
keepers of his Wardrobe, who are entrusted with his Plate and Jewels. To these
I may add those which take care of his Customs for goods brought into his
Empire, as for commodities carried thence. But these are not many, because his
Seaports are but few. The Customs paid in his Ports are not high, that
strangers of all Nations may have the greater encouragement to Trade there with
him, but as he expects money from all strangers that Trade there: So it is a
fault he will not pardon (as before) for any to carry any quantity of silver
thence. He has other Officers that spread over his Empire, to exact moneys out
of all the labors of that people who make the curious manufactures. So that
like a great Tree he receives nourishment from every, even the least Roots that
grow under his shadow, and therefore though his Pensions are exceeding great
(as before) they are nothing comparable to his enuch greater revenues.

By reason of that Countries immoderate heat, our English Cloth is not fit to
make Habits for that people, that of it which is sold there, is most of it for
color Red, and this they employ for the most part to make coverings for their
Elephants and Horses, and to cover their Coaches, the King himself taking a
very great part thereof, whose payments are very good, only the Merchant must
get the hands of some of his chief Officers to his bill, appointed for such
dispatches, which are obtained as soon as desired. And this the King does to
prevent the abuses of particular, and single persons.

And now that I may present my Reader with the further glory of this great
King, I shall lead him where he may take a view.

SECT. XXVII.
Of the Mogols Leskar, or Camp Royal, etc.

WHich indeed is very glorious, as all must confess, who have seen the
infinite number of Tents, or Pavilions there pitched together which in a plain
make a show equal to a most spacious and glorious City. These Tents I say,
when they are altogether, cover such a great quantity of ground, that I believe
it is five English miles at the least, from one side of them to the other, very
beautiful to behold from some Hill, where they may be all seen at once.

They write of Zerxes, that when from such a place he took a view of his very
numerous Army, consisting at the least of three hundred thousand men, he wept,
saying, that in less than the compass of one hundred years, not one of that
great mighty Host would be alive. And to see such company then together of all
sorts of people (and I shall give a good reason presently why I believe that
mixed company of men, women, and children may make up such an huge number, as
before I named, if not exceed it) and to consider that death will seize upon
them all, within such a space of time, and that the second death has such a
power over them, is a thing of more sad consideration.

Now to make it appear that the number of people of all sorts is so exceeding
great, which here get, and keep together in the Mogols Leskar, or Camp Royal;
first there are one hundred thousand Soldiers, which always wait about that
King (as before observed) and all his Grandees have a very great train of
followers and servants to attend them there, and so have all other men
according to their several qualities, and all these carry their Wives and
Children, and whole family with them, which must needs amount to a very
exceeding great number. And further to demonstrate this, when that King removes
from one place to another, for the space of twelve hours, a broad passage is
continually filled with passengers, and Elephants, and Horses, and Dromedaries,
and Camels, and Coaches, and Asses, and Oxen, (on which the meaner sort of men
and women with their little Children, ride) so full as they may well pass one
by the other. Now in such a broad passage, and in such a long time, a very
great number of people, the company continually moving on forward, may pass.

Thus this people moving on from place to place, it may be said of them, what
Salvian speaks of Israel, while they were in their journey to the land of
promise, that it was Ambulans respublica, a walking Commonwealth. And
therefore that ancient people of God were called Hebrews, which signified
passengers, and their dwelling so in Tents, signified thus much to all the
people of God in all succeeding ages, that here they dwell in moveable
habitations, having no continuing City here, but they must look for one, and
that is above.

It is observed of Cain, that he (a wicked man) was a tiller of the ground,
(though that calling of it self deserves much commendation) or as a man fastened
to the earth, whereas Abel his brother (a man fearing God) was a Shepherd,
which is a moving, rouling occupation, from one place to another, thou tellest
my flittings, says David, Here we often shift our places, and our company, and
must do so, our businesses carrying us up and down, to and fro, but our
felicity hereafter shall consist in rest, in not changing for ever after,
either our company, or place, but when the Godly man shall accomplish, as an
hireling his day, when his work, which God has appointed him here to do, is
done and finished, he shall lie down in peace, and receive his penny, and enjoy
his reward.

The Tents pitched in that Leskar, or Camp Royal are for the most part white,
like the clothing of those which own them. But the Mogols Tents are red,
reared up upon Poles, higher by much than the other. They are placed in the
midst of the Camp, where they take up a very large compass of ground, and
may be seen every way, and they must needs be very great to afford room in
them, for himself, his wives, children, women, Eunuchs, etc.

In the sore-front, or outward part, or Court within his Tent, there is a very
large room for access to him, 'twixt seven and nine of the Clock at night,
which (as before) is called his Goozulcad.

His Tents are encompassed round with Canats, which are like our Screenes to
fold up together; those Canats are about ten foot high, made of narrow strong
Callico, and lined with the same, stiffened at every breadth with a Cane, but
they are strongest lined on their outside by a very great company of armed
Soldiers, that keep close about them night and day. The Tents of his great men
are likewise large, placed round about his. All of them throughout the whole
Leskar reared up in such a due and constant order, that when we remove from
place to place, we can go as directly to those moveable dwellings, as if we
continued still in fixed and standing habitations, taking our direction from
several streets and Bazars, or Market places, every one pitched upon every
remove alike, upon such, or such a side of the Kings Tents, as if they had not
been at all removed.

The Mogol (which I should have observed before) has so much wealth, and
consequently so much power, by reason of his marvelous great multitudes of
fighting men; which he always keeps in Arms, commanding at all times as many
of them as he please, that as the Moabites truly said of Israel, (while they
had Almighty God fighting with them, and for them) so it may be said of him (if
God restrain him not) that his huge Companies are able to lick up all that are
round about him, as the Ox licketh up the grass of the field, Numb. 22. 4.

When that mighty King, removes from one place to another, he causes Drums to
be beat about midnight, which is a signal token of his removing. He r^moves not
far at one time; sometimes ten miles, but usually a less distance, according
to the best convenience he may have for water, there being such an infinite
Company of men, and other Creatures, whose drink is water, that in a little
time it may be as truly said of them, as it was of that mighty host of
Sennacherib that Assyrian Monarch, Es. 37. 25. that they are able to drink up
Rivers.

But when the place he removed to afforded plenty of good water, he would
usually stay there three, or four days, or more, and when he thus rested in
his Progress, would go abroad to find out pastimes, to which end he always
carried with him diverse kinds of Halkes, and Dogs, and Leopards, which (as
before) they train up to hunt withal, and being thus provided for variety of
sports, would fly at any thing in the Air, or seize on any Creature he desired
to take on the Earth.

The Mogol, when he was at Mandoa (which was environed with great Woods as
before was observed) sometimes with some of his Grandees, and a very great
company beside of Persian and Tartarian hors-men, his Soldiers (which are
stout daring men) would attempt to take some young wild Elephants found in
these Woods, which he took in strong toyls made for that purpose, which taken,
were ma(...)'d, and made fit for his serve(...) In which hunting they likewise
pursued on horseback Lions, and other wild beasts, and killed some of them
with their Bows, and Carbanes, and Lances.

An Heroic pastime, or rather an high and dangerous attempt becoming great
personages, who, if their honor and greatness balance, will not be taken up
with small things, Imperia dura toll^, quid virtus erit, things difficult in
their doing make them more honorable when done, Aquila non capit Muscas, Gnats
and Flies are not pursued by Eagles.

In Tauros Lybici r^unt Leones,
Non sunt Papilionibus molesti.
Hor. Thus on chased Bulls the Lybian Lion hies,
But troubles* not the painted Butter-flies.
I waiting upon my Lord Ambassador two years, and part of a third and
traveling with him in Progress with that King, in the most temperate months
there, 'twixt September and April, were in one of our Progresses 'twixt Mandoa
and Amadavaz nineteen days, (making but short journeys in a Wilderness, where
(by a very great company sent before us, to make those passages and places fit
to receive us) a way was cut out and made even, broad enough for our convenient
passage, and in the places where we pitche(...) ^ur Tents, a great compass of
ground rid, and made plain for them, by grubbing up a number of trees and
bushes, yet there we went as readily to our Tents, the same order being still
observed, in the pitching of them, as we did, when they were set up in the
plains. But that which here seemed unto me to be most strange, was, that
notwithstanding our marvelous great company of men, women; and children there
together, that must all be fed, and the very great number of other Creatures
which did eat Corn, as we never there wanted water: so, we had so many
victualers with us, and so much provision continually brought in unto us, that
we never felt there the want of any thing beside, but had it at as low rates as
in other places.

The Mogols wives and women, when as they are removed from place to place are
carried in Coaches (such as were before described) made up close, or in
Palanke^s on men's shoulders, or else on Elephants in pretty receptacles,
surrounded with curtains which stand up like low and little Turrets on their
backs, and some of the meaner sort ride in Cradles, hanging on the sides of
Dromedaries, all covered close, and attended by Eunuchs, who have many
Soldiers which go before them to clear the way as they pass, they taking it
very ill, if any (though they cannot see them) presume so much as to look
toward them, and therefore though I could never see any of them, I shall here
take the liberty to speak somewhat I have heard and do believe:

SECT. XXVIII.
Of the Mogols wives and women; where something of his Children, etc.

WHom I conceive to be Women of good feature, though for their color very
swart, which that people may call beauty, it being the complexion of them all,
as the Crow thinks his bird fairest, but (as before) I never observed any
crooked, or deformed person of either sex amongst them: For the honesty of
those great men's Wives and Women, there is such a quick eye of jealousy
continually over them, that they are made so by force, though (as they say)
they are never much regarded by those great ones after the very first, and
prime of their youth is past.

For that great Monarch the Mogol in the choice of his Wives and Women, he was
guided more by his eye and fancy, than by any respect had to his honor, for
he took not the daughters of neighboring Princes, but of his own subjects, and
there preferred that, which he looked upon as beauty, before any thing else.

He was married to four Wives, and had Concubines, and Women beside (all which
were at his command) enough to make up their number a full thousand (as they
there confidently affirmed.) And that he might raise up, his beastly and
unnatural lusts, even to the very height, he kept boys as before etc.

His most beloved wife (when I lived at his Court) he called Noor-Mahal, which
signified the light of the Court, and to the other of his Wives, and Women,
which he most loved, he gave new names unto them, and such names as he most
fancied.

For his Wife I first named, he took her out of the dust, from a very mean
family, but however, she made such a through conquest on his affections, that
she engrossed almost all his love, did what she pleased in the Government of
that Empire, where she advanced her brother Asaph-Chan; and other her nearest
relations, to the greatest places of Command and Honor, and profit in that
vast Monarchy.

Her brother Asaph-Chan was presently made one of the Stars of the first
Magnitude that shined in that Indian Court, and when he had once gotten, so
kept the Mogols favor by the assistance of his sister Noor-Mahal, that by the
Pensions given, and many Offices bestowed on him, he heaped up a Mass of
Treasure above all belief (as before) and married his daughter unto Sultan
Caroom, who is now King.

The Mogol of all his so many Wives and Concubines had but six Children, five
Sons and one Daughter. The names he gave his Children, and others were names
that proceeded from Counsel (as he imagined) rather than chance. His eldest Son
was called Sultan Coobsurroo, which signified the Prince with the good face,
his person and beauty answered his name, for he was a Prince of a very lovely
presence. His second Son he called Sultan Perum, Prince of the Pleiades, or of
the sweet influences of the Pleiades. His third Son (now King) though that
great dignity was never intended to him by his Father, was called Sultan
Caroom, or the Prince of bounty. His fourth Sultan Shahar, or the Prince of
fame. His fifth, and last Son was called by him Sultan Tauct, Tauct in the
Persian tongue, signifies a Throne, and he was named so by the King his Father,
because the first hour he sat peaceably on his Throne, there was news brought
him of that Sons birth.

The first Son of that King, which he has by any of his married wives, by
prerogative of birth, inherits that Empire, the eldest Son of every man (as
before) called there (the great brother.) And he that inherits that Monarchy,
does not openly slaughter his younger brothers, as the Turks do; yet it is
observed, that few younger brothers of those Indostan Kings have long survived
their Fathers.

Yet notwithstanding that long continued custom there for the eldest Son to
succeed the Father in that great Empire; Achabar Sha, Father of that late King;
upon high and just displeasure taken against his Son, for climbing up unto the
bed of Anarkelee, his Fathers most beloved Wife (whose name signified the
Kernel of a Pomegranate) and for other base actions of his, which stirred up
his Fathers high displeasure against him, resolved to break that ancient
custom, and therefore often in his life time protested, that not he, but his
Grandchild Sultan Coobsurroo, whom he always kept in his Court, should
succeed him in that Empire.

And now by the way, the manner of that Achabar Sha his death (as they report
it in India) is worthy observation. That wicked King was wont often to give
unto some of his Nobles (whom upon secret displeasure he meant to destroy)
Pills prepared with Poison that should presently put them into incurable
diseases. But the last time he went about to practice that bloody treachery, he
died himself by his own instrument of death, for then having two Pills in his
hand, the one very like the other; the one Cord^^ll for himself, the other
Corrasive, for one of his Grandee^ he meant to purge, and flattering him with
many proffers of courtesy before he gave him the P^ll, that he might swallow
it down the better, at last having held them both in the palm of his hand
long, by a mistake took the poisoned Pi^^ himself, and gave him the other,
which Pill put the King immediately into a mortal flux of blood, which in few
days put an end to his life in his ^itie Lahore.

-- Neque enim lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
When some to kill most deadly engines frame,
It Is just that they themselves be caught in the same.
Achabar Sha thus dead. Sultan Coobsurroo his Grandchild, then aged about
twenty years, took his opportunity at the first bound, and ascended the Regal
Throne at Lahore, where by a general Acclamation of that very great and
populous City he was pronounced, and acknowledged King. His Father (the late
Mogol) was thus acknowledged at Agra. Two great Armies were presently levied,
and meet together to decide the controversy, and the generality of the people
within that Empire, thinking it meet that the Father should be King before the
Son, clave by far, more to him then to his Son, by which means Sultan
Coobsurroo was defeated and taken prisoner, and a very great many of young
Gallants with him, whereof his Father immediately after caused to be impaled,
or put upon Stakes (that most cruel and tormenting death) eight hundred in two
several ranks in one day, without the City Lahore, and then carried his Son
most disgracefully through them, bidding him to behold the men in whom he
trusted. His Son told him that he should have served him so, and spared the
other, who did nothing in that action but upon his command; his Father replied
that he could serve him so presently if he so pleased) his Son, wild and
desired him so to do, telling his Father that he had no joy at all to live,
after the beholding of so many gallant men dead. Notwithastanding, the King
spared his life, casting him into Prison where his eyes were sealed up (by
something put before them which might not be taken of) for the space of three
years, after what time that seal was taken away, that he might with freedom
enjoy the Light, though not his Liberty. And after his Father had taken him out
of Prison, he kept him always near about him, but with a very strong guard
upon him, so that he following the King his Father in his Progresses, we
sometimes saw him. And once he called my Lord Ambassador to him as we passed
by him, asking him many questions, as how far distant our Country was from
them, and what we brought thither, and what we carried thence, and how the King
his Father had used him since his arrive there, whither or no he had not
bestowed upon him some great gifts. The Ambassador told him that his business
there was to obtain a free trade for his Nation the English, and that being
granted him, he had reward enough. The Prince replied that this could not be
denied us, we coming so far to trade there with him; and the Prince further
asked him how long he had been there, the Ambassador told him about two years,
the Prince replied again, that it was a very great shame for the successor of
Tamberlane, who had such infinite Rules, to suffer a man of his quality to come
so far unto him, and to live so long about him, and not to give him some Royal
gift; and he further added that for himself he was a Prisoner, and therefore
could do him no good but he would pray for him, and so he departed.

For that Prince, he was a Gentleman of a very lovely presence and fine
carriage, so exceedingly beloved of the common people, that as S^^tonius writes
of Titus, he was Amor and Deliciae, etc. the very love and delight of them.
Aged then about thirty and five years. He was a man who contented himself with
one wife, which with all love and care accompanied him in all his streights,
and therefore he would never take any wife but her self, though the liberty of
his Religion did admit of Plurality.

It was generally believed to be the intent of his Father (for he would often
presage so) to make this Prince his firstborn his successor, though for the
present out of some jealousy (his being so much beloved of the people) he
denied his liberty.

His Fathers love, brings upon him the extreme hatred of his Brother Caroom the
Mogals third Son, who then lived in very great Pomp and splendour at that Court,
aiming at that Empire, to which end he put many jealousies into his Fathers
head (now grown in years) concerning his Brother Coobsurroo, and that his
Father might live more secure and out of all present fear of him, if he so
pleased, upon which insinuations, partly by force (as I observed before) and
partly by entreaty of friends about the King, he was by the King put into the
Cruel hand of his Brother Caroom, who told his Father that he would have both
his eyes upon him, and further so provide, that he should never have cause to
fear him any more, and he was as good as his word, for presently after he had
gotten possession of him (though his Father had given him as great a charge as
possibly he could to use him well, and to keep him honorably, and by no means
to hurt him, which was all promised by Caroome, to be faithfully observed) he
caused his second Brother Sultan Parveen to be poisoned, and not long after
that, strangled that most gallant Prince his eldest Brother, which did so
trouble his Father, that the grief thereof (as it was strongly believed)
shortened his days, who not long after this (much against his mind) made room
for that murderer to succeed him in that Empire, who laid the foundation of his
high advancement, in the blood of his Brothers, and rather than he would have
missed it, would certainly made a way through the blood of his Father likewise,
All Laws of honesty, of Nature by him thrown down, trampled under foot,
forgotten and made void to compass and gain his most unjust ends, as if he
resolved to practice that language which Polynices out of the height of
Ambition spoke in the Tragedy

-- Pro Regnovelim
Patriam, Penates, Conjugem flammis dare;
Imperia Precio quolibet constant been
Sen. Trag. Fire on my Gods, Wise, Country for a Crown,
An Empire can the dearest price weigh down.
But whatsoever he might think, I am sure that the holy Scriptures are stored
with examples, that have fallen heavy upon usurpers and resisters of lawful
Authority, as upon Corah, and his Confederates swallowed up quick into the
Earth. Upon Zimri burnt in his Palace, which he had but immediately before
usurped: Upon Absolon hanged by his hairy Scalp, As Achitophel in an halter.

Certainly they, who ever they be, that come to rule upon hard and unjust
terms, shall first or last live to rue and to repent their bargain, as Ahab
did in another case, after he had killed and taken possession: And as the
Emperors of this large spreading and far extended Monarchy, have been like
Pikes in a great Pond, that eat up all the lesser Fishes about them, which can
make no resistance; by which they have enlarged themselves like Hell by a
strong hand, and have gained what they have by force, and by force keep what
they have gotten, ruling by an Arbitrary and an illimited Power: so time in
probability will ravel and rent all again in pieces; for

Regum timend^rum in Proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.
Hor. Over slav'd men dread Powers do reign,
God over them is Sovereign.
I shall add but a few things more to this Relation before I conclude it. And
one shall be to give my Reader a taste but very briefly,

SECT. XXIX.
Of the manner of the style or writing of that Court.

WHich I shall here insert, and in some measure show, by a Copy of a Letter
written by the great Mogol unto King James in the Persian tongue here
faithfully translated, which was as follows.

UNto a King rightly descended from his ancestors, bred in Military affairs,
clothed with honor and Justice, a Commander worthy of all Command, strong and
constant in the Religion, which the great Prophet Christ did teach King James,
whose love has bred such an impression in my thoughts, as shall never be
forgotten, but as the smell of Amber, or as a Garden of fragrant flowers, whose
beauty and ^dour is still increasing: so be assured my love shall still grow
and increase with yours.

The Letters which you sent me in the behalf of your Merchants I have received,
whereby I rest satisfied of your tender love toward me, desiring you not to
take it ill, that I have not wrote to you her etofore, this present Letter I
send you to renew our loves, and herewith do certify you, that I have sent
forth my Firmaunes throughout all my Countries to this effect, that if any
English Ships or Merchants shall arrive in any of my Ports, my people shall
permit and suffer them to do what they please, freely in their Merchandising
causes, aiding and assisting them in all occasion of injuries that shall be
offered them, that the least cause of discourtesie be not done unto them, that
they may be as free, or freer than my own people.

And as now, and formerly, I have received from you diverse tokens of your love:
so I shall still desire your mindfulness of me by some Novelties from your
Countries, as an argument of friendship betwixt us, for such is the custom of
Princes here.

And for your Merchants I have given express order through all my dominions, to
suffer them to buy, sell, transport, and carry away at their pleasure, without
the let or hinderance of any person whatsoever, all such goods and Merchandises
as they shall desire to buy, and let this my Letter as fully satisfy you in
desired Peace and love, as if my own Son bad been the Messenger to ratify the
same.

And if any in my Countries not fearing God, nor obeying their King, or any
other void of Religion, should endeavor to be an instrument to break this
league of friendship, I would send my Son Sultan Caroome a soldier approved in
the wars to cut him off, that no obstacle may hinder the continuance, and
increase of our affections.


Here are likewise the Complements of two other Letters of later date, sent
home by Sir Thomas Row, whereof the first does thus bebegin.

WHen your Majesty shall open this Letter, let your Royal heart be as fresh as
a small Garden, let all people make reverence at your gate. Let your throne be
advanced higher. Amongst the greatness of the Kings of the Prophet Jesus, let
your Majesty be the greatest, and all Monarchs derive their wisdom, and Counsel
from your breast, as from a fountain, that the Law of the Majesty of Jesus may
receive, and flourish under your protection.

The Letters of love and friendship which you sent me, the present tokens of
your good affection toward me, I have received by the hands of your
Ambassador Sir Thomas Row, who well deserves to be your trusted servant,
delivered to me in an acceptible and happy hour, upon which mine eyes were so
fixed, that I could not easily remoove them unto any other objects, and have
accepted them with great joy and delight, etc.


The last Letter had this beginning.

HOw gracious is your Majesty, whose greatness God preserve. As upon a Rose in
a Garden, so are mine eyes fixed upon you. God maintain your estate, that your
Monarchy may prosper and be augmented, and that you may obtain all your desires
worthy the greatness of your renown, and as the heart is noble and upright: so
let God give you a glorious reign, because you strongly defend the Law of the
Majesty of Jesus, which God made yet more flourishing, for that it was
confirmed by miracles, etc.


What followed in both those Letters, was to testify his care and love toward
the English. Now all these Letters were written in the Persian tongue, the
Court language there, and their Copies were sent to the Ambassador, that he
might get them translated. The Originals rolled up somewhat long, were covered
with Cloth of Gold, sealed up on both ends, the fashion in that Court and
Country to make up Letters, though they be not all clothed there in such a
glorious dress.

In which Letters notice may be taken (what was observed before) how
respectively that King speaks of our Blessed Savior Christ. And here it will
not be impertinent to speak something of those who pretend to enlarge the name
of Jesus Christ in those parts, I mean,

SECT. XXX.
Of the Jesuits sent thither by their Superiors to convert people unto
Christianity, etc.

IN that Empire all Religions are tolerated, which make the Tyrannical
Government there more easy to be endured. The Mogol would speak well of all of
them, saying that a man might be happy, and safe in the profession of any
Religion, and therefore would say that the Mohammedan Religion was good, so the
Christian Religion good, and the rest good; and therefore by the way,

The Priests or Ministers of any Religion find regard and esteem amongst the
people. I shall speak something to this from my own particular usage there,
then very young, while I lived in those parts; yet when I was first there
brought into the presence of the Mogol, immediately after my arrive at his
Court, I standing near the Ambassador (for no man there of the greatest
quality whatsoever, is at any time suffered to sit in his presence) and but a
little distance from that King in his Goz^lca^, he sent one of his Grandees to
me, to let me know, that the King bad me welcome thither, that I should have a
free access to him when ever I pleased, and if I would ask him any thing, he
would give it me (though I never did ask, nor he give) and very many times
afterward (when waiting upon my Lord Ambassador) I appeared before him, he
would still show tokens of Civility and respect unto me, and I never went
abroad amongst that people; but those that met me upon this consideration, that
I was a Padrae (for so they called me) a Father or Minister, they would
manifest in their behavior toward me much esteem unto me. But for the Jesuits
there.

There was one of that order in Goa (a City of the Portugals lying in the
skirts of India) of very much fame and renown called Jeronymo Xauere, sent for
by Achabar Sha the late Kings Father in the year 1596. to argue before him the
doctrine of Christianity, there being always present a Moolaa or Mohammedan
Priest, and a third person, who followed no precise rule, but what the light of
nature merely led him to, and these two were to object what they could against
his reasoning.

The Jesuit in the Mogols own language (which was a great advantage to him)
began to speak first of the Creation, and then of the fall of man, in which the
Mahometans agree with us.

Then he laid down diverse grounds to bottom his reasonings on.

That man by Creation was made a most excellent Creature, endued with the light
of reason, which no other sublunary Creature besides himself had; then

That man thus endued, must have some rule or Law to walk by, which he could
not prescribe unto himself, and therefore it must be given him from above.

That this Law was first given unto man from God, and afterward confirmed by
Prophets sent into the world, in diverse ages from God.

That this Law thus delivered must needs be one Law, in all things agreeing in
it self. And so did not the Law of Mahomet.

That this thus delivered was most conformable to right reason; And so was not
the Law of Mahomet.

That man fallen from God by Sin was not able to recover himself from that
fall, and therefore it was necessary that there should be one, more than a man
to do it for him, and that that one could not be Mahomet.

That this one was, Christ God, as well as man, God to satisfy (the Mahometans
themselves confessing that Christ was the breath of God) and man to suffer
death as he did.

That Christ the Son of God coming into the world, about that great work of
satisfying Gods anger against man for sin, it was necessary that he should live
a poor and laborious life here on Earth (at which the Mahometans much stumble)
and not a life that was full of pomp, and pleasure, and delicacie.

That the Gospel of Christ, and other holy Books of Scripture, which the
Christians retain and walk by, contain nothing in them that is corrupt and
depraved; But there is very much to be found in their Alcaron which is so.

That the great worth and worthiness shining in the person of Christ, was by
far more excellent than any thing observable in Mahomet (for they themselves
confess that Christ lived without sin, when Mahomet himself acknowledges, that
he had been a filthy person.)

That the feigned and foolish, and ridiculous miracles, which they say were
done by Mahomet, were nothing comparable to the miracles done by Christ, who
(as the Mahometans confess) did greater miracles than ever were done before or
since him.

That there was a great deal of difference in the manner of promulgating the
Gospel of Christ, into the world, and the introducing of the Laws of Mahomet.

That Christ has purchased Heaven for all that believe in him, and that Hell
is prepared for all others that do not rely on him, and on him alone for
Salvation.

There were many more particulars besides these, which that Jeronymo Xaucere
laid down before the Mogol to ground his arguments on, which that King heard
patiently at several times during the space of one year and half, but at last
he sent him away back again to Goa honorably, with some good gifts bestowed on
him, telling him as Felix did, after he had reasoned before him, that he would
call for him again when he had a convenient time, Acts 24. 25. Which time or
season neither of them both ever found afterward.

These particulars which I have here inserted (with many more I might have
added to them, upon all which that Jeronymo Xaucere enlarged himself before the
Mogol in his arguings before him) were given unto me in Latin by Francisco
Corsi, another Jesuit resident at that Court, while I was there, and long
before that time. And further I have been there told b^ other people professing
Christianity in that Empire, that there was such a dispute there held, and for
my part do believe it.

For that Francisco Corsi he was a Florentine by birth, aged about fifty years,
who (if he were indeed what he seemed to be) was a man of a severe life, yet of
a fair and an affable disposition: He lived at that Court, as an Agent for the
Portugals, and had not only free access unto that King, but also encouragement
and help by gifts, which he sometimes bestowed on him.

When this Jesuit came first to be acquainted with my Lord Ambassador, he told
him that they were both by profession Christians, though there was a vast
difference betwixt them in their professing of it. And as he should not go
about to reconcile the Ambassador to them: So he told him that it would be
labor in vain if he should attempt to reconcile him to us. Only he desired,
that there might be a fair correspondency betwixt them, but no disputes. And
further his desire was that those wide differences 'twixt the Church of Rome
and us might not be made there to appear, that Christ might not seem by those
differences to be divided amongst men professing Christianity, which might be a
very main obstacle, and hinderance unto his great design and endeavor, for
which he was sent thither, to convent people unto Christianity there. Telling
my Lord Ambassador further, that he should be ready to do for him all good
offices of love and service there, and so he was.

After his first acquaintance, he visited us often, usually once a week. And as
those of that society, in other parts of the world are very great
intelligencers: so was he there knowing all news which was stirring and might
be had, which he communicated unto us.

And he would tell us many stories beside, one of which, if true, is very
remarkable. And it was thus; there are a race of people in East India, the men
of which race have (if he told us true) their right legs extraordinary great
and misshapen, their left legs are like other men's. Now he told us, that they
were the posterity of those who stamped St. Thomas the Apostle to death, come
thither to Preach the Gospel, and that ever since the men of tha^ race have,
and only they of that Nation, that great deformity upon them. Some few people
I have there seen of whom this story is told, but whither that deformity be
like Gehiza's leprosy, hereditary, and if so, whither it fell upon that people
upon the occasion before named, I am yet to learn.

The Jesuits in East India (for he was not alone there) have liberty to
convert, any they can work upon, unto Christianity, etc. the Mogol has thus
far declared, that it shall be lawful for any one, persuaded so in conscience,
to become a Christian, and that he should not by so doing lose his favor.

Upon which, I have one thing, here to insert, which I had there by report (yet
I was bid to believe it and report it for a truth) concerning a Gentleman of
quality, and a serv^nt of the great Mogol, who upon some convictions wrought
upon him (as they say) would needs be Baptized and become a Christian. The King
hearing of this convert sent for him, and at first with many cruel threats
commanded him to renounce that his new profession, the man replied that he was
most willing to suffer any thing in that cause, which the King could inflict.

The Mogol then began to deal with him another way, asking him why he thought
himself wiser than his Forefathers, who lived and dyed Mahometans, and further
added many promises of riches and honor, if he would return to his Mahometism,
he replied again as they say (for I have all this by tradition) that he would
not accept of any thing in the world so to do; The Mogol wondering at his
constancy told him, that if he could have frighted, or bought him out of his
new profession, he would have made him an example for all waverers; but now he^
perceived that his resolution indeed was to be a Christian, and he bid him so
continue, and with a reward discharged him.

The late Mogol about the beginning of his reign, caused a temple to be built
in Agra, his chief City, for the Jesuits, wherein two of his younger Brothers
Sons were solemnly Baptized, and delivered into their hands to be trained up in
Christianity, the young Gentleman growing to some stature (after they had had
their tuition for some years) desired them to provide them wives out of
Christendom fitting their Birth, in which having not sudden content, they
gave up their Crucifixes again into the Jesuits hands, and so left them; who
had these conjectures upon this their revolt, that either the King their Uncle
caused them to be Baptized; to make them more odious to the Mahometans, being
so near of his blood; Or else it was his plot to get them beautiful wives out
of Europe, which himself meant to take if he had liked them.

The Jesuit I last named Francisco Corsi upon a time (at our being there)
having his house, amongst very many more consumed by a sudden fire, it so was
that his wooden Cross, set on a Pole near the side of his house, was not (as he
said) consumed. Upon which he presently repaired to that Court, carried that
Cross with him, and told the King thereof. The Prince Sultan Caroome (who was
no favourer of the Christians) being then present, and hearing him talk how his
Cross was preserved, derided him, saying, that it was one of his fabulous
miracles, and further added, that he would have a fire presently made before
the King, whereinto he would have that Cross cast, and if it consumed not, his
Father himself, and all the people there would presently become Christians, but
if it did himself should be burnt with it. The Jesuit not willing to put
himself upon so sudden and so hot a trial, answered that he durst not tempt
God, who was not tied to times, and it might be that Almighty God, would never
show that people that infinite favor to make them Christians, or if he had
such a great mercy for them in store, it might be that the time of manifesting
it was not yet come, and therefore if he should now submit to that trial, and
Almighty God not please to show a further and a present miracle, his Religion
would suffer prejudice there for ever after and therefore he refused.

It should seem that the Jesuits there do exceedingly extol the Virgin Mary,
which I have gathered from poor people there, natives of that Country, who have
often asked Alms of me, when I stirred abroad amongst them, and whereas one
has desired me to give him some relief for Christ's sake, there are many who
have begged it for the Virgin Mary's sake.

Well known it is, that the Jesuits there, who like the Pha^isees, Mat. 23. 25.
that would go Sea and Land to make one Proselyte; have sent into Christendom
many large reports of their great Conversions of Infidels in East India; but
all these boastings are but reports; the truth is that they have there spilt
the precious water of Baptism upon some few Faces, working upon the necessity
of some poor men, who for want of means, which they give them, are contented to
wear Crucifixes; but for want of knowledge in the Doctrine of Christianity are
only in Name Christians. So that the Jesuits Congregations there are very
thin, consisting of some Italians, which the Mogol entertains (by great pay
given them) to cut his Diamonds and other Rich stones. And of other European
strangers which come thither, and some few others of the Natives before
mentioned. So that in one word I shall speak this more of the Jesuits in East
India, that they have there Templum, but not Ecclesiam.

When I lived in those parts it was my earnest desire and daily prayer, to have
put my weak hands unto that most acceptable; but hard labor of washing Moors,
that the Name of Jesus Christ might have been there enlarged (if God had
pleased to honor me so far) by my endeavors. But there are three main and
apparent obstacles (besides those which do not appear) that hinder the
settlement and growth of Christianity in those parts. First the liberty of the
Mohammedan Religion given the people there in case of Marriage. Secondly, the
most debaucht lives of many coming thither, or living amongst them who profess
themselves Christians, per quorum latera patitur Evangelium, by whom the
Gospel of Jesus Christ is scandalized, and exceedingly suffers. And lastly the
hearts of that people are so confirmed and hardened in their own evil old ways,
their ears so sealed up, their eyes so blinded with unbelief and darkness, that
only he, who has the Key of David, that shuts when no man can open, and opens
when no man can shut, can open to them the door of life.

I have some things more by way of inference to add unto this relation, which
con^eins matter, a^ it appears to me,

THE COROLLARIE AND CONCLUSION.
SECT. XXXI.
Of serious, and heedfull, but sad Considerations, which shall be my Corollary,
and Conclusion.

Diverse particulars have been already observed in this relation, and I should
have taken notice of many more, but that my desire was rather to feed and to
refresh, then to cramme and cloy my Reader.

But that I may not so do; while I am professing the contrary; for the
inferences already put, or those yet to be inserted) which either necessarily
or obliquely depend on my story, or those which are more remote from it; I
shall at all not despair of my Readers pardon (notwithstanding my length) if he
shall seriously peruse, and carefully improve what he finds here written.

The principal end whereof, was to make this Nation ashamed by many carriages
of the Heathens; As the Jews were provoked to jealousy by them that were not a
people. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. And as God instructs man by the Ox, and Ass, and Stork,
and Turtle, and Crane and Swallow, and by the little Ant, or Pismire, Creatures
which are only sensible(...) much more they may be minded of, and learn the
practice of some duties from men, people (though strange and remote) yet endued
with reason.

It cannot be denied, but that there is a special use to be made in a clear
sight or interview of Nations Persons, Things. Yet he is the best observer, who
strictly and impartially so looks about him, that he may see through himself.
That as the Beams of the Sun put forth their virtue, and do good by their
reflection: so in this case the only way for a man to receive good, is by
reflecting things upon himself.

Therefore it was a very good precept which Plato sometimes gave unto his
Scholars, when they took notice of any thing bad, or of an evil report which
they beheld in others for every one of them presently to ask himself this
question, number ego feci tale? have not I done the like? A Christian must put the
Question further, in asking his own heart, may not I do the like? for there is
nothing so bad acted by one, but another left to himself may commit the same,
so long as the seed and spawn of every sin, the rankness of corruption by
reason of the pravity of man's nature, is lodged in every soul.

When the Prophet Elisha (with tears running down his Cheeks) told Hazael that
he should be King, and being so what mischief he should do to Israel, a^ that
he should set their strong holds on fire, slay their young men with the sword,
dash their children, and rip up the women with child. Hazael replies, but what?
number quid servus tuus Canis? am I thy servant a dog that I should do this great
thing? 2 Kings 8. 3. As if he had said, can I be so forsaken of humanity, as to
do such monstrous and prodigious things as these? yet he lived to do them; And
so have others to act such things, as they would long before have heard with
abhorrency, if they had been told them; doing things in the present, which
future times would not believe could ever be done. And we shall have cause by
fa^ less to wonder at this, if we consider that the very best in the whole
cluster of mankind, left to themselves without curb or rein to keep them in
order, may become as base, as bad, as the worst upon earth, as the most
wretched in Hell.

Yet to see Nature very much refined in many Heathens, and to observe it again
to lie so mixed, amongst all its lees and dregs in as many, if not in thousands
more, of those who profess themselves Christians (is a thought which cannot
pass by those (who love and pray for the increase of Christ's kingdom) without
much sorrow and sadness to attend upon it.

The Consideration whereof (as of many other things, wherein the due and
deserved commendations, even of those very Heathens reflects shame upon us)
enforces me, least I should be like those Bottles, in Job 34. that were ready
to burst for want of vent; enforces me (I say) having my Pen in my hand to
expatiate, and to let out my thoughts much further (I confess) than the rules
and bounds proper to be observed in an Historical Narration can well bear. Yet
however, I shall take liberty in this my last Section to enquire into some
causes and reasons, why those Heathens compared with us, but a wilderness,
should be so fruitful in many Moral good performances, and we compared with
them a Garden enclosed, should be so barren and fruitless. And while I shall
thus enlarge my self, I would not be looked upon as one altogether out of my
way, though I be here found more at home than abroad, more in England than
India.

This Narrative in some foregoing passages has taken notice of some Mohammedan
precepts, as of others delivered by those Heathens, to be as Rules for their
followers to walk by.

Now for the Doctrine of Christianity which we profess, it is that which
teaches a man to look for true and eternal happiness by Christ alone, there
being no other Name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby they may be saved.
Acts 4. 12. No way under Heaven, but only by and through Christ Jesus and by
him alone. And therefore we must not look after another new way, as for a new
Christ, a new passion, a new resurrection or the like. And here Reader let us
sit down a little, and suffer our thoughts to be taken up with that, I called
before matter of serious, and sad, I and of admirable consideration.

They who have curiously surveyed the world, and the several Nations which
inhabits it, have divided the Inhabitants thereof into thirty parts, whereof
nineteen are Heathens; six are Mahometans, and five are Christians, by which
account (and I conceive that there is a good proportion in it) if all the
people which possess the whole face of the earth were numbered, there would be
but one in six, so much as to bear the name of a Christian. And to make up this
Number, we must take in all Christ's retainers throughout the world, who do but
bear his Name, as well as those which be his household Servants.

As all those poor superstitious blind Abissins in Ethyopia, as also all those
which inhabit Georgia, and the two Armenia's, under the Tyranny of the Turk
and King of Persia (of whom something before in my first Section) now with some
of those poor souls I have conferred, and could never hear any thing from them
unto any purpose, only they would tell me they were Christiano's, but why they
were so, I persuade my self that they could not render any thing like a good
reason, their whole Christianity, I fear almost all of it, lodged (as before)
in their very Name.

To these we must add the Russians, and the Muscovites, who are most sottishly
ignorant, for one of their Churchmen, being asked how many Evangelists there
were, answered, that he did not well know, but he thought four, and when others
have been asked such obvious and easy questions, that a very child might make
answer too, they would reply, that they could not give an answer unto it
themselves, But God and their great Duke knew all things. Now as they are a
most ignorant. so are they a most treacherous, profane, filthy and an
Idolatrous people.

But further all those beside that bear the Names of Christians in the world,
as the Iacobites and the Maronites inhabiting Palestina, the Greek and the
Romish Church, with all others bearing that name, must be added to make up that
number before spoken of.

And now to come unto the Reformed Churches (or rather unto those which call
themselves so) how few amongst them are Christians indeed; who are so in name;
when we may run through many Congregations, as the Prophet Jeremy, was
commanded to run through Jerusalem, Jer. 5. 1. And not find a man a Christian
in earnest and indeed, as well as in Name so.

I confess that it is nothing, or at least no hard matter for a man professing
Christianity to act Religion, to play devotion, to appear excellent upon the
Stage, as the Pharisees did, to be all for show, nothing for substance, to
affect the praise of men, as the Pharisees did, and to get the praise of men,
and this is all Hypocrites can look for. And I know that the worst of men may
sometimes be in good moodes. But as good thoughts are long before they come
into bad hearts* so they continue not long, making but a through fare in them,
being like a Post that passes by.

Bless me, even me my Father, was wicked Esaus request. No man would ever be
miserable, if it were enough for him barely to desire happiness. In the 1 K.
21. you may see Ahab upon his knees, but all that he showed was but the visard
of sorrow, not the face, or if the face, not the heart, or if the sorrow of the
heart, not the repentance, a sorrow for the judgment, not a repentance for the
sin. The very Devils houl to be tormented, and grief is not always a sign of
Grace. In the 7 of Hos. 14. mention is made of some, that houl upon their beds,
when they do not seek God in their hearts. And experience tells us, that the
hardest Flint and Marble will sometimes seem to drop, it being easy to appear
good, but hard to be so.

Copia rara bonorum, they who are good indeed are rare Creatures, all good and
sound Christians considered together, in respect of those, which are not so,
being like Whales in the vast Ocean, apparent rari nantes, which are seen
rarely (not as other Fishes) but here and there, no where to be seen in
Companies. Or like the shaking of the Olive tree, when the fruit is gathered,
Or like the gleaning of Grapes when the vintage is done. Esaias 24. 13. Called by
one or two out of a City or tribe. Jer. 3. 4.

Now if we put all this together; as first, that there is no way, no means to
attain salvation, but only in, and through Christ Jesus. Secondly that there
be very few in the world which do, in respect of those, which do not so much as
bear the Names of Christians. Thirdly, amongst those which bear this Name, very
few there are (as to men it appears) which shall have benefit by Christ,
compared with those that shall not, what shall we say to all this? even that
which the Prophet does in another Case, Es. 5. 14. that Hell has enlarged it
self, and opened its mouth above measure.

Alas poor Indians, who live in darkness and in the shadow of death and cannot
help it but woe be to Christians, who have light to walk by and will not improve
it; for the first of these they cannot know, for the second they care not to
know, they will not know, which makes them more excusable, because there is no
plea for the wilful.

Many Indians, poor souls! walk in that little light they have, unreproveably
in respect of moralites, and doubtless, if they knew better, would do better
(though I am persuaded, that God will never honor Jesuits so far, as to
convert them unto Christianity, notwithstanding their great brags of their many
Converts there) but what can be said in excuse of those, who profess themselves
Christians, and live amongst so many clear visions yet even there do so shut up
their eyes against their light, as that they know nothing in Religion as they
ought to know it.

Therefore, if we leave those Indians a while, and come home unto our selves,
who are collectively and together called all Christians, we shall find that the
succession of times here amongst us, have very much resembled that Image, which
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream. Dan. 2. whose Head was Gold, Stomach Silver,
Belly Brass, Thighs Iron, but the Feet were of Clay, for the lower we descend
the worse we are; for it may be truly observed, that in former times, in which
there was by far less knowledge, there was by much more honesty, more honesty
in men's dealings with men; and in order then to their duties due unto Almighty
God, what zeal and care, and constancy did our forefathers show, while they
snatched at the bread of the word, even from the midst of flames, and did
seek after it with all their endeavor, while they were surrounded with many
perils for so doing. Oh how happy would those esteem themselves to be, if they
could but purchase with much price and more hazard, any part or parcel of the
New Testament in that language they could understand it, how then would they
have solaced themselves with that sweet Companion. And if then they were put
into Prisons for glorifying God, in the self same prison they glorified him
more, and were willing to run as fast to Martyrdom, as people in these days to
pleasure, or Covetousness; were as prodigal of their lives in the service of
God, as others are of their money now in the service of their lusts, suffering
then more willingly for Christ Jesus, than most are now to speak of him, or for
him. In these times how many miles would people have gone to have heard that
word of God which they now turn their backs upon, the plenty of Ordinances
having made many poor, and long enjoyment of the word, made them wanton with it
weary of it, and ready to loath it, as the Israelite^ did their Manna, calling
it out of contempt this Manna, Numb. 11.

Hence, as pampered Bellys, and wanton Palates come to Feasts and Banq^ets,
where nothing can please but some odd Sauce, or some new invention: so very
many come to Sermons, and to the reading of good Books, and will be satisfied
with nothing but the vanity and froth of wit, though indeed it can give no
satisfaction being like wind in the Stomach, which fills but feeds not. Or they
come to hearing the word, as if (like Malchus the high Priests servant) they
had their right ears struck off, for they hear not with judgment, but
sinisterly, and often with prejudice to the person speaking and to the doctrine
delivered, be it never so excellent, and he that delivers it of much integrity
and desert. Such hearers as these regard not what is solid, substantial, and
of most use to inform the understanding, and to stir up the affections; but
that which is delightful, and pleasant to feed the phancie, with Oily
passages, which like the ^iddle of the Sun, goes through the wood, and through
the wood, and breaks never a stick, so these through the head, and through the
head, and stay not. Now those, who thus hear, are easily brought to admire
every thing they understand not, as to slight and scorn those plain and
wholesome, and profitable truths which are made easy to their understanding.
And from this strange lightness and vanity of their minds, they grow into a
neglect of the holy Scriptures, those fountains of living water, as of other
excellent treatises, which clear and explain them, to wade in Kennels or filthy
Puddles. And (as one well observes) commit Idolatry (as it were) with idle or
fabulous, or else other dangerous Books. Like Polician who preferred the Odes of
Pindarus before the Psalms of David. When (if he could have understood so much)
he might have found more weight and strength, and wisdom and eloquence in the
Holy Scriptures, than in all the writings of the world beside.

And certainly that very great neglect of the Holy Scriptures, has been the
Parent, which has brought forth so much Athisem amongst us; when people
instead of the writings of Moses, and the Prophets, and Evangelists, and other
parts of that most sacred Book, which was wont to lie in their windows, as
their best ornament and to sit in their uppermost rooms a^ their best Ghest in
their houses, there are many Romances, and other vain and frivolous stories,
which take up their places, much viciating and corrupting the minds of many
Readers; who rather than they should want Books, that might afford matter to
please and feed their wanton humors, have the Turkish Alcoran taught to speak
English.

Now from that little love and liking that men have, and bear to the truth,
there have proceeded many endeavors of la^e, to grub, and root up the very
foundations of Religion, by turning all fundamentals (which should be received,
not controverted) into questions and dispates, as it was in the time of the
Schoolmen about three hundred years last past, that by so doing had almost
disputed all Religion o^ of the Church then; that being a true maxim, which
these times have not well considered of, Pruritus disput andi, Religionis
scabies, that the itch of disputing breeds an Ulcer or Scab in Religion.

It was never worse in Israel, than when every one did that which was right in
his own eyes, and this we may take notice of in the 17. 18. 19. and 21.
Chapters of Judges. And how ill it has been in this Church wherein we live,
since the Reigns of Discipline have been slackened, or broken, he that has
eyes to see may sadly behold; and he who has an heart; which holds any pity in
it, may bitterly lament.

I have observed that there is very much order to be taken notice of in that
remote people, for the better carrying on of things amongst themselves, and
they find much outward peace and quie^ in it, though it be but a disorderly
order. But for that Order and Discipline, which is managed and carried on by
safe and good Rules, they are so consistent to the well being of a Church or
S^^te, as that they cannot be separated or severed without much damage and
detriment unto both; Order and Government in a State, that may give Rules to,
and require obedience from humane Societies. So Order and Discipline in the
Church, which may direct, uphold, encourage and defend people in the profession
of Religion. Because Anarchy and confusion must needs stretch, crack and break
those Bands asunder, which hold men firmly together in a State; and like a Moth
by degrees eats up the life, the very Soul of Religion in the Church.

In the 16. Chapt. of Numbers, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram with others their
accomplices and adherents (all men of leveling spirits, and consequently enemies
to order and Government) rose up and gathered themselves together against
Moses, and Aaron, and said unto them, you take too much upon you, seeing all
the Congregation is holy, every one of them; And probably upon this false
ground thought that they were as good, and therefore it was fit that they
should be as great as Moses: Superiority is one of the chiefest marks that
envy shoots at, and that made these now rise up against their Governors, and
they tell them that all the Congregation was holy, it had been very well if
they had been so, for then these of them would not have so misbehaved
themselves as they did. But every word they said was false, for what holiness
could there be in Mutiny, disobedience, rebellion and irreligion, if these
could make them holy, nothing could make them impure. But why did not those
Rebels lift up their weapons against Moses, as well as their voices? the reason
was because they could not, for God has put such impressions of Majesty upon
the face of lawful Authority, that wickedness is much confounded, even at the
very sight thereof. But what does Moses now? They rose up against him, and he
falls down before God, and petitions against them; There is nothing that can be
so mischievous to the wicked, as the imprecations of the righteous. Him that
escapes the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay, not by weapons, but Prayers;
which prayers of Gods people can reach ungodly men, where no Sword can touch
them, now if it be sad for any (to be so far out of the reach of Prayer) as not
to have the Prayers of Gods people put up for them it is by much more grevious
^o have the petitions of those that can so much prevail with God, sent up
against them. But I return to that I spoke too before.

He that takes notice of the carriage of those primitive Christians mentioned
in the three first Chapters of the Acts, shall ever and anon find one accord,
and one assent to be specified in them, to be spoken of them, how that they
were all of one mind, as if they had been all but one man. But in these times
wherein we live, the Devil has cast such a Ball of contention, even amongst
people professing Religion, that as in the eleventh of Genesis, division of
tongues hindered the building then; so division of hearts very much hinders the
building up of Christianity now.

Come to a Jew, and you shall find how that the principal thing which scares
him, and makes him to startle from the Gospel, is the dissension of those,
which profess it, which he interprets to proceed from the lack of Unity of
truth in the foundation thereof.

And what said the Papists long since (and it had been well if there had been
no truth in it, that what one preaches in the morning, another contradicts
after dinner. And what peace, what accord in that house (say they) where the
Husband is a Calvinist, the Wife a Lutheran, or one for Martin, the other for
Luther, the Servant an Oecolampadian etc. These latter times have fitted us
with more several names of distinction, and enough for a very numerous family,
where so many people of so many minds do sometimes meet.

They say of Bees, that stir and strife among them is a sign that their King
is about to leave them, to remove out of the Hive and be gone; Strife and
Division in Religion, is a sad presage, that either God has, or else is about
to leave a People. It is a principle in Nature, that vis unita fortior,
Strength united receives more strength; and Experience shows that Planks and
Timber well joined together make a Ship, but disjoined they cause shipwreck; So
connection of Stones and other materials make an House, but dissipation of them
a ruin; So Agreement of Christians builds up the Church, Dissension amongst
them pulls it down.

To him that demanded why Sparta had no Walls, the King thereof showed Citizens
well armed, and unanimous; unanimity, in the profession of the truth of
Religion would make it impregnable.

Division and subdivision are Terms that have their use in Arithmetic, but
they are dangerous to be heard of in Religion. This way therefore, and that
judgment, and the other opinion or persuasion, can never repair, but make more
breaches still in the Church of Christ, and I fear that much less than half an
age will make the Church in this Nation most sadly to feel and to rue the truth
hereof: for as God is one, so is his will one, and his way one, and oh how
happy were it for Christians, if they could get into, and keep in that way.
How many exhortations have we in the sacred book to peace and unity; live in
peace, and the God of peace shall be with you. How are they reproved in
scripture that walk disorderly, or are unruly, both Metaphors taken from
Soldiers that have their several stations assigned them, and if they break
their ranks it is very dangerous.

Let the same mind be in you which was also in the Lord Jesus, says the
Apostle, not the like but the same, not another but the same. And the same
Apostle sets, a mark upon those which cause divisons; And if they shall be
called the Children of God who are makers of peace, they must look out for
another name who are the breakers and disturbers thereof in this Church wherein
we live, where the connivencie at some, whose opinions were thought less
dangerous, has been unhappily made Genus Generalissimu^ from whence all the
errors that have been heard of late in this Nation have taken their rise: for
while liberty was given to some, it was taken by others, and from hence it is
come to pass, that all those Ancient heresies recorded by Irenaeus and
Epiphanius and others (which we hoped had been long since buried in
forgetfulness) have in these late times of liberty (I say) been raked up out of
their corruption, revived, and with new faces and glosses put upon them,
presented to this Nation in Printed booksPunc^ and have been preached by some,
and applauded by others and defended by more, to the endangering of the very
life and soul of Religion, and the utter overthrow of true Godliness here
amongst us.

It was well resolved by good and reverend Calvin, ne december quidem maria etc.
that it would not grieve him to sail over ten Seas, about a uniform draught in
the profession of Religion.

Other particular men have wished (and I believe most heartily) that all these
impertinent, and unprofitable differences about uniformity in the profession of
Religion, which so much disturb the peace of the Church of Christ, were buried
in their Ashes.

Oh how many are led away with perverse disputings, a people of uneven, unquiet
unpeaceable and untractable spirits, quite fallen off from their first
Principles, revolted and gone, so wedded to their own opinion, as that there is
no reasoning with them, for whatsoever can be said to the contrary, they will
be sure to hold their conclusions, they being wiser in their own conceits than
seven men that can render a reason. And that great opinion they have of their
own wisdom; that love and likeing they have to their own false way makes them
incapable either of Counsel, or cure; they peremptorily refusing to return into
the way of truth.

Many of these have abundance of error (which proceeds from their own Pride and
ignorance) settled in their hearts as Solomon says Pr. 22. 15. a child has
folly bound up in his heart, and in regard that all reasonings and disputings
in this case with them will do no good, (for we leave them still where we first
found them) it were very well for such, and much better for the Church of God
in this Nation, if the Rod of Discipline and correction were long enough, and
smart enough to drive it thence.

Yet the greater part of these pretend conscience for what they do, when indeed
(as before) it is the Pride of their hearts, the ignorance and darkness of
their minds, together with the perve^sness of their wills, which carries them
into, and keeps them in error.

For the conscience and will they are both lodged together in the same soul,
and therefore may be easily mistaken, or taken one for the other, as they have
often been, and still are by people of this Nation, wherein we live, whence it
comes to pass by the righteous judgment of Almighty God, that very many here
amongst us in these later times have been given up (their sin being part of
their punishment) to believe, and to be led away with lies, because they would
not entertain the truth.

Now, whereas the people in general of those remote parts, honor and reverence
a Church^an, and for that very reason because he is so: these before named (men
of corrupt minds) cannot endure us who are the called and allowed minister, and
publishers of the truth of God and merely for our office sake, bestowing on us
all terms of obliquie and scorn they can possibly invent, esteeming us as that
blessed Apostle St. Paul and other good men of his time were accounted by some
(...) 1 Cor. 4. 13. which properly signifies filth or dirt scraped off men's
shoes, we are made says the Apostle as the filth of the world, and are the
offscouring of all things unto this day, as if we were the very offall, or
filth of manking, unworthy so much as to have being upon the face of the earth.

And whereas again the Mahometans, and heathens give their Priests not only
honor, but comfortable maintenance and without all grudging; there are very
great numbers amongst us, being very much led away by principles of worldly
minded ness and coveteousness, cannot abide us for our maintenance sake, not
considering how that they who preach the Gospel must live by the Gospel, and
that by Divine right we have an honorable maintenance allowed unto us by
Almighty God, as it is most clear by many passages of the new Testament, as
well as the Old. And by the Laws of the Land, wherein we live, we have as great
a civil right to what we may challenge from the people for our livelihood, as
any that would deny it us has either to his bread, or shirt.

Yet this is contradicted by many, and the reason is, because they do, and will
contradict it, we have cause therefore to bless God for good Laws, to direct
and lead some, as to constrain and bind others, for there is no hope in this
case to work Convictions upon many, such as the Psalmist calls the beasts of
the people, who would defraud us, if they could, of all our just rights. For
doubtless if we were left wholly to their courtesy, we might expect no more,
probably not so much from them as Micha gave his Levite Judge. 17. 10. ten
Shekels of Slver by the year, and a little clothing, and victuals. Now those
Shekels were rated diversely, some at fifteen pence, others at twenty pence, and
the highest rate of them was two shillings and six pence the Shekel, but which
of these Micha gave his Chaplen I cannot tell, neither can I say what our
people in this Nation, left to themselves, would generally give their Minister
by a voluntary gift.

But doubtless it would go very hard with many, with most, who if they were
left altogether unto their peoples feeding, would speed little better than a
young Welsh-man of the university of Oxford sometimes did (and I am very certain
that the relation is true) who after he had gotten a lambe-skin upon his
Shoulders, being Bacheler of Arts, presently went into the Country for
preferments, (as he said) and what he found was but four Pounds a year (as he
told me) for reading prayers in a Church, with liberty in the Belfary to teach
a few Children, out of which he was to provide himself of food, and clothing,
and all other necessaries. I meeting him some half year after, he told me how
he sped, and that it was but small, but small, I asked the poor man further how
he did make a shift to live, he told me, that he had been sick of an Ague the
greatest part of that time, could take but little food, and if it had not been
so with him, his preferment would have starved him. And thus certainly would it
be with many others, if they were left for their livelihood merely to men's
courtesies.

Who think the bread of the Church sweet, and therefore would eat it up all
from us, and leave us with their good will no part thereof, and happily they
may find or imagine it sweet in their mouths, but in their stomachs it will
prove hard of digestion. Honey in the one, Gravel in the other, we leave these
to God the righteous judge, who complains, that he is robbed and wronged in the
injury done to us. Mat. 3. 8. And will find a time to reckon with men for all
these arrerages, and therefore if repentance and restitution in this case, when
wrong has been done, and after-reformation prevent it not, they will one day
find enough mould in the grave, and enough fire in Hell.

The Athenians (as Valerius reports) though they were Heathens, yet when
Phydias was to make for them the jmage of Minerva, (which Goddess as they
called her, was in very high esteem amongst them) and when that workman told
them that he would make it for them either in Marble, or Ivory, they heard him
thus far, but when he further advised them to have it made in Marble, because
that would be cheapest, they presently commanded him silence, and put him out
of doors.

And if Heathens could not endure to entertain the thoughts of cheapness,
though but in the making of an Idol, let them of this Nation blush, and have
their faces covered with shame, whosoever they be that love to serve God (as
they call it) but to be at as little cost in that service as possibly they can,
as if they studied Jeroboams Politics, whose Policy eat up his Religion, who
after he had usurped his Kingdom, did invent this taking snare to fasten the
people unto him, in giving them some seeming immunity in the profession of
Religion, telling them that it was too much for them to go to Jerusalem to
sacrifice. 1 King. 12. 28. (though they were commanded so to do by Almighty
God) and therefore he set up Calves, one in Dan, and the other in Bethel, that
they might stay at home, and serve God better cheap, with more ease, and
(doubtless as they were persuaded) with no less safety.

Again, further for that people, they do so highly prize those books in which
their laws are written, that they know not how sufficiently to esteem and
value them, and therefore will not presume to touch them without much
reverence. What shall I say, as to this, unto very-very many of this Nation,
and such as have long lived under the Ministry of the word, but having profited
nothing by it, know not how to put any valuation on it, and therefore esteem it
a trouble, a burden, rather then a blessing or benefit, and consequently would
be very well content (so they might be freed from all charge to the publishers
thereof) if the whole book of God were served as that roll was, written by
Baruch from the mouth of Jeremiah the Prophet, Jer. 36. Cut all in peaces and
burnt in the fire.

Such as these will never be persuaded to follow that most excellent counsel
which Solomon gives, Prove. 23. 23. Buy the truth, but sell it not. Buy it of
God by Prayer, buy it of Books by reading, buy it of Orthodox men by hearing,
buy it of other good Christians by conferring, buy it over and over again, you
cannot over buy it, Non Priamus tanti. -- There is nothing in the world to be
weighed against it, to be compared with it. But sell it not for a world. Yet
there are a great many dunghill men of the earth, who with Aesops cock prefer a
Barley Corn before the Pearl, and therefore are most unwilling to part with a
Penny for that most rich commodity.

It is strange, further to consider (as I observed before) and is very true,
that Mahometans should never see their Alcoran (though but a fardle of
falsehoods and fooleries) or hear any part of it read, without a show of great
attention, affection and reverence; and Heathens do so likewise at the hearing
of their precepts; and all of them give honor and maintenance which is
comfortable and without grudging unto those that be their Teachers: (though
they lead them quite out of the way) and men dare to usurp the names of
Christians and yet would be content (I would not be uncharitable in this sad
assertion) would be content (I say) so they might be at no charge for hearing
the truths of God. If there were no book of God at all extant, no Gospel, no
Minister to declare and publish it.

But the time will one day come, when people. (if ever they return to a right
knowledge of themselves) who have manifested so much thrift in the profession
of Religion, shall rue and repent the time that ever they did so. When they may
desire to see one day more of the Son of man, one day more of the Gospels,
which they so slighted before, but all in vain. When distress and anguish
comes upon them, then shall they call upon God, but he will not hear them
etc. the reason follows, because they hated knowledge. Prove. 1. 27, 28. etc.
because they hated and despised knowledge, as Esau was said to despise his
birthright, because he put no greater valuation on it.

I confess that if we whose business it is to teach and direct others, do not
in the first place labor to teach and instruct our selves. If we be like the
statue of Mercury which pointed the way to others while it stood still it
self; Or like Watermen, that look forward while they Row and move backward. If
we seduce or mislead our people, by Error, or Example; If we do not manifest
love, and mercy, and pity to our Congregations, but while we undertake the
oversight of their souls, either silently or else in passion or discontent tell
their persons that we care not for them. If we be not ready according to our
abilities for to open our hands to relieve the poor, and having ability, our
doors, to let in others, that they may know we do not desire to eat all our
bread alone; If we open not our mouths to pray for, and instruct all, If we
desire not to carry our people in our bosoms, as God commanded Moses, Numb. 11.
12. that those under our charge may be tender and near and dear unto our
affections, and to this end use all winning carriages toward them, that may
draw their affections unto us, and by loving us may be won to the love of him
in whose stead we stand, and whose messages we deliver; If we observe not all
Gospel Principles, to order us as well when we are out of, as when we are in
our Pulpits; If we study (as some did in days of persecution) to defend evil
actions in evil times; and by depraved reason, or perverted Scripture, could
make any thing appear lawful that might please either our selves, or others; If
we desire more of the Serpent then the Dove, and know better to flatter then to
reprove; If we resolve (as some have done in all ages) to close unto that side
on which the Purse hangs, and as it was said of Joseph's brethren (but in a
different case) that when they opened their sacks mouths they saw their
(...)ey* so if it may be said of us, Sacco so(...) app(...) number(...), that if
the knot of our designs* and endeavors be und^^e, (...), advantage worldly
profit will appear; and so voluntarily hamper our selves in those s(...)es the
world casts in our way to e(...)ap us, which in a special manner we must ^arne
others to take heed of; If we study wealth more then books, and appear to be
Bubulci potius quam pastores, neatherds, husbandmen, horscoursers rather then
shepherds, and being basely and sordidly covetous, care for our fleeces more
then our floc^s; Or if by being any other way negligent or scandalous we
forfeit that respect and honor and love we might challenge and receive from
others, we have no cause at all to complain if we find i^ not. But yet the
high calling of a Minister of the Gospel deserves honor, even then when the
person that dishonors it (above all others offending) deserves punishment.

On the contrary, if we the Messengers of God labor in our whole course to
walk in wisdom, As first, by showing all diligence in our calling, that by
Gods blessing upon our endeavors we may do our work with joy and not with
grie^; if we study to show our selves approved unto God (whatever we appear to
others) workmen that need not to be ashamed, and so make a full proof of our
ministry by speaking and pressing truths in season, rightly dividing the word
of God. Not putting honey in the Sacrifice when we should put salt, nor salt
when we should put honey: But wisely temper and mix together Law and Gospel
Mercy and Judgment, as occasion is offered.

If we dare be good in bad in the worst times, as those blessed Martyrs and
Confessors (of whom the world was not worthy) in their generations were, some
of them making their faith to shine clear through their flames, who I say
durst be good when others durst not be so, but out of cowardice (though they
called it prudence) did not speak out; speak home, speak all, but betrayed the
cause of God while they undertook to maintain it, and were ready to censure and
judge and condemn others for want of wisdom and discretion who did but their
duty herein, while they spoke by the pound and talent, words of weight, and
neither knew, nor in this case feared the faces of men, but did boldly reprove
any that durst boldly sin against God; by setting up a standard in the Name of
the Lord, against the Abominable Pride, the bold profaneness, the swinish
drunkeness, the beastly filthynesse, against the Armed Injustice, the crying
oppressions, against the gross errors, the damnable heresies the horrid
Blasphemies, as against all other provoking sins, that the envy of Satan could
tempt unto, or the corrupt nature of man yield unto, committed in the times and
places wherein they lived, crying loud against them, by lifting up their voices
like Trumpets, and if their cries could not pierce their deaf ears, that they
might be left unto that cry at midnight which will one day awaken sinners with
a witness.

For as Jericho was overthrown with a noise Josh. 6. so every carnal heart is
like a Jericho shut up, it must be spoken loud unto, or else it will not down.
The gentle spirit of Eli is not sufficient to amend children that are
ungratious; nor mild and gentle proceeding, men that are so; and therefore we
must be bold, when sin grows impudent and cannot blush.

A little more by the way. Where I would have my Reader to believe, that I
desire to retain and manifest as many Bowels of mercy and pity toward others,
as any can show. Yet howsoever I do believe this to be a truth (and I am not
alone in this judgment) that Heretics and dangerous Scismaticks must be
compelled to do their duties if allurement will not serve. When people are and
will be obstinate, they must not always be prayed and entreated. He that has
a Frenzy, must be bound. And he that has a Letbargie must be pricked up. A
member that is rotten must be cut off, least it endanger the whole body. He
that has strengthened himself in Heresy or Schism, must violently be pulled
from it. For some must be pulled out of the fire and saved by fear, discipline,
correction, and these, they whose sins proceed from wilfulness; others must
find compassion, whose faylings take their rise merely from weakness. Some
things must be commanded as well as taught; these things Command and teach 1 Timothy 4. 11. Command, (...), which word is used Act. 5. 40. and it is a Metaphor
taken from a Judge giving a charge unto others to do what he commands, or not
to do it at their peril.

But secondly, if in our whole course we manifest Zeal for God, Zeal joined
with knowledge and carried on with discretion; If we propose the honor of God
as our principal aim and end, and make Love, Charity, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, meekness, modesty, temperance to shine in our lives,
that it may be said of us in Particular, non tantum praedicat sed vivit, that
we live as well as preach; for then do we preach the truths of God as we
should, when we endeavor to live up unto those duties our selves which in our
exhortations we commend to others.

Briefly, if we live though not without failings, yet without scandal, in not
giving any just cause of offense unto others (whatsoever they may say or think
of us) and thus we must labor to live, (and we deserve to suffer without pity
if we do not so) that we may be inculpabiles though not inculpati, not meriting
the least blame, though we must look to be blamed by some, who will not pass a
right judgment of us, how good soever our deservings are, the way to heaven
being as well through evil as good report; and hence it comes to pass that many
times while we are most faithful we are most foully used, by scorns and
contumelies put upon us which we must gather up, and keep together, as so many
jewels hereafter to adorn our Crowns. In the mean time be very well content to
be the drunkards songs, rather then their Companions: To suffer any wrongs from
others rather then do the least unto any. To carry cheerfully the reproaches of
wicked men to heaven, rather then their applauses to hell. In a word if we be
(...), blamolesse, though not sinlesse, for so we cannot be while our bodies
are clothed with flesh, but if we walk by rule, evenly, carefully,
Circumspectly, we are most injuriously dealt withal, if we be denied any of
those respects and encouragements which are due unto us.

And further if there be no way to attain Salvation but only in and through the
merits of Jesus Christ, all those who presume to name the Name of the Lord
Jesus, should behold much beauty in the face of them which proclaim these glad
tidings, especially if they consider what fair Characters are put upon them by
Almighty God both in the old and new Testament.

In the Old Testament called the strength of a Kingdom, and the excellency of
their strength; The Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, 2 King. 13.
14. (see Ezekiel. 24. 21.) so it is said of the godly Levites the Ministers of
that time, that they strengthened the Kingdom of Judah and made Rehoboam strong
2 Chronicles. 11. 17. and so they do all places besides wheresoever they are.

In the new Testament they are called Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
Mysteries of God 1 Cor. 4. 1. Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. etc. and
God has promised to be with his faithful Ministers and Messengers always unto
the end of the world. Mat. 28. 20 to be with them in respect of themselves by
his presence and assistance, and to be with them either in mercy or judgment
in respect of others which do or do not entertain their Messages, and he that
hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me, says Christ
Luke 10. 16.

All which promises well considered and duly regarded, might remove far from us
many causes of just complaining which now we have, and may make us take up the
complaints of one of the Ancients and say, ad quae tempora reservati sumus, and
to repeat it over and over again, Oh to what times are we reserved: In what
days do we live.

For that people in East India; two principal causes of their more accurat
walking, compared with others, may be these. First because they keep close unto
those principles (most of them founded in the book of Nature) which are given
them in charge to walk by. And secondly, because the current of justice run
very quick in these parts (as I have observed before.)

But for us of this Nation, I need not enquire into the causes and reasons, of
the most fearful miscarriages, and of the many many evils committed amongst us,
they lie so open unto every knowing and observing man's understanding, and
therefore they want no great discovery. Only I shall take liberty to repeat
some of them which are first more general, and then those which are more
special and particular.

And first the general and Principal cause of all the evil in this, and
consequently of every nation under heaven, has its Original from that mass of
Corruption, that poisoned fountain, which has infected the whole world, or
from that leaven which has sowred the whole lumps of mankind. Ne mali fiant
times; Nascuntur. Every one is born bad as well as becomes so^ Sin sticking
more close to man's nature then his skin does to his flesh. And that Original
guilt like a fretting leprosy has eaten into the manners of all, corrupting
the whole man, in all the parts of his body, and in all the faculties of his
Soul.

The Persons of our first Parents defiled their Nature; But ever since the
Nature of every one defiles his person. Whence the hearts of all are evil from
their youth, estranged from the womb, and go astray as soon as they are born.

Now secondly, for those causes, which are more special and particular of the
increase and grows of wickedness in this Nation, they proceed much from the
want of restraint upon people, who are so naturally apt to wander out of the
way, that dare take any unfit and unlawful liberty they please to take.

An eye and a sword, make a fit emblem to express Magistracy, an eye to
observe and watch, and a sword to chastise some, and to support and defend
others. But when this eye is dim, or sleepy, then justice must needs faintly
draw her breath. When Canker and r^st grows upon the sword of Authority for
want of use, and thence cries out against him who should otherways manage it,
for bearing the sword in vain (as Canker and rust does from the covetous man's
silver and Gold, Ia. 5. 3. and is a witness against him,) it is a principal
cause why the qualities and dispositions of so many people amongst us (who
cannot go without a Reine) are so invaded, and vitiated, nay quite overthrown.

It is a good and a true saying* Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet; those
which are in Power contract the guilt of all those sins upon themselves which
they might restrain in others but do not. The great sin of Eli (otherwise a
good man) for which he paid dear, because when his sens made themselves vile he
restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3. 13. All, which the poor indulgent Father there
says unto his l^wde sons, was, why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil
doings by all the people: nay my sons, for it is no good report that I hear.
When any parties offending deserve if not death, yet some severe smart, it is
not enough to chide them, because there must be some proportion twixt the
Punishment and the offense. To give a light cheek for a great offense, or to
award the stocks for theft, or the whip for murder, is to patronize offenders,
rather then to punish them.

And further, the want of Discipline in the Church since the hedge has been
trampled down and kept so low about it, has apparently been the most principal
cause of the Ignorance and error and heresy and Athesme, which has corrupted
so many minds amongst us.

Then thirdly, the very shameful neglect of other public Persons in their
several places, as of Masters in their Families, of Parents toward their
Children, and lastly of Ministers in relation to their Flocks have been all of
them, and are most sadly mischeivous in this Nation.

I begin with the last I named, Ministers of the word, many of which are too
too careless their charges, in taking no considerable pains for what they
deliver unto their people, but on the contrary by hasty and undegested
meditations, offer unto God that which cost them nothing; Or that preach as
most hear, resting merely in the thing done.

And further, there are others much to be blamed likewise, in that they do not
study the people, that so they might apply themselves unto them in all ways of
instruction, reproof, or comfort. In the last Chapter of St. John's Gospel our
blessed Savior speaks thus to Peter thrice, Simon Peter, love thou me?
love thou me? love thou me? as if he had said, Do thou love me? do thou
love me? and do thou love me indeed? what then? show thy love to me in this,
feed my lambs, feed my sheep: I have bestowed my dearest blood upon them, do
thou bestow thy best pains.

A wise and faithful Minister of the Gospel must consider that he has lambs in
his flock as well as sheep, and therefore must fit his discourse unto all the
several capacities of his hearers, providing, as strong meat for well grown
Christians, so milk for Lambs and babes. And he must deal with these babes who
are but newly entered into the school of Christ, as parents do with their little
children when they begin to spel or read, encourage and praise them, though
what they do be not so praiseworthy: so if he see any the least spark of good
in them, to blow it up, and not rigidly shut the door of hope against those,
when God keeps it open; nor despise small, the smallest things in who^ the Image
of God at all appears.

All Congregations then consisting of some very low and weak, as of others of
more high and quicker capacities, those who have the oversight of them must
take special notice of this in applying themselves unto their several
understandings accordingly. Which if so, I think they do very ill who do very
much if not altogether neglect the Reading of the holy Scriptures in their
Congregations, as if that were not an Ordinance of God. And they are much to be
blamed likewise who endeavor to feed their people with Sauce rather then food,
as Ephraim fed on wind; Or as that Roman Emperor who seemed to entertain his
guests with flesh, and fowls, and fishes of diverse kinds, the figures of all
which were most exactly counterfeited in thin silver plate with paint put upon
it, and presented before them, which they might touch and admire, but they
could not taste, and much less carry away: so these amuse, trouble, and perplex
many of the people whom they undertake to feed, with abstruse passages, or
uncooth expressions, with high speculations, or with aerie notions, or with
Metaphysical terms, clouding and obscuring many truths, while their business
is to explain them; for by new and unfit dresses put upon them, they sometimes
make truths which are easy in themselves, more hard to be understood; and
because they themselves may happily understand their own meanings, conceive
that their hearers must do so likewise, as if they were all in the upper form
of Christianity, and if they were, would be no more able to understand some
passages preached and printed (though some women say that they understand them
very well) then the others were to eat of that Emperors dishes.

And as these high exalted notions are very useless (to say no more) in our
Preachings, because so few can reach them: so a tootoo much affected plaineness
in them, which many times are presented to hearers in such unseemly, and
unpleasing, if not absurd expressions (though I know that there is a learned
plaineness, as well as a plain ignorance) as in probability will never give
that information to the understanding, nor that motion and quickening to the
affections, as may work upon both, or either. In all labor there is profit
says Solomon Pr. 14. 23. which as it is true in earthly; so in spiritual
things, where the Crown is reserved for the diligent. And to what purpose has
the Spirit and wisdom of God strewed the Holy Scriptures over with the choicest
flowers and figures of Rhetoric, etc. with many full, but short sentences, if
they were altogether useless in our Preachings. In which we are commanded to
use all arguments we can possibly invent, to persuade men to take Christ and
Salvation; and when these persuasions come from our hearts, as well as our
heads, the greater pains we then take, and the more our discourses are
furnished and set off with Scripture Elegancies, the more succesfull and
prevayling we may hope they will prove.

They therefore (as I humbly conceive) judge very rashly, and very much amiss,
who in dispensing the word, conclude nothing to be so spiritual, as that which
is low, and flat, savouring of very little, or no pains, but is very idly, if
not ignorantly performed.

And therfeore as good parts of learning, but above all, much P^ety; so there
is great wisdom and prudence most requisite to be found in every faithful
Minister of the Gospel, for the better carrying on of his Ministerial Office,
the want of which is without doubt, a chief reason why we labor so much in
vain, and do no more good in our places.

Which good he that desires to do must be Carbo and Lampas, first burning in
himself, and then shining unto others. And further he must go in and out before
his people, not only in priority of place, but also in precedence of virtue,
and Godliness, encouraging his people in all ways of holiness, not only by
precept but example likewise. And as it is written of Julius Caesar, that he
was wont to be not in the rear, but head of his troops, and there spoke to his
Soldiers, non ite sed eamus, not go ye, but let us go: so must Ministers of
the Gospel speak unto those in their several charges, and lead them so, that
they may safely and boldly follow them.

And then, for the comfort of all those, who have been wise and faithful in
this their great trust, and have done the utmost of their endeavors to do much
good thereby; although they have not gained a fair Seal to their Ministry by
converting many souls to God, they shall be sure of a full discharge, who have
been thus faithful, whatsoever their success has been; that when their
careless and unprofiting hearers, that he bound over unto the judgment seat of
Christ, with this sad testimony against them, Noluerunt incantari; this or that
people would not be admonished, they shall receive a Quietus est, from that
great and high Tribunal, which shall speak thus, well done good and faithful
servant.

A second great cause of the many growing evils amongst us, proceeds very much
from the great neglect and remisness of Masters, or Governors of Families, who
do not take care as they might, as they ought to keep in order those under
their roofs, and to nurture them up in the fear of the Lord. For examples
herein have much power in them to sway either to good or evil. And the greater
the example is, the greater hope if it be good, but if evil the greater
danger; for greatness has ever a train to follow it, either in good or evil.
Abraham, and Joshua, and David were great examples of good herein, as he that
turns to their stories may clearly see.

But on the other side Jeroboam is seldom mentioned in the writers of Israel,
but he draws a tail after him like a Blazing Star, Jeroboam the Son of Nebat,
who did not only sin himself, but made Israel to sin 1 K. 14. 16. by whose
high precedence, but evil example, he did exceeding much mischief so defiling
his Throne, that if ye look forward upon all the Kings of Israel his
successors, you shall not find amongst them all one good man. Omnes ad unum
from Jeroboam the first to Hoshea the last King of Israel they were all naught.
Now they who were so bad in the Government of a Kingdom, without doubt could
not be good in the well ordering of a family.

And hence let all know that as they may do much good, and consequently reap
much comfort, in the true managing of their families: so on the contrary they
shall be sure one day to suffer, and that heavily for the disorder of them,
when they shall be called to a strict account, not only for their own sins,
but sor the sins of others, under their charge, who by their precedence and
example they have drawn into, or else by their connivency suffered in
wickedness.

A third (and that shall be last cause I will name of so much increase of
wickedness in this Nation, and because it is so destructive and mischievous, I
shall speak more largely to it) is the great carelessness of Parents in their
not looking to their Children in their first institution and breeding; for
without all doubt the very sad miscarriages of all sorts of Children, of higher
and meaner extraction or descent, proceed very much from their first ordering;
when many Parents quite undo their Children, stulto and improbo amore; by
reason of their foolish indulgence, the great sin of Eli (before spoken of) who
brought up his Sons to bring down his house; who, for giving them their way too
much, was said, to honor his Sons more than God. So David after him was
observed over much to indulge his Son Absolon, when he was young, and to
requite him for this ill breeding, Absolon lives heavily to vex his Father
Davia when his Father was old.

The Children of many Parents (especially of great ones) bred when they are
young at home or abroad, are very often left too much unto their own will, to
learn or else to do almost what themselves please, when getting few, or no
grounds of learning in their youth or nonage, suddenly after many of them
travel, and then wanting for the most part good guides for their youth, they
being abroad first see naught, and then be naught, and after all this without
special mercy, they dye naught.

I do not deny but that there may be very many good experiences gaind by
travel, but very few do, in respect of those, which do not improve that
advantage: whence it often comes to pass, when a great number of these come to
write themselves men, being unable to read Books for want of those principles
of learning they might have gotten; and unwilling to settle themselves in other
good employments, whereby they might be enabled to give a fair account of their
precious time, they often learn to drink, and swear, and rant, and game, and
Court Women (to speak it in the modestest sense) or to spoil good Clothes, they
resolving to enjoy the pleasures that are present, as if they had been born to
no other end but to sit down, and to eat and drink, and to rise up to play.

Hence with those mad youngsters mentioned in the book of Wisdom, they say one
to another, Come let us enjoy the good things that are present, let us fill our
selves with costly wine, and let not the flowr of the spring pass by us; let us
Crown our selves with rose buds before they be withered, let none of us go
without his part of v^l^ptuousness* let us leave tokens of our joyfulness or
jollity in every place, for this is our portion, and our lot is this, leading
such lives as the very Heathens do abhor.

For they will deny themselves nothing that may please their sensual
appetites, not wine in bowls nor forbidden flesh, nor any thing beside; while
they feed without ^ear, and drink without measure, and swear without feeling,
and live without God, dancing a round about the mouth of Hell, into which they
fall and perish everlastingly before they are aware, not considering how others
have sped which have so done before them. As Ad^niahs feast ended in horror. So
Belshazzars Banquet concluded with a Cup of wrath. So the Philistines mirth in
their unavoydable ruin. And thus the peaceable days of the wicked are
described, who spend their lives in pleasure, and suddenly they are in Hell;
all their whole mirth put together, being but as the merry madness of one hour;
for they must assure themselves, that when their meal is ended, a great and
heavy reckoning will follow.

Of all the Ages of men there is no time of life whereon we may ground more
hope, and more fear than in Childhood and youth. And therefore those Parents,
who would have comfort in their Children, must look very carefully to their
first seasoning; For as it was the Policy of the King of Babylon, Dan. 1. 4. to
have the Children of the Jews, and not the old men to be taught the language of
the Chaldeans: so it is the subtilty of the Devil, to have Children, while
they are very young, traynd up in strange language, and to have them corrupted
with evil habits, which may make them, like a vessel, that has ill liquor
put into it at the first, taste of their first seasoning while life remains.

That dangerous time of youth, by the envy, and cunning, and help of Satan,
carries very many young men left too much unto themselves into most shameful
courses, They being of themselves like a Ship on the maine Ocean, that has
neither Helm, nor compass, and therefore moves it knows not whither. Or in
this, like weak limbed Children, who, if they be suffered to go too much, and
to soon, lame themselves for ever.

Yet many think that in that time of life, their youth gives them some liberty
and privilege, aliquid aetati juvenum est concedendum, they say, which words
abused, make them the Devils dispensation, and not Gods; though they may fondly
and falsely suppose, that because they are young, they may be borne withal in
any thing they do, as if Pride, Drunkenness, Whoredom, and the like most
fearful exorbitances, were not faults in youth, they not considering that want
of years and want of judgment (which judgment enables to put a right
difference 'twixt good and evil) usually go together. And that youth is like
unto green wood, which is ever shrinking and warping; for as with the ancient
there is wisdom, Job. 12. 12. so pampered and ungoverned youth is commonly
rash, heady, insolent, wedded to its own will, led by humor, a rebel to
reason, a subject to passion, fitter to execute than to advise: and because
youth cannot consider, as it should, it is no marvel if it so often miscarry.
The ways of youth being steep, and slippery, wherein it is very hard to stand,
as very easy to fall, and to run into most fearful exorbitances: It being the
usual manner of young men, so much to intend (as they falsely think) the love of
themselves in the love of their pleasures, as that they cannot attend the love
of God. And therefore that man may much better hope to come safely and happily
unto the end of his course, who has passed over his first journey (I mean his
youth) well,

But (which is a very great hinderance unto many young men, when they do but
begin to enter upon their way) there are many Parents which do not desire, that
their Children should be good betimes, they being misled by one of the Devils
Proverbs, which is a young Saint an old Devil. It is true, that some, who have
been wild and wicked in youth, have proved good in age: But it is a most tried
truth, to encourage the groth of early holiness, which has been made good by
much experience, that a Saint in youth, an Angel in age.

And truly very many Children may thank their Parents for much of the evil
that is in them, beside their Birth-sin, poisoning them (as they do) by their
evil examples. Children confidently believing that they may lawfully do any
thing, they see their Parents do before them, hence Juvenal speaks well

Maxima debetur pueris reverentia --

Therefore Parents should take heed what they do, or what they spe^k before
their Children. As it is writ^en of wise Cato (though an Heathen) that he was
wont to carry himself with as much grav^ty before his Children, as if he had
been before the Senate of Rome. The neglect of which care, shall give Children
cause one day to speak that in truth unto their Parents, which Zipp^rah
sometimes sp^ke unadvisedly unto her husband Moses, when he had Circumcised her
son, Ex 4. 25. Surely a bloody Husband art thou unto me: so these will say to
their Parents that they have been bloody Fathers, and bloody Mothers unto them,
in giving them a Serpent, when they should have given them a Fish, a stone when
they should have given them bread; in teaching them to swear, when they should
have taught them to pray, un^oing them by their evil, when they might have
done them much good, by their holy and unblameable examples, as also by their
early instruction, and their timely correction, which might have prevented
(through Gods blessing) their rushing into the pit of ruin.

But why Parents thus generally fail in their duties, we need not much marvel,
if we consider the carelessness or rather inability of most Parents to instruct
their Children

Scilicet expectas ut tradet matter honestes,
Aut alios mores quam quos habet. --
Ju. No Mother can good precepts give,
Who has not learned her self to live.
It is not to be hoped that Parents should give their Children better precepts
than they have learned themselves.

But here I must prevent an objection, and it is this. That if Parents be not
wanting in their duty herein, it is not all the care they can possibly have,
which of it self can make good Children. For how many good Children have fallen
from bad Loins: And how many gracious Parents (to their greatest grief) have
been the Fathers and Mothers of most untoward Children. The reason is, because
goodness does not like lands and goods descend from Parents to Children, for
God will be the free giver and bestower of all his Graces, and will have mercy,
on whom he will have mercy. So then if our Children be good, we must thank God
for that; if evil they may thank us and themselves, us for their birth-sin,
and many times for more of their evil then so (as before:) themselves, for the
improvement of that evil in the ways of wickedness.

However we may conclude this as a rule, that those Children of all others, (in
all probabilities) are like to prove best, who have been best seasoned in their
young years; for train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old,
he will not depart from it, Pr. 22. 6.

In the wars 'twixt Syria and Israel, there was a little Maid of Israel taken
by the Syrians 2 Kings 5. and she was put to wait upon the wife of Naaman the
Syrian. That Naaman was a great man with his Master the King of Syria, and
honorable, says the story, etc. but he was a Leaper, and that stain of
Leprosy sauced all his greatness so much, that the poorest man in Syria would
not have changed place with him, to have had his skin to boot. There is no
greatness that can exempt a man from the most loathsome and wearisome
conditions: doubtless that Leprosy, must needs be a grievous burden to that
great Peer. The Maid of Israel tells her Mistress, would God my Lord were with
the Prophet which is in Samaria, for he would recover him of his Leprosy Her
Mistress presently tells her Lord, who upon this report immediately repayr unto
that Prophet, and is healed of his disease. I report that story to this end,
that it is very good for Parents to acquaint their Children while they be young
with the knowledge of God and of his Prophets, for we do not know what great
good they may do by it, The general neglect of which, and of many other duties
of Parents, for the good and welfare of their Children, as the great faylings
of others (I have named) in their several relations, are principal, and most
apparent causes of the distemper and sickness of the whole Body of this Nation,
even from the sole of the foot, unto the Crown of the head.

Never such liberty taken by youth of all sorts, of both sexes as now. How
generally do they forget God, the guide of youth, for how do they slig^t him by
that irreverence they show in religious duties, they being seduced in ways that
carry them from Religion, and consequently* from God. What lightness,
looseness, pride, drunkenness, and profaneness may be observed in too too many
of them. What a general debauchery expressed by wickedness in life ^ath eaten
into the manners of such multitudes of the younger sort of people, more by far
in the present, than in foregoing times; whence it comes to pass, that there
never was such a scarcity of good servants. So that if Almighty God (that can
do what he will do) do not please to put ^u^bs on them that may reform, or
restrain them, the succeeding age is like to prove a monstrous generation.

How much uncharitableness and censoriousness, that is accompanied in some with
blindness of mind, and consequently with error, about the things of God, has
taken up the thoughts of many more of riper years.

And lastly there is so much covetousness, which turns so many wholly into
themselves, without respect had unto any others, which makes so many steer
their course for wealth, esteeming any thing that may be gotten to be good
gain, being resolved to be rich however they come by wealth, though that they
get be like the waters of Bethelem 2 Samuel 23 17. Which David there calls blood,
because gotten with so much hazard and jeopardy of their lives that got those
Waters: So of the lives and souls too of those that get this wealth; and yet
for all this for Judas his wages they will do Judas his work; they want pieces
of silver, and must have them as Judas had, though they earn them as dearly,
and suffer for them as deeply as Judas did. Esteeming gain godliness, when it
is godliness that is gain; the hearts of so many are so bent upon, and run
after their covetousness in these present, untoward and self seeking times.

The Prophet Esaias once cried, Es. 45. 8. O ye Heavens drop down Righteousness!
when righteousness was taken up into the Clouds: So may we say, Oh! ye Heavens
drop down kindness! Love, Charity in our times, that people may know that they
were not borne only for themselves, that they came not into the world to
laugh, and joy, and rejoice to themselves, nor to eat and drink, or to thrive
and grow rich, and to live alone to themselves, and to their own private
relations, but for others, who stand in need of them, who by the very
Prerogative of mankind, may challenge an interest in their succor and service.

The consideration whereof bids me turn back mine eyes again, upon some
forementioned passages in this relation, that set forth the most excellent
Moralities, which shine in those Indians* and by reflection do very much shame
us. And this does further make me call to mind a passage of Erasmus, in that
Colloquie of his called convivium Religiosum where admiring Soorates an heathen
upon the same account, said, that he could hardly forbear sometimes to cry out
Sancte Soorates Ora pronobis: Now (as before I have observed again and again)
that heathens should out-go us, in any way that is safe and good, that they
should outstrip us as they do, us that have so much advantage of them in the
way, us that have so much assurance (if we run well in the race set before us,
and chalked out to us) to get the better of them in the end: Tha^ heathens (I
say) should walk in many things so exactly, and being but heathens do so, as it
marvelously condemns, so it may deeply humble many of us, who bear the names
of Christians, and make us passionately to cry out, and say.

Oh Religion! (thou, when thou art professed in purity and power) which bindest
God to man, and man to God! Where art thou? What is become of thee, Whither art
thou gone? Whither departed? Where shall we seek thee, where find thee? If not
very much amongst those which profess thee, some, (and they the greatest number
by far) lay thee altogether aside, some make thee to consist too much in forms,
and others as much in affected Phrases (which are made by many a new Shibboleth
to distingush one, man from another. A very great Number make this a
Complement; as others a cloak. Some slight thee, and others think themselves
above thee, some make thee an any thing, and some an every thing, and some a
nothing: And yet for all this, it is true of very many by reason of their great
unsetledness. That while they run into these wide extremes,
Religion, and conscience are their Theams.


Without all doubt Machevils position is no good Divinity, which advises men,
to take up the profession of Religion, but to slight the practice and power
thereof.

Da justum sanctum que videri.

As if they resolved to make the Church of Christ a Theater or stage to act a
part on, as if it were enough for a man to seem good and not to be so.

But let all assure themselves, that their sin; their own sin will first or
last discover them, find them out. When they shall further, by sad experience
feel, that the revenges of Almighty God, are never so deadly, never fall so
heavily upon sinners, as after they have had most way in sinning. And that God
will find a time to pull off all peoples vizards. Thamar muffles her self to
take a short pleasure Genesis 38. 15. And others muffle their consciences for a
time, but as Thamar was discovered, so shall all hearts be laid open, and
pulled out of their thickets wherein they would hide themselves, as Adam when
he had sinned would have done Genesis 3. when a man shall say to his conscience as
Ahab sometimes spoke unto Elias, have thou found me O mine enemy? certainly if
the breasts of many were ripped up, the wounds, and rents and breaches, which
guilt has made there, would most visibly appear.

Tuta esse scelera, secura non possunt.

A man may think to sin without danger for a time, but never without fear. Oh
this conscience, when it is thoroughly awakned, will appear to be a very
strange, a terrible thing if, it be full of guilt, for then it will swell so
big, as that it will be ready to break open the breast of him that bears it.

And it would do so, but for these Reasons, first, because it is many times
hoodwink't, mask't, or seared, as with an hot iron, having the mouth of it (as
before) bung'd up, or hooft over, and this makes it not to see, or to be
sensible of its present condition.

And 2. a man by the malice and cunning of Satan may be brought to esteem the
doing of things good, which in themselves are most horrid, and damnable. Now
conscience is to the soul, as it is represented to it, the time shall came that
he which kills you shall think he does God good service, and upon his false
ground, a man may be never troubled at the acting of the worst things, they
shall think they do God good service, but they do but think so, and shall first
or last bemade to pay dear for so thinking and so doing.

But however, this will be found a truth, that conscience is ever marked and
observed by her own eye, though no other eye perceive her; followed she is, and
chased by her own foot, though nothing else pursue her; she flies when no man
follows; and and has a thousand witnesses within her own breast, when she is
free from all the world beside; she is a worm that ever gnaweth; a fire that
ever burns; and though a guilty man could escape the hands of the ^verliving
God, yet should he find it misery enough, and more than he could possibly
bear, to he under the rack, or lash of a never dying conscience; the
consciences of the wicked being so filled with the guilt of sin, that there is
no ^oom left for the peace and consolation of God to dwell in them. ^ain felt
this weight like a Talent of head upon his soul, which he thought could never
be removed, and therefore he (...)ers a blasph(...)y against the grace of God
never to be pardoned; for if he could have been as forward to ask pardon for
his sin, as he was to seek protection for his body, he might have found it.
But, Nemo polluto queat anim^ mederi, No cure so difficult as the cleansing and
healing of a polluted soul, no balm in Gilead, no Physician there can of
himself help it, and as all the wealth of the world cannot buy off the guilt;
so all the waters in the Sea cannot wash off the filth of one Sin.

-- Arctoum licet,
Moeotis in me gelida transfundat mare,
Et tota Tethys per meas currat manus,
Haerebit altum facinus.
said the guilty man, -- The Northern Sea,
Though cool Meotis pour on me,
And The Ocean through my hands do run,
Guilt died in grain, will yet stick on.


Oh this fear, when it takes its rise from guilt, is a most terrible thing. It
is written of Tiberius the Emperor (a very politic and subtle, but a most
prodigiously wicked man, who to compass his ends the better, was summus
simulandi and dissimulandi artifex; A very Masterpiece of dissimulation) that
for a time he seemed to stand in awe of no power either in Heaven or earth, but
after this monster had retired himself from Rome to Capri^, for the more free
enjoyment, of his most noisome lusts, in process of time he had such terrors
fell upon him, and his natural conscience did so perplex him, as that he came
to be afraid of every thing, as of his friends, his guard, nay he became like
Pashur, whom the prophet Jeremy calls Magor-missabib, a terror to himself, like
the man in the Tragaedy, who would fain have run out of himself saying, Me
fugio etc. I fly from my self-guiltiness would fain keep out of sight, and such
shall one day be the horror of the damned, as that they would hide themselves,
if it were possible, even in hell.

A wounded spirit who can bear! it is written of Cajus Marius, and of Mutius
Scaevola (men famous in the Roman story) that the first of them patiently
endured the cutting off his flesh, the other the burning off his right hand. A
wounded estate, a wounded name, a wounded head, a wounded body may be endured;
but a wounded spirit, a wounding conscience is unsupportable, cannot be born,
cannot be endured: being like unto a gouty joint, ^o sore and tender, as that
it cannot endure it self; the truth of all this being known by sad experience
of all those, who either have been, or for the present are pressed down under
the weight thereof.

I will now draw toward the conclusion of this discourse, but shall first make
this request unto him that reads it, that I may not be mistaken in any
parti^ulars laid down in my many digressions, for my witnesses are in Heaven
and in my own bosom too, that I desire to be angry and offended at nothing so
much, as at that which angers, and displeases Almighty God, hating that which
is evil in all, (and as far as I can know my own heart) am desirous to do it
in my self first and most. But the sad consideration of the strange and still
increasing wickednesses of this Nation (wherein we breath) bid me take leave to
enlarge my self far in this case, and to rebuke sharply or cuttingly, to go to
the very quick; I say the wickednesses of this Nation, to whom that of the
Prophet Jeremiah may be fitly applied, that we are waxen fat, we shine
overpassing the deeds of the wicked, putting far from us the evil day while we
laugh out the good, lying under the most heavy weight both of spiritual and
other judgments, but feel them not, having been like Solomon's fool, that
could laugh when he was lashed, in many things justifying Turks, Pagans,
Heathen, in being corrupted more than they all. Our sins being like that tree
which Nebu^hadnezzar saw in his vision, whose top reached up to Heaven, and
has spread it self in its branches over all the parts of the earth here below.

But I shall not lead my Reader into a dark and melancholy cloud, and leave
him there;

for notwithstanding all these sad and horrible truths I have named, I must say
this, that if God have a people, a Church in any place under Heaven, (which
none but an Atheist or a Devil will make doubt of) they may be found in this
Nation, and in that we may take comfort, for they are the righteous that
deliver the Island, the remnant that keep it from desolation, and were it not
for those few, whom the very great multitudes, amongst whom they are mingled,
scorn and hate, this Nation could not continue, which should make the wicked of
this land, if not out of piety, yet (if they understood themselves) out of
policy to love and respect those for whose sake they fare so much the better.

God has had a Church long planted in this Nation, and I dare say that since
the Gospel has been published to the world, it was never preached with more
Power than it has been here in these later times; As for our Forefathers,
they instead of the food of life, issuing from the two breasts of the Church,
the Law and the Gospels, were made to feed on moudly and fennowed Traditions.
The book of God was sealed up from them, in an unknown tongue, which they could
neither understand nor read, but for us at this present day, our Temples are
open, we may come, our Bibles are engshed, we may read, our Pulpits frequented
we may hear, and from these considerations arises a great cause both of
wonder and grief (unto every one who loves the glory of God, the happiness of
his country, and the good of himself and Relations) to consider that here,
where there is so much light and truth, light to guide, and truth to settle men
in the way of life and Salvation, there should be so much wavering, wandering,
and wickedness.

For ask among the Heathens who has done such things? the Virgin Israel has
done very fil^hily, or an horrible thing, as if the Prophet had said in other
language, Strumpets, Harlots, Prostitutes, (who sell, their Souls with their
Bodies) had done but their kind, but for Israel, whom I have esteemed as a
Virgin, for England which I have owned above all the Nations of the earth to do
such and such things, who would have thought it? Nay, further (as before)
considering all the means, that we of this Nation have had, above all the
Nations in the world beside to teach us to know God, and the great variety of
mercies we have enjoyed, to provoke us to love God (that have had the wind and
Sun of all other people) the Sun shines not upon a Nation (if we be considered
collectively, and together) worse than we are.

It was sometimes prophesied of Jerusalem, that Jerusalem, should become so
bad, that it should justify Sedome, Ezekiel. 16. we of this Nation considered (as
before) are a people that justify Jerusalem, oh what proficients have we been
in the School of Satan, when as those sins, which the Apostle would not have so
much as named among Christians, have been so common amongst us, so that we may
boldly say how that Sodom and Gomorrah, and those other Cities, which Almighty
God overthrew in anger, and repented not; those Cities which suffer the just
and eternal vengeance of Almighty God, lie not in Ashes for greater sins than
have been committed amongst us.

But I can take no pleasure to be long raking in filthiness, and corruption, I
will therefore make have to give over this unpleasing, unsavory and nauseating
discourse; The rather, because I know, that neither counselling nor declaming
against the sins of the present times does much good. This I believe that if I
were filled with a spirit of false-hood and could prophecy of wine and strong
drink, my book would want no buyers to read, and like it: but I shall leave
that discourse unto those that have not heard of Death in the Pot; for my part
I shall desire to be enrolled in the number of those, who can wish with the
Prophet Jeremy, that their heads were waters, and their eyes fountains of
tears, etc. and that they had in the wilderness a lodging place, that they
might set down and weep day and night for the sins of the Nation and places
where they live; that they might sit down, and weep, and weep, over and over
again those sins, figh and cry for the Abominations they must needs take notice
of, by which retirement they might be freed from seeing and hearing, and from
vexing their Souls, from day to day at the unlawful deeds, and filthy
conversation of others and have better leisure to think themselves out of this
wicked world.

Oh what cause have we of this Nation to believe that judgment is near, when
the Lord has tried us every way, and all has done us no good. As f^rst God
has been exceeding good unto us in many favors, so that it might have been
said of England (as one speaks of Israel) that the Lord made that people a
president of his love and favor, that all the Nations of the world might learn
by them, from their example what God could do, and what he would do for a
people whom he loved, but we have not been bettered by these benefits, and
doubtless if many amongst us had not been so blinded with light, and sick of
being well, the body of this Church and state had never received such wounds as
seem incurable. Oh if we had not sinned away our mercies; God would never have
taken away any of his loving kindnesses from us: but our offenses have been
marvellously increased by our obligations, there being no sins of so deep a die
as thosewhich are committed against mercy.

The Lord has tried us otherwise, his judgments have been in the land, and the
keenest of all temporal judgments, the sword, and the sharpest of all swords,
that which peirceth deepest* because, drawn amongst our own selves, which has
made us our own spoylers, and our own prey, yet we the inhabitants hereof have
not learned Righteousness, we have been encouraged by peace, and we have
slighted that, and we have felt the sword of war, and that has done us no
good. -- Saevior armis
Libertas nocuis.


Liberty as it has been abused, having given us deeper and more dangerous
wounds, than ever the sword could. So that neither the Majesty of God, nor the
Mercy of God, the Goodness of God, nor the greatness of God, the favor of God,
nor the frown of Almighty God has wrought upon us to reform us.

Now all these particulars put together, they may give us great cause to fear,
what we shall be made to feel, the weight of many sad conclusions, which for
the present we will not regard; as that sin committed and unrepented of, ever
leaves a venom and a sting behind it; and therefore, that to sin, is not the
way to prosper, that the longer a reckoning runs one, the greater still the
Sum; and that the further compass a blow fetches about, the heavier still it
lights.

I shall speak it again, under how many sad discouragements have many able
sober minded, and orthodox Ministers of the Gospel labored in these later
times, who as if they had not enemies enough abroad, find them at home in their
own house, their own coat, proprijs pennis configimur, wounded we are by our
own quills, by some who are excellent at close bites, and though they speak us
fair, can open their mouths as wide against us as any others, and then when we
deserve nothing but well. As the Athenians by their Ostracisme would punish
desert, and Crown ignorance. But vessels that are most hollow and empty make
the greatest sound and noise. And as love thinks no evil: So envy can speak
no good; we need not wonder at this, when we consider that men of the highest
deservings have many times had the worst usage.

And then if we find such dealing from amongst our selves, we need not marvel
at any thing we suffer from others, from any, from all that do not think well
of us, that do not love us, and for that reason which Martial expresses in
this Epigram.

Non amote, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare,
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amote,
I do not love, I love not Sabidie,
My reason of dislike, I know not why.
When the Cynick was asked what beast did bite soarest and worst, he answered
of tame beasts a flatterer, and of wild beasts a Slanderer: many a good man
sometimes feels the ^eeth of both these, of the tame beasts, who when they
creep into their bosoms will spit in their faces; of the wild beasts by their
detractions, slanders, censures, prejudices, contradictions, and what not, who
make their tongues worse than the tongues of dogs, for they are medicinable;
they cure, they heal, but the tongues of these are sharp, they wound, they
kill.

But in regard that it is the nature of these beast thus to do, a wise and a
good man, who deserves well, yet hears ill, has no more cause to be troubled
at it, than the bright and full Moon going on her course has at the barking of
many dogs.

And as some speak evil of us because we do not run with them to the same
excess of riot, to distemper, and overthrow our bodies: so others will not
abide us, because we cannot come up to them in a like luxuriency and rankness
of opinions* to disturb our brains, and to destroy our souls.

Now further, how have the Ministers of the Gospel in these last times (wherein
the world grows worse and worse) been discouraged in the neglect that many find
for the pains taken in their great work, their own proper means and
maintenance withheld from them by the fraud and deceit of some, and forceably
taken away by the power and violence of others, and grudgingly paid them by
many more, as if that greatest of all works, the work of the ministry, deserved
no wages:

And lastly (which is more and worse) what grevious heart-breakings do the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel meet withal in their pains, a very great
abundance of that spiritual seed of the word they sow so continually
miscarrying, upon the thorny, hard, rockey* barren hearts of their hearers.

It was an excellent commendation that Quintilian gave of Vespasian the
Emperor that he was Patientissimus very, most patient to hear and to
entertain truths, how happy should we be if our hearers in general deserved
the like praise. But truth is not for every ones, nay, for few men's turn, Ergo
inim^^i, a strange conclusion therefore and for this reason this very reason
are we esteemed many men's enemies, because we tell them the truth; as Saint
Paul was long since accounted Gal. 4. 16.

Some, that live in great and gross sins, cannot endure to have those their
sins ripp'd up or laid open; dealing with us herein as a madman does with a
Chyrurgia^, flying in his face when he goes about to open a Vein that might
recover him out of his Madness. Or like a deformed person, who breaks the
Looking-glass that shows him his deformity.

When our Blessed Savior fed the people, they resolved presently to make him a
King, John 6. but after when, he rebuked their vile manners, they cried
Crucify him, Crucify him, let him be crucified John 19.

I have formerly heard from many of the Scottish Nation (and I do believe the
Report is very true (that if a man did preach against their Bishops, while they
were haling them down, they would hear him with a great deal of seeming
attention, it did so please their humor; but if the same man told the people
afterward of their Swearing, Drunkenness, Whoring or the like, they would cry
Wha, wha, what does the man ail? what would the man have? There are very few or
none but will be very well content that we should meddle with other men's
matters, with other men's faults, while we let theirs alone as Herod seemed to
hear John the Baptist gladly, till he mentioned, Herodias.

Thus the Priest of Bethel, though he could not abide that Amos in his
prophecy should grate upon the house of Israel, yet if he would fly into the
land of Judah, and prophecy there, he was not against that. And though that
the Jews could not endure that Jeremy should meddle, with the burden of Judah
and Jerusalem, yet if he would prophecy against Edom, and Moab, and Ammon, he
might for all them. Men's dainty ears cannot endure to have their own sins
touched, because truth like light is of a discerning nature, and makes things
manifest. Hence evil men love darkness more than light, because their works
are evil, As dark-shops are best for bad wares. Light is good, but to bad eyes
offensive; Honey is sweet, but to wounds smarting; So truth is wholesome, but
to guilty men distasteful, like the bloody waters in Egypt sweet and potable to
the Hebrews (as Josephus reports) but so unsavory to the Egyptians, as that
they would not down.

As they write of some creatures that they have gallu in their ear, fell in
aure: so the hearing of some truths distasts many. like waters of wormwood,
which may make a new proverb bitter as truth, for this many times puts some men
into the Gal of bitterness, angers, nettles them, as ulcerous men use to shrink
at the lightest touch, yea sometimes to cry out at the very suspicion of
touching. So that we are often driven unto this Dilemma, if we desire to please
we must not speak truth, for if we tell truth, we cannot please.

Tell a Politician this truth, that, Summaratio est quae pro Religione facit,
that that is the best, the strongest reason, which makes most for Religion, and
that the best policy which makes most for Piety, this truth crosses his
purposes, projects, designs, and therefore he cannot abide it.

Acquaint a covetous man with that truth spoken by St. Paul, that the love of
money is the root of all evil (because every sin either directly or
consequently springs from Covetousness) you offer him loss, you are a
^respasser to his trade, an Enemy.

And let that truth spoken by St. Peter be pressed upon a filthy voluptuous
person, that fleshly lusts war against the soul; he regards you not, but though
he perish in his lust, he will enjoy the pleasures that are present.

Thus other sinners either question or quarrel at the truths that are told
them: Censure and Hatred being the ancient lot of truth, Censure of the
message, and Hatred to the bearer.

When Lot came unto his Sons in Law then liveing in Sodom, and acquainted them
with Gods purpose immediately to burn that, and other adjacents Cities, though
he warned them as a prophet, and admonished them as a father, that if they
loved their lives they must presently quit that place, they would not harken
unto him, but as Livie observes of others (though in another case) nec morbum
far ^ossunt, nec remedium, that they were troubled both at their sickness and
cure, so these sons in lawof Lot, might happily be a little startled, at the
report that Sodom should be destroyed; but more troubled at the thought of
leaving Sodom, which was as the Garden of the Lord, before it was destroyed,
and that special love they did bear to that place might share up their
infidelity to question the truth of that threat, and to reason the case
hap(...)ily thus. Who ever yet knew it to rain fire? and whence should that
Brimstone come? and if it must rain fire and Brimstone, why rather upon Sodom
and Gomorrah than upon other places? and therefore they were very willing to
believe that their father in that menace mocked them, in telling them a fable
or fancy of his own head, upon which they resolve to put it to an adventure,
rather to stay and burn in Sodom, than to live and be safe and happy out of
it. And therefore because they would not part with the company of the
Sodomites, they are justly wrapped together in their condemnation, and punishment
quos peredere vult Deus hos dementat. Wisdom enters not into the hearts of
those which are allotted to destruction, for God many times infatuats when he
means to destroy, as in the example of Pharaoh, who could neither consider nor
fear, because it was his time to perish; Pharaoh had warnings enough if he
could have taken them, but after all he neglects God, and trusts his Chariots,
who did serve him (as every thing shall serve others trusted to in instead of
God) they bring him unto the midst of the Sea, and there leave him to perish
miserably, where he sees not his misery ti^l he feels it nor feels it till he
could not possibly avoid it. It was even thus with the Sons in Law of Lot, of
whom it might have been spoken as it was afterward of the Sons of El^, they
harkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them;
the sons in Law of Lot were sufficiently made acquainted with their near
approaching danger, but all in vain, for the mon^ions of God hard^^ the wicked.
Hence to carnal minded men preaching is foolishness, devotion is Idleness, the
Prophets mad men, and Paul a B^bler.

St. John tells us in his third Epistle and fourth chap. that he could have no
greater joy than to hear that those which he had taught did walk in the truth,
that is, did live in some measure as they were taught; which indeed is the joy
and rejoicing the crown of every faithful Minister of the Gospel. On the other
side there can be no greater grief, unto those who watch over men's souls to
keep them safe, and above all things desire by the ministry of the word, to
bring them from darkness to light from the Power of Satan unto God, pressing
upon them all arguments they can possibly invent which may p^rswade them to
suffer God through Jesus ^^^ist to save their souls, and when this is done, to
find all their l^bour lost, all their strength and endeavor to be spent in
vain. The spiritual sword of the word having had its edg and point broken off,
and battered upon the stony hearts of their hearers, which it could not pierce.
Oh this is an argument of discourse and discouragement above all other
arguments that can be thought on, unto those who know how to value a precious
soul, and to desire its salvation.

And truly (which before was pointed at) if parents do not assist us in the
ordering of their children, and Masters of servants in the reforming of their
families: and to these if Magistrates suffer their swords to rust in their
scabbards, rather than to draw them out in our assistance that they may reach
scandalous offenders, whom the sword of the word cannot pierce, we may preach
till our Tongues cleave to our gums, or fasten to the roofes of our mouths, and
all to little purpose. And I must further add, that if all I named before do
their parts, the voice of the Minister will be too weak, the sword of the
Magistrate too short for to reach and bring down rebellious sinners unto the
obedience of Christ, unless the mighty arm of the Lord be revealed in his
ordinances: yet however because the ministry of the word is the ordinary means
which Almighty God has appointed and sancti^yed, to convert s^uls unto him,
(not excluding other mean^ that tend to this end) there might be a very great
hope of doing God much service this way by this present generation, if
Magistrates and Ministers and others in their several places did endeavor with
all their might, to preach down sin, and to smite down sin, and to pray down
sin, and to live down sin.

But sad experience shows that it is far otherwise. And it is a most evident
sign that the destruction is near when the messages from God, and the
Messengers of God are, as in these days so generally neglected; when the
faithful Dispencers of Gods Ordinances, who are spiritual Physicians, have
improved all their skill, to cure men's itching ears, to soften their hard
hearts, and to heal their head-distempers, and have done every thing beside,
that lies in their compass to further the salvation of their Hearers, but all
in vain. And therefore that which was once said to Babylon, Jer. 51. 9. may be
applied to this Nation. We would have healed England and she would not be
healed. After which, it were most just (when exhortations and reproofs, spoken
and pressed in the name of the Lord, can do no good) for Almighty God to say unto
his Prophets of England (as he did to them in Babylon) forsake it, up, be gone,
spend your breath here no longer in vain, apply no more medicines for such as
are past cure, get you to the Heathens, they will hear your voice. Go to
Africa, America, or India, and there eat your Bread. Sanctify unto me a
people that were not a people, fetch me Sons and Daughters from far. Let the
barren bear Children, and let them that might have been fruitful be barren. I
have been served with the sins of England a long time, I am weary of bearing
them any longer, and therefore let them from henceforth lie, and dye and perish
and ^ot in their iniquities.

Oh it is a Curse of all Curses, the very bottom of the Viol and dreggs of the
vengeance of Almighty God, when upon a continued slighting and neglecting of
his messages and messengers; they are willed to relinquish their accustomed
Flocks, and to carry the word they have to deliver, unto foreigners and
strangers, as Paul and Barnabas told the Jews at Antioch, Acts 13. 46. It was
necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you, but
seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life,
lo we turn to the Gentiles. The Jews there neglect the word of God, and the
loss of this word of God shall lose them their Credit, Liberty, Peace,
Prosperity and Salvation, both in their own days and in the days of their
Childrens Children. Where note, that Gospel and everlasting life are joined
together, and that the neglect of the one, is the loss of the other. Lo we turn
to the Gentiles; wild, neglected and unnatural Branches, they will hear our
voice. And Acts 18. 6. When the Jews at Corinth, opposed themselves, and
blasphemed, Paul shook his Raiment and said, Your blood be upon your own heads,
I am clean, from henceforth I will go to the Gentiles. When they resisted his
person, and blasphemed his Doctrine, he shook his Raiment against them saying,
Your blood be upon your own heads, as if he had said, I found you the Children
of Death, and so I leave you, grow in your filthiness and unrighteousnes, (...)
you have fullfilled the measure of your Forefathers, for my own part I wash my
hands in innocence, I can free my Soul in the sight of God, I was careful ^o
apply my Cures unto the hurts of Corinth, but they would not be healed.

Which thing, if the Lord in just judgment ever suffer to betall this Land, as
there are not very many months passed since there was a great and strong
endeavor by some (who fetched their Counsels from the depths of Hell) to
remove both Candlesticks and Candles cut of it, that so the people of this
Nation might have returned again to Egypt and in time become Bruits, Atheists,
and worse than Heathens. For if it be true of Humane Learning, Emollit mores --
that it softens and sweetens men's Manners; it is more true of that Knowledge
which is divine and spiritual, without which people may grow Barbarous, as in
all probability this whole Nation might have done if the Lord had not appeared
in the Mount, and by an immediate Providence prevented it. I say if any such
thing ever happen to this Land, they who shall be so unhappy as to live to the
fight of that woeful day, may borrow those words which that poor distressed
woman sometimes uttered in the extreme bitterness of her soul, saying 1 Samuel 4.
22. The Glory is departed, the Ark of God is taken. and again, the Glory is
departed. If this I say ever happen to this Land (which the Mercy and Goodness
of Almighty God forbid) it may be then said, that Judgment ^ath both begun and
made an end with it; and that the case of it would be more desperate than if
the Ground of this Island had opened her Jaws, and in one common Grave buried
all her Inhabitants.

But blessed be God, Prophets are yet in England, and long may they continue in
it, the Pearl is yet to be found in our field, the Gospel is yet amongst us.
Oh that as we have the sound thereof daily in our ears, the letter of it
walking through our lips, so we might see the power thereof more manifested in
our lives.

To speak a few words more of those Indians with reflection still upon our
selves, let us consider that as the Ground is more or less manured, so it is
expected it should bring forth fruit accordingly some an hundred, and some
fifty and some thirty fold, some more some less, but all some. Five Tal^nts
must gain other five, two must return two more, and one shall satisfy with
less proportion. A Child may think and do and speak as becomes a C^ild; but a
Man must behave himself every way as becomes a man. An Hebrew must live as an
Hebrew, not as an Egyptian. A Prophet as a Prophet, and not (by drudging and
digging) as an Husbandman. A Believer must live as a Believer, and not as an
Heathen or Infidel. A Professor of the Gospel must walk as a Professor of the
Gospel, not as a Libertine, an Epicure or Athiest. For a Wilderness to be
barren there is no wonder at all in that, but if those Trees which have been
well husbanded, dung'd and dressed, continue still fruitless, they deserve
cursing. Arbori infructuosae debentur duo, secur is et ignis. Two things belong
unto the fruitless tree, the Axe to cut it down, and the Fire to consume it.

When I have seriously thought on the many and mighty Nations at this day
inhabiting the remote parts of the Earth, and how that many of them are people
that live in happy and most fruitful Soils, which afford every thing to
please, de^ight, and to enrich the Sons of Men in sweet Aires; that being most
true of the Psalmist, The earth has God given to the Children of men, Psalm.
115. 16. To the Children of men who are mere Aliens and Strangers to God. Many
of these enjoying as delectable places as the Sun shines on. And for the people
themselves, many of them, for flesh and blood, as comely as the Earth bears.
And further, many of them people which are provident to forecast, ingenuous to
invent and most able and active to perform. Concerning whom, they who have
tried them may further say, surely they are a wise people and of great
understanding; but considering again, that they en^oying every thing, want
every thing in wanting Christ, it makes their condition in all their
enjoyments, which seem to make them happy, most miserable.

To which purpose Lactantius speaks well of the Learning of Heathen
Philosophers, Omnis Doctrina Philosophorum sine capite etc. That all their
learning was without an head, because they knew not God, and therefore seeing
they were blind, and hearing they were deaf, and understanding they understood
nothing as they ought to have done it. So for outvvard things, though they have
abundance, yet they have nothing, because they have not God, in the right
knowledge and understanding of him, as he ought to be known in Christ Jesus.

They want Christ because they are altogether unacquainted with him; but if
we, who have had such a continual power of him, and have such advantages to
know him by hearing him so often teach in our streets, if we want him, for
want of closing with him, and consequently be never a whit the better for
him, it will make our estate by far, to be more lamentable than theirs. Tire
and Sydo^, and Gomorrah and Sodom, and all the people I have named, will speed
better at the day of judgment than we shall do.

These Heathens in East India (as I strongly believe) see as far with the eye
of Nature as it can possibly reach, and nature it self teaches them, and
teaches all the world beside, that there is a God, but who this God is, and
how this God is to be worshipped, must elsewhere be learned. Thus nature
without Grace being like Sampson when his eyes were out, who could not readily
find the Pillars of the house wherein he was, no more can any man of himself
fasten unto any pillar of prop of truth, unless the Spirit of God instruct and
direct him how to do it.

Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologi^ invenit, Religio possidet, says
Mirandula. Philosophy seeks truth, Divinity finds it, but Religion possesses
it not the face or mask, or visard, or form, but the truth and power of
Religion, of which something by the way.

The truth, and power of Religion, I say, for there have been ever many
misconceivings about Religion. How many stirs, and quarrels, and Heats have we
known about the list, and fringe of Christ's Garment, (as one of most high
deserving long since observed) and these mistakes in Religion have made many to
agree no better than the Bricklayers of Babel, who when their tongues were
divided could not understand one another speech, but did mistake one thing for
another; And thus do many now who take nature (if but a little refined) for
Grace; Will for Conscience. So a floating knowledge for true wisdom, cruelty
for Justice, covetousness for frugality, baseness for humility, presumption for
hope, a distempered heat for true zeal, and vain credulity for faith. And the
reason of all this is, because the best Graces have their Counterfeits, and
from hence come those many mistakes.

Now for the power and truth of Religion we shall the better know it, if we
first briefly discover what it is not, and then what it is. What it is not; It
does not consist in a bare hearing of the word, though heard never so
frequently, nor in a bare performance of other duties, which are good in
themselves, though prayers performed never so constantly; long prayers will not
excuse the devouring of vvidovvs houses, nor the doing of other good duties,
any the like acts of oppression and violence. Thou Preachest, thou hear,
thou read, thou prayest, but how live thou? what do thou? if these
questions cannot be well resolved, all good performances will prove nothing
worth.

Again, the power and truth of Religion is not manifested in a rash censuring
and condemning of others, I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican (you
know who said it.) It does not consist in the exalting of a man's self above
others, whatsoever his gifts and graces are. It is not to be found merely in an
ability to talk or prattle, or dispute, or wrangle, and after to hold the
conclusion, whatsoever may be said against it in the premises.

But for the truth and power of Religion, if we would briefly, and in some
particulars know what it is, it is that which makes a man labor first to know,
and then to believe, and to do whatsoever is to be bele^ved and to be done, but
to believe and do rather than to know. It is that which makes a man put a
better esteem upon others than upon himself. It is that which puts a guard on
the lips, a bridle on the tongue, a cu^b on the will, and gives Rules to the
affections; which, when they are high and exalted, keep the heart still lovv,
Because the more acquaintance the heart has with God, the more humble it is,
even behol^ing through Gods purity its own vileness. And therefore a man (in
whom the truth and power of Religion shines) when he hears of sinners,
borrovvs the Apostles language, and says of himself, that I am the chief, for
he keeping a continual guard and vvatch over himself, can accuse himself of
thousand, both faylings and sins, when he is free from all the world beside.
This further makes a man to behold indifferent things with obedience, rather
than with opposition or dispute, knovving that the wisdom which is from
above, (...) first pure and then peaceable.

Briefly therefore, when the truth and power of Religion is separated from the
profession thereof, a man's Religion is nothing worth for in this Case there is
small difference 'twixt an Israelite and an Ishmaelite, 'twixt a Circumcised
Hebrew, and an uncircumcised Philistine, 'twixt a Bap^ized Englishman, and an
unwashen Turk F^r the barren Figtree in Gods Orchard is in no better case, than
the bramble in the wilderness, for God will lap them both up in the same bundle
of condemnation, It being all one to deny the faith, and not soundly and
sincerely to profess it.

It is reason which makes us men, it is Religion that makes us Christians, woe
be to us that we were borne men if, we be not Christians, woe be to us that we
are called Christians, if our lives shame our Christianity, if we be not
Christians in deed, and in earnest, as well in name, and in profession so.

We quarrel at the superstition and blind devotion of others. But let us
examine our selves, whether superstition in them, has not a great deal of more
heat in it, than Religion in us; whether in their blind devotion, the
avvfulness in their se^vices of God, does not arraign and condemn irreverence
in ours.

Ready we are to judge the Papists for their rash vows of C(...)y, but let not
us that do so, ever hope tha^ u^cleaneness will bring us to Hea(...)n. And we
that are forward to condemn the P^p^sts for their mad conceivings about works
of Supererrogation, must never think that Faith without works, will justify us
before God. That we, who wonder at such people as I have named in East India,
as at others for their austeritie of life, which they voluntarily and
unconstrainedly submit unto in their will-worships, must never conceive that
doing what we please, what we will, can bring us at last to true happiness.
God has called us (says the Apostle) to glory and virtue, to virtue and
holiness as the means, to glory and happiness as the end. That thereforeof St.
Hierom is undoubtedly true, ^ifficile imo impossible est and quis transeat a
deliciis ad delicias, etc. That it is an hard, yea, an impossible thing, for a
man to leap from pleasure to Paradise, here to have his belly filled
continually with the delicacies of the Creatures, there to have his mind
satisfied with the fullness of joy, and in both worlds to appear glorious.

Stories are filled with rare examples of virtue even in Heathens, Seneca the
Philosopher Writes of Sixtius, that when the day was ended, and the night was
come, wherein he should take his rest, he would first ask his mind quoa malum
sanasti hodie etc? what evil have thou healed this ^ay? what vice have thou
withstood? and in what part art thou bettered? I find this recorded of another,
who was so exact in his walking, that his whole life was perpetua censura, etc.
a continual censure of himself. Aristides for his uprightness was called the
just. And Tully Writes of Fabricius that he was a man who would resolve well,
and after so unmoveably bent to perform what he had resolved to do, ut facilius
solemn e suo cursu, etc. that you might as ^oon put the Sun out of hi^ course,
as Fabricius from his intended purpose: I have ob^erved before, that very many
people in East India, what lets and impediments soever they have, will by no
means omit their frequent devotions, nor any other thing they esteem themselves
bound to perform, as to G^d; ^he far greater shame for Christians; when every
tr^^^e is sufficient to make such a D^ve^sion as may hinder them in Religious
dut^es.

And for many of those Heathens I have spoken of, they live up even to the very
height of nature, and want means to lead them further. Now what shall I say
more of them? surely thus, that our Blessed Savior liked and loved the young
man in the Gospel, Mar. 10. 21. even for that morality he saw in him, Jesus
beholding him, loved him. And so may Almighty God who is infinite in mercy look
in favor upon many of these poor Creatures, that go as far as they can, in
showing them Jesus Christ, and in his face beholding them; for many shall come
from the East and West, and North, and South and shall sit down with Abraham
and Isaac and ^acob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

But this is a consideration locked up amongst Gods secrets, and therefore I
dare not pry any more or further into it; neither shall I for the present
enlarge my self in this Miscellany; which I could have made to swell into a
Volume. But if that I have written be as well taken as it is well meant, it is
enough if not too much.

However there are two things which I must add in relation to my self. The
first (that I may not always lie at the mercy of my Reader) this though,
difficile est Satyram non scribere, that if my Pen has let fall any thing in
this discourse unbeseeming my calling and years, I most humbly beg pardon for
that; I shall leave the Press to make an answer for it self.

For the Second, I shall presume one pardon, and that is for the leaneness and
lowness of my style, vvherevvith this Relation is clothed, when my Reader
considers, that I lived amongst Indians which made me rude.

Dum in vita sumus in via.
THis Lif's our way, in which where ere we be
We miss our path, if that felicity
Be not our utmost aim; toward which we meet
With Cross-ways, Rubs and streights that cause our feet
To stumble or to faint: yet must we on,
What ^'re we meet, until our journeys done.
We seek a Country, cannot find it here,
Here in this Pilgrimage, in the whole world, where
The streightest, smoothest paths, which most do please,
Are clogged with toil and trouble; but want ease.
Our God, and Country too are both above,
We keep our way whiles that we thither move,
But loose it when our motion does not tend
To that hoped period, which may make our end
Happy and safe. There is no standing still
Here in this life; we do extremely ill,
When we proceed not, for if once we slack
To press toward the mark, we then draw back.
Who therefore sees beyond his eyes, must know
He has a further journey still to go:
For though he could with weary paces get
The world's great round, his tyresome progress yet
Were not all passed, still must he think his ear
Filled with that voice Elias often did hear,
What do thou here Elias? up be gone,
Andafter many days still cried go onne.
Who follows close Gods call, and way runs best,
Till he receives his penny, take his rest.
In three parts of the world I Have been, now come.
To my last journey, that will bring me home.
Ed. Terry.

FINIS.

