The Uncharitable INFORMER Charitably Informed, That SYCOPHANCY is a Sin,
pernicious to all, but most of all to himself.

By Faithful Teate, Minister of the Gospel of Peace and Truth.

Thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel and before
the sun.

Si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens?

DVBLIN, Printed by WILLIAM BLADEN, by Order, Anno Dom. 1660.

TO THE Principal OFFICERS of the English Army Within these Three Nations.
NOthing, I think, but necessity and sense of duty could have made my thoughts
on this theme, public at this time: I am sensible how critical both are and
how apt, as he that did the wrong was to ask Moses, Who made thee a judge? Exodus
2.13, 14.
such will be to demand, Who made me a Reprover? and to say (though personally
unknown to, or unthought of by me) as the Lawyers did to Christ, when he
reproved the Pharisees, Master, Luke 11.44, 45.
thus saying thou reproachest us also. Yet finding Ireland replete with angry
humors, and distempered with tongue-dysenteries, having license here for some
time ad practicandum, I have reckoned my self obliged (especially considering
that to that grand text against Tale-bearing, is immediately added, Lev. 19.16,
17.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him) to offer something to the cure;
though expecting little thanks from the Patient, through the frowardness of his
disease, and necessary harshness of this physic; for when a Titus has to deal
with ill-tongu'd Cretians, Tit. 1.12, 13.
he must be sharp, that they may be sound.

Now the reasons that induced me to present this to your view, are

1. Because there are temptations peculiar to several conditions and sorts of
men, and to whom those of this kind are especially incident, you may gather
from John Baptist, Luke 3.14. (...).
when the Soldiers asked him, And what shall we do? He said unto them, Do
violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, or get nothing by sycophancie.
What that is, and the evil of it, is here discoursed.

2 Because the grand accuser (to whom all false and malicious Informers are so
nearly related) has the name (...), which signifies most properly such an
Accuser, as calumniates others before great Persons, Rev. 12.10.
as Satan the Accuser before the Lord. And so the greater any of you are, the
more in danger of being haunted by such evil spirits, if they may have but your
ear.

3. Psalm. 82.1, 6
Because the Congregation of the mighty, may be read, the Assembly of the Gods,
for God has said, You are Gods. Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19.
Now there are six things that God hat^s, yea seven that are an abomination to
him: and three at least of those seven do but make up the one thing that I
plead against, A lying tongue, a false witness that speaks lies, and one that
sows discord among Brethren

Lastly, You all say you are for the healing of our breaches, and if truth may
direct the way to peace, take away the Talebearer and the strife will cease.
Pro. 26.20


I love not to run Division, or to mention the usual tricotomy, yet must say,
Had the most passionate of one sort been but more Independent on misreports
concerning their dissenting brethren: and the most violent of another sort as
careful to keep off from the Backbiter, as to stand off from the Presbyter; and
all of a third sort as great adversaries to aspersing as they are to
sprinkling, (...)
our disease had not come to such a dangerous Crisis as our wisest Physicians
both in Church and State take it now to be at.

Therefore whatever construction this little Treatise do meet with abroad among
men, my conscience, I hope, will comfort me in this, that I designed it for the
quenching our furious flames, though in meddling therewith I should burn my
fingers. I would not aim to grate here or gratify there, I have not wittingly
offered injury or abuse to any text through the Treatise, nor I hope to any
person. I would not rob Statesmen of just and necessary intelligence, for the
due tutelage of the public weal; or make a sport of hacking at the evil of
Talebearing or hearing, a root of bitterness which I find too apt to spring up
in my self as in others; Heb. 12.15.
nor yet would I feed a discontented humor in any that look upon themselves as
injured, and perhaps are so, by this evil: I know men may go wrong by not right
suffering, as others may by wrong doing. I hope Preface and Postscript will (to
all that are candid though concerned) clear the charitable intent of him whose
prayer for you is, That while many bend their tongues like their bows for lies,
Ier. 10.3.
you may be Valiant only for the Truth.

To the INFORMER.
THere was a Minister lately living not far from my habitation in England, who
having, to his cost, some skill in Physic, and so much charity as to make use
of it for the good of his neighbors; putting his finger one day into a diseased
mouth, (though to do the man good) recieved such a sudden and unhappy bite,
(the Patient being put to some pain) that the finger gangrening in a few days
cost the Physician his life.

My charity would hope that thou would not so serve me, if thou could; and
my faith should, that God will restrain thy wrath if thou would.

My conscience bears me witness that what I have done, I have designed for thy
good, though perhaps it does not please thee that I should be meddling with the
Disease of thy Mouth. Gal. 4.16.
But am I therefore become thine enemy, because I tell thee the truth? This
little Looking glass does show thee how thy disease does deform thee; thou
know thou can form, conform, inform; and I have purposely performed this,
to transform, if it may be, and to reform thee. The Lord but bless it to thee,
and I am well assured, that when thou growest better thou will love the
Physician, though whilst thou art ill, it is like thou will dislike, perhaps
loath, the Physic.

A PREFACE Concerning Giving and Recieving of Informations.
AS it is the honor of virtue to steer a right course betwixt the Scylla and
Charybdis of vicious extremes, so as many sin in Informing, some may sin too if
they do not Inform. Eccl. 3.7. and 8.5.
There Is a time to keep silence and a time to speak; and a wise man's heart
discerns both time and judgment. Exodus 32.7, 8. Matthew. 18. 1 Cor. 5.1. and
1.11. and 11.18.
God himself informs Moses of Isreal's revolt: Christ in some cases bids Tell
the Church: Paul recieved Reports, and had his Spies upon the Churches that
brought him tidings not only of their Faith, but faults and failings. Moses
charge blood upon the Talebearer, and sin too upon the concealer. Lev.
19.16. and 5.1.
If a soul sin and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness whether he has
seen or known it, if be do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity. And
what complaint any are bound to utter some are to recieve. Jude 16.
Yet Jude complains of Complainers; and not only he that raises, but that
takes up a reproach against his neighbor is excluded Gods holy hill; (...)
Psalm. 15.3.
the same word indifferently, signifying the raising and recieving of Reports
as in the Text and the Margin, Lev. 23.1.

The Preacher seems to allow private Intelligencers, Eccl. 10.20. and 7.21.
especially to public persons, A bird of the Air shall carry them the voice,
and that which has wings shall tell the matter. And yet he says, take no heed
unto all the words that are spoken, least thou hear thy servant curse thee.

It seems then that as there is no Hebrew word for swearing, (...) in Niph.
but only for being sworn in the passive voice, We may not give tongue or ear
to Informations but when conscience of doing good, or of preventing or due
punishment of evil does justly urge; which that we may not unjustly pretend, I
say.

That neither false, frivolous, nor malicious accusations are pleasing to God
in the Informers, nor should be to Men as Recievers.

First, Who can think that God can, or men should be in love with Lies? But who
is the FALSE Informer? Not he only that speaks what he knows to be untrue as
Zibah; but he also that reports to another prejudice, what perhaps he
surmiseth, but falsely, to be true, Therefore the Apostle couples railings with
evil surmisings. 1 Timothy 6.4.
Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans, says Captain Irijah, Jer. 37.13, 14.
It is false says the Prophet Jeremiah.

And not he only that puts falsehood upon Truth, as trimming to the stuf, to
make his story seem the fairer and the innocent the fouler; But he also that
fraudulently conceals that part of the truth that would clear the mind and
Intent to be innocent, Reus est cujus men's est rea.
whilst he makes the most of that other part of it that speaks guilt as to
matter of fact. 1 Samuel 21. and 22.
Doeg thus dealing with Ahimeleck, though what he informed Saul of was partly
true, yet is justly called by David a false tongue. Psalm. 52.4.


To these we may refer the wresting of words complained of by the Psalmist,
Psalm. 56.5.
and distorting of doubtful sayings to the most offensive sense, They are
called false witnesses that gave in evidence against Christ, that he said,
Matthew. 26.60, 61.
I am able to destroy the Temple of God and to build it in three days: But his
words were, Destroy this Temple, John 2.19, 21.
and in three days I will raise it up, which he spoke of the Temple of his body.

So the misrepresenting of simple and honestly intended actions; ^ Sam. 17.28.
Traducere, quasi transducere.
as Eliab did by David's coming down to the Camp, (and this is properly to
Traduce, that is, to lead or wyre-draw a word or action beyond the speaker or
doers intent or meaning,) I know the naughtiness of thy heart, says Eliab: Why
what is my fault? says David, who had reason to complain both of Brother and
Stranger false witnesses did rise up, Psa. 35.11.
they laid to my charge things that I knew not.

And as false, so FRIVOLOUS Accusations are reproved by the Prophet in those
that make a man an Offender for a word, Isa. 29.21.
and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just
for a thing of naught: such whose work is to kindle great fires by the
continual blowing up of the smallest sparks, as Tatlers and Busybodyes speaking
things that they ought not. 1 Timothy 5.13.


But say the matter appear weighty and true, yet if Malice or other finister
respect have apparently acted the Informer: Let the sentence of an Heathen
confirmed by Gods own execution on Daniels Accusers how greatly soever
pretending to public service, Dan. 6.20 the end.
( this Daniel, O King, regards not thee etc.) Show how little God likes it,
or Men should encourage it.

But is not Malice a good Informer though a bad Judge? I answer, an error in
the first concoction is hardly mended in the second or third. A negatione
secundi, al negationem tertii adjecti valet consequentia.
Malice is not good, therefore I cannot well see how it should be a good
Informer. The Devil, that Arch-Informer, we know, wants no malice, who is yet
cast out of the Court of Heaven. I grant the Information Metaphysically
considered may be good, that is, the thing may be true, though malice provoked
the Informer to make it known, yet is he not herein approvable that he did it
maliciously, though still the Offender is nevertheless reproveable if truly
accused though maliciously.

Yet where there appears such a Moral miscarriage in the Informer as
malitiousness, it should render the matter of the Information the more to be
suspected, insomuch as it is hard rightly to represent what is not rightly
recieved; now it is a rule in Philosophy that every thing is recieved according
to the modification of that which recieves it. Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad
modum recipientis.
And therefore the eye that is blood-shot with malice, will be apt to deem
every thing (though it be not so) of a bloody color as the looking through a
Red glass or medium to make every thing look red.

But how if the man have been injurious to me first? Prove. 24.28, 29.
Yet be not witness against thy neighbor without cause, and decieve not with
thy lips: Say not I will do to him as he has done to me, I will render to the
man according to his work.

But on the contrary, Be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing etc. Being reviled we bless, 1 Cor. 4.12.
says Paul.

But he stands in my light may some Zibah say; and unless I can traduce him I
must still truckle under him. Yet will a man speak wickedly for God? and talk
deceitfully for him? Job 13.7.
Who shall dare then so to do, to serve his own turn?

But say thou design to promote some public good, nay perhaps that which thou
reckonest thy Religion by a slanderous detraction from another Reputation,
whose credit stands in the way of that which thou call the way of God. Yet
still if the truth of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory,
Romans 3.7, 8.
why yet am I also judged as a sinner? And not rather as we be slanderously
reported, and some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good may come? whose
damnation is just.

But though the false Informer do evil, may not I do well to recieve the
Information, if it seem to me probable as Zibahs did to David?

No not very well to be too suspicious of a Mephibosheth, one of known
integrity: 1 Samuel 24. chapter 26.
And David thought so too in his own ease, for having formerly given Saul full
proof of his fidelity, he afterward accurseth before the Lord them that should
yet persist to incence Saul against him. But Oh how hard is it for men, yea for
good men, when self-interest seems to prompt to jealousy or revenge, to cast
all their Accounts by that Golden-Rule of Christ's, Mat. 7.12.
on which hang all the Low and the Prophets?

What a strange confidence had Alexander in Philip Acarnama^ his Physician,
Plutar. in vita Alex.
who cheerfully took a portion at his hand, when Parmenio had advertised him
that he was largely hired by Darius to kill him? A shame that a Heathen can so
far trust a Heathen, and not a Christian a fellow Christian, though our
Religion does teach our charity, 1 Cor. 13.5.
not to seek her own, not to be easily provoked, not to think evil!

But men are mutable: he afterward became David's enemy that had sometime been
his guide, Psalm 55.13, 14.
his acquaintance, with whom he had taken sweet Council, yea, they walked to
the house of God in company. May I not then take an Information against any man
if it seem probable, though it may prove false? How else shall I be able to
secure my self?

I answer, The scope of the Information would here be attended, whether it tend
to do another hurt, or to prevent him from doing hurt. I may so far then
recieve it as to sense my self, in case it should prove true; but not so as to
fall foul upon him that is informed against, until I am ascertained that it is
true: I may safeguard my self, least a pretended friend should prove mine
enemy, but not deal with him as an enemy, till proved so. 1 Cor. 11.18. (...).
There is a partly believing of what we hear, (as Paul speaks, it the phrase
there be not a Meiosis) allowable in some cases where we may not yet fully
believe. Eccl. 2.14.
The wise man's eyes should be in his head, though his charity be still in his
heart. 'Twas commendable in Alexander not over hastily to distrust his faithful
Physician, yet I think his trusting the physic after such an item, without
further experiment or enquiry, was not: especially he being a public person,
who may best suspect, because inspection is his work, and if not circumspect,
he commonly looses more than himself. I rather commend the prudence of that
Prince, who handsomely over-hearing some of his Attendants speak evil of him,
bad them go further off, lest the King should hear them: so letting them know
that he heard them, and yet as if he heard them not.

He that will believe or listen to nothing, gives encouragement and occasion to
those to hurt him, that otherwise either durst not or could not: and he that
will suspect and loves to listen to every thing may probably give them
provocation to mischieve him, that otherwise would not; for how hard is it to
love him without dissimulation, that we know suspects us without reason? Both
he that so neglects an Information, if probable, as not justly to obviate an
intended injury; and he that so recieves one, though probable, till proved, as
to sentence or do execution, transgresses the Law Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. Prove. 25 2 Chapter 18.13.
It is the honor of Kings to search out a matter. But he that answers a
matter before he hear, (that is, rightly apprehend it) it is folly and shame
unto him.

We have lamentable instances of miscarriages in both kinds in Saul and
Gedaliah. Saul he listens to the barking of a Dog, a Doeg I should have said,
and upon the single Information of an Edomite, commits an horrid massacre upon
four score and five innocent and holy persons in one day. Jer. 13.15.
Gedaliah on the contrary will not hearken to the certain though secret
intelligence of Johanan, confirmed from several hands, That Ishmael was set on
work by Ba^lis to kill him, (as commonly the most innocent are least suspicious
of others, Ver. 16.
) Thou speak falsely of Ishmael; says Gedaliah to Johanan: but poor man, he
soon found it too true to his cost, Chap. 41. 2, 3. Plut in vita^ Julii Caes.
and theirs that were cast away with him for want of his care.

It Is said that Julius Caesar was murdered with a note in his hand,
discovering the bloody treason, he neglecting timely to read it, though
importuned thereunto by him that gave it.

Further, such Informations as are for prevention of an evil intended to be
done, may with good conscience and reason, be secretly both recieved and
improved: Thus the chief Captain being very privately advertized of the plot
upon Paul by those sworn Conspirators, Act. 23.22,
dismisseth the intelligencer with a charge to tell no man that he had showed
him those things.

But when the Information is an Accusation for a crime committed; though it may
be secretly recieved, if need be, yet before punishment can be fairly
inflicted, the person accusing, and the circumstances of the offense should be
made known to the accused, that the splendour of justice be not ecclipsed, nor
the offender barred of so just a means of vindicating himself, in case of false
imputation. As it was a good provision in their Law. That no man should be
judged till first heard: John 7.^^.
so it is an wholesome usage in our administration, That the Witness look the
Prisoner in the face. As they (bad as they were) had some color of piety, so
this, shadow of justice, 1 Kings 10.
who set the witnesses before Naboth? And says Pilate to Christ, Mat. 27.13.
Hear thou not what these witness?

It is a thing most worthy our observation, what abundant caution the Lord
gives concerning accusatory informations. Deuteronomy. 17.4, 5, 7.
If it be told thee, and thou have heard it, and enquired diligently, and
behold it be true, and the thing certain, etc. Then thou shall bring forth that
man which has committed that thing, etc. and the hands of the witnesses shall
be first upon him. If it be told thee, there is private information. And thou
have heard it, which seems to referr to common fame: yet there must be an
inquiring diligently; and behold, which seems to require all clearness of
evidence; If it, that is, the Information, be true: And the thing certain, The
matter of fact not presumed, but fully proved. Then thou shall bring forth not
only the accused, but also the accuser, whose hand is to be first in the
execution. It is also said expressly, for prevention and punishment of injury by
false witness, Deuteronomy. 19.17.
That both the men between whom the controversy is (Accused and Accuser) shall
stand before the Lord. And indeed were there no more than that general good
rule (and good rule for Generals as well as others) of doing as we would be
done unto, it were enough in this matter, for I know no man that would
willingly be condemned and punished upon that accusation, that he either denies
or does not confess (or I think ought) without knowledge of his Accuser that he
may be the better able to make his defense.

And further as the notifying of the Accuser does justify the Judge, and may
singularly contribute to the clearing of the accused if innocent: So also to
the just startling of drousy conscience, and silencing of sinful
self-justifications in case of guilt. And therefore Paul censuring the
Corinthians for that which had been declared to him of them, lets them plainly
know, 1 Cor. 1.11.
that he had it from them of the house of Chloe.

If any think the making of Informers known to others, would discourage others
from making Informations known: I answer, If they be for prevention of evil
intended as aforesaid, they may without sin be concealed: if for punishment of
evil committed, it either will not or ought not discourage honest informers or
Informations. And why others should be encouraged, I see not. If any think they
should, for some reason or necessity of State, let us take heed that be not
truly reported of us, that was slanderously of the Apostles, Romans 3.8.
that we hold, That evil may be done that good may come of it. And in such
case, if a Statesman admit what a good man may not, let him remember the grave
reply of one that being both Duke and Cardinal was urged to do that in the
capacity of a Duke which he judged absolutely unlawful for a Cardinal. A like
saying I have read of a Clown to the Bishop of Colein.
If the Cardinal (says he) be damned, what will become of the Duke?

I need not tell you how odious to all but to their Masters and selves,
Informers were in former times, even in my remembrance: but oh the treachery of
the heart of man! What credit have some self same practices, yea and principles
too, abominated by good men in those times, regained in ours, by putting on a
new fashion to serve a new faction? How are some men applauded now adays for
borrowing those very notes, for the chirping, of which every one was ready to
pluck ^ens feathers about twenty years ago. And the matter is much alike in
the case in hand: as if the promoting of Promoters, and the setting up of the
work of Information, were a singular part of that work of Reformation so long
spoken of.

Now as slanderous insinuations and sycophantical delations are always, so
especially to be abhorred in these cases.

1. When the Accused are not or cannot be present to answer for themselves:
this is manifestly akin to that cursing of the deaf, Lev. 19.14.
dealing with such as are out of hearing. They belch out with their mouths,
Psalm. 69.7.
swords are in their lips, they say who does hear?

2. When the Accused, through their abject condition, know not where to have
right, though they know they have wrong. Pro. 30.10
Accuse not a servant to his Master lest he curse thee, and thou be found
guilty, that is, lest he tell God, when he can get no right of Man.

3. When the Magistrate is traduced, as David by Absalom: for It is written,
Acts 23.5.
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Number. 12.8.
And says God, Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?

4 When a Minister is slandered, as Ahimelech to Saul, Acts 24.5.
or Paul by Tertullus, We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and a mover
of sedition; the old calumny on Gods faithful Ministers, but new vamped, and
so made use of to this day. So the Jews before Festus, Chapter 25. 7.
laid many and and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not
prove. As God would have his Ministers worthy of double honor, m. 15.
he has beset their good name with a double hedge. Ver. 19.
Against an Elder recieve not an Accusation, but before two or three witnesses:
which he speaks of the Elder that rules well and that labors in the Word and
Doctrine. The dishonor of his person is a disadvantage to his Doctrine;
therefore the accusation which was not to be determined against others, must
not be so much as recieved against him without two or three witnesses. And if
these things be so, who shall answer for the obloquies and reproaches that are
cast as dirt in the face, not only of Magistrates and Ministers, but even of
Magistracy and Ministry it self in this evil and adulterous generation,
wherein are sprung up so many cursed Chams, whose great delight is to see or
show the nakedness of Gods Noah's, Genesis 9, 23 29
though their fathers in a Theological sense.

Finally, on the other hand we may greatly sin by silence and non-informing.

1 When our Informing of evil intended may prevent its being committed, for
which end a David, a Magistrate, may maintain an Hushai, an honest spy, in the
Camp of an Absalom, with charge to send him every thing he can hear. 2 Samuel
13.56.
If thou forbear to deliver them that are ready to be slain, if thou say,
behold, Prove. 25.11 12. Est. 2, 21, etc.
we knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart consider? Thus Mordecai
for informing against Bigthana and Teresh two traiterous assassinates was as
honorably rewarded as they were shamefully executed by the just command of King
Ahashuerosh. Chap. 6.


2 When our informing is necessary for the reforming of the offenders, thus
good Joseph brought the evil report of his brethren to his Father, Genesis 37.2
and those of the household of Chloe, the Schisms of the Church of Corinth to
Paul's ears.

3 When it is necessary for the just punishment of crying offenses, Matthew.
18.31.
Thus the servants complain to their Master of his cruelty, who refused to have
patience with his fellow servant for two hundred pence, after his Master had
forgiven him ten thousand tallents. Concealment in some cases makes other men's
sins ours, as misprision of treason is treason. And I have observed as too
common a fault in private professors, their aptness to find fault if those
evils that themselves see or hear be not punished, while they neglect to lend
the Magistrate (as they ought) their eyes and ears; for who can think he should
be able to see or hear all with his own?

4 When it is necessary for the glorifying of God, and warning of others, that
all Israel may hear and fear and do no more so wickedly. Deu. 13.11


CHAP. I. The INFORMERS Pedigree.
THe Informer, in Scripture, firnamed Sycophant, alias Talebearer (for his
proper name you shall never know, Luke 3. Lev. 19.
if he can hide it, howsoever dishonestly bold he make with yours, not unlike
some Nations, more jealous then chaste, who love to be too free with other men's
wives, yet their own must not pass in the streets but under a veyle) He is for
his pedigree of a very ancient extraction, indubitably descended from that
original Incendiary, exiled from Heaven for factiousness there, and the first
that set up the Trade of traducing on earth; opening his pack to that sex that
he thought most inclined to the peddler, secretly suggesting to credulous Eve,
that goodness it self was not so well affected as were to be wished to man's
Commonwealth. Genesis 3.5.
The serpentine Sycophant having wound into the woman, she hyes her to her
husband with a tale as fair, but as fatal as the fruit that she gave him. Both
are too soon recieved by Adam, who too late finds Eve decieved in both, Ver. 6.
that the sly Informer was both a Liar and a Murderer, and his information
designed for the deformation of till that time happy, V. 7.
but thenceforth miserable mankind. So then (pardon my zeal against that trade
that cost us so dear before we were born, and at its first setting up) the
first Informer that ever was, was the Devil, the first informed against was
God, the first customer that the crooked Informer got was a Woman, made of a
crooked bone, yet made upright and innocent, till being decieved, she fell into
the transgression by recieving a Report against the innocent. Even our speech
puts as little difference betwixt a Talebearer and Talehearer, as the proverb
does betwixt the Thief and the Reciever.

When evil and unjust surmises and jealousies are fomented against those that
are good, men do but follow Satan who began with God: But Oh that there were
the ears of none but weak womankind (who are too many, by so many) to drink in
such venime as is spit by the seed of the serpent.

Adam now Bank-rupt takes up the same Trade as bad as it is, which could never
have had rise amongst us but for his Fall: had not our Father been broken we
should have scorned without doubt to have gone pedling about with a
Tale-bearers pack. But he not knowing what shift to make for a poor living, and
being yet too loath to cover himself with his own shame and confusion, Jer.
3.25.
which would best have become him, (but self censuring is too good a commodity
for such had Merchants to deal much in) He turns Informer against his own dear
wife, alas, too dear to him from the time that she grew tale-teller; but now he
pays her in her own coin, and not contented to deal in such small wares, he
adventures higher, and in informing against her, he suggests against God, and
casts a subtle imputation upon innocence it self (as Informers will be
muttering where they dare not speak out) The woman thou gave me, etc. Genesis
3.12.


The woman again she informs against the serpent, Ver. 13.
and (as strongly as she can) vomits up her Gall in the first Informers face,
who goes sneaking and creeping away (as false Informers are wont to do, when
detected) but not without Gods curse upon himself, V. 14.
on thy belly shall thou go; and entayled on his posterity. The Psalmist
complaining (as some read) of slander and calumny (Cherpah, Ainsw. A radic.
(...) and (...)
and Calimmah, whence carping and calumn, seem derived) inspired of God thus
imprecates, Psa. 69.23.
make their loins continually to shake, Romans 11.10
which text the Apostle quoting thus varies, bow down their back always; a curse
as near a kin to the serpents, as the traducer is to the Devil.

When each of these Informers had thus acted their parts, the earth it self was
the worse for it (as it is a plague to a Country to be pestered with such
pedlers. Genesis 3.18.
) Thorns and thistles must it now bring forth: And that in a moral sense too,
whereof the Prophet sadly complains, Mich. 7.4, 5.
The best of them is as a bryer, and the most upright is sharper then a thorn
hedge etc. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide, keep the
doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. Having thus traced this
Informer from his head spring, we find him to be too near a kin to a Cain, (who
was of that wicked one) fallen Adam is his Father, (...): 1 John 3.12.
a fallen Angel his Grandfather. having therefore a Prince to his progenitor,
we cannot fairly deny him, a Coat of Arms suitable to his origination, and as
Arms are wont often to be hung upon Sign-posts, you can hardly look off of the
Informers when ever you see a Sign of Adam and Eve, for he bears a serpent
proper with an apple (or) on his tongue, and a sting (sable) in his tail:
morally thus blazoned, he salutes you with fair pretenses, but never leaves you
till he have poisoned and inflamed you with prejudices against the innocent;
like that Wine that gives a fine color in the glass, Prove. 23.31, 32. Ecc.
10.11.
but at length it biteth like a serpent. Surely the serpent (says the
Preacher) will bite without enchantment, and a Babbler is no better. Psa. 146.3.
They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent (says David,) Adders poison
is under their lips. You see I have the Authority of a King at Arms for this
Heraldry.

Besides as the Surname of the Parent is derived to posterity, (...),
trajicere, traducere John 6.70.
if Devil be called Accuser, which is the sense of that name, so vice versa the
Accuser is called Devil, as Iscariot was that informed against Christ.

The Apostle who would not have women to be Slanderers (as we read,) says, 1 Timothy 3.11. (...). 1 Timothy 3.3. (...).
they must not be Devils, so the Greek. And where he foretells that Seducers
would be Traducers, we read, false accusers, or make-baits, but the word is
Devils.

If yet there be any doubt of the Informers Line, his friends will help us to
some proof, with whom it is a maxim that Malice is a good Informer.

But if they will needs have that true, methinks the Apostle should be true
too, who says, 1 John 3.10.
In this are the children of God manifest, and the children of the Devil,
whosoever does not rightousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
Brother.

You see who is his Father, if you ask for his Brethren, there is Doeg the
Edomite, and Zibah the parasite, and Judas the pseud-Apostle, cum multis aliis,
all too foul a fraternity for any honest heart to claim kindred of; especially
considering what a stock they are come of, let the upright say, O my soul come
thou not onto their secret, and unto their assembly mine honor be thou not
united.

To close this head, it is not to be forgotten, that as the evil spirit is
called a Pleader or Informer against others, (...)
so the good spirit of God has an appellation Antarctickly opposite viz. an
advocate or a pleader for others: (...). Gal. 5.16.
so that to walk in the spirit, (as Paul speaks), and to walk with slanderers
(as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 9.4.
) must needs be as contrary as Heaven and hell.

CHAP. II. The INFORMERS Trade.
YOu have seen the Informers Pedigree, come we now to his Trade, and pardon me
that I put it before his Religion, for so does he; 1 Timothy 6.4, 5.
for gain is his godliness: a thing charged upon Railers and evil surmisers.
You know his father, and may thence guess at his trade, for probably such a
parent will be wanting in no endeavors to educate his own children in his own
occupation. When God asked Satan, whence come thou? Job 1.6, 7.
his answer was, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and
down in it. And such must the Informers be to the same enquiry, unless he have
learned to out-ly his father: however the Psalmist speaks for him, Psalm. 37.9.
That his tongue walks through the earth.

His Trade is a Mystery (as some men call theirs) but of iniquity, of hidden
things of dishonesty. Particularly,

The Informer by trade is a Peddler, (for so the phrase is) and a dealer too in
prohibited commodities. A radice (...)
Rokel is a Peddler, thence Rakil an Informer, the word used Lev. 19.16. Thou
shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy people. Thou shall not walk
a Talebearer, Ains. Slanderer, Backbiter, Quarrel-picker. Marg. Rakil is one
that makes merchandise of words, Ainsw. in Lev. 19.16.
uttering them as wares, going from place to place to spread abroad
criminations of other men. Now walking in Scripture imports a set Trade, as
walking in Christ, the Trade of Christianity; walking disorderly, a disorderly
conversation, so walking a Talebearer, the trade of Talebearing. A good man may
possibly fall into it as his temptation, but none but a wicked will take it up
as his Trade. He that walks a Talebearer reveals secrets. Pro. 11.13. Marg.
Heb.
He will tell you it is a secret, yet he must needs tell it; He sits, and speaks
against his brother, Psa. 50.20.
and slandereth his own mothers son. Keep clear, Sirs, off this Peddler, though
a Brother: Paul was in peril among false Brethren as much as by the Heathen. 1
Cor. 11.26.


You see I have not nick named the Trade, nor slandered the Slanderer in
calling him Peddler, or in saying that he deals in forbidden Wares. Moses
forbids Talebearers, and Paul Tatlers, and calls them Busy bodies, 1 Timothy
5.13. (...) ebullio. Psalm. 45.1. Hebr.
speaking things that they ought not. The word comes from the boiling of a pot,
for as the heart of the godly is boiling up with a good matter: so the heart of
the wicked, which is little worth, is vainly bubbling up with other men's
matters, and casting up such things as it ought not.

We think perhaps because the tongue is but a little member, that tongue-sins
are but little matters: Jam. 3.6, 8.
but James says the tongue is a world of iniquity, an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison: and Jude, Jude 9.
That Michael the Archangel durst not bring a railing accusation, no not
against the Devil, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

The sin of Sycophancy, rendered false-accusing, forbidden by John Baptist,
Luke 3.14. Chap. 19.8. (...). Planud. in vita Aesopi
and repented of by Zachaeus, comes from showing of figs; which some refer to
the story of Aesop, who being traduced by his guilty fellow servants for eating
up his Masters figs, and unable through an impediment in his speech to
vindicate himself by drinking warm water in his Masters sight, did clear not
only his stomach, but his innocence; the colloguing Informers being made to
pledge him in the same liquor, discharge both their stomach of the figs, and
Aesop of the crime; whence the flattering false accuser was first called
Sycophant. (...). Plutarch.
Others refer it to the Athenian Informers set on work for discovery of such as
exported that kind of fruit, contrary to Law, who for lucre often times would
accuse the innocent. But what ever was its rise, it is certain, its use both in
Scripture and other Authors, is for a flattering Informer, defamer,
Talebearer, false accuser.

Now the Trade of this Rakil is not much unlike his, whom in Cambridg we call
Rake-hell, who goes hunting about in every hole. Pedlers are wanderers, and so
are Tale-tellers, which the Apostle well observes, 1 Timothy 5.13.
when he joins wandering about from house to house, to tatlers, etc. Yet
himself when at Ephesus, Acts 20.20.
went from house to house, but on a contrary errant, he did that to preach
truth, which these do to spread lies. Thus as Pedlers go round about the town,
so these barkers and belchers go round about the city. Psalm. 59.6, 7.


Pedlers will say that their packs are their own, when perhaps they are yet to
pay for them: so will these, with our tongue will we prevail, Psalm. 12.4.
our lips are our own, who is Lord ever us? yet is there a God to call these
men to an account, as Enoch has prophesied, Jude 15.
even for hard speeches. For how light soever men make of words, and call them
but wind; yet Christ the judge says, Matthew. 12.3.
By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned: Therefore think whilst thou art a trading of an after-reckoning.

Pedlers will not want Customers of possibly they may be had, no more will
Talebearers: They will even thrust their Wares upon you: yet these Pedlers, (
whisperers, backbiters, Paul joins them, Romans 1.29, 30.
and you shall seldom see them severed) love the darkest rooms best, as best
befriending their false wares. Psalm. 64.5.
They commune of laying snares privily: in secret places do they murder the
innocent. They will enjoin you to keep their names in secrecy, whilst
themselves lay others open: like those Pharisees that bind burdens on other
men's shoulders, which themselves will not touch with one of their fingers.

Pedlers when they open their packs, have many gay things for you, to get
something out of you, Tinsel-riboning with almost an endless etc. and so have
these sycophants, whom therefore Solomon calls potsheards covered with silver
dross. Pro. 26.23.
And God himself says of such as walk with slanders, Jer. 26.28, 30.
Reprobate silver, or refuse of silver shall men call them, for God has
rejected them.

Thus as the Peddler shows forth this painted wares, so the false witness, says
Solomon, Pro. 12.17.
shows forth deceit. Yet how poor soever their packs are, and dear soever you
pay for what you have, both would make you believe that they greatly befriend
you: you have such a pennyworth as your neighbors must by no means know how you
had it. Pray tell no body how I sold it you, says the Peddler; nor who told it
you, says the Informer.

Pedlers will crouch and cringe for a good customer: so these Informers, as
Zibah to David, 2 Samuel 16.4
I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my Lord, O King.
Master, says the Peddler, I have such a thing to sell you. My Lord, says the
Informer, I have such a thing to tell you. Psalm 10.7, 10.
His mouth is full of deceit and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and
vanity, be croucheth and humbles himself that the poor may fall by his strong
ones.

Pedlers will vend for you if you have any thing for their turn, as well as
sell to you; and perhaps if you do not offer it, they will ask it: your old
broken silver, etc. which when once they have gotten, let them alone to make
the most of it. Thus Informers will export as well as import; and let them get
out of you but a hint, though a broken one too, and I warrant you they will
soon make more of it than you did. They will put into you some of their water
to pump you the more easily. Pro. 29.19. Jer. 20 10.
Therefore the Tale bearer is called an enticer with his lips. They waited for
my halting, peradventure say they he will be enticed, and we shall prevail
against him. And if yet they can get nothing out of you that they came for, it
is not unlike that what themselves would have sold you, they will say they had
it of you. Christ was charged with blaspemy by them that were themselves the
blasphemers. And Nero set Rome on fire, and then said it was the Christians,
They can create, make something out of nothing, what wonder then if they make
more than is of what they see and hear?

Pedlers they bend their back for the pack, Jer. 9.3.
and the Informer his tongue for lies: Both are too commonly artificial liers,
counting lying their grace in putting off their slight wares so they do it
cunningly. The babbler in the Hebrew is called Master of the tongue. Ecc. 10.11.
He thinks its a great matter to tell a lie with a grace. Do not doubt, says
the Peddler, of what I sell you, for I bought it of such a one; or of what I
tell you, says the Informer, for I had it of such a one. Neh. 6.6.
It is reported, says he, and Gams^u says it.

Pedlers will seem loath to part with what they long to be rid of, with too
many protests, that if it were not to you, or for need, they would not part
with it so: so the sycophant has something to say, which he is very loath to
speak of, (as if informing forsooth went much against his grain) but necessity
puts him upon it, Vox faucibu^beret.
and then he humms and hahs: at length out comes what he is with child, till
delivered of: but yet were it not for the due respect he has to you, he should
not have spoke of it. Psalm. 50.9.
Thus both sorts of sellers give their mouth to evil, and their tongue frames
deceit. Thus have they taught their tongues to speak lies: as if corrupted
nature were not School Mistress enough who teaches that from the womb, Jerem.
9 5.
They will be sure to have this base Art to help Nature; Psalm. 58.3.
though some of them perhaps are none of the greatest friends to more liberal
Learning. Pro. 16.30
Solomon says of the Sychophant, that he first shuts his eyes to devise
froward things, and then moves his lips to bring the evil to pass. And thus
when the cunning Peddler has imposed on his credulous Customer, he laughs in
his sleeve. And the Tale-teller when he has cast arrows, and Firebrarnds, and
Death, yet because he has deceived his neighbor, he says am I not in sport?
And then as Pedlers probably sleep not so contentedly if their Markets have not
succeeded prosperously, Prove. 4.16
so these sleep not except they have done Mischief, and their sleep is taken
away except they cause some to fall.

One thing I had almost forgot, which the Peddler will for the most part be sure
to remember, being perhaps last in his mouth, yet not least in his mind: And
that is to ask you a piece of something before he has done with you: and if his
modesty do not serve to beg flatly for himself, yet he has a partner some or
other, that would thank you for a piece of your bread, etc. Thus the bread of
deceit lying or falsehood, Pro. 20.17
(that is, bread so gotten) is sweet to the Sychophant. Thus Zibah by his
Taletelling, and by his I humbly beseech thee, to David, shares stakes with
Mephibosheth, nay had almost turned him quite out of all, before he was once
heard to answer for himself. In this sense through Covetousness they make
Merchandise with fained words. It is foretold of the last days, first that men
shall be lovers of their own selves, then false Accusers. And supplanting is
yoaked with slandering, 2 Timothy 3.1 2, 3.
Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in any Brother, for
every Brother will utterly supplant, and every Neighbor will walk with
slanders. The Cuckoo picks a hole in another birds Eggs, that she may lay her
own in the same nest. Jerem. 9.4.
It was Nabaths good vineyard that made him a bad man, and that which made him
unfit to live, was that which he had to live upon. It is not always men's
walking ill in their place, as the goodness of the place that they walk in,
that makes them Criminal. The Carry on Crow can come clear off, Dat venia^^
corvis vexat censura ^^lumbas.
without being perhaps so much as aimed at, though a foul bird and a fair mark,
when some other bird is knocked down, not because it is more mischievous but
because it has better flesh. The Eagle-eyed Informer will not trust a fly. You
shall have happily here or there a ten or twenty pound Vicar that hangs still
like an old Cobweb in the same thatch where he was Twenty years ago, yet was
never touched with the beesom of Sequestration: not because he was a less
sinner than others upon whom Sequestration fell; or the souls of poor people
less precious there; but the Living less worth, and the Informer besides his
Charges to Westminster, and the indifferent supply of the place would not have
wherewithal sufficiently to recruit the expense of his zeal in procuring an
Order of Sequestration of it into his own hands till further Order. I speak not
thus for opprobry, but with grief. But if any be so pestilent and profligate,
as slanderously to accuse merely to mischieve others, I need not spend paper to
tell you whose trade they are of, However make the best of the proditors bad
Markets: If a Judas seem gainer by the sale of the Innocent, he will one day be
more hasty to get rid of, then ever he was to get his pay, Mat. 27.3
and will cry, take it again when he burns his fingers.

Pedlers are not over much at home in their own houses: no more I fear are
Informers in their own hearts. If they were, they would find less time, and
perhaps less reason to be so busy abroad; but this is too natural. 1 Samuel 18.9
A Saul can eye a David, a good man, whilst himself is possessed with an evil
spirit. It is easy to look about us, to see how other men go, but a kind of
pain (for it will cost some stooping which we love not) to see how we our
selves go. While we view the blemishes of other faces, we see not our own: but
did we look on our own natural face in Gods glass more, we should have less
leisure to gaze at other men's. Could you follow the Rake-hell home, that is
such a gadder abroad, I doubt you would find things in none of the best order.
There is one Informer would be encouraged, for he has Gods license, and that
is Conscience. Would we but often enough read over this Monitors bill, and be
but enough Critics upon our own hearts, which are nearest us, and as willing
to take informations against our selves, as some are to get them against
others, (...). 1 Pet. 4.1^. 1 Kings 20.49.
we should not be as the Apostles word is, such busy Bishops in other men's
matters. But whilst I was busy here and there, says he, he whom I had in
charge was gone. What is become of family-Religion, catechizing children,
instructing servants, secret duty, closet work, heart examination, etc. since
thou have taken up this trade, and been busy picking a talo here, and a thank
there? Can. 1.6.
Have they made thee a keeper of others vineyards, and thine own vineyard have
thou not kept? Think man if so, that thy every Information against another is a
double Indictment against thy self. Let thy charity then begin at home (for so
is self-censuring) and then thou will be less uncharitable when thou come
abroad. In my small observation, best men are least censorious of others, and
most critical as to themselves. However he that loves to be exhaling dunghills
(as the Informer loves to do) if he would do it with credit, had need be clear
himself, as the sun is. John 8.7.
Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.

Pedlers sometimes will have some weapon in their hands, which the Informer
carries in his head, whose tongue, says David, Psalm. 59.4.
is a sharp sword. And where they suspect any difficulty or danger in their
march, they love company, such as their own: and so do these Talebearers to
have seconds and vonchers. Jer. 20.10.
Report, say they, and we will report it. Thus are these foxes tied tale to
tale, as Sampsons were turned tail to tail, whilst they carry fire betwixt them
from place to place. You see why the hatred hiding-lyer is said by Solomon to
utter a slander, Jud. 15.50
a phrase proper to a Peddler who utters his Wares. But let me tell you it is so
bad a Trade that no man can live well upon it, no not in this world: for he
that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil,
and his lips that they speak no guile, let him eschew evil and do good, let him
seek peace and ensue it. Reader, whosoever thou art, let me warn thee though
thou love not thy Neighbor, yet as thou love thy life, to take heed of this
Traffic, warn thine Eve for her Grandmothers sake that she pry not into the
Pack. Let not this Peddler, if thou can help it, ever put his staff within thy
door; and be sure to trayn up thy children to a better Trade. I have been too
long upon the Informers Trade, and so has he; Let us now both bid adieu to
it. I shall be shorter in his Religion, for that is it wherein he is short,
else would he not have been so long in his Trade: That Is the short and the long
of it.

CHAP. III. The INFORMERS Religion.
THe moral Peddler for the most part carries what he has in a painted box. His
hatred is covered by deceit. Prove. 26.26
He has rough hands, yet Jacobs voice. When he speaks fair, believe him not,
Verse 25.
(says Solomon) or when he makes his voice gracious. It Is not so, yet he
makes it so. Marg. after the Hebrew
It would spoil his informing if he were not in the form. The Peddler had as
good be out of the world as fashion; he must have to fit that, or give over. Is
godliness in credit? the Informer will have a form of it: for less than that
would hinder him in his Trade; but no more, for that would quite overthrow it.
The false Accusers, 2 Timothy 3.3.5
whom Paul calls Devils, are yet said to have a form of Godlyness. They put on
the Saint, as Judas and Jesabel, to play the Devil. That Devils should co^et to
be under a form of Godlyness seems somewhat strange; but then he ads, they deny
the power, and that takes often the wonder: for had they not the form, they could
not carry in a false sense such a Grace in Traducing: But had they the power,
they would have more Grace (in a true sense) then to Traduce. So then, hear
such a one speak and you may take him for a Jacob, but if ever you come to feel
him, you will be perhaps of another mind.

Birds of Prey (how curiously colored soever,) are pronounced unclean, as
Eagles, Deuteronomy. 14.12.13. etc.
Vultures, Cormorants etc. And so is the tongue that loves like Doegs, all
devouring words. Isaiah 52.4. 1 Samuel 21.7
And yet it is said of that very Doeg, that he was detained before the Lord. He
was not it seems void of a Form of Religion, who yet bloodily betrays and
butchers in the next, Chap. 22.
those very Ministers with whom he had joined in waiting upon God in the
Chapter before. James 1.26. (...) Deu. 14.19 Some few excepted, Lev. 11.
Wherefore if any man seem to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, that
man's religion is vain. He has a Religion, but it is but seeming, therefore
vain.

I find also that every creeping thing that flies was unclean, which seems
most to fit the Informer, who creeps up and down to pick up tales, and then
has wings like a bird to carry the matter. 2 Timothy 3.6.
These creepers into houses (as the Apostle calls them) though never so heady,
Ver. 4.
(or high-flown) yet because they are false accusers, are therefore to be
turned away from, Ver. 3.
(as being unclean in a Gospel sense) notwithstanding their gay feathers, Ver.
5.
though having a form of godliness.

There is yet further cause why the Informer should be in love with a form; for
as it credits him in putting off, so in taking up of his wares. As he could not
so hope to be passant without aiming at the Shibboleth: Jud. 12.5, 6. Hail
Master John 18.^
so he reckons that by pretending to kiss Christ, he may best play the Judas;
for none kept more fawning or complementing than the Traitor, and so was so
much in credit, that he was a Secretis to our Savior. He that betrayed knew the
place: for Jesus ofttimes reserted thither with his Disciples.

A Sepulcher is such a thing as none would covet to come near it, were it not
covered and painted. Romans 3.13.
Such men's throat is an open sepulcher, which every one would fear to fall
into, had it not the Epiglottis the smooth covering of a deceitful tongue. The
Apostle speaks of some that became brethren, though false ones, to spy out the
liberty of those that are true. Gal. 2.4. Luke 20.20.
Thus feignedly just men were appointed for spies upon him, that was truly so.
The wolf in his own skin would affright the sheep, Acts 9 13. Ver. 26.
(as Ananias and the Disciples were afraid of Saul who appeared an open
persecutor) he must therefore put on sheeps clothing, Mat. 7.15.
that he may raven the more among the sheep.

Nay possibly men blinded in their judgment, by Gods, may conceit that their
seeming holiness may make some amends for their real unrightousness. Else how
should they say, Isaiah 66.5.
Let the Lord be glorified when they hate their brethren, and cast them forth
for his names sake, whom he has justified.

How nice were those envious Accusers of the Blessed Jesus, John 8.28.
that would not themselves go into the judgment-hall, lest they should be
defiled, but that they might eat the Passover. Ver. 29.
Therefore Pilate went out to them, and said, What accusation bring you against
this man? Nay it seems they looked on themselves as such pure Merchants, that
they seem to take it ill at his hands that he takes not off all their pack by
wholesale, Dolus in universalibus.
(as Informers will take snuff if you take not all upon their trust) They
answered and said unto him, Ver. 30.
If he had not been a malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee.
Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas.
What do you suspect us that have such scrupulous consciences, that we would
have been Accusers if he had not been guilty? I reflect not here on holiness,
but rip up hypocrisy. Jam 1.26. (...).
Therefore James betwixt seeming to be religious and not bridling the tongue,
puts in self-deceipt. It Is the less then to be wondered at, that under
semblance of Religion, such can deceive others, who have first deceived their
own heart. A fair item to all others not to overtrust him that deceives himself.

You have had a view of the Informer, How religious he is, and Why; yet but
overly of that which is but superficial. Perhaps if you follow close at his
heels for a particular survey of his Saint ship in his house or closet, you
might too frequently find his tongue so tired with travailing abroad, that by
the time it gets home, it has too little either list or leisure to praise or
to Pray. However we shall take notice of those particular Devotions that
himself not unwillingly exposes to public view; His set Fasting and public
Hearing.

The Informer will keep a Fast himself. when he intends by it perhaps the
taking of the bread out of your mouth. And will hang down his head, Isa. 58 4.5.
when he minds to have at yours. There is a Fasting for strife and debate,
which though God does not choose, yet he does. They whom Jezabel suborned
against innocent Naboth, must by no means forswear themselves till they have
first kept a Fast, either, as if real perjury were to be previously expiated,
by this counterfit piety, or else as if it were disorderly to falsify against
man, without lying to God in the first place, as if the needle of a double
tongue did disdain to draw after it such a slender thread as a single sin.
Proclaim a Fast, 1 K 21.9.10
and set Naboth on high, and set two men sons of Belial before him, to bear
witness against him etc. So commanded that Jezabel, 2. Kin. 9.30
whose Religion like her Beauty was but paint-deep, and so did her Knights of
the Post, those sons of Belial.

For the other point of his Religion, to wit, his public Hearing; He will
often be an auditor where he least loves the Preacher, which you will not think
strange when you consider his errand, which is not to get any thing by the
Minister, (for he takes himself already to be wiser then his teacher, or
however to be now too old to be a Learner who is turned to be Informer,) but to
get something against the Minister: and perhaps the best Preacher shall be most
haunted with such Hearers; as our Savior himself, you may well think 'twas not
for love of him that the Pharisees found him Hearers, Mat. 22.15
but to entangle him in his speech. Yet these Auditors will seem applauders,
Mat. 12.13
Master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man etc. This they did, Luke 20 20.
Mark says to catch him in his words, and Luke says, that they might take
hold of his words, and so of him too, not by Faith, but by fraud and fury. Thus
they consult him in a case of Conscience, not to be informed, but to Inform,
that they might accuse him. And if it were thus done to the Master,, Mat. 12.10
the servant is not above his Lord.

Jer. 37.13. Capt. Irijah.
Thus Jeremiah that was the best affected man amongst them, is charged by a
Captain amongst the Israelites to be a faller off to the Caldeans, and all
because of his honest and plain dealing.

Aut inveniam, aut faciam.
You see then what the Informer comes for, which he will either find or make
before he go away. He deals with what he hears, as Procrustes with his guests,
cuts off what is too long, and stretches out what is too short for his turn. He
wrests what he hears to the Preachers destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16 Psalm. 56.5
as some do the Scriptures to their own. David's words were wrested daily to his
hurt, and Paul was slandrously reported, Romans 3.8.
and some affirmed that he said what he said not.

He has a singular faculty both of Judgment and Memory, which he exercises
upon what he hears. He has so piercing a Judgment, that he understands that by
the Sermon that no body else can, and that the Minister never meant; and so
strange a memory that he can remember that which was never spoken.

To shut up his Religion, I must further add, that all the practical
improvement that he ever makes of what he hears, is only An Use of
INFORMATION. Witness that Michajah the son of Gemariah in the Reign of
Jehoiakim. Jeremi. 36 11.16.
What is further in his Religion, you may guess by the man himself; that is,
when Sermon is done he intends a Repetition, such as you may expect by what
has been told you, Am 7.10.11
even such as Amaziah the Priest of Bethel made to Jeroboam King of Israel,
saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the House of Israel,
the Land is not able to bear his words, for thus Amos says, etc. And when he
thus Repeats, he will be angry if you will not believe him, more then himself
did the Minister that Preached the Sermon.

CHAP. III. The INFORMERS Arraignment.
I Now come to the Informant against the Informer, and justly to deal with this
Adonibozek, Judge. 1.7.
as he has injuriously dealt with others, Nec Lex est justier ulla, etc.

There is no Law more just than that by which

The unjust's thrown in, that digs the just a ditch.

Only being much a stranger to the formalityes of our Law, as he whom I
implead is altogether to the tenor of Gods. I endorse on his Indictment a true
Bill, yet am I contented, where need is, that this Bill be mended in form but
not altered in substance.

The first thing therefore that I charge on the Informer is Defamation: Eccle.
7.1.
A good Name is as a precious Ointment, but then the Informer is as a Fly in
the box; I heard, Jer. 20.10.
says Jeremy, the Defaming of many. Now as Defamation bears an Action amongst
Men, so especially in Heaven, where God has set up a Court of Honor for the
Innocent, where he both pleads their Cause and executes Judgment for them, till
he bring forth their Righteousness as the light, and their Judgment as the noon
day. Therefore what Jeremiah calls defaming, Romans 3.8. (...). 1 Cor. 4.13. (...)
Paul calls Blaspheming, for complaining that himself, and the rest of the
Apostles were slandorously Reported and Defamed, as we read, the word in both
places is Blasphemed Cr.

The Scripture makes God the Guardian of the Innocent; now as no man can
commence a suit to the prejudice of the Orphan without taking in the Guardian,
so the reproaches of them that reproach the Innocent fall upon God; Mat. 15.19.
and hence to false witnesses are added Blasphemies. As is he that by lying
would make himself better, (I know the blasphemy of those that say they are
Jews and are not) so is he that falsely represents another as worse then he is.
Revel. 2.9.
Pro. 17.15.
He that justifies the wicked and condemns the just, even they both are
abomination to the Lord.

Next I present the Informer by the name of Sycophant alias Talebearer, as a
Common Barretour, an Inciter of litigations and vexations quarrelings among
Men. Solomon yokes a false witness that speaks Lies, Prove. 6.19.
and him that sows discord among brethren, for a froward man sows strife,
Chap. 16.28.
and a whisperer separateth chief friends. You se^ his Husbandry: Mat. 13.25.
His Seeds time is like that of the Envious man, that sows Tares, and then
his harvest is, when he sees not corn, Pro. 17.9.
but men together by the Ears. He that covers a Transgression seeks love, but
he that repeateth a matter separateth very friends. Oh how perilous as to
substance are our Breaches for Circumstances since the wound has taken wind by
false fame and continually been kept a chafing by evil Interpreters, and worse
Interpraters among dissenting Brethren. If the phrase be not allowable, no more
let the thing be. This Informer is a pernicious Ambidexter at the handling, I
mean, of his double tongue. (...) Reynolds Gods reveng against Murder.
Strange instances hereof do occur in reading, too prolix to be here inserted.
He often kills two birds with one stone. Persuades if it may be, the Husband to
doubt the Wifes Loyalty, and the Wife to dispute the Husbands Love; rejoicing
secretly to abate that in both, the want whereof, he subtily laments in either.
Such pranks he can play between Magistrate and Minister, one and another; and
who, if you will believe him, such a friend in the Interim, to them both, as he
that makes them Enemies to each other, who had had no quarrel had they heard of
none? And thus, as the ready way to make some blush, is to tell them that they
do so; so by telling them that they are Enemies, Pro. 26.21. and 20.
he makes them so. As coals are to burning coals and wood to fire, so is a
contentious man to kindle strife. Where no wood is, the fire goes out, so where
there is no Talebearer or Whisperer the strife ceases, or is silent. Marg.
after the Hebrew
So then, as we desire to silence the noise of the strife, let us stop our Ears
to the News of the Whisperer.

Also I present the said Informer for Bloodshed and Battery, for that he with
force of arms, that is to say, with swords, staves, clubs, or other Offensive
weapons did assault, wound, or otherwise evil entreat, Hebr. 7.2
contrary to the peace of our soverain Lord the King Jesus Christ, who is King
of Salem, that is, Peace, sundry of his Majesty's peaceable and good Subjects.

They speak not peace, Psa. 35.30.
but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the land.
Prove. 25.18
Now he that bears false witness against his Neighbor, is a maul and a sword,
and a sharp arrow. A maul, there is Battery; a sword, there is Bloodshed; and
a sharp Arrow, that is worse than the other. Jer. 93. v. 20
He has a subtle way of wounding at a distance, which neither club nor sword
can do He bends his tongue like a bow for lies, his Tongue is an Arrow shot
out. He speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, Prove. 26.23
but in heart he lays his wait. And thus the words of the Talebearer are as
wounds.

The Informer assaults as the Arabian fights. He loves not a close combat with
his enemy face to face, but lurks in some hole, whence he shoots his Arrow,
that the wounded may not see the hand that hits him. Ps. 64.3.4.5
They bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words, that they may
shoot in secret at the perfect; suddenly do they shoot at him and fear not.
They say, who shall see them? This Fox designs what Faux did in another case,
to blow you up in your credit and interest, and yet so as you may not know who
hurts you. Plutarch in vita Julii Caesar.
He deals as cowardly Casca did with Julius Caesar, that durst not adventure to
give him a wound, till he had sneakingly got behind his back. There is a Biting
of one another, Gal. 5.13.
censured by the Apostle, Romans 1.30
and a Backbiting too. There is a Backbiting with the tongue, Psalm. 15.3. Prove
25.23.
yea, a Backbiting tongue. It is a strange phrase. you had need, Sirs, carry
Eyes in your head, for the Monster I speak of carries Teeth in his Tongue. Nay,
if you knew how, your very Occiput had need be ocular, and you like Ianus,
double faced, to obviate the assaults of the double tongued. The Informer is
like Dan, A Serpent by the way, Genesis 49.17
an Adder in the paths, that bites the horse heels, so that his Rider shall
fall backwards.

When Antipater a great Commander, Plutarc. in vita Alex.
being then very far off, was accused to Alexander; Cassander the son of the
accused being then in the Court, says Alexander, Thy father is certainly
guilty, else these men would never have put themselves to the trouble to have
come so far to accuse him: Nay rather, O King, (replies the Son) it is manifest
my father is not guilty, for had he been, these enemies of his would rather
have accused him before his face. I leave this story to them whom it most
concerns, being called upon to a further prosecution of the Informer at the
Bar. I shall only add, That honest Mephibosheth might soon have made
traitorous Ziba stumble in his story had not himself (good man) been lame of
his feet, and so under an invincible necessity of being absent, when accused.
Therefore methinks since, Qui justum statuit, altera inaudita part, ipse
injustus est.
most honest men have two ears, whereas the Informer has but one Tongue,
(though that perhaps be a double one) they should make conscience of reserving
one ear for the accused, (as Plutarch says Alexander was wont to do) when they
have lent the Offender the other aforehand.

I do further indite the said Informer for burglarie and felony, Detraction is
so called because it steals from a man, etc. ^p Usher.
for that he feloniously and burglarly by force of arms a breach did make, and
with a felonious intent did rob. steal and take away, so many good names, to
the value of etc.

The Informer commits burglary to further his felony, he breaks through men's
good-names to come at their goods, as they through Naboths to rob him of his
Inheritance. Luke 19.8.
Says Zachaeus, when converted, If I have wronged any man by sycophancie, I
restore him fourfold, that is, by false Accusation in such case where part of
the pecuniary penalty did go to the Informer. Here Is a punctual restitution,
and besides the fifth part required by the Law to be added to the principal,
Lev. 6.2, 5.
here is a fair surplusage, forasmuch as the parties injured did not only
suffer in their goods but good names. And surely could we but see our Informers
reform, we should have much traveling in this unbeaten path of Restitution,
the necessary concomitant (where it may be) of true Repentance, with a
non-obstante to that saying, It Is a shame to steal, but a greater shame to
bring home.

The spoiling of ones good name is by so much a greater Robbery than the rapine
of ones Goods, by how much A good name is rather to be chosen then great
Riches, Prove. 22.2.
and loving favor rather then silver and gold. A man had better be plundered of
his Coin then Credit, and of his Goods then Good esteem. Credit has a
magnetic virture in it to draw livelihood and employment after it; but let the
good name be broken, Actum est de homine cum actum est de nomine.
and then good parts are like a curiously wrought Lock with a broken spring,
that may have many lookers on, but few buyers. And thus as we say (in some
cases) some rob many in one, when the Informer whets his tongue like a sword to
smite the Shepherd, the poor Sheep are scattered, Psalm. 74.3.
and thus he destroys the Dam with the Young.

Further, Deuteronomy.
he does not only wrong by Robbery, but robs of the means of righting the
wrong. He defameth whom he injureth, that their own denial may not be taken;
and if he can, makes their friends parties, that they may not be witnesses.
Thus treacherous Zibah took away Mephibosheths Asses, 2 Samuel 19.26 27.
that he might not ride to clear himself to the King, whom he knew to be so
lame, that he could not go on his own feet. Thus High-way-men will turn away
your Horse, as well as take away your Purse, to disable you to pursue the
Thieves, or however to get a sufficient start of you.

The Informer has learnt of Machia^il what Zibah found true before Machiavil
was born. Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit.
Calumnia^^ boldly and something will stick, as Venim will, when the Vipers
teeth are plucked out (so receptive are our evil hearts of any evil impression,
and so retentive, yea, tenacious of what is so recieved,) for when
Mephibosheth, as soon as he could, had brought the King, not only his most
cordial and clear expressions to blow off, but also his overgrown hair, 2. Sam.
19.24.
to brush off the false suggestions of a flattering Zibah, making proof good
enough that himself had remembered David and all his trouble, yet the King so
forgot the kindness of Ie^^^^an, to say nothing of the justice of a Prince,
Ver. 29.
that still Zibah must have half his Masters Estate, for telling a Lie of him
so well affected-ly.

I might add, that as the Thief in the Candle, so is the Talebearer to Time,
his own and others; stealing that away, that is inestimably precious. You know
what a Brand of Infamy was set on the Athenians, Acts 17.21.
that spent their time in nothing else, but to tell or hear some new thing.

Lastly, I present the Informer for Murder, (which here in Ireland is Treason)
for that he contrary to the crown and dignity of the soverain Lord of life,
the fear of God before his eyes not having, of malice forethought did kill and
murder. Thus Moses presents, who is the foreman of the Grand Jury; Lev. 19.16.
Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy people, neither shall
thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor, I am the Lord; as who would say,
the Talebearer is not only guilty of the blood of his neighbor, but also of
Treason and Indignity against the Lord. And thus Ezekiel after him, another
good man and true, and with him all the rest of the Prophets are agreed in
their verdict: Ezekiel. 22.9.
In thee are the men that carry tales to shed blood. Yea, the Coroner himself
who has made the Inquest, and probed the depth of the wound, says, Prove. 26.22
That the words of the Talebearer are as wounds, they go down to the innermost
parts of the belly. They sink not only into the Hearer, working an inward, if
not incurable Rancor; but especially into the innocent sufferer, Solomon speaks
of those that are afflicted by a lying Tongue, Prove. 26.28
and adds, that a flatering mouth works ruin. Such a Tongue the Greek Version
sometimes renders, (as Ainsworth observes,) a double tongue: but the Hebrew
Doctors phrase is a threefold tongue, (which methinks the Poets seem to have
respect unto, in their Fiction of Cerberus, that triple tong'd Hell-hound.
Maimon, gives the Reasons, Our wise men have said, says he, that the evil
tongue kills three, the Speaker, the Receiver, and him that is spoken against.

Psalm. 52.2.
David compares Doegs Tongue to a sharp Rasor working deceiptfully: a faithful
Reprovers Tongue is like a sharp Rasor too, but working honestly, it makes the
patient endurer thereof, more smooth and trim. But the flanderers Tongue is a
sharp Rasor, a cutthroat weapon, when it works deceiptfully.

Slander, too often takes away the Life, as Naboths, by color of Law; and a
better man's then his, whose Judgment in his humiliation was taken away; Acts
8.33
of whom the Prophet says, that he was not only as a Lamb, at the
slaughtering, but as a Sheep at the Shearing, Isaiah 53 7.
They first rob him what they can of his Fleece of Innocence, and then Butcher
him.

Otherwise it destroys Life by working Sorrow in the sufferer, that works
Death. Even Davia himself complains, that he was a dead man, and like a broken
vessel; Psalm. 31 12.13.
For, says he, I have heard the slander of many. As she that lives in
pleasure, so he that lives in disgrace, is even dead whilst he lives for what
is the Life of our Life next under the favor of God, but the favor of those
that are good? and next our acceptance with the Father, but to be accepted, as
was Mordecai's happy hap, Ester 10 3.
with the multitude of our Brethren.

Or at least, the slandering tongue stabs that to the heart, which should out
live our Life, and is in that respect dearer then it, to wit, the Name of the
righteous, which should be had in everlasting remembrance. The Name of the
righteous is blessed, Prove. 10.7.
but the Memorial of the wicked shall rot. It is this blessed thing, that the
putrid Parasite lies corroding, like some Worms that will be eating holes in
the foundest Timber, as if they envyed its more durable substance should
out-last their own. Mine Enemies says David, speak evil of me, Psalm 41.5
when shall he die, and his Name perish?

Ambition we know, could much more tempt the more generous Heathen, then sordid
Avarice, who would lose their Life to save their Honor. Se the Mar. Isaia. 63
19 Zach. 10.12
And how much dearer should a Christians good Name be to him, inasmuch as the
Name of the Lord is called upon him, and he said to walk up and down in it? So
that, whosoever slandereth his walking, and assassinates his Credit, adds
Treason against God, to his murdering of the just; whereof the first is the
worst. He that complains of the slander of many, Psalm. 31.13 Psalm 85.50 51.
on purpose devised to take away his life, was yet most deeply wounded at this,
says he, Remember O Lord, the reproach of thy servants, Ezekiel. 29.9. Hebr.
wherewith thine Enemies have reproached Jehovah, wherewith they have
reproached the footsteps of thine anointed. So then the Men of slanders, are
the Men of blood, and theirs are the bloody addresses, who address themselves
to accuse the Innocent. Now that this Treasonable murdering is of malice
forethought, the Wise man gives evidence where he says, Prove. 26.28
A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, which Text with some
experience may in time teach you to construe that paradox. That they that do
the injury are most hard to forgive. And that it is for that they have not the
fear of God before their eyes, David proves saying of the Ziphims, Psalm. 54.3.
Saul's sneaking Informers, Strangers are risen up against me, that seek after
my soul, they have not set God before them, Selah.

I have done with the Indictment: only if you ask after all did he fly for the
same? Let the Court hear the witness; the Psalmist first says, Ps. 10.7 8 9
under his tongue is mischief and vanity, and then that He sits in the lurking
places of the Villages, secretly, as a Lion in his Den. And again, They wrest
my words, Ps 140.11. Or, evil shall hunt him to overthrow him.
their thoughts are against me for evil, They hide themselves. And therefore he
imprecates, Let not an evil speaker be established in the Earth, but let him be
hunted to his overthrow. You may see by the worryed Lambs and Sheep, where the
Wolf or the Fox has been, which yet without hunting cannot be found. And now
having got him upon a fresh sent, Methinks, besides all that has been spoken,
the Informer smells so strong of the MALIGNANT, that it were easy to prosecute
him from Sessions to Councils, and from Courts to Committees, and to make the
charge good from that of the Apostle, Romans 1.29.
where he makes Malignancy the very Root of Backbiters and Whisperers, Full of
Malignity, Backbiters, Whisperers.

And thus, (what ever fair umbrage be put on to the contrary.) having proved
him a Delinquent against the Commonwealth, We are in the next place to bring
him to condign Pumishment.

CHAP. V. The INFORMERS Punishment.
ANd now to begin with him where we left him, (viz) in a state of Delinquency
against the State: He is in the first place liable to Sequestration (from the
favor I mean, of all great and good men.) Satan the Arch-Malignant was thus
sentenced of old at a Council in Heaven The Dragon was cast out thi^t old
Serpent, Revel. 12.9
called Accuser, and enemy, (for so Devil and Satan signify,) and so it is
explained in the following Verse where he is called the Accuser of our Brethren
V. 10.
that accused them night and day. And for my part, I see no reason why this
Sequestration should be taken off of his Children, till they give some better
proof of their true Repentance, and good affection to the Commonwealth: And
were but as round a course taken in this as in other cases there would not be
so many Malignants (in Scripture sense left so able to mischiev the Republique
as there are. The North wind says Solomon, Prove. 25 23
drives away Rain, so does an angry countenance, a back biting tongue: and
says David before him, Psalm. 101.5.
Who so privily slandereth his Neighbor him will I out off, that is, (to take
it in mitiori sensu) from mine audience, and favorable acceptance, for so he
seems to explain himself; He that works deceit shall not dwell within my
house, Verse 7.
he that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. So that by both their votes,
what you may see sometimes written over private Tables, would be most
necessarily inscribed over Council-Boards, Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere
vitam, Augustinianum distichon.

Hanc mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.


Which I thus English, Who loves the Absent to tradues, may he Present as Guest
at this Board never be.

I have touched on that part of this Delinquents Punishment, that may in part
disable him to mischieve others; and it is like he will think this to be
Punishment great enough. Maledico quoniammalefacere, cum velim, non possum.
For Zoilus being asked why he spoke mischievously of all Men? Answered,
because he could not do them mischief when he would; so that pull but out his
Sting, and you spoil his sweet Trade.

But if any shall think necessary to inflict further penalty, yet so as to keep
within compass of Law, I shall not here turn you over to the Cannonists, much
less to Ethnic Legislators, (for as a Reverend Author observes, Bp. Hall in
his cases of conscience. Dec. 2. cas. 7.
Delators and Informers have in all happy and well Governed States been ever
held an odious and Infamous kind of cattle: A Tiberius, says he, and a
Domitian might giv both countenance and rewards, as being meet factors for
their tyranny: but a Vespatian and Titus, an Antoninus pius, and Macrinus, or
whatever other Princes carried a tender care to the Peace and welfare of their
Subjects, whipped them in the Amphitheater, abandoned them out of their Dominions
as pernicious and intolerable.) Neither shall I direct you to steer your
course by his Compass, who caused some Accusers, (who were found out to have
wilfully falsified.) to be hung up by the Tongue: though it were to be wished,
that such were (if not tied by their Tongue; yet) somewhat more Tongue tied,
(...)
or to speak with the Apostle, Iam. 1.26.
(and then I am sure I speak safely,) that they would put a bridle on their own
Tongue: But I shall lead you to Gods own Law, and that is, Deuteronomy. 19.16.18.19
20.21.
If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which
is wrong: The Judges shall make diligent inquisition, and behold, if the
witness be a false witness, and has testified falsely against his Brother, then
shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to do unto his Brother, so shall thou
put the evil away from among you. And they that remain, shall hear and fear,
and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil amongst you: And thine eye
shall not pity, but Life shall go for Life, Eye for Eye, Hand for Hand, Foot
for Foot. Thine eye shall not pity: a severe Clause, say the Law be judicial as
to that time and people. If yet there be any parity of Reason that may carry it
further, if duly circumstantiated, which I leave to their prudence and justice
whom it most concerns to consider it.

Dan. 6.24.
'Twas lex talionis too, that Darius executed on Daniels Acousers, charging him
maliciously though not falsely of the breach of the Decree, that they had
subtly contrived to flatter the King and in trap him; which God himself as
aforesaid took care to see executed, opening the Lions mouths upon the
Accusers, which were stopped whilst the Accused was in the den. It Is said of
such, That swords are in their lips, whereby they cut others; and the Psalmist
threatens such, Psalm. 12.2.3.
that God will cut off their lips: and as their work is to divide others by
their tongues: So the Psalmist imprecates that God would divide their tongues.
Psalm. 55.9.
And perhaps if men forbear to punish in such cases, they may come to be
punished by those that they forbear. The fiery mettled ill-mouth'd horse will
not much spare his Rider, (let him get but his bit between his teeth) who
perhaps loved too well to see him throw up his heels at all others whom he
meets by the way. Jam. 3.7.8.
And the Apostle says, an untamed tongue is a much more ^^rnly evil than the
wildest beast. Vipers will not spare, when time serves, the bowels that bred
them.

But say, the Zibah be for from any punishment from men, that he seem to get by
his Trade: yet Solomon has assured us more than once in the same Chapter, Pro.
19.5.9
that the false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall not escape. Dreadful are the imprecations that lie at the slanderers and
backbiters door (as sin at Cains) up and down in the Psalms, (how consolatory
soever that portion of Scripture be to the rightous, though sufferers) some
whereof I shall recite, not that it is a delight but a duty to tell such men of
then danger: Psalm. 109.2, 6.7, 8.17, 18, 19, 20.
They have spoken against me with dying tongue, and then it follows: let Satan
stand at such a ones right hand: when he shall be judged let him be condemned,
and let another take his Office. As he loved cursing so let it come unto him:
as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him. Let cursing come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, etc. Let this be the
reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, Acts 1.2^.
and of them that speak evil against my soul. A Psalm applied to Judas the
Informer. And as dreadful the comminations, Psalm 64.3, 4, 7.
They bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words, etc. But God
shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded So David
against Doeg. (...) 52.1.4.5
Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty mar? etc. Thou love all
devouring words: God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee
away, etc. And elsewhere, Shall I not visit for these things? says the Lord,
(even these that I have been speak ng of, as is manifest in the Text) and shall
not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? Jer. 9. from 3. to the 9.
Verse.
etc. I might transcribe much Scripture of like import. But more may but more
harden them that fear not these; for accomplishment of all which, if others
should, themselves will not fail to be their own executioners; for David says,
Psalm. 64.7.
They shall make their own tongue fall upon themselves: as he that diggeth a
pit shall fall into it, and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.
So we read of some whose throats are open sepulchers for others, Pro. 26.27.
and yet elsewhere, that these very men's lips will swallow up themselves. Eccl.
10.12. compared with Prove. 10.14.
Thus he that with Judas has been an Informer against the Innocent, comes at
last with him too, to be felo de se. The Lord of his grace give him a timely
and better repentance than Judas's was, that he may never become a firebrand in
Hell, as he has been on Earth. This has been and shall be my prayer to God
for him, and is the end, the Lord knows, of this dealing so smartly with him.
And so Informer, Amend and Farewell.

A POSTSCRIPT. To the Innocent under the tongue-last of the Malevolent.
CHristian Brother, (so I call thee, however others miscall thee) wonder not
that thine uttermost endeavors both in way of Integrity to God, and
Inoffensiveness to man, cannot yet shield thee from the darts cast by
malevolent mouths. This was Paul's exercize, Acts 24.16
who was nevertheless defamed, and made as the filth of the world. 1 Cor. 4.13.
(...).
Yea the dear Disciple, who was all as it were made up of love complains of a
Diotrophes, who did prate against him with malicious words. 3 Ep. Joh. 10
Remember who has said, Luke 6.22.
Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from
their company, and shall reproach you, and shall cast out your name as evil,
for the son of man's sake; but be sure that it be for his sake. Verse 26.
But woe be to you when all men shall speak well of you. If you are reproached
for the name of Christ happy are you, 1 Pet. 4.14 15.16.
etc. but let none of you suffer as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other
men's matters; yet if any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but
glorify God on this behalf. But give none occasion to the Adversary to speak
reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5.14. (...)
the word is, to him that is set against you; he that is set against you will
be sure to find occasions, but be you sure to give none. The Ermin of
Innocence is a Robe worth the best man's wearing, though it be spotted with
black obloquies, and poudered with aspersions. And now, poor friend, finding
thee like Job on a dunghill of disgrace, though I come to counsel, yet I cannot
but first sit down and condole thee; for I question whether any wounds save
those of Conscience may reasonably go so deep in an apprehensive good man, as
those on his good name, in the sufferings whereof Gods name suffers with him.
There are three persons that have been the subjects of the sorest afflictions
that were ever sustained by men, Joseph, Job, Jesus: Amos 6.6.
James 5.11.
the afflictions of the first, the patience of the second are grown to a
Proverb, Isaiah 53 3.
and the third is styled (...), the man of sorrows. It Is said of the first,
Genesis 49.23.
that the Archers sorely grieved him, shot at him and hated him, and the
archest of those Archers was Potiphers wife, Ge. 39.7.14
who devilishly first tempts him, and then accuses him that he forcibly
attempted, what he could not be tempted to by all the force of her flatteries
and impudent importunities. The second had his children, his estate, and his
health all taken away, only his wife is left to be his Tempter, and his
friends to become his Traducers to lay the hypocrite at his door and it is
evident in his story, that their hard words went nearer him than all the
hardship before; and therefore he complains, Ye overwhelm the fatherless, and
dig a pit for your friend. And as for the third, Job. 6.27.
he complains by the Psalmographer of the reproach of men, and that all they
that see him shoot out the lip at him. Psalm. 22.6.
And the Apostle reckons it no small point of his passion, that he endured the
contradiction of sinners against himself. Hebr. 12.3.
And therefore Christ reckons his reproach with his gall, and complains that it
even broke his heart. Ps. 69.20.21
And therefore I cannot blame thee to lay thy sufferings in this kind to heart.
But yet look higher than the tongues of men, even to the hand of God, who can
tongue-tie if he pleases every dog in Egypt, Exodus 11.7.
that they bark not at an Israelite. Let him curse (says David of Shimei) for
the Lord has said, 1 Samuel 16.10
Curse David. Not that David justified him, but God, that justly suffered him
unjustly so to punish David's sin. And if we be observant, we may not only see
Gods severity, but his goodness in the permission, nay commissioning of evil
tongues against us, It may be (says David) the Lord will requite me good for
his cursing this day. Verse 12.
And therefore consider,

1. Whether thou thy self have not sometime sinned against others in like kind
wherein thou now suffer from others. Ec. 7.21.22 As the word maledico
signifyes to curse or to speak evil of.
For oftentimes also thine own heart knows that thou thy self have likewise
cursed or spoken evil of others.

2. Whether there be not some guilt unknown to others or unthought of by thy
self, that God signally aims at in thus punishing thee by others. A person
unjustly condemned (as was thought) for firing an house, to be hanged in a
field; persisted to deny that fact, but confessed of himself that he had
deserved to die by the Laws both of God and man, having secretly committed in
that very field bestiality not fit to be named. Especially if Good men speak
evil of thee thou have the more cause to suspect that all is not well with
thee. When Smicythus had accused Nicanor, and urged that he should be punished
for speaking evil of King Philip: Not so, said Philip, Plut. Phil. Man
for Nicanor is one of the honestest men in Macedon, and therefore it is more
fit to enquire whether the fault be not in us. And thus though reproaches be
like the water of the Severn thick and muddy, yet if they have, like that, but
a scouring quality, so that we can but improve unjust accusations as just
cautions, we shall have cause to bless God for them; as the said Philip would
reckon himself beholding to the Counselors of Athens, for that they by
speaking evil of him, were a cause to make him the more honest man, that by
word and deed he might prove them liers; which expression of an Heathen, does
bring to mind that Apostolical Exhortation, 1 Pet. 3.16.
To have a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

3. Art thou traduced by men? give the more diligence to attain and maintain
the clearness and strength of a state of justification before God, by an
operative faith in the rightousness of Jesus Christ. Isa. 50.3.
If he be near to justify thee, who can contend with thee? Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies.
Murus aheneus, Nil conscire sibi.
How big can an Horace, a Cicero, or a Seneca talk of the Bulwarks of innocence
and clear conscience. But says a Paul that was, by a better light, more able
to see through a self-spun rightousness, 1 Cor. 4.4
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified. And therefore, Phil.
3.6, 8, 9.
though touching the rightousness that was in the Law blameless, he accounts
that but dung that he may win Christ, and be found in him, not having his own
rightousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the rightousness which is of God by faith. There are special promises
that the faith of a justified person may improve against obloquies and
calumniations, Job 5.15, 16.
made by him that saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth and from the
hand of the mighty: so that the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her
mouth. Psalm. 31.22.
Thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues; and
many others of like import.

Lastly, Let all the barkings of dogs at thee, put thee more in remembrance
that thou art a stranger on earth, and make thee long more to be at home, where
as all tears shall be wiped from thine eyes: so shall all reproaches from thy
name. Your Brethren that cast you forth for my names sake, said, The Lord be
glorified: Isaiah 66.5.
but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

FINITUR
December. 1659.
The Weapon-salve if ever I allow,
It shall be now.
Gods good Word says, that evil tongues are Swords,
Wounding by words:
Such weapons being well kept salv'd, such wound
Will either never be made, or soon made sound.

