Thomas Taylor's Solemn Declaration To Clear himself from that Wicked Aspersion
of being a Jesuit, and from Popery, etc.
I Thomas Tailor do in the Presence of Almighty God, Solemnly Profess, and in
good Conscience Declare, It is my Real Judgment, That the Church of Rome is not
the Church of Christ, nor the Pope or Bishop of Rome Christ's Vicar, and that
his or her Doctrines of deposing Heretical Princes, and absolving their
Subjects of their Obedience, of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead, of
Indulgencies and Worshipping of Images, of Adoring and Praying to the Virgin
Mary, and other Saints Deceased; and of Transubstantiation or Changing the
Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at or after the
Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever: Are False, Erroneous, and
Contrary to the Truth of God declared in the Holy Scriptures. And therefore the
Communion of the said Church is Superstitious and Idolatrous.

And I do likewise Sincerely Testify and Declare, That I do, from the bottom
of my Heart, Detest and Abhor all Plots and Conspiracies, that are or may be
Contrived against the King, Parliament, or People of this Realm. And I do
hereby Faithfully Promise, with God's help, to Live a Sober and Peaceable Life,
as becomes a good Christian and Protestant to do. And all this I do
Acknowledge, Intend, Declare and Subscribe, without any Equivocation, or Mental
Reservation, according to the True Plainness, Simplicity, and usual
Signification of the words.

Stafford the 7th of the 4th Month, 1679. Witness my Hand Thomas Tailor.

Dear George Whitehead,
THY Labor of Love in this present Business of mine, and the Truths, is kindly
Received, and the Reward rests with thee in thy own Bosom, where our Heavenly
Father abundantly Answers and Satisfies his Children in and for all their
Services for his Names sake; So be it.

I have here enclosed, sent, subscribed my Testimony (as Friends have given)
against Popery, to show as need is, in the Lord's Power and Patience I shall
overcome all; for so from the beginning has been our Victory; having done what,
in the Light, the Lord has given us to see to be our Duty; to leave all to him
whom both the Winds and Seas Obey. In whose Dear Peace, with Tender Love to
thee, thy Wife and all Friends, with Prayers to the Lord for his Presence and
Assistance with you in all your Holy Affairs at this and all times, with his
Protection over you, Rests

Stafford, the 7th of the 4th Month, 1679. Thine Dearly in Christ Jesus Thomas
Tailor.


