A LETTER FROM HIS HIGHNESS THE Lord Protector, Sent into the North of
ENGLAND, touching loose and idle persons, and such as come from abroad to
kindle fire in England, as also for the Country to act according to Law.

WITH A List of the Prisoners at Salisbury, and Excester, condemned to dye.

AND Another List of the Prisoners at Excester that were not tried.

London Printed by Robert Ibbitson, 1655.

A LIST Of the Prisoners at Salisbury and Excester, condemned to die.
Wilts ss. At the Session of Oyer and Terminer, and general Goal Delivery held
the 11. of April 1655.
To be drawn, hanged and quartered.
JOhn Lucas John Dean John Kensey Henry Lawrence John Thorp Edmund Mack John
Fryaer.
To be hanged by the neck until they be dead.
John Lovelace. Thomas Sweet, alias Gamage. Robert Hartford, alias Harwood.
Sampson Pickefat John Woodward Margaret Gingel.
Devonshire ss. At the Session of Oyer and Terminer, holden at the Castle of
Exon, the 18 day of April, 1655.
To be drawn, hanged and quartered.
John Penruddock Esquire; Hugh Grove Robert Duke Richard Reeves Francis Jones
George Duke Thomas Fitzjames Edward Davege Thomas Poulton Edward Willis
Nicholas Mussel William Jenkins Thomas Hilhards Robert Harris John Byby John
Cook John Hayns Henry Collier Joseph Collier James Horsington alias Huish.
William Wake Christopher Honeland, Haunce Stiver John Giles, alias Hobbe, A
notorious Horsestealer that came in on the Act of Oblivion, and one that took
prison to turn Rebel. Abraham Wilson. Richard Brown.
To be hanged by the neck until they be dead.
Richard Thorn, Peter Lovering Andras Peterson John Vandenova John Wilcox
Thomas Sidley Samuel Lang Margret Honiwel Giles Brocker
A List of the Prisoners, not as yet Tried, and now remaining in Exon Prison.
Edward Penruddock John Jones Edward Moringe Joseph Moringe Thomas Rumsey
Richard Allwood Henry Harding George Gifford Robert Brown Simon Bearnard
Richard Humfrye Edward Payenter Stephen Eskyn John Jenninges Robert Nichols
John Shepperd Richard H: John Bond Isaac Stichley Robert Barefoot William
Levington Henry Hardiswell Carey Reynel William Hallet Edmond Clark Phillip
Woodward Thomas Fray John Russel Henry Sampson John Williams Moses Kenfeild
Robert Cordye John Bancks Edward Target Leonard Carket Nathaniel Saplin Richard
Broadgate Edmund Vynimouth James Comb Thomas Mortmore. Thomas Cawly Robert
Maton Robert Gugar Richard Batt Ambrose Cole John Chamberlain Thomas Uppington
William Pearse Thomas Cooker William Dyimont John Allen Thomas Lambert Ithroe
Morthey Henry Binsted Timothy Maton Cornelius Igney Richard Reed Richard Whitly
William King Richard Miles Edward Coxe William Bungey Richard Renfeild Thomas
Ranger Andrew Blackman Thomas Gray William Martyn Hugh Edward James March
Banks Richard Andrews John Vinson Francis Toop John Purchase Richard Arscot.
A Letter from His Highness the Lord Protector, sent into the North of
England, touching Loose and Idle persons, and such as come from abroad to
kindle fire in ENGLAND.
As also for the Country to act according to Law.
Gentlemen,
WE doubt not but you have heard before this time, of the hand of God going
along with us in defeating the Rebellious Insurrection, and we hope, through
his blessing upon our labors, an effectual course will be taken for the
total disappointing of the whole design; Yet knowing the restlessnesse of the
Common Enemy, to involve this Nation in new Calamities; We conceive our selves
and all others, who are entrusted with the preserving the Peace of the Nation,
obliged to endeavor in their places to prevent and defeat the enemies
intentions; and therefore as a means especially conducing to that end, we do
earnestly recommend it to you to take order, that diligent Watch (such as the
Law has appointed) be duly kept for taking a strickt account of all strangers
in your County, (and principally near the Sea coast) which will not only be a
means to suppress all Loose and Idle persons, but may probablely cause some of
those, who come from abroad to kindle fire here, to be apprehended and seized
upon, especially if care be taken to secure all them that cannot give a good
account of their business, and may also break all dangerous meetings and
assemblings together. Herein we do require and shall expect your effectual
endeavors, knowing that if what by Law ought to be done, were done with
diligence in this respect, the Contrivance of such dangerous designs as these
would be frustrated in the birth, or kept from growing to maturity. I Rest,

Your very affectionate Friend OLIVER P.
Whitehall 24 March 1654.
FINIS.

