MAN'S MASTERPIECE: OR, The best Improvement of the worst Condition.

In the exercise of A Christian Duty. On six Considerable Actions.

Viz.

1. The Contempt of the World. 2. The Judgment of Gods against the wicked, etc.
3. Meditations on Repentance. 4. Meditations on the Holy Supper. 5. Medita. on
afflictions and Martyrdom. 6. With a Meditation for one that is sick.
By P. T. Knight.

Luke 16.13. We cannot serve God and Mammon. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Barber
at the Lamb, and Samuel Speed at the Printing-Press in Saint Paul's Churchyard.
1658.

ON THE EFFIGIES, Of the most accomplished LADY, Dame ELIANOR TEMPLE.
REceive this Lovely Lady in the Room,
Of the lost Author, it cannot misbecome
Her worth, her Person; Since all must admit,
Her constant Practice is, the same he writ;
Different in Nation, Time, Sex yet agree,
In Virtues of vast magnitude; Souls Sympathy,
Souls be n't confined; our sad defeat at Babel
Wants influence on Those, nor is it able, Confusion of Tongues.

T'obstruct or Termiante such Notions,
Blest-Births, proceeding from the pur'st Motions
Of the Bright Dove the Adore:
Like sweet Lutes placed at distance, touch but This
And a Harmonious-murmur Ecchoed is
Soon by's Confederate; No virtue being Exempt,
From her fair practice of, The World's Contempt.
P. T. Another on the EFFIGIES.
THe Graver did his part (ingeniously)
Mixing (with curious Art) much industry;
Yet both, fall short, of what is Natural,
Than Infinitely of that is Spiritual;
How is it then possible, for my dull Pen;
To trace divine lines, not conceived by men?
Her Highborn soul, (disdaining sorded clay,
Illustrates that Person,) Crowns our day.
Many her Noble Graces, yet most High;
In what surmounts them all; HUMILITY.
Flourish then in my lines, as thou art sure
To fix on Syon, and shine evermore.
P. T. Another on the EFFIGIES.
THis stately frame, contains a gallant soul,
Whose praise, whose fame extends beyond each pole;
Perfumes the earth, with rich, with fragrant scent,
In whose bles't birth, A Treasure vast was lent
To unworthy Mortals;
Who her enjoyes, of Heaven is favored;
Like my best choice, Angels are figured.
Her Mother fed on flowers when she bred
One like a Seraphim, accomplished:
A blessed Geneus (questionless) is she,
At whose approach, grim Demons quickly flee.
Since Spirits have conformity with Her,
Haunt me each night; Dear, Dear Familiar.
Peter Temple. To the most PERFECT PATTERN AND PATRONESS Of Virtue and Piety,
The LADY ELIANOR TEMPLE, The Glorious Consequences, of a Gracious Conversation,
be multiplied.
My Joy,
PRovidence, (that most Potent Byas of Mundaine affairs, inclining our
actions, (as well the swarthy, lesse-commendable, as most splendid) to a more
prosperous end than our crooked, our oblique designs directs them.) That ever
watchful, all-piercing eye (I say) extracting (indifferently, its glory out of
all our enterprises; When I [possibly] was solicitous of lesse-profitable
discourses, French.
in that Feminine-language) fixes my roving eye on Le Mispris du Monde, this,
suddenly swells my drooping soul, with just indignation, to contemn, what had
too often, too treacherously deceived, disappointed, and (finally) disserted my
fairest ambition; Thus, converting my intended divertion to an inestimable
treasure: This providence (I say) together with the delightful raptures, the
satisfactions (if not benefit) I enjoyed in the perusal first, and after in
aiding this stranger to lisp, to stammer our native tongue, ue who, (in his own)
had so aptly pourtraied the sober conceptions of my heart) that you, my Dear,
might the more readily apprehend his worth;) thereby (at worst,) entertaining
and deluding (as with a no-lesse faithful, than cheerful and comfortable
companion) the sad solitudes of (otherwise) tedious minutes; And lastly, (my
matchless moity) you, being constantly the most worthy object, of my most
immaculate inclinations; To you therefore (as well out of yours, and the
Authors virtuous sympathy; as your interest in what is mine,) does this Essay
most properly appertain, which (nevertheless like a prodigal spring, you may
(without exhausting your proper store) hereby, with some advantage communicate
to the Commonwealth of Piety) To you I say, does this Alien, (now a Denizon)
address himself (fully satisfied of your civil reception of persons of less
merit) Imagine then you beheld him, in his native purity, (yet without Patron
or Protector more than his innocent virtue,) ombellish't with such splendid
lineaments, so fluently uttering that harmonious dialect of Canaan, in such
enchanting numbers, such soulcharming strains, such bemoaning, such
languishing accents; that whether you remark the subject, substance, design,
elegant style, or apt delivery; he is of more than ordinary consideration: and
no other than a product of divinity, since less than the inspirations of the
Spirit of peace and joy, could not breath such fragrant aires, such
ejaculations: But I may not ally, nor disparage his native value, with my
imperfect commendations, it is sufficient to pass him current, that he bears
your excellent image, and exact proportion on his wealthy-Ore: And, (by the
permission of your fair (but frail) sex,) whom you surpass as well in that
rich, that glittering Jewel (that illustrates your amiable person) your
gracious, and therefore glorious soul, as in your most exquisite outward frame,
and cimetry, your body, that stately structure of the divine Architect, its
most lovely Cabinet,) by your employing and improving those minutes in the
contemplation, and exercise of virtue, which others prodigally lavish and
trifle out in a too passionate pursuit of the vainest extravagancies of the
Authors Nation; yet now, dearest (though your strict severity, scarce permits
you to imitate the most decent fashions of your all bright, all dazzling sex,)
be you in this (as in the other perfections of your life) entirely consisting
(as by long and happy experience I am confirmed) in an unwearied exercise of
virtue, and an imbred and implacable aversion to vice) be, I say, not only
their Phair, their Mirror for present, for future generations to regulate, to
adorn their illustrious souls by, in your Contempt of the World; but herein
my Dearest, give them the Mode, the Garb of the new Jerusalem, converting
their Romantic diversions, to Divine and World-contemning Contemplations,
exchanging their delights to sacrifices: marching ever before them, as a Noble
Heroesse, a brave Conductresse of the lovely Troop of silver Swannes, in that
innocent vialactia of piety, that tends to a blessed eternity, that when the
bodies gilt shall varnish, and fall off, you may together exalt your
all-charming voices, in chanting forth Hallelujahs to him who was pleased to
direct, and strengthen my weak hands to cleave wood for his Sanctuary, and to
add my might to the treasure of those graces, that adorn thine incomparable
person; attribute only what disgusts to me, who should want confidence, to
intrude this on the World, but under your Banner; whose peculiar Function, and
constant Custom it is, to palliate, to extenuate, to cover the frequent
infirmities of the hand that presents them, not as directions to, but as a
character (rather) of your spotless conversation; nevertheless, imprecating
hereby (in some degree) it may supply, the other Defects, Disabilities, and
want of Industry, which his Relation oblidges him to, for your information, and
instruction; in the perusal, you cannot (altogether) regrete your pains, nor
remain unsatisfied, with those reflections of your own Pure spirit (whose
motions are none other, than restless actions, tending to Holiness and
Righteousness, the honor of God, the comfort of Men (that parallel 'twixt his
sayings, and your performances.) And, if the generality of men overpasse this
with neglect, with contempt, yet Providence (when it shall be instal'd in your
Oratory, that Sanctum Sanctorum of unsullied Devotions, your Closet) may be
pleased to move some curious eye, who may collect some word, some syllable that
may faciliate his voyage to the City of my God; this ensuing Treatise, not
only weaning men from the World, but gradually conducting them (in the five
subsequent discourses) to life eternal, through the ghastly gate of death, not
dreadful (though) to worthy Christians, but a rest from their labors: at
worst, I may not (altogether) despair, but (hereby) to fix a more than ordinary
impression, on the spirits, of the tender productions, of our entire affection,
our selves multiplied; who may, (as persons more nearly concerned, in their
parents acquisitions,) extract, what may advance their eternal welfare; which
if it fall out, as my Prophetic soul whispers and suggests, and my most
frequent and fervent addresses to the Throne of Grace importune, I am
abundantly recompensed for my cordial intentions, in thus exposing my self, to
the censure of this choice pallated generation: But, (my best blessed soul) I may
not longer detain thee from what is more worthy thy consideration, since it is an
effect of his singular regard, whose terrestrial glory solely consists (in what
renders him the object of others envy) that perfect, and indissolvable amity he
contracted with thee, from that happy moment, he had the peculiar privilege
and felicity to subscribe, what he entirely is,

MADAM, My Dearest, Passionately Enamored only with the title of Your most
Affectionate, More obliged Husband. Peter Temple.

TO THE Reader.
I Hold it not impertinent to Advertise thee, That (notwithstanding) the
infinite number of excellent Treatises of this nature (our Nation so abounding
with persons, famous in their generation,) that it may seem as Idle an
Irregularity, to address to this Forreiner, as to imitate the extravagancies
of his Nation, yet, the (not too) frequent, perusal in the Original (possibly,
out of curiossity, remarking that in a stranger, which I might have over-past
in a Denizon) so entertained (otherwise) but tedious, and unpleasant hours,
with such an agreeable Conversation, as encouraged (nay more) obliged me thus
to expose my self to an universal censure in this Publication, so I might
(thereby) Reluminate this glimmering, yet glittering spark of Divinity, who in
his native language (as well as choice subject) is so proper, so admirably
excellent, and insinuating, that I never observed a more sad, sober,
languishing, yet becoming, yea, enticing countenance, Portrayed by a more
Judicious Pensil, and in more flourishing, [not garish colours] which hitherto
notwithstanding, never so much as warmed our more Frigid climate, and (more
than probable) having served his generation, through the Authors modesty, In
omitting his name.
or oversight of men, is near extinct in his Native Country: The subject is the
most necessary, Faith, and Repentance; Instructing to do, to suffer; The
Active, The Passive Posture of a Christian; But I shall not longer detain you,
with a tedious Appollogy, to so short a Collation, yet dare I avow, your
entertainment, both wholesome, and not unsavory; your only Infelicity is, in
being thus slenderly served, and at second hand. I wish I had no greater
Frailties, than my deffect in not perfectly comprehending the language of the
Original; Attribute then to him (whose abilities reached not his clear
intentions) all over-sights, and imperfections, (but what it may contract in
the Press) and them alone, besides some necessary variations (that often
sounding harsh in a foreign style, which is most exactly ellegant in it is
Native Dialect,) It being the common fate of Translations to abate of their
Primitive purity, [as the most-knowing can easily determine;] The rest, I
gratefully return to the memory of the Pious Author, [whose worst fate it is,]
Thus to deliver his excellent conceptions, [by so insufficient an Interpreter]
his name [questionlesse] is regestred in heaven, though obscured here; I
heartily desire you no less satisfaction, [I would say advantage] then I
reap't; The same providence, [whose ways are past finding out] that directed
it to my hand [in the chiefest confluence of the most ellaborate pieces in the
Courts of his desolate Sanctuary, St. Paul's Churchyard.
] moving your heart, and if I be any way Instrumental herein, to contribute to
the consolation, or information of any deprest, dejected, or gasping soul [this
being a most Rich Cordial for a fainting spirit] he who only hears all
prayers, [and to whom only they ought to be directed, and addressed,] has after
his accustomed m^^^full manner, abundantly answered (...) Fervent Potion of

Your Companion in arms, under the invincible banner of the P. T.

A POSTSCRIPT.
IT may possibly prove no unseasonable Argument [to the Reader,] that Lot urged
for the rescuing of Zoar, out of that doleful, and general conflagration, It Is
but a little one, spare it and my soul shall live; For the same [if no other]
reason, peruse this, [let me thus excite such, as happily employ not their time
always more thriftily,] It Is not tedious, but doubtless of admirable use and
comfort, [specially, for such Reverst, overwhelmed spirits] who thereby may be
established to attend, to submit to the divine pleasure, and not rashly give
way to their extremities, Inhummanly to precipitate them, to the eternal
destruction of their precious souls; being a too frequent, too deplorable
remedy, or rather such an immortal Barbarism against themselves, that their
most malicious, most cruel adversaries, want gall to wish, and abillity to
effect:

ERRATA.
Page 7. line 14. read he is, for we are. p. 14. l. 22. add men, (before may)
p. 25. l. 1. after retrograde, ad to heaven. p. 34. l. 7. say that that. p. 41.
l. 17. r. their, for her. p. 43. l. 9. for lays, r. loves. p. 45. l. 4. r.
(of the) add paths. p. 46. l. 19. make a, at selves, p. 60. l. 24. omit he. p.
75. l. 1. for feigned r. sayning. p. 76. l. 15. make a, at serve, and omit
that, at manner, p. 78. l. 29. for park r. spark. p. 88. l. 3. r. victory for
ministry. p. 114. l. 6. r. in the extremity of my numberless afflictions. p.
133. l. 10. make a, at grave, p. 158. l. 1. r. to take a greater in his Globe.
p. 168. l. 6. for so he r. as one. p. 203. l. 14. leave out the first and. p.
206. betwixt the 12. and 18. l. you must 7. times. r. her, and she, for him,
and he, etc. p. 215. for highly r. slyly.

A DISCOURSE UPON THE CONTEMPT OF THE WORLD.
WE, having now a long time (in vain) pursued the shadow that flies from us,
and hasted after the Dreams and Imaginations of the World, which we could
never attain: Are our selves wandered from the path of our Felicity, stooping
toward the earth: notwithstanding it behooves us, that our Passion transport us
not ever into obscurity.

Let us (then) break off our slumbering, and rouse our selves up, regarding the
perilous bancks of our Sea, and the false visions of our night. If we farther
grope in the dark, and creep into corners, to redouble our obscurity, if our
spirits continue to embrace the impure Mud of this gloomy earth, it is to be
(more than) feared, that the infection of this pestilent air, altogether
converts our glimmering into blindness, and our stupidity, into a continual
lethargy of Ignorance.

The strength of the Poison which the world vomits against us, is subtle, and
peirsing: in one instant charming our spirits, enchanting our sense, depriving
us of Reason, and ren^^ing us lost.

This World treats us, as the Torpille with the other Fishes; The Crampfish.
she breaths upon them, she freezes them, she stiffens them, she lulls them
asleep, and then devoures them. Her touch deprives us of sense, as that of the
Leopard the Scorpion. The blast of her mouth is not less fatal to us, than
that of the Basalisk, who rends the soundest hearts, by the sweetness of her
sofisticated beauty, she deprives us of our time, to the intent to make us
plunge our selves to the bottom of her designs, and compels us to accept of
apparances instead of truths, and to cause us to straggle and steer
irregularly, even unto shipwreck.

But we may not for ever stageer and float at the mercy of all these blasts, it
behooves us to fix our sliding steps, and to sustain our stomachs with some
wholesome nourishment. We are created to aspire above the Sun, and Moon: the
earth is too base to be our end, it is requisite we have an object more rich,
more high.

Our spirits may not ever be fixed and anchored within this body: It behooves
that she languish after, that she raise her self up to a more sovereign
station, toward a more absolute felicity.

Let us (then) rend off the muffer that hood-winks our eyes, and contemplate on
the condition wherein we are, to the end we may observe how we run (with the
multitude) to our destruction: it will be a considerable task to kindle the
lamp to enlighten our obscurity, and direct our selves safely, to the end we
straggle not more, in the Deserts of the World.

We shall have obtained no small advantage, when we have chaste away those
clouds which obscure the Sun, and leaves us (like flowers) langnishing in the
shadow, when we shall call to mind the traitorous hooks of false delights: when
we shall have discovered, the otion of our designs and projects, which render
us slaves to those things, were created for us and for our use.

O how happily shall that hour be employed, in which we shall discover how the
flesh precipitates the soul, how it is desires stifle it, how it constraines
that divine part to cast away it is Scepter, to render it self abject, to offend
it is dignity, and to be subservient to corruptible things: Instead whereof,
she, (without ceasing) ought to raise her self up toward heaven, where her
inheritance is, and whether all her designs should tend! Assuredly, this day
shall be blessed for us, wherein (having chaste away all those follies which
possess and master our spirits, and in which, having received force to
surmount and vanquish all our passions,) we shall call to mind that our repose
is in a higher Region than the earth: That this world should not serve us for
other than a passage to mount up to heaven, that it ought to be our way, not
our end: That whilst we sojourn here, we should ever elevate our thoughts on
high, toward him who disposes the ever moving heaven, and governs the erting
courses of the wandering Stars: who sustaineth the earth without trouble, and
contains in his hands, the seasons, the ages, and winds, as servants to his
will. Our conscience, and the care of our safety oblidge us: the sound of his
omnipotent voice which echoes daily here below, advertiseth us; crying, that
it is time to think of it, and presses us unto it. But our designs shrivel in
the bud, these Divine seeds so soon as they begin to spring in our souls, and
we are so feeble that those motions which we direct toward heaven, are checked
in an instant; They appear a little, and are suddenly dissipated, vanishing
like lightning.

Let us then consider a little with our selves, let us free our feet from this
subtle laborinth, let us (for some time) disassociate our spirits from the
body, let us go out of our selves, let us for a while abandon the man; and so
retiring, we shall evidently behold the confusion of those designs, and the
deformity of those councels that possess humanity.

Behold he embraces more than he can retain, his greediness is incapable of
moderation, he engages in more business than he can perfect. It Is a perpetual
motion without stay, without end.

His desires follow him, and produce each other: abandoning one gulf, he enters
another: The World alluminates him, one design as another is extinguished. He
is ever clam'd and choked up, and resembles those unconstant leaves, who as
often shift place, as the air changes the wind.

One hope enchants him, which afterward proves vain, and in the instant he
throws himself upon another, which incontinently vanishes away in a dream:
Fr. Pro.
His counters are found liars, there is (without ceasing) a misreckoning in his
Cipher. The impetuossity of one passion assaults him, and suddenly he is
transported with a new desire.

We are ever giddy-headed, always troubled, continually pensive, and that
under a hope of an uncertain and perishing good; for the price of a handful of
wind, for a mortal thing, which every moment, slideth and slippeth out of his
hands: for the obtaining of that, which cannot stop the hasty flight of his
years, which cannot prolong his life one breath, nor can it prevent that his
songs be not changed into Plaints, his days into darkness, his pleasures into
sorrows.

O how much more expedient were it for him that this violence and desire would
employ it self upon the contempt of what he so ardently embraces: and that
instead of his grovelling on the earth, dazzled with it is vain splendour, he would
erect his face toward that sacred source, whence springs his life. There should
he draw waters, (more than sufficient) to satisfy the thirst of his scorch't
throat: and having his ears ravished with the harmony of the pleasant
murmuring of that purling stream, no path should seem rough to him. The
fruitful Rivers of this Divine Fountain dilating over him, and (by an ample
Deluge) happily choking all those cares that would approach him.

The truth (ever by him) would dispell all imaginations that would torment him,
possessing him with the real enjoyments of those celestial delights, which he
only knows by sight: and from that eminency would show him the follies of
men, and those winds which toss and threaten their vessels in this turbulent
Sea, discovering to him the perils of others without running their fortune.

Truly his estate would be marveilously changed, his condition would be
extremely blessed.

But can we not follow this Trace? is this place unaccessible to us? Let Us try,
let us divert our selves a little from the World, let us search out the ready
way to conduct us unto so pleasant, so delightful a habitation.

If our passions heat us, let us run to these waters, let us extinguish this
conflagration. Some flowers naturally turn toward the Sun, let us enforce our
selves to their imitation, remounting toward our Original. To the effecting
whereof, let us consider how the actions of this World have a false look; and
that under a pleasant appearance they embrace men but to strangle them:
resembling the Ivy which corrupts, and ruinates the Wall which it cherishes
and enfoldeth.

He makes much of that man whom thou beholdest; he accosts him, The Covetous
man described.
he bears him company: Observe in what condition it has rendered him. Behold
him who having run most eagerly, having always some design afar off, his
covetousness is never so that he will finish it, in that which has succeeded
to him.

He always desires, he ever fears: his desires are a fire that consumes him,
his fears an ice that chills him. And among the infinite multitude of
Worldlings, that are there assembled, there is not one alone that is content
with his fortune, with his condition, nor which makes the less quest for the
satisfaction of his proper inclinations.

All take one remedy for another, for to cure their griefs, they endeavor to
lose the sense of them: they administer to themselves poison for antidotes, and
death for life. Instead of receiving medicines, proper to close up and
consolidate their wounds, they apply corruption and the worm: they add one
project to another, they do naught but (without ceasing) turn, seek, and
enquire, and in conclusion thrust out more desires, and yet imagine new, they
enfold, and pester themselves in their business as the silk-wormes, and stifle
themselves.

Their care awaken; them before the dawning, and (yet overcharged with slumber)
draggs them to their labor. There, these poor children of pain and misery,
apply their thoughts (all the day) to their business, they bow their backs to
their work, and employ their hands in the labor of this wretched World.

They search for rest in that toil which consumes them, like to the Torch
which diminishes by degrees, feeding it self of it is Loss and living on it is
Ruin.

They are gray in the flower of their youth. The whole life of the most happy
among them, is nothing but a punishment, but a continual passion, but pain, but
vexation, which ever attends them till it has over-turned them into their
Sepulchers.

He there imagines, he discovers afar off, at the end of the course, some
appearance of repose, Note.
he conceives that after having heap't up much wealth, he shall (with his arms
crossed) sit at ease, and enjoy the fruit of his travel. But, as the eye which
athwart a cloud, or the water, apprehends objects untruly: after the same
manner his spirit which judges through the cloudy and false ices of the World
which obscures them, conclude otherwise of things than they are. For, whilst he
is in the carreire, so many difficulties cross the way, so many waves flow on
each other, and beat on his bark with desire for to split it: so many
hindrances are on the road, that divert and amate him, that usually (willing to
pass forward) his strength fails him, he loses his breath, and destroys
himself, and if happily he is preserved, and acquires the riches, which is the
end he so much desires: it is after so many years, with a body so wasted and
feeble, that his labor remains unprofitable to him, not being able more to
enjoy, what he has purchased with so much sweat: and is incontinently
constrained to quit the possession of that, the hopes of enjoyment whereof
tormented him all his life.

And if (at any time) he would stretch out his arms to comfort himself of his
labor, it (not seldom) happens to him that he finds a shadow instead of a
body, a Chest in lieu of a Treasure: he often imagining to hold a Bird with both
his hands, and sees nothing betwixt his fingers but a feather.

He beholds (before his face) a fire which devoures his structures, trophys of
his vanity, erected for ages, and as if he should live for ever.

He views the hail that batters down his harvests, and the heat that consumes
them: he observes that he renders himself an imitator of the spider, who frames
a web with much labor, which the least broom can tear off.

He perceives that his goods are carried away like leaves with the wind, and
overturned as woods with the axe: and understands what manner of things those
are, after the which he has so much tormented himself.

O Men! behold the riches for the which you lose so much repose and sleep;
Observe O ye blind the price for which you take so much pleasure to hasten your
deaths.


Frail and caitifie generation, Note.
consider the state of the place, for which you despise Paradise.

Miserable wretches; follow your vocations, to which you (by the providence of
God) are called, avoid idleness, the nourisher of all evils; eat your bread
with the sweat of your brows; it is the commandment of God. Enjoy those good
things he has given you with a liberal hand: but bound your desires to his
will,
and remember that it may possibly fall out, that before to morrow you may
leave the World. Enjoy (then,) this wealth as not possessing it, and having
ever the glory of God, and the salvation of your souls as your principal aim.
What folly, what madness, to destroy your selves in the pursuit of things? by
means of which travel men tend to misery and ruin, and do not so much as (one
hour) meditate on those things by the which (with joy and contentment) may
obtain eternal felicity? Nevertheless mark this unsatiable spirit, which can
fix no period to it is covetousness: he obliges himself ever to the time to
come, he does nothing but crave, and never enjoyes: he surfets of, abounds in
wealth, he has his full measure, he cannot grasp any more, and for all that
has not lost the relish of increasing.

He uncessantly pursues that mettle the father of so many evils. Gold.
He ever sets his heart on things that are to be obtained: and his desire is
like to fire, which furnishes a thousand fires without abating it is own
ardure: like the greedy flames, which are so much the more enflamed, by how
much they are supplied with fuel, and that nourishment increases in their
mouths. His thirst can be no more quenched than that of the Dropsy.

When he possesses the wealth and treasures of the earth, the care of it does
not fail to accompany his wretched steps. His desire has no limits, he finds
nothing that stays it: it still increases with the augmentation of his wealth.

His avarice interrupts his sleeps, accusing him of sloth, spurs up his
diligence the has always some design upon his neighbors estate: his eye is
ever pensive, ever sad, ever evil, and ever watching the riches of his
neighbors, as adulterers the wives of other men. He renders himself a slave to
his wealth, he commits himself into it is power, and possession, and still
stares and gazes upon it.

When he considers that they are fleeting and unstable, that none can ever hold
them sure, that there is ever danger, that they be not taken away: then he
trembles, then he changes color, then he grows pale. Beholding them ravished
in his presence, he suddenly tares, dismembers, and butchers himself with rage.

He cannot behold (without despair) the loss of the riches, which altogether
possesses his will. Poor and blind man! thou observest not how thou plungest
thy self into the water after those superfluous and perishing things: that the
defect is not in thy wealth, but in thy spirit: that by how much the more thou
augmentest thy treasures, by so much art thou laid open to the strokes of
adversity.

Go,
go, fill not the air with so many vain complaints, weep not more for that
thou have lost thy wealth, but because thy riches have lost thee. Shed rivers
of tears for that thou have hitherto disturbed thy spirit, and not for that
they are slipped out of thy hands. If gold would prolong thy days, if death
would accept a randsome for thy life, thou had (then) some excuse to have so
afflicted thy heart to be separated from them. But thy stately structures, the
spacious extent of thy fields, thy large and oriental pearls, the luster of
thy diamonds, and thy ornaments of pride, have not sufficient virtue, as to
remove sorrow from thy heart, and anger from thy countenance.

Thy feavour will not forsake thee to behold thy treasures displayed, nor by
unfolding thy great wealth: the cold fit will as much shake thee in a bed of
state, as of straw. Thou wast too eager, sharp and greedy after the provision
of this life, thou shall have more than is necessary, for the way that is
behind.

Observest thou not how speedily our age passes, that life then leaves us,
whilst we make preparation to live: how death pursues us, how he casts his
darts after us, and at one blow parts us from our riches? To what end serves
all this wealth, seeing life is so frail and fails. So lightly, so easily?
seek then things necessary for thee, Note.
and not more; Search them without Passion, enjoy them without care, and lose
them without regreat; For the Future, Elect Treasures which can secure
themselves from oppression, and that are not subject to Moth, or Rust; and hide
them in such a place, that by none they may be betrayed, unless thy self.

Behold another who is driven with different gusts, The Ambitious man described.
whose industry is not less, mark what pains he undergoes to atchief
glorious Titles to satisfy his ambition? he has not other end of his
struggling than a vain grandeur; he is puffed up, and swells his soul to the
height of his Station; he prides himself to observe the excellency of the
structure of his Palace; To see the threshold of his gate thronged by
multitudes of Suitors; And despises and contemns all beneath him: but the
miserable wretch Idolizeth the luster of some dignity more eminent than his
own, and being arived to that, he yet aspires higher: and so he daily pants,
gapes and reaches after those things which are above him, until that death at
one stroke deprive him of his life, and cause him at one horrible leap, to
tumble as low, as he designed to have flowen high.

What fury is so puissent and prevaent, that can transport his spirit so long
enraged with a blind error, to seek his content in the throng of such a
multitude of unpleasant and troublesome affairs? what folly is it rather to
seek his glory in a half wormeaten Title, Ancient Marble in a Rusty Helmet,
than in his virtue,
his Knowledge, his Prudence? what madness to glow with a desire, to eternise
ones memory, by erecting of Palaces which time will demolish, rather than
engraving his glory in an eternal Brass: and to seek a perdurable habitation
within the Holy dwelling of Paradise, where lies the Grandeur and Immortallity
of name, and not in the vanities and smothers of the world? This Rock is more
firm, This Holy Pillar more sollid and more assured, than the earth which has
not received from God other foundations than the slippery prop of the most
subtle Element. Air.
It Is there then that he ought to establish his felicity, and not in-humane
delights, which suddenly pass and escape our eyes in an instant. The
Voluptuous man described.


This other worldling which thou beholdest, is baited with the vain sweets and
delights of the flesh, he sucks his vapors with long draughts: he stupisies all
his senses in the pleasures and extacises of an adulterous bed; he plunges and
precipitates himself headlong in these transports; and that she who possesses
his soul, which even ravisheth him with delight, with one only glanse of her
eye, being incited with the same cupidity, and ever the more for to entice him,
mixes a thousand beauties with her native luster: she adds art to the
workmanship of nature, wherewith she so very properly embellisht all the
glances of her countenance. She adornes her head with false hair, and
borrows her complexion from a most exquisite paint and tincture. But all
these delights shall perish in an instant, like dreams who lose their pleasure
in awaking. These Delicates are (to them) venomous potions: These Perfumes
penetrating poisons (which murder in an instant.) They swallow Pills outwardly
gilded and sugared, whereof they shall incontinently relish the bitterness;
They eat of the apples of our first Parents, pleasant to the sight, but hard of
digestion. These airs which flow so sweetly from the mouth, and with such an
agreeable Tone, are Sirens Songs, which (through the ears) charm their souls,
and slacks them, to ruin them. Their mouth for one kiss, breaths out a
thousand sighths, their hearts for a dram of delight, sends forth a thousand
groans; The time of their pleasure is not to be compared to the length of
their Repentance. And often (by a sudden mutation men see one day) the sun
shining upon their delights, and on the morrow, Hell covering their miseries.

Behold some of those Dreams we ran after: The Passions, within the which we
bury our selves, without power to disengage us.

There are an infinite number of others, whereof the recital would be
troublesome and superfluous, seeing that in these alone the vanity of our
Cogitations are but two apparent, and their end cannot be hid. The covetous
wretch has but a little gold, and land, this Mallady is not folly, it is Rage:
all to him is too little, and a little to him is nothing. The Ambitious knows
no Serene days, the ferver of his desire causes him every moment pass his
life in renewing deaths: And in conclusion he enjoyes nothing but wind.

The voluptuous man has but little pleasure, which glides, vanishes away, and
forsakes him sooner than thought, or instant, leaving him naught but a Boysing,
but a sad Repentance: and all three are so inchain'd, so fastened to the world,
and yet have secret Vultures which without intermission, gnaw, and tire on
their Hearts.

Let us not then, like them, Establish our hopes on Humane things, which are
leaves moved with every blast. Let us not pursue these vain Grandures, neither
plunge our selves in these Delights, followed with so sad, so miserable a
conclusion.

Let us steer our vessels out of Peril, and not linger till the Tempest (by
force) cause us make Port after shipwreck. Let us not longer be slack to our
good, considering that all is vanity which the heavens encompasse: defacing and
razing one of our hearts all the Tracks of the world; establishing our
assurance on the force and right hand of him, whose firm support shall no way
be able to frustrate our expectation.

Our Ornament shall be quite different to theirs, and the fruit of our labor
shall far surpass them. They heap up these earthly vapors, and exhalations
which as suddenly vanish: They fill the air with their clamours, and wishes:
they sow to the wind, and reap naught but vanity and emptiness. They Build on
the sand, and their edifices fall to ruin: They paint on the floods, and the
Traits of their Pensill disappears. They are careful of nothing but their
frail Bodies, and permit their souls (the immortal seed of heaven) to lie
neglected: They wallow in Mud and Dirt, and come forth desil'd:
They search for Paradise in Honors, in Riches, in the world, and find naught
but Passions, but pain and sorrows. Instead of meditating of, and assuring the
life after these ashes, they close up against themselves the passage of heaven.

In the course of their vanity they are clear seeing Owls: and of that which
is above blind Molds: They suffocate their Reason in their Delights, and live
as creatures, that have not other care but for their bellyes.

Instead of transforming themselves to Angels, they degenerate into Beasts:
They abase, instead of exalting themselves: in lieu of elevating (continually)
their hearts on high, they pronounce not the Name of God, but with Blasphemies:
In stead of dreading the powerful effects of his puissant arm, they have
naught (but their desires) for Law. And if they (sometimes) talk of God, it is
not but (like Paretts) with their lips, without understanding what themselves
say, and are deaf to their own proper voices.

Let us not then follow this path, by the which men march retrograde: but
contrarily, not give rest to our eyes, till we have discovered the true path:
walking by the way that tends to our Original: Neither let us aspire to any
thing but our felicity, being still mindful of our salvation.

Let us build on the Rock, and on the Free-boord, to the end that we may
remain firm as the Mount of Syon.

Let Us oppose our spirits to our flesh, by a solemn Protestation consecrating
our hearts, our voice, and our hands, to the Glory of the Chief, Universal, and
the Principal cause of all beings. Let our desires terminate in him, that his
fear may be a Curb to our follyes. That in his love, these springing passions
may be extinguished: To the intent that we may hold in chief of Heaven, and not
so much as relish of earth. Joining our voices to the sweet and melodious
accents of those Divine spirits, and beautiful souls, which glitter in the
midst of our Darkness, as stars in the night. And ever be mindful, that our
other chiefest agitations proceed from artificial, and ridiculous causes: but
that our prime, and universal obligation is that of God, in which consideration
we ought freely to engage all the estate and our lives. Casting behind us the
Idolatry of perishing beauties, being obliged to trample under foot, that
luster we so blindly adored: It Is expedient to be effected, that the delights
of the world should be despleasant to us: it behooves us not (like mad men) to
weave the web of our proper destruction, and building our felicity on a basse
of so short a duration, and which resembles a flash of fire; which is
extinguish't as soon as kindled.

The riches of men are fleeting and subject to be lost, James 1.10.
there is no assurance in their favors: the rich with their enterprises, will
fade as the flower of the grass: having great designs, yet know not what shall
fall out to morrow, their life is nothing but vapor and smoke.

He lives in pleasure upon earth, James 5.2.
he abounds, and satisfies his heart, but his Riches shall corrupt, his
garments shall be moth-eaten, his money shall rust, and it is rust shall be a
testimony against him, and shall gnaw his flesh like fire. His fields shall
yield a plentiful increase, he shall gather goods for many years; but in the
following night, God shall require his soul.

Let Us not (then) more labor after the food that perishes, Luke 12.20.
but after that which endures to life eternal. John 6.27.


Let Us follow the steps of Jesus Christ, and push from us (with detestation)
the enchanting voice of the world, leaving our nets in the Sea after the
example of Saint Peter, and Saint Andrew: quitting the ship and Zebede in
imitation of St. James and St. John; following the Savior of the world who
summons us.

The graces of the Omnipotent are the greatest happiness we can attain to. Tim
6.7.


He forewarnes us that we set not our hearts on the uncertainty of riches, but
on him, who bestows all things plentifully.

He has advertised us, Tim. 6.7.
that covetousness is the root of all evil, makes men wander from the faith,
and envolves them in many sorrows.

Go to them!
let us call to mind that there is no felicity, but in him, and that none but his
love is Permanent.

He has caused the earth to yield fruits to nourish our Fathers: he (by its
daily productions) releeves us after them: and will effect it (by his
goodness) that it shall still bring forth to sustain our Posterity.

He, who has satisfied five thousand me^ with five loavs and two little
fishes, Mat. 14.19.
will ever supply us with means sufficient to pass the rest of our time, which
he will have us to live upon the earth.

The men of the world have their Heritage in this life, their bellies are
satisfied with food, their children are glutted, and leave the overplus to
their little ones. They imagine themselves rich, and that nothing is wanting
unto them; but see not that they are blind and naked, that they possess naught
but things transitory: and that they are far from residing in the Courts of the
Lord, and to have an everlasting habitation, within the holy place of his
Palace.


It Is then enough to have lived for riches, for glory, for delights: Let us
live for our selves, for our souls, let us recollect our cogitations for our
advantage, let us stand firm, and fall no more: and principally, let us
coragiously pursue our mark. Let Us not proceed as those who commence their
course eagerly and slack in running: preserving our selves from the same
Billows, from the same waves that (at other times) have overwhelmed us.
Considering that relapses are more fatal than diseases, that desires
interrupted increase and augment by their intervals.

Let Us Rally our forces, Reassemble our spirits, let us mortify our Passions,
and render our selves parties against them, chasing away these adversaries to
our repose. These are but slender and frivolous gins and cords that bind us to
them, and (in the interim) we budge not from their company, not otherwise than
if they had enchained us.

Shall we not more cheerfully smell to a heap of flowers, than to stinking
weeds, to grasp lillyes, than thistles, to be confederate to heaven, then to
earth? what difference 'twixt peace and war, betwixt the love of God, and this
of the world, life and death, between that which is above the heaven, where
there is nothing not stable, and the earth on which there is nothing but
inconstancy? To what intent follow we the world so violently and eagerly, since
we are but bladders which burst with the least pricking: which hourly
threatens us with death, where our feet daily descend into the grave, that time
carries away our years which return not any more, and leaves naught but a
miserable sound of our name, and after a few days incontinently defaces our
trace upon the earth, so that it shall not otherwise be known, than that of an
Eagle in the air, and of a ship in the waves? why do we not rather address
our vows unto that high place which is durable for ever, than on this Empire
of the world which shall burn to pieces, and take end? Know we not that in
that great day which will rather make it self seen,
than foreseen, that these Rocks, and these lofty hills shall dissolve, That
Jordan, Ganges, Euphrates, and the Nile, and all the other Rivers which Purle
and Roll so proudly on a gilded sand, shall dry up: and that the great Otian,
the Father and nourisher of men, shall become a flame, with all his troops,
who now divide with such swiftness, his Billows, with their gliding finns?

Concive we not that the Sun shall suffer an eternal Eclips, that that day
shall be overcast, the heaven shall cover his face, the air shall change, and
stifle so many birds that beat it now so pleasantly with their wings? That this
all, that seems firm in its course, shall be shivered in a moment, shall be
reverst Pell-Mell, shall be consumed and Reduced to smoke?

So then, let us acknowledge out Error, let us not more abase our spirits to
these mortal things, let us give the earth a bill of divorce: let us not breath
any thing more but what is eternal.

Let Us consider we are contrary to Rivers who arise from small streams of
water, and wax proud the farther they are from their spring.

Let Us immitate the flame which advances and ascends continually upwards, as
the Iron touched with the Adamant which ever regardes the North.

We have countenances erected toward heaven, thither let us ellevate our
cogitations. Their, infinite incredible Mervills will ravish our serious and
solid spirits in the contemplation of the Almighty, who in one twinkling of an
eye, causes the whole Universs to tremble, who governs all the world, and
conducts it by his providence. From thence we shall receive what is necessary
to entertain the rest of our days? It Is of this moon, whereon depends the
flux and Reflux of Humane affairs.

The Otian swells it self, and is Iritated at her will. This great Pilot (who
has drawn men alive out of the bowels of fishes) shall supply us with shipping
convenient to pass the Seas of this world without perishing.


He causes us continually to behold his face, to the intent that by the light
of his Divine splendor, we may guide our selves with all assurance.

He will crack the chains by which the world fastens us to the earth; he will
cause that we escape her sorrows, and free us from her Precipices.

He will give us a reward, greater than our wish: He will make us live content,
both in business and leisure, in our Houses, and in our Armies, in the
country, and in the throng of the Court.

And drawing our spirits by the power of his own, upon the high Olimpus, and
will cause us (with a steedy eye) to behold these humane plains on the which
these worldlings follow their besotted Passions: and these fields which serve
them at Amphitheaters and stages to act their bloody Tragidyes.

Go to then, Let us dash against the earth all our designs, all our delights;
and if (hitherto) we have continued stupid, let us now (being pricked forward by
divine fury) disdain this world, and for the love of the Omnipotent, cause that
which pleased us more than him, be the object of our indignation.

In the contempt of these vanities, pure and innocent desires are produced,
which will chase away, all these shadows and illusions that torment us.

In the contempt of these dreams, we shall enter into an affection to the holy
Scriptures, the most certain, the most prosound guide, the Sun least
overshadow'd with clouds, least eclip'st, the most resplendent star of all
stars, and in the light whereof we shall be ravished with a desire to embrace
the truth, which we shall find in these sacred volumes, in this elegant text,
in these rich phrases so eloquent, so pure, so clear, and which (nevertheless)
are to worldlings characters unknown, and which they cannot conceive, although
one touch the letters, and put their fingers on the syllables, and show them
how they ought to be assembled; and so retiring our selves from evils, and
approaching to virtue, flying Hell, and embracing Paradise, our spirits shall
incline all it is actions to that which is to its satisfaction, and salvation,
it shall make war againt the body, shall render it captive, and subdue it: he
shall ever bear his greatest wealth about him, he shall know the use of it,
during the rest of his days, he shall lend himself only to the World, and
shall not give himself but to God, who is our Shepherd, our Sheephook, and our
support, who holds firm the Mountains by his force, and who is girded with
strength.

It Is necessary then that henceforward, God be he alone to whom we address our
vows.

It Is then expedient, that our spirits and our pens waste not their labors on
the furrows of the World, but to cause them to fructify to his glory.

God (alone) is praiseworthy: God alone merits to be engraven on Brass for a
perpetual remembrance, all other things are unconstant, subject to change and
perishable.

He alone is fixed in his essence, only he who gives Law to the disorders of
the World.

Let us supplicate him to root out our crimes, and plant thorns in our hearts,
which may pierce us in a thousand places to enforce tears to flow out, that
are agreeable in his sight.

Let Us trust only in his goodness, and not longer rest on the vain pillars of
our delights; which may render us lost for ever under their ruins.

Let Us not love the World, nor the things of the World. Ephesians. 1.5. Joh. 2.15.
If any man love the World, the love of God is not in him.

The World vanishes with the covetousness thereof,
but who does the will of God shall abide for ever.

The Judgment of God against the Wicked, with an Exhortation to retire from
vice and sin.
THe Heaven and the Earth shall pass away, but the Word of God which is
living, and more sharp than a Sword, shall continue for ever. He has uttered
with his mouth that he will cause the grave to swallow the ungodly quick, and
will stretch forth their carcasses on the bloody dust, and scatter them under
the power of his thunderclap. That His calamity shall come suddenly upon them,
that they shall speedily be bruised, and that without hope of remedy. And
certainly in time past, the horror of the sins of our fathers, caused the
floods to overwhelme them, so that none were reserved but one family; and
lately our crimes have drawn a deluge of blood upon the universs, so that the
plague devoures what has escaped the Sword, and the Famine the remainder of
both.

And (nevertheless) in lieu of raising up trophyes of glory to the honor of
God; which causes the earth to move, according to the pleasure of his powerful
hands, we continually more enkindle the coals and flames prepared for the
perpetual punishment of our crimes.

Every day renders us culpable of infinite abominations, every hour we design
some cursed work: our feet have to evil, our souls entombe themselves in
sin, we even crack under the burden and weight of our transgressions, which
otherwhile we are acted in the shadow, and (at present) have abandoned the
night, and (being altogether impudent) discover themselves in the light.

In a word, we bend our brows against heaven, we provoke the tempest of God,
as if we had arms of proof against his artillaries: and plunge our selves into
these iniquities like mad beasts, stupid, and incapable of judgment, which
cannot cover our faults with any excuse. For we know that God is in every place
remarking and noting our offenses: that this eternal light spreads it self,
and in the twinkling of an eye penetrates all the laborinths of the World, and
observes both that which is open and secret, our bodies, and spirits, our
vices, their causes, and their progress.

We understand that our course is too slack to avoid the strokes of the Swords
of his Angels, who glide too and fro through the air: where his Word directs
them, and that our walls are not strong enough to sustain the violence of the
flood, who (at his voice) will bound from Rock to Rock, and bear away (in a
moment) our Bridges and our Shoares: he has heretofore consumed (by fire)
entire Nations, for their abominations: he has manifested the severity of his
judgments on his people, his well-beloved, the firstborn of his Family.

In our days a Nation (Anciently the most Noble of the World) not only in
Arms and Arts, Greece.
but also in the Christian faith is made a slave to an infidel, who ravisheth
their children from betwixt the arms of their Christian parents, This then
said of France, may well be applied to us.
and causes them to be circumcised in his Mosque's.

And for our own particular, we behold that to punish our extravagancies, he
has armed our malice against our selves.

We see our Land drunk with the blood which flows on our Plains; Our fields
covered with cockle; Our Cities are infected with a pestilent air.

We observe the hand of God weary to stay his thunder, in the racks of the sky
to preserve us that we be not reduced to dust: and yet notwithstanding, we are
as a sea of vices, agitated without intermission, and which can obtain no
repose.

We abandon our selves to the pursuit of crimes, which we adorn with the
glorious titles of virtue: as if they were not sufficient of their proper and
natural impetuosity to allure us, with a breath moist and infected, and from an
execrable mouth we belch forth curses and blasphemies which corrupt the air
and earth, sad to be covered with such derestable Monsters.

We belie those promises which we have imprinted on our brows: each one
breaths forth mischief, delights in it, glories in it, and impudently boasts of
it.

And as the young Eaglets, (issuing from under the wing of her Dam,)
incontinently wageth war with the Serpents: and as the Lions whelps, the first
time they quit their cavernes, attach the Bulls which they encounter: after the
same manner, from the very spring of our age, we precipitate our selves (with
displayed ensigns) into the most furious crimes.

One lets loose his eyes to adulteries, and pursues it like an Ox to the
slaughter, or as a bird, who hastes to the snares.

This man ever burns with vengeance, neither is he nourished but with flesh,
nor quenches his thirst without blood, and has not other pleasure, but to
paddle and imbrew his hands in the hearts of them he esteems as enemies; and
oft-times, (as an ungrateful Viper rendeth the flanks of his expiring mother,)
in like sort seeks he the destruction of him, to whom he is signally obliged:
receiving his condemnation from the example of the sparrow-hawke, who having
held a sparrow under his wing to foment and heat his breast, he restores it to
it is liberty, and hasts as far from it as he can at one different flight, to
the intent he may never imbrew his beak with that flesh from whom he has
received a benefit.

In a word, our fathers have enkindled the wrath of God upon themselves and us:
and we have forced it down on our persons and our posterity.

We sleep as entombed in our vices, although that vigilance were more requisite
for us.

Charity, (the glittering mark of Christians) is extinct in our days,
and not so much as one alone takes thought for the poor, who are the creatures
of God as well as we, who are under the same vault of heaven, and upon the same
Globe of Earth.

One lays a false balance, and hates equal weights,
and nothing can touch the heart of this man, neither fear of God, nor
reverence to his Laws, can restrain his ravening hands.

In brief, such are our offenses, that we are obliged to banish the discourse
of our abominations, as dreading to publish such things as the ears and
thoughts of men ought not to receive; as likewise men may judge what may be our
hidden crimes, when those which appear are so enormous.

It then remains to call to remembrance the excess of our vices, and how far
this feavour has transported us.

It rests to observe the heat of our passions, to conceive a just hatted, to
take leave of them to discharge them for ever, and to detest the very thought
of them, if it be not to demand pardon for them.

It Is a shame to make such slender profit of the wonders, by the which heaven
calls us to repentance: and, notwithstanding so many advertisements to behold
our selves grovelling in vices, and so corrupt in our behavior.

When storms and tempests arise, the Pesants tremble, they assemble
themselves, they make vows, every one for the conservation of his cottage, and
his little Field.

When a clamor of fire is in the City, every one runs to quench it, the weak
contribute their cries, the children their sighths.

And when the wrath of God is ready to tumble down on our heads, when the
plague is already begun, we stand immovable: one arm is already rotten,
before the other stirs; the body is in the agony of death, before the spirit is
awaked.

Go to then! let us consider of our wretchedness, let our cogitations. tend to
our advantage, let us be active in the reformation of our vices, let us draw our
feet out of the of iniquity: let us (with strength expectorate these crimes,
these plagues, these poisons, and not (hence forward.) suffer that the heart
recoile: let us have them in horror, let us convert our rage upon them; let us
tear them with wrath, let us vow an irreconcilable enmity against them, and
constrain our hands to wage war upon them.

Let us for the future, love God with all the faculties of our souls: let us
contain our selves within the limits of our duties, within the bounds of our
subjection: let us not again precipitate our selves into the abismes of
rebellion.

Let every one that bears the image of God, be pure from such imaginations.
It Is the fairest ambition to the which we can direct our vows, it is the best
Inheritance, and the most Eminenst Nobility we can enjoy.

The pure souls detesteth vice, their whiteness flies such ordure, their
beauty fears the touch of their hands.

If any lost man shakes not off the yoke of Satan, (who forgeth a thousand
wiles to ravish him from heaven, if others proceed as the reed, which shoots
forth a long and strait blade at his first springing, but afterward makes
frequent knots, as pauses, which declares him languishing and out of breath;
for that, let not us lose courage, let us not quit our strength, let us not
easily abandon our felicity.

These are Worldlings filled with vapors, which at first display their
puissance, and advancing, tire themselves at every step, abating some part of
their strength: and then one may (also) receive instruction, by contraries, as
by examples, by flight, as by pursuit.

In hearing an unskilful player touch an harp, one may learn to nautiate
discords and false measures.

Let Us abandon these worldlings to the dreadful judgment of God. Who shall
exactly collect their vices, and rigorously chastise their offenses.


Whilst (in the interim) the fear of punishment (which ought to humble them)
remain continually imprinted in their guilty memories. The Image of gloominesse
never retiring from their eyes.

They shall ever have a Judge to attend them, a million of afflictions which
shall stuff them with despaires, and hells, which shall tire on their hearts,
which shall pursue them in their flight; which shall watch over their slumbers,
and shall constantly accompany their wretched lives.

Punishment derives its original from sin,
this World has nothing secure but innocence, which we ought to cherish, which
we are obliged to embrace, as our infallible Rudder, as our assured Anchor. But
if our vices still survive in us, if they spring in our hearts, if we grow
obstinate in our offenses, if the experience of impunity, multiplies our evil
inclinations, or if the scourge hardens us, God will take vengeance of so many
outrages, he will declare himself to us in his fury, he will compel us to
acknowledge his omnipotency; he will convert judgment into severity, he will
scatter the bonds of our impiety, he will render us confused in our temerity.
He will thrust his sharp sickle in the Field so overgrown with brambles, with
stinking and loathsome weeds, and will over-turn in the mire by Pestilence, by
the Sword, by Famine, so many bastard-seeds, and unpleasant in his sight.

In his fury, he is the generous Lion, pricked forward by his force, which
redoubleth his fierce roarings over his enemies.

He is the untamed Bull who casts forth his affrightful bellowings, and under
the horror of his stern look, overthrowing (for ever into obscurity) those,
who are obstinate in their offenses.

He is the Omnipotent, who has terrors by his side, death in his hand, and
who darteth (on the wicked) the fire of his just vengeance.

He defeates (in the twinkling of an eye) the Batallions of men, and causes
to graw the earth, the most Ancient of all the Monarchs and most August Kings,
and who merit a principal place in the Register of the glorious Caesar's, with
the like facility as the smallest, and most infirm and inconsiderable of the
world.

We have felt, we have proved the weight of his arm: But what we have beheld,
is but the first act, our eyes have shed Rivers of tears. Our Theaters have
distilled all with blood, the bowels of the earth have been torn up on every
side to receive our carcasses, the Divine Justice engages it self against us
on all sides to our destruction, and yet these are but the prologus to the
rigor of the horrible Judgment of the living God, if we prevent not his
severity by amendment of life.

He is all goodness, all mercy, all clemency, He sufficiently demonstrats with
what regreat he lays hand on the sword, or fire: He never proves the last
remedies, he proceeds not to the rigor of chastisements, till after he has
tried all other expedients; but his backwardness is seconded with extreme
afflictions, and punishments.

That which men enterprise against heaven, he causes to recoyle upon them.

Whosoever strikes against God, he will there find such solidity, that the
repercussion will tumble him down shattred like an earthen Pitcher.

Whosoever precipitates himself into that encounter, there sinks, and
(ordinarily) perishes, before that he has enterpriz'd it.

Let Us not then flatter our selves, not then be drunken, then let us not
slumber, whilst that God spares us.

Let Us not expect till (for conclution) his arm fall heavy upon us, till he
trouble and consume us, as slaves of iniquity and of Satan.

The Master that is not obeyed by his servants, but outraged out of spite and
contempt, will not he break up his Family from whence he reaps naught but
vexation? So, the Master of the world who is (without intermission) affronted
by our vices, will he not withdraw (from the midst of us) his graces, the
testimonies of his presence? will he not approach us in his anger, to destroy
and to afflict us under his storms? He is Just, he is Omnipotent, his power
marches equal pace with his pleasure: he will crush his enemies, he will
terryfie them after such a sort, as to disable them to Rally or reunite, he
will cause them to tremble under his sword, as ears of corn under the siccle:
their bodies (torn and dismembered with wounds) shall be a pray to salvage
beasts, they shall serve as food for Ravens: he will inflict on the children,
the rigor of his revenging laws, for their fathers offenses: he will punish
the transgression in the Race, who shall shrivel and fade with a shameful brand
on the brow of the Nephews: and in vain would men ward his blows, in vain will
they sly before his face.

For neither the thundering Cannons, nor the sharp sword, nor the high
Bullwarks, nor the most inaccessible Mountains, nor the whole universs ranged
in battle array can preserve them, of whom he has vowed to take vengeance.

Let all the ungodly rally themselves, let them assemble, he would destroy them
at one stroke, he would reduce them into one handful of ashes,
into nothing, such is his force, that he can vanquish his enemies, and not
only overturne them, but entice and dragge them and their Armies, and tumble
them (for ever) headlong into the gulf of darkness, belching with fire, and
carcasses filled with despaires, and horrors, wherein they shall be tormented
without intermission, without having a thousand millions of years of exquisite
torments, to be esteemed as one only point of eternity; in which they shall
languish, suffer, and endure perpetually with rage, the racks, the flames, and
what ever can be imagined dreadful.

The Lord is living in truth, (says Jeremiah) he is living in judgment and
justice, erem. 4.
wherefore cloth you in sackcloth, lament and howl. Direct the ensign
toward Sion, retire together, and tarry not, for fear lest his anger break
forth as fire, and that it does not inflame by reason of the wickedness of
your deeds.

Let us beware then, that we be not of those accursed, flourishing like the
laurel, but are suddenly vanished, Psalm. 37.
suddenly they are no more, and are in a Moment destroyed with their
transgressions.

Let us beware that we are not of those reprobates, which have been beaten, and
have felt no smart; Jerem. 5.3.
warned and hardened their hearts, rejecting admonition, and refusing to turn
unto the Lord: Number. 2.4.
nor contemning the riches of his goodness, of his patience, and
long-suffering; which excites us, which calls us, and which (so long a time)
envites us to repentance.

God lives for ever, He is Great, He is Omnipotent, He is Dreadful, He will be
Redoubted, will you not fear me, (says He) will you not tremble before my
face? I can do all, all things are in my hand.

I have placed the sand for limits to the Sea, I have fixed his waves within the
shore, that they may not pass beyond them; what then? shall we persist still
in our crimes? shall our own feet search out the snares of our desolation?
what? shall we again lance out selves into the depth of the torrent? to the
end, that the stream of the water overslowing may carry us away? shall we again
thrust the sword into our bosoms, that our own hands should give us a wretched
death? we, did I say, from whom God has taken the veil from our eyes, on whom
he has bestowed holy, and manifest instructions, we allied to the Divinity.
Shall we abandon heaven? shall we quit the faithful and saving counsel of that
truth? to plunge our selves into the world, and precipitate our selves into
these vices?

God has instructed us in his ways, He has taught us his paths, He has
(with his own mouth) cutsed the wicked: we know that we ought to love him with
all our hearts, and with all our minds, that He ought to be Renowned for his
judgments, that our salvation should be more dear and precious to us, than all
the vain pleasures, and false treasures which can sustain this perishable
earth.

How is it then, that we follow the Prince of Darkness, which works
effectually in us as the children of rebellion?

How do we swerve out of the course, how break we out of the Park, to expose
our selves to be abandoned to Wolves? What considerations can deliver us up to
the concupiscence of our flesh, without judgment, without reason?

Bethink with our selves, that Satan does surmount, that he blinds and besots
us.

We are of those of whom Paul speaks, who having known the righteousness of
God, which understand that they which commit such things are worthy of death,
and nevertheless plunge our selves therein: we are inexcusable (says he) for
that having the knowledge of God, we glorify him not as God, neither render
him praise for his benefits; but are vain in our discourse, having our our
Hearts filled with Darkness.

Let us then remember, how we have been enlightened, that we have been partakers
of the Holy Spirit, that we have tasted of the heavenly gift, the Word of God,
and the power of the World to come: and that all his blessings having been
heap't upon us, we again crucify the Some of God in following the tracts of
iniquity, Heb 6.4.
and (as much as in us lies) exposing him to contempt.

Come then, let us force Fountains of tears to issue from our eyes; let us
(from the bottom of our hearts) cause sighths and regreats to arise, which may
produce the fruits of repentance: It Is time to set our affairs in order, the
hour presses us, the season hastes us, the mischief is at hand, if suits not
our purpose to slumber, the defluxion of this poison choakes us.

Let us awake, awake our selves from death, Ephe. 5.41 2 Timothy 2.26.
that Christ may enlighten us, and cause us to escape the snare of the Devil,
by the which we have been taken, for to accomplish his will. Be we not like to
rebellious people, disobedient, Romans 10 22.
gainsaying, which turn our backs on the Lord, while he calls us, and
stretches out the hands of his mercy toward us.

Let Us walk altogether according to the Spirit, Gal. 5.16.
chasing away the covetousness of our flesh; we very well understand which is
the sure path for the conduct of our worldly affairs, and can we not also
discern that which is just, and what is necessary for our salvation? since it is
thither that we ought to move our hands, whether our cares should tend, where
all our labors should terminate, since we understand nothing is more happy for
man, than what is proposed. To follow the way, tract him out by the finger of
God: that we know that none can sojourne in the Tabernacle of of the Lord,
Psalm. 15.
none can inhabit the place of his holiness; who regulates not his steps
according to his divine Ordinances.

In the Country of the Gadarens, the man who had an unclean spirit, which
inhabited not but in Deserts ^n^ Sepul^hres; which broke all the cords, all the
chains which restrained him, who roared without intermission, and gash't
himself with stones; when (afar off) he beheld the Savior of the World, he
ran and prostrated himself at his feet; and we, who are not crammed and
stuf't with Devils, who have not our abiding in Cavernes, and who do not
dismember our selves with rage and fury; we I say, who apprehend the verity of
the Gospel, who have the knowledge of God, shall we fly before him, when he
approaches us? shall we stop our ears at his voice, to lance and destroy our
selves in vice?

Let Us awake our selves from our drowsinesse, and render our selves capable of
our proper good.

The men of Nineve reformed themselves, at the preaching of Jonah.

The Queen of the South traveled from the extremities of the earth, to hear
the Wisdom of Solomon.

There is in the Gospel, greater than Jonas, greater than Solomon; there is the
Spirit of God who talks to us, who excites us to retire from our sins, who
hastens, who threatens us.

Let us submit our selves (then) to God, let us approach him, let us remark our
offenses, let us lament, weep, and purify our hearts, let us humble our selves
under his powerful hand, to the intent that he may secure us from the Devil,
who encompasseth us, to devour us.

Let Us abandon our transgressions, and submit our neeks under the just
government of the Omnipotent; acknowledging him the steadfast Wall, against
which, who knocks, breaks himself.

Let Us lift up our tired hands, Heb. 12.12.
and our dislocated knees; and adore him, who has formed both the heaven and
earth, the Seas and all Fountains of waters: and not longer abase our selves,
as the impious; as unregardful of his glory, which we should elevate more high,
than the heavens; if there remains in us any recentment of his graces,
(whilst his favorable hand) continues on us for our good; whereof he has been
more Prodigal than Liberal.

Let Us offer instantly our bodies a living sacrifice, let us spread out our
hands, before his wrath; by prayers and amendment of life, dreading his
vengeance, or ever it irrevocably destroy and overwhelme us; which if we omit,
we hasten our deaths, we ate the hang-men of our own souls: if we longer
attend, Luke 13.25.
the gate of Gods mercy shall be for ever closed against us: and in the day
(wherein we shall behold Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of God, wherein we shall see set at the Table of God, his children, who
shall come from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the
South,) we shall be miserably cast into darkness.

It Is long since God having endured our manners, expecting our repentance: he
has not hitherto corrected us, but with the chastisements of a Father, but if
still we are insensible of these stripes, and of our offenses, we shall
constrain him to punish us with the Sword of extermination, and give us up
unto the power of the Executioners of his Justice.

Long patience contemned, Heb. 2.1.
draws rigor without pity. If what was pronounced by Angels was firm, and
every transgression and disobedience has received a just reward: how shall we
escape, if we neglect the judgment of God; so often declared against the
children of iniquity? would we be of the cockle and straw, which shall be cast
into the fire? would we be of those cursed ones, Mat. 13.49.
who by the Angels shall be separated from the just, to be cast into the
Furnace? Of those evil servants, who shall be punished with many stripes? of
those Reprobates, who shall be overtaken with sudden destruction? of those
plants of offense, who shall be devoured with consuming flames?

Would we be of those of whom Jeremiah complains, in these terms;

They know the way of the Lord, Jerem. 5.
but themselves have broken the yoke and the bonds. Therefore are they slain by
the Lion of the Forest, the Wolf of the Evening has wasted them, and the
Leopard watches against their Cities, whosoever comes out, shall be torn in
pieces; for their offenses are multiplied, and their rebelloins are increased.
How shall I pardon thee for this? (says the Lord) thy children have forsaken
me, I have fed them to the full, and they have committed adultery, and are gone
in Troops into Harlots houses, shall I not visit for these things? (says the
Lord:) shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation? God is not idle in
Heaven, He contemplates on what is done here below; He is there seated as a
Judge, to punish iniquity: and when he reaches his hand highest, it is but to
give the heavier stroke.

Why tarry we, Romans 2.5.
if ( by the hardness of our hearts (without repentance) we heap up wrath
against the day of the just judgment of God, who renders honor, immortality,
and life eternal to them, who with patience and well-doing, seek his glory; and
who gives tribulation and anguish to every soul of man, who rebelleth against
him and follows iniquity. If God spared not the Angels who had sinned, 2 Pet.
2.4.
and at once drowned the whole World, except eight persons: If he have given so
many testimonies of his rigor on them, who live in impiety; what wait we for?
since it is recorded in so many passages of the Gospel, that we shall be more
severely handled, than Sodom and Gomorrah, which were burned and reduced into a
heap of sinders? Seeing then that it is said, 2 These. 1.8.
that God shall exercise vengeance with flames of fire against those who serve
him not and are disobedient to his will? Would we swallow the cup of the wrath
of God even to the dregs? would we dry up, and exhaust (to the very bottom,)
the treasures of his patience?

Go to then, since our malady is yet capable of Remedy.

Let us tear out those motes that are in our eyes; let us reconcile our selves
to God, who stretches out his arms to us, remembering that his children are
not born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, John 1.13
nor of the unsatiable desires of man, but are born of God; are born of
prudence, of charity, wisdom and virtue.

Let Us not tarry longer, fearing that he should rain fire and brimstone upon
us, and that he chase us not ( as cursed gates into eternal fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25.41.
Instantly detesting our crimes, abjuring our vices, our sins and offenses;
let us cast and prostrate our selves at the feet of God, let us raise our
voices, suing for our pardon, redoubling our petitions, submitting our selves
entirely to his pleasure: otherwise the tempest will surprise us, hell attends
to torment us within it is horrors, and the dreadful gulf is prepared to open
his jaws eternally to consume us in his flames.

Meditations upon Repentance.
MY Soul, Jerusalem (the heritage of the Lord, the beloved City,) has
transgressed: she was not cleansed from the pollution of her feet, neither has
she been mindful of her end: wherefore she has been rendered desert, solitary,
and a prey to the Gentiles.

My soul, Corah, Dathan and Abiram for not having obeyed the Lord, Number. 16
were punished by the earth; who opened her jaws, and swallowed them in her
gulf; Mat. 24.25.
The servant supriz'd in debauchery, is punished, separated, and ranck't with
hypocrites; Mat. 25.1.
And the Virgins for being but a little separate from the Bridge-groom, have
found the door for ever closed against them.

These are the Judgments pronounced by the Word of God, who is High,
Penetrating and Effectual.

These are the Judgments pronounced against them who stop their ears at the
voice of the Savior of the World, Mat. 4.17.
Who cries on the Earth, amend you, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Act.
3.19. Mat. 3.7.
Amend you and be ye converted, that your sins may be effaced; Fly from the
wrath to come, bring forth fruit meet for repentance.

My soul, be apprehensive then of the judgments of God; Consider of thine own
salvation, apprehend so many new plagues, which from the incensed heaven thou
beholdest tumbling upon thee; Consider so many woes that environ thee; and such
numberless forerunners of future miseries.

Prevent the vengeance of God by humility and penance, that so thou may not
be prevented by his wrath.

Imitate the humble Dove, who creeps into the bottom of the shrubs, beholding
(afar off) the ravenous Eagle, cutting and dividing the air with his wings,
and hasting to surprise her. Fill the air with thy sighths and regreates for
thy vices; even to the very bitterness of thysoul; cast forth cries of
displeasure and repentance: demean thy self as altogether dejected, altogether
wasted, perfectly penitent, even at the foorstool of the Lord: spread forth thy
hands toward his mercy, address thy voes and most ardent supplications unto
him, to divert from thee the flames of his wrath, and to appease his
indignation.

Importune thy Savior with so many plaints, with so many sacrifices of praise,
thereby to shake the Sword out of his Hand: Force the Kingdom of heaven, and
ravish it with violence: Mat. 11.12.
whilst a means of reconciliation is open; and be careful not to
procrastinate, till the day when the door shall be most securely barred.

Go to then, my Soul, defer not longer, make have to cover thy head with ashes,
and lamentations: cause to distill tears of acknowledgment of thy sins; and
raise up thy meditations on high to avoid thy Destruction.

Retire thy self from the press of the World, and dispose thy self as the
Pelican who seeks the least frequented, the most solitary places. Come out of
Babylon, and follow the way of the heavenly Jerusalem: propose for a pattern,
Jacob, Abraham, Moses, Elias, who retired from Mesepotamia, from Caldea, from
Egypt, and from the Court of Samaria. Imitate the great Legislator of the
Hebrews, Moses.
who separated himself from the multitude, and went to the Mountain of Sinai,
the more freely to converse with God.

My soul, be not like the inhabitants of Corazin and Bethsaida, who shall be
more rudely handled in the day of Judgment, Mat. 11.21
than those of Tire, Sydon and of Sodom, for that they were not reformed at
the Word of the Lord.

Contrarily, immitate those of Jerusalem, Mat. 3.5.
of Judea, and of the Country about Jordan, which ran unto St. John who
prepared the path of the Savior of the world.

Oppose to the Justice of God, his proper succors: oppose the bloodshed by his
Son, oppose thy prayers, thy vows, thy fasting, and thy repentance; He had
decreed the sacking and ruin of Niniv^: yet notwithstanding as soon as thy
had bewaild their faults, he suspended his decree: sanctify then a fast, my
son rend thy heart with tears and lamentations in the presence of thy God:
Return unto him, He is merciful, he is pityfull, slow to anger, and abundant
in kindness.

In ancient times (by a perpetual Ordinance) 'twas expressly commanded to his
people, to celebrate a fast on the tenth day of the seventh month, which was
the solemn feast of Propitiations: He had ordained them to afflict their
souls, and to refrain from labor: For as much as the Priest made a
propitiation for them to the end they might be cleansed from their sins in his
presence.

This day, my soul, is the feast of propitiations to thee, wherein it is thy
duty to be converted to the Lord.

Imitate (then) the people, afflict thy self, masserate thy flesh with
watchings, and fastings, to the intent thou may be the more strong, and cry
with the Priests who wept betwixt the Portck and the Altar; Joel 2.16.
Pardon me my God, and expose not thy Heritage to Reproach.

Lord, I lament before thee, I seek by amendment of life, to take a resolution
to follow thee. I humble my self, I abase my self to attain even unto the
heavens. But, Lord, for to approach to thee, it is requisite I retire altogether
out of my self; and that I can no way effect without the succors of thy hand.

Lord, the very Angels tremble in adoring thee, and I wretched and abominable
sinner, manifest no token of astonishment: I quake not, I have not an humbled
heart, nor eyes drowned in tears: I much desire it my God, I heartily wish it,
but it is impossible without thy grace. For if thou Prevents not the wicked by
thy compassion, he can never amend.

A man revolted and slip't into disobedience, returns not unto thee without the
conduct of thy spirit. Enlighten them, Lord, my soul by the operation of thy
holy Spirit, prevent its cold and slothfulness: Pierce it with a thousand
stings, and thousands remorces of conscience, to the end he may discover his
malady unto thee, and that to thee he may make his heat and anguish appear, to
obtain remedy.

Lord, thou art the wise Pilot of my squiffe tottering at the mercy of the
waves: thou art not ignorant of the storms and the floods that batter this
frail vessel: thou art the bright and shining lantern, which must be the
Bear-star in all extremityes to guide, to direct this poor Bark on this
raging Sea.

Guard me then from shipwreck; rebuke the winds, who mutiny against me, and
confederate together, are set against my sails.

Strike from the highest heaven, one considerable stroke, to engrave in my
heart the lively impressions of the love of thee, and to dispose my spirit to
thy service.

Open my eyes as thou did the servant of Elisha: incline my ears to thy
Word, arm my conscience against my flesh, and make to arise out of this stone,
a child of Abraham.

Mine iniquities are now against thy pleasure, but then shall my innocence be
agreeable to thee. Lord I would present my self at thy feet, I struggle, I
move that way, but instantly the horror of my offenses restrain me.

My enormities cannot endure thy sight, nor my transgressions sustain thy
presence.

Nevertheless, my God, repentance serves as a plaster to my wounds, confession
is the remedy of my distemper: It Is requisite then, that I manifest and publish
my iniquity before thee. Lord, I have not stirred up and awakned thy displeasure
by a small bruit rashly committed, I have belched out torrents of corruption,
and am turned unto detestable insolencyes; I am become a Magazine of vice, a
spout and sink of filthynesse, my conscience is so hardened, my offenses are so
monstrous, my night is so gloomy, that my obscurity is incapable of other
comparison, that has preceded it. The multitude of my crimes surpass the
number of the sand. It appears that the name only of Christian remains to me:
My eyes have had nothing more agreeable than the shadow: they have trod under
foot the torch and light whose brightness should be so precious unto them: and
these Infidels who should only bewail my offenses, have lamented none but
worldly losses.

I have pursued my laciviousnesse, I have yielded and submitted to their
inclinations, despising thy precepts: I have continually stumbled at the same
stone, I have without intermissio^, audatiously and impudently advanced my
brows against my neighbors, I have been deaf to thy voice, I gave way to the
temptations of the Devil, who vanquisheth me by the assistance of my own hands.

My wishes have been insatiable, my desires boundless, and bottomless, my
tongue not true, and my hands have delivered into thy power weapons for my
proper destruction, Romans 3.10.
and have drawn down chastisements upon my own head. My throat is an open
sepulcher, under my lips is the venom of Aspes, my mouth is full of curses, my
feet swift to evil, destruction and misery are in my ways, and I have been
ignorant of the paths of thy peace, thy fear has not been in my sight.

I am that figtree planted in the vineyard, Live. 13.6.
thou came thither after so many years seeking fruit, and finding none: I do
naught but unprofitably cumber the ground: I am of those Rotten trees who
merit to be cut down and cast into the fire: Mat. 7.19.
I am of the number who have received thy seed into stony ground, into thorney
places. My words are ever idle and unprofitable, Mat. 12.35.
and I always exhaust evil things out of the bad treasure of my heart. I
approach thee with my mouth, I honor thee with my lips, but my heart is far
from thee. I am of those feined hypocrites whose repentance is naught but
prevarication: Esaias 29.3
of those Pharisees, whose only virtue is in their countenance, who are adorned
with Hypocrisiy, not Faith.

True whited Sepulchers shining and glittering without, but filled with bones,
with ordure, with iniquity. I have not ranged my self under thy wings, Mat.
23.37
as thou assemblest thy little ones: I have not plucked the beam out of my
eyes, Mat. 5.37
my discourse have been fraught with blasphemies, instead of simply yea and no.
I have not given to those that ask me, neither have I lent to such who would
have borrowed. I have not rendered my self a worthy child to thee my Father;
who causest thy Sun to rise upon the good and upon the wicked: thy Rain to
descend on the just, and on the unjust. I have not affected my enemies, neither
have I blessed those who curse me: I have not done good to them who hate me, nor
prayed for those who persecute me.

Lord, I am of those Goats who have contemned thee, who have disdained thy
little ones, in the person of whom Thou would be cherish't.

I have not quenched their thirst, the gate of my house has been closed
against them, and I have not been so much as inclined to aswage their griefs.

Lord, I am convinced of such a multitude of crimes, I am so overwhelmed with
iniquities: and those numberless vices, wherewith I have lived from the hour
of my nativity, which I have followed, which I have served after such a manner,
accuse me, that they present no other thing to me, but a shrou'd, Coffin, an
obscure monument, hideous, and dreadful: Lord, when I behold the Myrror of thy
Law, when I read thy volume, I find my self smitten with so many Gangrens, that
they make me afraid, and even terrible to my self: and with bloody, and hearty
groans I accuse my impiety, I acknowledge the Grandeur of thine indignation,
stirred up by the multitude of my offenses: and confess I deserve to bear the
punishment of my demerits, if thy great mercy remove not the severity of thy
Justice.

Lord, thou hold in abomination the workers of iniquity: thy countenance is
set against them, thy day is mighty, it is strong, it is terrible says Joel, and
none can sustain it. Joel. 2.11.
Also my God, I stoop at the only sound of thy voice, I start, I tremble with
fear, I am a party against my self: I condemn my offenses, I detest them: Luke
13.1.
I acknowledge that the Gallaleans (whose blood Pilate mixed with their
Sacrifices) were not so eulpable as my self.

That the eighteen upon whom the Tower of Shiloe fell, had not committed so
many abominations. I acknowledge that I cannot bear thy sight alone: I
confess thou hold'st (in thy hands) the power of the winds, that with one
only blast, thou can cause me to disappeare that if thou please only to
move a little air against me, I should be no more, but, my God, my soul is
plunged in anguish and sorrow, wherein it flotes altogether filled with
bitterness: it is bruised under the violence of a million of remoreses that
agitate it. I am altogether wan, altogether trembling, altogether feeble. I am
abated, and turned earth, and my heart is pierced through with assaults,
sighing for anguish, and makes me swerve, testifying her regrets. Lord, thou
have chosen me before thou compassest the foundation of the earth, before thou
fixed the mountains, and stretched out the heavens.

Lord, incline thine ear to my complaints, open thine eyes to my desolations,
manifest not thy power against a shadow, against a withering herb, languishing
and dried.

Lord, all the perfections of thy Angels, are but imperfect before thee: all
the splendor of the Sun (to thee) is but obscurity: Thou find nothing pure,
nothing firm in them: How much more then in me, who am formed of dust, who
live on mud, and am ever mixed with ordure? Lord, from the Cedars of Lebanon,
even to the least wild plant, some park of thy Divinity shines: all thy
creatures bear thy mark, and thy Character on their fronts: My God, I am
(likewise) the workmanship of thy holy hands, display then over me some rays
of thy grace.

Lord, I am lost in the Otian of my offenses, I am drowned in their waves:
Preserve me (then) from ship-wracke, I am the prodigal child famish't, covered
with rags: I have sinned against thee, embrace me my Father, Extinguish (with
thy hand) these burning Torches which consume me, these firebrarnds of
desolation, these so abominable crimes: To the intent that these chains of my
captivity being broken, I may recover my liberty in thy grace to my salvation,
to the glory of thy Name, and the confusion of Satan.

Lord, my end is certain if thou stanch'st not the blood which streams from my
wounds. Banish me not from my presence, turn no thy countenance from me,
withdraw not thy clemency which shows it self after thy displeasure, and
which should not be of use if men lived innocently. Drive far from me that
cursed spirit, who from the beginning separated thy creature from thee. Chase
away that old enemy, whose ambushes are so prom't, and whose assaults so rude:
Adorn and Deck my heart with the spoils of my sins, dispose me to walk
with thee from the dawning; facilitate my tears, and fill me with a desire of
my salvation. Cause me to forsake all mundane contagion, and plunge me in the
pleasant streams of a holy and a peaceable life, give me an esteem of this
chaste and ravishing penetence, which opens me a passage into thy holy
habitation, which may bury my transgressions, and swallow my vanities under an
eternal oblivion.

Lord, I lament bitterly before thee, I pour forth my tears of complaint,
which, without drying, drench my soul in bitterness, and dissolves it in
displeasures.

I present my self to thee with an humbled and frozen spirit, a soul afflicted
and touched with true repentance. Receive then my God, this penetent sinner, be
thou apt to pardon, destroy not thine own work. Approach unto me, my God,
cause to wither in me this multitude of plants of perdition, who produce these
fruits of iniquity, and help my Mallady without indignation.

Manasses prostrated himself before Idols, he profaned thy Altars; yet never
the less, he being converted unto thee, and repenting his impieties, he
appeased thee. Thou delivered'st him from the hands of the Assyrians, and from
the fetters wherein thou had caused him to fall, and returnd'st him a
glorious King, commander of Palestine. And I Lord, I present thee my homage
with a contrite spirit; stifle and choke not (then) my heavynesse and my life,
Exercise not thy power on me to my destruction who am thine: cause not to
descend (on me) thy punishments from heaven, stigmatize me not with an eternal
infamy: but open (Lord) unto me the gate of thy mercy, Dan. 10.12.
and give ear to my supplycation as thou did unto Daniel from the first day
he afflicted himself before thee. Thy coming was to call sinners to repentance,
Luke 5.32.
Thou command thy Apostles to go unto the lost sheep: Mat. 10.6.
I am of that number, cause me then (in the midst of this displeasure,) to
experience thy comiseration, Luke 8.24.
the Tempest is descended on the lake, my bark leakes, I am in hazard, awake
thy self my God, rebuke the wind, appease the waves, and make it calm.

By the example of Daniel (with fasting, sackcloth, and ashes.) I address my
face toward thee, Thou strong, Thou great, Thou terrible God: I have sinned, I
have committed iniquity, I am estranged from thy Law.

Lord, to thee belongs Justice, to me confusion: but mercies and compassions
are (likewise) from thee. Turn away then thy displeasure and indignation,
hearken to my supplycations, and cause thy holy Spirit to shine on thy desolate
servant: I belong to thine election, I am an inheritor of the merit of thy Son,
and have my lot and portion in heaven. Regard me (then) Lord, in him: for in
his countenance, in his wounds thou can not deny me pardon.

The father defers (till the last) to cut off his members: He weeps, he groans
in severing them. Thou art my Father, good God, suspend thy strokes, restrain
them, have compassion on my ashes who am less then ashes, and of the lees and
scum of the world: Purify them after such a manner, that they be not
annihilated, let them not be forsaken of thee, who have deserted thee: If they
be reduced to naught, thou can not extract glory from them: for in nothing,
naught is found but nothing it self.

I say not, my God, that thou have created these eyes, to make them endure so
much, and to dissolve themselves into streams; For, Lord, their eyelids have
exalted themselves against thee, (They are the reason that thou assistest me
not farther with thy favors:) after such a manner that they ought to distill
into tears, until they have encountered the port of thy clemency, which now
files them and with-drawes it self away from their sight.

Lord, will thou be steadfast in thy wrath? will thou wage war with an
earth-worme? will thou regard the weight of my offenses, and not that of thy
goodness? I am guilty of errors and crimes, but I am covered with ashes and
tears: I am a sinner, but created with the sweet and fragrant breath of thy
mouth: I am covered with offenses, but thou art the Father of grace, the Father
of salvation, the Father of compassion, and in saving me thou conservest the
work of thy hands: in blessing me thou repleatest thy self with joy and
delight.

Receive then Lord, my prayer, that it be not lost, and vanish into air.

Hearken to my mouth, and my throat, which consumes with crying: and give ear
to their groans: Give remedy to that distemper, whose birth I ought to avoid:
stretch forth and abase thy hand here below to succor me, drive back by the
powerful motions of thy brows, the plagues which threaten me. Speak unto me
as unto the Paralitick, and save me by thy grace. I resemble blind Bartimeus,
Mat. 10.47.
who lifted up his voice to thee, and redoubled his intercessions equal to
their reproofs and rebuks, to the intent he should hold his peace.

My offenses by the brute of their obscure gloominess, will drown the
cleernesse of my voice: but, being fortified by thy holy Spirit, I take
courage, I reinforce my self, and attain the victory. Mat. 5.1.
Lord thou have expelled Legions of unclean spirits out of their bodies who
presented themselves before thee. Chase then from the those offenses which I
cannot tame: drive away these miseries which (by a divine vengeance) vissibly
torment me.

Lord, glory not in thy Puissance against me, to make thy self Renowned:
Display not thy force against me, since, with one glance of an eye, thou may
discomfit me, neither can I sustain thy presence: Rifle me, dart thy flames
from heaven, I acknowledge I have deserved more: The World.
But Lord, this great City would become desolate, if nothing should remain
is it, but what thou would absolve in the severity of thy justice: and thou
art the pitiful Father, who give more terror than stripes; and delightest
rather to restore, than to destroy.

Thou hastest to receive the cries of one penitent sinner: if he repents
himself, thou pardonest him: and as he adds transgression upon transgression,
thou multipliest the acts of clemency.

Be not then; My God, inexorable to my fault; pursue me not unto extremity. The
Nurse forbears not to give the breast to her child, because it disturbs her
repose and sleep: Thou art to me, more than a Fosterer, be not (then) deaf to
my plaints, and deny not the milk and the sweetness of thy grace to thy
infant, whom thou have imbellish't for an high design, and whom thou have
redeemed with the life of thy only Son.

I have forfeited thy grace my God, but thou never losest thy goodness; behold
me in thy clemency, not in thy justice: my hopes survives in thee alone,
swallow my transgressions in thy compassions, and the fruit shall remain to thy
glory.

Lord, my brains dissolve into tears, my hairs are full of ashes, my visage
heavy, my eyes are hollow sunk, and dull.

But Lord, if my tears can render thee more gentle, if they can move thee to
extinguish the flames of my crimes, set open the Fountains of my weeping, and
cause me to bathe in the waters of my penitence, until that by the merits of
the Savior of the world; thou have overturned my transgression, and impure
desires under the power of thy compassion.

Lord, I am nothing but Rottenness and Corruption: But the very ashes of a
rich substance want not their value: I am ransomed by the stripes of thy Son,
I am cleansed by his blood, I speak to thee by hismouth; be mindful then of
that sweet smelling sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered on the Cross: and do
me the honor I may participate in the Triumph of his perfect and complete
Ministry. Thou promisedst to Abraham, not to destroy Sodom, if so be that there
thou could find ten just persons; and I Lord, Genesis 15.36.
I am holy, I am enclosed, I am a member of the just one, without spot; of one
just justifying, who has swallowed my transgressions in the Ocean of his
merits: of one Just, who is the light from whence I borrow the rays of
splendour: Of one Just, who has cherish't me in his bosom, and who makes me to
draw the breath of his mouth.

Accept then, the offerings my God, of my humble acknowledgment which I bring
to thy Altars; with all the zeal and devotion whereof I am capable. Psalm. 51.
I beseech thee (with the Psalmist David,) O God, have pity upon me according
to thy loving kindness; according to the multitude of thy compassions efface
my offenses: wash me from mine iniquity, and purge me from my sin. I
acknowledge my transgressions and my faults are ever before thee; I have sinned
against thee, purge me with bysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall
be whiter than snow. Turn thy face away from mine iniquities. O God, create in
me a clean heart, and a steadfast spirit: east me not away from thy presence;
neither take from me the Spirit of thy holiness. Restore me to the gladness
of thy salvation, open may lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Lord, cause thy graces to abide with me, conduct and lead me in thy wholesome
paths, by a divine inspiration, touch (to the quick) my spirit and my sense,
and fill me with an ardure to thy service. Open my lips, which my
transgressions have closed: make to spring in me, piety, integrity, the love of
my neighbors, modesty: and that my vices (after having so long time abused thy
creature) may in conclusion quit and surrender the place to a blessed, to a
reformed estate: Effect it, that my very countenance may answer for me, that
one may read in my eyes and voice, the integrity of my intentions. Enable me
that I may fructify as Trees planted by the streams of waters. Enable me to
walk worthily, as it is requisite before thee, increasing in all sweet savor,
and declaring that I am a member of thy Church, instructed in thy Gospel, and
that thy Word dwells in me.

Lord, thou have unto this day conserved me, thou have born me upon thy wings.
Enable me (then) to be obedient to thy Voice, that I may keep thy Covenant, and
that I may be of the Kingdom of thy Priests, and of thy holy Nation. Engrave
thy holy Ordinances in my spirit, cause my ears to resound the sweet and
gracious airs of thy Word. Bring to pass that my tongue may sing a perperual
song, and be an echo to thy heavenly voice; and for the time to come, I may
ever address most ardent supplications (not idle drowsy words) unto thee, then
when as carried away with a Design or Slumber, and that I speak and understand
not my self. Establish my heart in thy fear, retain my inclinations in
obedience to thine: fill my soul with charity, which is the Complement of the
Law, the establishment of grace, the preparative to glory; which (as the
influence of the Sun,) enables me with a virtue to fructify and increase.

Lord, receive me into thy favors wholly blot out my sin, temper and aslwage
the scaldings of my wounds. Encamp thy Angels round about me, dispel and
scatter all evil far from me: Be thou my Guide, through the perisous
straights of the World, and the turbulent storms of the violence of my
passions; suffer me not to da^h against the rocks of this Sea of the world; and
(under the conduct of thy Holy Spirit,) cause me to arive at the Port of thy
salvarion, and cast anchor in the midst of thine. Love me my God, to the intent
I may love thee, that I may seek thee, serve thee, pray to thee, that I may
give thee glory and honor for ever.

A Meditation upon the Holy Supper.
UP then my Soul, continue not longer buried in the delights and vanities of
the World.

Arise, awake thee, rouse thy self, and lend an attentive ear to the sacred
voice of the well-beloved Son of God, who invites thee to take place at his
feast, to sit down to the Banquet of eternal life.

Arise, recollect all thy strength, and lift thy self up toward this Fountain
of light, who (by his Sun) illustrates all the Stars of heaven, and
illuminates all the parts and corners of the earth. He is the only Physician on
whom depends all thy deliverance: He is the only Author of grace, who can
conserve thee against darkness, against hell: he only is Omnipotent, who can
carry thee for ever into heaven.

Up then my Soul, prostrate thy self before him, fortify thy zeal follow thy
God who calls thee to participate of that great and divine mystery which he
has instituted and ordained in his Church: which is the Sacrament of his body,
of which one must take part to obtain eternal life. The Sacrament of his body,
by the which he is united unto thee, to convey thee into his glory; whereby he
removes, he abolisheth, he effaceth all that is in thee of sin, of cursing,
and of death; and there replanteth his grace, his life, and his felicity. All
whatever he has brought from heaven, all the grace which is infused into him,
all the treasure of those merits which he acquired on the Cross, is conferred
on thee by the communion of this holy Sacrament of his Supper, which is the
Fountain of spiritual sweetness: by the which God nourishes, sustaineth, and
conserveth the life he has conferred on us in Baptism, and has united us unto
himself, making ^s (as says Saint Paul, flesh of his flesh, bones of his
bones, and members of his proper body: But my God, all times are ever present
with thee, thou mindest not the past, nor attendest the future. Thou watchest
over my cogitations, thou art the Judge of my intentions; nothing is hid from
thee, all things to thee are naked, and entirely manifest: my heart is fast
closed in my breast, but my bosom is not other than glass in thy sight, and
thou beholdest Lord, that the fervor of my faith is (as it were) quite
extinct, that my brow has neither sincerity nor candor; that I take not repose
but under the branches cracking with fruits of iniquity, and that my soul is
more defiled, than the mire of which my body is formed. I cannot then, great
God, approach thy holy Table, till I have (in thy presence with a true
resentment and entire affection, without hypocrisy, and with an open and free
heart,) confessed my shame, acknowledging thy glory.

Lord, I am oppressed with fear and astonishment, I humble my self at thy feet,
I pour forth (in thy sight) all my offenses which appeal my countenance. I
accuse, I blame and condemn my ingratitude and my failings: I acknowledge, I
am the most infirm, the most abject of all thy creatures; the very scorn of
the earth, and the most vile and detestable of all that the heaven covers. I
have suffered my self to be carried away with the deceitful delusions and
enticements of the world; I am quite overspread with foul and filthy scales,
which ^^^ke me stumble into precipices: and in^^ead that thou have opened my
mouth, to the end I should exalt thee, and have given me the knowledge of thy
truth to declare it on the earth, I am ever backward to that which concern thy
glory, and my salvation.

Lord, thou may dart thy lightning from heaven, thou can consume and
over-whelme me with thy storms: but I am nothing, and in punishing me thou
losest thy labor and thy thunder; thou art the Omnipotent God from all
eternity: and I a frail man, yet the work of thy hands: as thou art powerful
in thy wrath, so art thou Omnipotent in thy clemency. Rend not him then, who is
humbled, I am thine now, thou can have no delight in my Funerals; I am a
great sinner, but thou art yet greater in thy mercies: thou hold the lives
of men in thy hands, it is thy mouth which pronounces their absolution; have
pity then on me, my God: by the infinite number of thy compassions, blot out my
innumerable iniquities, and save by thy grace, him whom thou may damn in thy
justice: deliver him who is ransomed by the precious blood of thy Son, of thy
Son, who all glittering and resplendent with glory has so far humbled
himself, as to be clothed with our flesh, to raise up the mud and refuse of
the earth toward the Throne of thy Grandeur.

Cause Lord, that my Repentance and Confession, may be to thee sweet sacrifices
agreeable and of pleasant odor. I knock at the gate, let it not be closed,
seeing thou art merciful; with thee the word and effect are the same; grant me
pardon, from deserved punishment, and mollify the hardness of my heart, which
is in thy power.

Lord, in times past, thou drewest out, and deliverest thy people from the
fetters of Egypt, thou have divided the Red Sea, and formed a Rampart of waters
against the waters: continue then thy goodness toward thine own.

Deliver me Lord, Deliver me immediately by the merits of thy Son, from the
servitude of mine iniquities, under the bondage whereof, with anguish I emplore
thy succors. Bow down thy greatness over me, display upon my soul the rays
of thy holy Spirit, and enlighten me with the luster of thy divinity; to the
end that I may meditate and fully comprehend, how the body of Jesus Christ my
Savior, is given and broken for thine elect, and his blood spil't on the
Cross, is made mine, by the communion of thy holy Sacrament. I am unable of my
self to raise me up from this miserable earth to a subject so High and
Excellent: But Lord, Thou have cleft the obscurity, thence to draw out light.
Thy divine eye enlightens the darkness, touch my spirit with thy brightness,
as thou did that of Saint Paul; render me incapable and untractable to the
vanities of the World, and clear-sighted in the inestimable treasures of thy
Gospel.

Assure my faith, establish my faith Lord, stay it upon thy promises: fortify
me mightly according to the riches of thy divinity, so that Christ may abide in
me, and that I may comprehend with the Saints his love and greatresse, Ephesians.
3.16.
which passes all understanding. That we (who when enemies) having been
reconciled by the death of the Savior of the World, may now much rather being
justi^ed by his blond; Romans 5.10.
Shall I be preserved from thine ire? Regulate Lord, the disordred affections
and appetites of my heart, mundifie the impure cogitations of my spirit,
cleanse all the pollutions of my lips, and wrench my sins in the blood of thy
Son, to the intent I may present my self pure at thy Table. Grant, that my
understanding may comprehend Thee, that my heart may affect Thee, my soul adore
Thee, and that all my powers and faculties may render and yield thee, the
obedience which is thy due.

Father of glory, grant me the spirit of wisdom, enlighten my eyes, Ephesians. 1.18.
to the end I may apprehend what is the excellency of thy Son, whom thou have
caused to sit at thy right hand, in the he^venly places, and whom thou have
preferred to all principalities and powers, and above every name which is
invoked, not only in this world, but likewise in that which is to come. Give
ear to me, Thou only object of the Angels, through thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, who lives and reigns in unity with Thee, and thy holy Spirit for ever
and ever.

Lord, after having formed the light, after having stretched out the heavens
with thy hands, separated the earth from the flood, and finishest the creation
of such a multitude of stars, of so many creeping things, of such a variety
of Fowls who have a being to thy Glory.

Thou tookest dust, thou embellished it and formed man, subjecting the earth
under his feet, giving him dominion over the fishes of the Sea, and over the
Fowls of the Air. And this man (good God) instead of lifting up (without
ceasing) his vows to thy honor and praise, and to possess with joy eternally
the delights of Eden, has opened his mouth against thee, and contrary to thy
express command and menaces, has tasted the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil; and with his rebellious throat has swallowed at once the Apple
and Death: He has swallowed the leprosy which has corrupted the mass of all
his blood, and the poison which has penetrated through all the members, issues
of his body.

This, Lord, this fountain which has continued corrupt in all it is streams:
this is the gloomy and black cloud, whence distills not one drop not infected.

It Is, Lord, this cursed rebellion which has constrained the heavens, ever
bright and serene before, to conspire and confederate against man, and to pour
forth upon him deluges of blood, and universal scourges to extirpate and
exterminate the Posterity of this Ancestor.

It Is this rebellion which has caused man to totter from his first estate,
rendered him a slave of sin, and a prey of that roaring Lion, who graspeth his
throat with his foot: So soon as the prohibition was made, sin followed: and
by sin, we have all received a Decree of condemnation.

But great God, thou have raised up, and restored thine through thy mercy.

Thou have destroyed that cursed spirit, who would glut himself with the blood
of our entrals: and have born us upon thy wings, as an Eagle his Ayry:

Thou have brought back, and renddred in a flourishing condition our souls,
who were languishing and abased unto death. The deluge of our vices, has drawn
a deluge of plagues upon us, but the deluge of thy Compassions has swallowed
the deluge of these Maledictions.

Thou have cleansed these streams of iniquity in a sorce perpetually flowing
into life.

Thou have healed these leprosies with a vermillion blood, and corrected and
abated the force of these poisons by a heavenly Antidote.

By the offense of one alone, death reigned over men: and by the merit of only
one, men shall reign unto life. The transgression of Adam is fallen upon all
to condemnation: and the justice of Christ justifying is come also upon all to
justification. Many by the disobedience of one alone, Romans 5.17.
were rendered sinners; and by the obedience of one alone, many are rendered
just: To the intent that as sin reigned unto death, grace should (also) reign
unto eternal life.

It Is Lord, that which Thou have so often foretold to our Fathers, by the
mouths of thy Prophets; who have declared on the earth, that thy Son should
bear our sorrows, that he should charge on himself our afflictions, that he
should be pierced for our offenses, and bruised for our iniquities.

Thou have caused all our outrages to fall upon him, and the wounds are come
on him for the Transgressions of thy people: As a Lamb is led to the slaughter,
neither has he opened his lips: Dan. 9.26.
he is set as an oblation for the transgressions of them who have known him, is
cut off, not for himself, but for us.

Oh admirable Architect of the World, who have stretched out the heavens,
sustained the massive foundations of the earth; and commanded the waters of the
Ocean to distill gently through the veins of the Rocks for the nourishment of
men:

Oh holy stream of our felicity, the strength of our Might, that the graces of
thy divine goodness, are singular, and the effect of thy providence marveilous
in the conservation of men, in having prepared for us by thy mercy this
conciliation before the foundation of the World: and from the beginning having
prefigured this sacrifice by the Tree of life in the Terrestrial Paradise,
afterward by the Paschal Lamb, by the Manna, by the loaves of propitiation, by
the bread which the Angel brought to the Prophet Eliah, in the strength whereof
it is said, that he went even unto the Mountain; to have instructed us that so
much blood of Bulls and Goats which was spilt before thee, and the ashes of an
Heifer, wherewith they besprinkled the unclean, were prefigurations of that
juslifying blood, which was requisite to be poured on the earth to blot out our
transgressions.

And lastly Lord, after having often spoken to our Ancestors by thy Prophets,
Heb. 17.
Thou would speak to our fathers face to face by thy Son, who is the
brightness of thy glory; who as the snow tumbling from heaven, and scattering
it self to whiten our plains: so is he descended from on high, to publish
peace from the rising, to the setting of the Sun: and to save those who were
fallen among the precipices, for for the punishment due to their offenses. The
woman the first seduced, sees her self a thousand times happier, she did see
her self a Virgin Mother, containing in her womb the Savior of the World.

Oh happy day, that thou art Remarkable among us, for having first beheld, and
having first caused us to see the well-beloved Son of God, the Father and the
Redeemer of the faithful! And you bright Services, that you are precious,
having given growth to the body, who has suffered for our sins, and who
since is risen with so much glory! And thou earth, thou art happy to have
nourish't within thy bosom, and seen to march upon thy face, the Savior of
the World! The Sages conducted by the Star, hasted to prostrate themselves at
thy feet; thy Angel in giving advice to the Shepherds: and the multitude of the
heavenly Host leaping for joy, lifted up their voices to thy honor, saying,
Glory be to God on High, in Earth peace, good will toward men. Acts 5.3.


Then Lord, he whom thou have raised up by thy right hand, for a Prince and
Savior to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins, appeared in the
flesh, that so the flesh might live, and by his humanity, thy Clemency might
approach us, which before was withdrawn; Thou have sent him as a Bright Sun to
enlighten all the compass of the Earth.

He appeared clothed with humane flesh, but all repleat, and all shining with
Divinity. The Power of His Virtue was manifest to the eyes of all the people.
The most impetuous storms and billows of the Ocean, gave way unto the sole
power of His word. The tempestuous whi^le-whinds which troubled the serenity of
the air, gave truce to their whistlings and roarings, at the only waging of
his hand: and acknowledged that they ought him respect and silence, and that
all things should be prepared to receive His Commands.

Men, captived under the power of the Devil, were enlarged, with the only
glance of His eye: The most inveterate maladies departed at the only touch of
His garment: and the bodies mouldering; under the obscurity of the Coffin, rose
again at his voice in the Tomb.

His life was nothing but an open Book of Doctrine, with a multitude of
miracles and favors toward men; The limits of his Course were so pleasant,
they were so bright, with the beams of his compassion; so glittering with his
triumphs over the enemy of men. The History is therein so rich, that the
excess takes away and obstructs the description. And that the world (as says
his Beloved Apostle) is not sufficient to contain that which might be written.
John. 21.25


Also Lord, He came to stifle (by the impetuosity of his power, and by the
grandeur of his merit) our cursed enemy, and to cut off the stream of the
course of his puissance, flying through the world:

He came as a great Royal Eagle from the height of heaven to descend on the
earth: and in favor of his own to scatter (with the only air of his vigerous
clapping of his wings) all the strength of Satan, unworthy of his encounter.

He came as the Evening, and close of our miseries, and dawning of our
felicity: as the bright Sun of men to comfort and strengthen them by his
wholesome and pleasant influence.

He came as the morning, which chaseth away the night, and advances, declaring
the return of the light: as the holy Columbe of the world, the solid pillar of
the heavens, the lively image of his charity, and the divine footsteps which
gives life. And finally my God, thy Christ our Savior, being upon the point
to die, would that the last act of his life, should be the institution of the
Holy Sacrament of his body, which he celebrated in the company of his Apostles:
declaring unto them, that all they who firmly believe in him, shall have
remission of their sins; in the effusion of this blood, and shall for ever
possess the Kingdom of heaven; and to confer on us an infallible assurance,
he elected (for a seal and witness of his last will,) bread and wine: to the
intent that the faithful (by these signs) should be ascertained of the
treasures which are acquired for them by his bounty.

But my Great God. It Is now that we must commemorate the excellent Sermon made
to the Disciples, for to instruct them and to render them capable of the
participation of this Holy Sacrament.

It Is here expedient to call to mind the words of him, which thou pronounced
with thy voice in the Mountain, in the hearing of Saint Peter, Saint James, and
Saint John, this is my well-beloved Son, hear him; Jon. 6.53.
He then said, Verily, verily, ^^^y unto you, that if you eat not the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink not this blood, you shall have no life in your
selves: he who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has life eternal, and I
will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed: he who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. As the Father, who is living, has sent me, and I live by the
Father: So he who eats me, Shall live also by me. That is the bread which
descended from heaven, not as your fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead: who
eats this bread, shall live for ever. He spoke these things in the Synagogue,
teaching in Capernaum: But knowing that many of his Disciples found this saying
hard, he added, does this offend you? what will you do then if you shall behold
the Son of man astend there, where he was at the beginning? It Is the Spirit
that quickens, the flesh is unprofitable: the words which I speak to you, are
spirit and life. And after he had finished these instructions, he made them
partakers of his Holy Supper, even as he has declared by the hand of his
blessed Apostle.

In the night wherein he was betrayed, He took bread, and having given thanks,
he broke it, and said, take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you, do
this in remembrance of me. Likewise also after Supper, he took the Cup, saying,
this Cup is the New Testament of my blood, do this in remembrance of me. For
how often, and whenever you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup,
you shall show forth my death even until I come.

And in the end Lord, his incomprehensible Charity, and (which exceeds all
admiration) having conducted him to the hour: wherein (by his death,) he would
redeem our lives, he became the saving hand which broke and opposed the blow,
and received the smart of the other members.

And be who was able as a Thunderclap of heaven to overturne under his Tempest
the highest Mountains: who could as a whirle-poole swallow all in an instant
that opposed this power; and as a whirlwind sweep away all that was on the
earth: He said I, who by the force of his Arm with one small motion can
destroy all humane souls, and with one only glance of his Eye, arm a million
of Angels, and overthrow under his feet the heaven and the earth, submitted
himself to the rage and brutishness of his people; adopted above all people,
the firstborn among men: and whom thou defendest as the Apple of thine eye. He
permitted them to extend his members on the Cross, to wash our sins in his
blood, and in that flood which the Iron made to issue from his body.

And thus, great God, Thine only Son gave his life a ransom for us, and
delivered us from the curse of the law, which had so long time held us slaves
to sin.

He offered his body in sacrifice, and by that holy oblation, acquired for us
the gifts and the fullness of his graces wherein the blessed shall eternally
rejoice.

It Is this Christ who is worthy to take the Book of life, Apoc. 5.9.
and to open the seals thereof.

It Is he who is the Lamb, Apoc. 5.12:
who meriteth to receive power, strength, Honor, and Praise.

His death was the sacrifice of sacrifices, the accomplishment and consummation
of all ceremonies, which have been from the beginning of the world.

This is the sacrifice without renewing, whereby the wrath of God is forever
appeased, his justice satisfied, and the transgressions of men effac't.

It Is that bright shining sacrifice in comparison whereof the foregoing were
but obscure shadows.

This is the only sacrifice full of Majesty, which is alone the object of all
sacrifices, offered in time-past by all people adoring the true God. All that
which the oblations of Aaron and of our fathers, have had of Propitiation and
of sweet Odor were anticipated on the fullness of grace, and on the infinite
merit of this sacrifice so often made in all foregoing ages.

This is the eternal sacrifice, filled with lively splendor, which darts his
Rays, and confers his Balm upon his, to render them a sweet Odor before thee
my God.

This is the sacrifice which has placed them on the sacred seat of the Church,
and has carried them into the glorious Temple of the legitimate Spouse of
Christ, all Glittering with Divinity.

It Is my God this sacrifice which has conferred thy love on me, which (without
intermission) I observe to shine in the flames of my own wretchedness, and
has acquired for me the infinite Grandeur of thy compassion, which I have ever
beheld firm in the glances of my extreme afflictions.

Also, my God, there was nothing but the puissant and victorious hand of thy
Son, which could sever the cords and the entangling which held us bound in
the snares of Satan.

There was none but he alone proper for so great an enterprise, He alone who
has drawn us out of the path and slaughter of death, to fill us with Triumphs.

He alone, who is the Phaire and the Lantern who directs us to arive in a
safe harbor, and who has ever his eyes open for our happiness, and watches
over our affictions.

He alone, who is the channel of perpetual sweetness, which uncessantly
distills on them who cast themselves into the Port of thy Clemency.

Great God, The compass of the Universs adores thy Grandeur: but as the glory
of thy chiefest benefits, are perpetually graved in the hearts of thy faithful
ones, in whom (by this holy sacrifice) thou have planted thy victorious
laurels: Also it is requisite that I be the Temple in which for ever there may
be chanting and sounding forth the Hymns of thy Triumphs: and that thou may
be the sole object of my heart, as thou art the cause of my repose: and the end
of my vows, as thou art the Redeemer and Conserver of my being, what more
beautyfull object my God, can I enjoy then for ever to contemplate, that Christ
is the inexpugnable wall and Rampart of my life: and that his charity heated
with his watchfulness over me, causes, (without intermission) to spring in
thy compassions new sprouts of compassion? This is the true Father of men, who
transported with the love of his children, is offered for them in sacrifice,
and has embraced their sorrows, and his death.

Up then, my soul, let thy thoughts be ravished in the contemplation of this
holy light of the world, who shines over the heaven and the earth, and
enlightneth with his flame the gloominesse of our most obscure night.

Up, admire his compassion, adore this Lamb without spot, that holy
Burnt-offering, that eternal high Priest, who has given himself for thee.

Rejoice thou oh my soul, since thy clensing is so perfect and so pure, since
the merit of that death shall carry thee into the heavens.

Thou have not my soul, Heb. 7.
one of those Sacrificers which are subject unto death, made after the law of a
carnal commandment, who have need to offer continual sacrifices: first, for
their own sins, then for those of the people: Thou have one Sovereign high
Priest, made according to the power of an uncorruptible life, and who has one
perpetual oblation, one holy Priest, Innocent, separate from sins, exalted
far above all heavens, who is consecrated for ever, offering himself once, to
obtain an eternal redemption.

The light of the world (my soul) chaseth the night and obscurity far from
thee: but the knowledge of this sacrifice dissipateth all darkness from thy
eyes, and renders thee capable (happily) to finish thy course on earth, and
attain (with joy) an abode in Paradise.

Divine Trinity: the only foundation of salvation, Holy unity of three persons,
in whom consists all perfection, and felicity, whereof my soul can be
rendered capable: Grant me that I may worthily comprehend the majesty of this
sacrifice, and that all the days of my life, I may meditate on its greatness.

Lord, the Lamb is slain from the beginning of the world: and both our fathers
and we our selves have washed in one same blood, and are redeemed by the same
sacrifice.

It Is what the Apostle says, our fathers were all under the cloud, 1 Cor. 10.1.
and have all passed throw the Sea, and were all baptized in Moses, in the
Cloud, and in the Sea, and have all eaten of one and the same spiritual food,
and have all drank of one and the same spiritual cup.

For they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was
Christ.

So, Lord, the Patriarchs, and Israelites, have eaten and drank the same
spiritual substance with us, and have participated as we of the Communion of
the body of the Savior of the world.

The word Prophetic and Apostolic, have the same efficacy: Christ in the one
and the other throw all equal to himself.

Their Sacraments giving them Jesus Christ to come, to assume humane flesh, and
suffer for their sins: and ours give to us the Savior of the world, come,
having taken flesh of the Virgin, endured the Cross, and risen for our
Justification: The Manna and the water signified to them their future
redemption, and the bread and wine signify to us the satisfaction of our
Randsome acquitted by Christ, come, dead, and risen, after such a sort that we
have but one like, and same faith under diverse signs.

Christ the only salvation of the Church, in all its periods, without the law,
under the law, and under Grace.

He is prefigured in all the sacrifices, exhibited in all Sacraments; as well
Old as New, which are (in all times) unprofitable without Christ, which is
himself alone both the foundation and the sustance.

Abraham saw the day of the Lord, and rejoyc't: This great secret was revealed
unto the Prophets who Published it through the world: they were the signs of
salvation to come, Or Host
and of the holy Bread which should be offered up for their sins, and for our
sakes, the great Savior of the world would raise to the heavens (at thy right
hand,) the body which he had taken of the Virgin, instituting the Sacrament of
his body and of his blood: to the intent that That, which was once offered for
the satisfaction of our sins, should continually be honored by a mystery.

Baptism admits us into an alliance with God, instead of ciricumcision: The
holy Supper instead of the Passover, nourishes and entertaineth us.

Baptism, is called Regeneration, that is to say, a new birth. The holy
Supper, The Communion of the body and blood of our Lord, to nourish us to life
eternal. Of Baptism, water is the sign, The blood of Christ the thing
signified: The water which washes the stains of the body; The blood which
cleanses the sins of the soul.

In the holy Supper, the bread and the wine are the signs, The Body and the
blood of Christ, the things signified, and signified most conveniently and
properly, by these signs of bread and wine: for as much as the nourishment of
our souls which is in Christ, could not be better expressed than by that of our
Body, which converteth into their sustance that which they eat and drink.

So in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the bread which is blessed, and which is
broken and given to eat, and the cup which is blessed and given me to drink,
represents to me, The body and blood of Jesus Christ given and shed for me on
the Cross, to me are the sacred Symboles and assured earnests, that I am
received into the communication of his body, and of his blood, which I
spiritually enjoy by Faith, in the Participation of the supper. When I see the
bread broken in the celebration of the supper, I meditate with my self of his
body, which has suffered death on the Cross for the remission of my sins.

When I behold the wine poured into the cup, I call to my remembrance his blood
shed for to acquire (for me) life eternal.

By the receiving the bread and the wine, I enter by faith into a community,
into the society of the body and blood of the Son of God: I draw life, I draw
absolution, and am clothed again with his innocence and with his Justice.

By the vissible receiving (which I perform) of the bread and of the wine, I
am assured, that I am spiritually united to Christ, and made a Citizen of the
Kingdom of heaven, that he has bequeathed me, and possessor of eternal life
which he has given me, and in eating and drinking the bread and the wine at
thy holy Table I am assured my God, that I Participate of the body and of the
blood of thy Son, which I truly receive by faith, and by which I participate
of the Treasures and Heritage which he has acquired by his death, and which he
has bestowed on his faithful servants.

When I receive the bread and the wine, I receive not only the Elements which
are the figures and sacred signs of his body and of his blood, but I receive by
faith and in spirit the things themselves which are signified, and represented.
Not that the bread and the wine of the Eucharist communicate to me his body and
blood: but thy goodness, my God, Thy truth, Thy majesty, Thy virtue and the
efficacy of thy holy Spirit, communicate and reach forth this body and blood to
my understanding and my soul to be spiritually eaten and drank by faith: The
bread and wine serving to this purpose, being sacred signs of his Body and of
his blood, which should be eaten by the operation of his holy Spirit, without
understanding any thing therein of sensual, any thing corporeal,
any thing carnal; and without searching here below, and in our corporal mouths.

His true body, with it is proper essentials, with it is inseparable accidents,
with it is quantity and dimentions, which is ascended to the heavens, and set at
the right hand of God, where it is requisite that the heavens contain him even
until the restoration of all things.

Thus Lord, I seek the body of Christ in heaven, Acts 3.21.
by faith I celebrate in the holy Supper the memory of his Death and of his
Passion: I declare it, I esteem it, and magnify it even until he come, and I
receive it not with a carnal mouth and corporal throat, but after a Divine
manner, Sacramentally, under a signifficant mystery, with the mouth of my
heart, and spiritually by faith.

By faith, which is the substance of things hoped for: By faith, whereby I
really embrace his Body and blood, and which bring to pass, that in the holy
Eucharist I am made partaker of it.

By faith, which is the vessel, and the hand whereby I receive thy Graces.

And, as Lord, it is by faith that the Lamb was slain from the beginning of the
world: it is by faith that Abraham saw the day of the Lord, it is by faith that
the Galatians have had Christ crucified before their eyes; It Is by faith that
the Gospel gives me at this present eternal life.

Also Lord, it is by faith, that in the celebration of thy holy Supper His body
and his blood are present and subsistent in my heart, in my spirit, and in my
soul.

It Is by faith, that I embrace his body, and suck his blood which distilleth
from his wounds: And by means of this Sacramental eating and feeding on the
body of the Savior of the world, and this spiritual drinking of his blood, I
am made bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, I am incorporated in him. I draw
(by faith) eternal life from his flesh broken for me, and from his blood shed
for me: I live of Christ, and in Christ, I live of his Justice, instead that I
should dye of my sin: I am justified by him, sanctified in him, to be
eniivened and glorified in him.

By this holy Sacrament, I am also admonished of my duty toward my Neighbor,
in regard as we are ransomed with the same blood, made members of the same
body, and Dependants of one and the same Head: and consequently, one among our
selves and by the Commandment of God, and natural duty.

We all draw life from one and the same death; nourishment from one and the
same food, and the self same cup.

Up then my soul, it is here where thou oughts to Anchor and fix thy
cogitations, stay thy course, and cast thy eyes upon the love of thy God. It Is
here that thou ought to supplicate that Divine and heavenly heart, who only
bestows motion upon men.

That only pulse and life of thy being. It Is the only base, whereon thou
foundest thy hope, to inspire in thee the ardent flames of his Spirit, and turn
into thy heart, the generous boylings of zeal, heat and ardour toward him; to
the intent that thou may be a worthy partaker of that holy Sacrament, which
is the most singular consolation, the most effectual remedy, and greatest gift
which he has communicated to his upon the earth.

It Is the entyre Sum and Sovereign abridgment of his benefits, it is the
certain token of his infinite love, the true treasure of his bounty.

Lord, Ephesians. 1.7.
thou have ransomed me by the blood of thy Son, according to the rickes of
thy grace, which thou causest plentifully to abound over me. Instructing me in
the secret of thy pleasure.

Thou have informed me, that it is the bread of life, by the which my soul is
sustained: That it is the true Vine, whereof I am a branch. The gate of Honor,
and the rich assent which conducts me to the mount of Glory.

Thou have called me to the communication of his body, Have applied his merits
to me, made me his Co-heritor, partaker of his Riches, enjoying his celestial
heritage.

In time-past I was not of thy people, but now am I of the chosen generation,
of the Royal Priesthood, of the holy Nation, of thy purchased people: To the
intent I should set forth and magnify thy grace and virtue, my God, who have
called me out of darkness into thy merveilous light.

Thy Son is my only sacrifice, my only oblation, my only Holocost, by the
virtue and merit whereof, the heavens and all the treasures of heaven are open
to me.

It Is the only remedy of my sin, the only sponge capable to efface my crimes.

It Is the Sanctuary, the Assillum of my salvation, my heritage, the joy and the
Divine chain sufficient to raise me from these miserable places.

It Is the tongue of succor, who undertaketh my defense, It Is the sacred Anchor
which stays my vessel, and secureth it from shipwreck, and the prosperous
Gale, which freeth and delivers me from the depths, and Gulfes of the world.

If the food, Lord, which will sustain me but one day, obliges me to praise
thy Fatherly goodness, how much more ought to be excited and enflamed my
Devoyre to render thee thanks for the bread of life, and for this spiritual
wine, which gives me an eternal Paradise, which returns me from death to
life, which gives me so perfect a recovery, that there remains no scar in my
ulcers: which conducts me unto an estate, wherein I shall not more suffer the
temptations and approaches of sin: where I shall be no more subject to
change, where I shall be a Citizen of the Kingdom of heaven? I prostrate my
self (then) before thee my God, who art my Judge, my Creator and Redeemer all
in one: give me I beseech thee both heart and lips, and that I may adore thee
with all the affections, and all the faculties of my soul.

Drive away my disobedient humors, fill me with true zeal, and with sincere
intentions to thy service: and scatter far from me these desires of the world,
who entangle, themselves in my cogitations, and thwart my holy resolution.

I am happy my God, Isa. 22.7.
to enjoy that which so many Kings, Nahum 1.15.
and so many Prophets desired to behold: I am happy to possess that holy
Heritage, which they having but obscurely seen and saluted by faith, they have
cried out with vehement desire, Romans 10.^.15.5
Oh how beautiful are the feet of those who preach the Ghospel! I am not Lord,
in the extremity of the poor Paraletick who attended so many years to have the
first place in the Bath troubled by thy Angel: I receive immediately my
recovery of the blood of my Savior, and there is no need that one, (more sound
than my self) take me in his arms to embrace and carry me into the water. For
the Faith which thou have given me, lifts me up even unto heaven; She thither
conducts my soul, which washes her self in this precious blood, and comes
forth clean and white.

I sin continually, and have cause of humiliation, and to dread and apprehend
Death and Hell, and I am ever cheered with hope by the memory of that Eternal
Sacrifice.

But my God, make me so perfect that I receive not thy Manna unworthily, that I
take it not in contempt of thy Word and thy glory, to be punished in thy wrath,
as he who was devoured of a Lion, having (contrary to thy command) eaten bread
in the house of the false Prophet: to be punished, as he, who was bound and
cast into darkness, inasmuch as he came to the marriage without being clothed
with a Wedding garment.

Lord, I know that it is recorded in the Gospel, that who so eats of this
bread, and drinks of this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of Jesus Christ thy Son.

But, my God Thou art Wonderful in thy mercies. Thou rejectest no man, Thou
abhorrest not the Thief who confessed thee, nor the sinner who wept, nor the
Canaanite who accused her self, Mary Magdalen.
nor the Disciple who denied Jesus, nor even they themselves who persecuted
thee, insomuch as they repented.

And I Lord, I confess my sins, I condemn them, I accuse my self, I beg thy
pardon, I entreat thee to behold thy goodness, not my demerit.

Lord, Thou have vanquished death, thou have raised my soul from the grave,
thou have drawn me out of the pit, thou have opened to me the gates of eternal
life.

Supply then my defaults with thy blessings, and grant me that in thy Temple,
in the Assembly of thy faithful ones, I may worthily receive with faith, this
heavenly food, and this spiritual drink: and that I take (with zeal and
reverence) the bread and wine which are presented to me, by him who has the
honor to preach thy Word, and whose mouth is the breast of thy Church.

A Thanksgiving after the receiving of the Sacrament.
My Soul bless the Lord, who daily fills and loadeth thee with his
treasures: Bless God, who causes the sweet dew of his Clemency to distill on
thee.

My Soul bless the Savior of the World, who has loved us, who has washed
our sins in his blood, who has made us Kings and Priests to God his Father.

Blessed be the Lamb who sits upon the Throne, Apoc. 5: 13:
to whom shall resound praises for ever under the Vaults of heaven, and his
Sacred Name shall be Celebrated and Magnified from age to age.

Oh my glorious God, how much satisfaction do I receive, in casting and
overthrowing my self at thy feet, how happy am I to approach thy holy Table!

It Is thou oh my God, who have tamed the Hidra of my miseries, who have
preserved me from the devouring knives of the Devil, who have succored me in
my bloody agony, who have recented my afflictions, seeing me exposed to the
Savageness of the infernal Tigers, who had reduced me to the cruel darts of
death; I was buried in despair and in the grave swallowed and overwhelmed in
the jaws of a miserable servitude, overtaken with the storm of so many
misfortunes.

But my God, by thy singular compassion, (though I bedewed not my face with
tears, nor filled the air with my complaints:) Thou have restored me to my
first condition, thou have imbellish't me with-the splendor of the graces of
thy countenance, and pollish't me with the first luster of my natural beauty; I
was overwhelmed under my proper ruin, I was entombed in the gulf di gged with
my own hands, I had cast my self within the horrible Den of Satan; but thou
have restored me, thou have lifted me up, and delivered me from my extremities.

I was captive, and now the gate of liberty is open to me: my vessel was on
every side battered with the Tempest: It was ready to split it self against the
bancks, and now saileth gloriously on the water, and cuts and divides the
waves, driven by a prosperous gale.

I was the prey of Satan, and now triumph (through thy mercies) above all his
temptations, above all his ambushes and all his powers, I cry out now Lord with
Simeon, let thy servant depart in peace, according to thy Word, for mine eyes
have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before all men, to be the
enlightening of all Nations, and glory of thy people Israel.

Lord, I render thee such thanks as I am able, not such as I ought; I am
obliged to magnify thy Name for ever, with a thousand sacrifices of praise,
to humble my self (all contrite) at thy feet to inflame my heart with
repentance, and sacrifice the ashes to thee. Thou have cleansed me, washed me
from my offenses, made me approach thy holy Table, and partaker of thy merits;
there remains nothing after this Sacrament, but to be united to thy glory.

Grant me, Lord, that I may submit to thy pleasure the remainder of my days.

Grant me repentance of my offenses, not for a day, but which may last even
unto my Sepulcher: that I may continually address my vows to thee, that I may
exalt thee without ceasing, and that (for ever) I may be at thy feet to do thee
homage as my God, my Sovereign, and my Redeemer.

Grant me, Lord, that I may be attentive to the reading of thy holy Scriptures,
to the end that the sharp Sword of thy Word, may sever and reverse the deepest
and profoundest roots of my infidelity: and that the divine light of thy
Gospel, which has enlightened thy Church from the Apostles even to this day,
may dissipate the thick darkness which overwhelmes me.

Grant me that I may serve thee in holiness and righteousness; that I may
furnish my memory with the beauty of thy divine power: enlighten the
gloominesse and obscurity which environes me, prepare my feet to the path of
peace; and my mouth to pronounce thy praise: and permit not that I be surpised
with any evil slumbers, and that I sleep not unto death.

Raise up my Soul Lord (by the fervor of devotion to a constant meditation) on
heavenly things: conserve me as he whose name is written in thy book of life.:
as he, who is ransomed with the blood of the Savior of the World, is destined
to be a vessel of honor in thine house.

Unite my spirit (by continual meditations) to them of thine elect, to the
intent that being endowed with thy graces, I may serve thee for a pleasant
habitation, as a fair Jerusalem.

In Conclusion Lord, to thee I recommend my Soul and my Body, my Councels and
Cogitations, my Words and Actions, the conduct of all my Ways, the Course and
End of my life.

A Discourse of Afflictions and Martyrdom.
THe Children of God are marked with a different Character, from the rest of
the Citizens of the Earth. God has assigned them for portion here below,
Poverty, Ignominy, the loss of kindred, maladies, and the most insufferable
kinds of deaths; but happy are these afflictions tending to salvation: blessed
these chastisements, which are to correct, not to destroy.

Praised be God who (by these strokes) prevents the celerity of our gangrenes,
who has recourse to absitions to preserve our lives, and applies the lance to
the inflammations of our ulcers, until the venom ceases to prevail.

Those whom he corrects not, are such whom he disdaines to amend, those are the
children of the World, who have their Paradise on earth, not in heaven.

Their wealth often exceeds their wishes, their honor surmounts their desires:
but the season of their delight fades in an instant, and that of their calamity
is eternal.

The Fatherly hand afflicts not them daily, they are only buffetted by the
enemy of men, which comes too late, and in recompense he tormenteth them for
ever.

Let us (then) call to mind that it is foretold in the Gospel, that we are
destined to suffer griefs, to support outrages, and be cut off from the world:
and that we are commanded to comfort our selves in these tribulations, and to
skip for joy in the midst of our torments, for as much as our reward is great in
heaven.

If we suffer our selves to be transported by heaviness beyond measure, it is
to be suspected that afflictions will overcome us, and give us over to despair,
as unworthy the consolations, which are presented to us by the hand of God, and
of the certain promises, which he has left us by writing in his Word.

Let us raise up our souls (then) above all the things of this World.

Direct our cogitations to remember the state of our lives, and on the remedies
which God has bestowed on us to solace our sorrows and calamities: of a
truth, our prosperity, and the sweetness of content ordinarily passes in a
little space, and gives place to afflictions, who march on with a hideous and
frightful visage.

Our life is nothing but a motion, if one day be pleasant, another renders it
self unsupportable: and that we enjoy of content, never continues constant.

But since this is the condition, in which it pleases God we should live, we
must not add our bloody hands to tear our wounds, and become unjust in respect
of what remains, for the regreat of what we have lost.

It Is folly to take on ones self the punishment of his infelicity, to stay upon
the part offended, and to look upon the worst side of our lives.

Let Us not (then) more imbitter our evils by our impatience, neither
(hereafter) render our green wounds and emotions, mortal strokes, and
incurable ulcers.

Let Us cast behind us that pusilanimity, which ever puts us to flight, causing
us to cast forth cries equal to the measure that the Ocean is irritated and
raised up against us, and hinders us from sustaining the storm without being
appalled.

Let Us fortify our hearts, let us fill them with assurance, to the intent that
contemplating with a confident brow the miseries of the world, not to apprehend
their approach, to sustain them with a courageous aspect, and encounter them
with valor.

Let Us approach afflictions to understand them, and (by the way) resolve our
selves to constancy. The Soldier is unworthy of that name, who trembles so
soon as he beholds an enemy, and persuades himself that already their Sword is
at his throat: and he is marveilous feeble, who is afraid at the only
appearance of afflictions. Their view cannot offend us, and their endeavors
(if we please) may be rendered successelesse.

Why (then) make we any difficulty to enter into the lists against them; since
their wounds ought to harden us, constantly to suffer their assaults? Those who
are nourisht in the shade, dread the ardure of the Sun, and not those that are
accustomed to it.

Children are apprehensive, and fear to behold their blood, and not old
Soldiers, who have often seen it, as it were continually to distill, and flow
from their wounds.

Few new afflictions can present themselves, we already have beheld and
sustained the most of them: if they be great and confiderable, the more danger
and peril, the more glory.

What delight to rend off the scales which would form themselves against the
brightness of our eyes? what satisfaction to prevent those discords, which
would trouble our harmony?

Up then, let us learn to accustom our selves to all diversity and inequality
of life, and to receive every thing of the saving hand of God.

And as the Superior part of the air, which is nearest to the heavens, is
never darkened with clouds, nor agitated with thunders: so our souls, (ever
elevated above these passions,) should never be shamefully overturned under
griefs and sadness, but so much as is necessary to bring her to repentance.

Let us not precipitate our selves desperately as mad men, after our
affections: enduring (with all our heart) the adversity of the world, ever
calling to mind, that as the divine benedictions, which we shall one day enjoy,
are settled in a continued and happy rank, so (also) these mortal things are
tossed by an infinite number of blustres, and totter and incline sometimes to
one side, sometimes to another.

It is familiar in the crowd and throng of a battle, to take ones fortune; upon
the Ocean, to be beaten with storms, upon the earth with diverse afflictions.

The Pilate, for having been preserved from so many tempests, cannot longer
dread Shipwreck.

The Soldier for the frequency and assiduity of peril contemns danger: The
infinite number of afflictions should instruct us not to esteem them as
considerable.

Our life is no other than a continual war-fare: if sometimes we are free from
heaviness, it is nothing but a short truce with the world; or rather a
suspension of arms, and no absolute, no entire peace.

If the Sun shines bright, a sudden storm (in an instant) chaseth away the
serenity of the air, and fills all with darkness: if we behold a glimpse of
light, we are again plunged presently into a more close prison.

War interrupts peace, sickness, health, death, the sweetness of
conversation. Pleasure and sorrow are of near assinity, and ever entertain each
other. Such is the condition of men, against which plaints are unprofitable:
Such it was to those in ages past, and so shall it be to them in time to come.

The remedy is, that we serve our selves of these changes as Musicians of
Tones, flat, sharp and diverse. It Is necessary that we learn to conduct our
vessel; not only in calm, still waters, but also in the high going and rough
billows.

Contrary winds do not hinder that we aid our selves by following the North, if
so be we hoyse and trim our sails as we ought.

The bitterness of griefs are sweetened by remedies, the nettles do not sting,
when we press them very hard, nor afflictions when we tread on their throat.

If they made choice of persons, if in passing by some, they spared them
altogether, their inequality would be more insupportable: but the bullet is
blind, it pierces as soon the Captain as the Soldier: The feavour is deaf, it
retires not sooner for the plaints of the greatest, than the meanest: The heat
of the Sun scorches without distinction all those who are in the Plain: The
cold as easily penetrates the Velvets as the Shagges; and death overturnes
every one without excepting any, to the intent that the equality of each ones
necessary destiny, should serve for a general consolation.

But if it appears to us, that we behold some who are ever at their ease, who
live and flourish in great plenty of all things, without encountering any
affliction: assuredly we abuse our selves; it is the luster of their habits,
which dasles us, their Port and Fashion, which deceives us: we see not with
what a multitude of agitations their souls are tormented, what perturbations,
and what desires vex their spirits, putting them into inquietude, and
interrupting their repose: we see not their Catarrs, their issues, and the
cries they send forth in the dolor of their stone and gout: the condition of
their spirit, and disposition of their Bodies is unknown to us.

They go not forth of their houses but in health, they show not themselves in
public, but with a cheareful countenance, whereas often their hearts are
heavy, and that is it which deceives us; and then, what know we what
afflictions they have had heretofore, what distempers, then when we were in
health: what heaviness at such time, when we were in delight? what understand
we what mischiefs hang over their heads, ready to overcome and destroy them? An
Ague is ready, a pestilent air, a weakness, a fall, the treachery of an
enemy: And if we be not satisfied with so many Considerations, let us cast down
our sight, and beholding so many poor people afflicted of all sorts, seeing the
beggar often in despair, for default of finding a morsel of brown bread.

Behold them tormented with a feavour, impaired, languishing; laid overturned
on the pavement: observe the greatest consolation which they receive from our
charity, they are dragged to a hideous place filled with wretches: there they
understand nothing but cries, but plaints, but groans, but gaspings after
death: oft-times the dead remaining long among them, before they be enterred:
and thus in these continued miseries, they finish their lives.

Behold on the other side, a poor father sick, stretched out upon the straw, to
whom bread is wanting when his labor fails him, having five or six small
children lying about him, crying for hunger.

Behold one Bed-ridden of the Palsy these four years, continually pierced
through with heaviness, constantly gasping after death: if we be so
mischievous to receive any consolation from the harms of another, agreeable to
our sorrows: It Is most facile for us (by this communion of miseries) to
assuage our own, and to mitigate our affliction; by the multitude of other
afflicted ones, which are so innumerable.

But let us return to our selves, what advantage have we by so many plaints? do
our afflictions retire for our cries?
no, they never swerve out of their way.

Give them passage then, and cross their humor, to the intent they should not
abide in our Company.

If by lamentations we think to chase away our evils; If by tears we hope to
lift up the Tombs, and renew and enlighten again the extinguished lives of our
friends: I should be of opinion to enforce our selves to distill out all we
have of oysture.

But if our lamentations bring them no advantage, if that our regreates are not
so much as understood by them, if the marble that presses them, hears not
our groans, to what end are so many unprofitable sighths, so many rages, so
many faintings to no effect?

If it be in regard of them, it is folly, if for our own, do we love our ease so
much, then as to cruciate our selves for the loss of one contentment, of one
support, or a little wealth?

If we lament, for that it is an affliction, consider our misery, observe how
one stroke seconds another: and how that if for every occasion we will afflict
our selves,
tears will fail us sooner, than a ground for lamentation.

It Is a miserable remedy to go about to drive away one heaviness with another,
it is the way to pass away our life in continual tears and sadness, and not
to manifest the grandeur of our courage, and generosity of our souls.

Who is more praiseworthy, or he who being surpised and overtaken by an
affliction, does by his impatience aggrevate and imbitter his misfortune, and
gives himself to despair? or rather he, who yields not to it is assaults, and
thereby abates and frustrates the force of adversity by an invincible heart,
and courageously bears away the victory?

The good disposition of our spirits, should not change as that of our bodies,
according to Climates and Moons.

This World, which beholds our persons may afflict them, but not our souls,
which should (continually) reside in the hand of God; what though our bodies
are sometimes languishing, wasting and consuming, we are nevertheless sound in
our better parts, to wit, our souls, seeing we fill them with assurance.

And why bemoan we our selves for so many diseases? understand we not that our
bodies are no other than receptacles of corruption, and that many of them are
hereditary, and left us as a sad patrimony? If we consider of how many diverse
parts our bodies are composed and framed, to how many several accidents each is
subject, and that the least change which causes discord, is sufficient to cast
us into a feavour; naught remains, but to admire, how we are sometimes so long
without pain. Our maladies are pleasant, seeing they so faithfully divide the
time with health: and then not seldom their anguish makes us relish the
pleasure of a speedy amendment.

The Sun seems more bright after darkness, rest more welcome after travel,
health more lovely after distempers.

Wherefore repine we at our betters? Know we not that the Valleys are less
subject to storms than the lofty Mountains? That a shrub is more rarely
thunderstruck than an high towering oak, which seems to despise the earth?
That the highest and straitest trees, are not the best? that the Popplers and
Sallowes receive (ungratefully) their nourishment, and (contrarily) that the
Vine bowed on the earth, is fruitful? how many great ones from the height of
their dignity, are tumbled among the multitude? How many Kings have beheld
their Scepters broken betwixt their hands, and their Crowns shivered in diverse
parts? And if our wealth be taken from us, why lavish we so many sighths for
things so casual? wherefore do we throw away our contentment after our riches?
Have not so many presidents that we have observed, admonis^^ us, that all
worldly wealth is set on slippery places, and that that which shines brightest
(...) us, The (...)
may be obscured in a mo^^^^? It Is not expedient that they be to joined and
glued to us, that we cannot part with them, without rending away something of
our own.

If we live not so gloriously, we live nevertheless not less happily.

That man disburses very much to fill his belly, and then awakens sluggish by
his unsavory stomach; and we, less satisfies us to sustain our lives: and at
worst, if one must lose all, is it not better to die for hunger without so much
fear, and such a deal of vexation, than in heaviness and torment of spirit?

The poor man, whom necessity compels to labor, (who gains not his living but
by his fingers ends) is all day attentive at his business, without any
passion: he eats his bread in quiet, he sleeps all night (without care)
until the morning wakens him to his work: very many of the most wealthy, pass
not their time so pleasantly, many prove this truth. Wealth and rest
unwillingly cohabit.


And then would we be ever in our spring? Is it not said that the rain follows
the heat, and ice moisture? who is that Soldier who would live concealed in
his Tent, the general who continues in his Chair with his hands on the Carpet
without presenting himself in the Field of Battle? Great men are well-pleased
(sometimes) to behold themselves in pain, virtue shines brightest among perils,
she is greedy of labor, knowing that her sufferings are a considerable part of
her glory.

We are obliged to please our selves sometimes in discovering our constancy in
afflictions: it is no small honor, when we cannot shun a mischief, to resolve
our selves to a courageous sufferance.

Go to then, all ye who bear the mark of God in your foreheads, resolve your
selves with me, let us unite in this Combat, arming our tender breasts, with
virtue, and magnanimity, let us fall on with fierceness, let us advance
(continually) to the prize against these afflictions: and so soon as we
perceive them appear, let us improve our courage by the cry and the course: even
as the Rock immovably sustaineth the waves and assaults of the enraged Sea; in
like sort let us dispose and contrive (...) that (...) souls continue firm and
constant against the threats and strokes of the world: even as the diamond in
the midst of ordure casts forth a more bright luster of his beauty: even so
(amongst afflictions) let us bear a more serene visage and smiling countenance,
to make a more eminent virtue appear.

A few Plancks joined together, serve us to sail down rivers, to pass the
Seas, and tame their most violent and angry tides and waves without
apprehension of Shipwreck.

Constancy, Magnanimity, Patience, and all these shining virtues united
together will assist us to pass athwart all the adversity of the world,
without feeling their assaults, and with an immovable Courage.

Let Us sustain our selves fixed betwixt public and private Desolations: If we
cannot Go, let us Crawle.

Men may (without difficulty) style a man wretched, but it is at his liberty
whether he will be so.


We are summoned to encounter afflictions which seem formidable; but let us
furnish our selves with considerable reasons to enkindle an heat in the
chillest frosts of the hearts of the most timorous.

Let Us lay hold on weapons, which not only wound these afflictions, but
destroy and kill them.

Let Us not only overturn them one by one, but execute them altogether, that
they may fall upon the place.

What if the enraged storms unite in one? what if they be assisted by the tide
of the Sea, and if they drive a ship with their most vigerous and impetuous
force, the Remora nevertheless (in fixing himself, and thrusting into the
plancks) stops it quite short: in like sort, some great adversity, some
extreme affliction which may overtake us, we are able to bear and sustain it
with patience, and take it in good part, remembering with our selves, that it
falls from on high, and from that divine providence who governs and rules all
things of (...) ^^vine (...) who (...) our (...), who (...) Angels about us, to
prevent that none do us the least violence, exceeding that he has ordained.

It Is the great King who with one glance of an eye can overturn this vast
Globe, who causes his showers to distill upon us.

It Is his puissant Arm, who has framed this al, whence his thunder is shot.

It Is that great Pilate at whose voice the Sea yields such ready obedience,
who causes us to be weather-beaten by it is storms.

We fly in vain, when his hand pursues us: his voice echoes in our ears
throughout the world: the blast of his mouth could shatter us even to the most
obscure and profound caverns of the earth: he corrects us when he pleases: he
has none other law but that of his pleasure; he conducts us through the Plains
and through the Mountains, by the spring, and by the winter, in prosperity and
in afflictions.

We must esteem the night as well as the day, the evening as the morning: we
must be satisfied with the (...) communicates (...) would for himself to
undertake a great enterprise, endangers himself to lose his sight therewith: We
must submit to the pleasure of God who governs all this Universs by his
providence.

When it so pleases him, He converteth (in a moment) the miseries of his into
rejoycings: He drowneth their afflictions under the streams of Benedictions,
he sustaineth them when ready to fall, and confirms them, that their succoures
and deliverance comes from his hand: He restores them when abased: He remedies
their distempers without disturbing himself:
and even he heals the wound he has made: and after cauterising and searing,
he applies Beninge and gentle Fomentations, and touches them with a most
delicate and tender hand.

And (usually) then,
when all humane help fails and forsakes us, it is then, that he is nearest to
his own.

Let Us remit and cast our selves then on his holy Providence, rejoicing before
him, leaping for joy, elevating our eyes to heaven.

He who has fixed the Sun and stars in heaven, He who has preserved his holy
Arc from the surges, and from the Tempest, He who has caused it to snow a
savoury Manna upon his people, and has caused fountains to flow-forth of
Rocks: To him who needs no Base for a foundation, who builds on the vacuum,
as on the fullness, on naught, as on matter:
He who electeth (when it pleases him) the most contemptible raising them out
of obscurity, and placing them upon the most Eminent dignities; is he not more
than sufficient to cause the Lillies to flourish under the Scepter of his
Anointed, Flower Deluce.
and under the air of a pleasant and gentle peace, without ever being faded by
a storm? Can he not effect it that our fields should answer our desires, That
our good fortune should surmount and exceed our expectations, that our days
should flourish in health and honor, and that we should dye heavy and satiated
with old age? Proceeds it not from him who causes that the earth is not yet
tired with so many Births and Productions, and that (of his own liberality) she
daily furnishes us with necessary nourishment: who causes that the floods
descend drop, by drop: that the Sun brings back the spring, and gives
carnation to the Roses, the Purple to the Gilly-flowers, Perfumes sents and
odours to so many several various Plants? what though the enemies of the Gospel
confederate against us, if they assemble together, if they levy war against
the Church: have we cause of terror, being covered under the Banner of the
great God, loaded with victory, who enjoys the principal point, and sovereign
period of the glory? of the great God, who produces so much splendor from the
Armies of his children? who causes the Cities to open their gates at the only
approach of their Host, that the mountains yield and bow under the burden of
their forces, who overturnes the most powerful armies, by the keen edge of
their sword, who paveth the earth with the bodies of their enemies, cementing
their Plains with their blood, and furnishes them with such a multitude of
Tropheys upon Tropheys, and so many diverse and sundry subjects to enrich
everlasting Histories; Have we not so much spirit to consider on these
benefits? Are we not capable to behold so many benedictions, The continuance,
the grandeur, the number takes that the admiration from us? He Is as Puissant
now as ever, to warrant us, and to settle and assure the victory on our
standards, and the honor and glory on our brows.

He Is the same who appeared to Moses in a burning flame, Exodus 3.
and declared that he had heard the affliction of his people, that he had heard
their cries, and understood their sorrows, that he would deliver them out of
the hands of the Egyptians, and conduct them into a land flowing with milk and
honey.

It Is the very same who effected so many Miracles (by the hand of Moses) in the
presence of hard-hearted Pharaoh: Exodus 13.21.
It Is the same eternal who marched by day before his poople in a Pillar of a
cloud, to conduct them in the way, Exodus 14.
and by night in a Pillar of fire to give them light. It Is the same who by an
East wind clave the red sea, piling up the waters to make way for Israel, and
who (soon aftar) overwhelmed in the Billows, Pharaoh and his Armey. It Is he,
who caused that the enterprises of Gideon were numberless: Joshua 12.
who made Joshua to Triumph over thirty one Kings, who stayed (in favor of
his Battles) the Sun in the midst of his course, and made him continue
immovable for a long space of time, whilst that he overturned his enemies (by
millions) on the dust.

It Is he who confirmed Israel flying before the Philistine, before that great
Thunderbolt of war, causing that the fury of a stone, parting from the hand of
a Shepherd, should plant it self in the midst of his forehead.

It Is the same who filled Hester with courage against Haman, who caused that
Baruch, that Sampson, that Jephta, that David, that Samuel, and so many
Prophets have combated Kingdoms, have closed the throats of Lions, have
repelled the force of fire, have escaped the devouring sword, have showed
themselves mighty in Battle, and turned their enemies to flight.

But these are favors which flow from his hand when it pleases him, and then
only when he knows it expedient for his glory.

In the interim we are obliged to rest satisfied with our condition, in the
which it pleases him we should live,
and receive those corrections which he gives us, to the intent to amend us:
who opposes himself against God, to repine and bemoan himself, shall incur
the danger (instead of temporary adversity,) to suffer eternal torments.

The afflictions which overtake us, are ordained by solemn Decrees; whereto we
ought to acquiesse and submit; by Ordinances, against which it is not permitted
we open our mouths.

The Murmur against Decrees so holy, is punished as the entyre voice, the Will,
as the Effect.

Moreover, these are afflictions tending to our health. Ruins, to cause us
turn to our wealth, Poverty, to make us regard our riches.

The clattering of his Thunder falls to awaken us, his corrections to put us
upon repentance, These chastisements, to force from our hearts sigths and
repentance.

These are the effects of the love of the Creator, testimonies, that he ever
has an eye over his work-manship, and that he will make them understand their
errors.

The Sovereign Law of a King, is the safety of his People, of God the safety
of his own, to make them ever tend to that point, he applies all manner of
remedies: observing them too intent on the world, he adds to the loss of
their substance, the loss of their kindred, and by these torments he awakneth
their zeal, which slumber'd in a peaceable time: He disturbeth their ease, to
preserve their ardure from rusting, He imployeth the Fan to cleanse his
Grain, Vinegar to efface the aines.

He is the Physician, who labors for health, not for pleasure, who would
heal the distemper, not sooth and flatter it, who ordains rather Ruburb than
Sugar, who uses scalding and sharp medicines, but very healthful: we must not
expect from him Flowers, Straw-berries and Cream: but bitter roots, nautious
Pills, and Potions black and troubled.

He extracts out of our sufferings, our prosperity, and that which seems to
us, to tend to our destruction, he converts to what makes for our safety: He
conserves us by strict dyets, and extreme thirst, and severs our Rotten
members which cannot be continued without the desolution of the whole Body.

But then when our welfare requires that so it must be, it is better to perish
in part, then entyrely, to lose one, than both our eyes: of't-times a member
spared, costs the life.

If we be always heated with Prosperity, if we ever live at our ease, what a
multitude of designs would take up our thoughts and interpose that we lift not
up our souls to that which is on high? with how little difficulty will we
permit our selves to slip into vices, and to be partakers of all the vanities
of the word? That little interval we have enjoyed, gives us full assurance, the
example of very many removes all doubt.

We are slothful to our safety, we must be pressed to it, we are slack, and
advance not but by constraint.

The Eagle hovers round about her young, to teach them to raise themselves from
the earth, he lets some days pass without feeding them, to the intent that
hunger may compel them to seek out their food: and for the utmost remedy: He
beats them, he corrects their sloth with strokes both with his beak and wings.

Even so the great God delivers his Ordinances into our hands, to observe them,
He commands us to obey them, he summons, he threatens us: and in conclusion
when bare words makes no impression in our hardened hearts, He puts us forward,
and constraines us through sundry afflictions. He deals by us, as a Father who
hastily snatches the Knife out of the hand of his child, fearing he should
hurt himself, and forbeares not for his crying: As the Father who retyres his
son from the brinck of the River, and in withdrawing him, corrects him, to
the end he should not return again; He chastises us, to the intent we should
resent our offenses: he leads us off, beating us, and ever adds some surcharge
to our afflictions, thereby to humble us.

During our prosperity we pride our selves, beholding every thing with a
scorneful eye, we value none but our selves, and think not of ought but our
content and felicity.

And as bodies that are fatted, languish under their proper weight, and stoop
beneath the burden and charge of themselves: in like manner, our overmuch and
continual repose drowns us in pleasures, and (lessons in delights) the first
glances men observe to blaze of our zeal and ardure to pursue the path of the
children of God.

The skilful Physician sometimes breaths a vein, not for present necessity,
but to prevent and remove the cause of that malady he judges approaching: In
like manner, God afflicts us to turn us from vices, which we are ready to
embrace.

And so he prunes off many branches of a plant, to the intent it may become
more fruitful: we undergo afflictions, to the intent we may fructify the more;
and that we may increase our zeal.

That we may preserve our selves dextrous and strong, we accustom our selves
to Justs and Turneys, we counterfeit war in a full and absolute peace: and to
preserve our souls ever amiable, always healthy, do we refuse adversity,
afflictions, and trials? we conceive not of our felicity, but by the same
measure that we recent evil,
we joy not in heaven, but so far as earth torments us, we embrace not God, but
in the same degree that men afflict us.

Men distinguish the children of God by their scars, their songs are sighths:
their garments sable, mourning and gloomy; their Edifices Prisons and the Grave.

Men send the stout Soldier to the assault, they plant him in the midst of the
breach, they place him in the mouth of the Cannon; the Loyal in battle, against
difficulties, losses and vexations.

The Courage of the Soldier, softens and relents during the truce, his
generosity abates, if he be long absent from the Field of battle: In like-sort,
the zeal of Gods Children languisheth, and consumes it self in time of
prosperity.

He there signalizeth himself by the scars in his front, and by the wounds
received for default of his Arms: This here, by afflictions proceeding from
the hand of the Omnipotent God.

All his adversities are advertisements, these rubarbs are healthful
nourishments, and bitternesses tending to pleasantness; we may not imitate the
Caterpiller, converting flowers into poison: the Anvil, which hardens it self
against the Hammer.

The sons of earth, who sink in despair: The valiant brow searches the
glory of Laurels and Palms, for testimonies of their courage: the true
believers suffer the honor of crosses, of griefs and trials, for signs of
their faith.

Let Us then quit the Field to these Panick, these feeble amasements,
overthrowing them under our weapons: enduring them with a cheareful aspect;
(since it is the pleasure of God) that afflictions (as pointed arrows) should
be fixed in our bodies.

Suffering with constancy, if his heavy hand presses us on, abates us,
dismembers us, and hence forward, being rather apt to penance than plaints.
Being of good courage, he is ever a spectatour of his own, who strugle and
contest against calamity: He is ever at hand to yield them courage, by their
sides to aid and assist them: He was by Job stretched out on the Dunghill: He
accompanied the three Children in the Furnace; He descended with Daniel into
the innermost crannies of the Den of Lions; He was near Elias in the Desert,
with Saint Peter in the Prisons, with such a multitude of Martyrs in the midst
of the flames.

This labor is an exercise of true Courage, in the sweat whereof men find
felicity: The end, the aim, whereunto we are called, is so excellent and
admirable, that we are obliged to embrace all enterprises, which may conduct
us thither: Then let these Ignominies, these faded, withered things, these
dolours be our Laurels, our Palms, our Crowns: let them be the marks of our
virtue, engraven on our bodies.

Let us chearefully receive these Presents from the hand of God, let us relish
these wholesome medicines, let us embrace (if it be the pleasure of God) wounds,
Martyrdom and Death.

What then? If for his honor and glory, if the more to publish the Name and
Merit of the Savior of the World; He delivers us into the hands of these
Barbarians, who oppose public afflictions, and the horror of death, to check
the progress of the Name of Christ: who seek not their glory, but by the
measure and proportion of their cruelty against persevering Christians: if he
deliver us into the power of these Butchers, who imagine the heavenly Field is
husbanded as ours, by the labor and assistance of the Iron: who persecute us
by public punishments, by the astonishment of flames, by the horror of
Gibbets, and of Pillaries: surfeting of blood and carcasses, and by the dread
of Butchers prepared to death and destruction?

What? Shall we not conserve this precious earnest, this holy gage, this divine
faith planted in our hearts by the powerful operation of the Omnipotent Spirit?
Shall we not inviolably observe this sacred oath of fidelity given to Jesus
Christ at our birth?

What? Shall we not freely lavish out our blood on so glorious an occasion?

What? (That we renounce not our faith, our salvation) shall we not advance
boldly to death, whereby we shall pass to immortality? let not these
Barbarians (then) imagine by the fear of their torments, to wrest from us any
expressions loose, and unworthy of Christians.

Faith is the greatest gift, which men have received from the hand of God.

Faith is of such vast importance, that it must out-ballance every humane
consideration; when it concerns our faith, we must suffer none to be more
Eminent, more Gallant, more Generous than the Christian; nothing more scorning
and contemning the Sword, more despising the flames, more contemning death:
it is necessary that we bedew and besprinkle her with our blood, and restifie it
with our death; it is expedient that it augment our zeal in the Prisons, that we
profess and affirm it before Magistrates, to reinforce it in Martyrdom.

Rendering our selves like green Trees, who bow themselves on one side, when
men would force them to yield to the other: stiffning themselves
proportionably, as men would bend them: Imitating the Diamond, which
obstinately resists both the iron and the fire: as the gold who spreads well,
but wastes not; which loses his dross, but not his weight; his scurse, but not
his substance: like the quicksilver, the which the more men press it to
collect it together, the more he is constrained, the more he is excited to
obtain his liberty, and free, goes vanishing and spreading into a multitude of
particles.

Do we make any difficulty to enter upon trial of the constancy of a true
Christian? Fear we the ran-counter of so rare, so precious a Prize, for which
so many of our Fathers have improved, and fatned the earth with their bodies,
and run so cheerfully to Martyrdom, to join themselves eternally to God?
Let Us maniest that we are true shoots of those Ancient stocks which have
produced such admirable and pleasant fruit: Let Us declare that we are
successors of the splendour of their faith.

It Is for this fair occasion that they have esteemed it so honorable to
suffer: It Is by this staire and assent that they are mounted into heaven, by
this Road that they are past into eternal beatitude.

Let Us (then) hereafter be always ravished, ever taken with a Divine fervor:
not having other aim nor object than what concerns the glory of the great
God, and the salvation of our souls: for the rest of the world have not other
esteem than so far forth as it shall serve to advance and attain it.

It Is not only permitted to us to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for
him: Consider with our selves that we have to struggle against flesh and blood,
against Principalities and Powers, and the Signeories of the world.

If God will not nourish us in the shadow, if he calls us to the trial, let us
glory in tribulations, supporting our selves with constancy. And although that
our enemies give us many assaults, yet for all that the glory, the crown
belongs not to them.

God afflicts and visits, God imploies those that he loves: and those whom he
seems to favor, He reserveth to Desolation: Chastisements correct us; and
impunity carries away them.

St. Paul says that he gave not place by submission, no not for a moment, to
the intent that the truth of the Gospel might be permanent: He says that he
made reckoning of nothing, that his life is not precious to him, Call. 2.5.
to the end that he may finish his course in the Grace of God. Acts 20.22.


Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing rather to
be afflicted with the people of God, Heb. 11.24.
than to enjoy the pleasures and delights of sin for a season, better
affecting the service of God, than to possess the riches of Egypt.

Daniel delighted rather to expose himself to the savagenesse of the Lions, He
chose sooner to be cast into their Den, wherein he expected to be (in an
instant) dismembered, than to abstain (for thirty days) to adore God with his
windows open, as he did before time.

The three children rather elected to be cast into the ardent flames, than to
bow before the Idol.

Eleazer gray and bald, and that Mother fearing God with her seven Children,
suffered Martyrdom and death, rather than to infringe the Commandment of God
by permitting swines-flesh to enter their mouths.

It Is most certain that there is but one path, to arive at felicity, but one
only heavenly Collume, whereon we must take place, but one only Arc wherein we
must be enclosed to avoid the Deluge. All other ways, how Contiguous, how
near, how like soever they be, lead directly into the Jaws of the Devil. All
other vessels, but that of Noah split, being swallowed by the waves.

The truth of the Gospel is published by the voice of the Apostles, proved by
Miracles, sealed by the blood of Martyrs, and acknowledged by the evil spirits:
What? shall we be so very detestable as to belly the holy writ, to reject our
salvation, to dissavow our Savior? He descended for us, has suffered for us,
has dyed for us: shall we make difficulty to confess him, to suffer for him,
to dye for him? No, No, let our speeches ever agree with our thoughts, let our
thoughts be always the same with our words.

Let Us not cast our selves (by the sound of our lips) into the snares of Satan,
that the fear of torments cause us not to renounce heaven, that the dread of
death make us not to abandon Jesus Christ and his heritage: that our Timidity
occasion not a sad shipwreck in the very harbor: not changing our affections
with fortune, nor varying our Face like as a Mass of wax, nor our habitation
as the wandering foul for the cold.

Let not the bands of the vanity of the world so eclips our sight, that we
discern not our offense, that our designs stifle and extinguish not the bright
sparkles of our souls; that our desires deprive us not of our Salvation.

We have tasted the heavenly gift, let not an Emotion and light distemper cause
us to disgorge and vomit it, we are pure, let us not fill our selves with
Ordure: we are clean, let us not defile our selves in the mire: Electing rather
a glorious and honorable grave, than a loathsome, infamous life.

Let Us rather instantly dye with a sound and entyre spirit, let us finish now
our voyage and life with God, than here (for a short space) with the world,
with despair, with Satan. Who would preserve himself by quitting the Helm,
suffers shipwreck: who imagins to recoyle one step, tumbleth into a
bottomless deep: who retyres from Paradise, precipitateth himself into hell.

God has not ordained all to be out-rag'd for his holy Name, all are not
capable: God has not marked all the inhabitants of the earth with the badge of
his Son, few are treated like the Master.

There Is but one plant taken of the stock, of the plant, one bunch, of the
bunch, a few grapes.

Blessed is he who is capable, happy he who is treated as the Master, Happy he
who is of those grapes.

The Children of this World, who are not couch't in a divine estate make
themselves merry; they are weak-sighted, altogether imperfect to contemplate on
heavenly mysteries; they are strayed too far to recover the right way, they
imagine not that the reward is at the end of the race: but they shall one day
find, that our miseries shall terminate in delights, which endure for ever; and
their pleasures end in horrible and eternal torments.

It Is (then) in this Combat against afflictions and death, that we must
contest, that we must vanquish, and that we must search for the Crown of
Christianity, and Kingdom of God.

Our hearts will be crush't, our eyes blemished, but our souls shall be filled
with gladness: we shall be beaten, we shall be torn, but our zeal shall
augment, and in its augmentation, our contentment shall increase.

Thou Barbarian, thou may ravish our goods, but the Eternal will not forsake
us: thou can exile us, but all the Earth is the Lords.

Thou can threaten our lives, but it is those of our bodies, it is that of the
World, our souls are immortal.

Thou may send us to death, but we conduct our selves thither, we there
shall receive it, we will there suffer it patiently: Our spirits are heads and
masters of our bodies, they are so elevated by the assistance of the Omnipotent
Spirit, that they are able to surmount all sorts of torments, and death it self.

Infidels, with what do you affright us so much? with punishment! with what do
you menace us so highly? to take away our lives? with what do you make us so
much afraid? of death!

O pitiful Adversaries, we contemn, we despise the world, we make no account of
afflictions, we trample over the fear of death. Ha, wherefore should we fear so
much to give for so admirable and excellent a Subject, so Glorious, so
Honorable. That which such a multitude of persons lavish daily, to obtain a
little pay: That which so many Generals give so freely, to merit to have their
brows encircled with a branch of Olive or of Palm?

How many mighty men hazard themselves daily to the peril of a thousand shot,
press into dangers, and into the crowd of a battle, on the hopes of an earthly
victory, rather than to behold their proper valor surmounted? what a multitude
press and advance to the forefront, bearing their bodies against wounds,
exposing themselves to the edge of the Sword, stretching out their persons on
the earth, to sustain the Banners of a stranger, of whom they receive not
above four Crowns of pay?

With how much more reason than they should we render ourselves obstinate in
the Combat? resolute of the victory?

We contend not for a point of honor and glory; we endure not for a stranger,
we suffer not for an inconsiderable reward, we have a better and different
hope, than a punctillio of honor, or of gain, than of pay.

We contest for the immortal honor of true Christians: we endure for the great
God, for the Creator of heaven, of earth, of men: we suffer for our Savior,
our Christ, our Salvation: for a glittering recompense, resplendent, and
enduring for ever.

God has not given us a spirit of fear, but of courage; we can perform all
things through Christ which strengthens us: 2 Timothy 1.7 Phil. 4.13.
we can demonstrate that nothing can reverse the Banners of the Church, and
that every thing that opposes it self against it is course, is not but for the
augmentation of its glory.

What if Murderers leavy war against the Gospel, they do nothing but dash
against a mighty and puissant Rock, which fixes and strengthens it self within
it is own wait. Let them satisfy their rage and fury, they shall not for that
overthrow the Kingdom of God.

Their fathers imagined they had massacred all the Prophets, and nevertheless
the Lord reserved to himself seven thousand men, who had not bowed their knees
to Baal.

It Is requisite (mauger all the Wolves) that the Gospel pass from one Pole to
the other; That it cause his voice to echo over all that which the Sun
illustrates with his beams, that it glide like a Thunderbolt of fire, as a
flash of lightning, even to the most barbarous and savage regions, and fill
their mouths with the memorable and mighty acts of the Lord. God, when it shall
be seasonable for his glory, will multiply his own by meriads, when it shall be
seasonable, he will cause his Church to outshine all the Idols of men: To the
intent, that as he caused (miraculously) the Rod of Aaron to flourish among the
twelve: Number. 17.
laid on the Tabernacle by the Tribes of Israel; he ratified and confirmed his
High Priest against the murmr of the people; after the same sort, having
caused his Church to flourish above all false doctrines of men, he shall by so
much the more confirm his own.

When it shall be seasonable, he will smite our enemies with dimnesse, as he
did the Inhabitants of Sodom, who would have forced the house of Lot, wherein
he had withdrawn two of his Angels.

When it shall be convenient, he will silence these Vultures and these Ravens,
who foretell epidemical calamities, these firebrarnds and incendiaries who come
to light again the flames, and to foment the sparks of our adversities: he will
stifle and silence these Trumpets of sedition; these bloody voices, these
stomachs of Iron and of Brass, who howl (without intermission) to procure the
destruction of Christians.

When it shall be seasonable, he will cause to rebound on their account, Luke
11.51
the righteous blood spilt from that of Abel, even unto that of Zechary, who
was slain betwixt the Altar and the Temple: and from that of of Zecharie, even
until this day.

But these days shall come in that rank, which he has ordained for them by
his providence, who now calls us to suffer affliction with constancy.

We know that the Nations ought to exalt themselves against us, Mat. 24.6.
that we must be led before Governors and Kings, for Christ's Name sake.

Our nearest relations must deliver us to death, we must be afflicted, we must
be hated,
we must behold the abomination foretold by Daniel the Prophet: we must be
torn as sheep by the Wolves; we must suffer hunger and thirst, we must be
Vagabonds in Deserts, and to endure persecution in every place; but our reward
is great in heaven, and the same has been practiced against the Prophets.

We are blessed to suffer persecution for righteousness, and to manifest that
we are the Children of God in patience, in anguish, and in labors; we are
happy to be guided through these dusky nights to the desired haven of our
repose.

Our bodies are blessed to suffer these stripes which heal their wounds, and
more blessed our souls to receive them to their salvation.

We shall relish somewhat of sweetness in our sufferings of repose in our
inquietudes, we shall bless our lives, and magnify our miseries.

Fear not then, the wolves who have power but over the wool: but fear God who
has puissance over our ^ouls.

Let Us fear God, who says, that he ^ho takes not his Cross, and comes ^ot
after him, is not worthy of him: who foretold, Mat. 13.13 Mat. 10.33
that we shall be hated for ^is Names sake, but he, who shall ensure to the
end, he shall be saved: who says, that he who shall deny me before ^^en, him
shall I deny before my heavenly Father: If after having received the cognizance
of the truth, we abandon Christ, there remains no other sacrifice for our
sins, but a horrible expectation of the judgment of God, and a servent and
violent fire that must devour his adversaries; if any man had contemned the
Law of Moses, he died, without mercy upon the testimony of two or three; Deuteronomy.
19.15.
how much more rigorously shall he be punished, who has abandoned the Son of
God, and the Blood of his Covenant? to him belongs vengeance: It is a
terrible thing to fall into the hand of the living God.

Go to then, let us take felicity (as St. Paul) in our infirmities, rendering
our bonds, celebrous and manifest: let us rejoice for that our names are written
in the heavens, let us watch, let us be firm in the Faith, fortifying our selves:
2 Cor. 12.10.
that our light may shine before men, Phil. 1. and 13.
to the intent that they may glorify the mighty God of Jacob, 1 Cor. 16.13.
who is our strength and our retreat. Declaring that oppression, that
persecution, Mat. 5.16.
that the peril and the sword, cannot separate us from the love of Christ:
Romans 8.54.
showing that neither death, nor life, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, can separate us from the love of the
Savior of the world, who has given his life for all: 2 Cor. 5.15.
to the intent that they who live, may not longer live to themselves, but to
him who is dead, and who is risen again for them. Let Us be without reproach,
and harmless children of God, Irreprehensible in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Generation, among whom we shine as lights, who hold forth before them
the word of life, Phil. 2.15.
we are the children of God, Heirs of God, Co-heires with Christ; let us endure
(then) with him, let us dye for him, to the intent we may be glorified with him.

And esteem with St. Paul, that the sufferings of this present life are not
comparable to the glory to come. Mat. 7.25.
After that we have built on the Rock, if the Rain descend, the torrents
increase, and the winds bluster, we shall not fail to abide firm and steadfast,
as the mountain of Syon; let us persist in one same spirit, let us strive
together all with the same courage for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27.
without being (at all) dismayed by our adversaties, and not being never so
little removed from the love of Christ, whom God has Soveraignly raised up, to
whom he has given a name, Phil. 2.9.
which is above every name, to the end, that at the name of Jesus every knee
might bow, of them who are in heaven, and in the earth, and under the earth,
and that every tongue shall confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the
glory of God the Father.

The Kingdom of heaven is that Precious Pearl to acquire which the Merchant
sold all his substance, it is his rich stone for the which we ought ^o cast our
selves: hood-winck't into the Jaws of death: for the which we must always
direct our countenance right toward heaven, and contemn and neglect the sultery
heat^ and the storms, the sword and the fire: and for the which men must
trample underfoot, the Pride of al^ the thunderings of men.

Not regarding (then) things visible which are for a time, but the invisible, 2
Cor. 4.17
which are eternal. Our light affliction which does pass away, produce^ in us
an eternal weight of excellent glory. 2 Cor. 5.1.


If our earthly habitations are destroyed, we have a heavenly dwelling which is
not of humane structure.

How many of the faithful, o^ whom the earth is not worthy, have wandered in
Deserts and Cavernes (...) clothed with skins of sheep, or of Goats afflicted,
tormented; Heb. 11.37
and in conclusion are stoned, sawed, scorch't and burnt at a gentle fire, not
regarding to be extended with torments, to the intent to obtain a better life?

The request made to God by Elias (...) is it not enough? Romans 11.3
Lord, they have slain thy Prophets; Demolisht thin^ Altars; I only remain,
and they hunt to take away my life.

Saint Paul foretold what should befall him, says he not? I am ready not only
to be bound, but also to dye in Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. Act.
21.13


It Is then most certain, that all they who will live according to piety in
Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution: 2 Timothy 3.12.
It is certain that the faithful shall have afflictions, in great number: Psalm.
34.
but the Lord shall deliver them. We are in the Furnace, 1 Pet. 4.12 2 Cor. 1.5.
but the Spirit of God shall rest upon us; The sufferings of Christ shall
abound in us, and so also shall his consolation:

Men augment our torments, and he will multiply his graces: and at the end of
the race, our afflictions shall determine, and our souls shall dance with
perpetual consolations.

These are the promises of God, this is his Word. The Holy and the Just, the
Omnipotent and Eternal, appearing to Saint John, having his aspect like the
Sun, when he shines in his full strength, Rev. 1.16.
holding the seven stars in his hand, and his voice was like the noise of
mighty waters; has pronounced it with his mouth: you shall have sufferings,
the Devil shall cast you into prison, to the intent you may be terrified, but
be thou faithful even unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.

He who overcomes, shall not be hurt by the second death: Rev. 2.10
To him who overcomes, I will give him to eat of the Tree of life which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God: To him who overcomes, will I give to eat of
the hidden Manna, and to him will I give a white stone, Rev. 2.7.
and on the stone a new name written, which name none shall know, Rev. 2.17.
Rev. 2.26.
but him who receives it.

To him who overcomes, and shall keep my sayings, even to the end, to him will
I give puissance over the Nations, and will give him the morning star.

Who overcomes, shall be clothed with white vestments, and I will not blot
out his name out of the book of life, Rev. 3.5.
but will confess it before my Father and before his Angels. Rev: 3.10.


Who overcomes, him will I ordain a Columb in the Temple of my God, Rev. 3.12
and he shall never go forth more, and I will write on him the name of my God,
and the name of the City of my God, which is the new Jerusalem.

Who overcomes, Rev. 3.21.
I will cause to sit with me upon my Throne, even as I also have overcome, and
am set with my Father in his Throne.

What hinders us now, what does obstruct us then to bear afflictions and
miseries with constancy? who hinders to surmount and overcome these things? Is
it this World? are they our riches? Alas, why change we not cheerfully and
willingly our lands, our habitations, and our lives, for repose, for felicity,
for eternal beatitude?

Our life is short, wherefore for so short a time do we renounce a perpetuity
of blessedness, of the ages of Paradise?

Our life passes in an instant, why (for to preserve a few days) do we
precipitate our souls in the Abisme?

Our life is precious to God, he holds it, he keeps it in his hands: i^ he
dispose it, it is for his honor, it is for our preservation,
why deny we him this glory, and to our selves this profit?

Do we dread torments? there is more of grief and anguish to finish ones life
by a long and continued distemper, than by a violent stroke; death is more
languishing and tormenting in a bed, than in the sight of heaven in an assembly.

The Fevers, Convulsions, Catarrhs are more insupportable and fatal than
torments.

Christ is present, he exhorts us, he offers himself to us, he invites us, he
spreads his arms to receive us; he will open the heavens for our consolation,
as to Saint Steven, than when the enemies of the Gospel stoned him.

He will assist us with his strength, and augment our courage, as he has done
to so many Martyrs, who have endured for his name.

Let us not then loyter any longer, committing our selves into his hands; The
Laurels and the Palms never cast their leaves, the true Children of God never
quail.

The love of heaven does so ravish them, they are after such a manner filled
with that divine fury, so that when nothing remains to them, but their heart,
wherewith they are accustomed to contemn the most dreadful things, that
continues sound, even to the end of their lives: their souls are invincible,
untameable, free, and generous.

Let Us suffer then with patience, lifting up our hearts to heaven: Let those
savage Beasts (which are not satisfied but with blood and wounds,) who are not
assuaged but with murders, who are not delighted but with the sounds of racks,
having nothing agreeable, but to dismember Christians.

Let us suffer (if it be the pleasure of God, to deliver us into the hands of
these Butchers) if they cause our bodies to stoop under the weight of
Martyrdom.

Let us suffer, if they redouble their rage, if they do not forbear any kind of
cruelty, and as Lions Whelps filled with flesh, they feed their eyes on our dead
bodies; and dabble their hands in our bloody effusions: God will assist us with
his power, and will raise us by his Omnipotent Spirit, (when it is for the
honor of his Name) above the racks and flames.

The most cruel torments shall not be considerable to us, the greatest, most
ponderous punishments shall be pleasant unto us, these cruelties cannot
astonish us, death it self, shall be life.

Our faith shall sustain our bodies, seeing them torn, it shall the more
encourage us to suffer.

Our holy zeal shall delude the most sour afflictions, will cause us to
advance into flames, without amazement, we shalconsume our selves, with
satisfaction, embracing Martyrdom. We shall imitate those Martyrs, who for
such a subject have endured a thousand afflictions, have a thousand times spilt
their blood, have sustained a thousand flames.

These Martyrs, whose Names and Renowns, have found the earth too narrow to
comprehend them.

These Martyrs who have magnified Christianity by their blood, who have
accepted Martyrdom for their Crown.

These Martyrs, who by a few torments are gone for ever into Supreme felicity.

Up then Barbarians, what havoc and slaughter soever you make of our bodies,
we remain firm and resolved to die. Our bodies are vanquished, our spirits
remain Conquerors.

You shall behold us languish full of delight in a divine Martyrdom.

You shall see our blood boiling with devotion, to distill and trickle into the
flames.

That our death shall be lovely and beautiful, to be for ever famous to
Christianity! That our bodies shall be blessed, to be consumed for the glory of
the Savior of the World! That our blood shall be precious to witness, and
trace out the way to heaven! That those flames shall be exquisite, which set a
luster on the truth, in the eyes of a throng and crowd of poor Ignorants! That
our ashes shall be precious, to celebrate, publish, and to spread the Gospel
among men!

If the earth be glutted with our blood, the example of our Martyrdom, will
make us re-created by Miriads: if they consume us, as the Phoenix, we shall be
renewed within our ashes.

Meditations for one that is sick.
FRail Creature, in the midst of thy imaginations, thou wastest and consumest
thy self, thou straglest, thou wanderest and losest thy self amongst the
vanities of the World.

Thou runnest out of knowledge in these slippery paths, without understanding
thy feebleness, without considering that at the first step, upon the first
advance thou may stumble, that a sprain may turn thee quite short, and that
thou have no sooner weighed anchor, than thou art in danger of Shipwreck; thy
health has puffed thee up, thy courage has raised thee up, precipitating thee
into pleasures and delights: and suddenly a chillness surpriseth thee, some
heat, a pain in the head, thou art dejected, thou tremblest, thou doubtest
whether it be some light distemper, or rather a disease tending unto death.

O Lord, the World to this moment has possessed me: her delusions have
intoxicated me: at this instant my sins stare in my face, as if I were awaked
from a prosound slumber.

I begin to recover my spirits, my eyes retort their looks upon my self, to
behold my weakness, and my body tired and consumed with the feavour which is
mixed with my blood, and with the pain which torments it, is constrained to
acknowledge her misery, to reject her Presumption.

Lord, these fogs which obscure heaven to me, begin to fall off, my Soul (so
long blinded) recovers some glimmering.

I have lived to this very instant, swimming and floating at the pleasure of
the Tide, give me grace, that I may arrive at the Port: I have passed my time
in darkness, give me light in the rest of my days.

Poor Carcass! thy Original is in infection, thy habitation in a station filled
with tempests, with diseases, with torments, with bloody wars: in a place
common to the savage beasts, upon an ungrateful earth, out of which thou can
extract nothing, but with the Plow-share and edge of the Iron.

For thy end, thy flesh is the prey and triumph of worms, thy designs and thy
grandures are buried with thee in the same shroud. Thy sorrests are reduced to
a biere, thy buildings to a stone; and yet thou art so blind, so bewitch't with
the love of the earth, which dispoyles thee of the knowledge of thy condition,
that thou daily augmentest the number of thy vows, of thy wishes, of thy
desires, which press thee hourly forward, until God, with the celerity of his
aid prevents thy fall, stretches his hand over thee for to interrupt thee, to
make thee behold the vanity of thy imaginations and cogitations, to make thee
feel the earth to totter already under thy feet, that she is ready to redemand
what thou have borrowed of her, and to show thee the fatal precipices, the
horrible depths, and frightful gulfes, within which all thy passions would
destroy thee. Bestir thee then, vapor of earth, shadow of life, since the
great God descends from his Throne to abase himself even to thee, and to
admonish thee.

Come then, order and command all thy unworthy, servile and foolish
imaginations to retire from thee; dispoyle thy self of man, submit thy spirit
unto God, and to thy spirit all the affairs of the World: smother up in thy
breast, thy stinking breaths, and permit truth only to proceed out of thy mouth.

O Lord, I am dust, composed of the earth, my members framed of this
imperfection, are apt to dissolve.

I am like the flower, which has its birth and funeral in the same day, who in
twelve hours sees it is spring and winter, birth and death.

I am like the Rose, who in his blooming, regards his decline, as the
Lillies, who shoots up suddenly to perish; as all the flowers of one morn,
which the same instant blooms and fades, which the least wind dries and
causes to fall.

This body increases in it is spring time, then comes its Summer, the winter
seases, and nips it, and it appears no more: the least cold chills it,
dispoyles it, as the Trees of leaves, and of its natural vigor: and often times
in its first season, it falls benumbed by some glance of thy displeasure; thou
mowest it in thy fury, as the grass: one stroke, a feavour stops his course
and his life, and so many sundry mischiefs which conspire its destruction, in
the end prevail against it, it vanishes, and choaks its memory.

Lord, I am born of the dregs of the World, I acknowledge it most reasonable
that I have a sense of it: out of rottenness, proceeds naught but clay, of
corruption, but worms: The earth has produced me, has nourisht me to receive
its accidents, to participate its wretchedness. I am unlike the Fishes, who
live in the Sea, without relishing of the Salt, and without being distur'bd by
the winds and tempests. I am more inclined to the humors of the earth, I am
subject to all its evils; wherewith it abounds and cannot decline their
attaints: every day threatens my life, and every hour raises me up some
affliction; but in the midst of these evils, I must not imitate the Children of
the world, which think not but of the edge that wounds them,
but of the Catarr that suffocates them, of the heat that burns them: like to
beasts who convert their rage to ceaze the stones wherewith they be wounded,
and to wreak their spleen with their teeth.

It Is requisite, Lord, that I raise up my Soul toward thy hand, from whence the
stroke proceeded, toward thy arm who darts the stone, toward thee, who
reservest (in thy power) the poison and the antidote, rest and labor, death
and life.

It Is necessary that my afflictions admonish me to retire my self from these
innumerable billows, to arive again at thy favorable harbor. I ought to fix
my eyes on thee, who must serve me as a Star of light, and a Phare during so
perilous a voyage: toward thee, who already seems to comply, to commiserate my
grief, and to offer thy omnipotence for my refuge.

Thou shall find, Lord, my Soul shattered by the contagion of my body and of
its senses; nevertheless, thou remarkest some traces of thy hand, some
relics of thy lineaments.

Thou beholdest them there sullied, not defast, it is flame and luster covered,
but not extinct: and regarding it in its distressed condition, thou will have
compassion on thine own image, of the work of thy hands.

Thou will inspire it with thy holy Spirit, making it glitter again, sparkle
and lighten my obscurity, for the time I have to live.

Give him then Lord, so much zeal, so much fervor to seek thee, that as
hitherto she has appeared cold and lazy: she has resembled the earth, who
deprived of the light of the Sun, remains disconsolate and sterill, covered
over with a profound, troubled silence.

But good God, if thou will be pleased to disperss some rays of thy Spirit to
enlighten it, incontinently all her transgressions (in the midst whereof she is
buried) will disappeare as clouds chased by the wind: This Ice, frozen about
his heart, shall dissolve it self, and shall slide and trickle on the ground;
and so he perceiving himself discharged of all his miseries which oppressed him,
untangled from so many Passions that bedim'd him, and animated by the power of
thy Spirit, she shall present her self before thee, contemplating with delight,
on that great day, the last of this life, full of contentment and satisfaction
for the Elect, full of terror, of dolors and horrible sighings for the wicked.

But Lord, can I rationally implore thy favor, and thy assistance, seeing that
all my actions merit death? can I well require of thee an absolution from my
offenses, which already seem fitted and prepared for an Eternal destruction?
And this careasse altogether stuffed with vices, covered over with ulcers and
sores, dares it yet boldly humble it self before thy holy Majesty, whom it has
so many ways provoked, to demand pardon, to supplicate thee not to permit,
that the burning furnace, and the horrible Gulf swallow it up? Yes, good God,
yes, and with assurance: For what though my sins retire me far from heaven,
never the less, the blood of thy Son shed for my clensing, will give me
entrance there, his wounds heal mine, rendering thee prompt to pardon me,
hindering thee to destroy thine own work-manship.

His descent from heaven was made in my favor, He has quitted his glory to
have to my rescue, by the merit of his death, He hat retired me from hell, and
given me the victory over my transgressions.

O Lord, since that I am redeemed with so precious a ransom, with so high a
prize, since his innocent blood poured on the earth, recoyles upon me, and
flows on every side of my body to cleanse it, I will take the boldness to
present my self before to thee, and (with assurance) to expect that blessed
day, wherein it will please thee to retire my spirit, and reduce this body to
dust.

I will contemplate it with satisfaction and delight, that this world does not
properly belong to us, that thou have given us but the use of it for a time,
for a time which thou cuttest, which thou shortnest, at all times, every
moment, according to thy pleasure. And not being less prudent than the savage
creatures, who know their dens, and love them; and the fowls, who desire their
nests, and they please themselves there: I will lift up my soul, and direct my
eyes toward my true and natural Country, wherein I ought to trust, toward that
heaven, wherein pleasures are heap't upon delights, wherein (at all seasons)
the beauty of the amiable spring, flourishes, in such delightful cogitations,
I shall find ease to my mallady, the refreshment proper to extinguish and
sweeten my scortching.

In these pleasant fountains I shall draw out waters and liquors to allay and
temper my feavour, and my heat: and plunging my self into these holy streams I
shall despise all other remedies, as being but an aggravation and fomentation
of my pain; and although, that wherever I stay my self, my body pains me.

Nevertheless I shall receive more of ease in the contemplation of my misery
and of thy Grandeur; of the quantity of my offenses, and the multitude of thy
graces, which they have not, which give not themselves but to be inquisitive
after diverse remedies, which they esteem healthful; and find a way and a means
to provoke them to sleep by the harmony of resounding voices.

I seek not my recovery in the substance of roots and herbs, but in the might
of thy hand, who has made the plant to spring, and has given it it is increase.

I shall not seek my rest in diverting my self from the remembrance of my
mallady, but in reducing to my memory, the wretchedness of my condition, in
representing to my self that fancying a thousand conceptions in my brain.

I was near swallowed in the Billows and over-flowings of my defires, that I
have a long time borne the wound in my heart without sense, or without
complaint, that I well nigh imitate the fish who swallow (at the same time) the
bait and death: That this world never affords me a cheerful look, dains not to
smile on me; that afflictions have ever clouded my countenance, that my
pleasures are filled with torments, my hopes with dispayres, that the course of
my afflictions have been equal to those of my days.

Briefly, that I have been a subject to all accidents that hang over the head
of man, that I am the Butte and white, against which all the crosses and
misfortunes of the world, let fly and discharge their shot, and their arrows.

And so, Lord, I constrain and force not my self to expect my recovery in the
virtue of herbs. I sooth and flatter not my mallady, and deceive not my pain in
stupifying and benuming my spirit, or otherwise diverting it: I seek not my
recovery in flight, but contrarily, I feel the inequality of my pulce, and the
difficulty of my respiration: I will consider how my mallady is fixed, that it
is rooted, that it holds off my body, and that I bear in my stomach the
spring and receptacle of heat and cold which consumes me: and that all the
parts of this body cease their operations and sunctions, through the grief that
afflicts them, and not longer able to support it, fail, and yield to death.

Behold me then, gracious God, as the Bird in crossing the otian, and not
finding where to pirch her self after she has long labored with her wings, in
the end drops down weary, and not able to struggle longer, into the sea and
death.

I have walked among the paths of this world, the Thorns have pricked me, the
Brambles have offended me, the stones have made me to stumble, the strokes have
bruised me, they have battered me, the feavours have weakened me, I have
searched for medicines and emplasters, I have applied splinters to sustain my
bones, I have swallowed bitter juces to drive away my distempers, I have
sustained and propped this poor cottage on all sides: but (in conclusion) it is
necessary that it ravel, that it crack, that it sink under it is proper weight:
I perceave Lord, that it slacks, that it dissolves, that it grows loose: I
behold on the other side that my soul the which she depresseth, distasts and
cleers himself of him by degrees, as not longer able to contain it.

But alas, It is very requisite, this poor carcass cannot ever draw his
years under so heavy a bondage, it cannot last ever, it is necessary that in
the end she render her self to this deaf and inexorable death, who yields not
to any prayres, who comes to surprise him without noise, and demands his debt
without agreeing to delay.

In conclusion, I must (after having so long course over the sea, slaves to
storms and tempests,) enter the haven, which I have touched already, that I am
already entering into; It Is expedient that I retire out of the crowd and throng
of the world, to a more pleasant conversation, and that I sustain this assault
and attempt without palenesse, without amazement, and without a dejected spirit.

How! Is It not more expedient, I fall once for all, than always to remain
tottering? wherefore decline I the terminating of this life, which to me is a
passage to a thousand better lives? why should not death be agreeable, since
she comes to unloosen the bonds which fetter me so closse to anguish and
misery? why make I difficulty to embrace death, to obtain heaven, and
everlasting delights and pleasures, and to arive at the haven where the fear
of death shall near approach? Shall I doubt, Lord, that 'tisnot seasonable to
dye (since it is but to live better) till the ways to live fail; shall I
preserve my life to my torment? no, good God, no, I will march confidently unto
death, I will commit my self to thee, who hold'st (in thy hands) the number of
my years, the bounds and marks of my life.

I will cast my self into thy embraces, to the intent thou shall dispose of thy
Image and thy clay, according to thy good pleasure.

I will constantly suffer the law of my condition, and the decree pronounced by
thy mouth.

Moreover good Lord, what can I farther expect of my so frail life, so feeble,
so subject to lose it self? what can I hope farther of the continuance of this
body, which has endured so many miseries, that has suffered so many evils,
that has been so often menac't, and that so many light occasions has so varyed
it is condition? can it be but this smoke must sometime vanish, and that this
dust should be carried a way with the wind? observe I not that the strongest,
the most sturdy, and most healthful are but light shadows, who must suddenly
increase the number of the dead? That these great thunderbolts of war find
themselves not armed against death? That these beautiful tresses, these white
breasts, the lineaments of these graces are not exempt, and that fame it self
who triumphs over time and death, in the end, tumbles into it is obscure abode?
perceive I not how easily old age surprises us, and crumbles our carcasses
under the weight of his years? how highly our days glide away.

That the present makes way to the future, that importunes it, that presses
it, that treads on it is heels; that our years are consumed by months, the
months pass away by days, the days glide by hours, and the hours by
moments, and that increasing to be, we advance our selves to decrease, and be
no more?

Perceive I not Lord, that in this world all things incline to their
destruction, posting to their period? marching and running into death? and
notwithstanding that there are some works of thy hand very durable, yet
nevertheless there is nothing that is permanent.

Witness those great and proud Cities, who find themselves sudenly devoured
and suddenly swallowed by earthquakes. Those nations grown insolent by their
long rule and authority, who behold themselves in an instant, mowed down by
millions, by the Pestilence.

I shall therefore prepare my self good God, cheerfully to obey thy Ordinances,
I shall contemplate on my infirmity which by degrees cuts off the use of this
life.

I observe that my fall is already far advanced, that death mixes and confounds
it is self through out my life.

I shall joyfully and cheerfully receive, and (with an unastonish't
countenance) that which it pleases thee to ordain for this poor creature, and
shall not be of their number, who submit to thee by constraint, because the
wind carries them, because the celestial decrees, (who ever conserve their
puissance) draw them from above, and because they understand, that in vain,
they should resist thy invincible power, which tames and surmounts all things,
wherefore (then) esteem I not my self blessed to have an entyre and absolute
deliverance from my sufferings, and to go and triumph with the ever blessed
Citizens in heavenly joys and delights, who feel not any griefs nor
distempers? wherefore (after having so long turned and tossed,) having so long
time floated at the pleasure of the waves and floods, do not I please my self
to have attained the shore, and to appear in the Port? why should not the haven
be agreeable, from whence I see a far off, the Sea swelling, stirred up and
enraged by the tempest, to lift it self up to the clouds, and the Billows
foaming, to sink the ships, or cast them against the Shelves and the Rocks to
break them; and my self in the mean time, freed from shipwreck?

Up, arise my soul, thou art here far off from perfection, fix not thy eyes
longer on the earth, withdraw thy sight from the miseries of the world, efface
them out of thy fantacy.

Imitate the Pilgrim, who seeks the fresh and the cool shadows to ease him of
his travel.

Up up my soul, remember thy self, that God gives not admission into his
pleasant Syon, but by the sacred gate of a blessed issue out of this world:
abandon the night, to enjoy that Sun, quit these desolate fields, and deserts,
to enter into these quarters of flowers: come out of these endless Gulfs of
mischiefs, to live in these fullness of blessings.

Up, rouse thy courage, fortify thy zeal, embrace this Divine present.

Embrace this passage to ascend to heaven; Follow cheerfully thy God, who will
catry thee for ever into his holy Temple, all resplendent, and glittering with
glory and felicity, where thy eyes shall perfectly behold him, whom thy spirit
adores, where thine age shall remain firm, where thou shall be rendered more
sparkling and bright than the Stars, where thou shall behold the earth under
thee, and the day to issue and break from under thy feet.

O wretched vessel, which the waves, which the winds and the Pilot direct and
steer to such contrary courses! that thou shall be happy to have power speedily
to traverse these dangerous Shelves and Rocks of this life, to behold thy self
in all safety and shelter, in a freedom, in a place of rest, in a place where
tranquillity and peace inhabit forever!

O my soul, that thou shall be content, freed from the vexations of the world,
to understand those holy notes, and that sweet, that pleasant, and Divine
harmony of heaven, which so many millions of Angels render unseasantly unto the
Lord!

Quit then thy shackles and thy prison,
render thy self into his hands who has formed thee, and will carry thee into
this holy habitation, wherein repose is infinite, the satisfaction eternal, and
riches without measure: where thy cogitations shall have no other aim than thy
God, thy eyes no other object than his glory: where thou shall flourish in an
eternal spring,
and shall breath nothing but most perfect and absolute felicity.

Praise, praise, this Divine Herald, which comes intimating the day of thy
departing, that thou must cease to live, and disrobe thee of thy desires:
imitate the swans, who in dying, render their voices most harmonious, being the
last day of their songs.

Good God, I am without color, without vigor, and without motion, unless
that which perturbations of mind causes; a thousand cares gnaw my spirit, and
a thousand snares of solitude entangle in my cogitations, and hold me
straightly fixed to their sorrows: the same distemper, the same grief, equally
labors my body and my soul.

I miserably languish in this poor carcass, which surfeits on sorrows, and
savours of nothing but the Coffin: My soul is stuffed with ignorance and
gloominesse, with ice and coldness, it is stupid and heavy: but by thy grace,
in one instant, she will mount her self into heaven, she will be filled with
splendor and light, she shall be ravished in the contemplation of the beauty
of thy Divinity, she will be partaker of joys not to be expressed, and with
contentments, the only contemplation whereof begets an ardent desire in my
will: she shall adorn her brow with a wreath, the folyage whereof shall ever
flourish, and never wither: she shall bathe her self in thy Divine spring,
there to draw water, and drink, to the intent never to thirst more; to the end,
that that draught should be made a fountain of living water in her, flowing
into life eternal.

O holy stream, Current of joy, and entyre delight, Eternal Source which never
dryes up, that my soul might ever repose under thy shadow, that it might draw
the sweetness of thine air, let her live in the admiration of thy perfections.

This Lord, is the ardent desire that inflames me, it is the only vow which
possesses my heart: the health of this body concerns me not, her greatest age
is not so much as one point to the price of the eternity of my soul, and then
it is necessary to return to earth, to be fashioned anew, that she may dye in
Adam, to be born again in Christ, that she may descend into the grave, to come
forth immortal; that she must hide her self under the earth, even to the day
that thou come to awaken on a sudden, raising it up to glorify it: until
that great day, which shall surprise all humane designs: Thou shall make this
All, to shiver at the sound of the Trumpets of thine Angels, which shall Harp
before the Savior of the world, who shall gloriously descend from the vaults
of heaven, all those whom the Sea has overwhelmed, or the earth received: to
the intent that being clothed with their bodies, before the great Judge, they
may receive their definitive sentence of life or death.

O Lord, that I may be of their number, who shall arise to their glory; and not
of them who shall arise to their infamy: that I may be of them who shall
rejoice with perpetual Triumph, and not of those who shall for ever remain
slaves of that horrible Monster.

That I may be of that number that may be borne into the brightness of heaven,
and not of those that shall be tumbled down into gloomy places, and to eternal
night: That I may be a Citizen of thy heavenly habitation, that I may inherit
thy Paradise, that my seat may be near my Savior, that my place may be there
designed, that I may not be of those victims prepared for Hell: that I may not
be of that number that shall be precipated into the abism of death, which shall
have their abode in darkness, and their habitation in the grave.

O good God, suffer not my Bark to fall into so cruel, so sad and dismal a
storm!

It should be more expedient for me never to have been born, than be ranck't in
the number of them who were created to their destruction.

Bring to pass (then) at that great day, that my rotten cossin may be listed
up, enlighten this extinguish't carcass, cause it to live and shine with my
soul, make them to flourish together for ever and ever.

I am nothing Lord, but a lump of mud, yet never the less thy hands have
compast me: I am nothing but corruption, but I bear on my brow thine Image
drawn to the life: I am all vice, all sin, all abomination in thy sight. Thy
love makes no impression farther than my lips, Thy Divine flame pierces not
within my soul.

But Lord, I have been washed with the water of holy Baptism, I have
participated of thy Sacraments, I have received a seal, a token, a sacred
testimony of my pardon.

I have sucked that powerful antidote, that immortal Ambrosia, that heavenly
nourishment which shall concerve me against the poison and venom of my sins,
and against the power of Satan.

Lord, A lively Description of the last Judgment.
it seems to me, that I already behold thee descending from on high, set on thy
Throne of Glory, filling all with astonishment, environed with a Million of
Angels, holding the sword of vengeance in thy hand.

It appears to me, that I now behold an infinite company of scattered men,
delving the earth to hide themselves, not daring ot sustain the bring flames of
thy countenance: that I behold the flock of thy chosen postrate at thy feet,
crying out, that the squadrons of thy holy Angels dare not appears in reverence
of thy just severity: crying out that their souls were purchase by the precious
blood of thy body. That their sins are surmounted by thy grace, that the
honor of thy goodness is manifest in their salvation, that thou will not cut
and prune off thy members, and reject those whose names are written in thy book
of life.

It seems that I behold thy countenance turned toward them, standing at thy
right hand, and thy mouth pronouncing their absolution, and saying to them,
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess for heritage the Kingdom which was
prepared for you, from the foundation of the World.

Methinks I behold them rejoicing and filling themselves with splendor while
thou art speaking, beholding them transported by a sweet and delightful
ravishment, by an ardure full of zeal for thee, and for thy glory, to remain
there for ever.

O good God, it is thither that we must direct all our vows, and confine all
the desires of our souls; It Is the luster of that glorious and holy day that
should dazzle our eyes, and not the riches of this world: It Is the remembrance
of these extreme bright and perfect beauties, which should ever entertain our
thoughts, and not the dark shadows of our cares. Bestir thee, (then) let us not
longer stay on these earthly cares, which are so many spiritual Divorces and
Adulteries.

My Soul, entertain not other discourse, my heart have no other wishes, my
mouth pronounce no other name, than that of our Savior, and thy salvation.

Let Us up, and anchor here our bark, in these fair desires let us perfect this
man, finish this body, let us forbear to corrupt and ulcerate our wounds, to
increase our woes, to open again our miseries; that our dolors, that our
convulsions, that our fleames, (if it seem good to them) hail us quick, and
drag us alive to the Tomb: that our carcasses be consumed with worms, that our
bones may be reduced to dust, it matters not, seeing that the Savior of the
world renders as possessors of the fruit of so signaland happy a victory, that
he bestows on us, our share and lot in his land, that he covers us with
Laurels and with Palms.

O God, this Crown is very high, it is above this aspiring rock, whose way is
narrow and uneven, encumbered with thorns and briars. I lie tumbling on my
Bed, I cannot pull up my feet, not raise my head above my bolster: my carcass
is nothing but dung, and my Soul then corruption; I am laden with a
counter-wait, which ever presses me down, my offenses are bolts and shackles
on my feet, which makes me ever stumble; The Devil places them near, the
avenues to close up the passage, to render the way dreadful, and to drive me to
despair of my salvation.

But what shall I say good God! I must not require the endeavors of my
attenuated legs, and my carcass half benumbed to climb this Mountain, to pierce
the thickness of the clouds, and raise my self even to the height.

It Is only requisite that I dive into the contrition of my heart, the
confession of my month: I need but lift up my eyes, and taise up my cogitations
toward the great Savior of the World, who opens his arms to transport me.

O my Rock, thou art not then any longer hard for me to prevail with: Christ
the object of my faith, Christ the only medicine who can close and consolidate
my wounds: Christ, in whom I establish all my present and future felicity.

Christ my guide, and my Bare star who must conduct me to the light of his
ensign; he shall open to me the way, shall make my faith to surmount all
despaires; he shall deliver me from these hindrances; he shall raise me up
free, and conduct me even into heaven; making me mount by his divine degrees,
and shall guide (by the might of his holy Spirit) my blessed and happy soul
into his high place, where the seasons pass eternally.

I will leave (to him) this Triumph. I will leave to him the accomplishment of
this great work, the honor shall be to his blood, to his blood, the only
virtue whereof shall fix and establish this handful of earth higher than the
heavens; I already perceive the rays of his divine grace, which begin to shine
over my soul: I feel (in my self) the assistance of his holy Spirit.

Away then all worldly cares, get you behind me, be packing, and approach no
more. You are nothing but corrupt water, but rottenness, then infection, in
respect of those heavenly beauties, of those odorifferous and fragrant flowers,
which cast forth so sweet a sent, which surpriseth my spirit, and ravisheth me
in the contemplation of them.

But good God, pain and torment, cuts off my speech, whilst I implore thee,
consider my malady, which reinforces it self, which redoubles its violence: It
appears to me, that my feavour is obstinate to revenge (on my flesh and on my
bones) the offenses committed against thee; the heat stifles me, the chillness
causes the members of my feeble carcass to shiver, to sustain, and endure a
thousand torments; I can do no more but sighth, and bemoan my self, I languish
all wounded, quite undone, and my vigor hourly wastes and decays; I am
thirsty, my mouth is dry, I can find nothing that can quench my infinite
drought: my feavour takes away from me the relish of every thing, all liquors
seem bitter, all food is against stomach, their very sight is nautious, not so
much as the thought, I swallow my spittle instead of all nourishment.

Alas Lord, I well perceive what will become of me, I cannot longer resist the
assaults of so many evils: all the succors of the earth are too feeble to heal
me, my countenance droops, its extinct, my members begin to feel the rigor of
death: I toss and tumble up and down, I stretch my self, and am no more: I
court a little repose, a little sleep, but it flies me, I can obtain none.

Alas, formerly my repose descended, and dropped so pleasantly into my eyes! The
night was accustomed to bury all my cares, to give truce to my labors, to
enclose all my torments, in a grateful slumber. I ever adjourned my trouble
until the day, until the Sun came to open mine eyes:

But now Lord, I cannot with great difficulty, close my eyes to slumber, but
instantly I waken my self, affrighted with the terror of a thousand dreams,
with a thousand horrible visions, which appear before me successively. The
silence of the night, which was so agreeable to me, at present redoubles my
horrors: my eyelids are inclined to watch perpetually, my infirmity increases
daily! its rigor and violence recovers new force every moment, and oppresses
me, the more it gains upon me.

Lord, thou have made adversity, as says the Prophet Amos; thou have created
it, as says Isaiah; and nothing comes upon us but by thy just providence, as
Job has acknowledged in the extremity of his affliction.

Alas, my God? thy judgments are perfect, I feel the effects of thy fury, the
weight of thine Arm: I submit and render my self to thy mercy, cure not my
evil by another, apply not remedies more sharp than the distemper, have pity on
my sufferings.

At least, Lord, prevent that the tediousness of my pain discompose not,
offend not, nor overturn my spirit: continue my judgment to me, to the intent
that I may employ that little time which remains to meditate and consider thy
graces, and to beg my pardon.

Lord, thou have caused waters to flow out of the rock, and to refresh thy
people in the Desert: cause to spring (out of my faith) a fountain to refresh
my scaldings, and to give intermission to my evils, to the end, that my soul
(filled with a divine zeal) may wholly raise up her self to heaven, and civert
from this carcass, the sense of its miseries.

Lord, Lord, approach thee near to me, my voice cannot convey my sorrows even
to thy ears, and so my miseries shall surpass my plaints.

Lord, from thy Royal Palace, from thy holy and sacred Throne thou considerest
all that is acted here below.

Alas, incline thy countenance to my aid and assistance; redouble not more the
extremities of my feavour, augment not my sufferings, I understand good God,
that by the destruction of this carcass my Soul must enter into its felicity:
but cause what remains to dissolve easily, cause that my natural faculties
diminish by degrees: and that my Soul may depart gently, and, from the midst of
this bed, she may fly to thee.

Lord, my breath is so short, my infirmity is so violent, my dissolution is so
near, that I behold nothing but the shadow of my Coffin, and the depth of my
grave which attends me. My half dead body, makes me utter interrupted speeches,
my words vanish in my mouth, and willing to continue my complaints, I cannot
make an end.

Alas, good God, I fear that my voice will forsake me, strengthen me for
awhile, or at least be so gracious, that in my Soul I may acknowledge my
faults, and obtain thy pardon.

Grant me, (that the short time I have to live) may be nothing else but a
penitence for my sins, and a meditation of thy goodness: that I may not
delight but in the sound of thy voice, that thy holy volume may be in lieu of a
pillow: that my heart, that my spirit may breath forth and contemplate thy
praises.

Lord, my distemper is so violent, that it suffocates me, yet notwithstanding
it oppresses me not so much as the vast number of my sins, which I observe
hasting before me, and the punishment that follows.

I tremble, when I turn my eyes toward thee, great God, revenger of iniquities,
which enlightneth and pierces through the shadows, and remarkest the tracts
of all my offenses: Thou beholdest my conscience without any vail, without
ornament, all my cognitations are open to thee, the past and present are both
alike before thee, thou read during the course of my life, the train of my
offenses that I have committed, thou beholdest thy enemy in my habitation, thou
find him enclosed in my bosom.

My voice should ever sound in thy ears, it ought incessantly to cause thy
praises to echo upon the earth: (on the contrary) my mouth has ever been open
to blasphemies, closed to thy Word.

Thou have given me a spirit to know thee, a heart to adore thee, hands to
stretch forth to the support and relief of my neighbor: I am revolted from
thee, I have despised the afflicted, and have avoided the path of the poor and
needy, fearing their ran-counter, I have avoided their company, as if I had
dreaded to behold them.

When thy heaven has thundered, I have stopped my ears, I have rendered my self
deaf.

When thy Sun has cast forth his beams upon me, I have made my self blind:
when thou have sought after me, I have fled away, when thou have called me, I
have not answered, when thou have corrected, I have been hardened at thy
strokes; Inlieu of sacrifising my life for thine honor, I have continually
betrayed thy service: I am abandoned to vices, I have served riches, the
follies and vanities of the world, the executioners of my life.

I have been immoderate and excessive in every thing which is contrary to thy
pleasure, without having other bound than an imbicility to advance farther.

My memory Lord, is not sufficient to comprehend and enumerate such a multitude
of crimes; and I now have more bashfulnesse to nominate them, than I had shame
to act them.

Also Lord, what need the trouble to recount them, seeing they present
themselves, they oppose themselves against me, accusing and confounding me:
seeing that the least, but lately committed, is sufficient for my damnation,
without the trouble to search after the past, which serve not but for
astonishment, how the nature of man could invent and commit so many mischiefs.

Behold them, Lord; they fail not to pass into my remembrance, and as an heavy
burden, press me so sore, that I am ready to yield, to give my self up to
despair, and to lose my self.

Lord, I cannot so much as deny them, I have committed them, they were acted in
thy sight, in thy presence: with a feeble, fearful, and astonished voice, I
acknowledge them, and am vanquished: the fear that I have (beholding their
great number) has frozen my heart, and appaled my countenance.

And (on the contrary) considering the rigor and strictness of thy judgments,
my sense fails me, and I attend nothing but the hour of punishment.

I will willingly lie down instantly (half quick in my grave) and in expiring,
draw the earth over me, to the intent I may remove my self from before thy
Justice, so much do I dread that thy hand will wax heavy against me to destroy
me.

I am like the poor Publican, who durst not lift up his eyes toward thee, I
dare not so much as entertain any imagination of remission for a criminal so
culpable; I despair to avoid them, even as undergoing the exemplar-punishment
of my abominable practices: The depravity of my manners, renders the severity
of thy censures sharp against me: and I know that no man has place in thy
eternal felicity, but those that are cleansed from sin, who are not fullyed with
the spots of iniquity, who have submitted and dedicated (to thy service) their
hearts and their toungs: as for me I have done quite otherwise.

Nevertheless, Lord, thou will not bruise in thine indignation those whom thou
have created after thine own Image.

Thou will not precipitate into the gulf, and forsake (abandoned to the roaring
Lion) those who are graffed and regenerated in that great Mediator, in the
grand Savior of the world.

On the contrary, Good God! Thou have commanded us to pray to thee in his name,
Thou have promised to hear us in his name, Thou have assured us that when our
sins are as red as vermillion, nevertheless thou will make them as white as
wool, seeing we have recourse to that Treasure of our Justification, to that
only Redeemer, to that only Author of our salvation.

Now, O Savior of the world, O Precious Stone, O Spirit of my Spirits, I
embrace thee, I discharge the burden of my sins upon thee, I ease my self upon
thee.

Thou art purposly descended here below, thou art clothed with out flesh, thou
have made thy self man, to the intent that I might be able to speak to thee:
Thou have stretc'h forth thy limbs on the Cross, thou have shed thy blood,
thou haft seen it distill from thy wounds all vermillion, to heal my mortal
sores, to dround my sins, to cloth me again with innocence: Thou have
suffered death, to give me the life.

Thou have made thy self the oblation and most immaculate offering, to take
upon thy self the pains which I have meritted: Thou have yielded thy self
captive to set me at liberty, of immortal, thou have made thy self mortal, to
the intent that of mortal, to render me immortal: Thy virtue ever flourishes,
that never waxes old, display it over me, approach, touch my sins, and they
shall dissolve away as wax before the beams of thy Sun, they cannot remain
near thee, thy sight shall be their flight, thy presence their dissipation:
Thou shall efface their steps, and their straglings.

Thy hand can bruise the gate of hell, thy hand can lift me up into the
heavens, and make me to ascend by the ladder that appeared to Jacob.

Lord, I cannot sufficiently comprehend thy infinite goodness toward persons
so vile and unworthy.

If I contemplate the excellence of thy Divinity, in thy descent unto the
earth, or whether I consider them to whom thou art come, I admire the Grandeur
of thy charity: and farther Ruminating thereon, I call to mind the happiness
of thy humane condition: The Creator of heaven and of earth, The Omnipotent,
who is not displeased, but with man, is descended for man, and made himself
man: is come to save him from the torture of the fire, and the horrors of hell,
and has taken his form: the Physician is hasted to the succor of the
diseased, the Master to ransom the slaves, the straight path presents it self
to the straglers; Life offers it self to the carcasses enclosed under the
Tombs; the Shepherd is descended from the top of the mountain, to seek the
straying sheep; He has again lifted them up on high, and enclosed them in his
Fold: The Hen has gathered her chickings under her breast, has made a shield
with her wings, to protect them from the Ravenous Kite.

Now, good God, drive far from me those doubts which Satan goes about to frame
in me, assure me, comfort my spirit, fortify my faith, redouble it is strength,
make her to vanquish all fears, all the dispayres which he would suggest unto
her: Enable her to repel all allutements and assaults of all his temptations:
She must not longer be afraid, she may not longer tremble, hell can have
nothing against me, seeing thine only Son has taken my sins upon him,
because he has washed me with his pure blood; after it has pleased thee to
allow (on mine account) the value of his satisfaction.

If thou art pleased Lord, to proceed with me according to my deserts, I should
be far distant from any such happiness, my salvation would be desperate: There
was never any contention with so much disproportion, the weapons are too
unequal, my fault is extreme, so is thy Justice; But Lord, thy mercy is
infinite, thy goodness surpasses my malice, Thou coverest my faults with the
body of thy Son, by his merit thou have satisfied thy Justice: Thou have given
me life, there thou concervest me, I hold of thy clemency.

Lord, Thou have spoken (by the mouth of thy Prophets,) that thou art nigh to
such as are of a broken heart, and that thou deliverest such which have
contrite spirits.

Lord, thou contemnest not the afflicted, thou hidest not thy face from them,
forget not then my oppression: forget not my afflictions, which are violent and
permanent: forget not the sorrows of my heart which are augmented.

Lord, my Soul is consumed, even to the dust; my belly cleaves to the earth:
Hear then, my God, myclamour, and my supplication, and forbear to aggravate my
torments: regard my afflictions and my travel, and forgive me all my offenses.

Lord, I suffer in my groanings, I mingle my Couch with my tears, I am pierced
with afflictions on the bed of languishing: The earth is not capable to deliver
me out of this extremity; The heavens alone have the glory of the medicines
that are requisite for me. Make have then to come to my deliverance, my God,
who does daily comfort me in my distress, and shelter me in all my storms.

Lord, I am afflicted that I cannot depart, more than that I cannot live: But,
good God, who have freed from death the great Shepherd of the flock, by the
blood of the perpetual Covenant, turn thy compallionate countenance toward my
torment, and cause it to shine upon me in joy and in salvation.

Lord, thou have instructed me to understand my end, and what is the
wretchedness of my days. But good God, since thou have ordained that I must
die, cause me to depart in thee, that Imay live again; I have sinned, my God, I
have displeased thee, I have a thousand and a thousand times every day provoked
thy fury, but thou art the God of my deliverance: I am washed, I am sanctified,
I am justified by thy grace in the name of Jesus Christ; who has taken my
sorrows upon him, and charged my offenses upon himself. I am a fellow-Citizen
of the Saints, of thy Household: I am built upon the foundation of the Prophets
and the Apostles.

Pardon then my sins, Lord, in the name of thy well-beloved Son, correct me
not in thy displeasure neither chasten me in thy fury; have mercy on me that am
destitute of strength.

I beseech thee my God, in the bitterness of my Soul, in the words of the
Propher David. Lord, hear my request, and make my supplication come unto thee:
Hide not thy face from me in the time that I am in calamity, incline thine ear
unto me in the day that I cry unto thee, have thee to answer me: for my bones
are dried as an hearth, and they cleave to my flesh by reason of my groaning;
and my time vanishes away like smoke, and as a shadow which passes away, and
as for me, I am become withered as the grass.

Lord, I said once again with David, Eternal, reprove me not in thine
indignation, thine arrows have pierced me, and thy hand has overwhelmed me:
there is no entire part in my flesh, there is no rest in my bones, by reason of
my sin, for mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are too weighty, as ^n
heavy burden above my strength; I am bowed down, and swerve beyond measure: I
am weakened and bruised more and more.

Lord, all my desires are before thee, and my afflictions are not hid from
thee. Forsake me not my God, be not far from me, have thee and help me. All my
hope is in thy mercy.

Lord, thou have spoken by the mouth of thy Prophet Esaias, I have heard thee in
an acceptable season, and succored thee in the day of salvation. My God, now
behold the agreeable time, see now the day of salvation. Be thou now Lord, my
Rock, and my Fortress, be thou my Deliverer, and sure Retrait. The snares of
death has surpised me, destruction has environed me, but I lift up my self
to thee my God: hearken to my supplication from thy holy place, and let my cry
enter into thine ears.

Give me by thy free mercy the wages and entire reward, notwithstanding that I
entered not into thy Vineyard till at the close of the day: show me thy sight,
give me life eternal after this fleeting, languishing and cransitory life, and
assure me of heaven, to the intent that the grave swallow me not up for ever.

Grant me, my God, that when the Savior of the World shall appear, I may
appear with him in glory.

Grant me that I may accompany that infinite number of thine, which shall be
before the Throne clothed in long white Robes, holding Palms in their hands,
and that I sing with a loud voice with them, salvation is of our God, who is
set upon the Throne, and of the Lamb. Wash my garment, and cleanse it in his
innocent blood; to the end, that I may eternally serve thee in his holy Temple,
wherein I shall never suffer hunger nor thirst, that I be no more molested nor
distempered with the Sun, nor with the Winter, nor with miseries; my tears and
my pains wiped away with thy hand.

O Lord, I am at the last gasp of my life, in the agony and shadow of death; to
thee I direct my latest vows, my last words: All my actions have not been
better than vanity, in respect hereof.

Good God, arm not thy self with vengeance against me, I render to thee my
penitent Soul, deploring, languishing, which savours of naught but earth and
dust, to which this carcass shall be incontinently reduced. I oppose my cries,
my tears, my requests, my plaints, and my groans against my condemnation and my
fall. Let the confession of my mouth, the contrition of my heart cause thy
Sword to tumble out of thy hands; let my gasping move thy goodness, magnify
not thy power and might against a languishing, attenuated, immovable carcass:
against withered grass, laid on the earth, expecting naught but to be driven
away by the smallest blast: I am at my end, I neither have more power nor heart
to offend thee: but I may still serve thee, to publish thy elemency, the
foundation of my hope, and thy bounty, the spring of my life. I am thine from
the Cradle, thou have sanctified me: I have been redeemed and ransomed by the
blood of thy Son, who died innocent to give life to the guilty: by the blood of
thy Son, who must open to me the door of felicity. I have my recourse to him, I
beseech thee in his Name: It is not reasonable that my sins should violate me
in so holy a Sanctuary.

Rouse thee good God, a rise speedily, the extremity of my affliction will not
admit any delay: to the end that these sins, be not too powerful for me:
hearken to my prayers, give me strength to prevail against these billows, that
drive me off from the heavenly shore; have thee to absolve me: preserve (in thy
hands) my Soul, lest it remain a prey: drive these sins our of thy presence,
which are the work of thine enemy, and Lord pardon me, that am the work of
thine hands.

Lord, I render praise for that thou have made me capable to participate of the
heritage of Saints in thy light: for that thou have delivered me from the power
of darkness, and have transported me to the Kingdom of thy well-beloved Son,
in whom I have deliverance, and remission from my sins.

Lord, I perceive the establishment of thine assistance, I feel my self
replenish't with thy Holy Spirit, who effaces my transgressions, and ravisheth
my Soul even unto heaven, to show him the inheritance which the mercy of thy
Son has bestowed on me, in thy presence.

O good God! how blessed shall I be to hear from thy Holy Spirit, that the last
of my days, shall be the first of my repose, that I am not farther from my
satisfaction, than the length of the last groan of my life. I am approaching
Lord, to thy Throne of grace with assurance, to obtain mercy by the virtue of
my High Priest, who has compassion on my infirmities. I am coming to behold
thee face to face, whereas now I discern thee but darkly, as in a mirror: I am
quitting these miseries, for a fullness of delight; from these dolors, into the
Mountain of Syon; from this Militant, to the Triumphant Jerusalem; from this
World, to the City of the living God. I voluntarily cease to live on the Earth,
to survive in heaven; I contentedly part with this wretched life, for that
which is most happy: I cheerfully quit my self to follow thee, I abandon this
carcass, and render my Soul into thy hands.

FINIS.

