HIERVSALEM: OR A VISION of PEACE. IN A SERMON PREACHED At Margarets in
Westminster, before the Honorable House of COMMONS at their Monthly Fast,
Aug. 28. 1644. By CHRISTOPHER TESDALE, Pastor at Husborn Tarrant, in the County
of Southampton, and a Member of the Assembly of DIVINES.

ISA. 28. 18. O that thou had harkned to my Commandments, then had thy Peace
been as a River.

JUDGE. 5. 8. They chose new gods, then was war in the gates.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Phil. Stephens, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the Golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard, 1644.

Die Mercurii, 28 Augusti, 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Cawley and Mr. Herle,
do from this House give thanks to Mr. Tesdale, for the great pains he took
in the Sermon he Preached this day, at the entreaty of this House, at St.
Margarets Westminster, (it being the day of public humiliation) and to desire
him to Print his Sermon. And it is ordered that none shall presume to Paint his
Sermon without License under his hand writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do give license to Philemon Stephens only to print my Sermon.

Christopher Tesdale.

TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Worthy Fathers of your Country,
IT is said of the Ambassadors of the King of Persia, that coming to Athens,
the Metropolis of Learning, in the time of the seven Wise men, they desired
that each of them would deliver in his sentence, that they might report unto
their Master the wisdom of Greece; which accordingly they did, only one of
them was silent: which the Ambassadors observing, entreated him also to cast in
his symbol with the rest: Tell your Prince (quoth he) there are of the
Grecians, that can hold their peace. Verily, it had been my wisdom altogether
to have held my Peace in such an Audience, or having spoken once, to have
proceeded no further, but as this Sermon, such as it is, came to the birth by
your Authority, so your Command now is the Midwifery to bring it forth. The ice
thus broken, I shall make a double virtue of this necessity. First, by
supplying and making out the failings of mine own unfaithful Memory; and this
done, though there were (...), in me, yet I hope to find an (...), an act of
oblivion from you. Secondly, I shall be your remembrancer by restoring the
loss of the care to the eye: Words, we say, are wind, and unless they be
taken upon the wing, even while they are flying, and brought to the Press,
they are gone and lost. You know whose wish it was, Oh that my words were now
written, Oh that they were Printed in a Book! as if that were the only way to
preserve the memory of things, and to imprint them so deeply in the m^nde, as
never to be forgotten. And though I may seem hereby to serve in your cloyed
appetites with a Crambe his cocta, and obtrude upon you, that which is no way
worthy to be laid up in those full fraught promptuaries of better notions, it
may be yet of some use to meaner understandings, and by this means too, that
which was delivered in the ears of one Congregat^on, shall be offered to the
publ^ck view of all, who so will, may take and read: and if by any thing
herein, I may, for the promoting the great cause in hand, in the least measure,
put more life into our Devotions, more speed and quickness into our motions, I
have my end. And now, Ever honored Patriots, that I have been Gods
remembrancer to you, I will be bold to be your remembrancer to God, that the
Lord of Peace himself would give you peace always, and by all means, that
he would let you see Jerusalem in prospe^ity, and peace upon Israel, and in
recompense of all your work of Faith, and labor of Love, and Patience of Hope,
he would fill you with length of honorable time here, and with a glorious
eternity hereafter.

Yours in the Lord, the meanest and lowest of all my Masters Servants,
CHRISTOPHER TESDALE.

HIERVSALEM: OR A VISION of PEACE.
PSALM. 122. 6. O Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.


THE inspired Penman of this Psalm, and Song of Degrees, recounting with joy
of heart the present flourishing estate of Jerusalem, the City of the great
King, and the holy Sanctuary, the place where Gods honor dwelt; and under that
the inestimable blessing the people of Israel enjoyed in the pure Ordinances
and worship of God, and the due administration of Judgment and Justice in the
Land: by way of apostrophe turns him to the godly of those times, and calls in
the Auxiliary help of their pious devotions for the happy continuance of this
welfare of the Church and people of God. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem.

Wherein we discover, first, the divine Oratory of the man of God, putting life
into his Doctrine.

Secondly, his zealous affection exciting others to holy duties, O pray.

Thirdly, his able direction, pointing out:

1. The right means of obtaining al good blessings, pray. 2. A choice subject
of Prayer, peace. 3. A choice subject of peace, Jerusalem.
A word or two of the former of these by way of Introduction, as not altogether
begged at the door of the Text; The first is a divine kind of Rhetoric, a
powerful delivery, becoming him that speaks the Oracles of God, which no
Academy can teach, no quaint strains of Arts, or parts, can reach, only a
supernatural principle of Grace, true zeal at the heart, heavenly affections,
suitable to the life and spirit of the Word, will naturally produce it without
straining.

The people were able to say then, by their own happy experience, that our
Savior Christ taught, (...), as one having authority, and not as the Scribes
and Pharisees, those dull Doctors of the Law, that were never able to keep
Moses chair warm, but cold Sermons made bold sinners. This was it which made
the Disciples hearts, whilst Christ opened Moses and the Prophets to them, to
burn within them; this made Apollo eloquent in the Scriptures, and Paul
mistaken for Heavens Mercury, quite putting down Tertullus the Orator, and the
Town Clerk in the Acts, so as it was one of Aust^ns wishes, to have seen Paulum
in ore, to have heard Paul in the Pulpit, the most Seraphicall Preacher of the
Doctrine of Grace. Multum intererit Davusne loquatur an herus: insomuch as the
same Sermon from sundry men's mouths, differs as much as the flight of an Arrow
from the arm of a Giant, and the hand of a child: Praise, says Solomon, is
uncomely in the mouth of a Fool, he cannot frame his speech to that Dialect:
he has no skill in the language of Canaan.

But oh how savoury do words come from graceful lips and a gracious heart,
how do they carry with them the very breathings of Gods own mouth? how do
they warm the coldest hearts, and quicken the deadest spirits? A man may
deliver matter, otherwise beyond exception, yet so without zeal and affection,
as to occasion the most inflamed attention, to chill into tepidity; and the
conscientious hearer, to be haunted with woeful distractions, so as such
justly fall under that blunt censure of a Countriman; This man may be a
profound Scholar, but he wants a good beetle, to cleave out our knotty timber,
our green wood must be better blown or it will not burn; Here is our way
then, first, to Preach to our selves, and work up our own affections, as Paul
would have Timothy, (...), stir up the gift that is in thee, every one get
fire first upon his own hearth, and so he shall be better able to kindle it
on others; do as Cocks, first rouse our selves, and then awaken others.

The next is the zealous affection of the man of God, exciting others to holy
duties, O pray, etc. It Is truly said, that every one is a coal, if he be a
living coal, he will inliven others, if a dead coal, he will sully others;
It was our Saviors charge to Peter, thou being converted, etc. and every true
Disciple will own this duty as directed to himself; and as one candle lights
another, so Grace where it is, will endeavor to kindle Grace where it is not*
and wheresoever there is life, there is a seminary also of generation, and the
more excellent the life is, the more pregnant to propagate its kind. The Holy
Ghost came down we know in fiery tongues, the tongue a member made for
communication, fire the most active of al elements And indeed if the devils
agents be boutifues and incendiaries, why should not men truly zealous,
chiefly ministers be, as Gregory compares, like glowing iron upon the Smiths
Anvill, casting their light and heat round about.

Secondly, this exhorting others, is no trick which many use, a cleanly put off
of duties from themselves, to task strangers, as Pharaoh, and ease his own
people, and as the Pharisees lay heavy burdens on men's shoulders: Caesar's word
was venite, not ^e, like that of Gideon, look on me and do likewise.

It is but a dull kind of teaching, to say, and not to do, (...), a silent
work is the best Rhetoric, and the real is more persuasive then the verbal
Sermon.

Miracles, say some, were the bells that tolled in hearers to the Apostles
Sermons, good conversation comes in now in the place of Miracles, these
Harbingers must make way and get intertainment for our doctrine, else our bad
lives will quite discredit our great learning, as many loathe the good light of
a candle for the noisome tallows sake. That was Christ's method just, he did
and taught, a Prophet mighty in deed and word: great speakers little doers, are
some, mighty talkers mean walkers, exhortations are but dead things, the man's
example must put life into his Doctrine, then Boanerges come kindly, when
lightning follows thunder, when the word of life, and the life of the word go
together. Here the man of God that exhorts others to pray, is first at his
devotion, Peace be within thy walls.

But this by the way, as the first essays of this days errand. I shall keep
my self, God inabling me, within the boundaries of this corollary and
doctrinall conclusion, as main subject of my ensuing Discourse, and the full
result of the Text.

The Peace of the Church of God, is a choice blessing much Doctr.
to be desired of all the true Members of it: and prayer is a special means
to obtain it: O pray.

We will first examine the thing which is here singled out, as a choice subject
of Prayer, and see whether it be a matter indeed worthy so great a motive, O
pray for the peace, etc.

The Proverb says, All is not gold that glisters; so all is nor Peace that
appears so, all pretenses of Peace are not Peace* there is great cry and
little wool, much seeming concord and agreement in the World, that deserves not
the name of Peace; such Peace as is not worth the wetting ones finger, or the
spending ones breath, much less ones blood to purchase and enjoy it;
Honorable Worthies, God has made you mount up upon Eagles wings, and you are
flowne too high, to be brought down by any tempting lure; though the bait be
pleasant, take heed of the hook, we have been well beat to it; in our
greediness let us not be cozened like children with Counters for current money.
To find out the right, our way will be to cast by the counterfeits of Peace.
And,

First, there is a Satanicall Peace, for the Devils are provident to maintain
outward Peace, even where there is no order but all confusion, lest their
kingdom should come to an end; so one Bear will kennel with another, and the
very Cannibals use not to eat them of their own Country. And O that this
Consideration should not shame the most unnatural opposites of this Land, that
without all regard of Nature, Nation, or Religion, imbrew their hands in each
others blood, that Protestants and Professors, bred up in the principles of the
same Religion, and walking all their life long in the House of God as friends,
should be teezed on to more deadly fewd, then between a Jew and Samaritan then,
or a Turk and a Christian at this day: we were sometimes branded for a
Kingdom of Devils, and now we are less provident then those infernal
Spirits, the foundations will be thrown down, and what has the righteous done?

Secondly, there is a Heathenish Peace, when men for their credit sake will not
seem contentious.

Thirdly, there is a Brutish Peace, when people consent together in beastly
behavior, because they know no better life.

Fourthly, there is Judas Peace, who held agreement with the Apostles, because
he bare the bag, and got by Christ's service.

Fifthly, there is Tyrannical Peace, when men are awed and kept under patience
perforce, as the poor Israelites under the Egyptian Taskmasters, and for very
fear are constrained to agree.

Sixthly, there is Herod's Peace, for he and Pilate which were secret foes, yet
agreed together against Christ.

Seventhly, and lastly, there is the Peace of Sampsons Foxes which were tied
together by the tails, but all their heads were loose, and every one looked a
several way; you may soon discover here the Peace of our adversaries, the
agreement of Atheists and Papists, Priests and Prelates, Irish Rebels, and
English Traitors, to ruin Church and Commonwealth, we may read the Pedigree
of Popish Peace and Unity, Romes surest note of the Church, but though Babylons
may, yet Jerusalems Peace is not found here: and I may say of them, as Samuel
of Jesses seven Sons, the Lord has chosen none of these. Heathens could say,
there was no true friendship but among the good; and Christians believe as an
article of their Faith, no communion but of Saints; there is no Peace, says
God, to the wicked: as Jehu said to Joram, demanding whether it were Peace,
What Peace so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother Jezebel, etc.

The People say something to the matter, in their description of peace Ps. 144.
that our sons may grow up as plants, etc but the chief ingredient is wanting
here; and therefore upon the acclamation of the common sort, crying up this
outward prosperity as the most desirable happiness in the world; Happy is the
people that is in such a case, as the Greek turns it; they count the people
happy that has these things: the Prophet subjoyneth by way of refutation
another sentence, opposed to all this outward felicity. Happy rather is the
people whose God is Jehovah.

God then must be one in this holy League, he must be principal, he must
think thoughts of mercy toward his people, he must speak peace unto them, he
must be reconciled to us through Christ our eternal Peacemaker.

And then secondly, we must be at Peace with God, Follow Peace and holiness,
says the Apostle, without holiness there is no peace: Sin separates us, Faith
reunites us: O knit my heart unto thee, was David's Prayer; so Christ must
ingratiate us into the favor of his heavenly Father, God must enter Covenant
with man, and man must be in good terms with his God by faith, repentance,
obedience, or there is no Peace.

Thirdly, there must be a sweet agreement between Prince and People, a
gracious accord too of the people among themselves, knit together in the
inviolable bonds of loyalty and love, neither entoiled with civil broiles at
home, nor infected with hostile inrodes from without, all professing and
maintaining that one eternal Truth, which is both Mother and Nurse of Peace:
Such a Peace as was enjoyed in the days of Solomon, when Judah and Israel
dwelt safely every one under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to
Beersheba. And in the days of Constantine, when there was silence in Heaven
for the space of half an hour, and the sweet odours of the Prayers of the
Saints ascended up as a cloud. But a shorter and more full definition of Peace
we cannot have then Paul gives us, 1 Timothy 2. 2. That we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Here it is, a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty, otherwise we may buy (as gold too dear,
so) our Peace, evil conditions, as bad ingredients are able to imbitter this
sweet blessing and turn it into a curse, Balaam may ingrosse the promotions of
Moab, as the temporizing Clergy of late the dignities of our Church, but upon
saucy terms, they must come then and curse Israel, and they must build Altars
the better to effect it, as it were with Bell, Book, and Candle, Micaiah may
have the Court favors, but he must frame his mouth then to the flattering
vein, and comply with the false Prophets in carrying on the King with lying
visions to his destruction; Eliah himself need not despair of being Chaplain
in ordinary to Queen Iezabel, could he but bate of his fiery zeal, and take
the Priests of Baal for his Camerades. Herod that fox will reverence John
Baptist, and hear him gladly, if he will not meddle with his Herodias. Those
Boanerges which the times favor not might be better accepted, would chey
thunder less, and not lift up their voice like a Trumpet, that carnal men
cannot sleep on for them securely in their sins. These cocks are a great
disturbance to drowsy Sybarites, they cannot away with the unseasonable
clamours of such wakefull birds. But we that are the Lords remembrancers must
not keep silence though we be silenc't for it, we must hold our faith, and hold
the truth, hold our profession, and hold a good conscience, but not hold our
peace: O'tis the basest tenure in all the World for any Minister to hold by, to
hold his living, or hold his favor, hold his Peace by holding his peace. And
so for public peace, Nahash the Ammonite will make a Covenant with the men of
Iabesh Gilead, upon condition he may thrust out al their right eyes, the Popes
condition just, upon which he admits blinded Proselytes into the communion of
his Church.

Hezekiah may make his Peace with great Senacherib, if he will take slavery
with his bravery, the Assyrian yoke with his chain of gold, and become a
Tributary King, some moderate men think that a good motion for controversies
in Religion, which the false Mother made for the living child, Neither mine
nor thine, but let it be divided. Upon such terms I doubt not, the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome, Protestancy, and Popery might soon b^e
reconciled, would we renounce our most Orthodox heresies, and come home to the
un-erring Council of Trent. Christ's Kingdom would be more quiet, would he
admit rivalls, and compeeres with him in his Throne, and suffer Romes Saints to
sit cheek by choul at his right hand, and at his left, as the Thieves upon the
Cross, to rob him of his honor; or would his faithful modest spouse but dress
her self after the garb of the Skarlet whore, in that garish attire; she
might find more favor in her sight. Holofernes would hurt none that would
serve the King of Babylon: no more will the Jesuits infest those kingdoms
that will worship their great Italian Idol, and be stigmatized with the mark
of the Beast; and if this be it, we were best take a nearer cut unto the
Devil for a boon, and as the miserable Indians fall down and worship the foul
fiend, that he may not hurt us, appease and please him, that he may be
quiet; rather when his conditions are ever most base, and he draws after him
such a Dragons tail of damned Idolatry, Si cecideris. Though he should offer
us all the kingdoms of the world, the devil and all; our answer is made
already: Avoid Satan, get thee behind me, thou foul fiend hold thy peace,
thy kingdoms, thy money, thy peace perish with thee. And how much better were
it, to have a biting Gospel, then a toothlesse Mass, as Bradford said; to sit
under the saddest shade of the true Vine, even weeping, then to frollick it
under the greenest Trees, and most pleasant Oaks of Idolatry, the people sat
down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play; to enjoy Christ, though with
the cross and persecution, then to live under Antichrist in all manner of
temporal prosperity. Better the Kingdom were troubled with the Popes leaden
Bulls, then his golden Calves; and fell under the curse of a man of sin, then
the wrath of a jealous God; you like not I presume, those hot gleames of
Sunshine, which carry fierce storms and tempests at their heels, like your
lucid intervalls, lightnings as they call them, in sick folks, seconded with
pangs of death, a short truce that brings after it long troubles: in a word,
better have a holy and a just war, than an irreligious, dis-honourable and
unsafe Peace; better want the peace of the Gospel, then not have with it the
Gospel of Peace.

It was Austins wish to see, Romam in flore, Paulum in ore, Christum in
corpore, I English it thus, the Church in its flower, the Word in its power,
each man in his Bower; such happy times were to be wished indeed, when
righteousness and peace kiss each other, then it is right indeed; when God
raises up Kings to be nursing Fathers, etc. when he sends in mercy Princes
after his own heart, and sets up David's, Solomon's, Hezekiahs, to preserve the
people committed to their charge, in Wealth, Peace, and Godliness.

And now that you have seen what Peace is, you will quickly perceive that it is
not incident to all Commonwealths, it is a choice blessing, and fit for none
but the choycest Subject, Jerusalem: To speak properly, Peace is no where to
be found, but in the true Church: Jerusalem is a City that is at unity in it
self: Verity is the bond of Unity; neither can they be truly one, that are
not one in Truth. The unity of other Kingdoms and Commonwealths, all societies
in the world beside, is but the agreement of Simeon and Levi, Brethren in
iniquity, the friendship of Herod and Pilate to crucify Christ, but a
confederacy, or conspiracy rather, against the Lord and his Anointed; we must
pray against this Peace, as dangerous and destructive to Jerusalem, with
David, break the arm of the wicked, Lord turn the Counsel of Achitophel into
foolishness. Say of it as Jacob of his sons. bloody riot, O my soul, come not
thou into their secret, and unto their Assemblies, mine honor be thou not
united.

Now Jerusalem the true Church, and the Members thereof, though they cannot
loose inward Peace, Christ's Legacy to them, My Peace I give unto you; yet they
may forfeit outward peace: O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments,
then had thy peace been as a River, Isa. 48. 18 How should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold, Deuteronomy.
32. 30. Sin is a perpetual makebate between God and men, and men among
themselves. Our National sins, pride, gluttony, drunkenness, swearing,
whoring, Sabbath-breaking, our neglect and slighting of the means of grace,
our non-proficiency, after so long standing in the School of Christ, our
though more science, yet less conscience then of darker times, our scornful
contempt of the power of godliness, and trampling under our profane feet, the
despised profession of sincerity, our superstitions, idolatry, form,
perfunctorinesse, neutrality, lukwarmnesse, will worship, and that universal
loathing of the heavenly Manna of the Word, in the people of the Land, their
hankering and longing after the trash and trumpery of spiritual Babylon, as
the Garlic and Onions of Egypt: These and many other Epidemicall sins
loudly crying to Heaven for vengeance, provoked God to let loose Satan, to
stir us up enemies abroad, and to sow too, Cadmus-like, his Serpents teeth at
home, which have sprung up into a banefull crop of armed men: but besides the
cursed agencie of these known incendiaries, to put a period to our Peace, many
pernicious instruments, close Factors for Rome and Hell, were deeply engaged to
imbroile these happily united Kingdoms in the uncouth miseries of Civil
wars: to this end they enforce sundry Popish innovations, and lay upon the
people heavy burdens of illegal taxes and impositions; too well verst in that
maxim of Machiavellian policy, Divide and impera: and the story of Scilurus
the Scythian, who upon his deathbed taught his fourscore sons, the force of
unity, by a faggot of rods, very strong, when tied in bundles, but when taken
asunder easily broken; these engin^s, they might be consident, would work
their ends, grating upon men's Religion, and liberty, they well knew they
should touch them in their Free-holds, touch them to the quick, this, if any
thing would startle their patience, to stand out pro aris and focis. In this
hurliburly, dissentions, and distractions of all sorts, they had reason to
believe, an easy inlet would be made to Forain Powers to inthrall this brave
Kingdom under the tyranny of the Spanish pride, and to inslave the free borne
Burgesses of the New Jerusalem with the intolerable yoke of the most
Unchristrian and Antichristian Sea of Rome.

Many inferior agents, and subordinate instruments which were employed, (as
the Monkey in the Fable made use of the Cats foot) though they had intermediate
scopes of their own, and those bad enough, yet I verily believe, they knew not
the main ends of their own motions, The grand Proj^ctors knew, the old Greyes
knew the cubs, the young Foxes did not; green heads, shallow brains, they were
not able to fathom the depths of Satan, they knew not whither they were going,
the devil that drove them knew: God knew who was taking away his Kingdom from
us, and Christ knew who was departing out of our Coasts. And oh that ever this
kingdom, such an illightned Goshen as this, should hatch or harbor such
black monsters, that would gnaw out the bowels of their own Mother; that so
many Judasses should be found amongst Christ's Disciples, so many false Sinons
amongst them that profess his name; but so long as there shall be a Devil in
hell, and a Pope, shall I say, at Rome? nay so much room for a Pope here, we
shall never want Achitophels, and Ravilliacks, either heads to plot, or hands
to act most bloody designs against Church and Commonwealth.

And indeed quantillum ab fuit? the proud waters had well ni^h gone over our
souls, and poor England been made the sad Prologue of that bloody Irish
Tragedy; and now the odds is not great, God has brought us upon the stage,
our parts are acting now, and we are made the second Scene of it. Our
mournful story is not told yet, the waters are not abated yet; the wicked are
like the raging Sea, they swell and roar horribly; yet though they should rise
higher, and even cover all, our comfort is, Christ is aboard the Ship, he can
put bounds to the proud waves, even of the Irish seas, when he pleases; he
can command a calm, and though he should be asleep, our prayers can awake
him, if we cry unto him, Save Master we perish.

But happily those Ionahs, for whose sake this great tempest is come upon us, are
snorting yet under hatches; let us try whether our loudest cries can a wake them
first, What meanest thou, O thou sleeper? arise, call upon thy God; art thou
only a stranger, said they then? there is not so very a stranger in this our
Israel, whose ears have not been filled with those more then barbarous
cruelties exercised by those cutthroat Rebels in Ireland upon our brethren by
Nature, Nation, and Religion; God has even thrown down the wall, and plucked
up the hedge of that Vineyard, and let in the wild Bores of the Wood to root it
up, and the savage Beasts to devour it; their houses have been rifled and
fired, their wives deflowred, their daughters ravished, women great with child
ripped up, old and young murdered and butchered without number, and without
mercy; Nay, the same hands have acted over the same bloody parts with us, what
plundering, what leading captive, what imprisoning, what starving, what
hanging, what murdering and massacring have we had? As if our own breed,
brats of the same litter had vied with those Monsters of Ireland for blood and
cruelty. Peerlesse Lords, incomparable Knights, and Patriots, much of our brave
Gentry, and truehearted Yeomanry have sacrificed their dearest Lives in this
unhappy quarrel, lives too precious to be so vilely cast away, though with
infinite odds, upon the scumme of the Land, men baser then the earth; and yet
for all this the wrath of the Lord is not turned away, the Sword is not yet
sheathed, the unnatural issue of blood in the body of the Kingdom is not
stopped nor stanched yet; Is it not high time then for Aaron to take his Censer
in his hand, and run between the living and the dead? O pray for the Peace,
etc.

The men of Israel have turned their backs, and fallen too before the men of A^:
Is it not time then for godly Joshua and the Elders of Israel to rent their
clothes, and with blubbering tears, cry unto the Lord, O pray for peace?

Israel and Amalek join battle daily: should not then Moses hands be lifted
up in prayer: and Aaron and Hur help sustain them, till the Lord has avenged
us of our enemies? O pray for peace.

When Christ's Sheep are but a little flock, their enemies many, you may call
them Legion, and as bloody and ravenous as evening Wolves; should not the Vine
branches out of a sense of their natural weakness twine and pleat, as it were
hand in hand, and arm in arm? should the Lambs appointed for the slaughter,
amidst such a world of Butchers, straggle one from another, break into
factions and schisms, and so gratify the common enemy?

Hoc I hacus velit, et magno mercentur Atridae. Should they not rather enfold,
associate, keep close together, and sweetly accord among themselves? O pray for
the Peace.

When so many Kings have given their power to the Beast to wage war against
the Lamb, and the Israel of God, should not Jerusalem be a City that is at
unity in it self? O pray for the Peace of Jerusalem.

Now that the great Cause of the whole Kingdom is handling and debating in the
High Court of Parliament; should the people of the Land suffer their own suit
forwant of encouragement to starve upon their hands? Now that the great
Argosie, the ship royal of Church and commonwealth is in danger to dash upon
the rocks, or be swallowed up of Quicksands, by an Euroclydon, the Malignity of
cross and contrary winds, unless those worthy Pilots who sit at Stern by some
propitious gale from Heaven, be able to guide and conduct her to the fair
Havens of Peace: should we not all lend an helping hand, should we not all
have an Oar in this Boat, when we have all adventures in it? should we not cry
and shout after it, Peace, Peace? Peace be within thy walls: for my brethren
and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee. O pray for the
Peace, etc. Surely we Christians ought to prize as a mean of our greatest
good, the peaceable frequenting public assemblies, and our future serving of
God; Merchants are more glad of a calm then common Mariners, and make too a
higher use of it: So should we Christians of halcyon days of Peace, then
Heathens, forasmuch as we may and ought to improve them to richer ends of Gods
glory and our own salvation. But is it no more now, but ask and have, pray and
and speed; must we stand still and see the salvation of God? Faith and
dependence upon God does not evacuate our own endeavors, prayer does not
justify the neglect, but presupposes the use of all other means which God
shall put into our hands; we may put forth the arm of flesh, but must not rely
upon it: Indeed prayer alone will do the deed, in them that have no strength,
and God no doubt will help his people in such a case even by a miracle; yet we
must not tempt God, and expect that Manna in Canaan, which he intends but for
the Wilderness. For David to stand fidling with an Harp in his hand hoping to
charm the evil Spirit, when Saul stands desparately armed with a Javelin in
his, who can commend his wisdom, or promise him any security? It Is time now to
lay hold on Goliahs Sword, and well advised he was, there is none to that;
Co^nsell and strength are for the war: Rabshakeh was right in this, Fas est
and ab host doceri, Counsel that is your work, honored Senators, and it
should be sound and secret; the everlasting Counselor make it such, that you
may decree a thing, and the Lord may bring it to pass, and let him never
prosper, if there be yet any false Brother, any close Spy in your bosom to
reveal arcana Imperii to your enemies: there must be (...) as well as (...),
and (...) as well as either, (...). Moses in the Mount praying, Aaron and Hur
staying up his hands, and Joshua beneath with an Army fighting with Amalek And
here my heart is toward the Governors among the people; those noble
Commanders, and Valiants of Israel, whether of our own Nation, or our brethren
of Scotland, whose affection was so enflamed toward us, that the sharpest
winter season could not abate it, whose love was so great, that many waters
could not quench it, nor the floods drown it, all that jeopard their lives
unto the death in the high places of the field, and among these as high in
merit, those lightning Legions of the City bands, who so willingly offer
themselves to the help of the Lord, the help of the Lord against the mighty:
The good Lord remember them for this, and reward all their kindness an
hundredfold into their bosom; and let this be written for the Generations that
are to come, that the people that are unborn may praise the Lord. And verily,
they that come not in now, fall deservedly under Meroz curse: how much more
they that help the mighty against the Lord, who Nero-like rip up the bowels of
their own Mother? the men of Smyrna had but a poor and beggarly kind of
charity, yet they prayed for their neighbors of Chios; but these are so far
from praying for them, that they prey upon them, and more inhumane then the
very Cannibals, devour those of their own Country; but let them take heed,
lest as Philip branded a Soldier that would have begged the Land of his honest
host, with ingratus hospes, ungrateful wretch up on his forehead, so God brand
them for their base thoughts of making our worthy Patriots a trampled footstool
to their ambition, and raising their broken fortune upon the ruins of the
three Kingdoms, and cause their names to rot, or else remain as Pilates in the
Creed, a curse to all posterity. And indeed this, if ever any, is the holy
war, the Lord himself seems to have set up his Standard, and sounded an Alarm
from heaven, Who is on my side, who? and we all owe this fealty to our great
Landlord Possessor, etc. we hold of him in Capite, in Chieftage, and so should
perform our homage in Knight Service, and follow the Lamb in all his wars;
and we hold of him in Soccage too, and so must do him plow-service, break up
our fallow ground, and sow in righteousness. And oh that the Lord would raise
the sunk hearts of our British Yeomanry, renowned heretofore for their brave
courage and high achievements; that he would not suffer a freeborn lion-like
people, to degenerate into a Kingdom of Asses; that he would once take off the
base cowardice from their low Spirits, and seeing he has given them wisdom to
get riches, he would give them courage also to defend it. Go to the Ant thou
sluggard, and consider her ways, and see, they have taken forth the lesson of
her providence in gathering wealth, they should go now to the Be (...), so it
follows in the Septuagint, a stout creature to defend her own, Illis ira modum
supra est, laesaeque venenum
Mor^ibus inspirant, animamque in vulnere ponunt.
Seeing plundering Drones are every where breaking into their Freeholds, if
they will needs have their honey, they should make them taste their sting too;
and seeing, as Solon told Croesus, the hardest iron is like to carry all the
Gold; they should remember their Swords in times of Peace were beaten into
Plowshares, and now resolve their plowshares into their old principles, and
turn them into Swords again; and I hope they will be so wise as make them win
it, before they wear it. But now our arms cannot move without their nerves,
money is the sinew of war; there must be not only praying and fighting, but
paying too; and here my heart is toward the free-hearted, and open handed
Araunahs, who have given like Kings, not only of their superfluities, but even
with the widow in the Gospel (...), their whole living; yet I hope not so
exhausted, but that they will find more yet to support a poor Church and State
at a dead lift; and the Lord increase their store, and mult^ply even by a
miracle, that little meal in the barrel, and oil in the cruse, till he send
rain upon the Earth; and I would have it remembered, that the Turks in sacking
Constantinople, the Imperial City of the East, quickly possess't themselves of
vast treasures of gold and silver, when, to the eternal dis-honour of the
Christian world, money enough could not be raised for Garrison soldiers to
defend it: They shall have for their security, not only the Public faith of
both the Kingdoms, but of the faithful witness in Heaven too: And lock
whatsoever they lay out, it shall be paid them again, infinitely, beyond the
proportion of any usury, an hundred fold in this life, and Crowns and Kingdoms
in the world to come.

But the burden lies upon some few, the more is God pleased to honor them, he
will not beg, it seems, at every man's door, their money may perish with
them, yet if their bags come not in as Volunteers, they should be pressed to it,
their gold perhaps will prove more cordial then themselves: and there is all
the reason in the world, the buckets of those boutifues should walk most to
quench the fire themselves have kindled. When Christ wanted a royal Steed for
his triumphant progress to Jerusalem, he sent his Disciples to the next
Village, with this Commission, You shall find an Ass tied, loose him and
bring him unto me, and if any man question you for it, say, The Lord has need
of him, and he will let him go.

Honorable Patriots, Christ is now gone forth with his Triumphant Army,
conquering and to conquer, and if you want Arms, or Money, or Horse, for their
accommodation, all the beasts of the field, though they be not ferae naturae,
yet are ferae Dei, even the Cattle upon a thousand hills. He is Lord
Paramount, the great Possessor of heaven and earth, as Abraham styled him. Art
thou then Gods Tenant? do thou owe him Knight Service, and Plow-service, and
does he want thy Horse, and shall he not have it?

Zacheus, does Christ want thy house or thy dinner, and shall he not have it?
Mary, does Christ want thy tears or thy hairs, and shall he not have them?
Joseph, does Christ want thy Tomb, and shall he not have it? The Owners, I
hope, will not try Titles with God, but remember themselves to be Stewards, and
not Proprietaries, and let them go; and if not, take them though, your warrant
is good, The Lord has need of them. And me thinks men should be willing to
part with any thing for a quiet life; Dulce nomen pacis. And if the very name
be sweet and amiable, how much more the thing it self?

Peace, sure, is a most desirable blessing, if these Cities, and the neighbor
Counties which yet enjoy it in part, know it not, ask Germany, ask Ireland, or
nearer home, ask the poor plundered Countries that want it:

Nulla salus bello; Pacem te poscimus omnes. If we be put to pay for peace,
as we are bid to pray for Peace, and so have it, we have it so at an easy
rate, if we should buy it over and over, we should not over-buy in; if some
blood be spent for it, pity indeed there should be any, yet we shall be
gainers by it, when they that shed it die Martyrs, and it shall be too the
seed of a glorious Church. So then it must be Manus ad clavum, oculus ad
Calum, the hand to the Helm, and the eye to Heaven, there must be an head to
counsel, a heart to pray, a hand to fight, and a purse to pay, we must pray
and use the means, use the means and pray, O pray.

But who now shall go up for us; who be they that must pray? Indeed it were
but reason, that they whose sins are gone up to Heaven, should send after
them, their prayers and tears, and try whether they be able to drown the
clamor of their sins, by the louder cry of their prayers, but the misery is,
they that cry most in their sins, are least able to speak in Prayers, they
are loud vowels or consonants, one way, but still and dumb mutes the other:
they whose hands have been most busy to set the Kingdom on fire, are not able
to afford one drop of water from their hard and stony hearts, to quench it. As
Joshua said, ye cannot serve the Lord, so all cannot pray. Every one is not a
fit Ambassador to the King of Heaven.

The blind man saw something that said, God hears not sinners: to the
wicked, God says, What have thou to do to take my name into thy mouth? And to
such sinners as hate to be reformed, I may say as Christ to the unclean
spirit, (...), Hold thy peace, keep thy breath to cool thy torment; yet
sinners repenting come: Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord.
Thou can not pray, yet thou eatest to get thee a stomach, so, pray that thou
may pray; the word and prayer are for beginnings and entrance in grace, and
though thou can not pray, yet run to Christ, He can teach thee: Lord teach
us to pray.

But now the house of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the true
Converts in Israel, the dear Saints and fervants of God, whose faithful
fervent prayer avails much; these are they must run of this errand, these
must pray for the Peace of Jerusalem. So Moses and Aaron must pray, Pharaoh
could not; Exodus 8. 8. The man of God must pray, Jeroboam could not, 1 King.
13. 6. Peter and John must pray, Simon Magus could not, Act. 8. 24. The
righteous must pray, the workers of iniquity cannot, Psalm. 14. 4. they call not
upon God. You then that are the dear favorites of Heaven, eloquent Orators
at the Throne of grace, royal Priests of the most high God, to come with
humble boldness into his presence, to plead continually, and persuade with
him, and put incense before him, who as Princes prevail with God, with
grateful violence holding the everlasting arms, and overcomming him who is
Omnipotent, whose powerful Prayers can work Miracles; open and shut heaven,
obtain any blessing, remove any judgment, whose zeal is able to call down
fire from heaven, to consume Captains and their Companies, and muster up whole
legions of destroying Angels, against the face of your enemies, and whose faith
can fill the Mountains and Valleys with Horses of fire, and Chariots of fire,
for defense and safety of you Isreal's: you that are the Lords remembrancers,
give him no rest till he make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth, speak you in
the ears of God, entreat now the face of the Lord for us, lift up a prayer for
the remnant that is left.

Enforce your faithful fervent Prayers with strong cries and tears at the
Mercy seat, and say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy heritage to
reproach, that the Heathen should rule over them. We are very right then, we
are seeking God in his own way, the price of Peace is in our hands, and the
purchase is before us, Fasting is a good handmaid to devotion, to pluck off our
shoes before we enter into Gods presence, an useful servant to keep the
Asses at the foot of the Mount, whilst Abraham goes up to sacrifice, to
cudgel away our lusts, which otherwise as little puppies will nothing but leap
about us; wholesome discipline to beat down our body, and bring it in
subjection, to humble and withdraw the soul from brutish and unreasonable
motions; and an excellent exercise to kindle in us a spiritual appetite, and
get us a good stomach to our prayers; and when faith and fervency have given
wings to our devotion, this will imp those wings, and make them fly home with
more speed to the Throne of Grace.

And here worthy Fathers of your Country, and the rest all beloved, I bear you
witness, you have been with Paul, (...), you have continued now many days
with Christ in his temptation, your prayers and tears have even now been your
meat and drink, and you have fallen, I hope, heartily to it; but I must invite
you yet, as to an aftermeale, and desire you in Gods name to fall to it again,
God will have not only the morning incense, but the evening sacrifice, that as
the sinners repentance sets him at liberty for showing mercy, so the righteous
man's prayer may tie up his hand from doing Justice. Our Savior often calls for
audience from his most attentive hearers, Matthew. 13. And David in the greatest
ardency of devoutest praises, calls up and summons in the powers of his soul,
to do over the same duty again and again, and to do it yet better: Praise the
Lord, O my soul, Psalm. 103. 1, 2.

And surely God is about some great work, he intends some great blessing to
the Land, we trust he will bless our eyes with the happy sight of the King
in his beauty, the Lord Jesus upon his glorious Throne, with all his holy
Ordinances about him in their purity and power, that in his time the righteous
may flourish, and abundance of Peace so long as the Moon indureth. The humbling
our souls before our God, abhorring our selves, repenting in dust and ashes,
the saving a poor undone Church and State from utter ruin and destruction;
the dethroning Satan and Antichrist, and setting up the Kingdom of Christ,
over the hearts and lives of the people of the land; the laying the sure
foundation of a blessed peace, these are the great works of the day: no wonder
then that every faint desire, and impotent endeavor, be not competent to carry
on such great motions as these: No, God will have us cry and cry mightily,
before he will answer.

A cold suitor begges his own denial; God will have us Jacobs, before we
shall be Isreal's: cito data vilescunt, that which is soon gotten, is as soon
forgotten; God will inhance the price of his good blessings by the dear
purchase of them, he will have them not only Samuels, begged of God, but
Napthalies, with great wrastlings obtained of him; and even Christ himself,
though the Son, yet learned obedience, he was heard indeed, in that he
feared, but it cost him strong cries and tears for it, Except ye become as
little children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: As little
children, how is that? little children, if they would have any thing from their
tenderhearted Mothers, they have many dear entreaties, and pretty
insinuations to win them to it; but if those will not do, they put finger in
the eye, and will be sure to carry it by crying, then the bowels yern, and the
Mother yields. So it is in our suites to our heavenly Father. Jacob wept and
made supplication, and had power over the Angel, and prevailed, Hosea 12. 4.
Though God keep silence sometimes at our prayers, he will not hold his peace
at our tears. Psalm. 39. 12.

And now to set on the point more closely upon the conscience, by way of
application, my first address shall be to you Honorable Worthies, in a Use
of Admonition.

It is a general rule for Prayer, that the Petitions of it must be practiced
as well as prayed. We bless God for your piety in commanding, and your zeal
in commending and encouraging these solemn days of public Humiliation; we
would not have you slacker in devotion, but quicker in motion. You must pray
for peace, and pursue too the things that belong to your peace. We obtain
great Victories, but have no skill to use them, Vincere scis Hannibal, uti
victoria nescis, the time of action we while away in consultation, and improve
not those precious advantages which God puts into our hands; Dum moliuntur, dum
comuntur annus est, whilst armies might be subdued, and kingdoms reduced,
we stand recruting our unbroken Forces, like tedious musicians more in tuning
then in playing.

Scuh tiring remora's, GOD help us, hang upon our swiftest motions, we are
even undone by delays, and quickly spend what prayer has been long a getting:
And oh that the Lord would raise us up some Jehues to march furiously, (and men
are never right indeed till in this sense they are beside themselves) to put
more mettle into our Charet-wheeles, that drive so heavily: Oh that the Lord
would purge our Armies, and purge all our Bodies; our soundest bodies, God
knows, need some purging; the zeal of the Lord of Hosts must do this, man's
courage will never do it: Oh that he would casheere those that carry on
counter-motions, to protract and spin out the War, till they have broken all
our brave spirits, quite beggered the State, brought our worthy Patriots upon
their knees, and forced them in that mean posture to pray for, and pay for
too, an irreligious, dishonorable, and unsound Peace.

And I know not how it comes to pass, though we prevail, as Jacob in his
wrestling, we go away halting, and with Sampson, are creepled by the fall of
our enemies, and we spend more time in setting a bone, then they in making a
new body. To mend this I move for a new association that zealous prayer, sound
counsel, constant resolution, speedy action, be firmly joined together; let
these as water and ice, mutually produce, and be resolved too, one into
another.

Secondly, God will have mercy and not sacrifice, and justice too, rather then
sacrifice; and as he is content that the acts of his own immediate worship
should be suspended, that mercy may be exercised, so also that justice may be
executed. Get thee up, wherefore lie thou upon thy face, says the Lord to
Joshua? He is called away from his devotion to an act of Justice. Phinehas
stood up and prayed, or executed judgment, the word will bear either sense,
and it is like he performed both; prayer doubtless is a good preparative to
Judgment, and judgment as good an inforcement to prayer. Achan must be stoned,
before Israel could stand before their enemies. Jonah must over board, before
the tempest would over: 'Twas not the Son of Jesse, but those sons of Kish that
hindered the Kingdoms settlement; some of that bloody house must be hanged up
then before the judgment would cease, and they that trouble Israel, must be
troubled now before there will be peace.

In Magistrates, Jacobs voice, and Esaus rough hands are best welcome to God,
and he will not hear their Prayers, unless their hands in this sense be
full of blood. We thankfully acknowledge that many an excellent Ordnance has
passed the honorable Houses; but cui bono? when they were but brutum fulmen,
and do no execution, when they lie still as the log in the fable, till the
frogs leap upon them: would you put life into them, and turn them into storks;
they would soon make them leave their insultations; but alas! now what have
the harmless laws done, that they should be hanged up daily, till they be
dead, when Delinquents are spared?

Non leges, verum figeredisce reos. I urge not for sentences of condemnation. I
should be sorry to have Letters to excite to that: the good Emperor was sorry
he knew Letters to write: I plead only for Justice against those children of
death, such as are dead in Law already, that a tribute of wolves heads may be
laid upon bloody Ireland, till that monstrous generation of new Cannibals be
quite rooted out: and we have too cutthroats among our selves; and I hope the
good blood of those honest Clothiers, that cries loud for vengeance in Gods
ears, cries yet for Justice in yours. They have presumed to set you a Copy
like Draco's Laws in blood, if you now write after it, in red ink, and
capital Letters, they may thank themselves; and seeing they have been so bold
as to begin to their batters, make them pledge you now, and give them blood to
drink, for they are worthy. And to in large this use to all that hear me;
know that a day of humiliation must not determine with the day. God expects we
should battle, as well one way by our Fasts, as by our Feasts another; My
tears have been my meat, says David, and my prayers returned into mine own
bosom; we must live upon our prayers, and thrive by our prayers, and go forth
in the strength of our prayers: our faces should shine, and our graces should
shine after we have been fasting, as Moses with God in the Mount: show me not
the meat, but show me the man; we should show forth the effect of our
humiliation in our reformation; by our abstinence we should pine our flesh, and
starve our sins, and our repentant tears should be a Noah's flood to drown
all our old world, that there may be a new face of things, a new man, a new
creature, al things new. And for the point in hand, you must not think your
work done when your prayers are ended, you must then act over your prayers,
and live over your prayers: the Sermon ended say not it is done, that part is
wanting yet, and rests in thee, thy life must be the real Sermon. Follow
Peace, says the Apostle, we must pray for peace and follow peace, (...),
follow it with earnestness, though it fly from you pursue it though, and
pursue too the things that belong to your peace, and pursue too the enemies of
your Peace, there is no sin sure in that kind of persecution; when I see so
many Military men about the City, me thinks I might put to them the Angels
question, What do thou here Eliah? It Was a worthy speech of a brave Soldier,
My Lord Joab and the Armies of Israel are encamped in the open fields, shall I
then go down to my house? and would not he solace himself with his lawful
consort: what make they then in unlawful beds? Is my Lord Joab, and the Armies
of Israel encamped in open fields: what do these then shrouding themselves
under the umbrage of every Vintners bush, swaggering in Meseck, and revelling
in the Tents of Kedar? What do thou here Uriah?

Nos patriam fugimus, tu Tytire lentus in umbra. And for the rest, you must not
sit still neither, but up and be doing, your heads, your hearts, your hands,
your purses, all must be stirring here, all working for Peace, not only must
the rich cast into Gods treasuries of their superfluities but their substance
too, the poorest widowher mite, and every one not only his mite, but his might
also we should al lay out ourselves in all our abilities, even stretch our
selves to our utmost possibilities, ready to spend and be spent upon the
purchase of peace.

Secondly, for an use of exhortation, the duty that I press is no lip labor,
there is more in it then ask and have, pray and speed; the Kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force; we must even besiege
Heaven with our united forces, and raise such batteries against Gods gates,
that we may break open those everlasting doors, and plunder all his treasures
of eternity; and now me thinks, that we feel it coming, we should set all
our shoulders to the work, and as the Apostle bids, (...), strive together as
fellow soldiers with a full concurrence of all our might; we must even
compass Babylon, as the Israelites did Jericho, yet seven times more in one
day; and shout against it with a great shout, before the walls will come down,
and the Angel cry, Babylon is fallen, is fallen.

My last adresse shall be to you, worthy Fathers of your Country, and all that
look for redemption in Israel, in a word of Consolation. The most look upon
the armies of troubles that are mustered up against this poor Church and
State, as Elisha's Servant upon the great Host of the Assyrians about Dothan,
and cry out as he, Alas Master, how shall we do? but it may be answered with
the Prophet there, Fear not, for they that be with us, are more then they
that be with them, and would the Lord but open our eyes we might behold the
mountain filed with horses of fire and Charets of fire round about us, when at
Christ's word we have walked often upon the proud waves of a roaring sea, seen
their rage and tumult broken into foame, and ebbing into emptiness, yet when a
stronger gust then ordinary blows upon us, we are ready to cry out with Peter
in his fear, Lord save us we perish; and we well deserve to be chid for it,
why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Every cockboat can sail in a
river, every Scule can live in a calm. God has embarked you, Worthy Pilots,
in the good Ship called the Victory; this is the victory that overcommeth, even
your faith; and you have by you the Anchor of hope, the Sheat-Anchor that will
hold, when all other tackling fails, and therefore though the blackest tempest
rises, and one deep calls, etc. you may ride on though the great billows
rowles toward you, even in the deep waterfloods your spirits need not faint,
nor your heart fail; but you may lift up the crest, and bear up your heads;
and be of good cheer, You carry not Caesar, but Christ: Nay, as in the old
Emblem of Saint Christopher, you bear not Christ, but Christ bears you: They
can never sink that have the Word for their Compass, and Christ for the Helm.
'Twas the pious presumption of holy Ambrose, wherewith he comforted Monica
Austins Mother then a Manichee, whom she had daily with much importunity
recommended to the Throne of Grace, Impossible est ut filius istarum
lachrymarum pereat, It is impossible that a Son of so many prayers and tears
should die an heretic. And may we not much more with an humble confidtnce
build upon the mercy of God, for the preservation and deliverance of this poor
afflicted Church and State, which have been the subjects of so much godly
sorrow in so many days of public and private humiliation? It is beyond all
belief, that a Mother Church, a Mother State, of so many prayers and tears,
should ever sit as a widow, mourning like Rachel; that such a Bochim, a place
of weepers, should be turned into Aceldama, a field of blood. Right Honorable
and ever Honored Patiots, God will give you beauty for ashes, the garments of
joy for the spirit of heaviness; and as you have been Ben-onies, the Sons of
our sorrow, so God will make you his Benjamins, the Sons of his right hand,
and the Kingdoms joy. That man sure is in a good way of thriving, that has a
stock going in every part of the Kingdom at once: So our Parliament, our
Armies, our Navy, when they have a stock of Prayers going for them in every
part of the Protestant World, when they have so many able Factors and Agents
negotiating for them at the throne of grace; one Paul saved the lives of all in
the Ship. One innocent delivers the Island. And shall not many Paul's, and many
innocents much more do it now? One Eliah, and one Elisha were the Charets of
Israel, and the horsemen thereof; and shall not many such be Armies Royal,
and Navies Royal now? If one righteous man were found in Jerusalem, the Lord
would pardon it, Jer. 5. If ten righteous had been found in Sodom it self,
God would not destroy it for tens sake. Has God forgotten to be gracious, will
he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure when so many righteous are in this
Kingdom, and in this City, will he make it like Sodom, and make it like
Gomorrah?

I will not execute the fierceness of my anger, I will not return to destroy
Ephraim: For I am God and not Man, the holy One in the midst of thee; and I
will not enter into the City.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4 l. 27. r. as the maine p 5. l. 1. r. motion p 7. l. 21. for infested,
ri infested. p. 15. l. 31. for future, r. secure, p 26. l. 12. for be r. lic.

A Catalogue of the names of those Divines who have Preached before the
Parliament, beginning Jan. 18. to September 25. 1644.
At a Thanksgiving before the Parliament and City of London. Jan. 18. -- Mr.
Marshall, 1 Chronicles. 12. 38, 39, 40. Jan. 31. -- Mr. Cawdrey, Prove. 29. 8. Mr.
Rutherford, Dan. 6. 26.
Febr. 28. -- Mr. Baylie, Zach. 3. 1, 2. Mr. Young, Psalm. 31. 24.
Mar. 27. -- Mr. Gillespie, Ezekiel. 43. 11. Mr. Bond, Isa. 45. 15.



A Thanksgiving for the Victory over Sir. R. Hoptons Army. Apr. 9. -- Mr. Ob.
Sedgwicke, Psalm. 3. 8. Mr. Case, Dan. 11. 32.



At the Thanksgiving for the Victory at Selby in Yorkshire Apr. 23. -- Mr.
Perne, Exodus 34. 6. Mr. Carryl, Rev. 11. 16, 17.
Apr. 24. -- Dr. Staunton, Deuteronomy. 32. 31. Mr. Green, Neh. 1. 3, 4.
May 29. -- Dr. Smith, Psalm. 107. 6. Mr. Henry Hall, Mat. 11. 12.
June 26. -- Mr. Hardwicke, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Mr. Hickes, Isa. 28. 5, 6.



At the Thanksgiving for the Victory over Prince Rupert, and the surrender of
York. July 18. -- Mr. Vines, Isa. 63. 8. Mr. Henderson, Mat. 14. 21.
July. 31. -- Mr. Rathband, not Printed. Mr. Stanley Gower, Dan. 12. 10.
Aug. 13. -- Mr. Hill. At a fast extraordinary. Mr. Palmer. At a fast
extraordinary.
Aug. 28. -- Mr. Rayner, Hag. 2. 6, 7. Mr. Tesdale, Psalm. 122. 6.
Sep. 12. -- Mr. Newcomen, Joh. 7. 10. At a East extraordinary. Mr. Coleman,
Psalm. 66. 3. At a East extraordinary.
Sept. 25. -- Mr. Prophet, Isa. 9. 14. Mr. Seaman, 1 King. 39.




