To the People of ENGLAND.
OYe people of England, whose iniquities are broken forth like the breaking of
the Sea, whose mire and filth appears in every place; O what an evil savor is
come up in every place; The Land stinks before the Lord because of the
abominations that makes desolate in every place. Oh! the filthy May-Poles that
Heathenish thing, how they stand up in every place, some Naked, some Painted,
and decked with Flowers, Garlands, Ribbans and such foolish things, after the
custom of the Heathen of old that knew not God; And Oh! with what Shoutings,
abominable Drinkings, foolish Dancings and Noises have they been brought in and
set up in thy Towns and Villages, Oh! poor naked England, as if thou had lost
all taste and savor of Christian Religion; And what will the Heathens and
Papists say when they hear the report of thee and thy Children? Old and young
even mad after their Idols, and none scarce any courage left to help in these
things, the hands of all even as it were fallen down in thee, and few but a
company of hidden mourners lays the things to heart that are ready to
overwhelm thee. Oh! the cry, the cry of thy sins O England is grown great, and
thou have been often warned by the Lord God, but thou have not repented, but
even hardened thy heart, and fitted thy self for destruction; And what shall the
Lord now do unto thee, but even open the Floodgates of his vengeance, and
cause his wrath to come upon thee, judgment upon judgment, misery upon
misery, till thou be brought low and be made very small, and in the dust it may
be thou will remember the Lord, and cry unto him.

But Oh! what Lamentation shall be taken up for thee and for thy Teachers in
the midst of thee O wretched England; for thy Teachers have also manifested
themselves to every eye to be a company of self-seeking men, striving one with
another about the Fleece, but none helping or healing the diseases and wounds
of the poor torn scattered flock, but every one cries give, give, they all look
to their own way, their gain from their quarter, and fear not me says the Lord
God; the best of them is as a bryar, and the most upright among them as a
Thorn-hedge; And now is the Lord arising, and he that has overcome is coming
in his mighty Power to dash the Potsheards of the earth together and break them
one against another, and Babylon the Great shall fall and be a place for
Dragons, and be no more inhabited by* any son of man, as the Lord has said,
for ever.

So howl ye Wildernesses, and rejoice ye fruitful Fields, for the Lord has
visited Sion and comforted his afflicted, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords,
and the haughtiness of the world shall be humbled, and the loftiness of their
looks shall be brought low, that the Lord God alone may be exalted for he is
worthy; And this is our holy Hope, and living Confidence, and faithful Witness,
who are counted worthy of God to bear his reproach amongst you O people under
the name of Quakers.

So people cease striving against the Lord and his witness in you, and devise
not evil against the innocent, but fear the Lord and in time repent, least his
fury break in upon you, and his fiery Judgments be multiplied upon you, which
none can stop or quench, for yet the day of your visitation is not wholly past.

Tho: Tailor:

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, 1660.


