Themista and Euphorbus In a familiar Dialogue, plainly Discovering, and
passionately Bemoning, the Exorbitances of the World in the Administration of
JUSTICE.

Composed at first for a private Diversion, and now presented to the Worthy
Maioralty within the Famous and ancient Borough of TAVISTOCK, Devon; Newly
Incorporated by His Maiesty's special Favor, and with the Assistance of the
Honorable Sr James Butler Knight.

By PHILOPOLITES.

-- facit indignatio versus. Hor. LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1683.

To the Worshipful the MAYOR, Together, with the Aldermen and their
Assistants, within the Famous and Ancient Borough of TAVISTOCK, Devon.
THis will come too late to tell you how Acceptable this Infant Maioralty was
in its very Embrio to the Author himself. How much also he shared with you in
the Common Entertainments (before it saw the Light) has been known to many,
but best Understood (certainly most sensibly felt) by himself. But
notwithstanding Envy and Might the Top-stone of the Structure is brought forth,
let it be attended with Shoutings, and Cry, Grace, Grace, unto it, I mean,
Thanks to God and the King.

There are yet Malevolents (like the Old Tobies) in a corner, Cursing,
Deprecating and Scoffing in the Ancient Dialect. If a Fox go up, he shall even
break down their Strong Wall. Neke. 4.3.
Let these both Talk and Do as they list. You may destroy it your selves: Your
Enemies cannot injure it. So long as ye follow the Undoubted Rules and Dictates
of Justice ye are safe, and this you have on the Word of God and Caesar both.

Had the Prize now in yours been lodged in the Hands of our Ancestors but a
Centurie of Years agone, How glorious a Town, how happy a People had we been?
The Government now obtained and possessed by you; by them, could only be wished
and longed for. It was too great a Boon for them to expect, or their Sultans to
allow. But what then seemed impossible, is now effected, by the Benignity of a
Gracious Prince, and the Indefatigable Industry of a Noble Friend. God forbid,
so great a Blessing in it self should become by Sinister Administrations an
Evil to the place. That Justice should be turned into Wormwood. It Is what your
Enemies Maliciously expect, and your Friends as passionately pray against.

Nature (Gent.) has done its part, and been not a little propitious to our
Clyme, Culled it out as a Subject, upon which she has peculiarly doted beyond
all places of this Western spot of Britain: Blessed us in the Transcendent
Excellencies of all the Elements, aptly situated us for Trade: Inspired our
Natives with such Mercurial Souls as have rendered them capable of serving
Princes in the very highest Capacities of Church and State, at Sea and Land, in
War and Peace. What remains but that ye also in your Spheres should Worthyly
Act your parts, and become the fairest Pattern in your Administrations for
Posterity to Observe and Imitate? If you fail in this, The World will swear,
your Extraction is Foreign, and that you bear the Name only, not the Nature of
the Ancient TAVISTOKIANS.

Gent. I heartily wish your Prosperity, and on that account (having no better)
have presented you with this Dialogue, not Sawcily to direct, but humbly to
mind you. May it in the Initiation of your setting forth into a Turbulent Ocean
prove a Lanthern to precaution you against the Rocks and Shelves that have been
fatal to too many. And why should not this Infant-Muse and our Infant-Maioralty
be good Company? Being born in the same place, Why may they not Breath together
in the same Air, especially at Tavistock, where they speak Poesy as Naturally
as they spit? Heavens Bless you all, and make you as good as your Government,
So Prays

Your Fellow Native, and Humble SERVANT, Philopolites.
Tavist. Sep. 3d, 1682.
To my Book.
WELL, since it is thy Lot, and that thou durst
Thus make a Sally, and Adventure first,
Leaving thy Brethren for a pause, to dwell
Within their Silent yet Securer Cell,
Heavens be thy speed. I know already some
Abhor thy Front, and do fore-bode thy Doom.
These, pincht with Guilt, in their unhallowed Ire
Could thee in Pieces tear, or damn to Fire:
Whilst (guiltless) thou do only Vices blame
And leave the Offender uncomrould by Name.
Be not dismayed, thou do a Mistress serve
That is thy Patron, and will thee preserve,
(The blessed Themista) who with Sword and Scale
Will give due merits unto Actions all.
"The Stars themselves, rather than Right shall fail,
"In their bright Sockets shall consume and quail.
Heaven will provide thee Friends in Court and City,
Which will thee lodge, and her extremely pity;
Embrace thy Leaves with candor, and declare,
How much that they concerned for Justice are:
They Will mix their Prayers with her redundant tears,
Till this World moulder, and a new appears.
THEMISTA Explaining her self in a Soliloquie.
ALas! why hated thus? and why am I
So great a terror to Humanity?
How can I be Injurious? who did find
Hard Measure from a Woman that is Blind?
I know nor Friend nor Foe. The Scales you view
Gives to each Person but what is his Due.
Nor is my Sex so cursed, my Looks so wan
To be a Scarecrow to an upright Man.
Mine Extract is not vile, I came from Deus metuens, ne Universa hominum
Communitas interiet Pudorem jis dedit and Iustitiam ut essent Civitatum Vincula
and Ornamenta Sinequibus civilem S^cietaten^ o^ju^ctionemque dissipari Necesse
fuit. Piat. in Prot.
Heaven
And can do nothing but what is Just and even.
Princes adore me through the boundless World,
And often their Crown have at my Footstool hurld;
Yea, to mine Honor as a Victim have
Themselves up given to the ravenous Grave.
Great store of Orphans and of poor oppressed
Their troubled minds do at my Portals rest.
Armies of Martyrs and confessing Bands
Await to take their Garlands at mine Hands.
The Sword I bear is only to defend
The Innocent against such as wrongs intend,
Nor out my Scabbard shall I ever it draw,
But when I am invaded, or my Law.
If Tyrants seize me and perchance me wrest, A gente ad gentem Transfertur
regnum propter Injustitiam. Siracid.

To serve their turn and selfish Interest;
Lay not the blame (like fools) on me, for I
Shall soon avenge my wronged Sov'raignty,
Resume my Crown, and with undaunted might
Will in full specie, their effronts requite.
Themista I Will go to heaven again and there i will say
Lord hasten thy Long Lookd for Iudgmt day

Euphorbus O Heauns. forbid sholdest thou depart from hence
Ill men Would have their Wish, good Loose their sense



THEMISTA Ill at ease, is Visited by EVPHORBVS.
Euphorbus a Divine, MADAM! what ailes ye? I am sad to see
Your Ladyship in such an Agony.
Where Is your Distemper? in what part does lie
The great occasion of your Malady?
Not many days ago, how brisque you were?
I never beheld a Bride much cheerfuller:
Now with dejected brows you 'front the ground chance?
Seem like one fallen in a fatal swound.
No Word, no Motion; Lord! whence is this
For Gods sake rouse, and do your self advance;
Impart your griefs, and if ought may be done
Within the compass of my Function,
None shall within the Universe you find
That to your comfort shall be more inclined.
With this she sighs and makes a doleful groan,
And to Euphorbus does express her moan.

Themista, Justice. Dear Sir! she said, I Am glad to see you here,
Your very presence does my Vitals cheer.
'T'is not the least of mine affliction that
I Have Unfrequented in this posture sat.
Heaven lately sent me in abundant Love
From my blessed Station in the World above,
To Yield my service to an Earthly throng
That daily did complain of fraud and wrong.
And tho I Am come to do them lawful right,
There Is none that cares to come within my sight;
As if I were a Spectrum, or some Ghost,
Which never before arrived in their Coast.
The name of Justice does extremely make
The Hearts of Pcasant and of Prince to quake,
So that upon my Throne (neglected) I
Awaited them that did my presence fly.
I Will go to Heaven again, and there I Will say,
Lord! hasten thy long-looked for Judgment day;
Take my Commission in thy Hands again,
For thou art Judge of Angels and of Men.

Euphorbus. Madam! I tremble at your hasty flight,
When Titan hides himself we are clothed with night.
The World into its Chaos old would turn, Justitia remora, nil aliud Sunt regna
Ni si latrocinia Greg.

If you should leave us, and your work adjourn
Unto that fatal day. Both Devils and Men,
Like Rav'ning Lions, soon would quit their Den
To Prey upon the Innocent: Fiat Justitia aut percat Mundus. Coes-Ferd.
and who
Shall rescue them that are so weak, so few?
For their Sakes yet abide, and if there be
Malignants that oppose your Sov'raignty,
Expose them to the Light, within my Sphere
I shall without respect to Love or Fear,
Declare your Message in their stubborn Ear.

Themista. I thank you Sir! you have in part allayed
The heavy Burden on my Heart was laid.
But yet I doubt my labor will be vain,
My Foes have got the Throne and proudly reign,
They Will scorn my message, and your counsel slight,
Perchance confound you with their raging might.

Euphorbus. Madam! this shall not me at all deter,
From being your most Faithful Messenger.
Heavens promised aid, I never yet have mist
Since first I was ordained Evangelist;
They will afford me Tongue, and whet my words,
Which deeper shall them wound then Spears or Swords
My foreheads made of Brass, I Will flatter none
I Will face both Prince and Judge upon the Throne,
And if I fall in doing of my trust,
My Blood will not be smothered in the Dust.

Themista. Bravely resolved, and if your courage hold,
I shall before your reverend Eyes unfold,
Who are the Miscreants, which do daily lay
A Thousand Scandals in my Duties way.
I Will first begin with one A Self-loving Judge.
Philautus who
(Often taken for an honest Judge and true)
And on that only Supposition,
Has for a season long possessed the Throne.
But on a narrow search I did him find,
One that Immensly to Himself is kind,
Respects not me. He is a Corp'lent Beast,
One hugely pleased with a sumptuous Feast.
May he but Riot and drink Wine in Bowls,
He Will slight all Humane Bodies, States and Souls.
He seems Pur-blind, but at times his Eye,
Will in a Pack of Hay a Needle 'spy.
On's still intensly fixed upon himself,
His gaped for Honor and his Mounts of pels,
The other keeps close, or open's wide,
As his own Interest does best him guide.
He flatters great Men, but toward the Clown,
(Without regard to me) he casts a frown,
He pumps his Princes humor, and will strain
A Point in Law, his favor to obtain,
Wherein may he but have the hope to live,
He Will sriendly seem to the Prerogative,
And raise it higher than it was before,
Waving the Laws, the Subjects, Wealth, or Gore.
This have I known, and hence it comes to pass,
Poor Men so often becomes the Great Man's Ass
To bear their loads, till (fore oppressed) she cast
Them all, and fall into the Mire at last.
Go tell this Wretch in spite of Prince or Pope
He merits not a Scarlet Gown, but Rope:
For not their Honor nor their Weal he minds,
(When thus the Faces of the Poor he grindes)
But his own Profit, which when he does draw
Within the Clutches of his ravenous Paw,
He has his End. Then goes in holes to Quaff,
And at their Ruins all does Jeer and Laugh.
If he will not hear you, but will disbelieve
This perfect Narrative that I do give:
If all consent with him, and therefore will not
This Horrid Caitiffe at their Bar effront,
I Will come my self, and will due Vengeance pay
Upon their Heads in an unlooked for day.
My Name no longer shall become a shroud
To harm the Guiltless and secure the Proud.

Euphorbus. In Reverence Madam! of your Sacred Name,
I shall the Message in their Ears proclaim,
Nor from its method Retrograde an ace,
Giving each accent its deserved Grace.
Tell who is the next Malignant that has dared
To Clog your way and reg'lar course ensnared.

Themista. A Covetous One.
Philarguros I next must roundly blame,
For he has oftentimes usurped my Name;
Whose Justice (if it to him I may ascribe)
Was ever midwif'd with a whisking Bribe.
This Oil l'argent is what men most apply,
On's Chariot Wheels to make them swiftly fly,
Without the which, when on the Bench he sits,
He is Indifferent whether he miss or hits;
But leaves it to the Faithless Jury, to
Improve it for their Friend, or against their Foe.
Nor may you wonder such a Kennel are,
Of Jurymen before my Reverend Bar.
Scenting the Prey; for where the Carrion is
Eagles do gather in great Companies.
A Judge corrupt, soon makes a Jury so,
Like unto Like, the Proverb still does go.
Such Correspondence is betwixt them all,
That into varience they do seldom fall;
Nor is it consistent with the Politics,
That they should blab abroad each others tricks.
Philarguros his Hand receives anon
What Is sacrificed to his Devotion,
Which by a due Observance you may find,
Is still extended on his Breech behind,
Lest that his squeazy Optics hap to be,
The Witness of his Cursed Briberie,
And that if called to Swear, upon good cause,
May say, I never saw Bribe from that man's Paws.
This done, his Name is in a Table set,
And sure this Man he will not once forget.
His Eyes are piercing, and they quickly ken
His Benefactors from all other Men.
One thing material I must mention more,
So greedy is he after Yellow Oar;
That before the Sun the Horizon forgo'th,
This Cormorant takes Fees of partys both.
Nor is it because his Mem'rie is unsound,
But that his Avarice is so profound,
His busmess well enough does understand,
At Pleading therefore has a Trick in Hand,
For there such Quirks and Niceties he displays,
The Lawyers are confused at what he says:
And such a dust before their Eyes does throw,
There Is none can tell for whom the cause will go
All which is done with art political,
To cheat the Videndum est maxi me, Ne Civitas legibus fundata legib. avertatur
laert.
Law, the Cliem, Court and all.
Hence comes a motion from his ravenous throat,
That some good Neighbors would their peace promote,
Urges a reference, and does name the Squires
Fittest to follow his most just desires,
Which if refused, as it often falls out,
(For neither party has great cause to doubt)
The Jury by some signal mark or thing
A special Verdict to the Court does bring,
Which does divide the cause between them so,
That one cannot well against the other crow.
This proves at times of such Validity,
Both prize it equal with a Victory.
His Lewis the 11th King of France, wore a Leaden Crucifix in his Bonnet, which
as often as he murdered any Body, he kissed it, and craved Perdon. Many take God
for a Leaden One.
Lordship laughs in's sleeve at all is done,
Thinks least of Heaven or Damnation.

Euphorbus. Madam! you little think with what sad Heart
(Whilst you the sad relation do impart
Of this Philarguros,) I here do sit,
Lord help this World, or else finish it.
Nor am I less affected when I mind
The Nil publicae mercis tam Venale quam hodie Advocatorum perfidia sit Tacit.
Perjuries you in the Juries find.
In my small time I Have observation made,
There are of that employ that mak't a trade:
And these like Hounds that after Carrion go,
At ev'ry' ssize themselves in clusters show. Caninum Studium and Confessum
latrocinium. Columetra.
These keep their Chambers and with brazen pate
Do sit like Barristers in Pomp and State,
Whom vile Attorneys and base gentry do,
Most shamelesly in Troops resort unto,
To tempt (like Devils) them to things unjust,
And damn their Souls for white and yellow Dust.

Themista. My Dear Euphorbus! whilst you are on this head
I Will tell you lately what has happened,
Within Schlwvonia at a Trial there,
The truth of which you need not doubt or fear.
Upon Novembers Mon'th (if not miscast)
A Trial in the Basha's Court there past,
'T wixt Guelp and Gibeline (for so it was
All men almost for one of these did pass)
The Action frivolous (as most actions are,
That come to be determined at that Bar)
The Plaintiffs Witness and Defendants both,
Where equal for their Number and their Troth.
Their Oaths quite cross unto each others go,
One Swore 't was Pitch the other Swore 't was Snow.
The Jury were a dozen Sans compare,
And could his Worship humor to an hair.
These did the Basha gravely counsel give,
To make their Verdict as they did believe.
They pond'ring, who was Guelp, who Gibeline,
Lo! where is the Gib, the cause is clearly thine.
That day one Trial only passed more,
Which was as frivolous as that before.
Where upon Oath shrewd Witnesses arose,
To prove the Basha did on them impose,
A false Record, which though he understood,
As well's his Deputy Gusmannus Crude,
Yet spite of fate the Trial must be past,
Wherein the Guelp quite on his back was cast.

Euphorbus, I lately of that Court indeed have heard,
And that the Basha has it merely marred,
By Packing Juries and perverting right,
According to the Dictates of his spite.
Such counter swearing amongst them there is (it is said)
That some for fear have from these Trials fled,
And if the Pillory had but its due,
St. Eustace might afford cheap heaps of Glue.
Yet has that Boni Viri and boni vini Originem non curiose inquirendum Coef.
Ferd. 1.
place for Ages been renowned,
For lofty Poets and Divines profound,
Acutest Lawy'rs and more not to name,
Here sucked their Milk, Men of great parts and fame;
That Air ('it is thought) did nature so supply,
It was a Natural Academie.
But by what strange mishap I cannot say,
It Is waxt Adult'rate, and its brightest day
Is changed to night, where long has dwelt the Owl,
And a lame Goose has kept the Capitol.

Themista. I Am sensible Euphorbus, I Have digrest
Now of Philarguros, I Will tell the rest
One noted slight his Avarice more to heal,
I shall to thee impartially reveal,
He Will tell the World. how great a Foe he is
To all that Excreise Embraceries.
Curses the Hand that takes Bribe or Fee
Against the rules of Law or Equity.
Yet Fryar-like that could not Finger Gold,
His Boy can freely touched and't safely hold.
This mighty man (whilst he is at Chancery Bar)
Does keep at Home a fatter one by far,
Managed by Stewards with that care and wit,
Af if at Athens they had studied it.
In comes a Coach that is daubed without with Gold,
Within, Rich Linings as Man can behold,
Drawn by six Stalions of Barbarian Race,
Which are a Present for his Lady Grace,
Then comes another with a glittering Watch,
Span-new from Artists Hands, sans flaw or patch,
Which in great caution by the waiting-maid
Into his Daughters keeping is conveyed,
Nor needs it Motto to declare the hap,
For which it falls a Victim to her lap,
Anon a Team of Oxen, bell'wing come,
Which with hard driving at the Mouth do foam.
These does the nimble Hind install enfold,
Until his master come and them behold.
Nor is their Dairy-Maid or Horseman vile,
Whose Hand base Bribery does not defile.
But what they take, besure shall not wast or rust,
(Alas poor Souls! they are but Slaves in trust,)
For these at even to Philarguros,
Yield up account with every farthing-cross,
Together with the Names of such great men,
As brought these generous Presents to his Den,
Which on his Book are set, He Will damn his Soul,
But in due season will well-please them all.

Euphorbus. Lord! bless me, these affairs are strange and rare,
And were never heard of in a Christian Air.
Turkey it self where the great Sultan sways,
Has no Example of such crimes as these.
Madam! I shall herein you truly serve,
And give that Sentence which their Sins deserve,

Themista. Euphorbus! Pardon me I make so bold
And to thine Ears that I these things have told.
It is some ease to mine afflicted Heart,
That I with freedom can these things impart.
Contracted grief within so narrow room,
Would else be sure Prognostic of my doom.
My next essay, shall therefore be to paint
Out A Coward.
Periphobes, that fictitious Saint,
Whom for his mildness some would fain adore.
An Apple fair he is, unfound at Core.
Whose Compass' is his fancy and does bear
Within his Breast an Heart much like an Dlonysius metu anxius and nemini se
credens familiarium Suorum aut propinquorum tonderefilias Suas docuit ne
tonsori Collum commit. terer, aquibus tamen is, cumiam esseut Adultae, ferrum
removit, Instituitq. ut Candentibus juglandium putaminibus barbam sibi and
Capilum adurerent.
Hare.
Such Ears likewise he has. The murmuring sound
But of a Bush, he takes for an Hound,
Which makes him take his Legs and run for fear,
When not the least apparent danger 's near.
And hence it is when on the Throne he sits,
A bold Offender drives him from his wits,
A boisterous word from either Count or Clown,
Shall run his Majesterial Honor down.
So that without respect unto the cause,
Often to their Rage does sacrifize the Laws.
Fear being in the Scale, I often him find,
The Faces of distressed ones to grind,
Without reluctance or respect to me,
Against his Oath which should most Sacred be:
For he well knows these can no Patrons have,
That from his Hands might juster measure crave.

Euphorbus. A Plaugy Pest it is, and like it none,
To see a Artemon adeo timidusfuit, ut domi plurimum viveret Servis duobus
Scutum aereum Supia Caput Semper tenentibus, ue quod Superne Caderet aut ne
Caeium rueret. Herae. par.
Coward sit upon a Throne.
None are more cruel, none more Sanguine be,
When favored with fit Opportunity.
Mauricius the Emp'ror cannot inhast,
Out of my Thoughts without great dread be cast,
Who sick at Heart, did dream by Phocas, he
One time or other should assaffin'd be,
He asks Phillip what might Phocas be?
One of thine own Centariens, says he.
A Man of great Ambition, but withal
There Is not such Coward more among them all.
Then he will my Murdrer be, a Bloody Spirit,
(Says he) a Poltrons breast does still inherit.
He proved true Prophet, for within few days,
He killed the Emp'ror and his Scepter sways.

Themista. Patly applied Euphorbus, I Will go on,
With Periphobes and his Passion.
Some to his guilt this Passion do impute,
Others do this Conjecture quite confute,
Ascribing it unto his vast Estate,
Which he would keep against the checks of Fate,
By hoarding up a swarm of Friends that may
Be useful to him in a doubtful Day.
Others again do charge this Action foul
Upon the narrowness of his own Soul.
Let these enjoy their Humors, but I must
To thee declare the reason true and just.
He fears not God and cannot at all believe,
What Divine Records of his Name do give.
His matchless Justice, Holiness and Power
Reside not on his serious Thoughts an hour;
May he therefore secure his Corpse and pelf,
With thoughts of Hell he will not disease himself,
Nor love of Justice make him open his Jaws,
For God, his People, or his sacred Laws.

Euphorbus. Lord! I Am aston'd at what I now do hear,
Who could once think there could such panick fear
Seize that Man's Heart, who holds his abode,
In seat of Justice, and in place of God?
When of our Savior's Crucifiction, I
With seriousness peruse the History:
I do observe for no Inferior cause,
That Jesus Christ our Lord Condemned was
By Pilate, for he feared the People Rude,
And killed our Lord to please the Multitude.
And therefore justly in our Christian Creed,
His most abhorred Name is Jibbeted,
That Generations whilst the World shall last,
May of the like Injustice be aghast.
A modern Story likewise comes to mind,
Of one Judge Morgan which Inrol'd we find,
Within the Reign of Mary, Englands queen,
Which without Trembling cannot be read or seen.
This Man in Judgment sat on Lady Jane
An Innocent, yet was most roughly taken
And brought at his Tribunal. Her cause heard
His Conscience pricked him, but because afear'd
In quitting her, he might procure a Frown,
From either Privy-Counsel or the Crown:
He did a fatal Sentence against her pass,
Accordingly she Executed was.
Immediately the Judge grows wondrous sad,
And desperately died Raging Mad.
One recent instance more I cannot but Name,
Which public stories in our Ears procla'me
And therefore shall with reverence tell the same.
How did King Charles of all Kings the best,
At's dying hour, even from his Heart detest
That Fact of his in giving his consent,
To Straffords Death, awed by the Parliament,
No Sin of his on's Conscience gastlier stood,
Then the effusion of his Guiltless Blood:
Let these Examples make the World beware,
How they wound Justice on a groundless fear.

Themista, My Dear Euphorbus! I shall nothing say,
Concerning Periphobes more this Day,
Mind only how I do his crimes resent,
And with all sharpness urge him to repent.
I Will name another one Mamodes A Furious One.

That does me most Notorious Injuries:
He bears a dreadful presence where he rules,
And counts all Men (save himself) but Fools.
His Eyes are sparkling, as if they would bore
The Breasts of Mortals, to find out a Sore. Quo pacto quispium aut jus recte
dicere aut homines decenter Judicare posset quinon Utrumq litigantem audiverit
Plato.

His Nose long-hang'd (like to a Vultures Snout)
That at a Distance scents Delinquents out.
A Crudelitatis horridus est habitus. Truculenta facies Violenti Spititus, Vox
terribilis. Ora minis et cru entis imperiis referta, (ui Silentium donare
incremertum est adricere. Val. Max. 1 9.
single Eared Gentleman he is,
And that is half Deaf for want of Exercise.
The first complaint one Ear so long en grost,
The sense of the other is quite gone and lost;
Yea, such Disease on that one Ear is grown,
He is offended at some kinds of tone.
What the distemper is, great thoughts there be,
Some take it for a Noli me tangere,
For if this humor any chance to touch, Difficilem oporlet anrem habere ad
crimina. Publi*

He Will bite and snarl his froward temper's, such
As if the Laws that are both good and right,
Were to vail Bonnet to his Rage and spite.
So that e're Prisoners at the Bar can speak, Ira in auribus habitat.

He does into a thundering Passion break, Oportet Judicem aures obiusas habere
and hebetes ad rumores atque fabulas. Plato.

Which ore their Hearts does such affrightment spread,
That before they know their crimes, they are half dead.
Anon the Indictments read, wherein are told
Ten Crimes, among them which scarce one will hold,
With such dread Circumstances more beside,
He must a Devil be if not belied. Nihil est violentius aure Tyranni. Satyr:
Persp. cierdum est Judicanti Nequid, aut durius aut remissius Constituatur quam
causa deposcit Martiarus.

Up stands Maniodes, Sirrah! you hear
What against you will (faith he) be made appear,
The Hanging is the worst use a man can be put unto. Clarendon. St. H. W.
Gallows long since Villain! groaned for thee
And thither shortly shall thy Carcass be,
What further have thou in defense to say,
Till Derick come and take thee quite away?
He Is mute the very thoughts of threatened Death,
Lays a suspension on his coming Breath.
Thus he behaves himself at open Bar,
And in the Country is no less severe.
For he no sooner comes in Towns and sits,
But he is enquiring after Hugonets,
Summons the Officers to bring him in,
A List of such as have most guilty bin.
This so much does allarm the Neighborhood,
Men leave their Houses to possess some Wood,
And though the Lion did design his Paw,
against horned Beasts alone that crossed his Law.
Yet will the Hare, whose fall the Lion scorns,
Tremble for fear, his Ears be termed Horns.

Euphorbus, Madam! the truth of this must be believed,
By what I know in Spain, where once I lived,
And therefore for diversions-sake shall tell,
What an affrighted Peasant there befell.
A Lord Inquisitor by chance did range,
And came into a silly Peasants Grange,
On whom poor Soul! no sooner cast his sight,
But fell a trembling before this man of might,
As if some Ghost or Demon rather had
Appeared, and in some ghastly garb been clad.
And having little to procure him grace,
For he was poor and in a thrift-less case,
A Flasque of Pears before his Lordship brings,
In most submissive mode amongst other things,
Which are accepted: but when they were spent,
His Lordship (not remote) him message sent.
He must needs speak with him. "Lord! what is the cause,
"(Thinks he) I never did offend the Laws,
"I am no Hugonet nor Heretic,
"Nor at the Churches Rites did ever stick,
"Both Mass and Mattens I did still frequent,
" Confessed and Penance did in time of Lent.
" Calvin and Luther I do curse and hate,
"Nor did I think or act against Church or State.
"What have I done, that I must go before
"His Direful Lordship, the Inquisitor?
Immediately the Peasant takes his Bed,
Nor Eats, nor Drinks, looks like a man that is dead.
His Lordship hearing that the Man was Ill,
And could not in that part observe his will,
Another Messenger at last repaires,
Tells him, his Lordship only begs some Pears.
He soon revives, and presently did go,
Into the Orchard where his Fruit did grow:
Roots up the Tree, and with good will anon,
Delivers it with store of Fruit th^^^
The Messenger condemns his rashness, and
Acquaints him, that he did not understand
His drift herein: His Lordships only wish,
Out of that Store, was but one friendly Dish.
"Good Sir! be pleased, he said, and forthwith wept,
"Within my House and Garden shall be kept
"Naught what his Lordship loves: now you have the tree
" You nor your Lord shall I hope more to see
"For I protest, Death don't I more abhor,
"Than the grim looks of the Inquisitor,
"The thoughts of whom since thou last saw my house,
"Has made me value Life not at one Louse.
Justice severely Scriptum Sequi Calum niatoris est beni vero Judicis
auct^rit^tem volentatemque desendere.
rackt, grows wan and dies,
Its empty Throne, Oppression soon supplies,
Whose direful rage unduely Subjects awes,
And works abhorrence both to Lords and Laws.
God keep St. Eustace's Government, that she
May not transgress the bounds of Eqnity.
Lest she turn Tyrant, and perchance what is worse,
Her Infant May'r look like her Old Termultis annts prae teteritis div ulgatum
sui^ quoddam Spectrum eo Nomine Mense Decembris, ibi. Perambulasse.
black horse.
Excuse me if I Have this you told in vain.
Madam! I long to hear what does remain.

Themista, Some are perchance surpised, and brought before
His Worship, who like Lord Inquisitor,
Gives them their Oath. You shall make answer true,
To all such Questions as are asked of you:
And forthwith by a most Imperial Nod,
Bids him to Kiss the Book, so help you God.
By Contents of the Book which you have kissed,
When (says he) last took you the Eucharist?
When were you at the Mass? when were you shrift?
And let your answer be without a shift;
When did you Penance? likewise tell me who
Was that damned Heretic last preached to you?
These silly Lambs, what man can but condole,
Who hereby damn their Body or their Soul.
Nor can they from his dreadful Sentence fly,
Without the cursed help of Perjury.

Euphorbus. Hev'ns bless our Nation, and maintain the Jura publica certissima
sunt humanae Vitae Solatia infirmorum auxilia potentum fraena. Cassiod.
Law,
Which does on Subjects no such mischief draw,
But every Peccant is per testes charged,
For want of which the Prisoner is enlarged.
The Ex-official Oath, the Parliament
To Rome and Hell from whence it came has sent.
That Court or Judge that shall it re-inspire,
Falls Sans redress into a Praemunire.
And this Right Magna Charta does convey,
None is himself obliged to betray.

Themista. I know the English Laws are just and good,
Yet by some Rulers not well understood;
They with like Oaths as these (not taking care)
Often against the Law some silly Souls ensnare,
But for Gods sake and your own Countries good,
Tell what I say. Bid them beware of Injuste reum absoluere, quam injuste
damnate and Occidere praestat. illnd namque peccatum hoc Impietas. Antipho.
Blood.
The Miscreant next Parantmos we have,
A Gentleman both Ancient, Wise and Grave,
His Eyes are roving all the World about,
To find the humors (...) all Persons out;
Of which he keeps account so full, so true,
He knows their Birth, 'State, Parts, Friends store or few.
His Memory his his Mon'ter that directs
Him how to give them all their meet respects,
Squaring the Measures of his Actions so,
His favors ever with the stream do go.
Hence is it when that two differees have long,
Been by the Ears concerning right and wrong,
Met at the Bar to hear the Sentence last,
That likely, shall be at the Action past:
The very Clowns that least of Law do know,
Forchode and tell for whom the cause will go.
And when my self has doubted, I have gone
Through a vast crowd, and a most numerous throng,
Plucked him by the Ear, yea, pincht his leathern heart,
Cried, Justice! Justice! yet he did not start.
But gives the final Sentence, that might best
Serve his own Friend, Geeat Man or Interest.
Not long ago, a Man of mean Estate,
Hoping for Justice, waited at his Gate.
And that so long, so often, without access,
That he despaires, goes off without success.
His mean Deportment, and his Sunburned Skin,
Wanted a Pass to let him friendly in.
His cause was dismal, for his cruel Lord
Did not like Measure ere that time afford,
He cast this Man from out his Farm, because
He wanted Copy-License from his Paws.
Tho his own Steward promised it before
For one Gold Angel, and as good as Swore.
With much ado Judicis auxilium sub iniqua lege regato. Saepe etiam Leges
cupiunt ut Jure regantur Cato.
Paranomos at last,
His lofty Eyes upon this Mushrom cast.
Fellow (says he) I cannot now talk with you,
You must at Law, his Lordships Steward Sue.
A task so Vain, as if to have his right
An Infant had been bid Goliath fight:
Whereas he should redrest such wrong as this,
By pleading for him Form a pauperis,
But his Antagonist was high and great,
So Justice must give place to Fraud and Cheat.

Euphorbus, Madam! that Judge was more upright by far
That had an Earl's Son once brought to's Bar,
I Will not be tedious but you will see in brief,
He spared not Greatness nor Excused a Thief.
A Prisoner he was before this Judge brought
Who had some Capital offenses wrought.
Being arraigned and Cast does humbly pray
His Lordships audience unto what he would say,
My Lord! Says he, stop Sentence for I am
One, that from a most Noble Extract came.
The Judge replys, your Crimes deserve the halter
Nor can in Justice I this Sentence alter.
This Boon indeed I will not you deny,
Your Gibbet therefore shall be Strong and High.
Madam! I hope there are no more you find
That against your Ladyship are thus inclined.

Themista. No more, Euphorbus! yes far more there are
Than I Will now tell, lest I thy patience Mar,
But I Have not all my story told to thee
How he behaved himself in Germany.
To tell thee When, It not the Matter helps,
But 'twas in the days of Gibeline and Guelps. Since in humane Laws there be
more things arbitrable than forceable Judges ought to a pproach more to Reason
then oppinion Plutto Trajan.

Paranomos was then a Justice there
After their cruel feuds grown calmer were,
And both Sworn Subjects to the Emperor.
He being chiefly to one party Kind,
Bore against the other a Revengful mind.
A thousand Crimes in Guelps he could not see
When that the silly Gibeline must be
Even for one Non ex Verbis pendet jus, sed verba serviunt hominum Confiliis
and auctoritatibus. Nec Verba veniunt in judicium sed ea re Cujus causa Verba
in leges Conjecta sun^. M. T. Cice.
Peccadillo clapped secure,
And made what Law * Could well inflict Legibus maxim amica est Simplicitas.
Ibid.

With patience this was born til at last,
The Empire into Civil broyls was cast,
Where he that Partial was this fate did bear
The people in two pieces him did tear;
The Justice of whose fall I never denied,
He lived Divided, and divided died.
But I Will Contract two brethren Joined by Blood, Magnu^ bonum sunt leges sed fi
quis nimis has intuetur a cute sycophante fit Menandr.

And governed one and self same Neighborhood
I cannot but Complain of unto thee,
Which Greatly do oppose my sov'raignty.
Procrites and swart Ecdicates who
Are of a like Complexion and like hew. A prejudiced and Revengful One.

Whose Ears are long (and Boar-like very quick)
To hear what is said against an Heretic,
Who if it but in a word * hap to transgress, Theodo. Arcad. and Honorius Nol
lent quen quam de populo subiici poenae qui procacitate linguae at Maledicto in
se peceasset. Quonlam siopprobrium ex levitate processerit negligendum, Si
surore aut in sania Condolendum si deniqe ab injuria remittendum Sit.

Are by promoters seldom rendered less,
But mounted up so to the highest pin
A Venial's turned into a Mortal Sin.
And Chiefly if a Monk or Friar do
Add but their Wit and siery Zeal thereto.
An act becoming ill their Sacred hood,
For oftentimes their heat Concludes in Blood.

Euphorbus. Madam Excuse me if I seem too prone,
To give your Ladyship divertion.
It Is often said there is no Christian Law,
That will allow a Priest a Sword to draw.
No Reverend Bishop in a Jury shall
Their Verdit give in matters Capital.
Yet by Experience We do often find
None have to bloodshed been so much inclined,
And some have been requited in their kind.
Madam! to all that has been said before,
I Will only give you one short story more.
Phillip a Bishop of Beavoys in France,
Whom fortune did unto that See advance
For feats of Chivalry against England done
Was in a battle by our Natives won,
Surpised and taken, whom our King does hold
Immured with others in a Dungeon cold.
The Prelate grumbles at his destiny
And to the Pope he does himself apply.
Pleads, to Excuse himself from Sec'lar thral,
His upstart dignity Episcopal.
The Pope's Enraged and in a pet Commands
A Speedy freedom from his loathsome bands.
Urges his Preisthood as a Sacred thing,
And may not be punished by an Earthly King.
Moreover dam's the fact as rashly done,
To Seiz his Bishop and beloved Son.
The King in his affairs advised was well,
Knew that a Victim Just to's Conquest fell,
Returns the Armor which his body wore
When he was taken by the Conqueror,
These words Engraven planly were thereon
Is this the Coat Sir, of your preistly Son?
At this his Holiness was wondrous wroth,
And from his lips rapt out a Sacred Oath.
This was the Coat of Mars and not his Son,
So gave him up to Execution.
Madam! I Have done, Now let me further hear,
These Judges great misdeeds and Character.

Themista. Their Memories retentive are and hold,
For ever fast what spite and Malice told.
This Non minus Turpe princtpi Multa Supplicia quam medico Multa funera.
Clarendon.
grates them much til them this change befall
Their hearts are into Wormwood turned and gall:
So that the Sugared sentences which they,
Or their grave Counsel in defense shall say.
Is as succes less as his pains would be,
That would the Ocean of its Saltness free.
But tho that Heresy be made the ground,
Of that dire rancour in their bosom found.
Yet all the Neighborhood do plainly Know,
A grudg long since did on their stomachs grow
Which since by Violence they could not vent,
Under the robe of Justice now is spent.
Yea tho that God Almightys Sacred Law,
(So good, so Equal, and devoyd of flaw.)
Commands that we forgive our foes as we,
Do hope our Selves by God Forgiven to be.
Yea Animum vin cere Iracundiam coh be re victo^ (...) rare Adversarum
Nobilitate, ingenio, Virtute praestare Non modo Extollere Jacentem sid etiam
amplisicare eius pristinam digni tatem, Haec qui facit non ego eum summis Viris
Comparo sed simillimu^ deo Judico. M. Cicero.
tho their Sovereign in Clemency,
Has past himself an act of Amnesty.
And by his Sacred Word for Ever has fenc't,
Such as before he was against incen'st.
Yet 'spite of Hea'en and Majestic throne,
They will revenge it and not pardon one:
These would be Zealots of the Highest rank,
But done concern them more then they have thank.
Nor can they so far blind all peoples eyes,
But one or other soon their guile Espyes.
Which by unconquered demonstration shows,
They Have acted Devil in St. Samuel's Clothes.
Venting their Wares in a deceiptful shade
Their own Avengers are in Masquerade.

Euphorbus. Madam! such Miscreants as these do bring,
Woe to themselves, and Odium on their King.
And to mine own Experience't has been known,
Such spitish Wasps have from their seats bin thrown
Eye has for Eye and tooth for tooth bin paid,
Til men and Citys in the dust were laid.
Now whilst upon that subject I am cast,
I Will tell you in my travels what has past,
At Millan where those eyes of mine did see,
Rancour requited with Severity.
Proud Millan loath to bear Imperial Yoke,
Their due Alleigance to their Prince they broke
Slighted great Fredrick, and from him withdrew,
That Homage which was to their Sov'raigne due.
Yea to Rebellion did that Malice add,
A Constant Hatred against that house they had.
It so even'd, when Beatrice his Wife,
Fancied a Jorney to delight her life.
She came to Millan only there to see,
That Once Appurt'nance of the Empirye.
Not on an ill intent, or as a Spy,
But merely out of Curiosity.
Having supposed that time had quite out-worn,
The feud they had against the Emp'rout borne.
The tidings were hereof no sooner Flown,
But the rude Multitude within the Town.
In coveys flock and in a Barbarous way,
Her tender Corpse within their Prison lay,
This done, they take her forth, and then astride
Upon a sily Mule they make to ride,
With face toward the Tail, and at command,
Instead of bridle held the same in hand.
Thus so exposed in Every lane and street,
To her great shame, and very sore regreet,
They led her forth without the gate, where they
With Kicks uncivil bid her take her way.
This act so foul Revenge does soon pursue,
A potent Army the great Fred'rick drew.
Before her walls and in some little space,
In fury Stormed and possessed the place.
Adjudg'd them all unto the dint of Sword,
Only this Kansome he did them afforde.
Between the Buttocks of a skittish Mule,
Which none could either Master, tame, or rule.
Was fixed a bunch of Figgs, the conquered these,
(That they the Empr'rors fury might appease,
And save their lives, which now ware at the Stake,)
With both their hands bound fast behind their back.
Must with their teeth pluck out as she did pace,
And this was taken for a wondrous Grace.
Such as Nor would nor could with this Comply,
Did by the Weapons of the soldiers dye.
"Mercy finds Mercy but the cruel wight,
"Vengeance with Interest will estsoons requite

Themista. All this is true, but what avails this,
To melt the heart that Adamaine is.
However perform thy office, and let me,
Know the successes of thine Embassy.
Go tell the Malefactors to their face,
That since they have me driven from my place.
I Will spread their Crimes before the Almighty King,
In such a mode that all the Hev'ns shall ring.
Unless they do repent, and change their mind,
And unto me more friendly be inclined
Heaven speed thy way, and when thou meet'st my Friends,
Tell them Themista to them Greeting Sends.

Conclusio and Votum Authoris.
HEavens preserve our Caesar, and secure
His Race from harm as long's the World does 'dure.
Endow them with all Heavenly Grace, that they
The British Scepter may with Justice sway.
Cherish all Loyal Hearts, proud Rebels tame,
And keep our clergy from deserved blame.
Rule all our (...) make our Judges Just,
Let not the Sword that is in their Scabbard rust.
Root up all Vice, let Virtue sprout amain,
And in King Charles's Heart, King Jesu! Reign.
FINIS.
The Printers Advertisement to the Reader.
THere is another Piece shortly will be extant, (God willing) Entitled,
Tavistock Anatomized; or the Honor, Dignity, Privileges, and other Natural
Virtues of that Famous and Ancient Borrough displayed, in a brief Coment on its
Name, Situation, Air, Water, Fireing, Abbey, Manufacture, etc. Consisting of
more then Twenty Chapters, each Chapter attended with a pleasant and suitable
Poem, very recreaiive to Ingenious Minds, and cannot but be very acceptable to
all Men, especially such who had the Honor of their Birth or Education in that
Clyme. Price One Shilling.

Likewise another Entitled,

(...) Containing the Golden Epistles of diverse Renowned Gentiles, perticularly
of several Roman Emperors, wherein may be read their profound Wisdom and
Policy, besides those Incomparible Moralities that challenge not only the
Admiration, but strenously call for the Imitation of the gentilest Christian:
First done out of the Original Greek, by a learned Spaniard, Chronicler to that
great Emperor, Charles the fifth, for about 160 Years since, and here
communicated to the World in our Native Tongue.


