THE TEARS OF SION Upon the Death of JOSIAH, Distilled in some Country Sermon
notes on Febr. 4.and 11 th, 1649.

Being the Quinquagesima and SexagesimaSundayes for that year.

Gloriosius esse pro Christo mori, quam Regnare in hoc seculo; Quid enim
praestantius quam fieri Christi Hostiam? Ambros. de bono mortis, cap. 3.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is
the kingdom of Heaven, Mat.5.10. Printed in the Year 1649.

To the Reader.
REader, I present to you those Tears, which (if you be truly Christian) were
once in your own eyes; and the cause of which can never be out of your heart,
for you ought to think your life spared awhile, only to lament his Death,
whose life was given in exchange for yours; and not to be spared long, because
his was not spared at all: you have nothing left you now, but to live and
Mourn, or to Pray and Dye: For which cause you may well give us also in the
Country, leave to be as dutiful as others, though not as Court-like as
Affectionate, though not as Eloquent; It Is not Ostentation (that after so long
Reluctancie) brings these sad Drops to be drawn out into public lines, but
mere Duty to the Dead King, and Charity to the Living Subjects, those
especially whom it most deeply concerns to be heartily sorry, yet care not to
come to the Place where this was first published, to know so much: And to them
as Servants, I as a minister of Christ must give this Admonition, They take,
not too little, but too much of Christ upon them to be good Christians: They
are taught to learn of Christ in his Humiliation, to be meek and lowly,
pitiful and Patient; But they do assume the state of his Exaltation, to be
Judges of the Quick and Dead: I dare not judge their persons, (for my self a
sinner fear to be judged of God,) but I must condemn their presumption, if
they measure their Religion by their success, why do they not advance
Turcisme above Christianity? If by themselves, why come they so far short of
the worst Christians? For in Government they know no Charity, and under it
they know no Patience; A character which belong^ only to those that live
within the Torrid Zone of a Furious Zeal, which if it cannot call down fire
from Heaven, will fetch up fire from Hell, rather then not set the whole world
in a combustion: Believe it men of this Temper (or rather of this Distemper)
had need either invent, or bespeake a new Christianity, for the Old will not
endure, much less maintain them. I must likewise say in behalf of the Woman
persecuted by the Dragon, (Apoc. 12.) And of the Man persecuted for the Woman,
that though (at present) driven into the Wilderness, they are still both on
the better ground: Not the more unhappy, or sinful, because the less
(outwardly) successful; And in this respect does the Disciple of the
Centurists judiciously castigate Salvian, for Defending Gods providence (when
he suffered the Western Churches to be trampled upon by Goths and Vandals,)
only with this Argument, That the said Churches had been very sinful: Debebat
autem non tantum Christianorum Peccata accusare, sed (propter pios and
innocentis hominis) etiam docere, Deum immittere etiam sanctis suis gravis
afflictiones and aerumnas, (ut Jobo Jeremiae, Johanni Baptistae, and aliis) ut
conformes fiant imagini Filii Dei, says Osiander, Cent. 5. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Salvian should not only have blamed the bad Christians, for their sins, but
(for some very pious and innocent men's sakes) have also taught, That God did
often inflict great temporal punishments even upon his best and dearest
children, (as he brought Job to the dunghill, Jeremie to the dungeon, John
Baptist to the Block) (we may add, And King CHARLES to all three) to make them
exactly conformable to the Image of his only Son; that as by their doings they
had borne the image of the living, so by their sufferings they might bear the
image of the Dying Christ. But I intend no new discourse, only the rehearsal
of an old complaint; yet certainly this present Age may blush to think, and
all future Ages will blush not to say, That never a more Pious, a more noble
Prince, swayed the Scepter; Never a more impious, a more ignoble People,
snatched the Sword: And therefore I may not blush to say, that I was at first
but Dumb in speaking, and still am but maime in writing this sorrow: Better one
hand had been on my mouth to stop my Voice, the other on my Heart to stop my
Pen; For as no sorrow is like Sions sorrow, so no sorrow of Sion was ever
like to this for her dearest Josiah; As no mourning like the mourning of a
Dove, so no mourning of the Dove like that of Haddadrimmon: And therefore it is
confessed, (without shame, but not without cause) that this expression of Sions
sorrow is too dry, to make your eye now water at the Reading (though happily
your heart did even bleed at the first hearing of the Dismal Tragedy) but sure
the affection* made the Authors eye water at the writing of it: And you must
needs have a drop in your eye too, otherwise you will see more clearly to spy
out faults, then the Author could to mend them: Who verily hopes for this
reason to be justly offensive to none, because he intended not to burden any
guiltless heart, but to ease his own; And those that are guilty, were better
feel their burden here, then hereafter. The Devout man that carried the Martyr
Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him, (Acts 8. 2.)
Burdened their shoulders by the carriage, but eased their hearts by the
Lamentation; Nor would the Jews that found so many stones to force St.
Stephens death, find one to throw at him that so openly bewailed it; The reason
was sure, they were overcome by his Incomparable Patience, which spent his
living spirits in converting his persecutors, But much more by his Divine
charity which poured out his dying spirit in praying for them; And so did our
lately deceased Sovereign, which melted the eyes (if not the heart) of that
Officer of war, who guarded him to his Death; And much more should it pierce
the very soul of a Son of Peace, who now Preaches the Gospel of Peace, and
never stretched out his hand against the Kings life to harden his Heart, but
for the Kings Bread to strengthen it, which was the staff of his Life at
Westminster, and the Universitie above twenty years, and bound him by the
piety of Education, not to study or play, not to eat or drink, not to sleep
or wake, without praying for a Blessing upon the King, as well as upon
himself. And though he has these two last Olympiads of the bloody Game (for
sure some men, like Abner, 2 Samuel 2. 14. made it but a Pastime) been wholly
trained up in the severe School of conscience, (not only speculatively for
the care of his own, but also practically for the cure of other men's souls)
yet is forced to confess, that he cannot live in so great Patience (and
charity) as his King could Die. For which cause he conceives himself
unworthy to be enquired after, either for Approbation, or for Reprehension; And
having undertaken to be Sions Penman, (though with Pans Reed, in stead of
Apollo's Quill) he is resolved to be known by no other Character then this of
a true Citizen of Sion, that he is yours in all brotherly love, whether you be
his so or no: Yet if you be any other so, he beseeches you not to separate
those, which God has joined together, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God, Honor
the King: He desires that all three may be inseparably 1 Pet. 2. 17.
joined in himself, and remains

Your servant in Christ, (...).

The Tears of Sion upon the Death of JOSIAH, etc.
2 CHRONICLES. 35. 24, 25. 24. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 25.
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah; And all the singing men, and the singing
women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day; and made them an
Ordubabce in Israel, and behold they are written in the Lamentations.
IT IS want of sorrow, that is the greatest cause of sorrow: Want of godly sorrow
to compunction, that is the cause of woeful sorrow to confusion; Dives being in
Torments has not his memento given him for nothing, Luke 16. 25. Son, remember
that thou in thy life time, etc. for Eternity and Time are as different in
their condition as in their continuance: Heaviness must endure for the night
of this life, that joy may come in the morning of Eternity (Psalm. 30. 5.)
(such a Morning as never draws to an Evening, and cannot be overshadowed with
night:) Joy and gladness may be a vanity at all times, but it is also an
impiety at such a time, when God calls to weeping and to mourning; And in that
day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and to mourning, Isa. 22. v. 12.
And behold joy and gladness, v. 13. but what follows? next, Surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye die, says the Lord God of
Hosts. At such a time Joy is not only a great Vanity, but also a great
iniquity, a very great iniquity, For this iniquity shall not be purged from
you, till ye die says the Lord God of Hosts: It Is not an Host of men may
forbid it, when the Lord of Hosts calls for it: Judah and Jerusalem would not
be guilty of this iniquity; The Prophet Jeremie durst not be guilty of it: For
when God called unto mourning for the Untimely Death (so untimely, that time it
self could wish to be untimed in that part of its succession) the untimely
death of their King Josiah, their Religious, their Devout, their unparalelled
King Josiah, the Text says, All Judah and Jerusalem mourned, and Jeremiah
mourned, and the Singing men and singing women mourned, and left a Pattern of
mourning to all Ages and all Sexes, and all conditions, and made them an
Ordinance in Israel, and behold they are written in the Lamentations. Tears are
the best comment upon the Text, and they cannot be brought into method; for
sorrow is an ill Courtier, and method is but the Courtship of Learning; The eye
that waters is not so quick-sighted, as to spy out elegancies: And where the
Heart is full, the Hand cannot hold, till the eye has done watering. But says
Judah as he goes along mourning, for he mourns till this day, says the Text
(and we may trace him by his tears) when I look upon the Parallel of the
place, Zach. 12. 11. I am directed to mourn with one eye for my King, with the
other for my Savior; and indeed he says true, for in this dismal Tragedy of
Josiah, there was very much of Christ, both for the Innocence of the sufferer,
and for the manner of his suffering. The Archers that shot Josiah knew him not
to be King of Judah; And the Jews that crucified Christ knew him not to be
their King; denying Pilats question in stead of answering it, John 19. 15.
Shall I crucify your King? for they said, We have no King but Caesar,
Professing that if he were their King (in their own knowledge,) they would
never crucify Him: O Generation of Christians, worse then Jews.

Josiah kept a most solemn Passover, and after it was made the Paschal Lamb;
So Christ: But with this Difference; Christ for expiation and Diminution:
Josiah for denuntiation and increase of Vengeance; Bothinnocencies suffer upon
Golgotha; in Christ to quicken the skulls, in Josiah to increase them: God
permitted Christ to be slain, that he might reconcile Israel; But Josiah, that
he might reject and remove it out of his sight, 2 Kings 23. 27. Josiah had not
fought against Necho, if God had not fought against Judah; He stood like Aaron
betwixt the Dead and the living; and God put him aside, being resolved to
destroy all by Death; whiles Josiah lived, Judah could not die, and now Josiah
is Dead, Judah may not hope (and scarce desire) to live. This is the Reason of
the sad Dity in the mouths of all the singing men and the singing women, who
seem to groan and sigh out rather than sing this heavy Lamentation; Ah thou
bloody Egyptian Tyrant, Had thou brought all the plagues of Egypt with thee,
and left those Archers behind that shot Josiah, well thou might have grinded
Judah and Jerusalem into Powder, but thou could never have dissolved it into
Tears: And now, O ye singing men, and ye singing women, forget all the songs
of Sion, as if ye were already in Babylon, (for it will not be long before you
will be carried away captive thither,) Let all your mirth be turned into
mourning; your Josiah is fallen, and your Hopes and Hearts are fallen with him,
your voices must fall too. Yet a deeper note of sorrow, your singing must be
turned into groaning, that your waylings may be as sad as are your spirits;
sigh out your last groanings, and when you have thus quite mourned away your
voices, then mourn out your eyes; Let not the Crocodiles of Egypt, outvie the
men of Judah; They weep over their slain traveller before they devour him,
having mercy in their eyes to check the want of it in their jaws: why should
we that have, or ought to have so much mercy in our Hearts, have none at all in
our eyes? If this Josiah and his goodnesses, (2 Chronicles. 35. 26.) (A magazine of
all that is good, in all other good men, laid up in one Josiah) move you not,
yet the other Josiah in Zachary must needs move you; If not his kindnesses,
yet your own unkindnesses must needs excite you; And were your hearts as Rocks,
yet struck with Moses his Rod (the terrors of Gods wrath against sinners,
which your Josiah did undergo in your stead) there must needs issue forth
Rivers of waters: If you can exceed in sorrow for Josiah, because he was taken
away from the evil to come, yet you cannot for your own sins by which he was
taken away: I am brought into so great trouble and misery (says the
tenderhearted King, Psa. 38. 6.) that I go mourning all the day long: He for
my sins, and not I much rather for mine own? Sorrow is certainly most
agreeable with a godly heart, or the man after Gods own heart could not have
spoken thus, much less in the Person of the Son of God; not is the Precept
and practice thereof merely legal, for those only that were under the curse
of the Law; but also Evangelicall, for those that are under the Cross of
Christ, and the blessings of the Gospel, James 4. 8, 9. They that are sinners
must be afflicted, and mourn and weep* though they are bound to believe the
Remission of sins; (And they must be sinners here in their own, who hope to be
Saints hereafter in Gods account:) Let us then join our selves to this sad
Quire of mourners, the season calls for it; Lent was anciently a time of
mourning; The occasion calls for it, our Josiah is slain, and we have yet, a
twofold louder call, that of our own sins and of Gods judgments, both which
cry aloud for the most bitter kinds of Lamentation: If not for our interest in
the life of our King, yet for our sin in his Death, we must heartily lamenr,
and that we may so do, we must ever hereafter speak of Josiah in all our
Lamentations; [They spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day.]

Sorrow is very unwilling to lift up either Head or Eye, and therefore though
we have heard some of the mournings of Judah, yet we have not looked so much
about us, as to see either the occasion of the mourning, or the condition of
it: The Text directs us immediately unto both.

First, The occasion of this bitter mourning, it was the untimely death of
Josiah, untimely to all but to himself: They mourned for Josiah.

2. The condition of it in the train of the Mourners; All Judah and Jerusalem
mourned, and Jeremiah lamented, and all the singing men, etc.

First the occasion of this bitter mourning, the untimely death of Josiah,
lamentable in it self slain by Egyptians, in a full age and ripeness of years
to govern both himself and Judah, 2 Kings 22. 1. But more lamentable in its
circumstances, for he had newly made a Religious Real, not a specious
Fantastical league and covenant with God, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31. A Covenant that
bound him to change his heart, not his Religion; and to keep the commandments
which God had given, not to give a new Commandment in the name of God: He had
taken away all the abominations of Israel, (34. 33.) Kept a most solemn
Passover (35. 18.) and both, with so great a Humiliation and Devotion, as
might have exempted a most wicked Ahab from a judgment already denounced
against him, not only in his own (as 1 Kin. 21. 29.) but also in his sons
days.

Yet after all this, comes his untimely Death, as it is said, 2 Chro. 35. 20.
After all this, when Josiah had prepared the Temple, Necho King of Egypt came
up, etc. After all this, when Josiah had prepared the Temple, then himself was
made the Sacrifice; So that this one occasion affords in truth many causes of
their mourning, which are all reducible to these two Heads, Their Affection,
and their Apprehension; their Affection, for what had befallen Josiah; and
their Apprehension, for what was like to befall them.

1. There Affection for what had befallen Josiah: So the Prophet Jeremy begins
his Lamentations, How is the City become a widow? Amisso Rege optimo, qui Regni
quasi meritus est, and popularium quasi Pater, says Tremelius, a very good
Protestant, but in this a far better Christian; Jerusalem was a widow having
lost her Husband, and an Orphan having lost her Father, in the death of one
Josiah; And so comes both with the Affection of a widow to mourn for her
husband, and with the affection of a child to mourn for her Father. If Rachel
mourned so affectionately for her children, much more for her Husband, Ierem.
31. 15. Do but change the persons, and you may see how Jerusalem mourned for
Josiah; A voice was heard in Ramah, Lamentation and bitter weeping, not Rachel
weeping for her children, but Jerusalem weeping for her Husband, refuses to be
comforted for her Husband, because he is not: If Jeremy could lament so
exceedingly for the slain of the Daughter, then how much more for the slaying
of the Father of his People? Do but so change his words, and you have a short
view how Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, as he went along with the mourners, Ier.
9. 1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughters, but much more, for the
slain of the Father of my people.

Thus the greatest natural and personal affection that could be to their
Josiah, as a Father, as a Husband, is the cause of this great Lamentation, and
yet greater is the affection they show to themselves: For they did indeed in
Josiahs death, mourn and lament their own Funerals: their affection to him
was capable of some comfort, but their affection to themselves was capable of
none; They knew that nothing but good had befallen Josiah, for he was gathered
to his Fathers in peace, (as Huldah had prophesied, 2 Chronicles. 34. 28.) But they
knew that nothing but evil could befall themselves, for whose sins he was so
soon gathered to his Fathers: So that for their affection to him, they could
comfort themselves with these two documents; First, That God will not have his
faithful servants rely upon a temporal reward for their service, but calls
them to the contemplation and fruition of Eternity, and yet is no debtor in
not paying their wages here in this world, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Secondly, That an
untimely and unmercifull Death, is sometimes given in favor, not in judgment,
to Righteous and merciful men, even to take them away from the evil to come,
Isa. 57. 1. As it was prophesied of this same Josiah, that he should be
gathered to his fathers in peace, 2 Chronicles. 34. 28. which was without doubt
fulfilled though he was afterward slain in Battle, which has the most
cruel, and the most dreadful visage of War; so that their inference savours
of ill Logic, but of worse divinity, who upon those words, Behold how he loved
him, John 11. 36. Presently replied, v. 37. Could he not have caused that this
man should not have died? as if that had been the greatest testimony of his
love: For because God loved Josiah, he suffered him to die. Thus their
affection toward Josiah, might receive comfort from these two Documents, which
most of all distracts and disturbs their apprehension, when they reflect upon
themselves; For both these considerations speak aloud to them this dreadful
truth, That the untimely death of their good King Josiah, was not a Judgment
upon the King, but upon the People, not upon him, but upon Judah and Jerusalem;
and that is the second cause of their great lamentation, their dreadful
apprehension for what was like to befall them: Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
themselves in mourning for Josiah; And the Prophet Jeremie shows them as much,
who though he writ his Lamentations upon this sad occasion, the Death of
Josiah, (as Jarchi expounds these words of my Text, Behold they are written in
the Lamentations, (...) says he, that is, In the Book of Lamentations, yet he
begins his complaint with the miserable estate, not of Josiah, but of
Jerusalem; How does the City fit solitary that was full of people? None of
all the Prophets seem so framed for, and composed to Lamentations as Jeremiah;
he had a Heart to conceive it, a Hand to endite it, and a Tongue to express
it; Surely because he writ much about the time of Josiahs death, which was the
Inlet of all Judahs misery: For immediately after that, Judah was captivated
under sin, and that brought in the captivity under Babylon, whiles Josiah
lived, he made Judah and Jerusalem serve God so devoutly, that Non fuit simile
huic in Israel, was the Eulogie of their Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35. 18. And no
sooner is he dead, bus it is said of them, They walked after the imagination of
their own heart, (a most secret, but a most sottish kind of Idolatry,) And
after Baalim, which their fathers taught them, Jer. 9. 14. (for in all
probability this Chapter was not penned till after Iosiahs death.) This is the
reason Jeremiah Prophesies so mournfully, (a fit Prophet for those calamitous
times, both for the Disposition in himself, and for his Invitation of others to
sorrow and contrition) insomuch that a great part of his Prophecy is but a
mere Lamentation, especially the former part of it, which was nearest the time
of Josiah, (for after the 21. chapter, all his Prophecy is in the days of
Iehoiakim and Zedechiah) wherein he somewhat exceeds the sorrow of his own
spirit, writing not only more dolefully then any other Prophet, but also more
dolefully then all the other parts of his own Prophecy, I will give you but
one instance for all, and that is, cap. 4. v. 19. My bowels, my bowels, I am
pained at the very heart: It Is in the Hebrew, (...). I am pained as a woman in
travail, at the walls or bulwarks of my heart, that which most struggles to
keep life, has the stroke of death upon it: The sorrows of a woman in her
travail are almost insupportable; But a wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.
14. The pain of the heart is for greater then the pain of the bowels, but lest
we should think, he was not in the greatest extremity of pain, he joins them
both together, saying (...) I am so pained at the heart, as if I were in
childbirth, such was his grief for Iosiah's death, a pain that both rends the
bowels and breaks the heart, and batters down the very walls and bulwarks of
life. And what is the reason of all this great pain? He tells us in the next
verse, Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is spoiled,
which could not be while Josiah lived, and therefore in these and such like sad
expressions, he did Prophetically foretell, if not Historically bemoan Iosiah's
death, or rather indeed bemoan Jerusalem, not but that his affection was most
dutiful to Josiah, but because his apprehension was more dreadful for
Jerusalem: For he saw that Josiah was taken to the Reward of mercy for his
great zeal to God and Religion, but Jerusalem was left exposed to Judgment,
for her multiplied Abominations and Impieties; And to the most heavy judgments
of this world, Fire and Sword, and Bondage, and to the most heavy bondage that
could be to them, a Bondage under the Egyptians. A Bondage, which their Fathers
before had groaned so long under, and which they could not at that time but
tremble to think upon, for Josiahs Passeovers, (according to the Law, Exodus 12.
26, 27.) could not but fill their ears with the narration, and their hearts
with the horror of it; It was the Bondage of Egypt, which those children could
not but expect merciless, whose Fathers had been formerly the spoylers and
destroyers of the Egyptians: Let us a little view this new Bondage, that it may
appear their fears were not greater then their dangers, though they were
greater then their hopes, for now Egypt had learned to act beyond it self in
the practice of cruelty: Before, it was contented to take the tribute of their
hands in work, or of their backs for not working, by the Brick-task-masters;
But now besides these, it has found out money taskmasters to demand Tribute
of their purses: The former Tyrants had made them slaves, but this Necho makes
them pay for their slavery; nay, he made not only their Purses Tributary, but
also their Patience, whiles they were forced to see Jehoaaz, whom they had
declared King in his Fathers stead, deposed by this Tyrant, and themselves
punished for their Allegiance toward Josiah, their beloved Josiah and his
seed, in an hundred talents of Silver, and one talent of Gold (2 Chro. 36. 3.)
For it is more then probable that Necho condemned the Land in that mulct or
punishment for presuming to be true and faithful to the Succession of the
Crown without his leave: And yet there is a worse Bondage then this, the
bondage of their Religion; begun by the Egyptians, and completed after by the
Babylonians. This bondage of their Religion was now begun by the Egyptians, for
Necho made Eliakim change his name to Jehoiakim, (2 Chronicles. 36. 4.) before he
would admit him to be King, as if he should renounce or forget his
Circumcision, wherein his name was first given him, or lose his Kingdoms. And
this same Bondage was completed by the Babylonians, who carried away all the
Treasures of the house of the Lord, and cut in pieces all the Vessels of gold,
which Solomon King of Israel had made in the Temple of the Lord; Thus were they
forced to see the abomination of Desolation standing in the Holy place, which
carried the Desolation further then the Temple, even to their souls that saw
it, whiles they were compelled to look on prophannesse in stead of Religion,
and see their Temple and worship both made havoc of by uncircumcised
Babylonians, they not in the least degree able to help either themselves or
their Temple.

All the Book of God sets not down so sad an History of a King destroyed for
his People, as this of Josiah; And therefore no wonder if we find not any where
else so sad a lamentation: they had kept a solemn Passover before, but now
they were forced to keep a dismal Passover, when their innocent Josiah was
made the Paschal Lamb, and their first born not saved, but destroyed by the
sprinkling of his blood. We have but one example that comes near this, and that
is of our Savior Christ; And he bids the women of Jerusalem lament not for
him, but for themselves, and for their children, Luke 23. 27. for though his
death did satisfy the eternal wrath of God against other sinners, yet did it
open the floudgates, to let in his temporal wrath upon them that crucified him
by a whole deluge of Blood. But behold in this of Josiah is somewhat a more
dismal Passover: For in the Passover of Christ, as it was typical in the
Lamb, none but Egyptians, as it was real in himself, none but Devils were
smitten; But in this of Josiah, all Israel, nay the best of all Israel, Judah
and Jerusalem, nay the best of Jerusalem, the Temple of God, nay the best of
the Temple, the Altar, the worship of God was smitten.

All the Plagues that Israel had formerly occasioned unto Egypt, were now more
then abundantly repayed back again to them by the Egyptians, in taking away
their Josiah, who stood alone betwixt them and the final wrath of God; From
henceforth Jerusalem may expect, to be made a Cup of trembling unto others
(Zach. 12. 2.) and much more unto her self: And the Inhabitants of Judah may
take up that sad complaint of the Psalmist, Psalm. 60. 3. Thou have given us a
drink of deadly wine, Potasti nos Vino, (...) Tremoris, quod bibens homo
contramiscit and moritur; Thou have given us not only a drink of deadly
poison, (...) as says Jarchie, that contracts and shuts up the Heart, but also
a drink of Palsie-poyson, that first brings a shaking, then death upon him that
drinks it; Jerusalem had such a Cup of Trembling at Josiah's death; she could
not but fear and tremble to think, that since her sins were now so great as to
make God snatch away her Josiah, that he might recall the blessings of Peace
and Truth, which he had given, they would not in have be so little as to suffer
him to renew again such blessed gifts.

This was the occasion of this great mourning, and the condition is answerable
to the occasion, which is my second general part, The condition of this
mourning in the train of Mourners, And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned, and
Jeremiah lamented, and all the singing men, and the singing women spoke of
Josiah in their Lamentations, etc.

The condition of this mourning is such, as never was before nor after it; all
the imaginable degrees of sorrow are to be found in it; Gradus extensionis,
Gradus intensionis, Gradus Protensionis; The greatest sorrow that ever was in
Judah for its universality, for its vehemency, for its continuance; 1. Gradus
extensionis, The greatest sorrow that ever was for its Universality: For it is
Omnes and singuli, all Judah and Jerusalem in general, Then Jeremiah and the
singing men and singing women in particular* in their several consorts and
companies, nay in their several Families, says Zach. 12. 12, 13. And the land
shall mourn every family apart, the family of the house of David apart, [for
the great loss that is befallen the house of David.] And the family of the
house of Levi apart, [for the great loss that is befallen to the house of God]
Every family apart [for their great loss, in the losses of the house of David,
and the house of God.] If true grief of heart could endure to be Ceremonious,
it would here easily find an employment for a Litania major; and busy another
Gregory (for here is a Mauritius too slaughtered by the Captain of his Armies)
to order this sad Procession, wherein all the Families of Judah and Jerusalem
apart, do bewail and lament the loss of their dearest Lord, the only joy of
their hearts whiles he lived; and now dead, the greatest grief of them: But I
can take notice only of their Passion, which makes them cry out with great
earnestness, but greater sorrow, in this dreadful Quaking of men, as those of
Constantinople sometimes did in that dreadful quaking of the Earth, (...),
Sanctus Deus, Sanctus Fortis, Sanctus Immortalis miserere nostri, Holy O God,
Holy O mighty, Holy o Immortal have mercy upon us; have mercy upon us that are
living, who have already magnified thy mercy toward the dead, in taking him
away by death, from the insupportable miseries of this wretched life.

But why is there no mention of Israel in this Universal sorrow of all Judahs
and Jerusalems mourning for Josiah? I answer, they were not so happy (though
this happiness was the greatest of miseries) they were not so happy as to have
any share in this loss, and therefore not in this Lamentation; this sorrow had
too much of God for the Israelites to be partners in it, who had so little of
God left in them:) Nay, who had so desperately fallen away from him; which
Apostasy of theirs is remarkably set forth by one of their own writers, R.
David Kimchi upon Hos. 3. v. 4, 5. The words of the Prophet are these, Verse 4.
For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a
Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Ephod, and Teraphim, Verse 5.
Afterward shall the children of Israel return and seek the Lord their God, and
David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter
days. The fourth verse sets down Isreal's captivity for their sin; The fifth
verse, their Restoration for their Repentance: And Kimchie upon those words
gives us this gloss, The children of Israel (says he) did in the days of
Rehoboam, reject or forsake three things, (...) They did reject the kingdom of
Heaven in forsaking God; (...) And the Kingdom of the house of David, in
forsaking Rehoboam; (...) And the house of the Sanctuary or temple of
Jerusalem, in setting up Calves at Bethel; And in these three consisted their
captivity. Therefore in the fifth verse where is promised their Restoration,
the Prophet says, they shall return again to all these; They shall seek the
Lord their God, there is promised their return to the Kingdom of Heaven; And
David their King, there is promised their return to the house of David; And
shall fear the Lord and his goodness, (...) and Bonum ejus, (...) says
Kimchie, that is, His Sanctuary: There Is promised their return to the house of
God; In their defection from these was their Apostasy, in their Apostasy, was
their misery and captivity; Before their Revolt in King David's time, it was,
O Israel trust in the Lord, and, he shall redeem Israel from all his sins,
Psalm. 130. But after Jeroboams Rebellion and Revolt from the house of David, we
find that Israel had not one good King in many successions of Ages, and that it
had very little share in the true worship of God, and as little in his blessing.

Secondly, Gradus intensionis, The greatest sorrow that ever was in Judah for
its Vehemency; mourning, lamenting, speaking, ordaining, writing not words
enough to express this Lamentation, Therefore is that for the death of Christ
compared to it, and expressed by it, Zach. 12. 11. To show, that not words, but
only tears can speak it: Those silent orators make least noise, but greatest
moan: Christ answers the tears of the weeping Woman, when he would not answer
the words of the insolent Judge; I hope he will so answer us, and in mercy
look back upon us, (as he did upon them, Luke 23. 28.) Bewayling and lamenting
our sins, that brought death both upon him, and upon our Josiah; we have no
other Balm to afford him at his Burial, but what grows in our heads, and
drops from our eyes: Joseph is acquitted from consenting to the counsel of
them that killed Christ, by providing a Tomb to bury him, Luke 23. 51. Let us
acquit our selves too, by providing tears to embalm him: And notwithstanding
the outcry of the people in their general Petition for Justice against the
Lords anointed, for Christ is so both to Heaven and Earth, as against one that
had injured God and Caesar, the Text seems to speak favorably of them who
smote their breasts and returned, Luke 23. 48. for such did certainly either
show their innocence, or wish themselves innocent: Let us earnestly follow
after such an innocence, which what it wants in Righteousness, has in
Repentance; Necho himself though he opened that dismal Urine of Blood, yet
cared not to stop this milder Vein of water; He had filled their hearts too
full, to deny them to fill their eyes: And that man would profess himself
worse then an Egyptian Tyrant who should go about to forbid such mourning for
a dead King, as testifies sorrow for the sin that killed Him; for that were
all one as to forbid Repentance, and to encourage an impenitent course of
sinning No Conqueror may expect to exercise his conquest over the affections,
And least of all should he desire to exercise it over that of sorrow, because
that most plainly, though unwillingly acknowledges his Conquest: But if Necho
should have desired this, he would have desired it in vain; for none can take
away tears from the eyes, but he that made them to be there; It was an easier
task for him to gain a conquest over the men's hands, then over women's eyes:
nay in this respect, he had made the most courageous and stout-hearted men of
Judah, to become women; that whom by their Swords they could not preserve from
falling, him being fallen they might bewail with their tears; thinking it more
honorable to pay the tribute of women to their dead King, then the tribute of
men to a living Tyrant: And yet indeed those tears were not so much the
expresions of duty to their dead Lord, as of Piety to their living God; Tears
of Repentance and remorse of conscience; The man of Judah highly disdaining to
become tributary to Egypt, before they had been tributary to Heaven, and
therefore they first pay God tribute of their tears, then Pharaoh of their
money; first God the tribute of their souls by a hearty sorrow, then Necho the
tribute of their bodies by a constrained Captivity.

Thirdly, Gradus Protentionis, The greatest sorrow that ever was in Judah, for
its continuance: For, To this day, says the Text, and an Ordinance in Israel,
and written in the Lamentations. Till this day, id est, till Ezra's time, after
the Captivity of Babylon; nay indeed, till our time, till all time, if not in
the sorrow it self (which is too too certain) yet in the Records of it, The
Book of the Lamentations. 'Twas happily a practice for some few, but sure
'twas a Pattern for all Ages; An Ordinance in Israel, for in all public
lamentations ever after (...) says Jarchie* They took an occasion to rub up
this sore, to make mention of this bitter weeping. It seems they had a
Remembrance of this in all their great mournings, as they had of worshipping
Aarons Calfe in all their great Repentances. And as in all their Epidemical
miseries and calamities after their Idolatry, they supposed they saw a Dram
of Aarons Calfe, which made them still bewail that sin; So in all the
bloodshed that ever after came upon Jerusalem, they might well suppose they did
behold some one drop of Josiahs Blood, and that made them multiply those tears,
which though they could not wipe away their guilt, yet could weep out their
sorrow.

O God put thy Jerusalems tears into thine own bottle, who did first put
them into her eyes; Let thy hand wipe them away from thence, because thy Spirit
first put them there; And lest (passing through so muddie a channel of sinful
earth) they should defile thy Hand to touch them, Wash we beseech thee both our
Bodies and Souls in the Blood of thy Son, that though we mourn for a season
in this life, yet we may be everlastingly comforted in the life to come, even
in the blessed Vision and fruition of God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, world without end, Amen.

(...)
(...),
(...):
(...)
(...).
Whom God has crowned, whom God has ever taught,
For him God would not have deliverance wrought;
And is he gone! may flames earth overthrow,
And gloomy darkness Heavens overgrow:
It was not Ink but Tears that filled my Pen,
When I did write, King CHARLES is crowned in Heaven.
Thus did I sigh, this was my hearty Groan,
Who loved my Kings life better then mine own.
FINIS.

