A TESTIMONY OF THE Ministers in the Province of Salop, TO THE Truth of Jesus
Christ, AND TO The Solemn League and Covenant; AS ALSO Against the Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them. Sent up
to the Ministers within the Province of London, Subscribers of the First
TESTIMONY.

LONDON: Printed by F. N. for Tho: Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet.
M.DC.XLVIII.

THE TESTIMONY OF diverse Ministers in the Province of Salop, to the Truth, etc.
HAving with singular contentment of mind, and sweet refreshment of spirit,
perused the Testimony of our Brethren of the PROVINCE OF LONDON to the truths
of Jesus Christ; and against the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these
times, unto which we, as they, by a solemn Covenant with hands lift up to God
have engaged our selves; Our zeal for the glory of God, and regard of the souls
of our brethren in which all have equal interest will not suffer us in this
common cause to keep silence. And though it were easy to add to the Catalogue
of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies, under sundry heads there laid down (our
Age being as dishonourably fruitful as any other in these monstrous births, to
the ruin of souls) as also to manifest our attestation, to the opposite
truths, according to the clear light of Scripture, and Confession of Reformed
Churches; yet we shall at present for the one content our selves in the
avouching of our ready assent, together with our Brethren, to the Confession of
Faith presented to both Honorable Houses of Parliament, by the Assembly of
Divines, called together, and yet sitting by their Authority, in which the
truth of Christ in the necessary concernments of Faith, Worship, and
Discipline, we conceive are piously, prudently, solidly, and fully asserted.
And for the other, to declare to the world, our utter detestation, as of the
particular errors, heresies, and blasphemies there enumerated, so of all others
of like nature, standing in equal opposition, to the orthodox truth before
mentioned, yet freely acknowledging, that some stand at a great distance from
other in the degree of their danger, few ages bringing forth the parallel to
sundry of those which for everlasting detestation are there witnessed against.
And further, we concur with our reverend Brethren, that the happiest expedient
for prevention, obstruction, and extirpation as well of errors in Doctrine, as
scandals in conversation, is a speedy and happy perfecting of the Government
begun, and in many places in some degrees of it now in prosecution; being fully
persuaded that it is consonant to the rule of Scriptures and primitive practice
in the Apostles times, and are confirmed therein by the happy blessing
wherewith, experience testifies it has been honored in several Reformed
Churches, whiles other platforms (how specious soeever, with which some piously
affected have been taken) have been almost as soon as set up blasted, not alone
with woeful divisions and schisms, but abominable heresies, and apostasies.
And though we can willingly join hands with many brethren, whom we highly
reverence, (that are of different judgment from us) yet from our souls we
detest, the thought of such licentiousness, viz: That opinions eminently
destructive to piety, and public peace, threatening and working the speedy
ruin of Souls, should find connivance, and TOLERATION amongst us; being well
assured, that the Christian Magistrate cannot answer his neglect before Gods
tribunal, if he be not a revenger to execute wrath on these evil doers;
spiritual as well as temporal adulteries, being an iniquity to be punished
by the Judges, which if our godly Governors in the days of our progenitors,
had not believed, and accordingly acted, they had never served Gods providence
in fulfilling the prophecy, that the Ten borns shall hate the whore, and shall
make her desolate and naked; Babylon had yet been in her pomp, and we their
posterity had been yet in that blindness and bondage. And for that Covenant
in which we stand with such solemnity engaged, we trust we shall in all
junctures of time esteem to be sacred, well knowing the judgments of God upon
Nations and persons false in Covenant, fearing that for this our Nation
already suffers.

Thomas Cook Pastor of Drayton magna. Tho: Porter Pastor of Whitchurch. Francis
Boughey Pastor of Hodnet. Aylmer Houghton Pastor of Prees. Andrew Parson Pastor
of Wem. John Bisby Pastor of Edstaston. Thomas Wright Pastor of Kinnersley.
Peter Nicolls Pastor of Adderly. Isaac Martin Rector of Bolas. Robert Benny
Rector of Ightfield. William Gower Minister of Morton Corbet. Robert Powford
Minister of Vppington. Humphrey Chambers Minister of Sterchley. Richard Fowler
Minister of Longford. Henry Vaughan Pastor of Moreton-say. John Malden Pastor
of Cheswardine. Richard Sadler Preacher at Whixall. Edmund Barton Pastor of
Brosely. George Baxter Pastor of Little Wenlock. George Adeney Pastor of
Wenlock mag: Gilbert Walden Pastor of Bridgnorth. Thomas Busby Pastor of
Kimberton. Michael Thomas Rector of Stockton. Jonadab Birch Pastor of Shifnall.
Michael Richards Minister of Madely. Thomas Adney Pastor of Easthope. Edmund
Paston Pastor of Halesowen. Will: Martin Rector of Sidbury and Billingsley.
Reginald Corbet Minister of Tasley. Richard Knot Minister of Barrow. Thomas
Niccolls Minister of Astley Abbots. Kichard Hayes Minister of Merveild. Jacob
Iephcot mag: art. John Spilsbury Pastor of Chetton. Thomas Froysell Pastor of
Clun. Samuel Hildersam Rector of Westfelton. Ia: Wilding Rector of Sillatton.
Francis Brown Rector of Shrawardine. Stephen Lewis Pastor of Baschurch.
Richard Pain Minister of Nestrange. Thomas Watmore Vicar of Riton. John
Soothil Minister of Monford. William Rock Minister of Aston. Francis Wright
jun. Preacher of Hadnal. Francis Garbett Pastor of Wroxeter. James Betton
Doctor of Divinity and Pastor of Worthen. Francis Wright Pastor of
VVellington. Thomas Blake Minister of Alkmonds Salop. Samuel Fisher Pastor of
Maryes Salop. Robert Alderson Min: of the first portion of Pontisbury. Samuel
Smith Pastor of Cund. Timothy Hammonds Minister of the second portion of
Pontisbury. John Andrews Minister of Pulverbach. James Smith Pastor of Vpton
mag: George Barkley Rector of Maynston. Edward Wall Minister of Abberbury.
William Stammer Pastor of Atcham.
The Letter wherein the fore-recited Testimony was enclosed, to some Ministers
of London.
Reverend and dearly respected Brethren:
When the Testimony of the Ministers within the Province of London came first
to our hands, and we had perused and weighed the Contents of it; as it gave us
occasion to magnify the Name of God (whose truth and glory to the shame of
this famous Church and Kingdom, have been so barbarously torn and wounded) for
engaging the hearts, and hands of his servants in such a work, more worthy of
their blood, then of their pens for testimony; so it began to awaken the
thoughts of diverse to consider, that all the Lords watchmen through the
Nation, were equally concerned, as one man to stand up for the defense of the
Gospel, to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, to join hearts,
hands, prayers, tears, and all that they are able to contribute in this Common
salvation. Hereupon though we know that the glory of truth, needs no witness
from men, being in its own native luster and strength (as the Sun in its
brightness) able to scatter and dispell all the stinking evaporations of the
bottomless pit, which the Prince of darkness and father of lies sends our to
eclipse it; And though we are assured that adored providence which now suffers
them, (as knowing, how to serve his own glorious purpose by the permission)
will in due season look upon them, as Hels cursed of spring, Truths enemies,
the Churches troublers, and speak them to their own place again. Yet being of
the number of those that are friends of truth, and (as we trust) receive and
love it in sincerity, are employed in the study of Truth, have seen, and
tasted somewhat of the beauty, and sweetness of it, and how unworthy soever,
have obtained this grace to be trusted with the keeping, and dispensing of it,
in which we tremble at the thought of being found unfaithful, we have with
other of our Brethern freely subscribed the enclosed paper, wherein you have a
weak yet hearty expressions of our concurrence with the rest of the Ministers
of Jesus Christ, in their faithful Testimonies, given to Gospel Truth; to the
solemn League and Covenant, and against the errors, heresies, and blasphemies
of the times, and the licentious Toleration of them. We put it upon our account
to be lasht by the tongues of some not only professed adversaries, but also
such whose discretion has such forwardness in distaste; But this we trust
shall not move us, making it our humble request to the Father of lights, that
we may be as ready to seal this Testimony with our lives, as to subscribe it
with our hands, (not knowing what is reserved for you, or us, but seeming
grounds of fear, that the jealous God is at hand, (it his wrath be not averted)
to take up a Controversy with this land, (as for other abominations, so) for
its evident unfaithfulness to God, and fearful Apostasy from the purity of
Doctrine; we hold it safest to be found in the discharge of our duties, not
amongst those that draw back from the Truth, but bear witness to it, casting
our selves upon the stream of Providence, and resting on God for an happy
issue.

Your Brethren, and Fellow Servants in the Labors of the Gospel.

FINIS.

