THE GAINSAYER CONVINCED:

OR, An Answer to a certain scandalous Paper, subscribed and sent by certain
seduced and seditious People to a Minister in the Country:

IN WHICH The Calling of the Ministry of the Church of England, the Nature of a
visible Church, the Power of the Magistrate under the Gospel, the right of
Tithes, with many other Points now in controversy, are briefly, fully and
plainly cleared, to the satisfaction of those that are wavering; also much of
the spirit and many of the Errors of the Anabaptists of these days (who call
themselves Saints) discovered and confuted.

By T. T. Preacher of the Word at Kemble in Wiltshire.

1 JOHN 2. 26. These things have I written unto you concerning those that
seduce you.

1 COR 14. 37, 38. If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let
him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, are the commandments of
the Lord. But if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

1 TIMOTHY 6. 3, 4, 5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness;

He is proud knowing nothing, ^^t doting about questions, and strifes of words,
whereof comes envy, stri^e, railings, evil surmisings,

Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain in godliness: From such withdraw thy self.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1649.

TO the Inhabitants of the Town of CIRENCESTER, Grace, Mercy, Peace and Love be
multiplied, through the knowledge of God and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved,
THese are the last and perilous times which the Apostle speaks of, wherein 2 Timothy 3. 1 2, 3.
men do abound in all clo^ked corruptions, having a form and show of
godliness, but denying the truth and power of it: many give Christ but Judas
kiss, saying, Hall Gospel, but do betray it. There is a Scylla and Charibdis,
two gul^s that are almost full to the brim of the blood of souls: On one hand
ignorance, impiety, profaneness, drunkenness, chambering and wantonness,
strife and envy, etc. These open vices (like a flood) carry down to hell
multitudes of souls: on the other hand there is a more subtle device of Satan,
whereby many thousands are destroyed, heresies, errors, blasphemies, schisms,
under the color of truth and more then ordinary devotion, eat like a gangreen
and canker, and run like a plague from city to city, town to town, family to
family, person to person, to the overspreading of the 2 Timothy ^^
whole land, and that without any remedy. Now the loss of so many thousand
souls, which profaneness and errors do daily destroy, will cry for judgment
to heaven against those who use not all their endeavors to stop these
mischiefs, and to apply what remedy lies in them to these heavy evils: Those in
the state that regard it not, may in due time find the civil inconvenience of
the toleration of, or conniving at these things: But the Lord forbid that any
of the Lords Watchmen should be Gallios in this, to care for none of these
things, that the loss of souls and the flourishing of Satan's kingdom should
not touch their hearts. For my own part I must seriously confess, I am so
conscious to my self of my many wants and infirmities, that I was very willing
to content myself to approve my doctrine to God, and the consciences of my d^ar
people committed to me (for whom I daily be^ge of the Lord that he would
preserve them, as (blessed be his holy Name) he has done hitherto from the
infection of these times:) But being invited by your pious, painful, worthy
and faithful Minister, and by many of you to bestow my pains sometimes amongst
you on your lecture day, I could not refuse. And being very sensible and
apprehensive of your peril, by reason of some that are crept in amongst you,
and have already drawn away some of your town from your Minister, and indeed
(as appears in their following paper which you may hereafter read) from
Ministry and public Ordinances, I could not but do what did lie in the fathom
of my power, to prevent the imminent danger of your souls, by endeavoring to
discover some of their deceits. I endeavored (with what clearness I was able)
to speak a word in season to every soul, and to hold forth to you from the
Lamps of the Word, some r^ies of divine light for your direction in these dark
and misty days, wherein it is as hard for many poor souls to find out duty as
to vanquish difficulty. You were my witnesses (with God) that I delivered
rothing but the words of truth and soberness: but it is hard for whosome
doctrines and seasonable reproofs to find an open and obedient eat in these
days, wherein there are so many itching ears abroad, for you may read in the
following paper sent to me, how many have charged me, which railing, faction,
sedition, etc. (and yet I am confident most of them never heard me in those
Sermons:) But had the paper charged or asper^ed me only, I should have
endeavored with patience and silence, to have put up any thing, but finding
the truth so charged as you shall find it in their paper by them, I thought it
might be my sin to be silent, and to sit down and not contend for that.
Therefore I was willing to set pen to paper, and to take a little pains to
vindicate and clear both the truth and my self, from those false aspersions and
scandals cast upon it and me: I was resolved to have sent them in my answer in
writing only privately, and the Lord knows how unwilling I was to appear in
public: but being overperswaded by many godly judicious friends and brethren
(who had the perusal both of their paper and my answer) that the publishing of
it might conduce much to the clearing of the truth to many poor sons, who are
in these days miserably pusled by seducers in the things herein objected
against us and answered, to the glory of God, and the good of the Church of
Christ, in directing and informing some, convincing others, and pulling others
out of the snares of Satan, in which they lay captive, being (I say) upon these
ground^ importuned by them, I could not deny the printing of it; And if it may
(by Gods blessing) have any of these eff^cts upon any (though some may scoff
and scorn) yet I shall not repent the publishing. Now because the occasion of
this work was given amongst you because the gainsayers herein answered, do live
among you, and are your neighbors, with whom you have daily converse, and
hereby your souls are in much danger of being (...).
infected with the same errors with which they are carried away so he^dlong.
In compassion to your souls, I desire to dedicate this my answer and labor to
you, for the preserving of you from further infection, and enabling you to
resist those tempters you may meet with among you. Your loving acceptance of my
former pains and labors in preaching amongst you, assures me that this also
will with the same love be accepted and received by you, as it is in love
presented to you from me. I shall speak no more to you at present, but the rest
I shall speak to God for you, that he would sanctify all means both preaching
and printing, for the converting of those that are unconverted amongst you, for
the preserving those that are yet sound, for the recalling and restering those
that are gone astray, and are seduced to live in error, and for the performing
of that good work which is begun in any of you, that the God of all grace would
make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you, and preserve you by his
own Pet. 5. 10.
power, through faith unto salvation: If your souls reap any benefit by any of
my poor endeavors, let the Lord alone receive all the glory and praise: all
that I shall desire of you is that which Paul so earnestly desired of the
Romans, I beseech you, Brethren, (...). 15. 30.
for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye
strive together with me in your prayers to God for me. And let me be known to
you, as one whose desires, prayers and endeavouss have been, are, and (by Gods
grace) shall be, to the the utmost in my sphaear, for the making up of the
divisions that are amongst you, and the building up of your souls in your most
holy faith, Ever resting

The Churches and your servant, (though the weakest and unworthiest of all) in
the work of the Gospel, Th. Th.

To the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
SEeing divine Providence has made it my lot, and a calling has induced me
(who am less then the least of all the servants of Christ) to appear among
others in the cloud of public witnesses to the truth of Jesus Christ, I desire
for thy better satisfaction to give thee a word or two of the occasion of these
sheets coming abroad. Whosoever thou art, thou can not but know that we live
in times wherein diversities of opinions are blown (with all license) by the
spirit of error over all the land, to the great dishonor of God, and the
indangering of men's salvation: And that there are many Simons abroad, who
(though they are but sorcerers) doyet give out of themselves, that they are
some great ones, and many people give heed to them as to the great power of
God: though indeed (as Paul said of his Galatians) they are but bewitched by
them, that they should not obey the truth. By these men the way of truth is
evil spoken of, the Ministers of Christ brought into contempt and despite,
the Ordinances of God slieghted and cast off all the truths of the Gospet
miserably invaded by them, and the sons of thousands poisoned and perverted.
This is certainly an hour of darkness wherein all sorts of devils are crept
out of their dens, and walk familiarly amongst us; and (hinc lachrimae) O that
we could weep tears of blood, and sigh to the breaking of our loins for this:
that we could smite with the hand; and stamp with the foot, and cry out, Alas
for this! that there are no Orders nor Acts made no new Laws made, nor old Laws
execu^ed, for the restraining, punishing, preventing of the spreading of the
most cursed heresies, errors and blasphemies that ever bell hatched, or heaven
or ear^h heard of, But that under a cursed pretense of conscience and liberty,
our poor Church and Kingdom should be a quiet habitation for all the devils in
bell. Surely these are dales wherein the says of Gods people needs all props
that either prayer or preaching pulott or press, public or private
instructions or admonitions can afford them. And nothing is more necessary in
these times then a spirit of discerning, whereby we may be enabled to know
chaff from wheat, gold from dross, a serpent from a Saint, A^^ichrist from
Christ. And surely it errors were set out In their true, clear and live^y
shape, that they might be seen as they are in themselves, without any di^guise,
their bare and unmasked face would be very ugly and abominable to judicious and
intelligent minds.

Now in the ensuing pages thou shall find, First, Satan appearing as an Angel
of l^ght, whilst he is in a great show of zeal, ralling against the truth, And
in the answer, thou host his mask so far taken off, that thou may plainly
perceive him to be the Prince of darkness. The Occasion both of that Paper and
my answer was this: Being called to preach in the Lecture at ^ir^^^ester (where
(with grief of soul I think of it and speak it) Satan has been suffered
exceedingly to prevail of late with many, to the sucking in of most grievous
errors; The Paper which thou will see here subscribed by no less then ten,
being a sad Testimony of this) I being directed by Providence to preach upon
the latter part of the 2 d verse of the 2 d chapter of the Revelation, viz Thou
have tried them which say they are Apostles and are not, and have found them
liars. The prosecution of the several doctrines raised from the words, some
seemed to be offended at, as (...) I had preached untruths, persecuted the
Saints, etc. I hearing of this offense taken (though none given) when God
brought me to preach among them again: in my next turn I preached upon the same
text again, and publicly desired the Congregation, that if I had or should
deliver any thing, in which they were not fully satisfied, that they would
either speak there, or come to me ere I went out of the town, and I should in
all love and willingness endeavor to satisfy them: not one of them ever come
to me, but continued still to revile and slander me, and those truths that had
been delivered. I being informed of this by their worthy Minister Mr Gregory,
could do no less but write to one of them, who seemed to be somewhat offended,
and made often complaints to their Minister about it, which Letter I had here
in the first place given you, but that I had no copy of it, and I know not how
to gain it out of their hands again. But I appeal to God and to their own
conscien^es, whether it was not written in expressions of soberness, love and
meekness, and whether there were any passage in that which might justly give
any offense to any of Gods people: I desired him to whom I wrote in that
Letter, to set down under his hand (seeing be refused to come in person to me)
what or wherein the offense was which they had taken, or what it was that so
much troubled them; And I there engaged my self to endeavor a sati^faction,
and a clearing of all their doubts to the utmost of my power in a loving and
brotherly way.

This M. Rudge (for to him I wrote) communicated this Letter to some others of
that faction, who (as it seems) betook themselves to one H^rris^n a man who was
formerly a Stationer in London, after that (as I an informed) a Troopar under
the Earl of Essex, and having run through some other employments, found this at
last to be the most likely to live by in these distracted times, viz. to turn
Preacher: A man (who as you may perceive by the Paper (if it were of his
penning) as is most probable; it being his handwriting (as some know that have
seen it) and he being their Teacher) looks upon the Ministry of the Church of
England as Antichristian, upon our Church as in Church, denies all our pub^ike
Ordinances, and goes about now from place to place to draw disciples after him.
And by the way take notice, that That Vigil^nt Committee of Gloucester have
approved of, and pla^ed this man a Pastor to a Congregation at Chatleton in
Glocestershire near Cheltnam where he now exercises his gifts. To this man I
say (as I am informed) these gainsayers betook themselves for assistance, he
being at that time and to this day their Teacher in private. He draws up the
following invective, and though it be in many things most hellish, yet ten of
them set their hands to it, and send it to me, wherein they desire ^y answer
under my hand. Tr^ly having read it, I found it so full of malice and
bitterness, that I was once resolved to sit down and to conceal it, and only
in private to pity, to mourn, and to pray for them, that the world might not
see their madness and solly. But some of them began presently to crack and to
cry out A Victory, (supposing their paper unanswerable) They reported about the
Country, that they had proved us to be Ministers of Antichrist, and that we
could not or durst not answer them, and justify our calling; Being informed of
this by some Gentlemen of Country, I took my self bound in conscience to send
them an answer, which (...) had (at last) been in private, only to their own
hands, had not they themselves first proclaimed it publicly, and had not I
been overperswaded and importan'd by some of my Brethren to publish it for the
satisfaction of all that are at present in doubt of those things here cleared
and the keeping fast and confirming of those who yet stand, and may be in
danger of falling into the same snares: and that which made me somewhat more
willing to publish this, was, the testimony which some of those Brethren of the
Ministry, which had the perusal of it, gave to it under their hands, which
thou shall hereafter find. So that I may say as Paul writing to his Galatians,
chap. 1. verse. 2. Paul an Apostle, etc. And all the Brethren with me to the
Churches of Galatia. In writing to them he does not come forth singly by
himself alone, but as it were guarded with the company and consent of all his
believing and faithful Brethren: Quasi dicat Paulus (says Luther upon the
place) At if Paul should have said, least I should be alone, ^adde over and
besides my self all the Brethren which write this Epistle as well as I, and
hear witness with me, that my doctrine is true, They are all of the same
mind, they think, write and teach that self same things that I do.

So I can say, I and the Brethren with me, who th^nk, write and teach the same
things, contend for the same truth which I do, which was once delivered to the
Saints.

In their Paper thou shall find that they strike at our Church, Ministry,
Magistracy, Ordinances, all which the Anabaptists of these times strike at.

In my Answer, I desire to give thee notice that there are some passages
concerning the maintenance of Ministers, and the rigbt of tiths, which thou
may find more largely set down in that excellent tract of that worthy and
learned D Reynolds upon the 110th Psalm, out of which I have gathered some
flowers, the Note in the Margent will direct th^e to the Page.

Friend, The Lord knows that with very sad thoughts I look upon the
disaffection, differences and divisions, which are betwixt Christians in these
days, as that which portends more evil, then all our enemies can bring upon
^^, and that which sadly exposes not only our persons, estates, posterities,
but that which is dearest of all, our Religion to the bloody advantages of our
enemies. And the Lord knows that the desire of my soul in this work, is not to
make wider or increase, but rather to compose our divisions, rather to beat
then to heighten them, ^^^ing that it may some way conduce to the making o^ us
all of one mind and of one judgment, when we shall see where the truth is,
which I have endeavored here to clear up. Read therefore and search the
Scriptu^e, whether these things are so or no, despise not the werkendeavours of
thy brother, that desires only in this Gods glory and thy good, but prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good, abstain from all appearance of evil:
And I pray God that the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the light of the world, the
morning star, the way, the truth, and the life, would clear up all our
darkness, and show all his people the way and the truth, guide them in it, and
bring them at last to life and light eternal. Amen.

T^ine T. T.

We have read this ensuing Answer, and find it so full to every particular in
the Charge, clearing so many material points now in contr^v^rsie, that we
judge the publishing of it may be very beneficial to the Church of God.

ALEXANDER GREGORY Minister of Cirencester. WILLIAM EDWARDS Minister of
Tethury. RICHARD BRITTAN Minister of Bisley. WILLIAM HALL Minister of Avening.
RICHARD HALL Minister of Beverston.

Sir,
ACcording to your desire we have presented you the particulars of those things
which we could not but much dislike, except we should be like many now in our
days, mere time-servers and men pleasers, and so prove persidious to our
principles and professions, and make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience,
and betray our freedoms into the hands of our bloodthirsty adversaries that
has long sought our downfall.

First therefore, We cannot but dislike with your praying and prating against
those which formerly you have both prayed and preached up (which p^esents you
mere weather-cocks) they desiring nothing but truth and justice may take place,
and our (almost lost) freedoms may be repaired, which has been earnest^y
endeavored by a corrupt Magistracy and Ministry to deprive us of, for the
recovery whereof, our ever to be admired lebovah has raised up a poor despised
(yet gallant godly) Army, Who has faithfully ventured their lives, and God
has crowned their labors with good success, for which good service, you and
the whole Kingdom are bound to pray for (not against) them, and we trust while
we have life, we shall own them and stand by them, with heart, hand and tongue
against all their inverterate and imbittered adversaries, so long as they stand
for truth and justice, as now they do.

Secondly, We dislike the misapplication? (as indeed is your common practice,
whereby youleade people in dark paths) of that expression [the base are risen
up against the honourable] who do you mean by base? and who by honorable? this
Riddle wants an Interpreter, these are but bals of wilde-fire to set the
Kingdom fresh on fire, and to fill the hearts of the sons of Belial with
dishonorable thoughts of the Kingdoms Worthies in the Army. But if truth may
take place with our time-serving generation, who are base, but such who are
content to be basely cheated out of all their privileges, spiritual and
temporal, by a few fine empty notions, who basely betray the lives and
liberties of themselves and posterities for present shadows? who are base, but
such as basely falsify and betray the trust reposed in them, but such as seek
their own advancement by a Kingdoms ruin? And who honorable, but such that
venture their lives rather then they and theirs should be vassels to the base
wills of any, though never so great? Is not that honorable service to bring
Delinquents to punishment, such Vipers that would eat out the heart of our
liberties, which is as dear as our lives (which the Army only does) Does not
the Scripture declare, that Righteousness exalts a Nation, but what shall we
say to this gainsaying generation, or generation of gainsaiers? who will not
understand, may it not be truly said to them, as Christ said to Nicodemus, Art
thou a Ruler in Israel, and know not these things? or rather as Christ said
to (seeing) blind Pharisees that sin open-eyed, Ioh. 9. last. If you were
blind, you should have no sin, but now you say, we see, therefore your sin
remains: and this we fear is your condition, because we cannot but remember
carriage and zeal for those who you now condemn. Oh! what pains was spent in
their behalf, what prayers was put up for them, what

(...) The ANSWER.
Friends:
SO in charity I call you, (because you subscribe your selves so) though your
Paper, from the beginning to the end, be full of gall and bitterness; and
savours as much as may be of that enmity, which God from the beginning, did
put 'twixt the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent.

Having received your Letter, and perused it, I took it (and as Hezekiah did
with the reproachful letter of Sennacherib, 2 King. 19.) I did spread it
before the Lord, who knows the secrets of all hearts, and judges righteously.

And for Answer to it, which you desired speedily, in that I have been thus
long about it, I must say as Paul did to his Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. I
would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again: but Satan hindered me. So
I say to you in this case, I would have answered you once and again ere this,
but Satan hindered me. You desire me to answer you in Scripture language, I
promise you here in the beginning, that I will endeavor in 2 Timothy 2. 2 last
ver.
meeknes and love to answer, and to instruct you (with much patience) if God
peradventure will give you repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and
that you may recover your selves out of the snare of the devil.

But me thinks it is strange, that you who desire Scripture language from
others, you who pretend so much to the Spirit, should yet so far forget
Scripture language, and so far put off the meekness of the Spirit, in this
your Letter as you do: for I appeal to the world, or rather to God (who knows
the hearts from whence these expressions come) whether it be not filled up with
that which St. Paul says grieves the Spirit, viz: Bitterness, wrath, anger,
clamor, evil speaking, malice: Ephesians. 4. 31. whether it savor not of many of
the works of the flesh reckoned up, Galat. 5. 20, 21. viz. hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, envy, with that reviling which the
Apostle reproves, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

Look upon some of your expressions: you call us, Time-servers, Weather-cocks,
blind Pharisees, Ministers of Antichrist, false Apostles, blood-thirsty men,
Popish, swearers, forswearers, drunkards, liars, seducers, Jews, Heretics, men
of no Religion, that our Doctrines are destructive, and damnable; yea Devils,
and the like: and this you have set your hands to.

But I shall endeavor with the Apostle being reviled, to bless; or as the
Apostle commands us to imitate Christ, who being reviled, reviled not again;
but committed himself to God, who judges righteously: 1 Pet. 2. 23.

I would willingly speak something to every material passage in your Letter;
but I shall pass by many of those extravagancies which I am willing,
charitably to believe, did unadvisedly drop from your pen, and not take notice
of them: for should I stay upon every piece of your madness and folly, the
profit (redounding to you or me) of such a work, would not countervail the
labor.

I shall therefore pass over all your bitterness, base slanders, your
reproaches, your reviling and railing accusations, with the words of Michael
the Archangel contending with the Devil, The Lord rebuke you: and the Lord
help you to see from what spirit they come, I heartily pity you (as knowing
the Author of these) and that nothing of what you have sent, comes immediately
from your selves, though by reason of your ignorance) you have been easily
seduced, and led to set your hands to: and (in that) to speak evil of those
things you know not. I shall therefore speak only to such passages in your
Letter, as do demonstrate to any common eye, the undeniable footsteps of the
spirit of Error walking amongst you: I hope the Lord will enable me so to
discover it to you, that you may at present be ashamed, and grieve that you
have been nursing fathers to any of Satan's brood; and that for the time to
come, ye may with all carfulness learn to avoid the deepdeceit of that
seeming Angel of light.

To begin.
You first say, you present me with such particulars, as you could not but
dislike, except you should be (as many now adays) mere Time-servers, and
men-pleasers, and so prove perfidious to your principles, and prof^ssions, and
make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and betray your freedoms into
the hands of your blood-thirstie adversaries, that have so long sought your
downfall.

To this I answer.
First, that many of your dislikes presented in your Paper are such, that if
you father the ground of them upon me, you are false accusers, if you look into
the 8. Joh. 44. ver. Christ will tell you, that the Devil is a liar, and the
father of lies. And therefore look to it: if I am not mistaken, the one half of
you at least, (who have subscribed this Paper, and these exceptions against my
praying and preaching) were not present, when either of those Sermons were
preached; yet it seems, (that believing by an implicit faith) you have set
your hands to them: 'twas bravely and boldly ventured.

2ly, I answer: that (if ever any did in any thing) you have in this your
Paper, if you will look upon it, and the times together) declared your selves
to be mere time-servers, and men-pleasers; and you have herein proved your
selves perfidious to your principles and professions, and have made shipwreck
of faith and a good conscience: And were it not that the power of the Church,
and the golden reins of discipline, were at present violently taken out of her
hands, you might (with Hymeneus and Alexander) be delivered over unto Satan,
that you might learn not to blaspheme.

3ly, Whereas you say, that if you should not have presented these your
dislikes, you should betray your Freedoms into the hands of your blood-thirstie
adversaries.

1. I answer. First, I desire you to remember the words of the Apostle Peter, 2
Ep. 2 Ch: 19. who speaking of false prophets, says, that while they promise
them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption. It is one bait,
which seducers do fish withal (and never more then in these times) viz:
Promises of Liberty and Freedom; and from hence 'cis that they have many
followers; because a carnal heart loves liberty, and accounts the commands of
God and his Word a yoke, strong cords, and bands: Psalm. 2. But such a freedom
and liberty, while it is enjoyed, brings a man into the greatest and basest
bondage and slaverie in the world, viz: under sin and Satan. Now I only advise
you, that while you so eagerly pursue your Freedoms, and are so encouraged
with the promises, and hope of liberty, that you do not become in it the
servants of corruption; it is an easy matter to be deceived herein; The heart
of man is deceitful above all things: Jer. 17. 9. and carnal liberty has a
false shadow of that Christian liberty whereunto we are called.

2ly, For your blood-thirstie adversaries who (you say) seek after your
downfall, who they are I know not: I thank the Lord I can wash my hands in
innocence, from thirsting after your blood; the Lord knows I hate none of your
persons; and I can speak that for your souls, which Paul did to his Romans,
10. Chap. 1. ver. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that
ye may be saved.

To come to your dislikes.
First, (you say) you cannot but dislike my praying and prating against those,
whom I have formerly prayed and preached up, viz: the gallant godly Army; and
this presents us mere weather-cocks, etc.

I answer: First, to your dislike of our praying for, and against -- while our
gallant godly Army, kept in Gods ways, and in their own sphere, they were
honorable and precious in the eyes of all Gods servants, they then had our
hearts, our help, and our prayers for success therein; and we have blessed our
ever to be admired Jehovah, for crowning their labor and valor with success:
But if these or any other for whom we have prayed, and whom we have preached
up, do decline that pitch, and we then withdraw, I hope no understanding
indifferent man can for this call us Weather-cocks; they that do, are revilers,
and slanderers; I leave it to the Lord (who best can) to judge betwixt us and
them, who have turned about, and who have kept their station.

2ly, As for my praying against them, the Lord (who is a God hearing prayer)
knows that my prayers have been such for them, as for mine own Soul; viz. that
God would show them all the evil of their ways, (I hope you will not make
them infallible) that he would give them repentance unto life; that so their
iniquity might be blotted out: Now I am much mistaken, if the understanding and
wise in heart, do call this praying against a man: I shall thank any Man that
has any interest at the Throne of Grace, that will thus pray against me; if
this, I say, be to pray against one.

In the next place, where you call our preaching, prating; if you be not quite
brazen and impudent (me thinks) ye might blush and be ashamed of your uncivil
and unbeseeming language, to call the preaching of that (which I challenge you
or all the world to prove) to be any thing but the truth of God; -- Prating. --

But this is no new thing; Paul, tells us that the preaching of the Cross, is
to them that perish foolishness. 1. Cor. 1. 18. And Paul himself, by
Idolatrous Athenians (though preaching Christ) yet counted a Babbler. What will
this Babbler say? Acts 17. 18. ver. Here was language as perverse as their
Religion, and for my part, I expect no more mercy at the Tongues of men, then
the Apostles had; In all Ages the wicked bend their Bows, and shoot their
Arrows, even bitter words.

Paper. In the second place, you say you dislike the misapplication of that
place of Scripture, Isa. 3. the base are risen against the honorable, you say
it is my common practice whereby I lead men in dark paths; you say this is a
Riddle that wants an Interpreter; and these are but Bals of wildfire, to set
the Kingdom fresh on fire, and fill the hearts of the Sons of Belial, with
dishonorable thoughts of the Kingdoms worthies in the Army. etc.

Ans. To this I answer. First, That that place of Scripture is no Riddle (if
you know what a Riddle is) and so needs no Interpreter at present, if you do
not shut your eyes, such plain places cannot be hidden to you, and as for the
misapplication of it, which you charge me withal, you charge me falsely, for I
made no Application of it all to any; you venture to expound the words in your
Paper, and to show who are the vile and base, and who the honorable, viz. who
base (say you) but those who basely falsify and betray their trust reposed in
them? who base, but such as seek their own advancement by a Kingdoms ruin?
Truly these are base ones indeed: The Lord help you to apply, as rightly as you
have expounded, and then I doubt not but you will see who they are that are led
in those dark paths which you speak of.

2ly, In that you say it is my common practice, to misapply Scripture, and to
lead people in dark paths: I say here as Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5. being
disgraced by some Corinthian Doctors, and false teachers that were crept in
amongst them (whose steps many do follow in these days, and do make it their
work to beget a prejudice in people against their Ministers) with me, it is a
very small thing, that I should be judged by you, or by man's judgment; for I
judge not my own self; for I know nothing by my self (in this which you here
lay to my charge) yet am I not hereby justified, but he that judges me is the
Lord: therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come; who both
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of all hearts.

3ly, In that you dare say, that any parts of Scripture, are Bals of wildefire,
etc. Remember what St. James says of an evil tongue, Jam. 3. 6, etc. The
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity, and is set on fire of hell: the tongue
that dares cast iniquity upon God, or his Word, is surely set on fire of hell.

Pap. 4ly, In that you charge us as seeing-blind Pharisees, and say that it is
our condition, to sin with our eyes open, because you cannot but remember our
carriage and zeal for those whom we now condemn: Oh what pains (say you) was
spent in their behalf? what prayers put up for them? etc. is all this buried in
the grave of oblivion? and what is the reason? have these Worthies (say you)
fallen from their faithfulness? No, no.

I answer. In this case you nor I must not judge, at least say whether they
have or no: only all that we desire is, that the Lord may judge betwixt us and
them. I shall say no more of this, in this place, because I have spoken
something to it already, in my Answer to your first dislike of our praying for,
and against.

justice and punishment, and that from this, that the Scripture says, That
Righteousness exa^ts a Nation.

Dr. Gaud. Rel Prot.
or mediately from those Politic Laws and settled Magistracies, which are Gods
ordinances amongst men. But where the execution of Justice is unjustly usurped,
and carried on without any warrant from Gods Word, or man's Laws, either as
precept and rule, or example; such an execution of justice, is a turning of
judgment into wormwood, and does depresse and bring a Nation low under the
judgments of God, rather then exalt it: I speak not this in reference to any
persons, or actions; only to inform your judgment a little.

Paper. In the next place, you charge me with praying that the Lord would bring
the King out of the hands of those that had restrained him, and what was this
(say you) but a stroaking Malignants on the breast? and a making the Army
odious in the eyes of the simple deluded ones?

Ans. To this I answer. First, that this accusation is from the father of lies
too, if ten more of you had subscribed it. This you take upon trust too, from
those who it seems have already given so much liberty to their consciences, as
to make no conscience of a lie: having forgotten it seems, or counting those
places Apocrypha, where the Spirit of God tells us, that a lying tongue is one
of those seven things which is an abomination to the Lord, and which he hates:
Prove. 6. 17. And (if this be an old Testament text) that of the Apostle, Ephesians
4. 25. Putting away lying, speak every man truth to his neighbor: and if you
had as much truth and honesty as you seem to lay claim to (no disparagement to
your honesty) I could bring twenty and ten as honest men as your selves to
testify the contrary. What I said, I trust I am able to make good, as being
nothing but what was, and yet is, justifiable before God and men, and that was
this: I prayed, that God would deliver the King out of the hands of those that
sought his destruction; and this was no more then what I was bound in
conscience to do (while he was living) being one of his Subjects, and having
many Oaths, Protestations and Covenants, sacred and civil ties and bonds lying
upon me, obliging and engaging me to obedience and loyalty; and to endeavor
in my place, the preservation of his person, and the promoting of his honor
and safety. And certainly you have not lived so long, nor undergone so many
Offices in the Commonwealth (as some of you have) but some of the same Oaths
and Covenants have been more then once taken by your selves: Now I must plainly
confess to you, that (what new Religion soever you have lately met with to
absolve your consciences from so many oaths and obligations, in all which, you
have called the Almighty and all seeing God of heaven to be both a witness to
you, and an avenger upon you) I for my part am (as yet) ignorant of any power
under heaven that can absolve me from such oaths taken before God to my lawful
Sovereign. I know but one power that pretends to it, and undertakes to do it,
and that is the Pope. But for God, I doubt not but you (who pretend so much to
walk by the rule of the Word) do know, what a swift witness the Lord is
against such as swear falsely by his name, and what a revenger he is to such
sins. Read Zach. 5. 4 first verses, there is a flying roll of curses, that shall
enter into the house of him that swears falsely, it shall remain in the midst of
his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof, and stones thereof.
Now (I say) though you may (perchance) have found liberty of conscience, yet
(for my part) I cannot yet find liberty to swallow down such a camel as this
is without choking.

Pap. 2ly, Whereas you say, that in this we stroaked the Malignants, and had
this end in it, to make the Army odious, that these prayers savor more of
flesh then spirit, more of zeal then knowledge, that they proceeded from self
ends, etc.

Ans. I answer. I bless God, I have learnt to bear with patience these, and
more such reproaches as these are; the Lord forgive you: what my prayers were,
and from what spirit they proceeded, and what I aimed at in them, as my end,
the Lord knows; that is my comfort: and you shall know too one day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be made manifest.

Again, whereas you charge us with not laying down our Call from the Bishops; I
shall more fully speak to that hereafter; you give me occasion in the following
part of your Paper to clear that, and therefore I shall not meddle with it here.

Paper. In the fourth part you say, I prayed that the Lord would take the Sword
out of those hands in which now it was, etc.

Ans. Ten of you have subscribed this too: Pray how many of you dare say, that
you heard me speak the words? This you take upon hearsay too: And let me tell
you, that if you give credit long to the informations of those, who have thus
learnt to stretch their mouths, you will forfeit your own credit quickly: I say
in this to you again, if the number were trebled, I am able to make it good, by
as good, and far greater testimony, hat this too is false, for there was not
such a word spoken: you tell me in the next branch, that true Ministers should
be no false accusers. May the people be such. The same spirit tells us, that
every righteous man will hatelying: Prove. 13. 5. The Lord in mercy give you
grace to repent (if that be not too legal a grace to be wished to such high
flown Christians) but however let me tell you (that except you repent) the
Scripture says, that A false wi^n^sse shall not be unpunished: and he that
speaks lies shall not escape. Prove. 19. 5.

Paper. In the fifth place, you say, you cannot but wonder, at that abominable
assertion, and false aspersion hinted in our expressions, as if the Army would
down with truth, with Government, faithful Ministers, and set up false
Apostles, etc. and how false this is, the world sees.

Ans. 1. I cannot but wonder at your abominable ignorance, and impudence, to
call that a false assertion and aspersion, and so cruelly to condemn it as
abominable, and a false accusation; which yet in the same place you say was but
hinted at in some expressions; blush and be ashamed (if you be not past it.)

2ly, For what the Army pulls down, or intends to set up, it is not for you nor
me to meddle with now; therefore no more of that: let it suffice that the world
sees (as you say.)





1. I answer. I shall herein give you a certain account of my judgment and
opinion herein, which I hope I shall be able to make good against you, and all
other gainsayers. To proceed plainly, and by degrees.

First then I say, that our Lord Jesus Christ as he does invisibly teach and
govern his Church by his holy Spirit, so in gathering, preserving, instructing,
building and saving thereof, he uses Ministers as his instruments: and has
appointed an order of some to teach, and others to learn in the Church; and
that some should be the flock, and others the Pastors.

Again, besides the first founders of the Church of Christ, extraordinarily
sent, and furnished with the gift of miracles, whereby they might confirm the
doctrine of the Gospel, he appointed also, ordinary Pastors and Teachers for
the executing of the Ministry even until his coming again unto judgment. See
Ephesians. 4 11, 12, 13.

2ly. I say that it is not lawful for any man, how fit soever, and how much
soever enriched with gifts, to undertake this Office of the Ministry, in the
Administration either of the word or Sacraments, by the will of private persons
or others, who have not power and right to call; much less is it lawful for
any, by their own judgment or arbitrament, to assume and arrogate the same to
themselves: But before it be lawful to undergo that sacred Ministry (in
Churches constituted) a special calling (yea beside a lawful Election (which
alone is not sufficient) a mission or sending, or (as commonly it is termed)
ordination, is necessarily required; I say, necessarily required, not only to
avoid confusion, and to shut out Imposters, but by reason of divine institution
delivered to us in the holy Scriptures. See these places, Romans 10. 15. How
shall they preach except they be sent. 1. Tim. 3. 10. where the Apostle
showing, how Bishops and Deacons should be qualified; says, Let these first be
proved, and then let them use the Office. Again, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Neglect not
the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery. Again, 1. Titus 5. For this cause left I thee
in Creet, that thou should ordain Elders in every City as I had appointed
thee. Again, Acts 13. 2. 3. etc. where you find that the Holy Ghost commanded
the Prophets and Teachers in the Church at Antioch, to separate Barnabas and
Saul, for the work whereunto he had called them; and the Text says, that when
they had prayed and fasted, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away:
Can any thing be more clear? Barnabas and Saul were questionles gifted men;
they had a Call from the Holy Ghost, the text says so plainly, but yet this
was not sufficient, till the Prophets and Teachers there, had fasted and
prayed, and laid their hands on them: Once more see the 5. Heb. the first 4
verses. Every High Priest, taken from among men, is ordained for men, in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer etc. And in the 4th. verse. And no Man
takes this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God as Aarou was.

Now you must know that there is a double calling, necessary to a dispencer of
the myderies of Salvation, viz. inward and outward; the inward inableth them,
the outward authorizeth them to discharge their sacred Function. Where there
are gifts (if God incline the heart of the heart of the Party to enter into the
Ministry) there is an inward calling, yet this alone (as I have showed)
suffices not, without an outward calling, either ordinary or extraordinary --
extraordinary callings (seeing miracles are ceased) we are not now to expect;
and if any (as many now) do pretend to such, we are not easily to believe and
give way thereunto, to the ordinary calling, by fasting and prayer, and the
imposition of the hands of the Presbytery -- as before mentioned. 1 Timothy 4. 14.
and by the way you may take notice, that though the word Presbytery be (in
these days) so distasteful, yet it is Scripture proof.

From hence now my account (which you said before you did conceive) is this:
that all that take upon them, to execute the office of a Minister of the
Gospel, ought to have a Calling, not only inward, but outward thereunto; I say,
not by the Approbation of the State, but the probation and approbation of the
Presbytery, and the imposition of their hands: And they who presume to
undertake to be your Ministers without these whatever their gifts be (which
many Laymen, Artizans, Mechanics, and broken Tradsmen in these days pretend
to) they are no Ministers of the Gospel, but deceivers and Intruders.

And thus I have showed you, whom we account Gospel Ministers.

In the next place I shall endeavor to remove the great block at which you
stumble so often, that Crum which troubles you so much even to your choking
almost, and that is the Ordination of some of our Ministers by the Bishops.

Paper. You say we have our call from the Bishops, and they from the Pope, and
such is our Call, if you mistake not.

Ans. It Is well you put in an [if] here, if you mistake not. It Is no news for you
to mistake, and your mistakes are very foul ones; such that every
understanding man cannot but wonder at, that they should come from such men as
you, who pretend so to light: But it appears plainly, that the new light which
has lately shune about you, it is as that extraordinary light, that did shine
about Saul at his conversion (if I may make such a comparison) it has struck
you quite blind at present, and the light that is in you, appears to be
darkness, and how great must that darkness be; as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.
23. The Lord in mercy to your Souls, hasten the time, wherein the Scales may
fall from your eyes, I shall endeavor to pluck off some of them at present.

Paper. We have (you say) our call from the Bishops, and they from the Pope,
and this (if you mistake not) is our call to the Ministry.

Ans. First, in that you say our Bishops are from the Pope; do you mean in
their Names or Functions? These are both from Scripture, from the Apostle, See
1. Tim. 1. 3. If any man desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work.
Again, 20. Acts 18. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, over which
the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, -- so the word is in the original.

Or 2ly, do you mean that they are Popish in their opinion and religion? if
some have been so, you cannot condemn them all for that; no your ignorance and
your malice, would then shame you to all the world; for the contrary has been
witnessed, by the blood of many famous Martyrs, eminent in the Prelacy, which
in fresh Records you shall read has been shed for God, against the Harlot of
Rome; and by the excellent labors of Bp. Hall Apolog: against Brownists
others, (and those late Bishops of this Church) whose learned Pens have pulled
down more of the Walls of Rome, then all the Corner-Creeping Brownists and
Separatists, will be able to do while the World stands.

Or 3ly, Do you mean that they are from the Pope in their Superintendency,
superiority and Lordlines, if in any thing, it must be in this? Now to this I
answer; That we received our Ordination from them, as they were Bishops and
Elders of the Church, not as they were Lords; and if they were Lords for their
external dignity, yet they were not Lords of of our faith, and if we looked
upon them in any thing of their Superiority, it was as they were our Elders,
and Fathers, not our Masters.

Farther yet I shall desire you to take notice, that in the making any man a
true Minister of the Gospel, there are some things required, which are
essential to the Ministry, without which a man is not a true Gospel Minister.

Again, there are some other things which are but circumstantiall, or
Accidental, which a man may have, or may not have, and yet be a true Gospel
Minister.

Now if I may make it appear to you, that we have all the Essential
requisites of Gospel Ministers (I hope you may be convinct, that we are
Ministers, and Ministers of the Gospel (how opprobriously soever, you censure
our calling (or else you must make the contrary appear to us.

Now then if God has made us able to teach, if he has inclined our hearts to
the office of the Ministry, and has made us desirous to teach: if he has
separated us, for this cause to the work, if our People have had a lawful
Election, if we have been admitted upon due trial, both of Ministers and
People, if we have been ordained by imposition of the hands of the Eldership,
and prayer, if (I say) we have had all these things (which appears to all the
World) and yet be no true Ministers; pray let me know from you, what is further
required, to the substance of a Gospel Ministry? If we have all this, and yet
have our calling from the Pope, let me know I say from you, what is a Gospel
calling; and if this be not according to the will of Christ and his Apostles in
the Scriptures, (but Popish) show me what is.

A little farther yet in this point, if God upon this call has committed a
charge to us; if he has followed our Ministry with power, and blessed our
labors with gracious success, if (I say) God has done this for us, and by
us; with what face dare you challenge our Ministry as Popish and Antichristian?
I am sure you cannot but grant the Ministry in general, to be the ou^ward
means by which God gives grace, and increases inward grace. Now then that
Ministry by which God has given grace and increast it, that ministry is of
Gods appointment: now whether God has not given grace and increast it by our
Ministry, some of your own hearts and consciences (if ever you had grace,
which you will be loath to deny) shall be our witnesses. I am able to make it
good to some of you (and that by your own confessions) that God has followed
our Ministry with power, and blessed our labors with gracious success, even in
some of your hearts, whose tongues are now so busy to call in question and to
deny the truth of our Calling.

Lastly, If Episcopal Ordination be a Popish and Antichristian rite, as you
say it is, I desire to learn from you, what was the Christian for me or manner
of admitting men into holy places for 1500. years after the Apostles time, can
you show me any other Ordination that was heard of, at least approved of for
the space of 1500 years? during which time, it there were no lawful Calling,
there were no Pastors feeding and governing the flocks; and if no lawful
Pastors, then no visible Churches: Now pray tell me, if they were not a true
Church in those several Centuries and ages while they lived under Bishops;
where had Christ a visible Church upon earth since the Apostles times?
Certainly if the Calling of their Pastors and Teachers were not (at least for
substance) sufficient (though perhaps not perfect) Christ never had any in his
Church since the Apostles left the earth.

And having thus given you an account of ours; I pray, tell me seriously
(seeing you have separated from ours as abominable, as you speak afterward in
your Paper) whence is that office of the Ministry which you now follow? I dare
say, not from Christ, nor his Apostles, nor their successors: what Church ever
in the world can be produced (unless in case of extremity for one turn) whose
conspiring multitudes made themselves Ministers at their pleasure? what ^ule of
Christ prescribes it? what reformed Church ever did or does practice it? what
example warrants it? where or when have the inferiors laid hands on their
superiors? what Congregation in Christendom affords you a pattern? The Apostle
indeed tells us, that the time should come, when men should not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts should heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears: And they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be
turned unto fables. 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. And if ever those words of the Apostles
were fulfilled, it is in these times upon which the Lord has cast us. And
certainly there was never any fable a more arrand device of man, then some part
of that Ministry of yours so much gloried in, for sincere correspondence to
the Primitive Institution.

Pap. In your sixth place, you say, you dislike not our zeal in Preaching
against errors, heresies, and Heretics.

Ans. Truly we thank you for nothing; it is a wonder almost: do you not indeed
dislike it? it is well there is something that comes not under the penalty of
your dislike: hut if you do not dislike it, I marvel why you (above others) do
so wince at it; surely this argues that there is some gawled place. Where is it?
-- you tell us something in the next place.

Ochim, Zim and Jim, Owls and Satyrs, all the devils in hell, are broke loose
amongst us, and may have a quiet habitation amongst us; and we are (at present)
stripped of all power, (but that of our prayers, and the immediate power of
Almighty God) to cast them out.

You need not (me thinks) wonder so much at our disorder, seeing we live in an
age, wherein all order and government in Church is counted Popery, and
Antichristianity, and persecution of tender consciences. -- For our disorders,
I shall say as Paul to his Galathians, I would to God they were even cut off,
that trouble our order: but they shall in their due time receive their reward,
and bear their judgment whosoever they be. Gal. 5. 10. 1^.


But I cannot but take notice of your supposition (if we be a Church) which if
you are, we wonder at your disorder.

It seems you conclude us to be no Church, because of some disorders: what? is
it come to an [if] with you? truly you have made haste to run thus far
already: what are we no Church? To satisfy you in this, let me ask you, do
you know what makes and constitutes a true visible Church? It appears you do
not, and therefore I will tell you.

According to the Scriptures, and the joint consent of all Protestant Churches
in the world, the sincere preaching of the Word, and the due administration of
the Sacraments, constitutes or makes a true visible Church. Again, do you know
what is a true particular visible Church? It is a particular company of men,
professing the Christian faith known by the two marks abovementioned, viz: the
sincere preaching of the Word, and the due administration of the Sacraments.

Now I tell you (and if you have any thing to say in denial of it, I shall
make it good to you) that by Gods mercy we have the true use of the Word and
Sacraments, and all other essential gifts and graces of God to make us a
Church; and though (at present) by reason of many such disorderly fellows as
your selves, and by reason of the want of some helps in execution of that power
and authority which Christ has invested our Church withal, there may be many
disorders amongst us; and we are annoyed with many practical evils: but yet so
long as the Gospel is it self amongst us; so long as the air of that is clear,
so long as we directly and inviolably hold the foundation; I tell you, that
though every rayler may term us no Church, and every Ignoramus may doubt
whether we be a Church or no, yet there is no Seperatist, shall be able to
prove us no Church: If you can do it, I desire to hear what you can say against
us: and I promise you (if you can prove us no Church, and prove your selves to
be one) I will be your disciple: and I will acknowledge that you have received
more new and miraculous light then all the Dr. Featly Dipper dipped.
Russet Rabbis, and Mechanic Enthusiasts, that ever I yet heard or read of.

For surely though some of the Masters of your new way have bitterly inveighed
against the Hierarchy and tyranny of some of our Prelates, yet the same
tongues and pens have both justified our Church, and extold it: many have
indeed opposed some of our Appendances and circumstances (which we dislike with
them) but they have acknowledged and defended our substance. And many of our
late most rigorous Fathers have not more disliked our Episcopal Government,
then embraced our Church: we are but little beholding to your charity, who
seem to question our true visibilitie of a Church, and the world cannot but
laugh at it; and we cannot but pity your ignorance, that you, for some
corruptions and disorders amongst us, should hold us to be no Church, and so
separate from us.

Again, are we no Church? pray then (tell me) what are you? can you be so
impudent as to deny this, that some of you have been begotten again by the word
of our Ministry? will not your own consciences convince you? lay your hands
upon your hearts, what says conscience to ^his? Have you not I say (some of
you) acknowledged, does not conscience yet acknowledge, that (as Paul said to
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3. 10. according to the grace of God which has been
given to us, some of us have laid the foundation of Christ in your souls?
though now another builds thereon (as the Apostle said) I am sure of this,
Other foundation ^an no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now
let every man ^ake heed how he builds thereon, he that builds upon this
foundation, wood, hay, stubble, this work will not abide, but shall be burnt,
and he shall suffer loss, and though himself be saved, yet it will be so as by
fire. Again, what says Conscience to this? have not many of you acknowledged,
that since your new birth, you have sucked much consolation and strength from
the breasts of our Church? have not many of you been nourisht, and grow'd
thereby? and are we now doubted to be a Church? what is the matter? is the food
changed? is there any alteration in that? or have you a sick man's palate, that
can relish no wholesome savourie food? Surely, surely, it is not because there
is no savor in the food, but because of the distemper of the palate. The Lord
help you to see your condition: there is no disease more dangerous, then those
which rob the party of his senses: and every one will tell you, that it is a sad
sign of death, when he that is desperately sick will tell you that he is well,
and feels nothing. I beseech you remember from whence you are fallen (in
^oofing your first love) even out of the Church already, whither will the next
fall be: I tremble to think of it, if God give you not grace to repent, and to
do your first works: therefore let me press upon you St. Peter's counsel, 1
Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. Laying aside all malice, and all guil, and hypocrisies, and
envies, and evil speakings; As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that you may grow thereby: If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious.

Once more: If you look upon us as questioning whether we be a Church or no,
and separate from us as no Church, let me ask you one question more: Have you
renounced your Baptism? if you renounce our Church, you must lay down that, or
else you are still of our Church; for that was the ordinance by which you have
been all admitted, and initiated into our Church. Now, I say, if that be not
renounced, you are yet members of our Church, which yet you say is no Church;
and so by consequence you must either be members of a Church, which is no
Church; (and if so) consider, and tremble to think of your condition; for
whiles you are out of the Church, you are such as Paul said his Ephesians were
before their Calling, Ephesians. 2. 12. Without Christ, aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. -- Now if it be not thus with you, what new
Church are you members of? (I hope you are able (at these years) to give an
account of your faith, and you would have us to look upon you as believers)
have ye then been dipped lately? or has the weather been too cold? I believe all
the arguments of your new Pastor have scarce (as yet) prevailed with you for
this; what sign or seal have you then, of your being admitted into a new
Church? That which makes me doubt of this, and ask the question, is because I
see you still retain your old names taken in your Baptism, in our now forsaken
Church; you subscribe your selves, Thomas, and William, and Giles, and John,
and Roger, etc. do you not look upon these names too, as received in that
Antichristian ordinance, and so away with them, as rags of Antichrist, and such
superstitious things as not to be retained any longer?

Paper. In your next place, under your sixth branch, you complain how the
poor, despised, forsaken, godly people of the Land, have not worldly powers to
side with, but against them; and persecution has been raised by those worldly
and secular powers against the godly, to death, and banishment, witness the
late endeavors and desires of the Presbyterian Ministers.

Ans. In this I must note two or three things: First, if you mean your selves,
and such as you are, by the poor godly people of the Land, surely you will no
more complain (I hope) of being despised, and forsaken, and persecuted by
worldly powers; you are yet alive, and you need not fear banishment, or
persecution to death; for you have now gotten the worldly secular powers (as
you call them) to be with you, and not against you: Now if you make the syding
of the worldly powers, against a people, to be always a mark of the godly
people of the Land; what then are you at this time, with whom the present
powers of this part of the world (in which you live) do side?

2ly, I cannot but smile at, or rather pity your ignorance here again; you say
you are persecuted by the secular powers of the world; witness the endeavors
of the Presbyterian Ministers: wherein you say plainly, that the endeavors of
the Presbyterian Ministers, are the endeavors of the secular powers of the
world: how gross and absurd is this ignorance? learn for shame to distinguish
better against next time, lest the world hiss at you.

Paper. 3ly, You say, the secular powers raise persecution against the godly to
death, and banishment; witness the endeavors of the Presbyterian Ministers.

Ans. Here again you plainly say, that the Presbyterian Ministers raise
persecution against the godly. We may here justly say (with David) we live
among men that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose treth are spears
and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Psalm. 57. 4. and 59. 7. Behold,
they belch with their mouth, swords are in their lips: But we doubt not but our
God will deliver us (as he said) from the reproach of them that would swallow
us up.

Again, I cannot conceive what your meaning should be, except it were the late
testimonies of the Presbyteriall Ministers to the Solemn League and Covenant,
and to the Truths of Jesus Christ, against Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies:
(your meaning can be nothing but this) Now if you call this an endeavor to
persecute the godly of the Land; you must necessarily conclude, those that hold
errors, heresies, and blasphemies to be the godly of the Land. (and if that be
your opinion, it is most abominable to all those that know any thing of God, or
of truth) And I tell you farther, that the banishing, or putting to death,
those who after conviction persist in heresies and blasphemies, is no more then
the written Word of God allows, and commands (if you be not gotten already
above the Word, and so lay that by) neither can it be called persecution no
more then the hanging of a thief, robber, or murderer, by the Laws of the
Land, can be said to be persecution, when the just and deserved punishment of
their wickedness is inflicted.

Paper. Again you go on in your sixth exception, and say it is no new thing for
worldly wise and seeming godly men, to persecute the Saints and power of
godliness; and the very same thing is practiced in our age; and that if men
were acquainted with the working of the mystery of Iniquity, they would never
be such slaves to time-serving self-seeking men, who only seeks their gain
from their quarters; and those that will not put into their mouths, they will
raise war against them; and this you positively say, does evidently appear in
me in my slighting and reproaching those whom I formerly rejoiced in, but now
are accounted by me, Sectaries, and troublers of the State, though I have
nothing against you but the case of Daniel, concerning the Law of your God, and
will not now believe as I believe, and put into my mouth to feed you with
untruths; and therefore I now dis-own you; and on the contrary, own, embrace,
and hugg in my bosom, those openly wicked, and profane, which formerly I
professed my self a stranger to.

Ans. Friends, wast in cold blood? were you in your right senses? did you not
for that present lay by that little reason, truth, honesty, and charity that
you pretend to, when you did set your hands to these things? did you not forget
that of Christ: Matthew. 12. 36, 37. that for every idle word that men shall
speak (much more for every lying, reviling, slandering word) they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment. For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Will you justify these
words before God or men? or will they not condemn you without repentance? Here
you charge me, with persecuting the Saints, and the power of godliness, that I
am a time serving self-seeking man, who seek only my gain from other men's
quarters: that I raise war against those that will not put into my mouth; that
I slight, and reproach, and call those Sectaries, whom I formerly rejoiced in,
because you will not believe as I believe, and put into my mouth to feed you
with untruths; and that I now hugg and embrace, the openly profane, -- etc.

Are ye able to make these accusations good against me? truly you speak very
largely, as if your tongue (that unruly evil member full of deadly poison,
wherewith you pretend to bless God, and yet do curse men made after the
similitude of God) were your own; and that none could or should control you.
-- Had I received such words from openly profane men, or from professed devils,
I could have born them better; but to be so traduced, by men that would be
accounted understanding men, men professing conscience as their rule, yea from
professed Saints, truly this makes me much more to suspect, and mistrust the
truth of that you profess, then ever I did before: remembering the words of the
Apostle, James 3. 12, 13, 14, etc. Can a fountain send forth at the same p^ace
sweet water and bitter? Can a figtree bear olive berries? or a vine, figs? so
can no fountain yield both salt water and fresh. Who is a wise man, and endued
with knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good conversation his works
with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your
hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. This wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual, divellish. See also Jam. 4. 11, 12.

1. But to answer the particulars: First for my persecuting of the Saints, and
the power of godliness; I do here appeal to the Lord Jesus, who takes all such
persecutions of Saints, as done to himself: Act. 9. 5. In this point (I say) I
call heaven and earth to witness, and shall say with David in Psalm. 7. 3. 5. O
Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be this iniquity in my hands: Let
the enemy persecute my soul, and take it, yea, let him tread down my life upon
the earth. And as he in Psalm. 69. 19. Thou Lord have known my reproach, and my
shame, mine adversaries are all before thee.

2ly, In that you say I am a time-server, and self-seeker, and that I seek
only my gain from other men's quarters, etc. What time-server I am, let the
times judge; and for the seeking of my self, or my gain from my quarters: I
thank the Lord that my rejoicing is this, the testimony of my conscience, that
in all quarters (especially to you-wards) I have preached the Gospel without
covetousness: and the gain that I have sought for, has been the gain of souls
to Jesus Christ, (knowing that this also shall turn to my gain) In this (I
hope) you will allow us to be covetous: and as Paul said to his Thessalonians,
1. Ep. 2. ch: Being allowed of God to be put in trust to preach the Gospel,
even so we have spoken, not as pleasing men, but God, who tries our hearts.
Neither at any time used we flattering words, (as ye know) nor a cloak of
covetousness (God is witness) neither of men sought we glory, nor of you, nor
yet of others: when we might have been burdensome as the Ministers of Christ.
Yea you your selves are witnesses (and God also) that I have both traveled to,
and labored amongst you in preaching the Gospel of God; neither ever yet have
I been chargeable to any one of you (to my best knowledge and remembrance) no
not for a penny, though most falsely and impudently you here charge it upon me;
And if I had sought my self, and my own gain, so much as you speak of, surely I
should have sought me out some more charitable quarters, then I ever yet found
yours to be: But the Lord forgive you your unthankfulness, returning, and
requiting me in this, evil for good.

3ly, In the next place though you cannot but be convinced of this in your own
consciences, that you never as yet put any thing into my mouth, yet pray tell
me; when or wherein have I endeavored to raise war against you? will this be
made good, or must I put it into the number of your most unchristian-like
slanders?

4ly, Whereas you say that I slight, and reproach, and dis-own you, whom I
formerly rejoiced in; because you will not believe as I believe, and put into
my mouth to feed you with untruths: I answer as Paul said to his Thossalonians,
1 Ep. 2 Chapter latter end, that ye were our joy, and our glory, and the crown of
our rejoicing, while ye seemed to stand fast in the Lord: But since you have
been so foolish (as he said to his Galathians, 3. Ch: 1. ver.) to be bewitched
by others not to obey the truth; you must pardon us this wrong if we be in
heaviness for you: and though we be far from slighting or reproaching any (as
you falsely object) yet (I say again) you must pardon us, if we dis-own you in
your errors; which of us it is that has changed, let the Lord judge betwixt
us, whether our doctrine, or your profession and practice, has been, yea and
nay. We dare appeal to the same God, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, that the
word of the Gospel which has been preached among you, by us, was not, is not,
yea and nay, but in Christ was and is yea.

But farther, you say we slight and dis-own you, because you will not believe
as I believe, and put into my mouth to feed you with untruths.

I answer. First for your believing as I believe; for my belief, I shall say,
first as Paul, 2 Cor. 10. 7. If any of you trust to himself that he is Christ's,
let him of himself think this again, that as he is Christ's, even so are we
Christ's: my belief is in the Lord Jesus, neither have I ever endeavored to
invite or entice you to any other belief then the faith in Jesus Christ. And
whosoever he be that shall preach to you any other Gospel, or another belief,
though he were man, or Angel from heaven, I must say as Paul, Galat. 1. 8, 9.
Let him be accursed. What other belief you have lately found out, that you will
not believe as we believe, I know not.

In the next place, for your putting into my mouth, to feed you with untruths.

I call you and all the world to witness against me, and to make it to appear
to me, what untruth I ever fed you withal: even here in this also (I thank my
God) I can say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2. 17. We are not as many, which
corrupt the Word of God; but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the fight of
God, have we spoken in Christ. And as he, 4. Chap. 2. We have renounced the
hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the Word
of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to
every man's conscience in the sight of God.

Lastly, for your putting into my mouth (which you here again speak of) I here
again answer you, I need no other witness against you then your selves: I here
ask you again, Where, or when any of you, did put any thing into my mouth,
though my mouth has been open to and for your souls in preaching the Gospel of
consolation to you; Though I have sown unto you spiritual things, yet when or
where have I ever reaped any of your temporals? Certainly therefore (if you
have not put on a whores forehead) you cannot be ashamed of this your so false
and groundless a reproach, which you so often here cast upon me.

In the last place, whereas you charge me with embracing and hugging in my
bosom, open profane ones: I desire you to let me know, who are those open
profane ones whom I do now so embrace and own: I believe l must set this by
amongst the rest.

Paper. In the next part of your sixth branch, you say, If we were Ministers of
Christ, we durst not give the childrens bread to dogs, much less press others
to sin to partake with such.

A. I wonder that you do not set the saddle upon the right horse (as the
Proverb is) either show us plainly who does so; or else confess to your shame,
that you let fly at all, at random, and speak more out of malice then
knowledge. And surely such tongues want bridles: I dare challenge you to make
it good against any of us, where ever you have known any of us, to give the
childrens bread to those whom we have known to be dogs: or where ever we have
pressed any to sin; or to partake with those whom we or they have known to be
dogs: surely this too, will prove to be another of the same, with your former
slanders.

Paper. In your 7th branch you say it is your desire, that wolves may be brought
to light, that you may know them and avoid them; but we fear some that would be
thought true Apostles, will prove false, and so must and ought to be avoided,
as the most desperate enemies to the truth, and to the professors thereof.

Ans. In all this we join with you, and (never fear it) I will warrant you,
that some who now appear to you to be true Apostles, and are now transformed
into the Ministers of the Gospel, and Ministers of See 2 Cor. 10. 13, 15.
righteousness, and spiritual men; when their vizor is plucked off, will be
seen in their colors: God has promised it, and God will perform it, that
their folly and their madness shall be made known unto all men, and they shall
proceed no farther. See 2 Timothy 3. 9.

Paper. Here again you say, some are afraid to come to light, and therefore
have gained Orders from Authority, that none must question what they say in
public; and be sure they will never meet in private: so they will avoid all
occasion of being questioned. Therefore let all the wise in heart judge who are
afraid of light.

Ans. I answer. That we are so far from avoiding the light, that we creep not
into houses, we preach not what we deliver in corners and Conventicles, but in
public Congregations And that there has been any order gained from Authority,
that none should question what we say in public, is false: who gained that
Order (that was put out by Authority) I know not; but (if I do not
mis-understand it) it only prohibits that disorder, which (for all your large
liberty afterward mentioned in your Paper) you would scarce admit of in your
private meetings, viz: that in the midst of your exercise, you should be
disturbed and called out upon, to answer every question, which every piece of
ignorance in the company or congregation should propose: but the exercise once
ended; as our doors (as well as yours) are open to all comers; so if any man
has any thing to speak, he may speak without fear of being questioned by the
Magistrate. And as you say you have often heard your Teachers desire, so I say
(for my own part) I desired it my self in public, but the last time (save one)
that I p^eached to you (and so have others before me there) that if any man
has any thing to say against what we deliver, they should stand forth and
freely speak, (only desiring (as you say) that they should speak in order, in
love, for edification, and one by one) or that you would come to us before we
went out of your Town to be resolved, which none of you did, (though entreated
in a Christian-like way to do it) but when we were gone from you, (and as you
thought out of the hearing of it) then with most black and dishonest mouths,
and tongues full of lying and bitterness, have gone from place to place, and
traduced us and our doctrine; let the Lord judge, and let your own consciences
speak, whether this be not so; and if it be truth, we say with you, let the
wise in heart judge who are afraid of light.

Paper. For your 8th branch: wherein you say you dislike our Babylonish
confusion in making no difference twixt the Church and the world, but jumbling
them together, contrary to the mind of God in Scriptures, and the clear
practice of Christ and his Apostles.

Ans. In a part of this Answer before, I have showed you what difference there
is twixt the Church and the world; in showing you according to the mind of God
in Scriptures, and the clear mind of Christ and his Apostles, what does
constitute a true visible Church: and if you would have had a larger Answer to
this silly objection and dislike, you should have showed us wherein our
jumbling them together does appear, and I doubt not, but we should have given
satisfaction, at least a reasonable answer, though perhaps that would not have
satisfied you.

Paper. Your ninth dislike is this; That we cry out against, and accuse persons
as overthrowers of public Ordinances; and neither declare the persons who, nor
the manner how.

Ans. Did not our Savior Christ tell the disciples when they were together,
that one of them should betray him; yet he did not tell them presently which,
nor the manner how; he did not tell them that 'twas Judas by name: however
(when they asked him) he gave them a sign by which they should know him, as
well as if he had named him, viz: He to whom I shall give a sop, etc. So here I
shall not give you the very names, as to say it is you Thomas, or you William,
or you Giles, or you Roger, etc. yet I will give you a sign in a word or two,
by which you shall know the very men. -- Thus then: They that separate from,
and they that refuse, and do lay down the practice of public ordinances, and
do cry out against them. These are ^hey that do what they can to overthrow
public ordinances: In these few words now, ye have the persons who, and the
manner how: I think now I need not give you the persons by name; by this that I
have said, (if the Lord help you to try your selves and your brethren by rhis
note) you will quickly see who are the men.

Paper. In your next place you say, That it has been offered by some of you,
to Indicate the true use of ordinances, according to Primitive Institution, yet
you could not prevail with our party to give a meeting to try it by the light
of Gods Word; and now again you offer it to me, that when I shall appoint a
time you will cheerfully give a meeting to clear the truth from all false
practices and innovations of men.

Ans. To this I answer. That except you were men of more moderation and
meekness, then your Paper shows you to be, except you knew better how to
bridle your tongues, and to overruled your mad passions, to which you have so
freely given the reins in your Paper) I cannot blame any man for refusing to
give you a meeting. Surely it is to be feared, that instead of clearing up the
truth, such meeting (with such men) might prove to be but just such as Paul
commands Timothy and Titus to avoid and shun, viz: Vain bablings, which will
increase to more ungodliness, a striving about words to no profit, but to the
subverting of the hearers. And again he calls them foolish questions,
contentions, and strivings, which are unprofitable and vain. See 2 Timothy 2. 14,
and 16. v. Titus 3. 9.

But thus far I entertain your proffer (because you shall not think that we are
afraid of you) that if any among you, or any one for you, (for as for your own
parts (poor men) I know you are no way able to undertake such a work) but if
any of your new inspired Rabbles, for you, I say, shall undertake under his
hand and yours, to set down what that truth of doctrine and practice is which
you hold, profess, and practice in ordinances; I do here promise you that I
shall be ready to entertain it, and to give you in, either my assent to it, or
my dissent from it; as I shall find it upon faithful trial by the Word, to
be either dissonant from, or agreeing to the Primitive Institution of Christ
and his Apostles. Or if you can charge us with any false practices, or
Innovations which we allow of, let me hear what they are, and I shall give you
in my Answer. And I take this to be far the better way (so you will do it
without railing and scolding, and as you say in Scripture language) to satisfy
and resolve both your selves and us in the truth; for words spoken (you know)
are apt to be forgotten, and often miserably mistaken; but words written, remain,
and you may all take copies of them, and lay them by you) to pawse upon; and I
shall give you a fair occasion of this in my Answer to the last clause of this
your ninth branch. Wherein you say:

Paper. You desire to be ashamed and confounded, for your former evil
practice, and for all your former abominations, in the abuse of the precious
ordinances of Jesus Christ, not only as you were Atheistical, Papistical,
Prelatical, but also Presbyterial in Doctrine and Discipline, contrary to
Christ's institution.

Ans. To this I answer. If you have any shame in you, you never had more cause
to be ashamed and confounded in your selves; then for some things in this your
profession: some things (I say) which are abominable, and they are these which
follow.

Here first you plainly confess, that you have been Atheistical, Papisticall,
Prelaticall, and Presbyteriall already, in your Doctrine and Discipline: truly
it is no marvel to see you such whistlers, and to see you carried about like
empty clouds, with every wind of new doctrine that you meet with now adays;
if you have past through so many changes already: let us view them a little.

First, you say, you have been Atheistical in Doctrine and Discipline, here is
a riddle indeed (as you say) needs interpreting: poor men! let me ask you
again, did you know what you did when you set your hands to this? how miserably
have you been betrayed to discover your ignorance, and to lay your selves naked
thus to the view of all? Pray tell me, what doctrine and discipline have
Atheists? do you see your simplicity? Atheists are such as live without a God,
and do acknowledge none; such are said to be Atheists: Now I say, what doctrine
or discipline is there amongst Atheists? I think you would be looked upon as
admirably inspired men; men that have deep revelations; if you would set out
the Atheists religion in doctrine and discipline: In these times wherein there
are so many new ones that are sprung up; I never yet heard of this till now
from you.

Next, you say, you have been Pap^sticall and Prelaticall; this is not so much
to be admired, because there have been some Papists and Prelates that have had
their doctrine and discipline in England; but I never knew (before your
confession here) that Thomas Clutterbuck, Giles Hancox, Thomas Sheapheard,
Calcb Self, and those of you whom I know, (for truly I cannot say that I know
you all, or that I have ever (to my knowledge) seen some of your faces) I say,
I never till now knew that you had been Papists in doctrine and discipline: and
I am sorry to hear it now: and for these your abominations, I cannot blame you
(nay I shall help you what in me lies) to be ashamed, and confounde^ ^n your
selves for them.

Paper. But lastly you say, you desire to be ashamed, and confounded for all
your abominations, as you have been Presbyteriall in doctrine and discipline
contrary to the institution of Christ Jesus.

Ans. To this I answer, (and here I shall give you that occasion which I but
now promised you) first what your abominations have been, whilst you professed
and lived under Presbyteriall doctrine and discipline I know not: it is like,
very many; be ashamed and confounded, and repent quickly for them. -- But for
the Doctrine and discipline Presbyteriall in it self, that which the Orthodox
Presbyterian Ministers of this Kingdom, do now profess, and desire to
practice: I do here undertake to make it good to you, and to him that shall
undertake it for you; That it is according to the Institution of Jesus Christ
and his Apostles; this I shall do when I hear what you have to say against it:
and if you have any shame left in you (which you profess to have) I hope the
Lord will then help you to be ashamed of, and confounded for all the abominable
slanders you have cast upon it, and to be ashamed and confounded in your selves
for that you have so causlesly and sinfully separated from it, and have fallen
from the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, to the practice of those new
ones that never had ground or being, other then in the vain and foolish
speculations of some newly inspired men.

greatest friends to profaneness, and profane ones, etc. a roll of Shemei's
and Rabshekah's language: the Lord help you to see your wickedness in it, and
to repent, that your iniquity may be pardoned, and forgiven by the Lord, for my
part I forgive you freely.

Ans. I shall only ask you, how you would take it to have your Argument turned
upon you? Thus: Some new Lights, Separatists, and Independents are raylers,
revilers, slanderers, swearers, drunkards, liars, follow all abominations; if
one should say, such are some of you, therefore you are all such, and to be
condemned for such; how would you like the conclusion? Now remember Christ's
rule; Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto
them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Only I shall speak one word to that, which you call to witness some of us to
be liars openly in Pulpits; because that will turn the lie upon your selves.
That is Dry Baptism: that was once publicly mentioned in a Pulpit, to be
amongst you. Now pray tell me (if you may not give it that name) what name do
you give to this ordinance practiced amongst you? instead of baptizing an
Infant, to pray over it only, and to give it a name without the use of any
water, either by dipping or sprinkling, tell me (I say) I shall be glad to be
informed by you, what do you call this ordinance? where is your ground for it?
your primitive institution which you profess to stick to? Is this orderly or
disorderly walking, I dare be so bold to say, that this has no ground in
Scripture either from rule or practice, precept or president, from Christ or
his Apostles; nor in any of the Churches of Christ, till these late times,
which every day (like Africa) bring forth some new Monster: yet that this has
been lately practiced amongst you, will be made good to your faces, by those
who were eye and ear witnesses: and therefore you need not to take so much
snuff at this.

Paper. In your 11th. place you say, you cannot but dislike our disowning of
the Saints meeting to communicate to each other of the things of God, being as
clear a command of Christ's under the Gospel, as any other: but (you say) we
discountenance the practice, that we may keep men in ignorance, etc.

Ans. Here Is another gross slander: when will this mouth of lies be stopped?
did you ever hear any of us dislike or disown the meeting of Saints, to
communicate to each other the things of God? when or where did we ever
discountenance such a practice? who See I am. 4, 11, 12.
are you that you dare judge other men thus? as to say it is our endeavor and
practice, to keep men in ignorance and blindness, can you answer this to God?
The Lord will one day judge you for this judging, and you will have the same
measure meted to you: are you the men that call your meetings the meetings of
Saints? look upon every branch of your railing Paper, and deal truly with your
own souls, judge your selves, that ye may not be condemned; does any part of it
savor of a Saints spirit, or of the things of God? if this be Saintship, the
Devil is a Saint, he is a liar, a rayler, a false accuser, the accuser of the
brethren; and whether there be not much of these things in your invective, I
leave it to God, and to the world to judge; ye make it appear to the world in
it, what spirit ye are of, and what Saints ye are.

Again, for the meeting of Saints, for those ends you speak of, I here tell you
again, that we do own it, countenance it, exhort to it, commend it, practice
it; but what we dislike, and must disown, and discourage our people from, that
I likewise tell you, viz: The following after those, who (having a form of
godliness) creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins,
and led away with diverse lusts. 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6. Again, we call to them to mark
those which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which they
have learned, and to avoid them. For they that are such, serve not the Lord
Jesus, but their own bellies, and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the
hearts of the simple. Romans 16. 17, 18. Again, we call to them to remember
Christ's words, and to take his counsel, If any man shall come unto you, and
say, Lo here is Christ, or there: believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs, and wonders, in so
much that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Wherefore, if
they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth: Behold, he
is in the secret chambers, believe it not. Matthew. 24. 23, 24. 26. We call to
our people to remember the Apostle Peter's words, who tells us, that as there
were false Prophets amongst the Jews, there shall be false teachers amongst us,
which shall bring in damnable heresies, that many shall follow their pernicious
ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of: And through
covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you; These he
describes to be such as despise government. Prosumptu us are they, self-willed,
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, and 10.
verses. Again, we desire them to remember the counsel and direction of St.
Jude, who exhorts the Saints to contend earnestly for the faith, that was once
de^ivered to the Saints. For (he says) there are certain men crept in
unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation. He likewise
does describe them to be men that despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities; that they are wanding stars, that they are mockers: and these are
they (says he) that separate themselves; sensual, having not the Spirit. If
you call this a disowning of the Saints meetings, to communicate to each other
the things of God, a discouraging of others from them, and discountenancing of
Saints practice, we leave it to God, Angels and men, to judge betwixt you and
us. And truly seeing these are those last times, in which there are many
Antichrists abroad, as St. John, 1 Ep: 2. Ch: 18. I know not any counsel that
can be more seasonable to you your selves then this, if the Lord would give you
hearts to receive and embrace it.

Your 12th. branch is very large, a great deal of Riffraff raked up together to
make one dunghill: much of the same stuff that has been spoken to before; the
fruits of that spirit that reigns in the Saints of these times: I shall pass
by, and turn over (as I promised you) all your raylings and revilings, and
shall endeavor to answer a^l that deserves an Answer.

Paper. In the beginning, you cannot but wonder, you say, at our
contradictions, in that we would make the world believe, that we are like to
suffer the loss of all, and to be brought to prisons, nay stakes, for our
consciences, by the Sectaries; and yet condemn them at the same time, for
endeavoring a prodigious tolleration of all Religions: what a strange
contradiction is here (say you.)

Ans. Have ye not read the story in 1 King. 12. 13. how Jeroboam suffered all
the people of Israel to go a whoring after the Calves which he erected at Dan
and Bethel; and that when the man of God came out of Judah to cry against his
Altar upon which he offered to his Calves, Jeroboam stretched out his hand
against him, and cried out, Lay hold on him.

We need not use many arguments to make the world believe, that we are like to
suffer the loss of all, to be brought to Prisons, and Stakes, and that for our
consciences: The world sees it sufficiently; that some of us have already been
brought to prisons, and some are now in prison; (and this not without loss)
and all have been threatened, (if not with stakes) yet with as cruel deaths,
and all this only for our consciences.

Again on the other fide, that there is a Tolleration of all Religions
endeavored, Heaven and Earth do see; and surely this is prodigious, and we may
here cry out, as the Lord by the mouth of the Prophet Jerem. 2. 12. Be
astonished, Oye heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very
desolate, says the Lord. Now if you will wonder; wonder not that we speak of
such contradictions, when ye see such contradictions acted: wonder at these
things.

Paper. But you undertake in the next place to justify these proceedings,
where you positively say, that we are (indeed) of no religion, and so not to be
tolerated by them.

Ans. Does this sound like the charity of Saints? you are of no Religion; let
me a little look upon your names that have subscribed this: Thomas Clutterbuck,
William Burge, Giles Handcox, Thomas Sheapheard, Caleb Self, etc. -- one while
you say we are Antichristian, here we are of no Religion: neither we nor our
people, nor our Churches can in this estate be judged to be so much as
Christians. What can any Devil in Hell say worse against us then this? if we
denied the true God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, if we denied every
Article of the Christian Faith; if we were the most damned Heretics under
Heaven, what could you say more of us then this, that we are indeed of no
Religion? you Thomas, or William, or Giles, will you make this good to any one
of us, that we are of no Religion? Certainly this uncharitableness is above
all example monstrous: Calumnies invented by Pagans against Christians have not
been so horrible: It could hardly have been imagined, that the Devil himself,
had been able to have led any reasonable creatures, into such an excess of
impudency and slander, unto such unchristian-like reproaches; yet these men
would fain be accounted, The Saints. Well, take heed lest while you run on in
these ways, you hear old Jacobs words; Cursed be their wrath, for it was
feirce; and their rage, for it was cruel.

Paper. Again, you are of no Religion (which indeed is true.)

Ans. Friends; have ye not heard of, nor read the stories of John of Leyden,
Kinpperdollin, and David George? Those famous (or rather infamous) Anabaptists,
and of the pranks they played in Germany: and whither the Lord suffered Satan
to lead those proud hypocrites; who in their own eyes were such holy Saints, as
they could not but (in the tenderness of their consciences) separate from the
best reformed Churches of Christ (as being of no Religion) how they apostatized
from that religion, and service, which the Scripture prescribed, how they did
put away baptism, the Lords Supper, and the preaching of the Word; and
persuaded many poor ignorant people, to follow their pernicious ways, to
their destruction, drawing them along after the directions of these new
Prophets? have ye not heard of these things? whether or no the same spirit
which was the author of that Anabaptisme (and under that of all other their
prodigious and horrible impieties in Germany) does not now make his appearance
in England, and walk amongst us, I leave to all to judge, who have but half an
eye open, and are any whit acquainted with those stories: -- out of pity and
compassion, and mere love to your souls, the Lord knows) I beg and pray for
you, that you be not taken captive in those snares.

Paper. Again you are of no Religion (which indeed is true.)

Ans. Of no Religion? we acknowledge the only true God, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, for our God, and he has acknowledged us to be his people, he has taken
us into Covenant with him; we believe that he has given his Son Jesus Christ
to dye for our sins, and that he is risen again for our justification; we enjoy
union and communion with him in grace here, being spiritually, and mystically
(yet really and inseparably) joined to Christ as our Head and Husband; we
partake of the virtue of his mediation, in our justification, adoption,
sanctification, we live in expectation of everlasting communion, with our head
Christ Jesus, in that glory of heaven, the first fruits of which glory with
Christ, is communicated to us in this life, as we are members of him, our head,
and so in him are interessed in that glory which he is fully possessed of; And as
an earnest thereof, we enjoy the sense of Gods love, peace of conscience, joy
in the holy Ghost, and hope of glory: and whilst we continue here in this
life, in the communion of Saints, the Lord has given us the presence, the
help, and support of his own Spirit, to teach, guide, direct and enable us to,
and to support us in his worship, fear and service, which we desire and
endeavor to perform, according to that rule which he has given us for our
faith and obedience in his holy Word.

All this, and yet of no Religion? if you have apostatized from this, I would
fain know, what new religion you have found out; what God ye acknowledge, and
after what way, and in what manner ye do worship: you tell me something in the
following part of this branch of your Paper, that after that way which we call
heresy, you so worship the God of your fathers; you have been lately taught to
say this in a Sermon of your new Pastors; I see you can remember the text. But
I tell you (and will make it good to you) that if you worship the God of your
fathers after that way which we call heresy, your worship is incense in the
devils nostrils, and an abomination to the Lord. And this I doubt not but you
will be convinced of anon, when I come to show you what way it is that we call
heresy.

Pray be so charitable for the time to come, as to think, that we are of some
religion; though (it may be) not of yours.

Paper. You say in the next place, that we are a hodg-podge made up of all like
the Turks Alcoran, of Heathenisme in permitting mere Atheists and profane ones
to be members of our Church, and partakers of our Seals in worship, of Jewish
Tithes and oblations, of Popish ordination and ceremonies, of Episcopal pomp,
pride, and avarice, etc.

Ans. What can you leave off so soon? is this all? have ye no more? it is
wonder, but let us see what all this outcry is for.

First, we are a mere hodge-podge; I would that you who pretend so to excel in
Saint-ship and the Spirit, would but once discover, and manifest thus much,
that ye had learned common civility, and how to give some civil language.

In what are we an hodge-podge? you say we admit of heathens, and profane
ones, to be members of our Church, and partakers of the Seals of our worship.
-- Truly no other Heathens, nor profane ones, then such as you your selves
are: I know of no Atheists, nor Heathens, that have been admitted members (as
Atheists and Heathens) to any of our Churches, or any Church in Christendom:
it may be that some of you that charge us with this have been travelers, and
so may lie by authority, (according to the Proverb) pray tell me, let us be
informed by you a little, where, or in what particular Church of ours have any
Atheists or Heathens been admitted members, or to either of the Seals? are any
admitted to the first or second Seal, but such as are born within the line of
the Church, of Christian parents, professing faith in Christ Jesus? are any but
such admitted (by us) to the first Seal? or any but such to the second? Now
will you make those, that are born within the line of the visible Church, and
that do profess faith in Christ Jesus to be Heathens and Atheists? what
Brownisticall, Anabaptisticall tenets are these? will not all the world that
hears of this, hiss at your madness, your simplicity, and nonsense, and your
witless, groundless uncharitable charging and censuring of us?

Again, where can you show any merely profane ones, who continuing openly
such; without profession of godly sorrow, and desires of coming to the Lord
Jesus for forgiveness, and for increase of grace, that they might be enabled
to lead a more holy life for the time to come, that have been admitted by us to
the Lords Supper? This is as very a slander as all the rest: and if they do
desire to come in this way, I would fain know of you, where is your warrant,
and authority from Scripture to deny them? To satisfy you further in this; I
long to see, where your rule, or your command is from Christ, to require
satisfaction, by convincing Arguments, of the true grace of every
Churchmember: I am confident of it, that if that were strictly stood upon by
your new Pastor, he would have but a thin Church, I am afraid (were an honest
and sufficient, impartial understand^ng Ch^istian to be Judge of this) the
greatest part of the Ten Subscribers would be found tardy in this, and so not
fit to be members, (what ever you lay claim to) -- What ever your new guide
pretends to, he must stretch his tender conscience, in dispencing with, and in
taking many upon charitable suppositions in this point, or else his quarters
would quickly grow as cold, and as thin at Cirencester, as they have been at
other places, and so he must again turn Traveller, and an Itinerary.

Again, I see you do not know (poor men) and therefore I would have you to go
to your spiritual and gifted man to teach you, what is the nature of a visible
Church; and (lest he should be ignorant of it) I will give you a hint or two of
it: The visible Church, it is such a body whose members are never all gracious
(if you will believe the Scripture) it is not like the Church invisible, the
Church of the Elect: but it is an Heterogeneous body (do you understand that
word?) I Will help you, the parts of it are very dissimular; some chaff, some
corn, some wheat, some tares, a net of fishes good and bad, an house wherein
are vessels of honor and dishonor; a fold of sheep and goats; a tree of green
and withered branches, a table of guests some with, some without a wedding
garment: In a word, every visible Church is a society, wherein many are called,
and few are chosen. Except therefore you will alter the nature of all true
visible Churches whereof the Scripture speaks, we must grant, and so must you,
that in every visible Church, there are some members which have not true grace.
If you have any thing to say to this, let me hear your Arguments, and I shall
answer you.

Paper. Your next grounds upon which you say we are of no religion, are,
because we receive Jewish Tithes and Oblations; because of Popish ordination
and ceremonies, Episcopal pomp, pride and avarice.

Ans. For matter of Tithes you give me large occasion by and by after, and
therefore I will refer that till I come to it there: Though your Paper be full
of Tautologies, to stuff up your invective, I shall shovell up as much of your
filth as I can together, into order in my Answer.

For Popish ordination, if therefore Popish because by Bishops, I have likewise
formerly said enough already to satisfy reasonable men, (though perhaps not
you) and therefore I shall say no more of that here neither.

For Popish Ceremonies, we renounce them, and are as far as the precisest
Anabaptist of you all, from tollerating them, either in our selves or others,
where we may in a lawful way hinder and remove them -- For our Episcopal
pomp, pride and avarice, which you say is in us; I tell you again you will be
judging till you are judged, if you leave not the sooner: The Lord forgive you.

Paper. To pass by much of your rubbish; the next thing you give me occasion
to take notice of is -- your zeal against evil in opinion, and practice,
against all humane inventions in the worship of God, and for the truth once
delivered to the Saints; And here you (very well) put in a parenthesis (so far
as the Lord shall discover it to you.)

Ans. Here I cannot but commend your zealous profession; but withal cannot but
tell you plainly, that yet the Lord has not discovered that truth to you which
was once delivered to the Saints, or else you have shut your eyes, that you
will not see it. For were your eyes open, and were you but clear sighted, you
must needs fall first upon your selves if you look discerningly into your
ways, and into your judgments, here declared in this your Paper; if you will
bring these to the Tex^, viz: the written Word, you will find abundance of
evil both of opinion and practice, which tends rather to the subverting, then
the defending and maintaining of the truth once delivered to the Saints. The
Lord discover it to you, for men are very blear-eyed and dim-sighted when they
look upon their own ways: Solomon tells us that every way of man is right in
his own eyes: Prove. 21. 2. Said we not well, thou art a Samaritane, and have a
devil, said the Jews to Christ: but I say let you and I lay by our selves, and
let us bring our ways and worship, our opinions and practices to that text in
Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the testimonies: and if they speak not according
to this word, there is no light in them.

Paper. In the next place you tell me, you are resolved (the same power
assisting you) that if I or any other (as we have done) do or shall vent any
opinion, or hold any practice contrary to what is held forth in the Word of
God, in the simplicity of its own sense and spiritual meaning, that we shall
hear of it, etc.

Ans. I answer. First I must here reprove you again for a falsehood, and a base
slander, in that you say I have vented, and do hold any opinion or practice
contrary to what is held forth in the Word: if we vent any thing (say you) as
you have done: I challenge you and all the world to make that good; or if you
do not, or at least cannot, then be ashamed and repent, acknowledge your fault,
else you will be seen and known to the world to be such as you are.

Secondly, if when I do vent or hold any such opinion or practice, you will be
as good as your word and promise; viz. to let me hear of it: I profess
seriously to you, I will thank you for it; but let it be done then in a more
civil Christian-like way then this is; leave off railing and slandering, and I
shall say as David, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a
kindness: and let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellent oil, which
shall not break my head.

In the third place, if any thing be vented contrary to what is held forth in
the Word of God, in the simplicity of its own sense and spiritual meaning,
then I shall hear of it. --

I say again I desire it; But pray tell me, who shall be judge of the same
sense and spiritual meaning of the Word in its simplicity? will you be
Judges? Alas you are not fit, you can go no farther then the letter, and where
the place requires more then a literal exposition to set forth its meaning,
you must be at a stand: And I am much mistaken, if your new Pastor can help
you; as spiritual a man as you take him to be, I am sure where you stumble
upon some places, and do venture to give the meaning of them (your Paper shows)
you sometimes mistake foully, and do make good that place of the Apostle, 2 Pet.
3. 16. where he says, that in the Epistles of Paul there be some things hard
to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, do wrest, (as
they do also the other Scriptures) unto their destruction. And if you fly to
the old shift of the new lights of these times, and tell us that the Spirit
will help you: I answer, first, it is the Spirit of God alone that must help you
(if any spirit) to understand it is own spiritual meaning; And I must plainly
tell you, that there be but few of the footsteps of the Spirit of God to be
seen (in this your Paper) if those who are best acquainted with them, were to
search for them here.

Again, the Spirit does not now help by miraculous ways, (as it has done) by
immediate revelations and infusions, and by giving men the gifts of tongues, to
understand all languages, (as in the Apostles times) and they that pretend to
such things in these times, are led along, and seduced by a lying spirit.

Paper. In the next place: you say, you trust God will give you courage and
boldness to maintain the truth, by sound doctrine; and to convince all
gainsayers (though never so sophistical) that ye shall not need to use (as
some do) indirect means, as stirring up the Magistrate against them, there
being no footsteps, for such practice in the Gospel to maintain the truth, but
is the way of Antichrist to set up his kingdom: Rev. 13. 7. 15, 16. but the
Saints overcome the devil and his Instruments by the blood of the Lamb, and by
the word of their testimony. Revel. 12. 11.

Ans. I answer. First, I know not what courage and boldness God may give you
to maintain the truth; but I am sure Satan has supplied you with abundance of
courage and boldness (even to Impudency) in speaking evil of the way of
truth, and in endeavoring to hold up errors: And what worthy Patrons such as
you are, are like to prove your selves to Truth, it is much to be suspected if
one view you well in that shape you appear in, in this your Invective.

2ly, Whereas you say the Magistrate is an indirect means, that there are no
footsteps of it in the Gospel, that it is the way of Antichrist, etc.

I answer. It may be you have a means that is more direct in your concelt then
by the sword of the Magistrate; though it has fewer footsteps in the Gospel,
and that is by the Sword of the Soldier.

Rev. 13. 7. 15, 16.

Ans. To this I answer. Now you speak like your selves: Here Is the pure pute
language of all the Anabaptists that I ever yet heard or read of, or have
spoken with. -- I doubt not but to make it appear to you, that these are only
the fancies and devices of Phanaticall Enthusiasts (and not to be deduced from
Scriptures) who because they be dissolute would have no bonds of Laws; because
they are Schismatics, would have no discipline in the Church; and because they
walk inordinately, they would have no coercive power of the Magistrate to
restrain them. This is only the spirit of those Schismatic Teachers, who
under a pretense of spiritual freedom, will lead you into all carnal
liberty, profaneness, sacrilege, and faction. -- And have they (nor you)
nothing else to prove Magistracy to be Antichristian, and to have no footsteps
in the Gospel, but Rev. 13. 7. 15. 16. Poor men, did not I tell you but now,
what miserable Expositors, and applyers, and wresters of Scripture you were, to
your own destruction? will you see how ridiculous you are in this place, and
how simply and sinfully you abuse Scripture. The text alleged plainly shows,
that power was given to Antichrist to wage war with the Saints, and by his
Armies to overcome them; and this you bring to prove, that the Sword of Justice
in the hand of the Civil Magistrate under the Gospel is Antichristian; oh
miserable ignorance and impudence; he that thus teaches you to understand and
apply Scriptures, is a blind leader of the blind, and (if the Lord open not
your eyes the sooner) you will both fall into the ditch.

Again, you urge, Revel. 12. 11. where the text says, that the Saints overcame
Satan by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony: and this you
bring to prove, that the Power of the Magistrate under the Gospel in
restraining and punishing errors, and maintaining truth, is an indirect and an
Antichristian way: may not he that has but half an eye see how grossly absurd
you are in these things? The plain meaning of the place is no more then this,
That by the death and sufferings of Jesus Christ (the Lamb of God slain) the
devil and all his Angels, all the enemies of man's salvation, are overcome; and
the Saints are said to overcome him by his blood, as they have their garments
washed in the blood of the Lamb, as they are justified and sanctified by his
blood, and by his Word; the victory of Christ over the devil and his Angels
being obtained not in his own name, but for us; we (that believe in his blood,
and the word of his testimony) are said (in him) to have overcome Satan, and
his Angels, the enemies of our salvation.

Do you see now how simply you have quoted Scripture here, and how little to
your purpose? Surely this is no small fin, thus to abuse and wrest the Word and
the truth of God, to the maintaining of errors; therefore repent for it.

Again you say, the power of the Magistrate under the Gospel is an
Antichristian way, -- and you have fairly proved it; -- Let me tell you, just
thus did John of Leyden in Munster, all Power of the Magistrate amongst
Christians, was by him and his followers cried down as Antichristian, and
persecution of tender consciences; till he himself had gained power by his
seduced ones, to murder and banish all the Magistrates in Munster; and John
himself was got up into the Throne of Sovereignty, made, and proclaimed by them
his followers to be King of the new Jerusalem in Munster, where he exercised a
great deal of most barbarous and unheard of cruelty; and then Magistracy was
no longer Antichristian, when the Saints there (as they called themselves) were
once become Magistrates.

I only mind you of this story, because the Town and Country Note that Giles
Hancox one of the Subscriters has (since this) taken his Oath for Justice of
the Peace, and now executes that office in Cirencester.
speaks it, that some of you that have here subscribed Magistracy to be
Antichristian, are designed and appointed, and are ready to undertake the
office of being Magistrates among your neighbors; I hope when you your selves
come to be Magistrates and Justices, then Magistracy will no longer be
accounted Antichristian amongst you, when the Sword is once in the Saints hands.

But that I may not discourage you in your young undertakings, I will take a
little pains to inform your ignorance; and to show you what footsteps the
Magistrates executing of Justice upon transgressors (both against the first and
second Table) has in the Gospel. I hope I shall make it appear plainly to you,
that it is so far from being Antichristian, that it is Gods own ordinance, and
that under the Gospel; and you shall see it is only ignorance, that makes you
so impudent, as to say, that this has no footsteps in the Gospel.

In the first place; let me tell you, that all the best reformed Churches in
Christendom, do renounce and detest these Anabaptisticall dreams of yours; and
most harmoniously and willingly confess, and acknowledge it, to be Gods will
that the world be governed by Laws (by the way remember that the Church is
within the Commonwealth;) and God himself has appointed the Civil
Magistrate, and has delivered to him, the Sword, to the protection and praise
of good men; and for punishment on the evil. And by this bridle, men's vices
and wickednesses should be restrained, whether committed against the first or
against the second Table.

2ly, They confess the Power and Authority of Magistrates to be the
ordinances of God himself, appointed, as well to the manifestation of his own
glory, as to the singular profit of mankind: That by reason of the will of God
himself revealed in his Word, we must not only suffer, and be content that
they should rule, but also to love them, fear them, and withal reverence, and
honor, and embrace them as the Ambassadors and Ministers of the most high God
(being in his stead, and preferred for the good of their Subjects) that we
should pour out prayers for them, pay tributes to them; and in all businesses
of the Commonwealth (which are not against the Word of God) to obey their Laws
and Edicts.

3ly, They believe also, and do willingly acknowledge, that every lawful
Magistrate being by God himself constituted, the keeper and defender of both
Tables of the Law, may and ought, first and chiefly, to take care of Gods
glory, and (according to his place) to preserve Religion, when pure, and to
restore it when decayed and corrupted; and to this end, to restrain and punish,
as well Atheists, Blasphemers, Heretics, and Schismatics, as the violaters of
Justice and Civil peace.

Now by what spirit you are led, to run out of, and to cry down the opinions
and practices, of all the Churches of Christ in this point, as Antichristian,
every man may judge: And the Lord help you timely to see whither you are
running headlong; not only beyond the Churches of Christ; but into ab^urdities
and extremities, which even the Law of Nature teaches poor Pagans and Heathens
to avoid, who have their Governors and government amongst them: nay even to be
more brutish, and more void of understanding then the creature, the very
beasts that perish, for even they too, are taught of nature to observe an order
amongst themselves. -- But to show it unto you from Scripture grounds.

Paper. To stir up the Magistrate against those who oppose the truth, you say
is an indirect way, that has no footsteps in the Gospel, but is Antichristian.

Ans. First, let me present you a glass wherein you may see your own faces
drawn to the life. In 2 Pet. 2. and St. Jude in his Epistle, these two
(speaking of false prophets that were then in those days; and foreshewing what
ones should creep into the Church) do so describe them that all men may see
them: They walk (says Peter) after the flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness,
and despise government and dominion. Presumptuous are they, self-willed: they
are not afraid to speak evil of dignities; Whereas Angels, which are greater
in power and might, bring not a ray^ing accusation against them before the
Lord. So St. Jude, 8. ver. These filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. If you note it; these words of these
Apostles do as directly fit the Anabaptists of these times, as if they had
aimed at them. -- This by the way.

In the next place: Ple show you out of Scripture, that the office of the
Civil Magistrate, is so far from being Antichristian, that it is an office
appointed by God himself, for the administration of Justice, and preservation
of Peace both in Church and Commonwealth. And that in this way of administering
Justice, and preserving Peace in Church and State, their authority extends, to
the punishing and restraining of Heretics, Blasphemers, Schismatics, as well
as Murderers and thieves: First see these places of Scripture, Exodus 18. 20,
21, 22. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. and 11. ver. Prove. 8. 15, 16. Dan. 2. 21. These places
will show you sufficiently, that Magistracy is Gods ordinance. If you would
have a Gospel proof, see Romans 13. 6 first verses, where they are called
several times, The ordinance of God, and the ministers of God.

2ly, You shall see it cleared to you (de fact^) that these Magistrates have
exercised their power, in suppressing errors, heresies and blasphemies, which
have been contrary to sound doctrine and true Religion. See 1 King. 15. 13. 2
King. 10. 11, 24. 2 King. 23. 20. 2 Chronicles. 15. 13.

3ly, You shall see that they did exercise this power (de jure too) upon Gods
warrant, and by virtue of his ordination: See Deuteronomy. 13. from the 5. to the 10.
ver. and 17. Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5, ver. Exodus 22. 20. Levit. 24. 16.

All that you can say to this is, that these be old Testament texts, and God
appointed Magistrates under the Law, and the Jews were kept in order by them;
yet this does not prove that Christians under the Gospel may exercise that
power one over another, or that they need any Civil Magistrate.

I answer. I shall show you the weakness and simplicity of this reply, and
that in this order. -- First, there is the like necessity of the Civil
Magistrates and Judges under the Gospel, as well as under the Law; for the sad
experience of these times shows us, and the Scripture shows us, that the same
disorders fall out amongst Christians, as did among the Jews; not only
envyings, strifes, debates, going to law, etc. and the like disorders in the
State, but also errors, heresies, and blasphemies, and divisions in the Church.
See 1 Cor. 3. 3. and Chap. 6. 6. Phil. 3. 18. 2 Pet. 2. 1. etc.

Now if there be the same disorders in Church and State (amongst Christians) as
were among them; it must necessarily follow (and you cannot but in reason
grant,) that here is need of the same power and au^horitie for the restraining
and punishing of these. -- If we have need of the same power and authority,
and that has been a power appointed of God for the same end, if you will deny
it to us under the Gospel, you must show me, where ever that Command and
ordinance was repealed, or that pract^ce prohibited, under the new Testament. I
must confess to you that I could never yet find it repeall'd or prohibited by
Christ or his Apostles; and therefore rational men must grant that it stands
still in force under the Gospel.

And to satisfy you further, I will show you several grounds why, and places
from which you must conclude, that their Calling is warrantable by, and
agreeable to the Gospel.

First, we having need of such, as well as the Jews under the Law, you must
either grant us them, or else you must conclude, that the State of the Church
of Christ (in respect of the Civil Magistrate) is worse under the new
Testament then is was under the old, which no man will be so mad as to say.

Again, if the office of the Magistrate, were an office and ordinance under the
Law, and not under the Gospel, then it must be because this ordinance was
ceremonial and typical; but this cannot be: for I shall plainly show you that
the power of the Magistrate is moral and perpetual.

First look upon the fifth Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, etc. I
hope you will not turn Antinomians too, and deny the morality of the ten
Commandments: if you do, the Apostle Paul's words will show, that if you
condemn all the rest, yet this Command is moral and perpetual; for he renews
it in the Gospel; and it must stand as long as the Gospel stands. Ephesians 6. 1,
2. Now I believe that your inspired and spiritual Pastor will not deny, but
that in that Command (though the Apostle applies it there only to parents and
children) yet both this relate and correlate, viz: the Magistrate and Subject,
the power and authority of the one, and the obedience and submission of the
other, are both warranted and commanded.

Again, the power of the Magistrate must needs be moral and perpetual in the
Church; because the reason, and ground, and end of that power is moral and
perpetual: one ground and reason why that power was established amongst the
Jews, was because seducers and dreamers of dreams, would turn away the hearts
of Gods people from the Lord; and the end of exercising and executing that
power, was that all Israel might fear, and do no more so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
11. Now these grounds, reasons and ends of the ordaining the power at first,
and the executing of it are perpetual, and are at this time amongst us,
therefore it cannot be denied (by reasonable men) but that the power must be
still in force: you know that the grounds, and reasons, and ends of both the
institution of it, and the execution of it are now with us, viz: seducers do
still endeavor to draw away the hearts of Gods people from the Lord (if
Justice were executed on these) the people would fear, and do no more so
wickedly.

Again, you shall find that the want of a Civil Magistrate to sway the Sword
of Justice, was noted by the holy Ghost, as a great plague, and a fearful
judgment on the Jews: See Judge. 17. 6. and Chap. 18. 1. v. and 21. 25. So
likewise on the contrary, 'twas foretold and promised as a singular blessing
to the Christian Church under the Gospel: Isa. 49. 23. And Kings under the
Gospel are required and commanded to employ their power to the advancement of
Christ's kingdom: Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. The Psalm is clearly expounded of Christ
and his kingdom by the Apostle, Act. 4. 25. and Act. 13. 23. Now (says the
Psalmist) Be wise, O ye kings; be instructed, O ye Judges: Serve the Lord with
fear. Now ye must Dr Featly in his Dipper dipped.
know, that Kings and Judges, serve God two manner of ways: First, as men by
leading a godly life agreeable to the rules of the Gospel. 2ly, as Kings and
Judges, they serve God by enacting and executing Laws with convenient severity;
commanding just things, and prohibiting evil: So did Hezekiah and Josiah: And
then properly do Kings and Judges serve God as Kings and Judges, when they do
those things in and for the service of God, which none can do but they.

Farther yet, ye shall see, how in the Gospel, Christ himself and his Apostles,
have approved of the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, and have commanded
obedience to them. Matthew. 22. 21. Christ commands all to pay unto Caesar, the
things that are Cesars: And he himself paid tribute, and acknowledged even
Pilates power over him to be from God: Joh. 19. 11. -- Again, the Apostle
commands all people to submit, and to obey the Magistrate, and to obey for the
Lords sake, and for that they are the ordinance of God. And therefore surely
the Authority of the Magistrate is established by the Gospel. See Romans 13. 1, 4,
5. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. Again, the Apostle commands us to offer up
prayers in special for them as Magistrates: 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life, under them, in all godliness and honesty.
Which we could not do, except the Lord bless their government over us.

May not a man now say to you here, as Christ did to the Pharisees, Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures: what a gross error is this in you, to set your
hands to such a falsehood as this is? That the office of a Magistrate under the
Gospel is Antichristian, and has no footsteps in the Gospel? Ye see it has
those footsteps there which neither you, nor all the Anabaptists in England,
nor all the Devils in Hell, shall be able ever to raze out. The Lord give you
understanding, that you may see your error, be ashamed of it, and repent for
it, and from it.

Let Us see what you say next: -- Truly in 20 lines together, or more, nothing
but a throwing out your very gaul, in most unchristianlike slanders and
reproaches; in which too, the Devil has helped you, to belch out as hellish
lies, as ever the father of lies himself vented. Oh, what a Saint-lik spirit
this savours of? to rayl, and brawl, and speak evil of Magistrates and
Ministers, and all that come in your way. In your following page of your Paper,
ye pretend much to the carriage of Christ and his Apostles; you say you are
commanded to be gentle, and meek, and courteous; to be moderate, to walk as
brethren, and to beseech men, and that you are condemned for following these; I
leave it (even to your selves) and to all the world to judge, of the meekness,
and lambelike spirit, which you have in this Paper expressed to be in you. I
leave it upon your own consciences (if they be not seared) if they be, the Lord
soften them, and give you speedily a sense of your condition, (for my part) I
shall beseech God to pardon you.

Paper. You call us vain, time-serving, self-seeking Teachers, turning with
every wind, perfidious men, who will be any thing, nay nothing for a little
pelf, though under pretenses of piety, penny masters, hirelings, false
prophets; that our means is the prop of our ministry. That we will not trust
God, that we are at every word of command from men; facing about, and turning
as we were; that we have sworn to maintain Episcopacy with and cetera.

Ans. We shall not revile again, but, as I said, commit our selves to God who
judges righteously. We may say of you as Paul said of Alexander the
Copper-smith; you William, and Thomas, and John, and Caleb, etc. you have done
us much wrong, the Lord help other men to beware of you: -- only before I
leave this, let me ask you one question or two: Pray let me know ('it is but a
reasonable request from you who have charged us with it) in what have you found
us vain Teachers? has our teaching been in vain to you? we are sor^ie for you;
and say as Paul 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost: In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine unto them. For we have not preached our selves, but Christ
Jesus our Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake.

Again, how many winds and times have you known us to turn withal? we have
(the Lord knows) desired, and we hope we have hitherto held fast the profession
of our faith without wavering; and we trust (through Christ that strengthens
us) that we shall yet stand fast in the faith, and quit our selves like men,
though we have strong shakings: we bless God, we have not as yet said a
confederacy, nor feared the fear of men.

Again, which of us, and which way can you make it appear, that we are
self-seeking men? who amongst us have for Pelf or honor proved perfidious to
our trust, and to our charges: we trust that the Lord has seen, that we have
no^, we do not seek our own, but every man another wealth, and the things
which are Christ Jesus. As Paul enjoins, 1 Cor. 10. 2. And for your parts (I
think) you have as little cause or ground to charge us with this, as any, for
in our labors to you wards, even to this day, we are able to say as Paul, 2
Cor. 12. 14. We are ready to come again unto you, and we will not be
burdensome to you, for we seek not yours but you.

Again, which of us can you charge (justly) with prophesying or preaching false
things to you; name the men (if you can) that are false prophets, and prove it
against us: we tell you again, that we are not of those that handle the Word of
God deceitfully; and we desire to renounce the hidden things of darkness, and
(we bless God) we can say as Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 23. We have received of the
Lord, that which we also have delivered unto you.

Again, when, or where, or which of us have you known to be Beagles to our
Reverend Patrons (as you call them) the Bishops? where have we faced about, and
turned again as we were? or whom amongst us can you prove to have taken the
Bishops Oath with and caetera: we are able to make your falsehood and slanders
in this appear to the world; that in this County of Gloucester it was generally
opposed, and refused: how base then are these accusations?

Again, whom of us have you known to have layen at the Alehouse three days in
a week? -- blush for shame. -- Did you know what you did, when you were led by
the nose, to set your hands to such an heap of lies together, which are all
from the father of lies; and any one of which we challenge you and all the
world, to make good against us, if you can. Does it become the Saints to do
such things as these are? Me thinks, here be fit grounds for you, to be ashamed
and confounded in your selves.

Paper. In the next place you tell us, that certainly, if you should see the
downfall of our means, you should see the downfall of our Ministry, that being
the grand prop thereof; And therefore rather then we will trust God for our
maintenance, we will take, nay force the legal maintenance of Tithes from the
people, etc.

Ans. I answer. First, we know that the downfall of our Ministry is that which
you look, and long, and gape after; that so you may run on without control, in
your villainies. But (me thinks) (if you were not wilfully ignorant) you might
know, that Tithes are not the grand prop of our Ministry. It Is a promise of
Christ, that is the prop of it; And that is such a prop, that the gates of hell
shall never prevail against it: he has promised to be with our Ministry (and
us in our Ministry) to the end of the world; And therefore you are not like to
see the downfall of it so soon as you think for: except you have a revelation
(as one of your grand Prophets lately had) that the end of the world will be
very soon; your hope in this (therefore) is but as the hope of the wicked which
shall perish, and be as a spiders webb.

If the Lord strip us of that which you call legal maintenance, if he bring us
to a morsel of bread, yea down to sackcloth and ashes, yet I doubt not, but
you shall find, that we shall trust God so far for our maintenance, that
while we live we shall preach the Gospel: And while we do preach the Gospel, we
doubt not but we shall live by the Gospel: and if our maintenance be in that
way which you call legal, we shall not desire to keep it, if we be not able to
justify it to honester men, yea better wits then yours; to be lawful, yea
under the Gospel. And that in the next place I shall undertake to show you, by
removing all those silly and ridiculous objections which you (in your Paper)
have laid in against it.

Paper. First, you say, 'twas a legal maintenance. 2ly, that 'twas only given
to the Priests under the Law for their service. 3ly, that 'twas given to them
as one of the ten Tribes, which they took only of their brethren, and that not
by compulsion; but (you say) there is no equality that our Priests should have
it. First, because they are not the hundredth part of the people: 2ly, because
they have inheritance among their brethren. 3ly, (you say) the Priests of the
Law had but the 10th. of the increase; ours of men's labors. 4ly, the Priests
of the Law were not so covetous as ours be. 5ly, (you say) Christ having put an
end to the Priesthood, has also changed the Law which (you say) is Tithes:
here you urge, Hebr. 7. 12. Hence you do farther infer, that to take Tithes
under the Gospel, is abominable heresy: and a denying of Christ come in the
flesh. 6ly, (you say) you may see God blasting them in our posterity, for they
generally come to nothing, but are miserable Lastly, that in this we are
Jewish, and may be called Jews.

Ans. For Answer. First, whereas you say it is legal maintenance; this is just
as you call repentance, humility, obedience, and all duties legal graces and
duties. We need not value such a brand set upon the office, or Ministry, or
maintenance of the ministry of the Gospel, when the very graces of the Gospel,
suffer by you and your companions under the same reproach: -- But to answer
you. -- It Is legal maintenance, (say you) how legal? (I believe your meaning
in this, is, that which you speak more plainly in the 2d) as it was paid only
to Priests under the Law, therefore legal: if this be your meaning (as it can
be no other) here I shall presently show you your gross ignorance: Were Tithes
paid only to Priests under the Law? how false is this? you might have seen in
Hebr. 7. quoted by you, that Abraham paid Tithes to Melchisede^h, and Levi
himself in Abraham's loins. Now the Apostle shows you that the priesthood of
Melchisedech was not that of Levi; for this is taken away (says he) but the
order of Melchisedechs Priesthood abides for ever.

Here then you see, that Tithes were paid to some other Priests then only to
the Priests under the Law. Farther -- when you read that Abraham and Jacob paid
Tithes; I desire to know from you, by what law they paid Tithes: whether was it
by the Law of Nature, or by the Leviticall Law, or by an Evangelicall Law? one
of the three must be, it is plain as the Sun, that it could not be by a
Leviticall Law, and by virtue of that; for that was not then enacted, and by
that Law Levi was to receive and not to pay Tithes; yet Levi himself in Abraham
paid Tithes to Melchisedech. Again, if they paid by the Law of Nature, that Law
binds all men still, as well now as then. And lastly, if they paid by an
Evangelicall Law, that binds also all Christians to pay their Tithes toward
the maintenance of Melchisedechs priesthood which endures for ever. Pray let me
see your Answer to this.

Paper. In the next place you say, Tithes were given to the Priests under the
Law, as they were one of the ten Tribes; which they took only of their
brethren, and that not by compulsion; but there is no equality that our Priests
should have it: first, because they are not the hundredth part of the people:
2ly, they have inheritance among the brethren. Again, they had but the tenth of
the increase: ours of men's labors.

Ans. In Answer to this, I must tell you here again your ignorance has made
you very bold and impudent, in speaking that which I shall show to you, and to
all the world to be very false -- And it must be under these heads. You put me
here upon the consideration of these two things: first the proportion of the
persons of the Priests under the Law* and 2ly, the proportion of their
maintenance, and to compare it with ours now.

If you will look upon these two things in Scripture; you shall find how
falsely and absurdly you do argue in your Paper. I will show you, first for
their persons, that it will not be hard to prove, that the Tribe of Levi under
the Law, were not the fourtieth part of the people. 2ly, for their maintenance,
they had three times as much as any one Tribe. --

First for their persons; look upon the numbering of them, and compare, See Dr.
Reynolds Exp: Psalm. 110. page 477, 478, etc.
Numb. 1. 46. with Numb. 3. 39. and you shall find, that the other Tribes were
numbered from 20 years old and upward, to all that were able to bear Arms, which
was to the age of fifty years (as Josephus reports) (for at that age they were
supposed to be unserviceable for war) and yet being thus numbered, but from 20
to 50 years, their number amounted to six hundred and three thousand, five
hundred and fifty men able to go to war. On the other side, the Levites were
numbered from one month old and upward, and yet the whole number amounted but to
two and twenty thousand. Now conjecture the number of those in the other
Tribes, who were under 20 years of age, and who were above fifty years to be
but half as many as the rest, (as it cannot be supposed that they were less)
yet the whole number of the Tribes reckoned from their infancy upward, will
amount at least to nine hundred two thousand men, of which number, the number
of the Levites, is just the one and fourtieth part. If you say that the Tribe
of Levi increased to a mighty number afterward, as may be found, 1 Chronicles. 23.
3. I say that the whole people increased accordingly; for the Tribe of Judah
which was before but seventy four thousand, was then five hundred thousand,
and in Jehosaphats time eleven hundred thousand: See 2 Samuel 24. 9. and 2 Chronicles.
17. latter end: -- here then ye see, how ye are mistaken in the proportion of
the persons of the Levites. They were so far from being a tenth part, that
they were not so much as the fourtieth part of the people. And in the next
place look into the proportion of their maintenance, and you shall see your
selves more mistaken there, one would think that the fourtieth part of the
people, could require but the fourtieth part of the maintenance in proportion.

Paper. You say, they had no inheritance amongst their brethren, and that they
had but the tenth of the increase only.

Ans. How durst you thus belie the Scriptures? do you do it ignorantly, or
wilfully? First you shall find that they had the tenth of all the increase of
seed, and fruit, and great and small cattle. See Levit. 27. 30. and 32. ver.
2ly, though they were not the fourtieth part of the people, they had 48 Cities
with suburbs for cattle, and for gardens. See Numb. 35. the 7 first verses;
which Cities were next to the best, and in many Tribes the best of all: in
Judah, Hebron; in Benjamin, Gibeon; both royal Cities: so that those Cities
with about a mile suburb to every one of them, can come to little less then
the wealth of one Tribe alone in that little Country, which from Dan to
Beersheba, was but about 160 miles long.

3ly, They had all the first fruits both of clean and unclean beasts; see Numb.
18. 13. of the fruits of the earth, and of the fleece of the sheep: Deuteronomy. 18.
4. Nehem. 10. 35. of men to be redeemed, Numb. 18. 15, 16.

4ly, The meat offerings, the siu-offerings, the trespasse-offerings, the
heave-offerings, and the wave-offerings were all theirs. Numb. 18. 9, 10, 11.

5ly, They had all vows and voluntary oblations, and consecrations, Numb. 18.
8, 9.

6ly, (excepting the Holocaust) they had either the shoulder, or the breast, or
the skin, or something of every sacrifice which was offered: Numb. 18. 18.
Deuteronomy. 18. 3. Levit. 7. 30, 31.

7ly, The males were to appear three times a year before the Lord, and they
were not to come empty handed: Exodus 23. 15: 17. -- Lastly, unto them did
belong many recompenses of injuries, which was the restitution of the
principal, and a fifth part. Number. 5. 7. 8. Now put the Tithes, the Cities, and
these other constant revenues together, and you shall find that the Priests
and the Levites, who were but about a quarter as many as one Tribe, had yet
about three times revenues of any one Tribe.

And thus you may see how falsely, how blindly, and groundlesly you argue, from
comparing the revenues and the numbers of the Priests under the Law, with the
Ministers of the Gospel and their Tithes. And whereas you say, they took it not
by compulsion, how simple and silly is this? where did the people deny it? or
where did they refuse the payment of it? was it not a command of God?
Doubtless had there been denial, there had been compulsion, in this as in
other Laws.

Paper. Your next objection against us, why we should not receive Tithes, is
because we are covetous; we bring into our storehouses, but we do not give to
the poor.

Ans. I only ask you here again how ye dare? how ye are not afraid to judge
others thus: how came you to have that searching eye to look into men's hearts,
and to see how covetous they are? Certainly (though ye pretend to believe
what is written, in the Law, and the Prophets) your practice shows that you make
little conscience of making that your rule to walk by; or else you have learnt
the trick of many now a days, to slip the collar, and to lay by so much of the
Word, as does in any way tend to the bridling or restraining of you in any of
your unruly lusts.

Paper. In the next place you charge us with abusing that place of Scripture,
Mala. 3. 10. which (you say) was lawful then, but not now; and you prove it
thus: Christ having put an end to the Priesthood, has also changed the Law:
Hebr. 7. 12. which Law (you say) was Tithes. And hence you conclude, that to
take Tithes under the Gospel (there being not the least syllable for it) is
abominable heresy, and a denying of Christ come in the flesh, etc.

Ans. I answer. First, for your charging us with abuse of Scripture, I may say
to you as Christ to the Pharisees judging others, Matthew. 7. 3. Why beholdest
thou the moat in thy brothers eye, and considerest not the beam that is in
thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thy own eye: --
what a beam there is in the eye of your judgment, plainly appears to the
world, in the very next line to this, in which you charge us with abusing
Scripture: And that is in your text cited, Hebr. 7. 12. where the Apostle,
saying, that the priesthood of Aaron and Levi being changed, there is of
necessity a change of the Law; you very boldly and impudently say, that by the
word Law there, the Apostle means Tithes; And hence you conclude, that the
right of Tithes is changed; -- abominable ignorance and abuse of Scripture: If
this be not that wresting of the Scripture which St. Peter speaks of, let the
understanding judge. Me thinks it would be incredible (if I had it not under
your hands) that men who pretend so much to the spirit as you do, and are led
by such spiritual men, as you are, should be thus blind.

I Will take a little pains here too, to show you the Apostles meaning, and your
own gross mistakes.

The scope of the Apostle in several Chapters here, is only to draw off the
Hebrews from the sacrifices of the Law, and from seeking perfection in them;
and to bring them to Christ crucified (and offered up now a sacrifice for the
sins of those that believe in him) and to the seeking of perfection,
justification, sanctification, and life in him: To this purpose, the Apostle
sets forth to them the excellency of Christ's priesthood and sacrifice, above
the priesthood and sacrifices of Aaron and Levi. In this Chapter he sets forth
the honor and excellency of Christ's priesthood, above that of Aaron and Levi
under the Law, by showing, the excellency of Melchisedechs priesthood above
that of Aaron and Levi (he having avouched and declared before, that Christ was
constituted and made a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech) first
here he shows that Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedec (as from a
testimony of David in Chap. 5.) from that absolute agreement betwixt
Melchisedech and Christ, the parts whereof are these. 1. As Melchisedech was
King and Priest of the most high God, so Christ. 2ly, as Melchisedech was King
of righteousness, and Prince of peace, so was Christ. 3ly, As Melchisedech his
parents, kindred, beginning and ending of life are not recorded, so Christ as
man without father, as God without mother, kindred, beginning, or ending of
life, therefore Christ is truly a Priest after the order of Melchisedech. --
Secondly (having showed that Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchisedec)
he comes to show that Melchisedecs priesthood is more excellent then that of
Levi (and then 'twill follow, that he who is a Priest after his order (as
Christ is) is greater then Levi.) This the Apostle proves, because he was
greater then Abraham; in whose Joins Levi was: he proves him to be greater then
Abraham, in that Abraham paid Tithes to him, and in that Melchisedech blessed
Abraham, and without all contradiction the less is blessed of the greater.
(says he) The Apostle having thus proved the person and priesthood of Christ
to be before and above that of Levi and Aaron; in the 11. verse he shows, that
the priesthood of Levi was but imperfect in respect of Christ's priesthood, and
therefore must justly now cease, and be abrogated, when the priesthood of
Christ is come. According to that of the Apostle (in another case) 1 Cor. 13.
10. When that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect is done away:
Now to prove that the priesthood of Levi is imperfect, he shows it, because
perfection, (viz: justification, sanctification, and life eternal) could not
be obtained by the Leviticall Priesthood, viz: by their offering sacrifices of
bulls, and goats, and rams, and lambs, etc. for under their Priesthood the
people received that Law.) And he goes on to show that this perfection was not
to be found in that service; for if it could have been found there, there had
been no farther need that another Priest should have risen after the order of
Melchisedech, which was a more excellent order then that of Levi. But seeing
another priesthood more excellent then that of Levi or Aaron, (viz: that of
Christ) is risen; in which there is perfection, viz: justification,
sanctification, and eternal life to be found; (in the 12. verse) he shows them
that the Priesthood is changed, and therefore that Law which they were tied to
under Aaron and Levi (viz: of offering sacrifices of bulls and goats, etc.) is
of necessity changed, and therefore must cease to them: This Law (he says) is
changed, because the Priesthood is changed under which this Law was executed;
and now another high Priest is risen, (viz: Christ) who has offered a
sacrifice once for ever. -- So that by the Law here, the Apostle plainly means
those services which (pursuing the same argument) he calls (in the next Chapter)
the old Covenant, and a temporal Covenant, which was established and ratified
upon the legal priestood. And in this 12. verse of this 7th Chapter, he shows
the mutual relation betwixt the Leviticall priesthood and the old Covenant,
that the Priesthood ceasing, when the priesthood of Christ did rise, the Law
also, that old Covenant, must of necessity cease, being established and ratified
upon the Leviticall Priesthood.

It Is as much as if Paul had said, Your Priesthood being imperfect, and
abrogated by Christ, your law (by which you were bound by those Priests to
offer sacrifices for sin) does now cease too, Christ having once for all
offered himself a sacrifice for the sins of his people.

Now whether the words of the Apostle here, can by any (but such as your
selves) be wrested to have any reference at all to Tithes, I leave all the
world to judge. And I tell you, in your bold expounding the word [Law] here to
be understood of Tithes, you have arrogated to your selves, more new and
strange light, then ever any man yet did, that undertook to expound this place
of Scripture, since the Apostle did write it. -- Oh glorious revelation.

Paper. In the next place, you say, there is not the least syllable for it in
the Gospel, and the Apostles never owned it.

Ans. Pray show me where is the least syllable against it in the Gospel: or
where did ever Christ or his Apostles disown it? if your texts be no other
against it then what you urge, Hebr. 7. 12. (though it may pass amongst your
selve^, and your silly women, who understand not Scripture) yet you will be
laughed and his't at, for your simplicity, by those who have any knowledge. --
Show me, I say, where the Law for paying Tithes is abrogated in the new
Testament: whether it be not rather confirmed (at least in the equity of it)
for Christ speaking of tithing mint and cummin, says. These things ye ought to
do, and not to leave the other undone. Luke 11 42. You Will say, perhaps, that
the priesthood of the Law being ended, Tithes also, which was their due are
ended in them This I know is your argument you trust to. -- But for Answer, I
have showed you already, that the paying of Tithes did not belong only to the
Leviticall Priesthood; they were paid long before that Priesthood was
constituted.

Again, in that Melchisedech received Tithes from Abraham (which the Apos^le in
Hebr. 7. takes special notice of four or five times) ye may observe
(Melchisedech being a type of Christ) that Christ is a receiver Dr. Reyn: Exp:
Psalm. 110.
of homage and tribute from his people. And farther, there was never any type
of Christ, as a Priest, but he received Tithes as those in the Law did: And
these they received, not in the right of any thing in themselves; but merely in
the virtue of their typical office; so that originally they did manifestly
pertain to that principal Priest whom these represented, whose personal
Priesthood is standing for ever, unalterable and eternal; and therefore the
rights, thereunto belonging are such too.

Obj. If it be objected by you, why then did not Christ in his life time
receive Tithes.

I answer. First, because though he were the substance, yet the standing
typical Priesthood was not abolished, till after his ministry on earth was
finished; for his Priesthood was not consummate till his sitting at the right
hand of God.

Secondly, he did not himself take Tithes, because he took upon himself a
voluntary poverty, for special reasons, belonging to the state of his
humiliation, and to the dispensation of man's redemption. See what Paul says, 2
Cor. 8, 9.

Ob. You may (perchance) object farther, and say, now Christ's priesthood is
consummate, and he himself is in heaven, whither no Tithes can be sent;
therefore none are due, because he has no typical Priests on earth to
represent him.

Ans. I answer. Though Christ be in heaven in his body, yet he is on earth in
his ministry; and in the dispensation of the virtue of his sacrifice, and the
Ministers of the Gospel are in his stead: 2 Cor. 5. 20. and ought to be
received as Christ himself: Galat. 4. 14. So that men are not by this excused
from rendering Christ's dues unto him; first, because, there is in respect of him
(whose sacrifice we commemorate, and show forth to the people) due, a
testification of homage to him. 2ly, because in respect of us there is due a
reward of our labor; -- for the labourer is worthy of his hire.

Now to lay all these together in one view. -- In as much as all the types of
Christ (as Priests) have received Tithes as due; and in as much as that right
was not grounded upon any thing in or from themselves, but upon their typical
office, and so did originally pertain to the principal Priest whom they
typified; And in as much as his person and office is eternal, and therefore
such are all the Annexa and dues thereof; and in as much as he has no where
dispensed with, denied, or refused, or revoked this right, which from him (as
the principal) all his types ever enjoyed. And lastly, in as much as he has
left to the Ministers of his Word the dispensation of his sacrifice, and made
them his Ambassadors, and in his stead to the Church to set forth him crucified
in his ordinances. For my part I desire to be resolved from you, (or by any
other of your sect, if there be any wiser then other amongst you) why unto them
(in the name and right of their Master) those rights should not be due which
were manifestly in his types, and of which he himself has no where in his Word
declared any revocation.

Paper. In the next place you say, That receiving of Tithes is an abominable
heresy, and a denying of Christ come in the flesh.

Ans. Oh abominable ignorance! I see you had need to be told what heresy is,
(and I cannot yet but commend your desire of being informed) to this point what
has been already spoken may satisfy reasonable men: And because this is yet
but (dictum) spoken by those, who have spoken but little truth in this Paper, I
must defer the giving any farther answer to it, till I receive some more of
your new light, whereby you will prove, that the receiving of Tithes, denies
Christ to be come in the flesh, when I see how you go about to prove it; I
doubt not but I shall show your folly in that as in the rest of your stuff;
therefore no more at present.

Paper. Your next objection against Tithes is this: (you say) if we were not
wilfully blind, we might see God blasting them: for it is remarkable, that
scarce any of our posterity come to any thing, but are generally miserable.

Ans. To this I answer. First, if you were acquainted with the Word of God, or
any of his dealings with his people (as you pretend, and indeed it appears to
be but a pretense) you might know that prosperity in this life, and increase
in riches, is not always a token of the favor of God. Read Psalm. 17. 14. and
there ye shall see who they are, whose portions are in this life, Whose bellies
are filled, and who leave the rest of their substance to their babes. For our
parts, we are not envious at the foolish, when we see the prosperity of the
wicked. Psalm. 73. 3.

Again, 2ly, that our posterity are generally miserable, is no better then a
bold lie.

3ly, If it were truth; yet the simplicity of your argument appears to the
world; I will make it appear to your selves: you argue thus, because men that
receive Tithes do not grow rich, nor thrive in their posterity, therefore it is
not lawful to receive Tithes: You shall see the absurdity of your conclusion,
in turning it upon your selves, thus. Some men have been Mercers, and have
broke in their Trade; some have been Note that their new Pastor has past
through all these Trades, and Callings, and thrived in none.
Stationers, Soldiers, Dairy-men, Schoolmasters, etc. and have been blasted in
all these, have not thrived in all or any of these, but in all have proved
miserable; therefore it is not lawful for any man to be a Mercer, a Stationer,
a Soldier, a Dairy-man, a Schoolmaster, etc. Do you see now what senseless
absurd arguing this is?

Paper. In the next place (you say) we call our selves the Tribe of Levi, that
we may have Tithes. -- Ans. This is another of your lies.

Again, in this we are Jewish. -- Ans. I have already manifested your
simplicity and ignorance in this; therefore it is worth no more words here: I
pass it over.

Paper. Again you say, you plainly see upon what our Ministry stands; take
away our honor and our means, and our gifts are taken away.

Ans. I have told you before whereupon our Ministry stands; and though you
speak so plainly, yet you have not (as yet) made it appear that our Ministry
stands upon our honor and our means; but I doubt not but I shall make it
appear to you, that both honor and means belong to our Ministry. In the mean
time, let me know of you, when, or where did you ever know any man's gifts taken
away with his means? either make it appear, or else sit down, and acknowledge
your selves to be men whose tongues are full of lying, slanders and reproaches.
Does this savor of the Spirit, ye pretend to be in you?

Paper. Next you tell us, that we cannot live by Tent-making and preaching the
Gospel, by fishing and catching of men; how then should we have time to tumble
over the Fathers? But Paul wanted for back and belly, yet was not wanting in
preaching the Gospel.

Ans. I answer: (though we cannot) yet some in these late days have learned so
to fish, and to catch men, that they can live by it, when (the world knows)
they could never live, by continuing in that honest calling, unto which God had
called them; they learn to forget that of Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 20. where he
commands, Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

Again, for our tumbling over the Fathers; you that speak so scornfully of
those worthy men, (whose pions labors and memories are precious with all godly
and understanding men) you, I say, might very well employ your time in going to
schoo! to them a while (if you were able to understand them) by whom you might
be convinced of the wickedness of those ways you are now seduced to walk in;
and that ye might be taught how to understand the Word, which now you so
shamefully abuse: and that you might be directed by them to walk in that truth
which you are now so ignorant of.

Paper. The next nayl you drive at in a great deal of your stuff together, is
to tell us how we ought to preach the Gospel, and to labor with our own hands,
as Peter by fishing, and Paul by Tent-making.

Ans. I answer. I doubt not, but that Paul whom you have instanced in for
preaching the Gospel, and working with his own hands, will discover to you,
your malice and your folly, and your syllinesse in objecting this to us: Paul
himself will teach you (if you do not look upon this part of his doctrine as
Apocrypha) first, that liberal maintenance is due to us from the people for
our preaching the Gospel: and 2ly, that this is due not out of mercy (as if our
maintenance ought to depend on the voluntary contributions of our Parishioners)
but out of justice for our works sake, as we labor in the Word and doctrine.
-- And farther, that they who do labor in the Word and doctrine, have power to
abstain from laboring with their own hands, it is not required of them that
they should live by fishing or Tent-making, but it is allowed them that they
should live by the Gospel. -- For the proof of these things, see first, Gal. 6.
6. Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches, in all
his goods. (so the word is in the original) 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. The Elders that
labor in the Word and doctrine are worthy of double honor. For the Scripture
says, Thoushalt not muzzle the mouth of the ex that treads out the corn, for
the labourer is worthy of his reward. But if you will look into 1 Cor. 9. 3.
and so forward in the Chapter, ye shall there see Paul stating and debating the
question at large, Who goes to warfare at any time at his own charges? who
plants a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? that is, Am I
partial? do I speak merely out of affection, and humane favor to my own cause
or calling? or says not the Law the same also? For it is written in the Law of
Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn:
does God take care for oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? that is,
Does God provide Laws for the rewarding and encouraging the labor of bruit
beasts; and does he leave the maintenance and honor of his own immediate
officers to the arbitrary and pinching allowances of covetous and cruel men?
For our sakes (no doubt) i^ this written: that he that plougheth, should plough
in hope: and he that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. That
is, that the encouragement of the Ministers in their service might depend upon
such a hope as is grounded upon Gods Law and provision; And that they might not
be left to the will and allowances of those men against whose sins they were
sent. And this the Apostle proves farther, by an argument drawn from a most
unanswerable, equity. -- If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a
great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? Again, Do ye not know, that
they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and
they which wait at the Altar, are partakers of the Altar? (to show that they
receive their maintenance from the hand of God himself, whose only the things
of the Altar are) Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. He says not, that God permits or
allows, but God ordains and commands it. And pray tell me, what is it to
live? first, they must live as men; they must have enough for necessity. 2ly,
they must live as believers; He that provideth not for his own, is worse then
an Infidel: 1 Timothy 5. 8. They must therefore have of the Gospel, sufficient to
lay up for those whom the l^w of common humanity (much more of faith) commands
them to provide for. 3ly, they must live as Ministers, they must have wherewith
to maintain the duties of their calling, a good example of piety, charity,
and hospitality. 1 Timothy 3. 2. and 4 Ch: 12. v. From this you may observe, that
those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, and are Ambassadors for Christ, and
stand in his stead, to reveal his mysteries, and dispense the treasures of his
blood in the Church, ought to have, (by way of homage to Christ, and by way of
recompense and retribution to themselves) a liberal maintenance, and fitting
the honor and dignity of that person whom they represent, and of that service
wherein they minister. The Apostle says, they are worthy of double honor;
honor of reverence, and honor of maintenance.

Again, farther yet: to show you that this maintenance ought not to depend upon
the voluntary contribution of the people, as an act of Mercy, and not of
Justice. The same Paul tells the same Corinthians in the same Chapter, that he
and Barnabas did not work with their hands, because they had not power to
demand and receive maintenance from them for their preaching the Gospel to
them: Am I not an Apostle? (says he) what then? Have we not power to eat and
to drink? Have we not power to lead about a wise, a sister, as well as the
other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? Or I only and
Barnabas? Have not we power to forbear working? The Apostle plainly intimates
in these 4, 5, and 6 verses, that all the other Apostles did receive
maintenance from the people for themselves and their wives, and that they had
power so to do, as they were Apostles. And pray tell me, whom do you find of
the Apostles (besides Paul and Barnabas) who (after they did preach the Gospel)
did ever work with their hands (for their living) in their former Trades and
Callings? but had maintenance by the preaching of the Gospel, and had power to
receive it. And Paul himself tells them there (as you have seen) that he and
Barnabas, did not work for this, that they had no power to receive maintenance
by the Gospel as well as the other Apostles, and power to leave working with
their hands, but they did it for other ends.

Hence now (as you say, if you be not quite blind) ye may see, that liberal
maintenance is due to the Ministers of the Gospel, as Ministers for their works
sake; That they have power to take this from the people, and power to leave
working with their own hands for their maintenance. -- Let me hear what you
have to say to these things.

Again, see 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to
them; that thy profiting may be known to all. Answer me; what does Paul mean,
by bidding Timothy to give himself wholly to these things? had it not sounded
like a contradiction if it had run thus; Labor with thy own hands at some
trade for thy living, and give thy self wholly to reading, exhortation,
doctrine, meditation? do you see your simplicity and ignorance now in this
malicious objection against us?

Farther yet. I hope by this reasonable men may be convinced, that it is a
divine right that Ministers should have a maintenance, and that for their
preaching the Gospel: And for the proportion, distribution, the manner of the
peoples paying, and their receiving that maintenance, their use and enjoyment
of it, if you look upon it, and we acknowledge it to be of a civil right; Then
if by the Laws of the Kingdom, the proportion of Tithes be allowed us, and we
by the same Laws hold and possess them (there being nothing in the whole
written Word to forbid such a way, and such a proportion) it appears to
rational men, that we have as lawful a Freehold in our Tithes, as any man,
has to his Lands, and can enjoy and possess them, without being guilty of
abominable heresy; and without a denying of Christ to be come in the flesh.

Again, as for our receiving, so for your paying Tithes; know this, that it
being the Apostles doctrine, that Ministers of the Gospel should live by the
Gospel; And the Ministers of this Kingdom being allowed and authorized, by the
just Laws and lawful Magistrates of this Kingdom to receive Tithes of their
people; and every man being compelled under the penalty of the Law of this
Kingdom, to the payment of them (there being nothing, no not a word) in the
Word of God to forbid such a law, I say, Tithes becoming this way due to us by
the Law of the Land, and the Apostle commanding all Christians (Romans 13. 7.) to
render to all their dues; whosoever shall go about to defraud, or to deny their
Minister this his due, he is in this most impious, and sacrilegious.

Will you be ashamed now of your ignorance? and be a little more wary for the
time to come, how you give liberty to your unbridled tongues, and distempered
passions to censure, misreport, or slander, or scandalize the persons, parts,
callings, maintenance of such men against whom Timothy was not to receive an
accusution without two or three witnesses: 1 Timothy 5. 19. -- and to take notice
of the ill consequences of the same; you do not only contract the guilt of sin
to your selves; but you expose your selves in your madness, ignorance, malice
and folly, to be the object of sorrow and grief to those that know you, and
pity your poor souls; and the object of laughter to all others, that have any
knowledge of the truth.

In your next passage you express more of that bitterness that is in your
spirits: (poor men) There be some Symons crept in amongst you, which (as he
did in Act. 8.) do bewitch you, who seems to you to be some great one; and (as
the people believed of him) so do many now give heed to many that be abroad, as
if they were the great power of God; whereas (indeed) in the end they will
prove to be but sorcerers. And as for all your wicked and false accusations, I
shall only say to you (as Peter did to Simon) Repent of this your wickedness,
and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of your hearts may be forgiven you. For
it is easy for a Christian to perceive, that these are the expressions of those
who are in the very gaul of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Look upon some
of them, and you your selves shall be Judges.

Paper. You say peremptorily that we strike at the very foundation of Truth, as
he that is spiritual may easily discern, etc.

Ans. I answer. First, I will not undertake to judge your spirits; but this I
must tell you, that (how spiritual soever you pretend to be) that spirit that
charges us with striking at the very foundation of Truth, is a spirit of envy,
hatred, malice, reviling, evil speaking, lying and slandering; and what spirit
this is, I leave it to your selves to judge.

2ly, Me thinks you should not so cruelly have condemned us for this, but you
should have told us what truth we did ever strike at; you have quickly
forgotten your own rule, but now given to us, concerning heresy and heretics:
you told us that the Gospel way, was first to prove men such, and then to
reprove; but it seems you walk not in the same Gospel way. Remember here that
of Paul, Romans 2. 1, 3. Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same things. And think thou this, that judge
another, and do the same things, that thou shall escape the judgment of
God? you should first prove us such, and then condemn us. It Is your own
counsel, and therefore (I hope) will not be rejected by you. I desire that
this may be proved against us, else surely 'twill condemn you.

3ly. I doubt not, but in the end, and upon the trial it shall be made appear
that in those very things (wherein you rashly condemn us, for striking at the
foundation of truth) the Lord himself (whose eyes are upon the truth) and all
that are acquainted with any of the truths of God, will acquit and justify us,
as contending only for the truth that was once delivered to the Saints, and
striving for the faith of the Gospel, which is now invaded and miserably
wounded by those spirits that are already, whom (as the Apostle foretold) the
way of truth is evil spoken of.

Paper. In the next place, you charge us with deceiving the hearts of the
simple, and endeavoring to deceive the very elect, that we make truth look
every way (like Janus faces) that you have need of the wisdom of God to
discover us, and the depths of Satan's deceipts and wiles, that the Lord, who
has begun to uncover, unvayl, unmask, uncloath, etc. will do it fully, and
will tread Satan under foot.

Ans. I answer, in that we are charged as deceivers. I tell you here again we
can (we bless God) speak it before God, that we are not as many, that deal
deceitful with the word of God, but as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight
of God speak we in Christ, and as Paul said, 2 Cor. 6. We shall endeavor
(under all your reproaches) to approve our selves as the Ministers of God in
much patience, by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers and yet true.

2ly. We cannot but smile at your comparison: Can you Tho. Clutterbuck, or you
Tho. Sheppard, or the Ironmonger, or Shoemaker, or Boddice-maker, or any of you
tell what Janus faces mean? -- Poor men (though you seem to scorn the
precious fountains as you call them) yet it seems you do sometimes so far
forget your selves, as to make use of heathen histories.

3ly, The Lord give you his wisdom, (if it be his will) that you may be once
able to discern the depths of Satan's deceipts and wiles: And let the Lord go
on (in much mercy to your souls) to pluck off Satan's mask and vizard, to
uncloath, unvaile and uncover to you, the hidden things of darkness, which are
at present so embraced by you as new light: It Is the desire of our souls (the
Lord knows) to have Satan discovered and trodden under foot.

Paper. In the next place you say, though you have been as Balaams Ass to
carry the false Prophets and to call them Divines, yet God having now opened
your eyes, you dare not go forward in that practice.

Ans. I answer, if ever in your lives, you carried the burden of Balaams Ass,
you do now: we have given you some descriptions already out of these two
Apostles Peter and Jude, wherein as in a glass (I told you) you might see the
faces of those whom ye follow. And both those Apostles do likewise add this
of them: they have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray following the
way of Balaam the son of Bosor who loved the ways of unrighteousness, 2
Pet. 2. 15. Again, Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Caine, and
run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, Epistle of Jude ver. 11.
And if your eyes were were but so far opened, (if you were not more blind
then Balaams Ass was) ye might see the Angel with his drawn Sword in his
hand ready to destroy you for your running on thus to curse the people of God.

Paper. Next, you say, that we run you through with the Sword of reproach, and
had we the Sword of the Magistrate in our hands we would have slain you,
because you would not obey us rather then God.

Ans. All that I say to this, is, as formerly I have spoken to some of the like
stuff, the Lord rebuke thee, thou false tongue, the righteous God judge
betwixt you and us in these things, which of us, or in what have any of us, at
any time desired you to obey any of us rather then God? Set us know, or else
recant and repent: however this is our comfort, that the Lord will clear this
one day.

Paper. In your next part you cry out of the monstrous desperate heretics of
these times, that condemn your gentle, meek, courteous carriage, your
civility, and your moderate brotherly walking for symptoms of heresy.

Ans. I believe this comes, from a mark of a false Prophet, which was lately
given you amongst other notes, by which you were directed to know them, this
was given to you as one, viz a counterfeit humility, and this is no other mark
then what Saint Paul himself gives of false Prophets, Colos. 2. 18, 23.
therefore sure this is no such abominable monstrous and desperate heresy, as
you call it. And for your parts whether your meekness, gentleness,
courteousnesse, civility, moderation, walking as brethren (which you pretend so
much to) be in you in truth, or whether it be counterfeit, I leave it to God
(who sees the inside) to judge, and to the world, to whose eyes this Paper of
yours may come; ye have here indeed given us a Taste of your meekness, of your
civility, gentleness, moderation, and of the Saint-like, Lamb-like spirit that
is in you.

Paper. In your next place, you tell us, that we own in words Christ to be our
Lord and Master, and call our selves his Ministers, if you are so, then (say
you) we hope you are able to produce his commission for what you do. And if
Christ be your only Lord and Lawgiver how comes it to pass, that you wind
and turn at every command of men?

Ans. I answer, we do own Christ to be our Lord and Master, and Christ has,
and we doubt not but he ever will own us to be his Ministers; so long as we
are able to produce his commission for what we do. That we have his commission
for our office and ministry, that I have showed you before.

Paper. But (say you) if Christ be your only Lord and Lawgiver, how comes it
to pass that you turn and wind at every command of men?

Ans. I answer, we acknowledge Christ to be our only Lord and Lawgiver. But we
desire (for the information of your ignorance) to let you know, that Christ
gives Laws either immediately, or mediatly. The immediate laws of Christ are
those which are set down in his written Word. But 2ly, he gives laws
mediately, by those lawful Magistrates, who are Gods ordinance amongst men.
Now when the commands of lawful Magistrates (whom you call men, and God calls
Gods) are such as are no way contrary to, or disagreeing from, but agreeable to
the written word of Christ, (in a word) when their commands are only in things
lavvfull, honest, just, and good; our obeying them (which you call vvinding
and turning) is no less then an obeying of Christ our Lord and Lavv-giver,
who by his Apostles has commanded us, to be subject to the higher powers,
for the powers that be, are ordained of God, and has told us likewise that
whosoever resists, resists the ordinance of God, and they shall receive to
themselves damnation, for he is the Minister of God to thee for thy good.
Wherefore we must needs be subject not only for wrath but for conscience
sake, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc. -- And again, submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as supreme,
or unto Governors, as unto those that are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. --
Now on the other side, I desire you to make it good to me (if you can) where
any of us have turned and winded at any other commands of men, then such as
have been the lawful commands of lawful Magistrates, whom (I say) we are
commanded to obey, for the Lords sake, and for conscience sake.

Paper. In the next place. If Christ be your Lord (say you) where is his
command that you should go seven years or more to the University to fit your
selves; and then, and not before to preach: and that unless you do, you must
not preach.

Ans. Oh ridiculous simplicity and syllinesse! may I not as well ask you
Thomas the Clothier, Giles the Mercer, Roger the Shoemaker, Samuel the
Boddice-maker, and William the Ironmonger, you profess that Christ is your
Lord and Master; where is his command that you should serve seven years under a
Master at your Trade, and that then you should set up your trade for your
selves, and not before? I will answer your quaere in such a comparison. Thus,
-- you know that it is God's will that every man have some or other lawful
Calling to abide in, and to labor. See 1 Cor. 7. 20. 22. 24. Now the
Commonwealth in which you live, has in Christian policy, thought it good to
Enact such a Law, that none shall have leave, to set up any Trade in the
Commonwealth, till they have served such a time in the Trade; And this is
grounded upon several reasons. As first to avoid confusion in the
Commonwealth: 2ly, that men might be thereby enabled and fitted for their
callings; lest entering upon them without knowledge, they (first) abuse and undo
their selves for want of skill: and 2ly, that the Commonwealth be not abused,
by their venting and selling Wares not vendible, and useful, and the like. To
clear this to you in an instance, if every man, that had a will to it, should
freely set up the Trade of a Mercer, Shoo-maker, Boddice-maker, Ironmonger,
Clothier, etc. who had not served at the Trade, and had no knowledge in the
Trade, you would presently judge, that here were like to be a fair Trade, the
Commonwealth was like to be well served, and we should have strange
commodities from them, poor Cloth, Shoes, Boddice, etc. -- This by way of
comparison.

And from this to show you in like manner, that the office of preaching the
Gospel of Christ, and administering of Sacraments, is a distinct office in the
Church: It is the will and command of Christ that such as undertake, and enter
into this office, should be qualified with abilities, parts, and gifts, fitting
for so great a work, he must not be a novice, 1 Timothy 3. 6. he must be able to
teach others: 2 Timothy 2. 2. he must be a workman, so able to divide the Word of
God aright, as that he need not to be ashamed: 2 Timothy 2. 15. Where this ability
is wanting, the Church of Christ is like to be as ill served, as the
Commonwealth by simple and unskilful Tradesmen. -- Now the Apostle tells us,
that the Scriptures are sufficient to make the man of God perfect, and to
furnish him thoroughly to all good works: (that is) to all the services of his
profession, to those works of his calling he mentioned before, viz: doctrine,
reproof, correction, and instruction: for these things the Scriptures are
sufficient to furnish a man: But now for the sufficient understanding, and not
perverting, and wresting of the Scriptures, learning is requisite and
necessary. 2 Pet. 3. latter end.

To clear this farther to you, you must know, that there be two great works
which belong to this high calling: first Instruction of the scholar: 2ly,
conviction of the adversaries. Now every understanding man can judge how many
different parts of learning are requisite to the perfection See Dr. Reynolds
Exp: Psalm. 110. pa. 268.
of these two services. First, there must be knowledge in the tongues, for the
better understanding of the holy Scriptures, by their original Idiom and
emphasis; for in Translations there may be, and are some errors; for though the
Scriptures be the infallible Word of God, yet the Translators are men, which
are subject to error, and may mistake. 2ly, There is required the knowledge of
the Arts to observe the co^nnexion, the argumentation, and method of them. 3ly,
there is required knowledge of ancient customs, History, and Antiquity, of
the Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans: without in-sight whereinto, the
full meaning of many passages of holy Scripture cannot be clearly understood
and apprehended. 4ly, there is required School-learning, for the discovering
and repelling of the subtilty of the adversaries (and because Julian the
Apostate saw that the Christians in his time made excellent use of this, in
repelling and beating down his errors, he therefore interdicted them, the use
of Schools of Learning; whose examples many Apostates from our Church follow in
these days, who cry out against all humane Learning as the weapons of
Gentiles, and not fit for Christians to use.)

Lastly, there is required a knowledge of the Histories and Antiquities of the
Church, that we may observe the succession of the Professors and doctrines
thereof, the originals sprouting of Heresy therein, and the better to answer
the reproaches of our insolent adversaries, who lay innovation to our charge.

In a word, men cannot understand the Scripture in their original languages
without the tongues, they cannot expound without Grammar, nor persuade without
Rhetoric, nor divide without Logic, nor sound the depth of any controversy,
without Philosophy and school divinity. Now seeing all this learning is
requisite, for the understanding, expounding, dividing the word aright, and for
instructiing, exhorting and persuading thereby, and for the convincing the
gainsayers thereof. You must know, that there are but two ways (that ever we
heard of) for the gaining of these requisites. The first is extraordinary, the
immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and the miraculous gifts of Tongues
and Prophecy. And 2ly, The ordinary acquiring of these by the means which God
has vouchsafed viz. Schools of learning, and our applying our selves to, and
our endeavors in them. -- The first of these ways, viz. the gaining of these
abilities, by immediate inspiration and revolation, has ceased in the Church
of Christ these many hundred years, even ever since the time of the Apostles
of Christ, who (being in themselves some of them (before their calling to their
Apostleship) unlearned men) did receive their gifts and abilities this way:
Acts 2. And many other Primitive Christians with them in those days: but those
Irradiations, Revelations and Inspirations of the Spirit together with the
fiery Tongues have ceased for many hundred years, and have not been seen in
any Christian Church of late. Therefore there remains only that other ordinary
way of gaining these abilities which I have mentioned, viz. in the lawful and
diligent use of the means; by going to the University (as you call it) or to
some Schools where learning is to be had, to fit our selves. --

Now then -- seeing the office of the Ministry is a distinct office, seeing
those that enter into it must be furnished with abilities, gifts, and parts
enabling them to teach, and by the word to instruct, to correct, to exhort and
to convince, seeing these parts and abilities, are not inspired miraculoully,
but acquired in and by the use of means, seeing these means are the Schools of
Learning; seeing through the use of these means (by Gods blessing on our
endeavors) we attain to these abilities and parts; And seeing the Spirit of
God directs and enables us by these abilities and parts, to divide the word
aright, to instruct, exhort, correct, and convince etc. I hope that the
simplicity of your Quaere, and the the sufficiency of our commission in this,
does visibly appear to rational men.

And before I leave this point, let me tell you, that we can never sufficiently
admire nor detest, the sauciness of those bold Intruders in these days, who
venture to become teachers of the ignorant before themselves have been
Disciples of the Learned; who being rude and unlearned (I had almost said
illiterate) mechanics without calling, and without knowledge, do so boldly and
presumptuously leap from their manual Trades into this sacred and dreadful
office, of which Paul himself could cry out, who is sufficient? And though some
of them pretend to a calling to it, and to gifts and abilities; for their
calling I would feign know who is the author of it: if they avouch God; I
would require that they should prove th^^ their calling from God by some
evident sign: for whenever it pleases God to change the ordinary course,
and to call any man to any office extraordinary, he declares that his good will
and pleasure by some evident sign. Now if the calling of our Anabaptisticall
new teachers, be ordinary, let them demonstrate it by the Scripture, if
extraordinary, let them prove it by sign and by miracl^^. And as for their
gifts and abilities (in which they say they are spiritual men, and have all
the gifts from the spirit: I shall tell you that (whatsoever their pretenses be
to the Spirit and Revelations and Infusions) yet seeing they cannot do as those
Primitive Christians did; seeing they come as far short of those Christians in
extraordinary gifts, as they do behind them in time; seeing they are so far
from speaking with strange Tongues, that they cannot speak correctly See Dr.
Featly Dipper dipped.
and coherently in their own Mother Tongue; seeing they are many times so wide
from the sense of some Scriptures they venture to expound and apply, that their
Expositions and Applications are often without sense; seeing they utter old
broken Notes taken from other men's Sermons, for new Revelations; seeing they
furbish up ancient heresies that have layen long in the dark, for Christian
Armor of light; seeing in their Interpretations they not only contradict
Scripture, but themselves; seeing their prophecyings are but vain janglings;
(though some of them have got a glib tongue, and thereby slide into the
approbation of the vulgar sort) seeing in their contemplations they often soar so
high, as that they loose themselves; and vent blasphemies and gross errors,
for visions and revelations of the Spirit. Seeing (I say) that (notwithstanding
all their specious pretenses) these be their fruits, as the very sad experience
of these times, do too well manifest to the world; They shall give us leave to
esteem them no Prophets, but Enthusiasts; no inspired men, but distracted; no
Seers, but dreamers; no Expositors, but Impostors; no workmen, but botchers; no
fixed stars, but wanderers; no lights, but exhalations incensed in the night,
which lead fools out of their way, sometimes into thickets, sometimes into
ditches and quagmyres, and many into Rivers over head and ears.

Paper. Your next Quaere is, where is our command that we should admit any to
either seals, before they can make it visibly to appear that they are in
Christ?

Ans. Here you begin to speak a little plainly, and to tell us now what
Religion you are of, viz. pure Anabaptists. I know your meaning is, where is
our commission to baptize Infants? for these cannot make it visibly appear
that they are in Christ: I answer, where is your command from Christ, to
require all those that would be admitted to the seals, first to make it visibly
appear, that they have interest in Christ? I here undertake to make it good to
you from the Word of God; first that it is an unwarrantable practice, in you or
any other, and an unjust scrupulosity to require satisfaction of the true
grace, and real holiness of every one that is admitted a member of the visible
Church: what do you think of the Apostles baptizing Simon Magus, Act. 8. 13.
it is true, the text says, that he believed also, and was baptized: but all the
world knows, and acknowledges that that believing, was but an external
profession of faith (being convinced by miracles of Gods power) did he, or
could he make it (visibly) appear, that he had interest in Christ? The Apostles
tell him afterward in that Chapter, that he was in the gall of bitterness, and
the bond of iniquity; yet having before made but an outward profession of
faith in Christ, he was admitted to baptism. And where there is such an
outward profession made, you cannot answer the denying the seal of Baptism to
such a one; And we have no warrant to require a farther satisfaction of their
real interest in Christ.

And therefore 2ly, I likewise undertake to make it good to, and against you,
and your Goliath (who ever he be) that children of believing, and Christian
parents ought to be admitted to the first seal of the Covenant, viz: Baptism:
and if you require a syllabicall command for this practice; I desire to know of
you on the contrary, where Christ or his Apostles have in plain terms
forbidden, or denied them this ordinance, or where we are commanded not to
admit them? because the Church wherein we live, has been for many hundred
years, and is still to this day, in possession and practice of this ordinance;
I (being already satisfied in my own conscience) must hear from you, what you
have to say against this practice, before I spend more labor in the defense of
it: if you have any thing, to say against it, let me hear what it is; and I
doubt not, but I shall easily make it appear to you, that your denying the
Sacrament of Baptism to Infants of Parents professing faith, is an heretical
opinion and practice; and so convince you of your error herein; And I shall
likewise in that show you our commission from Christ for this practice.

Paper. In the next place, you ask us, where is our command to admit profane
drunkards, swearers, liars, or raylers, to the Lords table?

Ans. First, whosoever charges us with admitting profane drunkards, swearers,
liars, or raylers (as such) to the Lords Supper, they are liars, and raylers.
2ly, I demand of you whether if a man has once been a drunkard, liar, swearer,
etc. he may never be admitted, because he has been formerly such a one? or
whether those that have been such, may not be admitted when they give visible
testimonies and professions of their repentance, of their desires to wait upon
God in that ordinance, for their receiving a seal of the pardon of their former
sins upon their repentance and faith in Christ; and for increasing, confirming
and strengthening that grace they have already received in their conversion? If
because some men have been such, they therefore may never be admitted, upon any
terms, if that be your opinion, the Lord deliver me from it: if you would deal
truly with your own souls, and look in upon your selves, may it not be said to
you, as Paul said to his Corinthians: 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you: And
I heartily wish that you did not give such occasion (as many of you do) to the
world still to say, such are some of you: I do not know what your Communion is,
or what your ordinances be which you follow, and communicate in since you
renounced our Church; but (for all your outcries against our profane mixtures
and communions; I believe if God would give you hearts to search, and see among
your selves, you would quickly find, that you are not all of you such Saints,
as you would fain pass for. The shameful corruptions which might be found
amongst your selves, would stop your mouths from crying out against confused
and mixed communion with the profane.

Paper. Your next Quaere is, where has Christ commanded, that Gospel Ministers
should take Tithes?

Ans. I ask you, pray tell me, where has Christ forbidden either them to take,
or the people to pay Tithes?

Again (me thinks) (men that can take that liberty that you can) should not be
so hard driven for accusations against us, as to be fain to repeat the same
thing twice or thrice over; which you had so largely urged before: I have said
enough already to satisfy this silly question; and therefore shall meddle no
more with these Coleworts twice or thrice sod.

Paper. Lastly, you ask me, where is our command that after persons are admitted
Church Members, (by which they have a right to all the privileges thereof)
that we must examine them, whether they be fit or no; or to deny any, if they
refuse to be examined by us?

Ans. How do you contradict your selves in these your Quaeries, which are
within half a score lines: before you asked us, what command we had, to admit
profane ones, who were unfit? here you ask us what authority we have to
examine them, concerning their fitness, or unfitness before we admit them?
you tell us it is unwarrantable practice to keep any away who are members; and
the ground upon which you conclude this to be unwarrantable practice, is,
because they are members, and so have right to all the privileges of the
Church. Here let me ask you, whether or no those who are admitted members of
the visible Church, if after their admission they fall into profaneness, into
gross and scandalous sins (as their being Church Members does not put them into
an impossibility of committing some such sins) if (I say) after they are
members, they fall into such practices; must they be admitted to all
privileges, and communion in all ordinances merely upon this ground because
they are already members? and must no lawful means be used to bring them to a
sight thereof, and to repentance, and to fit them farther for ordinances,
because they are already members? what simple wild fellow is it that leads you
into these strange conceits? what think you of the incestuous person, in the
Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5. was he not a member? did he not commit a grievous
sin? might not he (upon your argument have pleaded a right to all privileges,
as he was a member? yet for all this the Corinthians had a command to cast him
out. Now for our casting out (you say) if any of our members be unfit (as
questionless there may be an unfitness in some members, in any Church) why is
he not cast out? (say you) what will no less punishment serve turn? nothing
but cast him out presently? we would fain know of you, where is your, or any
Churches authority, to cast out a member, for every sin that may make him unfit
at present for communicating, in the Lords Supper? or is the casting him out of
the Church the only way to make him fit? whether or no is it not (even in your
weak judgment) a more likely way, in a mild and brotherly manner, first in
private to admonish, to reprove, to convince, to exhort, to instruct, to the
end such a one may be fit, and if no other means will serve, then to cast out.

But for our casting out, I have told you already, that the power of our Church
in the execution of such things, is taken away by those, who will have Liberty
to be, and to do any thing, and yet not be cast out. Surely therefore your
charging us with these things and censuring us for confusion, is an
uncharitable and an unwarrantable practice.

Paper. In your next particular you tell us, that whereas we say that heretics
spread errors and heresies without opposition; furely we must mean our selves.

Ans. Truly, it is very wittily concluded; we desire you to prove this, that we
are heretics, that we acknowledge our selves to be such; that our doctrine is
pernicious and false (for this you charge us with) prove this (I say) against
us, or else you will be posted for the must impudent malicious liars, revilers
and slanderers, that this generation has brought forth. -- For any thing else
that is in this particular of your Paper, it is answered before, and therefore
not worthy of any more time here.

Paper. In the next particular there are two things to be spoken to. First you
tell me that whereas I say I love true grace, piety and holiness, and shall be
willing to embrace it though it come from the breast of the greatest enemy
(here is a mystery wants unfolding, and (in the close of this particular) you
tell me wherein the mystery lies) you say, my expression hints to you, that
true grace, piety, and holiness, and I are enemies: for can it be, that if you
have true grace (say you) that another that has true grace, and you should be
enemies, yea the greaest enemies, when true grace makes of the greatest
enemies, the nearest and strongest friends: sure (say you) you did not consider
what you writ, or if you did, you should have done well to have explained your
meaning.

Ans. I answer. First, I did very well consider what I writ, when I said that I
loved true grace, piety and holiness, and should be willing to embrace it,
though it come from the bosom of the greatest enemy: And he that is but one
ace, or one inch above a novice, is able to tell you that this is no mystery,
and needs no unfolding; but it being my misfortune to deal with those whose
foggy ignorance makes them think, every plain truth to be a mystery, I must
and will explain my meaning to you in a few words: You say that my expression
hints that true grace, piety, and holiness, and I are enemies. I answer, it is
not my expression but the Devils, the Father of lies that hinted (that) to you
from that expression.

I love true grace, piety and holiness, though it come from the greatest
enemy: How does this expression hint to you that true grace, piety and
holiness and I are enemies? how ridiculous is your malice and ignorance? can
it be (say you) that if you have true grace, another that has true grace and
you should be enemies, whereas true grace makes of the greatest enemies
strongest friends? can it be? Poor men! what an amazing mystery and wonder is
here? can it not be? that two men, both having true grace, may yet be divided
and at enmity? what do you think of Paul, and Barnabas? do not you believe they
had both true grace? do you not read of the sharp contention between them,
and that but upon a light occasion. See Acts 15. 35. But how can it be? (say
you.) I answer, do you not yet know, that every man that has true grace in
him, has yet withal some corruption in every faculty as well as grace? do
you believe this from Paul? or are you turned Chatharists? if you do believe
it, as you must, (or else deny the Scripture) then it is easy to unfold this
mystery you speak of, thus: Though true grace cannot be an enemy to grace, yet
two men that have both true grace may for some time be at variance, and enemies
to each other, through the corruption that is in them. -- how do you think now?
may not a man that has true grace, be said to embrace true grace, piety, and
holiness, though it come from the bosom of an enemy, and yet not be an
enemy to grace? do you think that if men of understanding should come to see
your simplicity, they would not hiss at it. For my part, I heartily pity you.

Paper. In the next place you ask me what I mean by true grace; And how shall
you know it but by the signs thereof, in obedience to the revealed will of God
in his Word? And if so, you beseech me to convince you, wherein those amongst
you I point at do walk contrary in word or action, and you are persuaded of
them, that they will be thankful to me, and bless God: if not, I must needs
be convinced that I walk contrary to my profession, and so you cannot but
expect acknowledgement and satisfaction from me, If there be any truth or
ingenuity in me

Ans. I answer: it is truth. True grace in the soul, is best seen and known by
the effects thereof, seen in a man's obedience to the revealed will of God in
his Word. The tree is known by its fruits, and a fountain by the water it sends
forth: so grace is best seen, to be in the heart (by us who can judge only
according to the outward appearance) by the fruits of it in a gracious life.
Now would you be convinced wherein any amongst you do walk contrary to the
revealed will of God in his Word? it is the easiest thing of a thousand to do
that; and you cannot but be convinced of it, (if you be not like Solomon's fool,
which though he be brayd in a mortar, yet he will retain his folly) I will
instance in a few particulars. It Is the revealed will of God, that there be no
divisions among you: 1 Cor. 1. 10. that you should mark those that cause
divisions, and avoid them; as men that feed their own bellies, and serve not
the Lord Jesus Christ: Romans 16. 18. You walk contrary to this; for you do not
avoid, but receive, uphold, follow, and countenance such fellows, of whom
'twill be made good, that in what place soever they have come, they have made,
and caused, such unhappy breaches, and divisions, as have been made, and are
now amongst you. Let the hand be laid upon the heart, and see if conscience
does not bear witness to you of this thing: have there not been formerly an
happy union, a sweet concord, a sweet conspiring together in the love of the
same truth, in the communion of the ordinances of Christ, and in private
duties? which truth and ordinances (though now condemned by you as abominable)
yet I here again proffer to make good to you, to be no other then the truths
and ordinances of Jesus Christ, (and your own consciences will make good to
you, that your own souls have received comfort by them) and you know that God
has enabled some of you ^o suffer for them. Now as Paul said, Gal. 3. 2, 3, 4.
Who has bewitched you? have ye suffered so many things in vain? (if it be yet
in vain.) Are there not now envyings, strife, divisions, and contentions
amongst you: 1 Cor. 3. beg: Do you not now speak evil of that way of truth you
have formerly walked in, and found comfort in? is it not so? Now who has
caused this separation, envying, strife, division, contention, etc. is he
marked by you, and do you endeavor to avoid him? If you do not, you must needs
be convinced in this, that you walk contrary to the revealed will of God.
Again, I need go no farther then your Paper to convince you of your walking
contrary to the revealed will of God in his Word: you have sent it to me under
your hands, and therefore I must look upon it as your words, your act and deed.
Let me instance in a particular or two.

Is it not the revealed will of God that you should know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and to admonish you, and to esteem
them very highly in love for their works sake, and to be at peace among your
selves: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Is it not Gods will that they that labor among you
should be counted by you worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 7, 8.
Now let me ask you? has not God in mercy, set those over your selves that
labor in word and doctrine? has not God given a seal and a testimony to
their ministry by begetting some of you again by the word preached by them?
and nourishing others amongst you by the word of their ministry? and have they
not been highly esteemed amongst you for their works sake? have they not been
sought to by you to come among you again? have you not received them as a
blessing? now let Conscience answer. Do you not now walk contrary to these
commands of God in his Word? and contrary to your former practice? Are they not
looked upon as enemies because they tell you the truth? instead of esteeming
them very highly in love, are not both their persons and doctrine, nay their
very calling and ministry (which I say again, I challenge you to prove, if
you can to be any other then the Ministry of Jesus Christ) are not these I say
despised, scorned, reproacht by you? and branded even with the highest brand of
being Antichistian. Let me ask you (my brethren) are not these things so? The
Lord knows (that is our comfort) and you shall know too one day, if you do not
now. -- Now is not this a walking contrary to the revealed will of God? are
these the fruits of grace think you? -- Again it is the revealed will of God
in his word, that putting away lying, every man should speak truth with his
neighbor, Ephesians. 4. 25. Now I think I have made it appear, (and shall make
it appear farther) that this Paper which you have set your hands to, has not
one page of it, but what is stuffed with lies and falsehood: I leave to the Lord,
and to the world to judge (betwixt us) of them. And therefore here again you
have walked contrary to the revealed will of God.

Again. It Is the revealed will of God that you should not backbite with your
tongue, nor do evil to your neighbor, nor take up a reproach, against your
neighbor, Psalm. 15. 3. Again that all bitterness, anger, wrath, clamor and
evil speaking be put away, with all malice, Ephesians. 4. 31. Now look upon your
Paper. There you call us Praters, Time-servers, Weathercocks, blind Pharisees,
Ministers of Antichrist, Popish persecutors of the Saints, haters of
godliness, lovers of profaneness, false Apostles, self seekers, penny
Masters, Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, men that endeavor to keep others in
ignorance, Seducers, men of no religion, proud, covetous, blood thirsty men,
for-swearers, vain teachers, men of perfidious opinions, that we preach
destructive and damnable doctrines, destroyers of truth, and true religion,
perfidious men, that will destroy souls for gain, Alehouse hunters,
Heretics, Jews, Monsters, men that condemn the practice and precepts of
Christ for heresy, enemies to true grace, Ministers of Antichrist, nay Devils.
This is the language you afford us in your Paper; and you have set your hands
to it that we are such as these. Now whether this be a walking according to the
Word, or contrary to the revealed will of God in his word, let your own
consciences be Judges; or else let the Lord (the righteous Judge) judge betwixt
you and us.

I think I need go no farther in this particular, I hope this may be
sufficient to convince you (if the Lord will set it on upon your consciences)
and if so, then be thankful and bless God for it, if there be any truth or
ingenuity in you.

Paper. In the next particular you tell me, you are grieved in spirit, to see
and hear my light and frothy carriage, in the mentioning of Scripture, as to
say that is a nimble Place. You say a carnal and wicked heart will abuse the
best thing, even grace, mercy, and love: you say a Stage Player could do no
more, nor the Devil himself to abuse and mock at Scripture, and you close
thus; -- for shame come not in public to act such Diabolical parts.

Ans. I answer. -- This whole accusation is from the Devil the Father of lies
too: you are grieved (you say) to see and hear, pray how many of you ten, dare
say you saw and heard me in that carriage or that expression which you have
here set your hands to? if I am not much mistaken, not near the one half of
you, and yet you have set your hands to it, I hope you will not turn Knights of
the post, -- these be some steps toward it. Me thinks you should not call men
Devils, merely upon hear say; if you had any Charity in you, you could not;
he or they, that informed the rest of you of this, may be ashamed to look an
honest man in the face; (as we say) to come to Public ordinances, under a
pretense of worshipping, and to belly the truth of God in this manner; the Lord
will find out such one day. -- But (as you say) a carnal and wicked heart
will abuse the best things: I am able to bring you twenty for one of your
informers of this, who will pass (I believe) both in the presence of God and
account of men, for as honest conscientious Christians as your informer,
whosoever he be of you, that will be witnesses, that there was no such word
spoken, and I call God (that heard and recorded every word) to witness of it.
-- You tell me that a Stage Player a Devil could have done no more. --

I answer. -- For what I did, and speak then, and there in public, the Lord
knows, that (as David said to Michal) it was before the Lord, and for the Lord;
and if this be, to be vile, and a carnal wicked man, a Stage Player, a Devil,
I shall desire that I may be more vile yet.

Paper, You bid me not come in public for shame to act such Diabolical parts.

Ans. When the Lord shall again call me, I shall not be ashamed to come again
in public, and to act that part, which the Lord has put me upon: -- as for
your expression Diabolical, -- the Lord forgive you; I do; and I value it not.
The Lord Jesus has taught me, that the disciple is not above his Master, nor
the servant above his Lord. If they have called the master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household? Fear them not
therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, and hid,
that shall not be known. Matthew. 10. 24, 25, 26.

In the next place you come to make your requests to me --

Paper. First, that I would define what heresy is.

Ans. I define heresy thus: -- Heresy is a voluntary choosing of an opinion,
against some Article of Faith without ground of Scripture, and an obstinate
maintaining of it against all lawful determinations of the true Church, for
some sinister and particular respects. -- Or if you will have it more briefly,
thus: -- Heresy is an error in the foundation of Christian Religion taught and
defended with obstinacy: Thus Paul says, Tit. 3. 11. that an Heretic is
perverted, that is, put besides the foundation, and condemned of himself in his
sin, that is, he erres obstinately.

This heresy is differenced from a simple error, by its obstinate maintaining;
from a schism, for that schism is in discipline, heresy in doctrine, from
Heathenish superstition, Jewish perverseness, stup^d Mahometisme, and the like,
because heresy is a revolt from the faith, contrary to the Word of God; which
such never had, no professed. -- The father of it is the devil; the mother,
pride; the nurse, singularity; the attendant, hypocrisy; the promoters of it,
enticing persuasions, and peremptory will worship; Apostacy is an eminency in
it, it being a falling away from the truth professed, self-condemning the top of
it. The outrages of it, will be blasphemy against God, virulent persecution of
his Church and children: The end final impenitencie and despair; the dismal
forerunners of eternal damnation.

Having thus showed you what Heresy is; you may easily resolve your selves the
2d. Quaere what an Heretic is. And can likewise best satisfy your selves in
the 3d. viz: whether there be any such among you. The Lord help you to search
narrowly, and to deal truly with your selves, that if there be any amongst you,
you may see them, and beware of them.

For your 4th desire, to satisfy you in that, I give you all this under my
hand. And for the 5th. I leave it to the world to judge, whether I have
answered it or no.

And whereas in your close, you again desire a meeting in a sober and in a
Christian way, I have told you my mind before, and here tell you again that the
most safe and sure way, to clear up the truth, to satisfy doubts, to discover
errors, to establish Saints that are wavering, will be to deal by setting down
under yours and my hand, what we would speak face to face at such a meeting;
one thing we shall more probably avoid this way, (which would frustrate our
endeavors in the other) that is, clamor, passion, and tumults. Again from
written words we shall not so soon start and fly, as from words spoken (which
in such a way with such people have seldom proved any better then wind.)

For my part, I profess it in the presence of God, that it is, and by Gods
grace shall be my endeavor, that love may be increased, that jealousies, heart
burning and evil surmisings may be removed: And that we may live in love and
peace as becomes Christians. I trust the Lord Jesus who is the great Prophet of
his Church, and the teacher of Israel, will always direct me, not only to
speak of, but to endeavor after the peace of the Church, by convincing and
stopping the mouths of gainsayers, who are crept in to disturb our Peace, by
perverting the truths of God once delivered to the Saints. And my prayers in
special are, that that God, whom I serve in my spirit, who knows the heart
and prayers of his servant, would only so be with me in these endeavors of
mine, as it is the truth which I endeavor to maintain. -- Amen.

You subscribe your selves, My loving friends, so far as I love the Lord
Jesus. --

For your love and friendship to me, I know not how I have of late forfeited
it. There are but few signs of it at present to be seen. But for love to the
Lord Jesus, I here set my heart, tongue, pen, to that of Paul, as the
conclusion of his Epistle, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

March -- 1648. Kemble. Yours to serve you in the work of the Gospel of the
Lord Jesus: THO: THACHE.
Postscript.
FRiends; If hereupon you find grace to see, and heal your Errors, we shall
with all brotherly meekness, love, and humility, be willing to receive you,
and shall bless God on your behalf: But if the sway of your mis informed and
mis-resolved Conscience be heady and unresistable, and your return hopeless;
-- Even these poor endeavors of mine, shall one day be a fearful and
material evidence against you, before that awful Judge who has already said,
That judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.



FINIS.

