(...)and commanded by the Malignant party, who are enemies to God our King,
and his Majesty's well affected Subjects, this Assembly is necessitated during
this war, in some formalities and circumstances, to deviate from the
proceedings prescribed by the said Laws and Statutes; Nevertheless, reteining
the substance and essence thereof, so far forth as the endless malice and
cruelty of their enemies the said malignant party does permit, who shut the
said places and other passages and ways to his Majesty's justice and mercy,
from his Majesty's well affected Subjects of this Kingdom. For the exaltation
therefore of the holy Roman Catholic Church, for the advancement of his
Majesty's service, and the preservation of the lives, estates, and liberties of
his Majesty's true Subjects of this Kingdom, against the injustice, murders,
massacres, rapes, depredations, robberies, burnings, frequent breaches of
public faith and quarter, and destruction daily acted and perpetrated upon
his Majesty's said Subjects, and advised, contrived, and daily executed by the
malignant party, some of them managing the Government and affairs of State in
Dublin, and some other parts of this Kingdom, to his Highness great disservice,
and complying with their confederates the malignant party in England, and
elsewhere, who as it is manifest to all the world, do complot and practice to
dishonor and destroy his Majesty, his royal Consort the Queen, their
children, and Monarchical Government; which is of most dangerous consequence
to all the Monarchs and Princes of Christendom.

5. The said Assembly does order and establish a Counsel by the name of a
Supreme Council of the confederate Catholics of Ireland, who are to consist
of the number of 24 to be forthwith named, shall reside in this City, or where
else within this Kingdom they shall think expedient, and the members of the
said Council shall have equal votes; and two parts of 3. or more concurring,
present votes to conclude, and no fewer to sit in Counsel then 9. whereof 7.
at least are to concur; and of the 24. a President shall be named by this
Assembly, who is to be one of the said 12. resident. And in case of his death,
absence, or sickness, the rest of these who shall be resident, may name a
Vice President to the 24. And this Assembly is forthwith to name a Secretary
and Clerk of the said Counsel, the Secretary to be of the said 24. And the
Counsel shall have the power and preheminencies following; viz. The Lords,
Generals, and other Commanders of Armies, and civil Magistrates, and Officers
in the several Provinces shall observe their orders and decrees, and shall do
nothing contrary to these directions, and shall give them speedy
advertisements and account of their proceedings and actions, with as much
expedition as may be, that the said Counsel shall have power to order and
determine all such matters as by this Assembly shall be left undetermined, and
shall be recommended unto them. And their orders therein to be of force, until
the next Assembly, and after until the same be revoked. That the said Counsel
shall have power and authority to question and inflict condign punishment
upon all Commanders of Armies, exempted from the power of the Generals, and
upon the Generals themselves, and upon all Governors, Magistrates, and other
persons of what degree or quality soever; and upon any of themselves in causes
of delinquency.

6. That the said Counsel shall have power and authority to do and execute
all manner of arts and things conducing to the advancement of the Catholic
cause, and good of this Kingdom, and concerning this war, as if done by this
Assembly, and shall have power to hear and ordain all matters capital,
criminal, or civil, excepting the right or title of Land.

7. That the Generals or other Commanders of Armies, and all Governors and
civil Magistrates, and all other persons within this Realm, shall obey the
orders and decrees of the said Council, touching the present service: that the
said Counsel shall have for their Guard the number of 500. foot and 200.
horse, to be equally extracted out of the Arms of the four Provinces. It is
further ordered and established, that in every Province of this Kingdom, there
shall be a Provincial Council, and in every County a County Council; the
Provincial Council to be composed of the number of two of each County, and
the said Provincial Council shall choose a President of themselves.

8. That the Provincial Council shall sit four times a year, and oftener if
there be cause for it; that they shall have power and authority to renew or
reverse the Judgments of the County counsels, the party complaining entering
security (de adjudicant seluendum) and shall, during the troubles, have power
to hear and determine all matters of the Crown as Judges of Oyer and Terminer,
Jayle Delivery, were wont to do; so that no special person be present at the
determining of matters of blood, and shall have power to hear and determine
all Civil causes, and to establish rents, possessions, so they meddle not with
Tithe of land other then in case of Dower or Jointure; and the Sheriffs
Provincial Generals, and all Commanders of the Armies in case of disobedience
are respectively required to execute their Decrees and Orders: and in case of
debts and Accounts, great consideration is to be had of the disabilitie of
Creditors occasioned by the war.

9. Item, in every County there shall be a County Counsel consisting of one
or two of each Barrony at the election of the County; and where there are no
Barronies, the Counsel of such County to be of the number of 12. and the said
County Counsel shall have power and authority in all points of Justices of
the Peace to hear and determine all matters concerning the offices of Justice
of Peace, and all matters of the Crown, happening within every such County; and
the Delinquent being a Free, holder may, if he please, have his trial in the
Province, and hear and determine debts, trespasses, and personal demands, and
to do all things as Justices of the Peace were accustomed for to do, and to
restore and establish possessions taken by force or fraud since these troubles.
And likewise to take a special care that Tenants Farmers be kept to their
Farms where they were used, and to be preserved from extortion and oppression;
and that Trades, Tradesmen, Manufactures, Agritculture and husbandry be
maintained, and Markets daily kept.

10. Item, In every County there shall be Coroners, high Sheriffs, high
Constables, petty Constables, and Jailer, who are to do their respective
offices as accustomed; the high Sheriff to be confirmed or nominated by the
supreme Counsel out of 3. to be presented by the Counsel and high Sheriff,
is required to execute the commands, Orders, and Decrees of the Provincial and
County Council.

11. Item, In Cities and Towns corporate, Justice is to be done, and the Laws
executed as accustomed.

12. Item, In every County the high Sheriff shall be Provest Marshall, and
shall have power to execute a Layman not worth 5. l. and none other, for
murder, manslaughter, burglary, thefts, robbery, or other capital offense.
Provided the person to be executed may have 24. hours times to prepare his
soul, and that the supreme Council or Provincial Council shall and may
name more Provest Martia's as they shall think expedient, qualified with the
like authority.

13. Item, It is further ordered, that no temporal government or jurisdiction
shall be assumed, kept, or exercised in this Kingdom, or within any County or
Province thereof during these troubles, other then as is before expressed,
except such jurisdiction and government as is or shall be approved by this
general Assembly, or the supreme Council.

14. Item, It is further ordered, that whosoever has entered since the 1. of
October. 1641. or shall hereafter during the continuance of the war in this
Kingdom, enter into the lands, tenements, or hereditaments of any person or
persons, who has been in possession of such lands, tenements, or
hereditaments, at, or immediately before the 18 day of October either by himself
or his under tenants, or by the renewing the rents, issu^s, or profits thereof,
shall immediately upon demand restore the said possession to the party or
parties so put out, with such reasonable damages as the Council Provincial or
supreme Council shall think fit; or if the party refuse to restore the said
possession gained as aforesaid, upon demand of the party so put out, his
heirs or assigns made to the said possessor his servants or adherents in the
premises or publication of this Order, within the Parish where such lands
lies, that upon his or their denial thereof, or default therein, he, his
heirs and assigns shall be for ever after debarred and secluded from all and
every right, title, interest, and demand, which he or they may make or pretend
to all or any the said lands, tenements, or hereditaments, and if after such
denial or default made, the said party his heirs or assigns shall not
immediately restore the possession of the said lands, tenements and
hereditaments to the party grieved, his heirs or assigns that he, and they,
and his and their adherents in the premises shall be declared and proceeded
with as enemies. Provided, and so it is meant, that if any of the said parties
so put out, and be declared a neuter or enemy by the Provincial and supreme
Council, that the party who gained the possession as aforesaid, shall give up
the possession to such person or persons as shall be named either by the said
County Provincial or supreme Council, to be disposed of toward the
maintenance of the general cause, upon the pain and penalty aforesaid; And
as for the rents and main profits of the said lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, and all kind of rents, and the goods and chattels taken or
detained from any Catholic as aforesaid, due satisfaction is to be made of
the same to the parties from whom the same goods, rents, or chattels were or
shall be taken or bestowed, since these troubles began, as the Provincial
council or county council shall respectively order.

15. Item, it is further ordered and established, for the removal of evil
disorder and enmity, and to the end that all men may bend their thoughts and
actions to the common cause, that all possessions of lands and tenements shall
continue and remain unto such as have already joined in this union, as they
have been for three years past next before the beginning of these troubles, and
that no title of land shall be drawn into any debate or question until the
next Assembly, other then in case of Mortgages, Leases, and particular estates,
de facto, determined or determinated by effluction or other determination
thereof.

16. Item, For the avoiding National distinction between the Subjects of His
Majesty's Dominions, which this Assembly does utterly detest and abhor, and
which ought not to be endured in a well governed Commonwealth, it is ordered
and established, that on pain of the highest punishment which may be inflicted
by the authority of this present Assembly, that every Roman Catholic, as
well English, Welsh, or Scots, who was of that profession before these
troubles, and who will come and please to reside in this Kingdom, and join in
this present Union, shall be preserved and cherished in his life, goods, and
estates, by the power, authority and force, if need require, of all the
Catholics of Ireland, as full and freely as any native born therein, and
shall be acquitted and eased of one third part in 3. parts to be divided, of
public charges and leavies raised, or to be raised for the maintenance of
this holy war.

17. Item, It is further ordered and established, that there shall be no
distinction or comparison betwixt old Irish and old or new English; or betwixt
sex or families, or betwixt Citizens or Townsmen and countrymen joining in
this Union, upon pain of the highest punishment that can be inflicted by any
of the Counsel aforesaid, according to the nature and quality of the offense
and division like to spring from thence.

18. Item, It is further ordered and established, that all new converts born in
any of His Majesty's Dominions, or else where without manifest occasion given
by the persons converted to the coritry and joining in this cause, shall be
accounted as Catholics and natives to all intents and purposes.

19. Item, It is further ordered and established, that all the Artificers,
Artians, Navigators and Mariners, not being denizons, who shall please to
reside in this Kingdom, shall during their residence in this Kingdom, after
such time as they and their families shall be here settled, have and enjoy the
free liberties and privileges of nature in all respects.

20. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in regard of the present
estate and condition of the Kingdom of England, no native of this Kingdom;
especially if he be a Catholic, or any other Catholic, is permitted to
continue in the Innes of Court: And to the end the laudible Laws of England and
Ireland may not die amidst the disasters of these times, one Inn of Court
shall be erected in such place of the Kingdom, as to the supreme shall be
thought fit for the training of the Gentry of the Kingdom to the knowledge of
these Laws.

21. Item, It is further ordered and established, for the advancement of
learning, that in every Province in this Kingdom, Free-Schools shall be erected
and maintained, so many and in such places, and in such manner and form, as to
the Metropolitan and Ordinary of the Diocese in their respective Provinces
shall be thought fit.

22. Item, It is further ordered and established, that no Lord, Gentleman, or
other person, shall raise or keep any company of soldiers, but such as shall
be authorized by the supreme Council, Provincial Council, or County
Council, or Magistrate within their own corporate Towns. And that the Statutes
against Sesse Coynees, or Livery be duly put in execution: and that no company
of soldiers whatsoever shall be paid or relieved by the country, excepting
such as are or shall be enrolled in the Martials Lists; and none shall be
billited but by the Constable.

23. Item, It is further ordered and established, that Church Lands and tithes,
impropriate in the hands of Catholic owners before these troubles, and
joining in this cause, may be left to them according to their several estates,
until the same be disposed of by Parliament, they in the intrim answering
their rents as accustomed.

24. Item, It is further ordered and established, that the Kings customs,
rents, revenewes, arreares and dues, and the rents, issues, and profits of the
lands, hereditaments, and goods and chattels of the enemies, which are or shall
be declared by the Provincial or Supreme Counsel, or by the general
Assembly, to be received and collected and be disposed for his Majesty's use
and service.

25. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in every County there
be Collectors and Receivers to be appointed by the County Counsel, and that
they be accountable to the said County Counsel for the same, which County
Counsel shall be accountable to the Provincial therein half yearly, and
Provincial Counsel to the Supreme Council yearly, to the end the same may
not be concealed or unsupplyed.

26. Item, It is ordered and agreed, that where any Archbishop, Bishop, or
other dignitary, or any other person or persons whatsoever, has or enjoyed any
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, tithes, or Church Livings in one County or
Province, or does or shall keep his or their residence in another County or
Province, or has his or their relation or nomination in another County or
Province, that in all such cases the profits accrewing out of all such lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, tithes, or Church Livings, to the general use,
shall be employed in the said County and Province where the said lands,
tenements, and hereditaments, tithes, or Church Livings do lie, as by the
several County Counsel respectively shall be thought fit for the public
cause.

27. Item, It is ordered and established by the said General Assembly, that
any woman being a Roman Catholic, and wife of any Protestant or Catholic
that has forsaken his houses, estate and wife, and adhere unto the enemy, that
every such wife may enter into her Jointure, if any be conveyed unto her, or
may recover her thirds of her said husbands estate, as if her said husband were
actually dead, and that every such wife shall be in such condition or capacity
to suc and be impleaded, as if her shid husband had exiled or abjured the
Realm by Judgment of Law, except the Provincial or Supreme Council in
particular cases order the contrary.

28. Item, It is ordered and established, that the possession of Protestants,
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Dignitaties, and Parsons; in the right of their
respective Churches, or their tenements in the beginning of these troubles,
shall be deemed, taken and construed as the then possession of the Catholic
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Dignitaties, Pastors, and their Tenants
respectively; to all intents and purposes, and that those possessions are
intended within the precedent order for settlement of possessions.

29. Item, It is ordered and established, that no man being prisoner by
authority of any the Counsels aforesaid, shall be enlarged without the order
of the said Counsels, respectively; and that no Protection be given to
servants or other men of the enemies party, without the like order of the
chief Commander of the Army in the several Provinces or Counties.

30. Item, That whereas abuses have been committed in some parts of this
Kingdom, in taking of Arms, Ammunition, and other Merchandises from several
Merchants arrived in Creekes or Harbors, far from their intended Port. By
reason of Tempest, or the danger of the enemy, to the great discouragement of
the Merchants; it is therefore ordered and established, that where any Ship or
Ships, or other Vessel, shall come or arrive in any Harbor, Key, or Creek,
within this Kingdom, Laden with Arms, Ammunition, or other Merchandises,
that in such Cases all those who are or shall be in Command in the adjacent
Counties respectively, shall protect and defend the said Merchants, their goods
and servants, and shall at the charges of the said Merchants, procure carriage
for the said goods, and safely convey the same to the said Merchants intended
Port, and not to suffer the same, or any of the same, under color of paying
for the same, or otherwise to be disposed of or taken before the same come to
the intended Port, and be entered into the Lists of the Commissioners, or the
express direction or writing of the said Commissioners; any that shall rob,
steal, or violently take away any of the said goods, contrary to this order,
shall be deemed and punished as enemies to the public good of this Kingdom,
and suffer death therefore.

31. That certain Commissioners shall be appertained in every Port Town of the
Freemen and Residents therein, by the Provincial or supreme Council, for the
viewing of all the Arms and Ammunition that shall be hereafter imported into
this Realm from beyond the Seas, and to certify the same to the supreme
Council with all speed; and to prevent abuses in the sale, or issuing, or
disposing of them.

32. Item, It is ordered and established, that where soldiers do run from
other Garrisons or Commanders unto other countries and Provinces; That the
commanders or chief Governors of the said County or Province, upon complaint
made thereof, shall send back the said fugitive soldiers to their Commanders,
to be dealt with according to justice.

33. Item, It is ordered and established, that the debts and other duties owing
to creditors of this Union, being Neuters and Enemies, shall be paid out of
the goods, lands, tenements and hereditaments of the said Neuters and Enemies
respectively, before any other public charge be answered thereout.

34. Item, it is ordered and established, that no soldiers or other persons
without command from the county counsel, meddle with the goods or lands of
Neuters or Enemies.

35, Item, It is ordered and established, that to prevent the springing up of
all National distinctions, the Oath of association Union be taken solemnly
after confession, and receiving the Sacrament in the Parish churches throughout
the Kingdom; and the names of all the persons of rank and quality in every
Parish that takes the same be enrolled in parchment, and be returned, signed
and sealed by the Parish Priest, to the Ordinatie of every Diocese, who is to
keep the same in his Treasury, and to certify a copy thereof under seal to
the Metropolitan; who is to keep that, and to certify a true copy thereof
under his Metropoliticall seal, to the Rolls of the Kingdom, where the same is
to be enrolled.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. in Goldsmiths-Alley. 1643. March the sixth.

FINIS.

