TWO ASSIZE SERMONS Preached at Bridgnorth for the County of Salop in the year
1657.

The first, upon Psalm 58. verse 1. Do you indeed speak Righteousness, O
Congregation?

Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?

The second, upon Psalm 37. verse 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright: For the end of that man is peace? By MICH. THOMAS;

Rector of Stockton in the same COUNTY.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

A SERMON, Preached at the ASSIZES Held at BRIDGNORTH For the County of Salop
in the year, 1657.

On the First day of the Assizes, By Mich: Thomas, Rector of Sockton in the
same COUNTY.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

TO MY WORTHY FRIEND MAJOR EDMUND WARING.
SIR,
WHen the Command of the Power of this County, both Civil and Military, was
committed to your care and management; you were pleased to exercise a little of
that power you had over me, in desiring me (and your desires are commands)
according to my Function, to attend upon the Judges.

You cannot but say, you found me both willing and obedient. And I undertook
the work, upon a threefold encouragement.

First, as it was a Service to your Self. Secondly, as it was a Service to my
Country. Thirdly, as it was a Service to the Lord.
For your self; I am glad that I have occasion to make this public
profession, that I am very sensible of those great Civilities, I have received
from you. I know, that, by the laws of Friendship, where there are receipts,
there should be returns; which though they do not answer in proportion, are
yet completed by their intention.

I have always thought, That to be the truest love, which projects and works
to the good of Souls. It is strange, that men should delight in the society,
and neighborhood of each other in this; and not desire to meet, and live
together, in Another world: That they should study the Comfort, and Welfare of
each other, in respect of their Persons and Estates, and not bestow a thought
on their Salvation.

Devout Bernard complained of old; Omnes amici, et omnes inimici: omnes
necessarii, et omnes adversarii; pax a paganis, sed non a filiis: and we are
fallen into such times. There is a general pretense of amity, yet a general
emnity: we are all neighbors, yet all adversaries; we have peace with the
heathen, and we Christians differ among our selves: Our divisions are the
sparks of that fire, which our blessed Savior came to kindle, namely about the
purity and power of Evangelicall doctrines and ordinances. We agree about the
substance of divine worship, and contest about the circumstances.

It is our sin, and our shame, that we out-doe the Jews in our malice
against Christ: They crucified his body, but kept his garment whole: we tear
both his body and his garment. We dispute, and wrangle about those reverend
solemnities, wherewith the Christian religion in all ages, and among all
nations, has bin apparelled and adorned.

But we should all sit down, and consider, what St. James says; The wrath of
man works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 20. When all is done, when
all is written and spoken that can be, on either side; The work of
righteousness must be minded and regarded. That Is soul-work. That will be the
business of inqeust at the last day: The question then will not be, Who has
bin the best Soldier, nor who the best Scholar, but who has bin the best
Christian.

Sir, Upon this meditation, I thought no argument more proper for such a
solemn Convention, than this of Righteousness. It is a doctrine of universal
concernment, and since you were pleased to call me to preach these two Sermons,
I conceived it the best expression of a real affection, to present them to
You, as a testimony, that I am an hearty wisher both of your present and future
happiness: That as you have bin a man of War, so by the study and acquest of
that righteousness which is taught and recommended in these discourses, your
end may be Peace.

The second encouragement was the Service of my Country: for which (though not
my native) I have a great observance and respect. I came a poor stranger into
it, yet have received many, and great favors from some eminent members of it;
and no small ones, from the generality. Their candid censures, and acceptance
of my weak labors in this kind, was not the least motive to undertake this
service. And they are able to testify for me, that so often as I have appeared
in it, my discourse has had a tendency this way, to instruct in some point of
righteousness, that, through the blessing of God upon his Ordinance, I might
redeem the reputation of this County from an unhappy obloquie it lay under.

The Third Encouragement, which was the highest and the greatest, was the
Service of the Lord; whose honor and glory we should all study and endeavor
to promote and advance, and which we can do in no better, or more acceptable
way, than by speaking and doing righteousness.

Sir, I humbly present these plain Discourses to your, and my Countrie's;
service but more especially I devote them to the Glory of our God, whose
unprofitable servant I am, but desire to improve.

And as I have cast forth this holy seed of righteousness into the world, so I
shall not cease to beseech the Lord to water it with the dew of his grace, that
it may bring forth the wished fruits of it: Peace and quietness and assurance
for ever.

This is the desire, and shall be the prayer of

Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, MICH. THOMAS.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes holden at Bridgenorth for the County of
Salop, in the year, 1657.
(...). Psalm 58. verse 1. Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O Congregation?
Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?
IF we inquire into the Argument, or Occasion of this Psalm, and guess aright
at that; It will give us some light, to the proper Application of the Text. And
I shall neither waste the time, nor your patience in unnecessary quotations, or
comparing the opinions of Expositors. I shall present that conjecture which I
humbly conceive the most probable, and so proceed upon it.

Lorinus, who with great industry has collected the opinions of the Greek and
Latin Fathers; And Marlorate, who, with the like diligence, has summed up the
Judgments of the Divines of the Reformed Churches, do both agree in this, that
this Psalm was written by David, and intended as an admonition to all the
Officers of Justice in the Court of Saul; that when Saul shall call them to
Council, and they shall be sitting in Judgment upon Him; that they would
speak righteousesse, and judge uprightly; that they would not hearken to the
malicious informations of his Enemies, nor form their Judgments according to
the humor or the Designs of Saul, whose Counselors and Officers they were;
but prudently, and equally to consider both his Cause, and his Conversation,
and to give sentence accordingly.

And allowing this to be the Argument or Occasion of the Psalm (as truly it is
grounded upon very fair probabilities) you will easily perceive, that the Text,
in the proper Application of it, will have an influence upon this Congregation,
and prove a word in season, in respect of the occasion of this solemn
Convention.

We are met at this time in the Name and fear of God, about the work of
Justice: the Persons, and Causes of men, are to be weighed and examined; And as
I cannot say that there are any David's to be tried at this Assizes, men of such
eminent Piety and Integrity as He was: So I hope there are none of Readiness
Officers here, neither Men of such prostitute and mercenary consciences as they
were: Omnia Dicta Domini, omnibus posita sunt, says Tertullian. The words of
God have a general prospect; and though they may seem a particular Admonition
to some few men, yet they intend a general Instruction to all men who may be
concerned in the like case. This Psalm was written about a matter of Justice,
and Judgment: and that is the business we are all met upon: And forasmuch as
the Administration of Justice in this Nation, is by the Prudence and Wisdom
of our forefathers, cast into that form that in all judicial proceedings
there are many Parties; The sentence upon any cause, issues not from the bosom
of any Judge alone, seeing he is tied up to Proofs and Allegations: So that the
miscarriage in the work of Justice, may proceed from the corruption of those
parties which prepare a Cause for Sentence.

If the Counselors shall be corrupt and Covetous, and by their flourishing
Eloquence shall guild over a rotten Cause.

If the Witnesses shall be false and malicious, and seek rather their private
revenge, than Public Justice.

If the Jury shall be packed and partial, or instructed to swear according to
the private interest of a Friend or a Landlord; there may prove sad
obstructions in the work of Justice: this (as the Prophet Amos speaks) may
turn judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock.

And therefore I shall not address my discourse to any particular Party, or
Officer, in this great work of Justice; but to all, who are in any respect
concerned in it, and enforce Holy David's admonition in the Text, That they
would speak righteousness, and judge uprightly in all causes, and between all
parties: that so Wickedness and Impiety may have its condign punishment; and
Innocence, and Honesty, their due protection and reward. And this is the design
and project of the ensuing discourse; for which I humbly entreat your Christian
patience and the Lord's assistance.

The Text, you see, is presented in the form of a Question, but it appears by
the Context, that it is such a Question, which (as Divines observe) has vim
Negationis; it implies a denial, like that of St. Paul, Do we provoke the Lord
to Jealousy? are we stronger then He? No, we are not. So here in the Text:
Do ye speak righteousness? do ye Judge Uprightly? No, ye do not: for,
their conviction follows in the second verse; Yea, in heart ye work
wickedness, and weigh the violence of your hands in the earth. So that the
Text becomes (as Musculus has it) an invective, or a reproof of the iniquity
and injustice of Readiness Officers, and Counselors, that when according to that
place and power which they had with Saul, they should have defended and
protected Him as an innocent person; they on the contrary prosecuted, and
sentenced him as a seditious conspiratour. And this reproof is embittered with
terrible threatenings and imprecations, as we find in the body of the Psalm. And
these David, in the Spirit of prophecy, breathes out, and denounces against
them, as knowing that the Lord in his due time would plead his Cause, and by
the glorious effects of his Power and Justice would give men occasion to say:
Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous? Doubtless, there is a God that
judges in the earth.

It well became the majesty of that Spirit by which David wrote, to convey his
admonition in that form, by way of reproof or invective: But it will become me,
to observe a greater distance. And I humbly crave leave to present that
instruction, which I conceive due to this Auditory, and Occasion, by way of
Exhortation. Let me exhort you (I say) justitiam loqui, and recta judicare, to
speak righteousness, and to judge uprightly. And when I have opened the Duty
to you, and shown you what it is, and how it may be done; we shall find, in the
other words of the Text, weight enough to press it by way of motive or
consideration. And this I shall do (by Gods assistance,) with all respect to
your Patience and Employment.

For the Duty it self, to declare unto you what Righteousness, and Upright
Judgment is; I shall not perplexe your attention with the variety of
definitions, and distinctions which might be offered out of the Schoolmen and
Casuists. In this first part, I intend only the edification of the common sort
of people, who now are, or hereafter may be concerned as parties in the
Administration of Justice. To them I say this; Righteousness is a constant
purpose and resolution, of giving to every one their own.

And you may very easily perceive how this Definition agrees with the Case in
the Text. David complains of the Corruption, and Iniquity of those that were
Judges in his cause. Doeg was a false witness, and gave in a malicious
information against him. Saul was too apt of himself to believe it; and yet he
wanted not some flattering Courtiers, some perchance of his privy Council, who
blew the Fire, and by their evil suggestions, turned Saul's hatred and
jealousy into a flame; that David was a suspicious, discontented person; and
the Crown would not sit fast upon his head, while David lived: and with this
unrighteous dealing, David charges them. Now,

Had these men been endued with the grace of Justice, and Righteousness; had
they had a constant purpose and resolution of giving to every one their own,
that is, their due, then they had given David that Character and commendation
which was due to him, namely this: That David was misrepresented to Saul;
that he had given large testimonies of a peaceable and quiet Spirit; that he
had spared the Life of Saul, when it was in his power twice to have slain him:
Thus they should have spoken righteousness; and defended an innocent person:
But they did not. They wrought wickedness in their hearts, as David speaks
here; they complied with Readiness humor in his bloody intentions, and
persecutions against David; and did not care though he perished, so long as
they might secure their own persons and fortunes.

But this case, this trial of righteousness, does not often happen, yet
sometimes it does: And then, those that are in power and authority in any
State, cannot better improve their greatness, than by countenancing and
supporting oppressed Innocence. Holy Job in his own just vindication, relates
this, as one evidence of his righteousness; I delivered the poor that cried,
and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him
that was ready to perish, came upon me; and I made the Widows heart to sing
for joy. I brake the jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth, Chap. 29.

Even the heathens by the light of nature, did discern this to be the duty of a
Magistrate. Sudandum est his, qui Magistratum gerunt, pro communibus commodis,
says Cicero: Such as undertake the office of Magistracy, must sweat and lay
out themselves for the common good, must endure storms and emnityes, and
contest; not only with unjust and audacious, but even with potent adversaries,
in the defense of Innocence. And Seneca reports it in the commendation of
Caesar, Omnium domos illius vigilia defendit: He was a man of such a public
Spirit, that his watchfullnesse defended all men's houses; his labor and
industry secured all men in their ease, and pleasures, and vocations. A
precedent, not unworthy of the knowledge and imitation of those, who shine as
Stars of the first magnitude in the Orb of Honor: and let them know, that
they are then truly glorious, when their Goodness sends forth as bright a
beam, as their Greatness; when they use their power, as well to defend the
oppressed, as to punish the transgressour.

But I must not restrain the work of righteousness to this case only; the
duty is of a greater latitude, and yet St. Augustine in his Enarration of this
fifty eighth Psalm, has reduced that great variety of cases, to that one Head
which our blessed Savior in his Sermon lays down before us: Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them. This is the grand
rule of Equity. He that observes this rule, shall think and speak, and do
righteously, and be of an holy and blameless conversation: This (says that
Father) was the first law which God wrote in the heart of Mankind. In matters
of civil righteousness and morality, in all those duties which we owe to our
Neighbor, a man need but knock at his own heart, and ask, What shall I do in
such or such a temptation? and he shall hear this answer Ecchoing and sounding
thence: Do as thou would be done by.

Would thou, not have thy Children, or thy Servants disobedient or
undutifull to thee? Honor thy Parents.

Would thou prolong thy Life to a good old Age? Do no Murder.

Would thou have thine own Marriage Bed honorable, and undefiled? Do not
commit Adultery.

Would thou possess thy goods and estate in peace and safety? Do not Steal.

Would thou not be overborn in thy righteous cause by indirect proceedings?
Do not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Would thou enjoy thy own house, and wife, and servants, and cattle, entire
and without damage to thy self? Covet nothing of thy Neighbors: Do as thou
would be done by.

This rule (says St Hierom) is Compendiosum commonitorium. A breviate of the
whole duty of man to his neighbor: If he would neither do evil to, nor suffer
evil from, his neighbor; let him remember This. Lorinus tells us, and Beza
affirms as much, that, in some Ancient Greek Copyes, This rule of our blessed
Savior was inserted by the Apostles into their canons, in their first Council
at Antioch. Having decreed, that they should abstain from meats offered to
Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication, then
it was added: And whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do so
unto them. As if this were the most perfect rule for a Christian to walk by.

Lampridius tells us also, that the Emperor Alexander Severus, did so highly
prize this Rule, that He caused it to be written in his Palace, and in many
public places; and that in his Military discipline, he was wont to punish his
Soldiers in this manner; If upon their march they had plundered any thing, and
were taken with it, they were brought back to the owner, and there in his fight
and presence were beaten either with clubs, or with rods; and upbrayded in this
manner. Would you be content that that should have been done to you, which you
have done to him? You have robbed and spoiled this man of his goods would you
be robbed and spoiled of your own? And being thus upbrayded for transgressing
this evident law of nature, he was dismissed with shame and sorrow.

And (my Christian Brethren) let us all with shame and sorrow, consider our
delinquency in this case, How contrary we have walked to this rule of Equity;
either in an utter contempt, or forgetfullnesse of it. How many poor Souls
are there now in the Jayle, and to be tried for their lives, who with a deep
sorrow and remorse of conscience wish they had always walked according to this
rule. Such as are to be arraigned for Murder, or Felony, how passionately do
they wish, they could gather up that blood which they have spilt, and that they
had kept their hands clear from all acts of Violence and Robbery. But alas, it
is too late, and it is to be feared that some of them must yield up their lives,
to satisfy those righteous and equal laws, which they have transgressed.

And although our piety and our prayers are in a great measure due to Them, let
us not forget Our selves. Let us look into, and examine our own hearts,
whether we stand not guilty before the Judge of all the World of many acts of
unrighteousness. Alas, it is but little, that our finns, are not written on
our foreheads as theirs are; that they are not legible to the World in a
public indictment. The time will come, when we shall be arraigned in the Court
of Conscience, and groan under the gnawings of that greedy worm, which nothing
can satisfy but a broken heart. Oh (my Brethren) lets think upon it. We know
not how near the day of the Lord, is. It Is 1600 years ago and upward, since St.
James told us: The judge stands at the door. It Is his infinite patience and
long-suffering; that he does not enter into Judgment with us. 'Twere wise and
safe, by a speedy and unfeigned repentance to prepare to meet Him, and by faith
to get on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, by which only we shall be able to
stand in that evil day.

But although we must make mention of the righteousness of CHRIST only, in
the point of justification, yet there is a stock of moral righteousness we
must lay in too, to declare the truth and life of our faith, of which we have a
pregnant intimation in the Text. And having shown you the Quid, what this duty
is that David enquires after: It follows now that I show you the Quomodo, How
it is to be performed; which appears in the words of the question, Do ye
indeed speak righteousness? do ye judge uprightly?

I shall observe in this part but two branches; for we may well conceive, that
those phrases, Speaking righteousness, and judging uprightly; are but
Synonyma, important of the same thing, and under that joynt-notion, I shall
consider them.

And then a second thing will be: This speaking righteousness (indeed); we
shall perceive some weight in that word, when I come to open it.

For the first of these: How are we to speak righteousness, or to judge
uprightly?

Mollerus tells, that some Expositours render the words thus; An certe mutam
justitiam loquimini? It seems to be an improper speech: but they thus explain
it, that David charges the counselors of Saul with an unjust silence. Do ye
speak righteousness? that is, Ye do not speak righteousness: ye do not
declare that innocence and integrity, which in your own consciences ye believe
to be in me.

I touched upon this before, and showed you, what reflection it might have upon
the great Officers and Counselors of State; let me in a word or two bring it
a little lower.

As it may be a fault in a Witness to depose more then the truth; so it may be
a fault to conceal any material circumstance, which may make for the discovery
of the truth. They had a proverb among the Ancients, when a man would not speak
freely what he thought or knew in any cause, they would say: Bovem habet in
lingua: He has a bull in his tongue; the Atnenian money having the figure of a
Bull, stamped upon it: and by that proverb they would tax him with bribery,
that he had taken money to hold his peace. And the like scoff was put upon
Demosthenes, when, upon a gift received he would not plead, as he did against
the Melesian Ambassadors: (...), He had swallowed a bribe, and that made his
throat sore: I have heard complaints in this kind. Poor men, when with great
cost and trouble, they have prepared their Cause for a hearing, have yet lost
it; their witnesses have bin corrupted to say less then they knew; and their
Counsel taken off to attend other causes in other Courts; and so all has
miscarried for not speaking righteousness: unrighteousness has prevailed
against him. But i will carry this note no further.

Let me now take up that term in the Text (indeed), and weigh it to you, and
you may receive some farther light and instruction from it. The Lxx render it,
(...), that is, Do ye truly speak righteousness? Apollinarius thus: (...);
that is, do ye undauntedly speak righteousness? So now we may guess at holy
David's meaning. Do ye speak righteousness without fear, without favor, from
the truth and sincerity of your hearts?

And now that I have cleared the words, let all the Officers and Ministers of
Justice from the highest to the lowest, be pleased to suffer a word of
Exhortation.

There is no one thing, Religion only excepted, that more secureth and
adorneth a State then justice does; It is both Columna and Corona Reipub: A
prop to make it subsist firm in it self, and a crown to make it glorious in
the eyes of others. Jus et Aequitas vincula Civitatum, says Cicero; As the
Cement is to the Building: so is Justice to the Body-politick; it holds all
together. Bodies politic owe both their strength, and their height to Justice.
So Solomon tells us: Righteousness establishes the Throne, and exalts the
Nation.

It was the Lords command to the officers of justice in the 16 of Deuter: That
which is altogether just shall thou follow. Justissimam Justitiam sectare,
Tremelius renders it: The old Vulgar, Justum just persequere. According to the
original, we should read it, Justice Justice shall thou follow.

The Charge you see from the great Lawgiver, is very strict, pressing all his
underofficers to the execution of Justice. We of this Nation are happy in an
excellent body of Laws, and we want but one Law more, to enforce Magistrates
to the execution of those Laws. Execution in Polity, is like Elocution in
Oratory. Primum, Secundum, Tertium: The prime, and the maine, the all in all of
it.

The Lord by his Prophet Isaiah commands, Keep ye judgment, and execute
Justice. Now it were a sad thing if we should keep judgment as a Prisoner, or
execute it as a Malefactor. The Apostle Paul complained of some such, that did
withhold the truth in unrighteousness: but God forbid there should be any such
found amongst us, who by any base arts should obstruct the course of judgment,
or award a punishment to any one, who has walked according to ancient and
known Laws.

The purpose of the Lord by his Prophet was this: keep Judgment: that is,
declare it, lay open the Law in the grounds and reasons of it, and execute
justice, that is, administer it impartially, indifferently, and without respect
of persons. The Jews had a proverb; Transgressors need a Sessions house.

It is not enough that good Laws are enacted by pious Princes and their
Council.

It is not enough that they are rightly understood by the Reverend and learned
Judges.

Nor enough, that they are diligently enquired into by the Grand or petty
Juries.

The maine thing, is, the execution of the Laws, that unrighteousness should
not dare to outface Justice, that the Magistrate do not withhold his hand from
seizing upon impudent iniquity. Remember the importance of this word in the
Text [Indeed]: that ye speak and do righteousness (...), truly, without any
by, or base respects, and (...), without fear or care.

Self-respects are too often obstructions in the course of Justice. Viderit
Utilitas, is no good motto for a Magistrate. Favor may blear his eyes, but
gifts will blind them: He that is (...) will easily become (...), and that
undoes all. Consider the case in the Text, between SAUL and DAVID, and you will
wonder the less at the Corruption of his Officers, when you hear the argument
he urged to them. He had intelligence that his Son Jonathan was in league with
David, and, suspecting the revolt of other great Officers, he speaks thus to
them: Hear now ye Benjamites: Will David give every one of you Fields and
Vineyards, and make you Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds? 1 Samuel
22. 7. Here was an hook cunningly baited, to draw them to his own party; and it
is hard to say, in whom the Corruption was greater: In Saul to offer, or in his
Officers to accept? in Him to suggest a temptation, or in them to yield to it;
but between both, we know that David a man after Gods own heart, was pursued
and persecuted. So David tells Saul: I have not sinned against thee, yet thou
huntest my Soul to take it, 1 Samuel. 24. 11.

I persuade my self, you never readd the History of David but it begat sad
thoughts in you, that a man so innocent, should be so violently prosecuted: but
see, what self respects will do, when once a man layes-by all care of piety
and religion, and designs nothing but the advancement of his own private
interest, He cannot say at what sin he will stop. It is a great truth that
of Solomon, He that receives gifts over-throweth a land.

Vir Oblationum according to the Original, A man that is ready to receive any
motion that shall be offered him, if it come with a gift; A man that comes to
an Assizes, as Plutarch said of Stratocles, tanquam ad messem auream as to a
golden Harvest, and brings a mercenary tongue and conscience with him; what man
though never so innocent can be secure of his life or fortune? When Judas
opened his heart to the High Priest with that indication Quid dabitis? What
will ye give me? They knew they had an agent for their turn. He betrays his
Master, and sells his blood, though he knew it was innocent.

That most Christian duty of Selfe-denyall, runs through all the offices of a
man's life. It is the greatest preserver of Peace and Unity, and righteousness:
He that has learnt to deny Himself, will never envy the happiness of his
neighbor; much less invade his rights or possessions, and with a violent hand
seize upon them. He has learnt with St. Paul, in whatsoever state he is,
therewith to be content; and to such as are in a better condition then
himself, he can say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: I bless you in the
name of the LORD.

Again to speak Righteousness truly, is to speak it without favor. Favor
in a Magistrate, when misdemeanors are gross and palpable, is the nurse of
Vice. St. Chrysostom calls it, the mother of all sin. It is not seldom seen,
that when a man has spent his youth, and his strength in the service of some
great One, he is at length rewarded with a License to hang up a Sign: and that
proves perchance a Sign of drunkenness, a sign of unthriftynesse, a sign of
wantonness, a sign of prophannesse, and all kind of wickedness. The Spirits of
Godly men are vexed, to see such a confluence of all sorts to that Sign of
sin: and they do not only grieve that that house of sin is sometimes as
full as the house of God, but complain of it; yet that Sign must not be pulled
down: Why? He was my old Servant, and I must wink at him. And this favor has
an evil influence upon his fellow Commissioners: If he will wink, they must
not see. They must show favor to his Servant, that their own may find the
like.

But what will be the end of this? He that will wink at the trespass of the
Laws in his servant, how pore-blind would he be toward a Friend, or a Kinsman?
Yea, stark blind, if a Son should be a trespasser.

Such was the Justice of the Heathens that they did not stumble at greater
stones then these. Torquatus a Roman, and Zaleucus a Grecian, spared not to
give sentence even upon their own Sons. You know the old word, Amicus Plato
etc. Sed magis amica Veritas. Truth and Righteousness should be dearer to us
then all the World beside; We may have a fair respect for servants, and
friends, and kindred, and Children: but the peace of our Country, and the
honor of Religion, and the glory of God should over-weigh all. Let the
Christian Magistrate hear the Heathen Orator Exuat personam Judicis, qui
induit Amici. The affection of a friend fits not the function of a magistrate.
He may say to his Acquaintance, In all matters of civility I am yours, but in
matters of Justice I am God's, and my Country's servant.

Let me note but one thing more in this part, If ye would speak
Righteousness indeed, speak it according to Apollinarius Metaphrase (...):
without fear. It was fear, no doubt that made Readiness Officers so corrupt as
they were. When selfe-interest brought them to serve him in his unrighteous
designs, selfe-preservation continued them in his service: Their worldly
wisdom made them consider that, He that could give them fields and vineyards,
and those great commands, could as easily take them away. And such as yield
themselves servants unto sin for gain; it is some question, whether they
would yield themselves servants unto righteousness, upon apparent
disadvantage. The Kingdom of Israel was in a sad state; when Naboth must dye,
rather than Jesabel be displeased: and Christ must be Crucified, rather than
Pilate offend Caesar. And it will grow as sad with us, if the portion of the
Widow, and the Fatherless may be swallowed up; and neither Witness, nor
Jury-man dare speak his Conscience, for fear of the mighty Oppressor.

'Twas a noble courage in those Ancient Bishops, who being charged by the
Arrian Emperor, to condemn Athanasius without witness, and unheard, only
propter Me, on the Emperor's word, refused to do it; and would rather hazard
their estates, then do such an act of unjustice. And let the fear of the Lord
so rule in all our hearts as not to fear the faces or frowns of men, by them
to be overawed or persuaded to any act whereby the Glory of Christ, or his
Gospel may be disparaged; or the right of our neighbor in any measure
diminished.

And now that I have shown you What Righteousness is, and how ye may speak it
indeed, Let me beg but two minutes more of your Christian patience for those
two Motives or Considerations in the Text, that may press you to them; and I
have done.

And these Motives will rise out of the Text, like a Party laid in ambush, and
surprise your Spirits, while you think not of them.

There are two motives to speak righteousness, in those two Compellations,
with which David bespeaks these Officers of Saul.

O ye Congregation! O ye Sons of Men! Calvin conceives that David expresses
himself thus by way of contempt. q. d: O ye servants of Saul! albeit when ye
are met in Council, ye seem to be a Congregation, such a number of men, whose
power and policy, I, a poor fugitive, am not able to resist; yet know, that ye
are but the Sons of men. Ye, by your Counsels, seek to take away my life, and
when ye have taken it, ye are but the Sons of men, Ye must dye your selves. Man
that is born of a Woman (says Job) is but of few days. The greater should our
care be to spend them well. And I suppose that learned man, took the ground of
this gloss from the signification of the original term, Elem: which signifies
Manipulus spicarum, a sheaffe of Straw or a bundle of Reeds: and in that sense
it is found in the thirty seventh of Genesis, verse seventh, Where Joseph
relating his dream, tells his brethren: that their sheaves bowed to his sheafe.
There Is the word Elem.

And now you may perceive the weight of this Motive. That a Congregation of
men, conspiring in an act of unrighteousness, are but a sheafe of straw, and a
sheafe of straw is nothing in the hand of God. God is a consuming fire, says
the Apostle: and when God shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance to
those who obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, what will become of
this sheafe of straw?

And it is considerable to this purpose, what David speaks in the 82 Psalm, God
stands in the Congregation of the mighty, He judges among the Gods, verse. 1.

Magistrates are called Gods, because they are advanced to do the work of God,
for such is the work of Justice. And so Hezekiah told his Judges; See what ye
do, For ye execute not the judgment of men, but of God.

Well, but yet God stands in their Congregation. He is present at their
Counsels, and He judges among them. He sees, and knows all their designs,
how they are laid, and how they must be carried on: and then, as it is in the
second Psalm, When the Rulers took Counsel against the Lord and against his
anointed, The Lord sat in Heaven and laughed at them, and had them in
derision. But be pleased to reflect upon this passage in this 82. Psalm, God
stands in the Congregation of the Mighty. The meaning is, as I said, He is
present. It is not enough that He looks down from Heaven, and sees all
Congregations afar off, but he comes, and stands in them. And some Expositors
conceive, that God is presented in that posture of standing, to denote His
attention. As you know it is with us, when we sit and hear a discourse, which
we would listen better to, we stand up. And so here. God is said to stand: that
is, he is so present, as that also he is attentive. Nothing passes but Deo
astante, and attestante, He is an eare-witness, and an eyewitness, yea and an
heart-witnesse of all that is said, or thought, or done in any Congregation.

And this notion David did conceive very proper to intimidate the hearts of his
enemies, to re-mind them, that God stands in their Congregation, that He is
present at all their meetings, and attentive to all their debates: that they
are but a sheafe of straw, he can break their band, and scatter them as the
chafe before the wind. And that is the first motive to incline us to speak
righteously.

And the second is this. Let us consider that we are but the sons of Men.

And upon this theme, Holy David in another Psalm, preaches to us a Lecture of
Mortality. Surely (says He) every man living is altogether vanity. In the 62
Psalm, He wraps up all mankind in that sheet of corruption: Men of low degree
are vanity. True: there is but little doubt or dispute of that: but what are men
of an high degree? They are a lie. That is: There is no safe depending on them,
their breath is in their nostrills as well as other men's, and dye they must;
and dye they may, as soon as others. So that, take the whole race of mankind
together; High and low, Rich and poor, the mean and the Mighty, and lay them
upon a balance, and they are altogether lighter then vanity. And this was that
which David intended in that 82 Psalm, when he said, He judges among the gods.
If God did only stand in the Congregations of unrighteous men, and heard, and
would do nothing, the care were the less; yea (but says David here,) He stands
to judge.

It is acutely observed by a late reverend Author; that God's standing in the
first verse. has reference to the fall of those mighty ones in the sixth and
seventh verses. I have said ye are Gods, and all children of the most high, but
ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes. God is a standing God;
He only does and will stand, when all unrighteous men, how great soever shall
fall, and fall to dust. Their greatness cannot exempt them from the first
statute, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, It is appointed for all men once to
dye; Nor from the second statute; et post mortem Judicium, and after death to
come to Judgment.

Magistrates, though they are called Gods, yet they are Dii sub Judice; when
they have judged others, they must be judged themselves. They are Dii caduci,
and Dii judicandi: Gods that shall fall, and Gods that must come to Judgment.

Now then for the Conclusion of all. Let me recommend this one Meditation to
you. I may call it an occasional Meditation, because you may have frequent
occasions to remember you of it. You know a sheafe of Corn when it is in the
band, will stand by it self, and endure an indifferent blast of wind, ere it
fall: but, undo the band, and you cannot make a single straw to stand. I
infer this.

When unrighteous men assemble, and sit in Counsel together, then they are as
a sheafe in the band: their strength may be considerable and formidable, and
the upright man may be overborn in Judgment. A pack*d jury (as I said
before,) and a few suborned witnesses, may carry any cause; and it lies not in
the power of the most prudent upright Judge, to prevent it. Whereas when the
band is once broken, (as God will break such bands), when such men return to
their single capacities, their weakness will not only be visible but
despicable. Although considered in their united capacities, in their greatest
strength, compared with God, they are but as a sheafe of straw laid upon a
flaming fire, which leaves only the poor revenge of its ashes to hide the
embers of that fire which consumed it. Yet it pleases God sometimes to break
the band, and to single those unrighteous men out, and in their solitude to
pursue them with horror of Conscience, and the distracting remembrance of
their perjuries and forgeries, their frivolous delays, and demurres, their
frauds and subornations, and those irreparable injuries they have done; and
they shall be no more able to stand, and look either God or good men in the
face, than a single straw is to resist a whirlewind.

I shall show you this in one example. Doeg the Edomite was an instrument of
much evil to David, and to all that favored his righteous cause; by his
malicious information, Abimelech the Priest and eighty four more of the Priests
of the Lord were put to the Sword. What became of him? Lorinus tells us out of
Rabbi Solomon, that it was a received tradition among the Jews, that he and
his only Son dyed in this manner: That Doeg himself was armor-bearer to Saul
in that battle with the Philistines, at which he dyed. There, when Saul had
fallen upon his own Sword, and slain himself; Doeg calls his Son, and sends
him with Readiness Crown and bracelet to David, thinking thereby to engratiate
himself; and then Doeg falls upon his own Sword, as Saul had done, and kills
himself; and his Son instead of a reward from David, is commanded to be slain.
And there was an end of Saul, and Doeg his informer, and their family.

The Lord by that army of the Philistines brake up the Congregation, and made
them know they were but the Sons of men, and that they were not able to stand,
when he came to judge them.

Now the Lord help us to consider of these things and dispose our hearts to
love the work of righteousness, and in all our dealings with men to behave our
selves justly and uprightly, that when we shall come to dye like men, we may
find the fruit of righteousness, which is peace: even Peace with God, and
peace with our own consciences, that we may commend our spirits into the hands
of the God of our righteousness, with joy and not with fear.

The Prayer after Sermon.
GReat and Glorious Lord God, who art righteous in all thy ways, and holy in
all thy works: be good and gracious unto us thy poor Creatures, who here stand
guilt, before thee of many acts of unrighteousness, for having rejected and
despised thy most pure and holy laws, and have chosen rather to walk after
the lusts and imaginations of our own hearts.

We have defaced that perfect Image of righteousness and Holiness, in which
we were created, we have defiled our selves with the pollutions of sin; so
that all our righteousness is but as a filthy ragge, and we cannot but loath
and abhor our selves for all our abominations.

Blessed God, we desire to return unto Thee, and to seek thy face; not only for
thy mercy and pardon for the sins we have committed, but for thy Spirit and thy
grace, that we may be renewed and restored to that state of holiness whence we
are fallen.

And forasmuch as the Ministry of thy Word is the means which thou have
ordained, and promised to sanctify to that end; We humbly call upon thee for a
blessing upon that portion of thy Word which has bin dispensed unto us at this
time.

Great God! our hearts are in thy hand, we beseech Thee mould and fashion them
according to thine own holy will. Beget in us a constant purpose and resolution
of giving to every one their own, and re-imprint in our hearts that excellent
rule of righteousness, Not to do any thing to our neighbor which we would not
be content that he should do to us.

We are met at this time, O Lord, about thine own work, The Execution of
Justice and Judgment; we beseech thee assist us in it. As we begin this work
in thy Name, give us grace to continue in it in thy Fear.

Touch the hearts of all those who are in any respects interested as parties in
the administration of Justice, that they may all speak righteousness and judge
uprightly, without respect to themselves or respect to their friends, and
without fear of the face of any man

And give us all grace to consider that a congregation of men, conspiring in an
act of unrighteousness, are but as a sheafe of straw, not able to contest with
thee who art a consuming fire. Oh help us to consider, that how great or mighty
soever we be in this World, we are yet but the sons of men, frail and
mortal, and know not how soon we may be called to thy Judgment Seat: And let
these meditations quicken us to an holy care to prepare our accounts, and to
behave ourselves so righteously toward all men here on earth, as that we may
cheerfully commend our Spirits to the God of Heaven.

Hear us O God, and answer us according to thy wonted grace and goodness;
supply all our defects out of the fulness of Christ Jesus, who is the Lord
our Righteousness: to whom with thee, O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, we
desire to ascribe all honor and power, and praise, now and for evermore. Amen,
Amen.

A SERMON, Preached at the ASSIZES Held at BRIDGNORTH For the County of Salop
in the year, 1657.

On the Lord's Day.

By Mich: Thomas, Rector of Sockton in the same COUNTY.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

(...). Psalm 37. verse 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: For
the end of that man is peace.
IT may perchance raise your attention to the Doctrine of this Text, when you
shall consider, that it is a branch of that Psalm, which has always bin in
very high esteem both among the Ancients, and our Modern Divines.

Origin calls it Humanae animae Medicinam. It is Physic for the soul of man,
forasmuch as it reproves sin, and teaches us to live according to the laws
of God.

Athanasius recommends it to be readd by all those who are scandalized at the
prosperity of the wicked, and find themselves tempted to go along with them in
their ways; and to think this world to be governed by chance or fortune, that
God is not a God of Judgment; that he makes no difference between the righteous
and the wicked.

Calvin and Mollerus meet both in this censure of it, that it contains
doctrinam apprime utilem, exceeding profitable doctrine; and Lorinus tells us,
that Fulgentius (that great light of the Church in Africa,) by reading St.
Augustines commentary upon it, was converted by it.

The tree then being so good, you may fairly presume the Text, which is a
branch of it, may yield you the like fruit. I may not unfitly call the Text,
Totius Psalmi Epitomen. The summary or abridgement of the whole Psalm. The
doctrine which is dispersed in the other verses of it, is collected and united
in this.

All the defect will lie on my part, by reason of my weakness, I shall not be
able to shake this so full laden branch, that all the fruit of it may fall
amongst you. So far as the Lord has enabled me to understand the doctrine of
it, I shall humbly present it to your religious consideration, and shall hope,
that that slight taste of it, which you will receive at this time by my
service, will provoke your holy appetites to make a farther enquiry in your
private meditations.

But not to waste more, either of the time, or your patience, be pleased to
take the Text divided into these three parts.

Here is an Act, and an Object; and they are both twofold.

The Act is, to Mark and to Behold.

The Object of this Act is the Perfect and the Upright man.

And in the third place here is the reason of the Act which is very weighty and
considerable; For the end of that man is Peace.

But I must crave leave to invert the order of these parts, and consider the
Object first, Who this perfect and upright man is. And then pass to the Act,
what it is to Mark and to behold Him. To which act, we shall be the better
disposed, by the weight of the reason which enforces it; Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright: For the end of that man is peace.

The first part: The Object.
I confess, I find much variety in the several Translations concerning the
reading of the Text. The LXX render it (...), and according to the old vulgate,
Custodi innocentiam, and vide aequitatem: and then we should read the Text,
Keep innocence and take heed to the thing that is right. And although Lorinus
follow these translations, yet we acknowledge that other grave Authors,
Concrete interpretantur ex Hebraeo, render it out of the Hebrew by the
Concrete. Observa perfectum, and aspice rectum; and so Junius, and Tremelius
have translated it; and so also those Divines of the reformed Churches, whose
opinions Marlorate has collected. And truly the difference is not great,
whether we read it in the Abstract, or in the Concrete, the one will be the
Exposition of the other: and so the perfect man will be, He that keeps
innocence; and the Upright man, He that takes heed to the thing that is right.

But we must behold this Object at a nearer distance; and let us look upon this
perfection and uprightness in the Root, and in the Branches of it; and then,
according to our English word, we shall have three Marks by which we may know
who this perfect and upright man is; and so the better judge of our selves,
whether we are such or no.

The Root of this Perfection and Uprightness, I place in the Heart; and the
branches of it, in the Words and Actions of men. And this method answers that
Distinction so common among Divines; Integritas Cordis, Oris, Operis: The
Uprightness of the Heart, of the Mouth, and of the Hand; and upon the
consideration of these Marks, we shall have the fuller and the cleerer prospect
of Him.

And I was put into this method, not so much by the common distinction, as by
the propriety of the terms in the Original. We read of Noah, that he was a
perfect man, Genesis 6. 9. of Jacob, that he was a plain man, Genesis 25. 27. of Job,
that He was a perfect and an upright man; and in all these places there is the
same word in the original, Tamim: and Mercerus upon those places in Genesis,
and Pineda upon that place in Job, interpret this perfection to be the
simplicity, the integrity, the sincerity which was in the Hearts of Noah, and
Jacob, and Job. For the farther clearing of the word, you know well, there is a
twofold perfection: Imputata, and Impertita. A perfection which is imputed to
us: and a perfection which is bestowed upon us; the one is called the
Perfection of Justification, the other of Sanctification.

The former of these, in a strict sense, is a complete perfection. The Saints
are complete in Christ, they are perfectly justified, there is not any sin
left uncovered, nor any guilt left unwashed in the blood of Christ, not the
least spot but is taken away. By one offering, Christ has perfected for ever
them that are Sanctified, says St. Paul. Heb. 10. 14. And then there is a
Perfection of Sanctification; and that is called so, either in regard of the
beginnings of it, or in regard of our desires or aims at it.

The Saints even in this life, have a perfect beginning of holiness, as being
sanctified in every part; they are Sanctified throughout, in soul, and body,
and spirit.

And then their desires are high and real toward perfection; they pray, and
strive to subdue every corruption, to abandon every known sin, to perform
every duty. And this is the utmost degree of perfection that any son of man
can attain to, in this life. And in this respect it was that Job had the
character of a perfect man. Not that he thought himself so, in respect of an
exact obedience to the whole law of God; so he professes, If I say I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse, Job. 9. 20. but in respect of his
desires, and endeavors toward this perfection. Job was sincere, he was sound
at heart, He did not personate religion, but was really a religious person. He
was (...), as the Lxx render that place, A simple man, that is: plain hearted,
single minded. He was not a compound, speaking one thing, and meaning another.
Job's heart might be known by his tongue, and his spirit by his actions. And
this is the first and chiefest mark of the perfect man, whom David, in the
Text, advises us to observe and behold.

And truly, this perfection in the root, as I have called it, this foundnesse
of heart, is that perfection, which is only valuable and considerable; it is
that which the Lord so often calls for in the Scripture, to love Him, and serve
Him with all our hearts, that we would not suffer our hearts to be divided, and
carried away from God, and laid out upon the vanities of the world, while we
pretend to be the servants of God in a more strict and purer way then others
are.

In the second of the Kings, chapter 17. v. 33. we read of the Samaritans, that
they feared the Lord, yet served gods of their own. And the prophet Zephany
reports it as one of the sins of Judah, that they swear by the Lord, and by
Malcham the idol of the Ammonites.

And I would to God we that call our selves, and would be thought, Christians,
could purge our hearts from this guilt, that our hearts were perfect, and
sincere, and entirely devoted to the service of God. Beata servitus (says St.
Ambrose) si nihil possit adversarius de tuo sibi servitio vendicare, That Is a
blessed way of serving God, when Satan can challenge no part in it. How few are
there of us that can come to God with David's argument, and may press Him as he
did, I am thine, oh save me. The worldly-man cannot say so to God, because he
has many Masters: Lust comes and says, Thou art mine, for thou make
provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the desires thereof.

Covetousness comes and says, Thou art mine, thou servest not Christ, but thy
self. The Gold and Silver which lies rusting in thy coffers, is the portion of
the Widow and the Fatherless. The stone in the wall of thine house cries out,
and the beam out of the timber does answer it, and the furrows in the field
join in the outcry, and say, We were gotten by oppression, and bribery.

Luxury comes and says, Thou art mine, thy conscience can tell thee, thou have
spent more at a feast in one day, then thy charity to the poor has cost thee
in a whole year; that thou have striven to pay most at a Reckoning in a
Tavern, but have pretended excuses to give nothing to a Brief in a Church.

Ambition comes and says, Thou art mine; thou have affected greatness and
power, that thou might sin without question or control; and then Christ
will put in his charge too, and say; Thou considerest not, that I gave thee a
command over men, that thou should obey Me; I honored thee, that thou
should honor Me. Now, Quem tam multi competunt, quam vile mancipium est?
says that Father St. Ambrose, What a vassal, what a slave is that man, whose
heart is challenged by so many masters? Such an one cannot pretend to Jacob's
title, to be Homo Simplex, a perfect single-hearted man: He is rather Homo
Multiplex; St. James his (...), does not reach Him, He is more then a
double-minded man, He has an heart for every lust, a new God, and a new
Religion, when soever the sway and humor of the times shall require it of him.

Upon those words of the Lord by his prophet Joel; Turn unto me with all your
heart; devout Bernard has noted thus: Corporis conversio, si sola fuerit,
nulla erit, If the body only turn to God, and not the heart, there is no
conversion. It is but the form of Conversion, there is nothing of truth in it;
when there are pretensions to godliness, but no power. He is a miserable man
that contents himself in the outward formalities of religion, and neither
knows, nor regards his heart. Bernard applied this Note to his monks upon a
Fast Day, and took occasion to reprove them for their hypocrisy. Manet
tonsura, (as he goes on) ye continue your shavings, ye change not your
garment, ye observe your rules for fasting, and your hours for prayer; and yet
the Lord cries from heaven, Cor vestrum long est a Me, Your heart
notwithstanding all this, is far from me.

The best discovery we can make of the integrity and sincerity of our hearts,
is to observe the bent and sway of those four chief affections, Love, Fear,
Joy, and Grief; and see whether God or the World have most of these, and
accordingly we may judge our selves, whether we are true Converts, or Perfect
men.

But because the nature of the root, is best discerned by the fruit which
appears on the branches; be pleased, that the discourse may pass from the
first mark of perfection, which I called perfection in the root, the perfection
of the heart, to the second, which is Integritas Oris, the Integrity of the
Mouth or words; and no mark can be more proper then this, or more naturally
consequent. Our blessed Savior has given us the rule, Out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks.

In the 32d. Psalm David pronounces a blessedness upon that man, in whose
Spirit there is no guile. And there are good Expositours conceive, this guile
to consist in and about the duty of Repentance, and especially in the covering
of sin; as when men shall cover their extortions and oppressions by building
an Hospital, and when they shall cover all the Week-sins, with a Sabbaths
solemnity. Such is sometimes the folly of Hypocrisy, that it will strive to
cover sin though with a Net, which every man sees through: they will have such
mean and pitiful pretenses for their unjust actions: whereas a
perfect-hearted man, is serious in the search of his conscience; and he will
take knowledge of his sins, before they discover themselves; he will
acknowledge his riot and voluptuousness before he burn in a Fever, occasioned
by his surfeits. He will acknowledge his wantonness and licentiousness,
before he comes under the anguish and smart of corrosives. He will acknowledge
his pride and wastfullnesse, before he lie in prison for debt. The perfect man
does not seek his sins in his belly, nor in his bones, but in his conscience.
He unfolds that, ripps up that, and enters into the privatest and remotest
corners thereof. And he that does not thus, there is dolus in Spiritu, There is
guile in his Spirit; and he has no title to that blessedness, which David was
pronouncing. So that if there be Veritas in Cord, Truth in the heart; there
will be also Veritas in Ore, Truth in the mouth: which being the second mark of
a perfect man, give me leave to lay it open to you.

The perfection of the Mouth has a double prospect; it looks toward God, and
toward man. God shall have His glory, in the Confession of his sin, and man
shall have his right, in speaking the truth.

Among those marks which David gives of that happy man, who shall dwell in the
holy hill of the Lord, this is one: He speaks the truth in his heart. And so
in the 14 of the Revel. v. 5. those blessed persons who are said to follow the
Lamb, are thus described: In their mouth was found no guile.

Truth, as it is a most excellent virtue; so it is (...) says Philo: the most
sacred possession, precious and necessary as the Sun to the world.

When the question was put to Pythagoras, What that was, in the doing whereof,
men might be like unto God, he answered, (...), If they speak the truth. It
will be a good interpretation of that command of our blessed Savior: Be ye
therefore perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is perfect: when, as He is
truth, so we be always careful to speak the truth from our hearts, (...) even
the Heathen, by the light of nature could conclude, that it was a servile
un-ingenuous humor, to lie, and to speak falsely. And we have some impression
of it still remaining in us, of all reproaches we can least brook that: Thou
lie. How many quarrels has it occasioned? How much blood has bin spilt
about it? But truly, it is sad and strange, that men will not endure to be
charged with lying, and yet make no conscience of lying; that they should take
up that part of the Heathens morality, (...), To speak the truth, is an
evidence of a noble, constant, well composed spirit; and desert the other part
of it, by a deficiency in their practice, in yielding themselves up to tell
lies for advantage.

Some Divines have moved and debated these two Cases: Whether if a man be
examined before a Competent Judge, he may not lie to preserve himself or his
Friend from the penalty of the Law. And it is answered in the negative: He may
not lie. There can no case be put, in which it may be lawful for any man to
lie to any man: not to a midnight, not to a noon-thiefe, that assaults his
house, or his person, he may not lie. And although many have put names of
disguise upon such practices, and call them Equivocations and Reservations, yet
they are all children of the same Father the Devil, who is the father of lies.

The other Case is: Whether if a man be examined before an incompetent Judge,
he may not equivocate and prevaricate with Him? And it is answered thus: that if
he do speak, he must speak the truth. They allow, that to an incompetent Judge,
that has no legal power to examine him, he may be silent without sin: but
to a competent Judge, it is an indefensible sin either to be silent, or to
depose an untruth.

And upon this account, since it is so clearly sinful in a witness, either to
prevaricate or to depose an untruth; I submit it to your grave Judgments,
whether it be not highly considerable, for an Advocate to plead an untruth; by
the advantage of his Rhetoric and Eloquence to palliate such a cause, which,
in his own conscience and opinion, deserves rather a punishment then a
defense; whether in pleading such causes, they do not take part with evil
doers, and encourage men to venture upon unjust actions, since they may be
assured, that for a fee, they may have a subtle and ingenious Advocate, to
maintain their cause. But in this case, since I speak to such, whose piety and
integrity, I have no reason either to question or suspect, I shall proceed no
further.

Indeed, my design lies mainely against that sort of men, who inure their
tongues, to speak maliciously and defamatorily, and blast the fair reputation
of their neighbor, by false suggestions and insinuations.

It may be sometimes unlawful, to speak all that a man knows to be true of
his neighbor; but it is always unlawful to speak that which he knows to be
false. This is (...), calumnia, such a practice whence the Devil takes his
name, Diabolus, an accuser: it is a devilish practice by false informations and
slanders to represent a man worse then he is, and to expose Him either to the
hatred of the common people, or the censure of the Magistrate, for crimes
whereof he was never guilty. Like the Heathens of old, who put the Christians
into the skins of beasts, and then brought them forth to be torn and worried,
such an artifice has Satan used all along, by suborning foul tongues, to sully
and stain the fame and reputation of men, thereby to prepare them for
destruction. When Paul and Silas were misreported to the Roman Magistrates, as
troublers of the City, and teachers of customs, which were not lawful to be
observed; we may wonder the less, that they were beaten and imprisoned: yea,
we see it in a greater example, in our blessed Savior Himself; when He was
slandered to be a deceiver of the people, a wine-bibber, a companion of
publicans and sinners, and one that had a Devil, these aspersions raised the
hatred of the common people, and the malice of the Jews was less discernable,
when they cried away with Him, crucify Him: and you know what the issue was,
the murder of the Lord of life.

I shall not need to urge any arguments to prove how far distant a back-biter
or a slanderer is from a perfect man. That grave Author Parisiensis calls him,
Dentem Diaboli, The tooth of the Devil, which he fastens in an innocent
person, and tears his good name, and perchance his estate too, cruelly, and
unmercifully, and irreparably. We may easily conclude the sin is great when the
Judgment is so heavy, when both St. Paul and St. John tell us, that whosoever
are revilers, and makers of lies, shall not enter into the new Jerusalem, the
Kingdom of God.

There remains yet the third mark of this perfect man to be considered, and
that is, Integritas Operis, His Equity and Uprightness in all his Actions.

Pineda tells us that the original term, Jasar; which, in that place of Job,
is rendered upright; signisies sometimes Jucundum esse: and then the upright
man will be such an one, as is of a complacent humor, of a mild and soft
temper. And probably Apollinarius had respect to this sense of the word, when
he metaphras'd our text, (...), Keep meekness, and then it may mean, Be
neither sour not bitter in looks or language; be not harsh or cruel in thy
dealings or actions with men.

I observe in most Latin Translations, that they retain the word Rectum. In an
old Manuscript I read it, Custodi simplicitatem and vitae rectum: and Pineda by
many instances clears it, that Jasar signifies Planitiem viae, the smoothness
and evennesse of a way. And then by a fair allusion it may import that Justice
and Equity which men ought to use in all their dealings and commerce. There is
no trouble in walking in a plain way. When there are hills to strain the
nerves, or valleys to endanger a precipice; hence arises the trouble of a
Journey.

And so it is in civil commerce: when we are to deal with a plain man, whose
words and actions are both of the same piece, who lies not upon the catch, and
has not his subtle reserves, of false weights, or lights, or measures; there
is neither fear nor danger in conversing with such a man. If we look into the
body of this 37 Psalm, we shall find David instancing in some actions, which
seem to be contrary to this uprightness, which I am to present to you.

In the 12 verse, he speaks of plotting against the Just. In the 14 verse, of
drawing the sword, and bending the bow against the poor and needy: In the 21
verse, of borrowing and not paying again. And so far forth as any man is
plunged in the guilt of those practices, he is so far distant from true
uprightness. Will you please to review these instances.

First, What is it to plot against the Just man? I rest in Lorinus his opinion
upon the place: It is to pick a quarrel with him about his Religion, and the
worship of his God: such enemies we find the Prophet Daniel met with. They said
among themselves, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we
find it against him concerning the Law of his God. So we read, Luke the sixth,
That the Pharisees watched our Savior, that they might have an accusation
against him. So true is that of Solomon, He that is upright in the way, is an
abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29. 27. But this is certainly an abominable
kind of wickedness, when the worship of God shall be made the occasion of
envy. When, like Cain, they shall hate, and rise up against their brother,
because he offers to God a better sacrifice then themselves. It was a pious
wish that of Bucolcerus: Mortuus est Cain: sed utinam non viveret in filiis
suis. Cain is dead: but would to God he did not live still in his sons; who
carry still his bloody club, wreaking in the gore of Christians, and seeking
the destruction of those, that are more holy then themselves.

It is a sad thing, when men shall come into the house of God, as Doeg did into
the tabernacle; and to return an informer against the Minister, as he did
against Abimelech. Any plot against a just man, argues rather pride then
perfection: He is an ill subject to Christ, who envies Him the glory of a
populous Kingdom.

Consider the second instance: The drawing the sword, and bending the bow
against the poor and needy. Expositours conceive that David in this instance,
points at Saul, and those several acts of injustice, whereby he oppressed him.
It is no new thing to see Right overcome by Might, and Ahab solacing himself
in Naboth's vineyard

Notwithstanding Holy Job, and the Prophets Jeremy and Habaccuck have
expostulated the case with God, concerning the prosperity of the wicked; yet in
his infinite wisdom he sees it fit to continue it, and still we see the poor
and needy, become a prey to the rich and mighty. But these permissive acts of
Providence are no warrant, or security for such acts of Injustice. He is far
from a perfect man, who seeks to slay the upright, or, as Solomon speaks, Robs
the poor because he is poor, and unable to help himself.

The third instance is: The wicked borroweeh and pays not again. In which is
noted an high act of injustice, and contrary to that Evangelicall precept
delivered by St. Paul, Owe nothing to any man but love; provided always, there
be sufficiency and ability to pay. Whosoever shall pretend poverty to his
creditour, and make a fraudulent composition, contracts upon his own soul the
guilt of theft in an high degree. And some have been so curious to make the
observation, That estates compounded for, seldom prosper: there is for the
most part something of fraud and concealment; and that constitutes the wicked
man, whom David here points at, He borrows and pays not again.

You see in common experience, how the Courts of Justice are troubled and
pestered with suits and causes in these cases; with actions in regard of
conspiracy, The wicked plotting against the Just; with actions of trespass and
battery, The drawing his sword against the poor, and by might oppressing Him;
and with actions of debt, The wicked borrows and paying not again.

And no doubt, David desiring to win, and work up the souls of men, to this
perfection and uprightness, has proceeded in that Method throughout this
Psalm, as it were Antiphonically, and by way of contra-position, to set down
the Characters of the upright and the wicked man, and describe them by their
intentions, by their words, and by their actions. Of so much concernment did
David conceive it to be, exactly to know the perfect and the upright man.

And in all this discourse, I have pursued the same method: as contraries are
best discerned when they are placed together; so in every mark of this perfect
man, you have had something positively, something negatively delivered. And now
that I have presented the Object before you, in which the great part of my
business lay, I am now to invite you to the Act: To mark and to behold him,
which was the second part I proposed to observe.

The second part: The Act.
But I need not detain you long in this Act. I do not find any Expositour whom
I have consulted, that stops upon it. Mollerus conceives, that David only
calls upon us to observe the passages of Divine Providence, and the various
issues of his Dispensations, concerning the ways and the ends of the wicked,
and the perfect man. It is the humor, or rather the weakness, of most men to
judge outward appearances, and to conclude a man either Happy or Miserable,
according to his successes in this world So Job's friends passed their censures
upon Him, and he must needs be a dissembling Hypocrite, because He was so
grievously afflicted.

But this, according to that saying of our Savior, was unrighteous Judgment.
And as David had made his observation concerning the righteous man, I have been
young but now am old: yet I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging their bread, so he calls upon all others to make the like observation
concerning the perfect man. Mark and behold Him (says He) And although ye may
see the wicked flourishing like a bay tree, and the upright man withering like
a shrub; the one in honor and flowing with all temporal abundancies, the
other vile and despised, and lacking necessaries, yet judge not: They are yet
upon their way; they are not yet come to their journeys end; they are now
busied in their several works, and have not received their wages: but when the
day of our life shall begin to close, and the shadows of death shall spread
themselves; and the grave begin to open her mouth; and the Arch-angell's
trumpet, in a passing bell, shall summon the sons of men to Judgment, then
will be fulfilled that of the Prophet Malachi: At that time God will make up
his Jewels, and men shall discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Chap. 3. verse. 17,
18.

The third part: The reason of the Act.
And now, here, enters our third part, for the conclusion of all. Mark and
behold the perfect man, for he is worthy of your observation. The end of that
man is peace. Our blessed Savior speaking of John the Baptist: What (says He)
went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? It may
be in the eyes of some that saw him, he seemed not much more considerable: but
I tell you; He is a Prophet, and more then a Prophet.

And if any profane spirit should say; What do you call us to mark and behold?
broken reeds? and smoking flax? persons that have lived in trouble, and are
dying in dishonor? such as have been the subject of wanton wits to make Songs
of, and the object of men's hatred and scorn? Such indeed is the lot and portion
of the upright man: yet let me tell you, he is somewhat more, yea very much
more then he is conceived to be. Though the Wicked raise war against him, yet
He is the Son of peace; though he sail through a rough Sea, yet he has a calm
haven, though he meet with crosses on his way, yet he shall find comforts in
his end. And herein lies the weight of the reason, and upon which the state of
the perfect man becomes so worthy of all observation.

Man as he is a rational creature, proposes to himself some end in all his
actions. That Is the great wheel that moves him, and sets him to work; and
whatsoever he proposes to himself as his end, that in his present sense and
opinion, has an appearance of Good. Those two maxims in Philosophy consist
well together. Omnia agunt propter finem, and Omnia appetunt Bonum.

But now it oft-times comes to pass, that there is a sad miscarriage; men
project one thing, and another falls out. There is Finis Operis, and Finis
Operantis. The end which is properly consequent to the Work: And the end which
is in the design of the Workman. And these do oftentimes differ: Men engage
themselves into sinful actions, and propose to themselves as their End,
pleasures, or profits, or preferments: this is Finis Operantis, the end of the
workman; but this is not Finis Operis, the end of the work: For, the wages of
sin is death, In the eighth of the prophecy of Amos, the Lord threatens his
people Israel for their oppression and prophannesse: Hear this ye that swallow
up the needy. I will turn your feasts into mourning, I will make it as the
mourning for an only Son: and the end thereof as a bitter day, at the 10 verse.

This bitter day was the end properly consequent to the work of sin, though
they projected and designed another, namely their private gain and advantage.

Let us remember then what the prophet Isay has taught us. The work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness,
and assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17.

But we must not understand this word, Peace, in that latitude as it was
usually taken among the Jews, for a confluence of all temporal blessings, as
it happened in the case of Job, whose latter end the Lord made better then his
beginning, that is, in respect of temporal abundances, having his estate
doubled to him. We must take it in that sense, as it means peace of conscience,
and an assurance of the favor of God in Christ, that however matters go with
him in respect of his person, or estate, or his life, or his posterity, he
rests secure as for the state of his Soul; and can with cheerfulness commend
it into the hands of his faithful Creator.

Whereas the same prophet Isaiah tells us, There is no peace to the wicked,
Isa. 57. 21. Such as do not walk in the ways of peace, shall never find peace
at their End. I deny not but a Wicked man may dye possessed of all the comforts
this world can afford him; he may dye (as it was said of David) full of days,
riches, and honor, and yet his deathbed pillow may be uneasy to him, when it
shall come to that of the Poet Linquenda domus and tellus, etc. when he shall
look upon those things, which we call worldly comforts, but find no comfort in
them.

When he shall look upon his estate, and not only grieve that he must part from
it himself, but he must leave it to a Son, whom, as Solomon speaks, he does
not know whether he shall be a fool.

When he shall look upon his Wife and Children, and take his last farewell, and
out of the horror of his conscience shall be forced to declare himself thus.
I leave a great Estate amongst you, but I fear, you will find it encumbred
with the curse and vengeance of God.

When he shall look upon his friends, that stand weeping and mourning over him,
and shall breathe out Socrates complaint in that sense, (...), Oh Friends, ye
cannot help me, your counsel, nor your power cannot enlarge the term of my
life a minute, nor give a ransom unto God for me.

When he shall look upon his body wasted, and confumed by his Luxuries, and, it
may be, so diseased, as to be loathsome to himself and his attendants; and
from a sad reflection upon the vanities of his life past, shall sigh and groan
out this as his own Epitaph; I have lived in sin, and now I lie down in
sorrow.

But above all, when he shall consider the state of his poor Soul, whose
immortal nature delivers him up to an Eternity either of bliss or misery. When
this poor Soul, poor I say as not being rich in faith, or any other spiritual
grace, shall sit upon his lips, as the Emperor Adrian's did, with a Quo nunc
ibo? whither shall I go? what shall become of me? How shall I appear before
God, whose Name and Sabbaths I have blasphemed and profaned? How shall I stand
before Christ, whose Ministers and Ordinances I have persecuted and despised?
What comfort can I expect, or hope for, from the holy Ghost, whose private
motions and workings in my heart I have slighted and resisted? I never looked
upon, nor examined my heart or ways, by saying, What have I done? And now,
miserable man that I am, I know not what to do.

Oh my Christian brethren, let us think upon these things; this will be the
certain Fate of a dying wicked man. The Lord will be just and righteous though
we are not, and every secure sinner shall feel in his conscience Futuri Judicii
praejudicium, as Tertullian expresses it, a taste of that eternal Judgment and
Horror, which he must endure irremediably and everlastingly.

Think upon the sad state of Cain. We cannot tell by the Hebrew, whether he
said; My iniquity, or, my punishment, is greater then I can bear. Think upon
the sad state of Antiochus: when he lay dying, he calls to his friends, and
says, My heart fails me, into what floods of misery am I fallen? and now I
remember the evils that I have done at Jerusalem.

Think upon the sad state of Saul: when he was discomfited by the Philistines,
he calls to his servant; Stand upon me I pray thee, and kill me, for anguish is
come upon me.

And let these terrors of the Lord convince us, that this perfection and
uprightness in our hearts, and words, and actions, is a considerable quality.
Let us with all possible speed and care provide for our deathbed comfort, and
purge our consciences by Confession, and Faith, and Repentance and Restitution;
that we may stop their Mouths, and still their Clamor, and not become, as Job
complained, a burden to our selves. Job 7. 20.

It was a good Caution that Bernard gave Eugenius; Nullus molestior oculus suo
cujusque. Through the guilt of sin, it will so come to pass, that no eye
will be so dreadful and terrible to us, as our own; there will not be a face
either in Heaven or Earth, which a troubled conscience would rather fly from
than his own, and can less do it.

The Laws of God are the rules of that perfection and uprightness, which in
St. Paul's phrase we should follow and press after.

And Holy David tells us that their peace will be great that love, and are not
offended at the laws of God. This peace in our last sickness will prove our
best Cordial. It was so to King Hezekiah, when the Prophet Isaiah brought to
him that sad message: Thou shall dye, and not live: He betakes himself to
prayer: Remember now, Oh Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, Isa. 38. 3. It was not his Crown, or his
Kingdom, nor those vast Treasures he stood possessed of, that then administered
any comfort to him, only the testimony of a good conscience, that he had
walked before the Lord in truth and uprightness.

Wherefore it is a sad thing, so many men should seek after Science, so few
after Conscience; that men should hunger and thirst after Riches, and not after
Righteousness: whereas did we bestow as much pains in seeking Moral and
Theological Virtues and Graces, as we do for Arts and Sciences, we might
attain them sooner, and retain them longer.

Longer, did I say? I need not recall the word: Spiritual graces are truly
called a treasure, because as they supply to all purposes, so they continue to
all times. Grace carries us through all duties, and through all trials. It
makes the yoke of Christ easy, and his burden light; it weakens the strength
of sin, and takes out the sting of death; it stusses our pillows with the
Feathers of a Dove, and fills us with those joys that are so unspeakeable and
glorious. St. Augustine speaking of the primitive Christians: Quidam patienter
vivunt, and delectabiliter moriuntur: They live with patience, and they dye
with joy. Their Life it seems was a trouble, Death an advantage: they endured
the one, and desired the other. That blessed Martyr Vincentius, had doubtless
a great measure of this blessed peace in his end, when he could say to his
executioner Dacianus; Nunquam aliquis adeo been servivit mihi, ut tu; No man
ever did me so good service as you are about to do: your torments will hasten
me to my triumphs, your sword will but let out that corruption of flesh and
blood, which cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

I shall conclude and dismiss you in the comfort of that promise recorded by
Holy David in the 64. Psalm. All the upright in heart shall glory, at the 10
verse.

The subject of the promise you see, is Glory: and the persons to whom it is
due, are the Upright in heart. And we may admire the wisdom and goodness of
the Holy Ghost in that expression: (upright in heart.) A man may be upright in
the desires of his heart, when through the suddenness or violence of a
temptation, he may be over-borne into a sin. The Lord help us, we cannot
maintain a perfect rectitude in the ways of this world. In every calling
there are some in-evitable temptations: but yet let us strive and bear up,
though the stream of corruption run strong against us, let us put off all
disguises in religion, and lay down the love of craft, and false-hood, and
circumvention in Civil actions; and then we shall secure our title to the
promise. Of what? Of glory. So we read it; but translations differ: some have
it, Laudabuntur, they shall be praised. Uprightness is such a grace as creates
an Holy and Reverentiall admiration in all that behold it. Even wicked Balaam
could wish, Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
the Israel of God. But I rest not in that. Take the word in another
translation; Laetabuntur, they shall rejoice. If we could crowd Heaven into a
Map, we might find two Hemi-sphears; the one would be Joy, the other would be
Glory: And as of those two Hemisphears of the world, the first has been known
long before: The other (that of America which is the richer in treasure) God
reserved for latter discoveries: so though he reserve that Hemisphear of
heaven, which is the Glory thereof, to the resurrection; yet the other
Hemisphear, the Joy of heaven, God opens to our discovery, and delivers for our
habitation, even whilst we dwell in this world. That which Christ shall say to
our souls at the last Judgment; Enter into your Master's joy; He says to our
Conscience now, Enter in your Master's joy. The everlastingnesse of the Joy, is
the blessedness of the next Life; but the entering, the inchoation is afforded
to the upright in this. Those words of Christ, Come ye blessed, are words
intended to them that are coming to Him, that are upon their way. And as here
he bids us, Come; herafter, he will bid us, Welcome.

Let it not trouble you then, what I told you out of Solomon, that the upright
is an abomination to the wicked, and so, tribulations are to be expected. But
you know, as a man must have some land, or he cannot be in wardship: so a man
must have some of the love of God, or else he could not fall under Gods
correction. And when the hand of God lies upon him, either in a disease, or in
a persecution, and presses him, so that even life it self is expiring, then he
shall feel the comfort of this promise: Laetabitur, he shall Rejoice. And as
the Lord said concerning the reducing of his people Israel out of Babylon:
Sibilabo populum meum, I will hiss for them, Zech. 10. 8. so when the upright
man shall lie panting, and languishing upon his bed of sickness. The Lord shall
then come to his bedside, and hiss for him, and whisper gently to his
departing soul: Fear not Sin, I am thy Righteousness: Fear not Death, I am
the Resurrection: Fear not the day of Judgment, I am thy Advocate now, and
shall be thy Judge then. And by these flashes of joy, shall so inlighten his
soul, as to overcome all the cares and the fears of Nature, all the Horror of
the passing Bell, all the cries, and tears of a distracted and scattering
family. Like blessed Stephen, he shall, by the eye of Faith, see Heaven open,
and his Savior standing at the right hand of God. And his joy then shall be so
strong, as that it shall no more extinguish, or evaporate than his soul shall.
And it shall become a Joy that shall pass up, and put on a more glorious
garment above, and be a Joy super-invested in Glory.

FINIS.

