The unchangeable Resolutions of the Freemen of England.
WHereas amongst other the ancient Rights and Freedoms of this Nation, it is
declared in the Grand Charter of the liberty of England, cap. 29. That no
Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseiz'd of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or Free Customs; or be outlawed, or exiled, or any other way
destroyed; Nor any Sentence pass upon him, nor condemned but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the land: And that justice, or right,
shall be sold, denied, or deferred, to no man: Which said Charter (obtained by
the vast expense of the wealth and blood of this most puissant Nation*) has
been confirmed by two and thirty several Acts of the Free Parliaments of
England; explained, and enlarged, in the Petition of Right, 3. Car'. From time
to time asserted by this present Parliament, as the only foundation of all
Government; and ever heretofore entrusted, and of late frequently avowed to be
maintained accordingly (and so secured, cannot be altered) by all the Power and
Authority of the whole Kingdom of England: But nevertheless for the
advancement of self ends, has been, and at present is invaded; the ordinary
course of Justice obstructed, or partially dispensed; Our Possessions every day
more and more seized on, surcharged, and drained; till at last this whole
Nation do become a prey to the avarice and ambition of a prevailing Faction;
whose unsettled condition, (notwithstanding all pretenses of easing our present
grievances, wherewith we have heretofore been too frequently deluded) cannot
possibly subsist, but by the exercise of a boundless power over the people,
and their prop^r interests:

We, the Freemen of England, (deeply sensible of the premises; and having
nothing before our eyes, but the fear of God, the honor of our Country, the
love of our own, and of the safety of our posterities; and a fervent desire,
that Truth and Peace may be settled amongst us; Not reflecting upon the
particular designs, of any self-ended party; Nor fearing, or suspecting, the
rage, or power of any adversaries whatsoever; (so regardlesse of themselves, as
to draw upon their own souls, the guilt of innocent blood; so ignoble in
spirit, and prodigious to nature, as to neglect or betray the known Interests
of our common birthright; or so unthankful to us, as to oppose, envy, or
dis-relish the services and hazards which we shall willingly undergo for the
vindication and defense of the Liberties of our Country; Nor doubting the
assistance of any true-hearted English man; which they naturally owe, and have
generally avowed ( in the Parliament Protestation, Oath of Association, and
National Covenant) to contribute unto us, in this our self-defence; Nor
dismayed at any difficulties or dangers whatsoever, ( unworthy in matters of
this concernment to be looked upon) confidently relying upon the Justice and
mercy of Almighty God, and the sincerity and zeal of our just intentions
herein; and well knowing, that all pretense of Conquest, and Arbitrary
Jurisdiction ( however obtained, and wheresoever lodged) is utterly destructive
to propriety, and the common Interest, ( which can never be secured but by the
supreme Justice of a standing law) the fayler of all other means, and the
exigency of our condition, requiring the same) are now at last unchangeably
resolved, with the hazard of our lives and fortunes, clearly to shake off the
yoke of our present bondage, and to sacrifice our selves, and all that is dear
unto us, with all cheerfulness of heart,

For the Right and Liberties of the Freemen of ENGLAND.
In reference whereunto,
1. THese Resolutions, with the Petition of Right, are to be published
throughout this Kingdom; and the People gained by the Gentry and Ministry to
a right understanding of the same.

2. A competent Brigade of the most sufficient, faithful, and moderate
Military persons, are to imbody themselves in every County as near as possibly
they may at one time, who are not to violate or charge the Country.

Whose Office it must be,
1. To suppress all Force, and to put the whole power of the Land (man, woman,
and child) into a posture of defense, against all opposition to the preceding
resolutions: Some expedients being contrived for a mutual intercourse of
Intelligence, and assistance therein.

2. To remove all Oppressions and illegal Impositions, and to restore every
Freeman to his just rights and liberties; all Offenders against the public
Interests, being remitted to the Law.

And for this end it is to be wished,
That one or more Tribunals be thereupon erected within every County of this
Dominion; who are to advise, in the premises; and finally to determine in
matters of difference ( without costs and delays of service) within their
respective Divisions.

FINIS.

