THE JUDGMENT Of the late Archbishop of ARMAGH, and PRIMATE of IRELAND.

Of BABYLON (Rev. 18.4.) being the present See of Rome.

(With a Sermon of Bishop BEDELS upon the same words.)

Of laying on of hands (^eb. 6.2.) to be an ordained Ministry.

Of the old Form of words in Ordination.

Of a Set Form of PRAYER.

Published and enlarged by Nicholas Bernard D. D. and Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Grayes-Inne, London.

Unto which is added a Character of Bishop BEDEL, And an Answer to Mr. Pierces
Fifth Letter concerning the late PRIMATE.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM ELLIS BARONET, His HIGHNESS Solicitor
GENERAL, The Readers, and Benchers, With the Ancients, Barresters, and
Students, Of the Honorable Society of Graies-Inne.
Ye are thus entitled to these Treatises. The occasion of publishing the
First, was a Sermon preached by the late Archbishop of ARMAGH in your Chapel
of the same subject, Nov. 5. 1654. who (out of his old love to this society,
whereof he was a member) intended it as his last: the request then made to him
for the permission of printing that, he did satisfy in his consent to the
publishing of this. For the other, some parts of them have been long agone
preached before you by the Author, though now in another manner enlarged;
which as a testimony of his due observance and respect to this Honorable
Society, he desires may be accepted from him, who is

Grayes-Inne, October. 27. 1658. Yours in the service of Christ, N. BERNARD.

To the Reader.
HOw Popery and Though of late it has had that latitude as to comprehend
Episcopacy, yet, in Ancient Records (which I have seen) it was limited to the
Deans and Chapters; For this was then the form of the Archbishops Provincial
visitation, declaring that he would visit, Episcopum, Praelatos, clerum and
populum.
Prelacy came first to be contracted, is not my enquiry; but sure I am, they
are here very far asunder, such as do apply that of Babylon (Rev. 17.) and the
Man of sin (2 These. 2.) to the Pope can hardly be accounted Popish, which you
find affirmed by the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Bishop Bedell, in their
discussing of the same words, And who are supported in it by the most Eminent
Bishops of England and Ireland, since the Reformation. Archbishop Whitgift,
Bishop Jewel; Abbot, Bilson, Andrews, Downham, Morton, Hall, Davenant,
Prideaux, with others, who have unanimously given their votes the same way, as
is hereafter shown, And indeed it could not be otherwise expected from some of
them who had been taught to put him into their Common Prayer in Edw. 6.
Letany, From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable
enormities, Good Lord deliver us. So that if any of later years professing
themselves to be the sons of those old Prophets, have so far favored the Sea
of Rome, as to divert the stream of that application some other way, it appears
they have in it degenerated from their Ancestors.

The first Treatise, being the Primates three positions concerning Babylon, was
wrote above 40 years agone, (which appears by the places of Scripture, rendered
according to the old Translation) and sent to an Irish Jesuit in Dublin, (as I
take it The first that broached that figment of the Nagges head consecration in
England, after 45 years silence of any other Author, which in Bishop Bedells
Letters to Wadesworth, p. 142. is confuted.
Christophorus a sacro bosco, there called F. Halywood, the sum of which
having been delivered by the Primate in a Sermon which he preached at
Grays-Inne, Nov. 5. 1654. and being much desired by some of the Auditors to be
published, he did condescend, to permit this, with that other Letter following,
in their satisfaction.

The learned Sermon of Bishop Bedels (being of the same subject) I heard him
preach it in Christ-Church, Dublin, 1634. before the Lord Deputy and
Parliament. The occasion of his giving a copy of it, was at the request of a
Papist, to have shown it to some learned men of his own Religion, and my
opportunity to have it, was the near relation I had to him for diverse years in
that See; which after these 22 years lying latent with me) I have taken this
fit occasion to publish it.

That which I have added, is by way of confirmation from some grounds out of
Ancient Fathers, the successive votes both of the learned Writers in those
ages, who lived under the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome, as of our eminent Bishops
and Writers, since that yoke was cast off in England; with the concurrence of
our book of Homilies, several Synods of our own, and other reformed Churches,
the determination of the Synops. Theol. disp. 4^. de Christo and Antichristo
conclus. Ex quibus apparet Pontificem and Papam Romanum, revera Antichristum
and filium perditionis esse, etc.
Dutch and French Divines. It being very observable, that whatsoever
differences there are in the reformed Churches in other matters, yet there is a
mavelous unity in this. To which is added the like judgment of Arminius, and
some of the Church of Rome, (continuing at least in that communion) who
profess it outright; others by way of consequence: Their chief Writers, who
meet us half way, granting the place, only disputing the time, contending as
much as we, that Babylon (Rev. 17.) must be meant Rome, the difference between
us, whether Ethnic, or Papal.

For that of the Primates judgment (seconded by some eminent Writers) what is
meant, Heb, 6.2. by laying on of hands, and of the sense of the old form of
words in Ordination; viz. Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou forgivest,
etc. and the use of them to be continued. I had leave from himself for the
manifesting and enlarging of it. And I suppose the last subject concerning a
Set Form of Prayer, will pass with the less opposition, by the concurring of
diverse eminent and worthy Persons, whom the contrary-minded cannot but highly
esteem of. Having both in the former and this, taken up Saint Paul's manner of
arguing with the Athenians, as certain also of your own have said, etc. or as
elsewhere, one of themselves, even a Prophet of their own, etc. And surely, the
Primates appearing so much against the Sea of Rome in the first, cannot but be
a preparative to the harkening unto him the rather, in the two later.

For my self, I have no other design in the whole, but the peace and unity of
the Church, which we are all bound to seek, (and without which end and aim, all
gifts whatsoever coveted by us, are of no value) and I hope to have that
interpretation from such as are so affected.

Two things which have been enlarged by way of Vindication of the Eminent
Primate, from the injuries of Doctor Heylene, came so in my way, that I could
not pass them, which else (by his being in the esteem of men so far above his
reach) there had been no need of. He having in those and diverse other
aspersions which he has cast upon him in his late book (which may hereafter be
fully cleared) done himself the chiefest wrong.

I commend the whole to the Readers charitable and impartial censure, that no
prejudicate opinion do obstruct his right apprehension.

THE CONTENTS Of the Several TREATISES;
The First consists of three POSITIONS.
1. THat a great City called Babylon, shall be a Seducer.

2. That by this City is meant ROME.

3. Not Heathen Rome, but since it was freed from the Government both of
Heathen and Christian Emperors, and became the possession of the Pope.

The Second.
How the Papacy may be said to be the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is,
Rev. 17.18.

The Third (being Bishop Bedels Sermon on Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people,
etc.)
The Speaker, our Savior Christ: His people, those within the Covenant of
Grace: A paralleling the Speeches here, with those of the Prophets; Of
Litterall Babell; who meant by Mystical Babylon: The judgment of Bellarmine,
Salmeron, Viegas, to be the City of Rome. How the title of Babylon the great,
and her reigning over the Kings of the earth, rather agrees to Rome Papal, then
Heathen: The Cup of enchantment whereby she has deceived all Nations, and one
in special, in imitation of literal Babell, (Dan. 1.) applied to that See;
Her Wantonness, Pride, sitting as a Queen, glorifying her self: the blood of
Christians shed by the Papacy, to be beyond that of Heathen Romes persecution:
his conclusion from the Premises.

That there are some of Gods people in Babylon; That they are to go out not
only in affection, but the place also: Of Baptism, Grounds of the Catechism,
Faith, taught there; of the doctrine of of merits: What is to be thought of
those that do yet live there, and cannot come out: Whether the Church of Rome
be a true Church, rightly stated, p. 83. Of the Ordination had there, by the
use of these words; Whose sins ye remit, etc. That the Papal Monarchy is
Babylon, proved by arguments at the bar of Reason, and from common principles
of Christianity. p. 89.

Answer to that motive of staying in Babylon, because they are told they may be
saved in it:

An exhortation of such as are yet in that captivity to come out, and of our
selves to come further out. Of Impropriations, Dispensations, etc. with a
conclusive prayer for the destruction of Babylon.

The Fourth, A Confirmation of the abovesaid judgment.
From some grounds out of the Ancient Fathers, consenting in an expectation
that Rome must be the place, and the successor of the Emperor there, the
Person. A clear application of it to the Sea of Rome, by the Fathers and
Writers in successive ages before and after the tenth Century: The Judgment of
the eminent Bishops of England since the reformation, the book of Homilies,
especially in 2 places, calling the Pope Antichrist, and the Babylonical beast
of Rome. A Synod in France, as Ireland; How far confessed by the prime writers
of the Church of Rome. The mistake of such as have diverted the application of
it some other way; an Answer of a passage of Doctor Heylenes concerning it, in
relation to the Primate, and Articles of Ireland.

The Fifth, Of laying on of Hands. Heb. 6.2.
Reasons why not confirmation, but ordination. Paraeus and Mr. Cartwrights
concurrence in it with the Primate. The necessity of an ordained Ministry. The
neglect of it as undermining the foundation. Objections answered, with a
seasonable application to the present times. The necessity of an external call;
The Authority not from the People, That objection against our ordination being
derived from Rome, at large answered p. 218. That personal faults in the
ordainers does not null the ordination; Some application.

The 6. Of the old form of words in Ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost, not
meant of the sanctifying grace of the spirit, nor extraordinary gifts of it,
but of ghostly or spiritual Ministerial authority. 1 Cor. 3. verse 3.6. and 1
John 2.20. The anointing teaches you, etc. illustrated. An objection out of S.
Augustine answered.

Whose sins thou forgivest, etc. In what sense Ministers are said to forgive
sins. The Primates judgment in his answer to the Jesuits Challenge, defended
to be according to the doctrine of the Church of England, which Doctor Heylene
has scandalized him in it.

The 7th. Of a Set Form of Prayer.
The judgment of Calvine. Dutch, and French divines with their Practice.
Examples out of the Old Testament, and New. The pattern of our Savior, giving
a form to his disciples, taking one to himself, and observing the set forms
made by others. That objection of Stinting the spirit answered. An Uniformity
in public prayer a means of reducing unity in Church and State. The full
concurrence of Mr. Rogers, Mr. Egerton, Dr. Gouge, Mr. Hildersham, Dr. Sibbs,
Dr. Preston, etc. Of the length and gesture in prayer, Mr. Hildersham of an
outward reverence in the public.

A Character of Bishop Bedell, his industry at Venice, and at home, humility,
moderation, government, and sufferings.

An answer to Mr. Thomas Pierces fifth Letter, wherein three Certificates have
been published by him, for the justification of a change of judgment in the
late Primate of Ireland in some points.

ERRATA.
SOme omissions of Accents Pointing, and number of pages, the intelligent
Reader may correct himself.

Page 39. l. 2. r. professed p. 40. l. 8. r. Lo-ammi. p. 41. l. 18. r. ir- p.
45. l. 9. for there it is related that p. 46. l. 15. d. and p. 48. l. 8. circun.
p. 49. l. 6. ly. p. 63. l. 21. d.,. p. 59. l. 11. (although p. 60. l. 4. her.
p. 63. l. 1. As gods l. 21. dis- p. 64. l. 22. they, they. p. 70. l. 10. val.
p. 82. l. 20. d.,, p. 92. l. 6. may, p. 160. l. 23. and p. 161. l. 11. Padre.
p. 162. mar. l. 8. justif. p. 185. l. 2. baptizing p. 189. l. 2. mining p. 198.
l. 6. of the p. 248. l. 22. mediatly p. 250. l. 22. 2. p. 278. l. 12 there p.
317. l. 8. Wethersfield p. 322. l. 18. prayer, p. 329 l. 21. and Mr. p. 362. l.
12. d. following. p. 378. l. ult. d. which.

The judgment of the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, what
is understood by Babylon, in Apoc. 17. and 18.
Apoc. 18. v. 4. Go out from her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and receive not of her plagues.


IN these words we are straightly enjoined, upon our peril, to make a
separation from Babylon. For the understanding of which charge, these three
Positions following are to be considered.

The first Position.
THat it is plainly foretold in the the Word of God, that after the planting of
the Faith by the Apostles; the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth should be
seduced and drawn into damnable errors: and that the mother of all these
Abominations of the Earth, should be a certain great City called Babylon, in a
Mystery.

Proof.
THis we find directly laid down in the Revelation, that a Apoc. 17. v. 18.
and 18 v. 2. and 21.
great City called Apoc. 17.5.
in a mystery Babylon should become the mother of the spiritual whoredom and
abominations of the earth, so that the Apoc. 17 2. and 18. v. 3.
Kings of the earth should commit fornication with her, and the Inhabitants of
the earth should be made drunk with the wine of her fornication.

The second Position.
THat by this great City Babylon (the Mother of all the abominations of the
earth) is understood Rome.

Proof.
1. BY the clear Testimony of Scripture, in the seventeen Chapter of the
Revelation; where this City is described unto us, First by the situation; that
it is seated upon seven Hills, (v. 9.18.) and then by the largeness of the
Dominion thereof; That it is that great City that rules over the Kings of the
earth, (v. 18.) Now that by these two marks Rome was most notoriously known in
the Apostles days, may appear even by the Roman Poets, who describe Rome just
after the same manner, as (Horat. in Car. seculari.) Dii quibus septem placuere
colles.
Ovid;

Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem
Montibus, imperii Roma Deumque locus.
Trist. lib. 1. Eleg. 4. Lib. 3. Eleg. 10.
Rome the place of the Empire, and of the Gods, which from seven hills does
take a view of the whole world.

And more shortly Propertius.

Septem urbs alta jugis toti quae prafidet Orbi. The City mounted on seven hills
which rules the whole world. No man reading Propertius, ever made question,
but that Rome was here described; and therefore no reason why any doubt should
be made, what that great City may be, which with the same colors is painted
out unto us in the book of the Revelation.

2. By the judgment of the anancient Fathers, affirming expressly that Rome is
meant by Babylon, in the seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation, as the Rhemists
themselves do voluntarily confess in their last note upon the first Epistle of
Peter

3. By the Confession of those who are most Devoted to the Sea of Rome: as (to
name one for many, De Romans Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 2.
( Bellarmine the Cardinal Jesuit; whose words are these: [ John in the
Revelation every where calls Rome Babylon, as Tertullian has noted in his
third Book against Marcion, and in his Book against the Jews: and it is
plainly gathered out of the seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation: Where great
Babylon is said to sit upon seven Mountains and to have Dominion over the Kings
of the earth. For there is no other City which in the time of John had Dominion
over the Kings of the Earth, but Rome; and the building of Rome upon 7. hills,
is a matter most famous.]

Hitherto Bellarmine.

The third Position.
THat old Rome only under the Heathen persecutors (from the time of the first
Emperor till Constantines days) was not Babylon (as the Proctors of the
Church of Rome would persuade us) but Rome in her last days being free from
the Government both of Heathen and Christian Emperors. And that Rome was to be
that Babylon, which should draw the Kings and Nations of the world unto
Superstition and Idolatry from such time as it ceased to be subject to the
civil Prince (and became the Possession of the Pope) until the last destruction
thereof, which is yet to come.

Proof.
1. THe matter of Babylon is revealed unto Saint John as a mystery, Apoc 17.6.
But the persecution of the Church by the Heathen Emperor was far from being a
mystery: For it being openly committed, Apoc. 1.9.
Saint John himself at the same time being a companion with the rest of the
Saints in this tribulation ( banished for the Word of God, and for the
witnessing of Jesus Christ into the Island Pathmos:) this could not be showed as
a secret and mystical thing. And therefore some further matter, not then openly
known to the world must here be intended.

2. The state of Babylon after her fall, is thus declared, Apoc. 18.2. It is
fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City is become the habitation of
Devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird; for all Nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, and the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with her,
etc. If Heathen Rome only were Babylon, it would follow that upon the fall
thereof in the days of Constantine the Emperor, Rome professing the Faith of
Christ should then become the habitation of Devils, and a cage of every unclean
and hateful bird. Which being a most gross and absurd imagination, it must
needs be granted, that afte^ (...) ^ayes of the Christian Emperou^, the
faithful City should become a harlot; even Rome (whose Faith was once renowned
throughout Romans 1.8.
all the world) should become Babylon the mother of whoredoms and abominations
of the Earth. Apoc. 17.5.


3. Such a Desolation is foretold should come upon the great City Babylon
(which in the second position is proved to be Rome) that it should utterly be
destroyed and never built again, nor reinhabited, (Apoc. 18. v. 21, 22, 23.)
Now at that very time when this judgment shall come; it is said that the Kings
of the Earth which have committed fornication with her, shall bewail her and
lament her, (Rev. 18. verse 9.) whereby it is most evident that Rome is not to
cease from being Babylon, till her last destruction shall come upon her; and
that unto her last gasp she is to continue her spiritual fornications,
alluring all Nations unto her superstition and idolatry,

4. Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians 2.7. Declares that there was One in his time
who did hinder the revealing of that wicked man, who was to be the head of this
Apostacy, and falling away from the Faith. And when that he should be taken
out of the way, then (says the Apostle Verse 8.) Shall that wicked man be
revealed. He that withheld and made this hinderance in the Apostles time could
be no other but the Emperor, in whose hands, as long as the possession and
government of Rome remained, it was impossible that that wicked One (of whom
the Apostle speaks) should reign there So that upon his removal, that man of
sin must succeed in his room, whereupon that great City, wherein he
places his Throne falls to be that Babylon, Revel. 18.23.
which should deceive all Nations with her enchantments. Now all the world can
witness, that the Emperor, who sometime was the Sovereign Lord of Rome, is
now quite turned out of the Possession thereof, and the Pope entered thereupon
in his stead. Whereupon it follows, that the Pope (for all his Holiness) is
that wicked one of whom the Apostle Prophesied, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
that he should sit in the temple of God exalting himself above all that is
called God or worshipped: And consequently, that Rome, (where he has settled
his Chair) has long since begun, and yet continues to be that Babylon; from
whose communion we are charged to sever our selves, by that voice from Heaven,
Apoc. 18.4.
Go out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive
not of her Plagues.

The judgment of the Primate (wrote by him long ago in answer to the request
of a learned Friend) what is meant by the beast that was, and is not, and yet
is, and other passages in the 17. and 18. of the Revelation.
IN the Revelation these four Particalars must be carefully distinguished. The
woman (which is the great City Babylon.)

The first beast which arises out of the Sea, Apoc. 13.1.

The second beast which arises out of the Earth, Apoc. 13.11. and the false
Prophet which ministers to the second beast that goes to destruction, Apoc.
16.13. (19.20.) by which are meant (as I conceive) Vrbs Romana, Imperium
Romanum, Pontifex Romanus, and Clerus Romanus. The two beasts in Cap. 13. verse
11. are plainly distinguished, and that distinction must necessarily be
observed in the seventeenth Chapter. Likewise for the great beast mentioned in
the third and seventh verses of that Chapter is the same with the first beast
of the thirteenth Chapter as appears by the like description of the seven
heads and ten horns: the lesser beasts mentioned in the eighth and eleventh
verses, (which is the last head of the former) can be no other but the second
beast mentioned in the thirteenth Chapter, verse 22. who revived the Image of
the former, i. e. of the Empire, and made all to admire and adore it.

Now the Question is how this latter which is Pontifex Romanus can be said to
be the beast, that was, and is not, and yet is? My conceit of this is Singular,
but such as it is, I will not conceal from you; The Pontifices among the
ancient Romans (as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, no^eth in his second Book of Roman
Antiquities) were obnoxious to no other jurisdiction, neither were bound to
render account of their doings to any, they were only at the command of the
Pontifex maximus, whose authority was so great that the Emperors thought it
inconvenient that this Supremacy should be committed to any other, therefore by
assumeing it to themselves, and anexing it to their imperial Crown, they did by
this means extinguish the Spiritual Magistracy, and in a sort extinguish the
solemn Magistracy, which (under the 5. former heads) was distinguished from
all other superior Governments, and prosecuted with special regard and
reverence. That as if now for example in our state, one should Prophecy of the
Government of the Dukes of Lancaster under the like Type, he might say of them
in this manner; The beast that was (for the Dukes of Lancaster in their time
have been great) and is not (for by annexing of the Dutchey to the Crown, there
is now no speech of any Duke) and yet is (for the Dutchey still remains with
the several offices appertaining thereunto, though the state of the Duke lies
as it were drowned in the person of the King.) So in like manner, the Angel
might speak of these Pontifices Romani, the beast that was (for he was in
former time of special account) And is not (Being now confounded, and, in a
manner, swallowed up with the state of the Emperor) And yet is (for the
Priesthood remained still,) the Title and Dignity thereof resting in the
Emperor. This Beast, this Pontifex Romanus shall hereafter appear in his
Pontificalibus, and by his creatures (the false Prophet) induce the world to
accept his Pontifical power for the highest upon earth, as before they did the
Imperial, the image whereof is in this perfectly revived.

As for the second we are to consider that the seven heads of the first beast
are expounded, Apoc. 17.9. and 10. to be both the seven Mountains on which the
woman, (i. e.) the great City, verse 18. was seated, and the seven Kings (or
head Governors,) by which that City was ruled.

The Pope in regard of his Civil power over the woman (i. e.) his Regal Power
over the City of Rome, orderly succeeds the six heads that went before him,
and so becomes the seventh, claiming that respect in higher headship then did
his Predecessors.

But not content with that, for whereas the state of Pontifex maximus, which in
Saint John's time after a sort was, and is not, as has been showed, by means of
the Christian Emperors was clean extinguished (the first of them bearing only
the Title, but not exercising the Office, and Gratian the Emperor at last
abolishing both the Title and the Office, as by Zosimus a heathen Historian we
understand) the Pope raised it again out of the grave and took it to himself,
and after he had gotten to be the seventh head, retained not the pontificality
as an appendant of his regal Power (as did the Emperors before him) but
advanced the head thereof far above any of the seven civil supreme governments,
making himself by that means an eight head distinct from any of the former,
which in respect of his civil Power was one of the seven; Neither was he
content to extend the jurisdiction of his Pontificality, ad urbem and regiones
suburbicarias only, or to bound it within the confines of Italy, but (which
was never done by any Pontifex maximus, before him) by being Pontifex urbis; he
challenged a Title of Summus Pontifex Orbis, and so became not only a head of
the former beast, but also a several beast by himself, receiving in his
government the image of the former beasts, drawing all the world to worship the
same, for (as Augustinus Steuchus writes in his second Book against Laur.
Valla) when the Pontificality was first set up in Rome, all Nations from East
to West did worship the Pope, no otherwise then of old, the Caesar's.

A SERMON, Preached at Christ-Church Dublyn, before the Lord Deputy, and the
Parliament of Ireland, by BP. BEDELL, Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland, Anno 1634.
Revel. 18.4. And I heard another voice from Heaven saying, Come out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.


Right Honorable, Reverend, Worshipful and Beloved.
THe Censure that Saint Hierome passes on this Book of the Revelation, Tot
Sacramenta quot Verba, so many Words so many Mysteries, has often run in my
mind, and made me even fearful to pronounce concerning the diverse Visions in
it, and even loath to meddle with it; Neither have I to my best rememberance,
above twice in my whole life chosen any Text out of it to declare out of this
place, which resolution I should still have holden, save that I conceive some
extraordinary fitness in this passage for the present occasion of this great
meeting: And yet even now I shall treat of such a part, as is none of the
hardest to be understood; so as with out lanching into any deep and subtle
Disputations, we may keep us by the shore side. And if you will be pleased to
favor my endeavor: with your religious Attention, and the weakness of my
voice with your silence, I will hold as straight a course as I can, and without
further preamble come to the matter it self of this Text.

And first for the Connection and Declaration of the Sense, you shall be pleased
to understand, that in the former Chapter, Saint John is showed a sight whereat
he wondered with great marvel. Verse 3.
A woman sitting upon a Scarlet colored beast, full of names of Blasphemy,
which had seven heads and tenn horns; this woman had in her forehead a name
written, Babylon the great, the Mother of harlots and Abominations of the
Earth. And in the rest of the Chapter the Mystery of the Woman, and the beast
that bare her, being largely declared and one thing amongst the rest, that she
sitts on seven hills, Verse 9.
) the Conclusion is, Verse 18.
That she is the great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. In
this Chapter Saint John proceeds in the same matter, and tells, how he saw
first a mighty Angel descending from Heaven and proclaiming the fall of this
Babylon, (Verse 2.3.) and toward the end of the Chapter, to confirm the matter
wih a sign, another mighty Angel takes up a Millstone and throws it into the
Sea, with this word with like violence Babylon shall be thrown, and no more be
found. Verse 21.
In the midst between the Voices of these two Angels is inserted a long
Speech, uttered also by a Voice from Heaven, beginning at this fourth Verse
which I have now read and extending to the twenty ninth, partly admonishing
Gods People to come out of this Babylon in time, Verse 7.
partly describing her pride and security going before her destruction, partly
bringing in as it were the Funeral Song, Verse 10.
that is, sung for her by her followers and Lovers partly exhorting Heaven with
those that dwell therein to rejoice at her ruin. Verse 20.


This is the Order now for the meaning of the words, that shall appear best by
resolving three Questions. 1. Whose this Voice is? 2. To whom it speaks? And 3.
What? We need not be long to seek Who it is that speaks; For both those that
speak before and after are expressly called Angels, and he that now speaks lacks
that Addition, and the interest that he challenges in those that are spoken
to, calling them My People, shows plainly (to use the words of our blessed
Author in his speech to Peter at the Sea of Tiberias) It is the Lord. John 21.7
And albeit those relations between the Lord and his People are often mentioned
in Scripture, without any restraint to any one person in the blessed Trinity,
yet because he that here speaks tells of the Lord Gods judgeing the great
City, Verse the 8. As of another and third person, Strong is the Lord God that
judges her. And again, Verse 20. Speaking to the Prophets and Apostles, says,
God has avenged you on her. It is evident that he who hear speaks is the
Mediator, Our Lord Jesus Christ, who carries his people not in his mind
only, but in the Explication of his name, Matthew 1.21. He shall save his
People from their sins. Whereto it fitly agrees that this Voice is uttered,
From Heaven, where our Lord Jesus is at the right hand of God: We see the
speaker, now who are spoken unto Christ's People: There is no doubt, but in some
Sense all the World are Christ's People, His Inheritance, his Possession. Psalm
2.8.
And so much is often expressly expressed, Exodus 19.5.
But yet the Scripture in many places intimates, that this phrase restrains
from the World to some particular and choice people, namely Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.6.
Chap. 10.14, 15. and Chap. 3. and 9.
The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself above
all People that are upon the face of the Earth. So Chapter 10. The Lords
portion is his People, Jacob the lot of his Inheritance; Exodus 19.5.
Ye shall be my peculiar Treasure above all People, though all the Earth be
mine.

Hence it is, that these two, My people, and Israel; are used indifferently in
the same Sentence, as Psalm 57: Hear O my people O Israel, and so in many
other places; Isay 81.8.13. Micah 6 2
yet even amongst these there is some time a difference put, for all that are
of Isra^l are not counted Gods People, to some of them it is said, Isay 1.10.
Hear the Word of the Lord ye Rulers of Sodom, give ear ye People of Gomorah:
And for an upbraiding of their continual rebellions against the Lord, the
Prophet Hosea is bidden to name one of his sons, Hosea 1.9.
Lo-mmi, ye are not my people; and when to all other their Rebellions they
rejected, yea crucified the Lord of Glory, the Lord also rejected them, and as
he threatened by his Prophet, Isa. 65.15.
called his servants by another name, Christians: Even these also are in a
different manner so called; sometimes all that are within the Covenant of
Grace, and the Sacraments thereof are called Christ's People; sometimes th^se
that he has foreknown, and that are within the grace of the Covenant; God has
not cast away his People whom he foreknew according Romans 12.2
to that: Jer. 31.33
I will put my Law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, I
will be their God and they shall be my People. And these are those here most
properly spoken unto, as appears, because the Motives here used the fear of
partaking in sin and punishment, most properly work upon these, besides these
being oppressed and holden in Captivity by the mystical Babylon here spoken of
are in the 6. Verse Exhorted to cry her quittance in the same words almost
which the ancient Church of Israel uses concerning the old Babel: Psalm. 137.8.
O Daughter of Babylon which art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us.

The third and last Point to be cleared remains, what the people of God are
commanded to do, go out of her, says our Lord Jesus Christ; That is
doubtless out of Babylon, before proclaimed, Isa. 21.9.
to be fallen that is after the Prophetical phrase certainly to fall; Babel is
fallen, is fallen whence this form is borrowed.

That Babel was a City in Chaldea, standing by the River Euphrates, where by
the occasion of the presumptious Tower, the Languages of Mankind were
confounded, Genesis 11.10. The first seat of Nymrods Tyranny, Chapter 10.10.
Nebuchadnezer the King thereof carried thither Captive, Jehoiakim and with him
Daniel and his companions, together with the vessels of the House of God; about
some twelve years after Zedekiah also was carried away Captive to the same
place, Jerusalem burnt, the Temple desolated, and the whole people in a manner
carried out of their own land to the same place of Babel, where they continued
seventy years unto the overthrow of the Babylonian Monarchy by Cyrus.

The Prophets Isay and Jeremiah, foretell the ruin of this Babel, and
delivering of Gods People from her Tyranny, whom they exhort upon her fall to
return into their own land: Hence is this form taken, and this whole Chapter
is compiled of little else, but the phrases of the Prophets touching Babel and
Tyrus as the diligent reader by comparing the concording places may easily
perceive:

This Exhortation to leave Babylon, is, Depart ye, Isa. 52.11. Ser. 50.8. and
Jer. 51.6.9.
Depart ye go out from thence, remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go
forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, flee out of the midst of Babylon, and
deliver every man his Soul, be not cut off in her iniquity forsake her, and
let us go every one into his own Country, Verse. 45. My people, go ye out of
the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his Soul from the fierce anger of
the Lord, which as you see are almost the very words of this Text, so that
which follows here in the seventh Verse, I sit as a Queen and am no VVidow,
and shall see no sorrow, is taken out of Isaiah 47.7, 8.

The wayling of the Merchants of this Babel, and the store and preciousnesse of
her Merchandise is borrowed from the like Description of the Costlyness of
Tyrus, Ezekiel 27. Ezekiel. 27.
The inrecoverable ruin of this Babel showed in the end of this Chapter, by
the sign of a great Millstone cast into the Sea, is taken out of Ier. 51. Ier.
51.
Where the Prophecy of that it self against Babel, is appointed to be bound to
a Millstone, and cast into the river Euphrates, which ran through the old
Babell, with this word. Thus shall Babel sink, and shall not rise from the
evil which I will bring upon her.

These Prophecies were accordingly accomplished, as you may see in Daniel,
Daniel 5.
for she is related in a great Feast made by Belshazzar to a thousand of his
Lords (wherein he would needs bring forth the Vessels of Gods House for his
Nobles and Concubines to quaff in.) God wrote his Doom with a hand upon the
wall of his Banqueting house, and the same night the Medes and Persians under
Darius and Cyrus, entered the City, slew the King, and proclaimed liberty to
Gods People, Ezra 1.1.
to return into their Country and reedifie the House of God as you may see,
and thus came Babel the Glory of Kingdoms (as it is called Esaias 13.19.) to
Confusion: But this is the literal Babel, whereunto there is a reference in
this Text, What now is the Mystical Babylon which here Gods People are bidden
to leave. Questionless some City answering to this, in State, in Glory, in
Oppression of the People of God, neither must we take it for the buildings
only and houses, but for the State also and Policy; as besides the Evidence of
the Type of old Babel, so taken by the Prophets, and the common use of all
Authors in like Case does lead us.

There be two Opinions recited by Cardinal Bellarmine in this matter, one that
it should be the community of all the wicked and reprobate. But this has no
manner of agreement: with the Circumstances of the Text: This is not seated on
seven hills, nor has it seven Kings, five fallen, one being, and another to
come, nor will those things that are foretold of the destruction of Babel agree
to this Exposition, and is rejected by the learned of that side: And himself
names another (which he approves for the better) viz. that here by Babel is
meant the City of Rome. As that was in Saint John's time, for as he shows out
of Tertullian, Look as old Babylon was the head of that Empire, whose King
persecuted and lead into captivity, the People of God, so did Rome then: This
is not only Bellarmines judgment, but Salmeron, Viegas, and others of that
side that Babylon is Rome. They do well to yield to the clear evidence of truth
so clear in deed as it would be too shameful impudence to deny it; For what
City was there which in Saint John's time could have the addition of great, but
only Rome, or did rule over the Kings of the earth, or (to omit all other
Arguments was seated on seven hills: Septemque una sibi muro cirnundedit arces;
It may be said Constantinople also is set on seven hills and not unfitly, for
it was built in Emulation of Rome called new Rome, but not till some Anno 330.
Ages after Saint John's time, we need not spend more words in a plain matter
having our Adversaries own Confession, Babylon is Rome, and old Rome; yea says
Bellarmine, Heathen Rome persecuting Rome: Hear I beseech you, (Right
Honorable and beloved) to observe well, not what Isay, but what Saint John,
what the Angels, what our Lord Jesus Christ himself do foretell and relate in
this Chapter, touching the fall of this Babel or Rome. It is confessed; if
Babylon be Heathen Rome, that is now fallen, and has been above a thousand
years ago, and consequently thenceforth it is become An habitation of Devils,
the hold of every foul spirit and a Cage of every unclean and hateful bird, for
these are by the Angel conjoined with the fall thereof in the 2 Verse, will
Bellarmine and his fellows now confess this to be so? I trow not.

But because it may be some body else will, that we may speak not only to the
men, but to the matter. Observe that the ruin of Babylon here spoken of, is so
described as to be sudden in one day, in one hour: her desolation is not only
without recoverie, but even Consolation, Verse 8.10.19.
like to the throwing of a stone into the Sea, Verse 21.22, 23.
so as neither Music, nor Minstrel, nor the sound of a Qu^rn, or any
Crafts-man, nor the voice of a Bridegroom, or a Bride, nor light of a Candel
shall be found in her any more, This cannot agree with the Conversion, or the
Subversion of heathen Rome, for all these things are yet left now to be found
there; and if men will not wilfully shut their eyes, they must (me thinks)
needs see that this Desolation did not then come upon Rome, nor is yet come
upon her, And therefore it is not Heathen Rome, but after the embracing of
Christian Religion, which is to fall, and consequently that out of which
Christ's People are called;

Viegas of likelihood was aware of this, and therefore has devised another
shift to escape by: He says, Rome is here to be taken in a double estate. That
before it received Christ's Faith, and that which shall be in Antichrists time:
when (as Saint John says in this and the former Chapter) It shall revolt from
the Bishop of Rome, and from the Faith (as he says) a little before
Antichrists coming, or at least at the beginning of his Kingdom Rome shall be
grown proud, and secure, so as to say, I sit as a Queen; and then by the ten
Kings mentioned in the former Chapter (who had given their Kingdoms unto her;)
shall she be ruined and burnt, etc In this Exposition, the revolt that he tells
of from the Obedience of the Sea of Rome, is a Fancy of his own, and has not
the least ground in St. John's Vision, That the revolt from the Faith, whereof
the Apostle Paul speaks, (2 Thessalonians 2.) is the very Apostasy of
Antichrist the man of sin, and son of perdition, 2 These. 2.3.
that Rome in Antichrists time shall be secure, and account her self to sit as
a Queen, and then be destroyed by the ten Kings that formerly had served and
obeyed her; this is very true, as being expressly so laid down in the 16. and
17. Verse. of the former Chapter. But that which befell the Jews in the looking
for the Kingdom of Christ when it was already among them, happens to Viegas
and those of his side, They fondly look for Antichrist the last head of the
beast, whereupon the Babylonian Harlot sits above a thousand years after
all the former, and consider not that this beast is one Principality under
diverse forms of Government, whereof five being fallen in Saint John's time, one
then in being, and the other to endure, a short space. To make this short space
a thousand years, or else to put in so many years of the Popes government over
Rome before Antichrist come, who shall forsooth revolt from his Obedience: It
seems rather the dream of a waking man then to hold any likelihood of Truth,
Howsoever it rests even by Viegas consent (notwithstanding his cunning
combination of two states of Rome, that under Paganism, and that under
Antichrist, with a thousand years between) that Rome must have continued
Christian for sundery Ages before her Desolation, and for ought does yet appear
the present Monarchy which she claims to exercise over the Christian World, is
the Mystical Babylon out of which Gods People are called.

For the better clearing whereof, let us consider the Description that is made
of this Babylon, by the Angels and our Savior Christ himself more distinctly,
to see whether it do agree to the present estate of Rome or no: The Angel
tells John in the last Verse of the former Chapter, The woman which thou saw
is the great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth, and before (Verse
5.) upon her forehead is a name written, Mystery Babylon the great. Touching
this greatness I may spare my pains to speak much, there is a learned Book of
Iustus Lipsius which he intitles Admiranda, marvells, touching the greatness of
Rome, not long after in concurrence thereto, there was another made by Thomas
Stapleton our Countreyman Professor at Lovaine, which he intitles Vere
admiranda, Marvels indeed, touching the greatness of the Church of Rome,
wherein by comparison he endeavors to show that for largeness of Extent,
strength and power over Princes themselves, honor yielded unto it, the
greatness and magnificence of the Roman Church does far surpass the Roman
Empire. These two books were both printed together, and set forth at Rome
against the year of Jubilee, 1600. as if the Papacy labored to carry in her
forehead the name Great Babylon;

For the reigning over the Kings of the Earth by this great City, (which is
another point of the Angels description.) It is true that heathen Rome had
anciently in the borders and consines of the state, sundry Kings that held
their Kingdoms of her, Such were the Herod's, Aretas and Agrippa mentioned in
the New Testament; but these were neither in number nor dignity, nor in the
absoluten ss of their subjection to be compared with those that the now Rome
reigns over: And no great marvel if the Roman Emperor armed with thirty or
forty Legions had many Kings at command (says Stapleton) but that the Pope
being altogether unarmed, should give Laws to the Kings of the Earth: and
either advance them to their Kingdoms, or depose them, who would not account
worthy of great marvel? true, but the Angel shows us the true reason, Verse 12.
the ten horns which thou saw are ten Kings which have received no Kingdom
as yet but receive power, Verse 17.
as Kings at once with the beast, etc. For God has put in their hearts to
fulfill his Will, and to agree and to give their Kingdom unto the beast, until
the Word of God shall be fulfilled.

And consider I pray you here the manner how they have given their Kingdoms to
the beast; Upon the Election of any new Pope, they send a solemn Embassage to
profess their Obedience to him: And one of those (which is extant in Print, as
great a Monarch as any the Christian World has) Offers himself and all his
Kingdoms, his Seas, Firm lands, Islands, Arms, Forces, Treasures, Ships,
Armies, whatsoever he is, whatsoever he has, whatsoever he is able to do; and
falling down at the Popes feet as a most obsequious Son: he acknowledges and
confesses him to be the true Vicar of Christ our Savior on Earth, the
successor of Peter the Apostle, in that See, the head of the Universal Church,
the Provost, Parent, and Pastor of all Christians, praying him and humbly
beseeching him that he would receive all whatsoever he has offered to the
profit and defense of the Church into his Protection and Patronage: And these
words, etc. are said with a gesture corespondent: the Ambassador falling down
upon his knees: let Lipsius if he can with all his reading in Story, show us
such an Example of any King subject to old Pagan Rome:

It is true that Nero accounted it for his highest Glory to have set the Crown
upon Tiridates the King of the Armenians head in the City of Rome, with great
state and pomp. But let us see (says Stapleton) If the Majesty of the Church
of Rome has not had an equal part of this glory, yea and a greater, and then
he reckons how Pope Leo the third gave the Empire to Charles the great, and how
other Popes conferred to others a great many other Kingdoms: One thing he
forgets that neither Nero nor any other Emperor of old Rome ever Crowned any
with his feet, as Celestine the third, did Henry the sixth, nor caused him to
hold their stirrops, or kiss their feet, much less set their feet upon their
necks as Pope Adrian the fourth, and Alexander the third, did to the Emperor
Frederick.

And that we may not spend more time in proving that the present Papal Rome
reigns over the Kings of the Earth, the Merchants of Babylon are now resolved
That all the Kingdoms of the Earth are the Popes, insomuch that the best Title
that any Prince can have to his Crown is, Dei and Apostolicae sedis gratia, by
the grace of God, and Apostolic See. Lib. Romans Pon^. 5.1.2 6. Ab Alex 6. Cap.
7.8.
And Cardinal Bellarmine recognizing his works retracts that which might seem
to Cross this title about the Popes dividing the new world to the Portugals and
Spaniards: And tempers that which he had said that Christ himself whose Vicar
the Pope is, had no temporal Kingdom, and lastly, asserts more roundly,
contrary to his former opinion, viz. That the Church may deprive infidels of
their Dominion which they have over the Faithful, yea, albeit they do not
endeavor to turn away the Faithful from the Faith: Howsoever she does not
always so, because she wants strength, or does not judge it expedient, but
questionless, if those same Princes do go about to turn away their people
from the faith, they may and ought to be deprived of their Dominions: I shall
not need to call to rememberance here what Faith or infidelity is at this day
in the Roman Language when Paul the Fifth, teaches the Catholics that they
cannot take the Oath of Fidelity (salva fide Catholica) with safety of the
Catholic Faith; which shows, that if the Pope may deprive infidels of their
Dominions, how much more such as are Christians, being thereby more under the
verge of his Authority, concerning the Popes ruling over the Kings of the
Earth, this may suffice.

The Angel which in the beginning of this Chapter proclaims the fall of
Babylon, says that all Nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
Fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed Fornication with her. In
the Greek the Text is so, but might as well for the force of the Words, and
better for the circumstances be rendered of the wine of the heat of her
Fornication. And so Chapter 14.8. (...).
This seems to be a Declaration of the liquor contained in the golden Cup which
she has in her hand full of Abominations and unclean Fornications, And in this
Chapter Verse 23. See also Chapter 14.10.
by thy Sorceries were all Nations deceived; by all which is meant that with
hot intoxicating love drenches, she had besotted the Kings of the Earth to be
enamored of her; How to declare this of Heathen Rome I cannot well tell, unless
it were that by benefits, favors and show of honor, Kings and Provinces were
alured to bear the Roman yoke, and conform themselves to Rome, but for Papal
Rome the matter is more easy, for under the pretense of religious Holiness,
and Spiritual profit, the blessing of Almighty God, and of the blessed Apostle
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, Christ's Vicar and Saint Peter's successor the Keys
of Heaven, fullness of Power: And the Apostolical Sees, Exemptions, Dispensaons,
Pardons, Faculties, Indulgences, Jubilees, enlarging of souls out of Purgatory,
she has brought all sorts to her love and lure, Princes and great men, finding
how needful her favor is for dispensing with some disadvantagious Oaths or
incestuous marriages, or a soldering some cracked title to some signory, have
been in Emulation and jealousy one with another about her love, and contented
their subjects should flatter her and be seduced by her, so as at length she
has brought them to believe (at least to make profession that they believe)
She cannot deceive them though she would never so fain, Volens Nolens errare
non potest. If this cup of Enchantment were not; were it likely, were it
possible, that she should persuade Christians to be content not to hear
Christ's. Voice, speaking in his Word, not to receive the Holy Sacrament of his
body and blood whole and entire though he so gave it; and the Church for many
Ages so kept it, Not to pray with understanding in a known tongue not to take
the ten Commandments as God pronounced and wrote them twice with his own
finger, but as she has rased and deformed them, Not to say Amen to the Lords
Prayer in the company with other Christians, because she would not allow it;
were it not for this cup of Error, could she have ever persuaded that she can
dissolve the bonds of fealty betwixt Subject and Prince, depose and denounce
Kings; and warrant their Subjects to kill them, and had she not first with this
cup of Sorcery transformed men into beasts, could she have found any that would
have adventured to execute these her ungodly and wicked designs?

Here by the way let me tell you of an old Babylonian trick, by which
especially, the Western Babylon has conveyed this cup of Error into the
hands of all Nations. We read in the first of Daniel, that Nebuchadnezzar
commanded the Master of his Eunuchs, That he should bring certain of the Kings
seed, and of the Princes Children in whom was no blemish, and of able wits, to
teach them the Learning and Tongue of the Chaldeans; Thus were Daniel and his
fellows used, and had other name^ and education given them that they might
forget their own, (though Gods special Grace in them went beyond the policy of
Babylon.) Such and worse has been and is the practice of new Babylon in
drawing younger Brothers of great houses and good wits to Rome and Romish
Colleges and Seminaries, some of their names changed; making them their
chief instruments of State to mould and frame their own Families, and
Countries to the Roman Doctrine and Obedience. Those of the Council of the
Samaritanes that resisted the building of the Temple; render the reason of
their careful advertising the King of his interest, Ezra 4
viz. that because they were salted with the salt of the Palace it was not meet
for them to see the Kings damage: how should not they that have had their
Education at the new Babylons Charges; but in gratitude further her affairs,
and draw all they may to her Obedience and Devotion: And thus much concerning
Babylons Cup.

It follows after in process of our Lords speech; upbraiding her that she
glorifies her self and lives in wantonness and pride, and says, I sit as a
Queen and shall not be a widow, nor see any sorrow, etc. It would require a
long time to recite the Prov^rbs and by words only, which have been cast up and
down, concerning the wantonness and uncleanness of Rome, since she came to be
the seat of the Popes Court, and how she has drawn to her self, and spent the
wealth of all Nations; in this matter I will spare rather your Ears and this
place, then my own pains; for the Boast of sitting as a Queen, consider her
maxims; viz. The Church of Rome is the Mistress and Teacher of all Churches,
without spot or wrinckle, and it is necessary to salvation to every humane
Creature to be under the Bishop of Rome, that no man may judge him nor say unto
him Domine cur ita facias. If any man have a desire to see the vaunts of Rome
in this kind let him be pleased, to view the image of the Man of sin, exalting
himself in the Temple of God, as it is drawn by Master Fox in the end of the
former Tome of his Acts and Monuments Ecclesiastical, out of the Popes own
Decrees and Decretals; And if any make scruple to look on that Book, let him
see Bellarmine undertaking that the Pope int^nding to teach the whole Church
can in no case err in things appertaining to Faith; De Rob. Pont. Cap. 3. Ver.
5.
no, no, yet the particular Church of Rome, that it is probable and pious to
believe the Pope cannot become an Heretic even as a particular Person; that
he is the judge of Controversi^s in the Church, and his judgment certain and
infallible: Add to these, that the same Bellarmine makes Temporal Felicity one
of the notes of the Church. De Not. Eccl. l. 4. c. 8.


One point more rests in the speech of the last Angel concerning Babylon in
this Chapter, Verse the last, That in her was f^und the blood of the Prophets,
and Saints and of all that were slain upon the Earth: And in the former
Chapter, Verse 6.
John saw the woman drunken with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus: That
Heathen Rome was such there is no doubt: And although Bellarmine would draw the
Text another way to Jerusalem) that this is the great City, Verse 11.8.
where the bodies of two witnesses shall lie unburied, where also the Lord was
Crucified, since in the Roman Empire, and by a Roman Deputy, and to a Roman
Death, our Lord was put, But this does no less stick by Christian Rome unto
this day, to be drunken with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus: Let
Histories be turned, and an exact account taken, how many thousands (otherwise
good Christians) have been slain and massacred merely for his pleasure sake,
And because they would not submit to her Obedience; I think it will very
evidently appear that they are imcomparably more then all those that suffered
Martyrdom for the Christian Religion under Heathen Romes persecution. To omit
those whom as an Imperious Harlot she has caused to be killed for calling her
name in question.

Thus you see the Description of Babylon does no less agree to the present,
then the old Heathen Rome, the great City, her command over the Kings of the
Earth; Her enchanting Cup, Her wantonness and delicacy, Her arrogance and
pride: Lastly, that bloody and bloodthirsty Cruelty against the worshippers of
Christ, exercised by her, and (which I desire you to observe) by her alone; for
in no other part of the Christian world you shall find it.

To conclude then, since neither Heathen Rome only, as she was heathen (as
Bellarmine would have it) can be Babylon, nor partly Heathen, and partly
Antichristan, as revolted from the Pope, with a gap of a thousand years between
(as Viegas divineth) And the Character that the Holy Ghost sets upon Babylon
does no less, but rather more agree to the present Pontifical Rome, then to
the old Imperial. It is the falsely termed Christian, indeed the Antichristian
Rome, which is the Babylon, out of which Gods People are called.

And how they are to go out of her, it rests to be considered: Bellarmine cites
Saint Augustine to prove that it is Cord non Corpore, not in place but
affection; But the Temple of Gods people departing from Babel would seem to
imply both; And the rather because this great City is spiritually called Sodom
and Egypt: Rev. 11.8
now such was the departure of Lot out of Sodom and Israel out of Egypt.

It is true that by Cyrus his Edict Gods people were permitted to return into
their own Country to the place where the Lords worship was then fixed; Now
there is no such place specially appointed, as our Lord Jesus Christ shows in
his speech with the woman of Samaria: John 4.
But certainly if any of Gods people cannot by separation in judgment and
affection so live, as not to be partakers of the sins of Babylon, they are to
go out bodily also and in no wise to touch any unclean thing, Gods people are
warned to do, even by the consideration of the Holy vessels of the Lord which
they carried with them out of Babylon. The reason which confirms this charge of
going out of Babylon, is drawn from the danger of participation in her sins,
and in her Plagues, that is, Isay 52.11
blows, stripes, punishments, which are not only those mentioned in the 8
Verse, Death, Mourning, Famine, Fire, but as in the 14. Chapter (where the same
Proclamation is made of her fall which is here) the drinking of the hot and
unalaid wine of Gods vengeance, and to be tormented with fire and brimstone in
the presence of the Holy Angels, and the Lamb, and the smoke of their torments
shall ascend for ever and ever. We have thus descussed the meaning of this
Scripture, which being all laid together is this, Saint John hears our Lord
Jesus Christ admonishing from Heaven his faithful people to come out of the
obedience of Romish, Popish Babylon, least partaking with her in her sins, they
receive also of her stripes and punishments, both Temporal and Eternal.

Here concerning the person of the speaker mentioned in this first place, and
that circumstance, that he speaks from Heaven, I will for the present say no
more, but desire only that it may renew the religious attention of all; that
each would say with himself, I will hearken what the Lord God will say, for he
will speak Peace unto his People, and to his Saints that they turn not to
folly: That every one would remember the words of the Apostle, see that ye
despise not him that speaks, Heb. 12.25.
for if you escaped not, when ye refused him that speaks one Earth, much more
shall not we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven; But
these points shall be more profitably pressed when we shall have considered the
speech it self.

Wherein observe first, he call his people to come out of Babylon,) a plain
Argument that there are many not only good Moral and Civil honest men there,
but good Christians, not redeemed only, but in the possession of the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which may be confirmed by these reasons.

First there is amongst these that are under the tyranny of the Romish Babylon,
the Sacrament of entrance, into the Covenant of Grace; Baptism, by which those
that are partakers thereof are made Members of Christ, the children of God, and
heirs of Eternal life: and of these that have but this Seal of Gods Covenant, (
viz. infants) are no small and contemptible part of Gods People, though as yet
they cannot hear this Voice of Christ calling out of Babylon; besides this
there is publication of the tenure of the Covenant of Grace to such as are of
years though not so openly and purely as it might and ought, yet so as the
grounds of the Catechism are preached, sin is showed, Christ's redemption (or
the story of it) is known Faith in him is called for, John 3.18.36.5.24.
and this Faith is by the Grace of God wrought in some: For the Word of God and
his Calling is not fruitless, but like the rain returns not in vain; and
where true Faith is, Men are translated from death to life, he that believes
in the Son has everlasting life. John 3. last verse.


Some men perhaps may object the Faith which they describe and call by this
name of Catholic Faith, Is none other but such as the Devils may have:

I answer, Religion is not Logic, He that cannot give a true definition of the
soul is not for that, without a soul; so he that defines not Faith truly, yet
may have true Faith; learned Divines are not all of accord touching the
definition of it, But if (as by the whole stream of the Scripture it should
seem) to be a trust and cleaving unto God; this Faith many there have, the Love
of our Lord Jesus Christ is wrought in many there, John 14.21.23.
now he that loves Christ is loved of him and of the Father also, and because
the proof of true love to Christ is the keeping of his sayings, their are good
works, and according to the measure of knowledge great conscience of obedience.

Yea will some man say, But that which marreth all is the Opinion of merit and
satisfaction. Indeed that is the School Doctrine, but the Conscience enlightened
to know it self will easily act that part of the Publican, who smote his breast
and said, God be merciful to me a sinner. I remember a good advice of one of
that side, let others (says he) that have commi^ted few sins, and done many
good works satisfy for their sins; But whatsoever thou do, refer it to the
Honor of God: so as whatsoever good come from thee, thou resolve to do it to
please God, accounting thy works too little to satisfy for thy sins: For as
for thy sins thou must offer Christ's works, his pains and wounds, and his death
it self to him, together with that love of his out of which he endured these
things for thee. These are available for the satisfaction for thy sins. But
thou whatsoever thou do or suffer, offer it not for thy sins to God but
for his love and good pleasure, wishing to find the more grace with him,
whereby thou may do more, greater and more acceptable works to him, let the
love of God then be to thee the cause of well-living, and the hope of
well-working: thus he, and I doubt not but many there be on that side that
follow this Council; here with I shall relate the speech of a wise and discreet
Gentleman, my neighbor in England, who lived and died a Recusant; he demanded
one time, What was the worst Opinion that we could impute to the Church of
Rome? It was said, there was none more then this of our merits: And that
Cardinal Bellarmine not only does uphold them, but says, De justifica. lib.
5. cap. 7.
we may trust in them, so it be done soberly; And says, they deserve Eternal
life, not only in respect of Gods promises and Covenant, but also in regard of
the work it self: whereupon he answered, Bellarmine was a learned man, and
could perhaps defend what he wrote by learning, But for his part he trusted to
be sav^d only by the merits of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and as for
good works he would do all that he could; Et valiant quantum volere possint.

To proceed: In or under the Obedience of Rome there is Persecution and that is
a better mark of Christ's people, then Bellarmines Temporal felicity, all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle) shall suffer persecution;
ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake (says our Savior) and so are
all they on that side that are less superstitious then others, or dare speak of
redress of abuses, yea, there is Martyrdom for a free opposing men's
traditions, Image-worshipers, Purgatory, and the like.

Add that inobedience to this call of Christ, there do some come daily from
thence, and in truth how could our Savior, call his people from thence if he
had none there? How could the Apostles say that Antichrist from whose captivity
they are called shall sit in the Temple of God (since that Jerusalem is finally
and utterly desolated) unless the same Apostle otherwhere declaring himself had
showed us his meaning, that the Church is the house of God, and again, 1 Timothy
3.15.
ye are the Temple of the living God, and the Temple of God is Holy, which are
ye; It will be said that there are on that side many gross errors, many open
Idolatries, and superstitions, so as those which live there must needs be
either partakers of them and like minded, or else very Hypocrites, But many
errors and much ignorance, so it be not affected, may stand with true Faith in
Christ, and when there is true Contrition for our sins, (that is, because it
displeases God) there is a general and implicit repentance for all unknown
sins, Gods Providence in the general revolt of the ten Tribes, when Elias
thought himself left alone had reserved seven thousand, 1 Kings 19, 18.
that had not bowed to the Image of Baal; and the like may be conceived here
since especially, the Idolatry practiced under the obedience of Mystical
Babylon, is rather in false and will worship of the true God, and rather
commended, as profitable, then as absolutely, necessary, enjoined, and the
corruptions there maintained rather in superfluous addition then retraction in
any thing necessary to salvation.

Neither let that hard term of hypocrisy be used of the infirmity, and
sometime, humble and peaceable carriage of some, that oppose not common errors,
nor wrestle with the greater part of men, but do follow the multitude,
reserving a right knowledge to themselves, and sometimes, (by the favor which
God gives them to find where they live,) obtain better conditions then others
can; We call not John the beloved Disciple an hypocrite, because he was known
to the High Priest, John 18.15, 16.
and could procure Peter to be let to see the arraignment of our Savior: nor
Peter himself that for fear denied him, much less Daniel and his companions
that by suit obtained of Melzar their keeper that they might feed upon pulse
and not be defiled with the King of Babels meat, Daniel 1. v. 16.2
and these knew themselves to be captives and in Babel. But in the new Babel
how many thousands do we think there are that think otherwise that they are in
the true Catholic Church of God, the name whereof this harlot has usurped:
And although they acknowledge that where they live are many abuses, and that
the Church has need of reformation, yet there they were born, and they may not
abandon their Mother in her sickness. Those that converse more inwardly with
men of Conscience on that side, do know that these are speeches in secret;
which how they will be justified against the commands of Christ (come out of
her my people) belongs to another place to consider. For the purpose we have
now in hand, I dare not but account these the people of God, though they live
very dangerously under the captivity of Babylon, as did Daniel, Mordecay,
Hester, Nehemiah, and Ezra, and many Jews more, notwithstanding both Cyrus
Commission and the Prophets Command to depart.

This point may give some light in a Question that is on foot among learned and
good men at this day, Whether the Church of Rome be a true Church or no, where
I think surely if the matter be rightly declared, for the terms, there will
remain no question. As thus, whether Babylon pretending to be the Church of
Rome, yea the Catholic Church, be so or not, or this, Whether the people of
Christ that are under the captivity be a true Church or no, either of both
ways declare in these terms, and the matter will be soon resolved.

still Object, Though there be a people of God, yet they can be no true Church,
for they have no Priesthood which is necessary to the Constitution of a Church,
As Saint Cyprian describes it, Plebs sacerdoti adunata, Epistola 6 9.
people joined to their priest, They have no Priesthood being by the very form
of their Ordidination Sacrificers for the quick and the dead.

I answer, under correction of better judgments, they have the Ministry of
Reconciliation by the Commission which is given at their Ordination; being the
same which our Savior left in his Church, John 20.23.
Whose sins ye remit they are remitted, whose sins ye retain they are
retained.

As for the other power to sacrifice, if it be any otherwise then celebrating
the Commemoration of Christ's sacrifice once offered upon the Cross, It is no
part of the Priesthood or Ministry of the New Testament, But as superfluous
additions thereunto, which yet works not to the destruction of that which is
lawfully conferred otherwise. This Doctrine I know not how it can offend any,
unless it be in being too Charitable, and that I am sure is a good fault, and
serves well for a sure mark of Christ's sheep, And has very good opportunity to
help Christ's people out of Babel: John 13.35.
by this says he, shall men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Charity
one to another; But they call us Heretics, miscreants, Dogs, etc. and
persecute us with more deadly hatred then Jews and Turks, yea, this is
Babylon, and perhaps some of Gods People in it that are misinformed of us. Thus
did Saul for a while, yet a chosen vessel to bear Christ's Name over the world.
But let us maintain our Charity to them as we are wont to bear with the
weakness of our friends or children, when in hot Fevers or Plurisies they
miscal us. Let us remember if they be Christ's people, how little loving soever
they be to us, they must be our beloved Brethren, and this of the Persons.

Now let us see their duty. It is the Duty of those people of Christ to come
out of Babylon; that is (as we have already showed) the Obedience of the
present Roman Monarchy, And for this, the very authority of Christ's Voice from
Heaven should suffice: For his sheep hear his voice. But if that be yet
doubted, whether the Papal Monarchy, be Babylon, let us for the present set
aside the mystical Arguments from this place, and all other Prophetical
Circumstances. And let the matter be tried by plainer Arguments, at the Bar of
Reason out of the common Principles of Christian Doctrine, as thus, John 5.39.
Luke 11.52. 1 Cor. 14. Matthew 28.20. Jer. 17.5. Romans 6.9.
Where the use of Christ's Word is forbidden to his people, where they lay away
the Key of Knowledge, and Gods Worship is without understanding in an unknown
tongue where Christ's Sacraments are corrupted and maimed: where Divine worship
is communicated to Creatures, where Christ's Glorious Body is defended to be
torn not only with the teeth of the faithful, but also of faithless men, yea
of Rats and Mice, where besides a number of other superstitions, the effects of
Christ's blood, are communicated to Purgatory fire, to Saint Francis frock, and
the Carmilites scapular, where the sole infallible interpretation, of
Scripture, decission of Crntroversies, last resolution of our Faith, is placed
in the breast of one man, who may be without true Faith and sound Knowledge of
Religion or moral honesty it self, where the Doctrine is maintained as
Catholic, that the Pope is Vice God, Monarch of the Christian World,
Almighty, that he can Depose Princes, and Expose them to their subjects to be
killed, Command the Angels, with many more like blasphemies; From this place
and society Christ's people are to depart and separate themselves; But the
present Roman Monarchy is such, The conclusion follows undeniable, Go out of
her my People.

I crave leave to answer on Objection that may be made by flesh and blood, to
be retentive to keep Gods people from harkening to this voice of Christ; and is
used for a motive to draw more also to the Obedience of Rome, Gods people, (of
which number I hope I am one) may be saved; nay, which is more cannot perish,
why should I then be so solicitous, if salvation may be had there; on the
contrary they deny that you have either Church or salvation; Therefore it is
the safest course, by the Opinion of both sides, to continue there still.

I answer; This is not the discourse of Christ's sheep who make the hearing of
his Voice, and doing of his Will, a higher end then their own salvation: but
well may become the mouth of those deceivers that would seduce them.

ye shall not surely die: The reason and rule of Obedience is not the avoiding
of hell fire, or the attaining of bliss of Heaven, but the doing of the Will of
God.

Babylon; yet it is attained with great difficulty, and as it were through the
fire. As the Apostle speaks of those builders which foolishly lay upon the
precious foundation of Christ, the hay, straw, and stubble of men's Traditions:
And there is again a large entrance, to be afforded into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2 Peter 1.11.
If the graces of Gods Spirit abound in us and make us not barren and
unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ.

ignorance, so that it be not wilful and affected may have some pardon, but to
hold the Truth of God in unrighteousness, as all do that receive not the love
of the Truth, and knowing how they which commit such things are worthy of
death, yet do the same and favor those that do them.

wrath of God from heaven is revealed against such, Romans 1.18.31. Even the
danger of temporal punishment threatened to the sins of Rome is not to be
neglected.

Eternal punishments in Hell are not so great an evil as is the offense of God,
and partaking of sin.

Sophisme of Satan is in all other temptations to be answered; Thou may do
this and yet be saved being of the number of Christ's people, for David, Peter,
and others, although they did such things, yet found pardon and salvation, so
here. Nay, I will not adventure Gods wrath, I have other sins enough to
answer for, My Conscience is more then a thousand witnesses: 2 John 8.
I will not buy repentance so dear, and loose the things I have gotten.

Now should I come to the Motives from the Danger of sin and of partaking in
punishment. But the handling of these would require a long time: let me rather
make some Application of that which has been said already. And First and most
properly to those that this Scripture most concerns and is directed unto: The
People of God holden in the Captivity of the Roman Babylon; But alas they
are not here, for this is one part of their Captivity, that they are kept, not
only from hearing the voice of the Servants of Christ, or of Saint John the
beloved Disciple, but of himself speaking here from Heaven; And they are so
contented, what remedy may there be for those that are thus bewitched, Unless
you (My L. Ls. and Brethren) will be contented to become Faithful Feoffees in
trust, to convey this Voice and Message of Christ unto them: and by my request
you shall be pleased to do it, with a great deal of Love. As this President
of our Lord himself does lead you as to Brethren, and, as you hope, faithful
People, loath to sin against him, desirous to please him in all things; Tell
them then, that it is acknowledged by their own Doctors: That Rome is
Babylon, and it is averred, that this is the present Papal Monarchy, that out
of this they must depart by the Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ's own Voice,
under pain of being accessory to all her sins, and liable to all her
punishments, wish them to use the Liberty to read the holy Scriptures, and to
come out of the blind Obedience of Men's Precepts and Traditions; be pleased to
tell them further, that others may have some Color of Excuse, that live in
such places where they may not discover themselves without danger of the loss
of their Goods, Honor or Life, they may do it here, not only with safety,
but with Reputation and profit, entreat them to beware least they make
themselves extremely Culpable, not only of partaking with the former
Idolatries, Extortions, Massacres, Powder Treasons, and King killings of that
bloody City, but the new detestable Doctrines, Derogatory to the blood of
Christ which moderate men even of her own Subjects detest. But which she for
fear it should discontent her own Creatures, and devoted Darlings will not
disavow: O if they would fear the plagues of Babylon, and that of all others
the fearfullest: Blindness of mind, and strong Delusions to believe Lies, 2
These. 2.11.
that they may be damned that believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: But you hope better things of them, accompanying Salvation;
and this Message of our Lord Jesus Christ if you will be pleased to deliver,
accompanying it with those General and common goods of Charity and Meekeness,
Integrity, good Example, and the special furtherance, which your Callings and
Places in State, Church or Family can give it, doubtless to Christ's people,
will not be uneffectual.

Blessed be God that has long ago stirred up the Spirits of our Princes, Ezra
1.1.
like Cyrus to give liberty to Gods People to go out of Babylon, Chap 6.3. and
7.12.
And to give large Patents, with Darius, and Artaxerxes, for the building of
the Temple and establishing the Service of God.

And blessed be God, and his Majesty that has sent us another Nehemiah, Neh.
2.18
to build up the walls of Jerusalem, and to procure that the Portion of the
Levites should be given them. Give me leave (Right Honorable) to put you in
mind, Chapter 10.37. and 13.10.
that this also belongs to your Care, to Cooperate with Christ in bringing
his People out of the Romish Captivity; And if to help away a poor Captive out
of Turkey has been Honorable to some Public Ministers: What shall it be to
help to the enlargeing of so many thousand souls out of the bondage of Men's
Traditions, and gaining to his Majesty so many entire Subjects, your wisdom
(my Lord) is such, as it needs not to be advised; and your Zeal as it needs
not to be stirred up: yet pardon me one word, for the purpose of helping
Christ's People out of Babylon.

They are called by himself often in Scripture, His Sheep; and verily, as in
many other, so in this they are like to Sheep; which being Cooped up in a
narrow Pent, though they find some Pleasure, and the Passage be set open, are
not forward to come out; unless they be put on, but strain Courtesy, which
should begin, yet when they are once out with a Joyful friske they Exult in
their Freedom, yea, and when a few of the foremost lead, the rest follow; I
shall not need to make Application: Do according to your wisdom in your
place, and Christ whose Work it is shall be with you, and further your
endeavors.

The like I say unto you the rest of my Lords, Fathers, and Brethren help your
Friends, Followers, and Tenants out of Babylon, what you may in your places,
you have the Examples, of Abraham, Joshua, Cernelius praised in Scripture for
propagating the Knowledge and Fear of God in their Families and Commands with
the report of Gods accepting it, and rewarding it, And this to the use of
others.

But shall you not carry away something for your selves also; Yes verily, take
to your selves this Voice of our Savior, Come out of Babylon; you will say we
have done it already, God be thanked we are good Christians, good Protestants,
some of us Preachers and that call up on others to come out of, 2 Cor. 5.2.
Babylon; But if Saint Paul prayed the Converted Corinthians to be reconciled
to God. And Saint John writing to Believers, sets down the record of God
touching his Son, 1 John 5.13.
That they might believe in the Name of the Son of God; why may not I Exhort in
Christ's Name and words, even those that are come out of Babylon, to come out of
her, Qui monet ut facias, etc. He that persuades another to that which he does
already, in persuading incourageth him, and puts him on in his performance, but
if there be any yet unresolved, and halting or hanging between two; (as the
people did in Elias time) That present their bodies at such meetings as this
is, 1 Kings 18.21.
when their hearts are perhaps at Rome; or no where; If any in some points
rightly informed and cleared, in others doubtful, to such Christ speaks, Come
out of her my People, press on by prayer, Conference, reading, (If Christ's
Voice be to be heard) If Rome be Babylon, Come out of her.

And let it be spoken with as little offense as it is delight, We that seem to
be the forwardest in Reformatino, are not yet so come out of Babylon, as we
have not many shameful Badges of her Captivity, witness her Impropriations,
being indeed plain Church-robberie, devised to maintain her Colonies of idle
and irregular Regulars, Idle to the Church and State, Zealous and Pragmatical
to support and defend her power pomp and pride, by whom they subsisted, witness
her Dispensations or dissipations rather, of all Canonical Orders; bearing down
all with her Non obstante, her Symoniacal and Sacrilegious Venality of Holy
things, her manifold Extortions in the Exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictiction, which we have not wholly banished: Let each of us therefore
account it as spoken to himself, (Come out of her my People.)

In this Journey let us not trouble and cast stumbling blocks before Gods
People, that are ready to come out or hinder one another with Dissentions in
matters either inexplicable, or unprofitable: let it have some pardon: If some
be even so forward in flying from Babylon, as they fear to go back, to take
their own goods for haste and let it not be blamed or uncharitably censured, if
some come in the Rear, and would leave none of Christ's People behind them: No
man reaches his hand to another whom he would lift out of a Ditch, but he
stoops to him. Our ends immediate are not the same, but yet they meet in one
final intention; The one hates Babylon, and the other loves and pitties Christ's
People: There the one believes the Angel that cast the Millstone into the Sea;
in the end of this Chap. with that word ( so shall Babylon rise no more.) The
other fear the threatening of our Savior against such as scandalize any of the
little ones believing in him, that it is better for such a one to have a
Millstone hanged upon his neck, and be cast into the Sea himself:

Finally, let us all beseech our Lord Jesus Christ to give us Wisdom and
opportunity to further his work and to give success unto the same himself, to
hasten the judgment of Babylon, to bring his People out of this bondage, that
we with them and all his Saints in the Church Triumphant May there upon sing a
joyful Hallelujah, Matthew. 18.6.
as is expressed in the next Chapter.

Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto the LORD our GOD, Amen.
Halleluiah.
A Confirmation of the Judgment of these two most Reverend and learned Bishops
in this particular, and the vindication of it, from the aspersion of Novelty or
Singularity, from some grounds out of the Ancient Fathers; the continued
Suffrages of learned men in successive ages, and the most eminent Bishops of
England and Ireland of later years: occasioned to be the more large by the
Censure which Doctor Heylene (in his late book) gives the Primate, and the
Articles of Ireland for it.
Fathers, who lived before that defection or Apostasy, whch was to preceed, and
prepare the ways for the man of sin. (2 These. 2, 3.) there could not be
expected from them, any such direct application, unless they had a Spirit of
Prophecy themselves; Rome was in the Primitive times a pure Church, and the
least infected with Arianisme, and other heresies which then abounded in the
Eastern parts; being rather a receptacle of such as were banished thence by
that persecution; so that it must have been a Prophetic pen that should then
have affirmed, that righteous City should become an harlot.

It Is true, there might be a conception of that man of sin; but till his birth,
there could be no judgment given of him, iniquity was breeding but in a
mystery (verse the 8.) like the child in the womb, which the Mother of it,
cannot then be assured, but it may prove an abortive; and harlots use to keep
their conceptions close and undiscerned, till they are forced to discover them.
Now this being thus in the conceiving and producing of that wicked one; the
silence of the Fathers, as to so early a sentence, (whatsoever they might
suspect) is not to be wondered at. Diseases may be gathering in the body, when
neither the party himself is sensible, nor the most skillful Physician can
discern of the event; fire may be kindling in the house, but the next
neighbors do not cry out of it, till it be smelt; or flame forth to their
view: And so there might be some such distempers, and strange fire, smothering
in the Church of God for some 100's of years; but till it brake out, ye could
not expect the Fathers of those ages, could take any notice of it; at least,
digito monstrare, and dicier hic est.

Daniel in the Old; shut and sealed up, till the Time of the fulfilling;
according to that of Saint Augustine; Prophetias impleri citius quam intelligi;
that prophesies are fulfilled before they are understood; agreeing with that
(Rev. 1.3.) blessed is he that reads and understands, for the time is at hand;
It Is the speech of Irenaeus Omnes prophetiae priusquam habent efficaciam,
aenigmata sunt hominibus, sed cum venerit tempus, and evene^it quod prophetat^m
est, habent ^ quidam d^^ c^^rtam ex^^si^^ (...) etc.
All prophesies before they are fulfilled, are riddles unto men; but as soon as
the time is come, and the thing prophesied is come to pass, they have a clear
and certain exposition, our apprehension conceives no further then our
experience reaches unto. That old Adage, Veritas est temporis filia, truth is
the daughter of time, has its place here, and in this sense, the day shall
declare it; and therefore Andraeas Caesariensis, in his Commentary upon the
Revelation, speaking of Babylon, and who should be meant by it, though he had
his suspicions, as living near the time of the revealing of it; yet suspended
his direct application, only saying that the Accuratam calculi notitiam, tempus
and experientia revelabit vigilantibus.
accurate knowledge of the person, time, and experience will reveal it to the
diligent observers. What our Savior said of John the Baptist, for his
knowledge of some mysteries foretold in the old Testament, and living after the
Prophets, That he was greater then they, and the least of the Ministers of the
Gospel by surviving him, to be greater then he; so is it in this sense
appliable, to the afterages of the Fathers, who lived to see the fulfilling,
what is foretold of this subject by Saint Paul in the Thessalonians, and Saint
John in the Revelations; Which is according to the judgment of Bishop Andrews
in his Tortura Torti, page 186. where having fully applied that of Revel. 17.
and 18. to the Sea of Rome, he adds this Minime vero mirum, si ista quae dixi
tam vel claram, vel certam in scriptis patrum interpraetationem non habeant:
Operabatur enim modo mysterium tum iniquitatis. Signatus adhuc liber erat hujus
prophetiae. Verissimum autem verbum est, aenigma esse prophetiam omnem, cum
nondum completa est, ut quamvis prisci illi omni genere Charismatum, vitae vero
sanctimonia longo nos intervallo supererarint, mirari tam^n non debeat quis, si
illis tum non adeo explicata omnia suerint quam nobis per gratiam Dei jam sunt,
quiconsummatam jam prophetiam illam quotidie oculis usurpamus. page 186.
But it is no wonder, those things which I have said, have not so clear or
certain an interpretation in the writings of the Fathers; for it was then a
mystery of iniquity; which wrought, the book of this prophecy was as yet
sealed up; And it is a most true speech, every prophecy is a riddle, while
it is not fulfilled. And though those Ancients very much excelled us in all
manner of gifts, and specially in the holiness of life, yet no man has cause
to wonder, that all these things did not seem so clear to them, as by the grace
of God they are now to us, who do see this prophecy now consummated daily
before our eyes.

Certainly, while Rome continued in its purity, the Fathers of that age, might
well have wondered with great admiration, as Saint John himself did, and look
upon it as incredulous, that it should have degenerated into that pride,
Idolatry, Murder, and become the Mother of all abominations, etc. even as we
would at this day, if the like should be foretold, of England, which has been
so famous for Religion, in being a shelter for such as have been persecuted by
the Sea of Rome, abounded with writers against it, and the chief Church of the
reformed Religion, in opposition to Popery. I say if any should take upon him a
spirit of prophecy, in averring it should in time be an advancer of Popery,
and be utterly overrun with it, and become a persecutor of such as should
oppose the errors of it; the sink of Heresy, Schism, and profaneness,
etc. would not we who now live, be as far from believeing the report, as Hazael
was at what was told him by the Prophet concerning himself.

which may be accounted as foundations, whereupon to build this application the
more firmly; being (as Bishop Andrews says) a wonder they should see so much,
looking on these things only, quasi per transennam.

Tertullian, who lived about 400 years before the Emperor, was cast out of
Rome, in the Exposition of that (2 These. 2.9.) and now ye know what
withholds, or who lets. verse 7. he who now lets, will let till he be
taken out of the way, says this; Quis nisi Romanus Status, cujus abscessio in
december Reges dispersa, Antichristum superinducet, and tunc revelabitur iniquus.
Who can this be, but the Roman Empire, whose removal out of Rome, being
dispersed into 10 Kingdoms, must usher in Antichrist, and then shall the
wicked one be revealed; what he says in his Apology for the Christians to the
Emperor Severus, who was afraid of the multiplying of them, as Pharaoh was of
the Israelites in Egypt, has bin touched already in the former Treatises,
where the principal argument against any such fear is this. viz. The
Christianis necessitatem incumbere orandi pro Imperatoribus, etiam pro omni
statu Imperii, rebusque Romany; quod vim maximam universo orbi imminentem
accerbitates horrendas comminentem Romani Imperii commeatu scimus retardari
Apol. c. 32. Commeatum dicere solet Tertullianus, spatium temporis
praescriptum, etc. Vid. Downham Episc. Derens. de Antichristo. lib. 2.
Christians have need to pray for the Emperor, and even for the whole State of
the Empire, and the Roman affairs, in regard we know the greatest mischief
hanging over the whole world, threatening horrible and bitter things, to be
retarded by the continuance of the Roman Empire: which being compared with the
former exposition, must be meant in the same sense, and is so applied by Bishop
Abbot (demonstrat. Antichristi. n. 92.)

Cyril Hierosolymitanus, and Ambrose say the like upon the same place, (2 These.
2.) Then shall that wicked one be revealed, viz. cum completa fuerint tempora
Romani Imperii; post defectum Romani regni appariturum, etc. i. e. he shall
appear after the failing of the Roman Empire, for, as long as that stands, he
dares not appear. Saint Chrysostom upon the same (...), etc. id est, Imperium
Romanum, quando e medio sublatum fuerit; tunc venit ille, etc. and vacantem
Imperii principatum invadet and tentabit ad se rapere, and hominum, and Del
Imperium.
this can be no other then the Roman Empire, for as long as that stands, he
dares not show himself, but upon the vacancy of that, he shall attempt to take
to himself both the power of God and man, which how it fits the Papacy, may
easily be discerned; Saint Jerome has much to this purpose in diverse places.
In his answer to the 11. q. ad Algasiam, expounding that passage, ye know who
lets, etc. remember what I told you when I was with you, etc. he says Non
vult aperte dicere. Romanum Imperium destruendum, quia tum adversum
Christianos, rabiem concitasset persecutionis.
he could not openly name the Roman Emperor, lest it should have caused a
cruel persecution against the Christians (who imagined their Empire to have
been without end) and referres them to what they had from him by word of mouth;
And indeed there was none but the Roman Empire, that could then either have
let, or hindered the man of sin from that presumptuous tyranny, or that the
Apostle had cause to be cautious in naming, for fear of raising that
molestation of the Christians. And in his Epistle ad Gaudentium; hearing that
Rome was taken by he Goths and Vandals, and saw the Western Empire declining,
he was looking for the man of sin to have sprung up in his room, at least,
expected his birth then; So accordingly Saint Augustine, in his twentieth book
de Civitate Dei, cap. 19. makes it to be a matter out of doubt, (nullus
ambigit) that the successor to the Emperor in Rome, shall be the man of sin:
The same says (Donec de medio fiat,) donec regnum quod nunc tenet de medi^
auferat^r: hoc de Imperio Romano dictum est and propterea Paulum non id aperte
scribere voluisse, ne calumniam incurrat, quod Romano Imperio male optaverit.
Primasius and (...), tenet) intelligit (...), quod prohibet, vel impedimento
est; quidnam autem est illud, nisi Romanum Imperium, etc. nisi enim hoc
selvetur, iste non veniet, etc.
Oecumenius upon the place, as Theophilact (who usually follows Saint
Chrysostom:) unto which diverse more might be added. But by this ye see the
consent of the Fathers to the first 400 years for the time and place of
revealing him; That though some lived 200 years, others 400. before the
Emperor was cast out of Rome; yet they believed it should be: and though it
cannot be expected they should directly name the person before he was in being;
yet that Rome must be the place, and that he that should succeed the Roman
Emperor, in it must be the person, they agree in. So much for clearing it from
the aspersion of Novelty.

2. Now secondly, to take off the aspersion of singularity, for which there are
a multitude of votes this way, of such writers who lived after the Emperor was
put out of Rome, and the Bishop of Rome had succeeded him, viz. after the 600
years after Christ. It would be endless to relate the Authors, who have given
their testimony both in the exposition, and application of that of the 2
Thessalonians 2. to the Sea of Rome; Baronius himself acknowledges in the
general, that there was not an age, but some learned man or other appeared in
it accordingly, and even some of their own Communion. And about a thousand
years after Christ, when the man of sin was come to the height, according to
the description of him, foretold by Saint Paul, there were abundance. Avent
Annal. Boior. l. 5. p. 455.
Aventinus, who was one of their own) tells us in his Annals, there were many
of the German Bishops and Pastors in Gregory the seventh's time, that preached
it throughout Germany, applying the whole prophecy of Saint Paul to the Bishop
of Rome. Ibid. p. 470.
Qui titulo Christi, negotium Antichristi agitat, who under the title of
Christ, does the work of Antichrist. Nay, says he, Plerique omnes boni, justi,
ingenui, Imperium Antichristi coepisse, eo tempore cernebant. i. e. that all
good men and ingenuous, for the most part discerned it at that time.

A. 1100. a Bishop of Florence so publicly averred it, Antichristum advenisse,
and in Ecclesia dominari; That the Bishop of Rome Paschalis the second ( an.
1105.) was feign to convocate a Council at Florence, to silence him. Eberhardus
Archiepiscopus Salisburiensis in Germany, in a great meeting of Bishops,
applies to the then Bishop of Rome, Gregory the seventh, diverse passages in 2
These. 2. among which he has this speech, speaking of the Bishop of Rome.
Perditus ille homo, quem Antichristum vocare solent, in cujus front scriptum
est; Deus sum, errare non possum, in Templo Dei sedet; i. e. That wicked one,
whom they use to call Antichrist, (it seems it was a common Title given in
those days to him as now) in whose forehead is written, I am God, I cannot
err, he sits in the Temple of God, etc. And applies diverse of the passages of
the Revelation, 17. and 18. accordingly, Imperator vana appellatio and sola
umbra est, Reges december pariter existunt, qui Romanum quondam imperium partiti
sunt, etc. December Cornua (id quod D. Augustino incredibile visum est) Romanas
provincias possident, etc. i. e. See, the Emperor is a vain title, a mere
shadow. Ten Kings have parted the Roman Empire among them, signified by the ten
horns (which seemed incredible to Saint Augustine) Turks, Greeks, Egypt,
Afric, Spain, France, England, Germany, Sicely, Italy, etc. Avent. Annal.
lib. 7. 547.

Honorius Augustadunensis Ad ca^cem 2. Tom. Auctarii. Bibliothec. Edit. Paris.
1620.
in anno 1120. applies the prophecy of the Beast, and Babylon in the
Revelation to Rome, and the Pope. Bernardus Cluniacensis calls the Pope the
King of Babylon, Joachimus Abbas Vide Rog. Hoveden.
in Richard the first's time, ( anno 1190.) set forth his Theses, and
maintained publicly, Antichristum jam natum esse in civitate Romana, and in
Sede Apostolica sublimatum. i. e. Antichrist to be now born in the City of
Rome, and promoted in the Apostolic See. Johannis Sarisburiensis a Monk ( anno
1150.) did the like. Matthew. Paris.
Richard Grosthead that learned, pious, and eminent Bishop of Lincoln; anno
1253. made an excellent Oration to that purpose, a little before his death,
Papam esse Antichristum, and the last words of men are the more memorable.
Gulielmus Ockam, anno 1350. wrote to Clement the sixth, and publicly charged
that See with Heresy and Antichristianisme.

Franciscus Petrarcha, An. 1347. in Epist. 18. etc. applies the prophecy of
the Babilonish harlot to Rome, not Heathen, but Papal, the then Court of Rome
in these words; Tu es, famosa dicam, an infamis, meretrix, fornicata cum
Regibus Terrae, illa equidem ipsa es, quam in spiritu sacer vidit Evangelista,
illa eadem inquam es, and non alia, sedens super aquas multas, (i. e.) Thou art
the famous, should I say or infamous harlot, which have committed fornication
with the Kings of the Earth; thou art the very same which in the spirit the
holy Evangelist saw (i. e. John,) thou art I say the same, and not another,
sitting upon many waters, etc.

Besides, throughout these ages, from the year 1100. how many were there of
those, whom the Sea of Rome Non defuerant etiam in omnibus terris numerosi
piorum coetus, qui toto soluti Satanae tempore bellum Antichristo indixerunt:
cujusmodi erant, quos Papistae (cum primum sectae authorem a quo
denominarentur, invenire non possent) a quodam Petro Waldo Lugdunensi
Waldenfium and pauperum Lugdunensium nomina, indiderunt. Usserius Arch. Armach.
de Eccles. Christ. success. and stat. p. 150.
called Waldenses, whom Reynerus confesses to have filled France, Spain,
Italy, and most of those Western parts; they with one mouth declared
accordingly, thousands of them suffering death by that See, upon that account,
whom we find then in most points consenting with us, and declaring against most
of the errors of the Church of Rome: being guiltless of those scandals put
upon them by Sanders, Coccius, and specially F. Parsons, which are fully
cleared by the late Archbishop of Armagh, in his book de Eccles. Christi.
Success. and statu. p. 159. even by the testimony of their own Authors; their
witness agreeing not together. For John Wickleiffe our Countryman, one of great
learning and piety, it is known sufficiently to have bin his judgment and
declaration, as those succeeding him, Johannes Purveius, John Hus, Savanorola,
and diverse others, long before Luthers time, after which, it was more generally
received in the reformed Churches, and the most learned men of each, whom time
would fail me, so much as to name. Only as we have given you the votes of our
own countryman and others, while they lived under the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome, so let me add the votes of the most eminent of our English Bishops,
since the withdrawing our selves from him, that it may the rather appear, that
the judgment of the Primate concurres with the rest of his brethren before him.

Bishop Jewel that learned Bishop of Sarishury, in his Exposition of the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, cap. 2. is very large in the application
of the whole prophecy, to the Sea of Rome, as that of the vision of Saint John
concerning Babylon, p. 373. etc. Concludes that Antichrist, shall not be a Jew
but a Christian, not a King, but a Bishop, and a holy Father, and should wear
a Mitre. For on whom (says he) should an Army of Priests attend (as Gregory
the great a Bishop of Rome prophesied of Antichrist) but upon a Bishop, and an
universal Bishop, at least one so claiming that universality; see his
recollection of the whole: page 319. wondering any man should doubt of it; it is
so apparent. And what he says, p. 279. viz. that he knew what he should speak,
would be ill taken of many, such affection they bear to him, whom the Apostle
deciphers to be Antichrist (though I shall say nothing, but what, the holy
scriptures, and learned writings of the Fathers have left unto us, and which
the Church of God has at this time proved to be true) will be found I fear
also in many of this age, whose inclinations are too much declared in the
defense of that See, in this particular.

Bishop Abbot one of his successors, Bishop of Sarisbury) in that book of his
called Antichristi demonstratio, which were his Lectures at Oxford, is as full
also. Wherein at his entrance, having spoken of the name of Antichrist, and
given some descriptiption of him, he adds these words; All which are most
fitly to be applied to him, Haec vero notatio nominis Antichristi, si illam
integram acciptamus quadrat in illum optime, quem esse verum illum Antichristum
(Deo juvante) demonstrabimus: Romanum dico Pontificem, qui se esse caput
Ecclesiae Christi, Christi vicem implere gloriatur.
whom (with Gods assistance) we shall demonstrate to be the very Antichrist, I
say the Bishop of Rome, who arrogates unto himself, to be the head of the
Church of Christ, and his Vicegerent, etc. and p. 92. wonders at the blindness
of men, like Owls at noon day, not to see it accordingly.

Archbishop Whitgift in his defense of the Answer to the Admonition, often
applies the Title of Antichrist to the Bishop of Rome, as a thing taken for
granted. See Tract. 8. p. 349. where having spoken much of him before, he thus
concludes. I know that those Sects and Heresies gave strength unto Antichrist,
and at the length were one special means of placing him in his throne, even
as also I am persuaded that he works as effectually at this day by your
stirs and contentions, whereby he has and will more prevail against this
Church of England, then by any other means whatsoever. Therefore it behooves you
to take heed how you divide the Army of Christ, which should unanimiter, fight
against that Antichrist. That he means the Sea of Rome none can doubt.

Whosoever shall read Bishop Andrews his Tortura Torti, cannot but conceive his
judgment to be the same, Where he has many of the observations, which have
been mentioned already from the situation on seven hills, and the 7 head
governments. And p. 183. upon the grant on both sides that Babylon is Rome; De
eo tantum nobis lis erit jam quanam illa ibi Roma Babylon, aut Roma quo tempore
Babylon esse coeperit; Cui rei tot ibi circumstantias adhibet S. Johannes, vix
ut in ea errare cuiquam contingat. Quae enim Babylon ibi, eadem meretrix magna
dicitur, etc. Edoctum autem ibi se dicit Johannes a spiritu de rebus quae
ventura essent. Quod si jam Romam ibi (quo tu sensu vis) designavit, nihil
venturum edocuit spiritus; Ethnica enim tum Roma in Auge erat vel maxim.
Propheticus vero is liber totus haberi solet, etc. nimis autem illa misella tum
prophetia foret, si praediceret fore, ut persequeretur R^ma Christianos vidit
vero hoc priusquam in Pathmos relegatus esset, etc. p. 183, 184. and p. 185. De
ea Roma quae veneficiis seducit, quae agnum specie refert, scriptam tamen in
front blasphemiam, in Templo Dei sedet, cujus merces hominum animae; quam
december Reges igne concrematuri sunt ad perniciem sempiternam; quae per pseudo
prophetam suam vim habet signa faciendi. Vere a Torto dicitur Romam Christianam
perditam non iri: Non certe sed illam Antichristianam scilicet, etc.
he states the question for the time, and resolves it cannot be Rome Ethnic,
for then it had been no prophecy, it being at that time a persecutor of the
Christians, and a shedder of the blood of the Saints, which Saint John then had
the experience of himself, with diverse other arguments from her enchantments,
manner of destruction, making merchandise of souls, the persons which shall
burn her, which could not agree to Heathen Rome; Adding to be the same beast,
which has horns like the lamb, sits in the Temple (or Church) of God, exalts
himself above all that is called God, one that was not in being in Saint John's
time, pretends to to the working of miracles; and so concludes, that though
Rome Christian may not go into perdition, yet Rome Antichristian shall, which
has been drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the Martyrs of Jesus, etc.

Bishop Bilson in his book of the difference, between Christian subjection, and
unchristian Rebellion, delivers his judgment often accordingly, as a matter
out of controversy, affirming the Tyranny of Rome to be the power of
darkness, and kingdom of Antichrist, applying the pride of the Papacy, to
that of the man of sin, exalting himself in the Temple of God. 2 Thessal. 2. It
was, says he, the ancient device and drift of Antichrist, to make himself
mighty: when it was first attempted by Hildebrand (Greg. 7.) and now colored
by the Papists, with the name of Religion. p. 527. 817. etc.

Bishop Hall, that elegant and pious Bishop of Norwich, has much to this
purpose, dispersed through his works. ( No peace with Rome, Sect. 1.) Look on
the face of the Roman Church, she is Gods and ours, look on the back, she is
quite contrary Antichristian. Sect. 22. shall we ever grow to that height of
madness, as to come from the Standard of God to the tents of the Roman
Antichrist. The heavens shall pass away by a change, Rome by a destruction,
not a change. (The Honor of the married Clergy) Were it not for this opinion
(i. e. the forbidding it) the Church of Rome would want one evident brand of
her Antichristianisme. (Sect. 15.) Speaking of a Popish Priest; Well does it
become the son of that Babylonish strumpet, the lips drenched in the cup of
those fornications, etc. and abundance of the like, might be produced.

Bishop Downham, the learned Bishop of Derry in Ireland, (from whose mouth I
have heard sufficiently that way) in his book entitled Papa Antichristus, is
the most large of any we have yet named, dividing his discourse into the
description of the place and person, and the designation of the time, out of
the 2 Thessalonians. 2. and Revelat. 17. and all directly applied by him to the Sea of
Rome.

Bishop Morton, that famous and Reverend Bishop of Durham, (coetaneous with the
former) and yet living, has much of this in diverse parts of his works.

Bishop Davenant, the eminent Bishop of Sarisbury, and professor of Divinity at
Cambridge, has often declared his judgment accordingly, in his Determinations
page 24. Pontifex Maximus Antichristianam suam superbiam, etc. audacia plusquam
Antichristiana, etc. Vniversalem Papae jurisdictionem in totam Ecclesiam, non
esse jure divino, sed usurpatione Antichristiana.

Bishop Prideaux, in his Lectures says the like often, specially in that de
Antichristo, that he cannot be the Turk, but the Pope, etc, Unto which Bishops
might be added, the votes of many other learned orthodox and Episcopal men,
whose judgments have been declared accordingly: As that learned Professor of
Divinity, Doctor Samuel Ward, in his Lectures and Determinations at Cambridge,
lately printed: specially in those three questions, Romana Ecclesia est
Idololatrica; Apostasia a Paulo praedicta, est adimpleta; Romana Ecclesia est
schismatica, i. e. 1. The Roman Church is Idolatrous. 2. The Apostasy foretold
by Saint Paul, is fulfilled. 3. The Roman Church is schismatic. Thus
concluding in relation to the Sea of Rome. Haec scilicet est illa Babylon, quae
in cord suo dicit sedeo regina, sola sum, and non est praeter me. i. e. This
is that Babylon which says in her heart, I sit as a Queen, I am only, and
there is none besides me. And who knows not (till of later years) how both
the Universities in their public disputations, and determinations, abounded in
their conclusions accordingly.

I shall only add the judgment of that meek and judicious man, Mr. Hooker,
see his Treatise of Justification, Sect. 10. God has spoken by his Angel from
heaven to his people concerning Babylon, (by Babylon we understand the Church
of Rome) Go out of her my people, that ye be not partaker of her plagues, he
expounds the going out of her to be specially meant, out of Popish
superstitions and heresies, calling the maintainers of them Popish Heretics,
and by plagues, not only temporal but eternal. Sect. 20. compares the Pope to
Jeroboam, Rome to Samaria, that played the Harlot, etc. Sect. 27. speaking of
the Bishop of Rome, and the Church of Rome, adds this. As Frenzy, though it
take away the use of reason, does notwithstanding prove them reasonable
creatures which have it, because none can be frantic but they, so
Antichristianity being the bane and plain overthrow of Christianity, may
nevertheless argue the Church wherein Antichrist sits to be christian. Sect.
57. God did in all ages keep his elect from worshipping the Beast, and from
receiving his mark in their foreheads; he has and will preserve them from
receiving any deadly wound at the hands of the man of sin, whose deceit has
prevailed over none unto death, but only such as never loved the truth, but
took pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 Thessal. 2 Sect. 35. speaking of Christ's
mercy to the worst of men upon their repentance, says thus; if a Pope,
stripped of usurped power, Antichrist converted, penitent, and lying prostrate
at the foot of Christ, etc. shall I think Christ will spurn at him. In his
Sermon on Saint Jude, Sect. 14. He calls the Pope the man of sin, and son of
perdition, who has fawned upon the Kings and Princes of the earth, and by
spiritual consenage proclaiming sale of Pardons, etc. has taken the children
of the Noblest families, and made them his Cardinals, built Seminaries; and
hereby as at this day, the man of sin wars against us, etc. with the cup of
whose deadly abominations, this Jeroboam of whom we speak, has made the earth
so drunk, that it has reeled under us, etc. Now of whom the Prophet speaks
this; whether of the Bishop of Rome, or some other man, needs no further
resolution, and so much for Mr. Hooker.

And whether or no, those of the Remonstrants are of a contrary judgment
(which some call the Arminian party) it is apparent, Arminius himself consented
with the aforesaid Bishops and Authors, These. 31. De Pontifice Romano, and
praecipuis qui ipsi attribuuntur titulis, S. 12. Adversarii porro Dei, and
Antichristi nomen ipsi competere evidentissima ratione monstratur. Prius enim
illi Apostolus tribuit, quum appellat illum homi nem peccati filium
perditionis; adversarium and efferentem se supra vel contra omne id quod
dicitur Deus aut (...); ita ut in templo Dei, tanquam Deus sedeat, prae se
ferens se esse Deum: qui ex collapso Imperio Romano exurget, ejusque vacantem
dignitatem, occupabat; haec enim de Pontifice Romano sola intelligenda esse,
and intelligi posse asserimus. Antichristi vero nomen illi competet
excellentissime, sive particula (...) oppositionem, sive unius rei pro altera
substitutionem, vel legitime factam aut per vim and fraudem, etc. significat.
S. 13. i. e. Omni instrumentorum Satanicorum genere usus est sophistica
hypocrisi, mendaciis, aequivocationibus, per^^dia, perjuriis, violentia,
veneno, armis; adeo ut merito dici possit^, bestiae illi formidabili quae
Pardo, Vrso, Leoni, similis est, and qua Romanum Imperium significatum est,
successisse, etc. Faxit Deus ut Ecclesia ab Antichristi fraudibus and Tyrannide
liberetur; Religiosae sapientiae est, Curiam Romanam, ab Ecclesia in qua
Pontifex sedeat interstinguere, etc.
in his 31. Theol. disput. entitled: Of the Bishop of Rome, and of the chief
Titles which are attributed unto him. Wherein after the rejection of the title
given unto him by his favorites as blasphemous, and asserting his deserts of
others, viz. the false Prophet (Revel. 19.20. cap. 16.23. cap. 12.14.) Which
did wonders before the beast, out of whose mouth three impure spirits came
forth; The overthrower and destroyer of the Church in matters of faith and
worship, and raising of divisions between Princes and their subjects. S. 12. he
asserts the name of Antichrist, most evidently to belong unto him: for the
Apostle gives it unto him (2 Thessal. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.) where he there calls
him, the man of sin, the son of perdition, that opposes and exalts himself
above, or against all that is called God or worship, sitting in the Temple of
God, and saying he is God; who upon the fall of the Roman Empire, should rise
up in his stead; and take his vacant dignity. That these (says he) are to be
understood of the Bishop of Rome, and are to be understood of him only; we do
affirm. And for the name of Antichrist, that most specially it is appliable to
him, whether (...) be understood by way of opposition to Christ, a pretended
substitution, or a subordination in his stead, etc. Sect. 13. He has made use
of all sorts of instruments, hypocrisies, lies, equivocations, treacheries,
perjuries, poison, force, and arms; that he may well be said to have succeeded
that beast, like to a Leopard, a Bear, and a Lion. Revel. 13.2. by which the
Roman Empire is signified, whose Image he bare; and brought it to pass,
whosoever would not worship the image of the beast, should be put to death,
etc. and concludes with a prayer, that God would grant; that the Church might
be delivered from the fraud and tyranny of Antichrist. And so much for the
judgment of Arminius.

Now, that the Divines of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, do generally
accord also in it; need not to be inserted being sufficiently known, such as
Daneus, Franciscus-Junius, Tilenus, Morneus, Viguierus, Rivetus, Chamerus, etc.
The Reformed Church of France, have made it one of their Articles in their
confession, as ye may find in Chamier (Paustrat. Cathol. Tom. 2. lib. 16. de
Antichristo cap. 1.) where he gives you the words of the 31. Article conceived
in Synodo Papinsensi, owned by him to be the confession of the reformed
Churches in France, in these words following.

Cum Episcopus Romanus, erecta sibi in orb Christiano Monarchia. dominationem
usurpet in omnes Ecelesias and pastores, in tantam erectus superbiam, (1.) ut
Deum se dicat, [Can. satis did. 96. lib. 1. Sacrar. Cerem. cap. de
Benedictiensis.] velitq^e (2.) adorari, [Concil. Lateran. ult. Sess. 1.3.9, 10]
omnemque tribui sibi potestatem in coelo and in terra, res Ecclesiasticas omnes
disponat; articulos fidei definiat: Scripturarum authoritatem, atque
interpretationem a se esse, dicat, animarum mercaturam exerceat; vota
juramentaque dispenset, novo: Dei cultus, instituat; Tum in civilibus,
legitimam magistrat^um authoritatem pedibus su^igat, datis, ablatis, transl^ti^
Imperiis. Credimus atque asserimus esse verum illum and G^rmanum Antichrist^m,
perditionis filium, pronunciatum in verbo Dei: Meretricem purpuratam insidentem
septem montibus in magna civitate; quae regnum obtinebat in Reges terrae:
Expectamusque dum Dominus prout promisit ac jam coepit, conficiens eum spiritu
oris sui, tandem illustri adventu suo aboleat.
Whereas the Bishop of Rome having erected to himself a Monarchy over the
Christian world, does usurp a Dominion over all Churches and Pastors; and has
rose to such a height of pride, as to call himself (1.) God, will be (2.)
adored, and all power to be given him in heaven and earth; disposes of all
Ecclesiastical things; defines Articles of Faith, says the authority of the
Scripture, and the interpretation of it, to be from him; makes Merchandise of
souls, dispenses with vows and oaths; institutes new worships of God. As
also in civil affairs, treads upon the lawful authority of the Magistrate, in
giving, taking away, translating of Empires; We do believe, and assert him to
be the very proper Antichrist, son of perdition foretold in the word of God,
the scarlet harlot, sitting on seven mountains in the great city; which has
obtained a rule over the Kings of the earth: and we do expect when the Lord
according to his promise, and as he has begun, will destroy him with the
spirit of his mouth, and at length abolish with the brightness of his coming.

And Maresius in his preface to the Answer of Hugo Grotius his Observations
upon the 2 These. 2. and other places gives us the like Article, agreed upon in
Synodo Nationali Gapensi. Anno 1604. which has very little or no difference
from the former, and so needless to be repeated. Which do fully agree with the
Synod of Ireland, by the Archbishops and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy
there in the Convocation holden at Dublin, 1615. number. 80. viz. The Bishop of
Rome is so far from being the supreme head of the Universal Church of Christ,
that his works and doctrine, do plainly discovar him to be the man of sin,
foretold in holy Scripture, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his
mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his coming.

The former Synod may possibly be undervalued with some, by bearing the name of
Presbyterian; but seeing it consents with the latter which was Episcopal, why
may it not be an introduction to a further moderation between them in other
matters. And it stands but with justice; that if Presbytery have had a hand in
the match of Episcopacy with Popery, (which seems to have been without consent
of parties) it should upon this evidence be the more forward in assisting in
the divorce.

Now in regard that abovesaid Article of the Church of Ireland, confirmed by
the judgment of the late Primate, has been objected against by Doctor Heylene
for that (as he says) there is no such doctrine in the book of Articles, nor
in any public monument, or record of the Church of England, but the contrary
rather. I shall cite some passages out of the book of Homilies, which are
approved by the book of Articles, as a larger declaration of the Doctrine of
the Church of England, and leave it to the Readers judgment.

In the third part of the Sermon of good works, speaking against the Popish
singing of Trentals, and the superstitious Orders in the Church of Rome,
introduced to serve the Papacy, these words are as follows: viz. Honor be to
God, who did put light in the heart of King Henry the eighth; to put away all
such superstitions, and Pharisaical Sects, by Antichrist invented, etc. which
can be meant of no other, but the Sea of Rome; by the words not long after.
viz. Let us rehearse some other kinds of Papistical superstitions, etc. In the
second part of the Sermon of salvation, speaking against the Popish opinion of
justification by works; these words are as follows. Justification is not the
office of man, but of God; for man cannot make himself righteous by his own
works, neither in part, nor in the whole, for that were the greatest arrogance
and presumption of man, that Antichrist could set up against God, etc. and so
accounts it not the doctrine of a Christian, that sets forth Christ's glory, but
of him that is an adversary to Christ, and his Gospel; and a setter forth of
man's vainglory, etc.. And that passage in the third part of the Sermon against
the peril of Idolatry, p. 69. I leave to the Readers judgment, if the sense
can be understood, otherwise then of the Sea of Rome, in these words following.
viz. Now concerning (popish) excessive decking of Images and Idols, with
painting, gilding, adorning with precious vestures, pearls and stones, what is
it else but for the further provocation and inticement to spiritual
fornication; whieh the Idolatrous Church, understands well enough. For she
being indeed, not only an harlot (as the Scripture calls her) but also a foul,
filthy, old harlot (for she is indeed of ancient years) and understanding her
lack of nature and true beauty, and great lothsomnesse, which of her self she
has; she does (after the custom of such harlots) paint her self, and deck and
tire her self with gold, pearl, stone, and all kind of precious jewels, that
she shining with the outward beauty and glory of them, may please the foolish
fantasy of fond lovers, and so entice them to spiritual fornication with her.
Who if they saw her (I will not say naked) but in simple apparel, would abhor
her, as the foulest, and filthiest harlot that ever was seen; According as
appears by the description of the garnishing of the great strumpet of all
strumpets, the Mother of whoredoms, set forth by Saint John in his Revelation
(Apoc. 17.) who by her glory provoked the Princes of the earth, to commit
whoredom with her, etc. and it follows, page 77. And it is not enough to
deck Idols, but at the last, come in the Priests themselves likewise decked
with gold and pearl, and with a solemn pace, they pass forth before these
golden puppets, and fall down to the ground on their marrow-bones before these
honorable Idols, and then rising up again, offer up odours and incense to
them: etc. He that reads the whole, cannot judge of it to be meant otherwise,
then of the Papacy.

And if the fifth and sixth part of the Sermon against wilful rebellion be
viewed, there will be found such a large narration of the pride and ambition of
the Bishop of Rome, that there will not need any further help to an application
of that 2 These. 2. to him, which thus begins, viz. After that ambition and
desire of dominion, entered once into Ecclesiastical Ministers, whose greatness
(after the doctrine and the example of our Savior) should chiefly stand in
humbling themselves; And that the Bishop of Rome did by intolerable ambition
challenge, not only to be the head of all the Church dispersed throughout the
world, but also to be Lord of all kingdoms of the world, as is expressly set
forth in the book of his own Canon-Lawes. He became at once the spoyler and
destroyer both of the Church, which is the kingdom of our Savior Christ, and
of the Christian Empire, and all Christian kingdoms, as an universal Tyrant
over all. The particulars of whose actions to that end, are there related. viz.
The Bishop of Rome stirring up subjects to rebel against their Sovereign
Lords, even the Son against the Father, pronouncing such Schismatics, and
persecuting them, who refused to acknowledge his abovesaid challenge of
supreme authority over them; discharging them from their oath of fidelity made
not only to the Emperor, but to other Kings and Princes throughout
Christendom. The most cruel and bloody wars raised amongst Christian Princes
of all kingdoms: the horrible murder of infinite thousands of Christian men,
being slain by Christians, the loss of so many great Cities, Countries,
Dominions, and Kingdoms, sometimes possessed by Christians in Asia, Afric,
and Europe; The miserable fall of the Empire, and Church of Greece, sometime
the most flourishing part of Christendom, into the hands of the Turks; The
lamentable diminishing, decay and ruin of Christian Religion: and all by the
practice and procurement of the Bishop of Rome chiefly, which is in the
Histories and Chronicles written by the Bishop of Rome 's own favorites and
friends to be seen, claiming also to have diverse Princes and Kings to their
vassals, liege men, and subjects, etc. behaving themselves more like Kings and
Emperors in all things, then remained like Priests, Bishops and
Ecclesiastical; or, (as they would be called) spiritual persons in any one
thing at all, etc. and so concludes with an exhortation of all good subjects,
knowing those the special instruments of the Devil, to the stirring up of all
Rebellion, to avoid and flee them.

Is not this a full description of the pride of that man of sin. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
in exalting himself above all Kings and Princes, and that son of perdition
(being understood actively:) who was the cause of the perdition, or loss of so
many thousands of Christian men's lives.

And in the sixth part of the same Sermon, you have a more particular relation
of the Bishop of Rome 's bloodshed, (according to the description of that
Harlot, Revel. 17.6.) in these words. viz. And as these ambitious usurpers the
Bishops of Rome, have overflowed all Italy and Germany with streams of
Christian blood, shed by the rebellions of ignorant subjects against their
natural Lords and Emperors, whom they have stirred thereunto by false
pretenses: so is there no Country in Christendom, which by the like means of
false pretenses, has not been over-sprinkled with the blood of subjects, by
rebellion against their natural Sovereigns, stirred up by the same Bishops of
Rome, etc. And in conclusion, as the Sermon often entitles the Bishops of Rome,
unsatiable wolfes, and their Adherents, Romish greedy wolfes; so does it in
special call the Sea of Rome, the Babylonicall beast, in these words; viz. The
Bishop of Rome understanding the bruit blindness, ignorance and superstition
of the English in King John's time, and how much they were inclined to worship
the Babilonical beast of Rome, and to fear all his threatenings, and causeless
curses, he abused them thus, etc.

I have transcribed these the more largely out of the Book of Homilies, both
that such as have rejected them as Popish may see their error, and those that
now so much favor the Sea of Rome, that they call such language railing, may
have their mouths stopped, being it is from the mouth of the Church of England
in her Homilies, which is a good warrant for her sons to say after her.

Let the Reader judge whether these passages do not confirm, rather then
contradict, or be contrary (as Doctor Heylene says) to the Articles of
Ireland, and the Primates judgment of the Sea of Rome.

I shall only allege one passage more, and that is in the conclusion of the
second part of the Sermon for Whit-sunday. viz. Wicked and naught were the
Popes and Prelates of Rome for the most part, as does well appear by the story
of their lives, and therefore worthily accounted among the number of false
Prophets, and false Christ's, which deceived the world a long while, the Lord
defend us from their Tyranny and pride, that they may never enter into this
Vineyard again; but that they may be utterly confounded, and put to flight in
all parts of the world. And he of his great mercy so work, that the Gospel of
his Son may be truly preached to the beating down of sin, death, the Pope, the
Devil, and all the kingdom of Antichrist, etc.

This latter passage is only produced by Doctor Heylene, as an evidence, that
the Pope is not declared to be Antichrist, either here, or any where else, in
the book of Articles or Homilies, which how the force of it can be extended so
far beyond its own sphere, does not appear: For his principal argument, that
he finds here the Pope and Antichrist, distinguished as much as the Devil and
the Pope. It Is answered, The destinction here is not between the Pope and
Antichrist, but between him and his Antichristian kingdom; for the words are
not, the Pope, the Devil, and Antichrist, but, and all the kingdom of
Antichrist. That Universality (all) comprehending both head and members. And if
we should allow a Duumvirate, (in the Pope and Devil) for the government of
that kingdom, one as the visible head, the other as the invisible, or the one
him that reigns; the other by whom he receives power so to do: (Rev. 13.4.)
both might be thus owned without infringing the title of either: Howsoever it is
not the arguings from such niceties in the placing of words (which the book of
Homilies, are not strict in, as might be showed in several instances) but the
observation of the scope and drift of the place, the comparing it with others,
the concurrance of the judgment of several eminent Bishops afore-cited, (who
cannot be imagined to declare against the doctrine of it) will carry the sense
of it accordingly, with the judicious and unbiassed Reader: and so much for the
book of Homilies.

Unto which I might also add the opinion of some learned men, liveing and
dying within the outward communion of the Church of Rome. To instance only in
Padrio Paulo, who wrote the History of the Council of Trent: After whose
stabbing by an Emissarie from Rome, many of the Clergy of Venice, brake out
into that application, calling that See Impura, insana, superba, meretrix,
pestis, ac lues mortalium; and her ruin to be expected, according to Rvelat.
18. Some of the verses are printed at the end of the Interdict writ by Padrio
Paulo, and translated out of Italian into Latin by Bishop Bedell, who was often
an ear-witnsse when he lived in those parts of diverse learned men, producing
that of 2 These. 2. the man of sin who exalts himself above all, etc. and shall
sit in the Temple of God, etc. both as an argument that the Bishop of Rome is
the person sitting; and that those who are oppressed, and tyrannised over by
him, are Calvin. Epist. 104. Under the Papacy some Church, remains, a Church
crazed, forlorn, mistaken, yet some Church, his reason, is. Antichrist must
sit in the Temple of God, which is cited by Mr. Hooker. Instit. Sect. 27.

Gehazi a man though overrun with a Leprosy, and to be shunned as unclean.

Antichristianismus est morbus in Christianismo.


the Church of God, and from thence rejecting any application to Mahumet, and
fixing it upon the Bishop of Rome, some questioning, Is it he, or shall we look
for another; others saying, (as the Jews of the blind man) This is one very
like him, but many, This is he? Which puts me in mind of the confident
assertion of Cardinal Perron, who affirms that whosoever maintains this
wicked doctrine, that Popes have no power to put Kings by their supreme
thrones, they teach men to believe that there has not been any Church for many
ages past, and that indeed the Church is the very Synagogue of Antichrist; and
the Pope in good consequence to be the Antichrist; which Oration the Cardinal
himself addressed to King James, upon a supposition, it might have converted
him. See King James Preface, to the defense of the right of Kings The words of
the Cardinal are these. viz. by this Article ( i. e. that Kings are not
deposable by the Pope) we are cast headlong into a manifest heresy, as binding
us to confess, that for many ages past, the Catholic Church has been
banished out of the whole world; for if the Champions of the doctrine contrary
to this Article, do hold an impious and detestable opinion, contrary to Gods
word, then doubtless the Pope for so many hundred years expired, has not been
the head of the Church, but an heretic, and the Antichrist. p. 453.
.

Now whereas both sides (as you have heard) are agreed upon the place, to be
Rome (which checks the fancy of such as would apply it to Constantinople, or
to persons that never were at either) I shall only confirm it out of one of the
Popish Writers, who has quoted most of the rest (to save the Reader any
farther labor, if he has a mind to satisfy himself in it) it is Tyrinus the
Jesuit, in his Commentary upon the 17. Revelat. Where comparing the vision of
the beast with 7 heads, and 10 horns, cap. 13. with that of the 17. and
granting it to be meant of the same, (like Pharaoh's dreams, the seven ears
of corn, and the seven kine were both one) then, for the vision there; he
says by the great harlot, whose Mystical name is Babylon, cannot possibly be
meant of any other then Rome: it is plain (says he) she sits upon The usual
style of the Sybils (...). i. e. Roma septicollis in Plutarch, and Varro, a
Festival among the Romans called dies septem montium. Tertul. in his time calls
the people of Rome, the people of the seven hills, Ipsam vernaculam septem
collium plebem convenio. Apol. l. 35.
seven Mountains, and raigns over the Kings of the earth, which can agree to no
other city besides. And urges that place of Saint Peter (2 Peter 5.13.) the
Church which is at Babylon salutes you, to be meant of Rome (for as Bishop
Andrews observes, Ita avide avent homines hii Petrum Romae, alicubi in
Scriptura reperire, potius ut Babylonem velint esse Romam, ubi Petrus fuit,
quam ut Petrus Romae non fuerit. Valde enim illorum interest ad caput fidei ut
Petrus Romae credatur fuisse, etc. Tort. Torti. p 183.
rather then Peter should not be at Rome (which they have slender or no proofs
for out of Scripture, but yet is of great consequence to the Papacy) they will
confess it to be Babylon.

And, though 2 These. 2. he says the Temple of God, where the man of sin
sits, is Jerusalem; yet here his seat of Babylon must be Rome; Produces the
express Testimonies of the Fathers for it, Lactantius, Tertullian, Jerome,
Ambrose, Augustine, etc. and (says he) even our heretics meaning the
Protestant Writers (for after the same way he calls heresy; so worship we the
God of our Fathers) and in conclusion, produces most of his own associates,
the Writers of the Church of Rome, Sixtus Senensis, Bellarmine, Bozius, Zuarez,
Salmeran, Alcazar, unto which I may add, Baronius, Certissimum esse nomine
Babylonis Romam urbem significari. Anno 45. n. 18.
It Is most certain (says he) by the name of Babylon, the City of Rome is
signified.

Ribera in his Commentary upon it, says the same, adding also Huic convenient
aptissime omnia atque illud inprimis, quod alii convenire non potest; optime
etiam convenisset^, quod in eodem capite, and mulier quam vidisti est civitas
magna, quae habet regnum super reges terrae.
all things fitly agree to it, and somewhat that can be applied to no other
then Rome, as The seven heads are seven hills, and, The City which reigns
over the Kings of the earth.

Viegus says, Existimamus nomine Babylonis Romanam urbem significari in hoc
Apocalypsis opere, ubi toties Babylon nominatur, etc. omnia quae his capitibus
memorantur, in Romanam urbem aptissime quadrant,
We conceive, wheresover Babylon is mentioned in the Revelation, it signifies
Rome, and all things in the 17. and 18. Revel. very fitly appliable to it.

According to that of Johannes in Apocalypsi Passim Romam vocat Babylonem ut
Tertullianus annotavit, and aperte colligitur ex cap. 17. Apocalyp. ubi dicitur
Babylon magna sedere supra septem montes and habere imperium super reges
terrae; nec enim alia civitas est, quae Johannis tempore imperium habuerat
super reges terrae quam Roma; and notissimum est supra septem colles Romam
aedificatam esse. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 13.
Bellarmine (formerly quoted) and Lessius Roma a Johanne vocatur Babylon, quia
Babylon fuit figura Romae, quibus verbis apt designat Romam.
who says, John calls Rome Babylon, as being the figure of Rome, and by his
words he elearly shows it to be Rome, All which may well give a check to the
Novelty of some among our selves, who without the ballast of sound or sollid
judgment, have been carried about with the winds; of other imaginations, which
yet I could easily believe, some Popish Agents (upon second thoughts) have had
their hands in, to get it driven off the further from their shore; Though how
far not-withstanding our aforesaid Writers, and these are from an agreement,
in the abovesaid, has been made apparent in the two former Treatises; viz.
Those of the Popish Writers, would have it Rome, while it was Heathen, and the
fall to be with the Heathen Empire; and ours, Rome since it became Christian,
and the fall yet to come. Those of ours, who in defense of our Ordination from
the scandal of Antichristian, by its passing through the Sea of Rome, have
endeavored to take off that See, from being such in the aforementioned places;
as it was a needless refuge, so the cure is worse then the disease.

And those, who have with the Popish Writers, yielded the man of sin, and the
son of perdition, by that manner of expression; to be meant of a single person,
were not forced to it; for it may notwithstanding be meant of a successive race
of men, in one place and government; non de unitate individui, sed speciei,
according to the like instance in Scripture. Esa. 23.15. Tire shall be
forgotten 70 years, according to the days of one King. (i. e.) of one Kingdom,
viz. The Empire of the Caldeans, which after Nebuchadnezar and his successors
Evelmerodach and Belshazar, was given to the Medes and Persians, and Dan. 7.17.
the 4 beasts are 4 Kings, (i. e.) the four successive Empires, the Chaldean,
Persian, Grecian, Roman, as the seven Kings do accordingly, ( Rev. 17.) signify
seven successive governments, and so the man of sin, may be meant accordingly,
not of a particular man, but of a race of men succeeding in that Tyranny; as
when they say, the Pope is the Head of the Church, they do not limit it to this
or that particular Pope, but mean it of the continued succession from S. Peter.

Neither is the Article (...), of any more force for the limitation of it to
one man there, (2 These. 2.) then it is in Luke 4.4. Man lives not by bread
only, or Mark 2.27. The Sabbath was not made for man: both includeing all
mankind; or, 2 Timothy 3. ult. That the man of God may be perfect, etc. which is
not confined to one, but takes in all the Ministry. For which; or any thing
else, concerning this controversy (which I shall not enter into) I shall
refer the Reader to Bishop Downham, Bishop Jewel, Bishop Abbot, with others,
from whom he may receive full satisfaction. Only thus much in confirmation of
the Judgment of those two Reverend and eminent Bishops, and a Vindication of
it, from the aspersion of singularity, and novelty.

THE Late Archbishop of ARMAGH'S judgment, of the sense of that place. Heb.
6.2. Of laying on of hands, enlarged and defended.
THis and the former verse may well be called the Apostles Catechism,
consisting of six Principles, or Fundamentals of Christian doctrine (as they
are called in the former verse) of which this is the Method.

The two former concern this life, viz. Repentance from good works, and Faith
toward God. The two latter, the end of this life, viz. the Resurrection of the
dead, and eternal judgment. The two middle, viz. the doctrine of Baptismes,
and laying on of hands, are in relation to both, either as Conduits to convey
the two former into us, or as Chariots to carry us with comfort to the two
latter, That they are Fundamental Principles, as well as the other, cannot be
doubted of, by their being placed in the midst of them; only the question is,
what is meant by them.

First, by the doctrine of Baptismes, I conceive is meant the Sacrament of
Baptism, which is often joined with the two former Fundamentals; By our
Savior; with Faith, he that believes and is baptized. Mark 16.16. By Saint
Peter with repentance, Acts 2.38. Repent, and be baptized.

The objection against it, is, that it is Baptismes in the plural number.

Answ. First the Syriack reads it in the singular number, and Saint Augustine
in his book de fide and operibus, renders it; Lavacri doctrina, the doctrine of
the font, from whence Ribera gathers there might be some Ancient Greek Copies
accordingly.

But secondly, it is an Enallage Numeri, the plural for the singular, as Genes.
8.4. The Ark rested on the Mountains of Arrarat, which Tremelius by way of
explanation, renders uno montium; Matthew. 27.44. Thieves, for one of them only.
Luke 23.39. So accordingly, The Israelites having made one, golden Calfe, said,
these are thy Gods O Israel, etc. ( Exodus 32.4.) and verse 33. Moses says,
they have made themselves Gods of Gold, yet verse 24. it is called by Aaron,
This Calfe; Drusius has diverse of the like, as Sepulchers, for Sepulcher,
Cities, for City, etc. and so here Baptismes, for Baptism.

I am not ignorant of other conjectures by learned men, signifying a threefold
Baptism. Sanguinis, flaminis, fluminis, or, the thrice dipping, for
sprinkling; the number of perons coming to be baptized; the two several times
in the year, in the Ancient Church set apart for it, Easter and Pentecost,
called dies baptismatum, which is Calvin's and Bezaes; or implying the double
act in it, the inward Baptism of Christ, and outward baptism of John; that is
to say, the Ministers; which are Mr. Answ. t^ Rhemist. Comment. on N. T upon
this place.
Cartwrights words upon the place, who also says, by a trope both Sacraments
are here noted under one, but I conceive, that which we first gave, is the
best; And it is observable, that the Apostle says, the doctrine of Baptismes,
it is not the absolute want of it, when it cannot be had, but the rejecting of
the doctrine of it that damnes. It Is possible that some of those three thousand
converted by Saint Peter's Sermon, might have died before they could come to the
water, and yet be saved; but if they had rejected the doctrine of it, when they
were bad to be baptized, like the Pharisees rejecting the Counsel of God
against themselves, or like Naman who despised the river Jordan, I question it.

A well ordered discipline is the ornament of the Church, but upon the
confession and doctrine of Saint Peter, it was to be founded, in which sense
the Apostles and Prophets in their doctrines are called the foundation of it;
Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone, and (as some think) is the sense of
that, Revel. 21.14. that in the twelve foundations were the names of the twelve
Apostles, in relation to their doctrinals; So much for that.

Now the next is, the doctrine of laying on of hands. Here is the great
question, What is meant by it? That it is a Fundamental, cannot be denied; if
Baptism be one, this must be another: see in the verse how like twins they are
borne and bred under the same roof, And it is observable, that in the Greek it
is (...) in the plural number, doctrines referring to both.

In the search of several Authors, I find these two expositions, most worthy
of consideration.

The first is, Confirmation of children after Baptism, which has somewhat of
Antiquity for it, most of the Writers of the Church of Rome incline that way,
and even Calvin is of that mind also, and in his Comment upon this place,
stands much for it, and wishes it had not been laid aside; hodie retinenda
pura institutio, superstitio autem corrigenda; and produces this custom of
confirming of children in the Primitive times, to be an argument they were then
baptized, but I conceive it cannot be the sense, for this reason; because it is
not a Fundamental, and hard to prove, it was then (like Baptism and the rest)
esteemed to be of a necessary use and belief in the Catholic Church, according
to that of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Magnopere curandum est ut id teneamus, quod
ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est, hoc est enim vere and
proprie Catholicum. contr. haeresin. cap. 3.
That is, to be held for a Catholic verity, which has been believed every
where, always, and by all; And our Church says, children baptized, have all
things necessary to their salvation; The Papists that hold it to be a
Sacrament, do not say it is a Fundamental, and when it was observed by us, we
took it to be only an ancient laudable custom of the Church, and whether it
was so in Saint Paul's time, in the Church of the Hebrews, it does not appear.

The second Exposition is, that it should be meant an ordained Ministry, which
clearly in Saint Paul's time we find was wont to be by laying on of hands. This
is Pareus his sense upon this place. It was (says he) Initialis doctrina de
ministerio Ecclesiae quia tum ordinabantur per impositionem manuum.
an initial doctrine, concerning the Ministry of the Church then ordained by
imposition of hands; Totum munus Propheticum. etc.
Gualterus in his Comment upon this place, says, In this is contained the
whole function of Preachers, etc. designed unto it by imposition of hands: But
none so full as Mr. Cartwright in his answer to the Rhemists upon this place,
his words are these. viz. By the imposition of hands the Apostle means no
Sacrament, much less confirmation, after Baptism; but by a trope or borrowed
speech, the Ministers of the Church; upon the which hands were laid, which
appears in that whosoever believes not; that there ought to be a Ministry
by order (or Ordination) to teach and govern the Church; overthrows
Christianity, whereas if Confirmation of children were a Sacrament, as it is
not; yet a man holding the rest, and denying the use of it, might
notwithstanding be saved. And some lines after, gives us summarily the sense of
this verse, viz. to be the doctrine of the Sacraments, and of the Ministry of
the Church: Ye see, in his opinion, what a dangerous thing it is, no less then
the hazard of their own salvation, to lay aside an ordained Ministry, or to
deny the doctrine of it, which men now frequently presume.

And it is observable, the argument which he uses, he produces as a Maxim
then in his time, taken for granted; not to be proved, but supposed; no man
then so much as questioning the necessity of it, for though there were then
diverse disputes about discipline and ceremonies, (in which this learned Author
then appeared) yet both parties esteemed alike of Ordination to be a sacred
institution, none presuming to take upon them the office of the Ministry
without it; Well, this I conceive to be the sense here of laying on of hands,
viz. That it was a Principle of the Catechism taught to Christians at their
first reception, that there was to be a successive ordination, or setting apart
of persons for the Ministry, for an authorative preaching of faith and
repentance, and administration of Sacraments, called laying on of hands from
the outward rite; as the Lords Supper, by breaking of bread; And this was the
judgment of the most Reverend and learned Father of our Church, the late
Archbishop of Armagh, which has the rather emboldned me to employ my thoughts
in the confirmation of it; and surely, if it be a fundamental, the knowledge
of the sense of it, is of a greater consequence, then to be slighted.

First, it is considerable, how well this does suit with Saint Paul's expression
elsewhere, speaking of Ordination, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God that
is in thee by the putting on of my hands, 1 Timothy 4.14. neglect not the gift
that is in thee, given thee with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery,
both thus sufficiently reconciled; Saint Paul was the principal, the Presbyters
were his assistants, according to the constitutions and custom of our Church
in Ordination. The Bishop is not to do it alone, but with the assistance of at
least three or four of the Ministers, which was after the patte^n of the
Primitive times; The injunction of Saint Paul for it, is accordingly. 2 Timothy
5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, i. e. ordain. And it is the more
observable, that all are from one and the same Apostle, it being one argument
to prove Saint Paul was the Author of this Epistle to the Hebrews, by the use
of this expression here, which is not in the Epistles of any other Apostle.

It Is true, we read of extraordinary gifts of tongues, etc. given by laying on
of hands, in the Acts, but they cannot be understood here, for they were but
temporary, and ceased, like Scaffolds, which, after the building of an house,
are taken down, but what is meant here, must be as the foundation which remains
to the last, and all falls with it, that agrees to an Ordained Ministry, which
must continue for the preaching of faith and repentance, and administration of
Sacraments to the end of the world. In which sense is that last speech of our
Savior. Matthew. 28. Lo, I am with you unto the end of the world, it cannot be
limited to the persons of the Apostles (with whose deaths those Administrations
did not expire) but must be understood collectively of the whole body of the
Ministry, then as it were in their loins, who should succeed in preaching,
and Baptism, and through whom a successive powerful assistance of the spirit,
is to be transferred in and through those, unto the worlds end. This power of
officiating, was powered on the head of the Apostles, and descends to the
skirts of their garments, in these days. And how like a fundamental,
Ordination is, may easily appear; it began at the foundation of the Church, and
was one of the first stones laid in this Edifice, and it must continue to the
last, for as the Lords Supper is to continue till the second coming of Christ,
so the Ministers of it have the same term also ( Ephesians. 4.13.) He gave some
Pastors, Teachers, etc. Till we all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the Stature of the fulness of Christ, etc.

Romans 10.15. Ye have a building of four or five stories high of several Acts
and Ministrations; but Ordination of a Ministry is the Foundation, Salvation
is at the top of this Jacobs Ladder, but Ordination at the bottom: Whosoever
will call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved, but how shall they call on
him, on whom they have not believed? how shall they believe on him, of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher, and how shall
they preach, except they be sent? etc. See, praying, believing, hearing,
preaching, and then as the foundation of all, a Mission of Preachers for that
end; what is said of the Commandments of the Law, ( James 2.) he that offends
in one, is guilty of all; such is the concatenation of the principles of the
Gospel; break one link, and all are endangered; He that renounceth his
Baptism, renounceth his Faith, into which he was baptized, even the death and
resurrection of our Savior signified by it, Colos. 2. Consider what ye do in
renouncing the Ministry by whom ye were baptized, and have believed (1 Cor.
3.5.) if any efficacy be in the Sacrament, according to the qualification and
authoritative faculty of the person officiating, see what hazard you run in
rejecting of such so ordained?

Ye know the speech of our Savior, Matthew. 23.17. He that swears by the Altar,
swears by it, and all things thereon; and is not the contrary true, he that
despises the Altar, despises not only that, but all that depend on it: If the
Ordination or Mission of the person through Gods institution, be of any
efficacy to what is officiated, I may leave the application to your selves.

Consider what ye do in a total renouncing of an ordained Ministry, as to
Baptism and believing, through whom as instrumentals, ye did partake of them;
If the foundation fall, how can the building stand: As ye see here Saint Paul
makes an ordained Ministry, a fundamental principle of Christian Religion. So
much for the sense of the Text, what is meant by laying on of hands.

Now if Ordination be a fundamental principle, hence then these 2 things may be
inferred.

1. A necessity of continuing an ordained Ministry in the Church, and the
neglect of it to be the underming of the foundation of it.

2. That Ordination is not only an internal call from God, but an external
from Man; for it is denominated here from laying on of hands.

First a necessity of continuing such a distinct Order and profession for
preaching, and other sacred Administrations; This subject would heretofore have
been accounted needless to be handled, but it is necessary and seasonable now,
there being many set against the very function, as if any man might of himself
assume it. To such I shall represent these considerations following. viz.

1. That in all ages there have been some persons set apart for such divine
Offices even before the Law, or constitution of Aaron and the Levites; as
since, see some appointed, Exodus 19.22. Let the Priests which come near to the
Lord sanctify themselves, (Chap. 24.5.) called young men of the Children of
Israel, sent of Moses, who offered the burnt offerings and sacrifice unto the
Lord, and this is usually interpreted to be the Firstborn, and that of the
principal of the families, instead of which the Levites were afterward taken,
(see Numb. 3.12.) And what a settled Priesthood there was in Moses and Solomon's
time to the Captivity; and after it upon their return; who knows not? see Mal.
2. A speech to the Priests, and for that five hundred-yeer gap betwixt the Old
Testament and the New, when the Prophets ceased, yet a Priesthood continued,
that the service of God, then was not to put to the charity of Passengers, as
beggars are by the high way, but some were appropriated to it; Jeroboam that
forsook the Temple, yet retained a Priesthood, though of his own corrupt
appointment.

Object. That of the Law was a Priesthood, but we speak of a Ministry.

Resp. 1. We stand not upon words or Titles; neither does the Apostle, for as
(2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.) he calls the Priests of the Law Ministers, and their office
a Ministration; so he implies, that the Ministers of the Gospel might have that
Title of Priests (1 Cor. 9.13.) by taking his Argument for their maintenance
from the Priests, Altar, and Temple, as they that serve at the Altar, partake
of the Altar; even so has God ordained, that those that preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel; and the name has only grown ignominious, by the
Church of Rome's retaining it, whom if by way of distinction, they had been
called by us sacrificers (as Bishop Downham observes) there had been no offense
in it. All that read the Fathers, know it is the term used by them; whose
Tractates of the Ministry are entitled De Sacerdotio.

And the Apostle makes it only a change of the Priesthood, (Hebr. 7.12.) not a
nulling of it, upon which change of a ministration, none presumed of themselves
to officiate without an Ordination; John Baptist who was the preparative voice
of the Gospel was ordained to it, and his disciples were set apart by him; our
Savior did the like in ordaining first Twelve for preaching and baptizing, and
then 72 after them, when one of the twelve was lost, no other stepped into his
place without a solemn choice of him; Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.23.
wheresoever they came and converted any nation, were careful of ordaining
Successors. Saint Paul, as his last, gives that charge to Timothy and Titus
after him, and in all Ages of the Church from the Primitive times, both in the
Greek and Latin Church, it has been observed to this day successively.

So that for such as would have no such office of a Ministry by ordination,
but all men left to themselves to officiate at their pleasure, we may say with
the Apostle (1 Cor. 11.16.) We have had no such custom, neither the Churches
of God, (or as Eliphaz to Job cap. 5.1.) call now if there be any will answer
thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn, where is there any such
President in all the reformed Churches? The Israelites would have a King as all
other nations; These are upon the contrary singularity. It Is true, the New
Jerusalem (Revel. 21.22. meant heaven, is found without a Temple and a Priest,
because Christ shall then give up his kingdom to his Father (1 Cor. 15.) i. e.
the manner of this present government by the Scepter of his word, and Seal of
Sacraments, and then God shall be all in all, but till then, a settled Ministry
must be continued.

Paul spend so much time in exhorting to a future provision for them. (1 Cor.
9. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17.) can we think it was only for himself, and such then
living, who expected Martyrdom weekly; why such large directions for the
qualification of such, as were to be ordained by his Successors, in his
Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, surely it was written for our instruction now.

conclusion must be the issue of the contrary, our Savior pitied the people,
when they were like Sheep without a Shepherd; That which is every man's work, is
no bodies: As in reason, the office of the Ministry must be weakly and
negligently done, when no persons are appointed to make it their study and
labor, so when gaps are thus opened for any person, may not Jesuits and such
lik Agents creep in under other forms, and privily bring in damnable heresies,
to the seducing of the hearers; I am loath to imagine that this should be at the
bottom of this assertion, that so with the more specious pretext, they might
take away the maintenance, as indeed one must follow the other; for if there be
no need of a settled ordained Ministry, what use of a settled means allotted for
it.

If any shall stumble at that speech often in the mouths of some, Isa. 54.13.
All thy children shall be taugbt of the Lord, he may be satisfied by this
double Answer.

1. It was fulfilled in that time of our Lord and Savior, teaching them
immediately by himself, which he expounds accordingly; ( John 6.45.) It is
written in the Prophets, they shall be all taught of God, every man therefore
that has learned of the Father, comes unto me, etc.

2. The Lord is said to teach, when he does it by a Ministry, sent by him
according to that of Jerem. 3.15. I will give you Pastors after my own heart,
that shall feed you with knowledge and understanding, etc. fulfilled under the
Gospel. And we grant, that though the proposal of the doctrine is by the
Minister, yet the illumination of the mind, and the rectifying of the heart
through it, is from God.

Object. If that of Saint Peter (1 Ephesians. 4.10.) he objected, As every man has
received the gift, so let him minister the same as good Stewards of the
manifold grace of God.

Answ. I conceive it is not meant the gift of preaching, but of Alms. The
words immediately before, are these. Use hospitality one to another without
grudging, there is the manner, and then in these words, As every one has
received the gift, so let him minister, is employed the measure of it; agreeing
with that of Saint Paul's injunction, 1 Cor. 16.2. Let every one lay by him (to
that end) as God had prospered him, etc.

That these temporal things are the gift of God, the fourth Petition of the
Lords Prayer, shows sufficiently. And that collections of these, and giving
them to the poor, is called a ministering to the Saints. See 2 Cor. 8.4. cap.
9.1. and styled grace, ( cap. 8.19.) and what other sense can there be of that
( cap. 9.8.) God is able to make all grace abound, but of temporal blessings,
as the next words show, to multiply your seed sown, and minister bread for
your food, (V. 10.) and they may be called the manifold grace or gift of God,
by the diverse sorts of them to be administered, food, clothing, relieving of the
sick, etc. according as they are distinctly remembered at the last day, ( Matthew.
25.) And are not all bountiful charitable persons, the Lords Stewards, in
dispensing these things to those of his household of Faith; so that upon these
considerations, the place appears to to be far off from any application of it
to Preaching. Indeed the next verse may be so meant. If any man speak, let him
speak as the Oracles of God, etc. but yet to be understood with this
limitation, viz. of a man ordained and constituted (as we have said) for that
end.

In a word, to allow all sorts of men to be preachers, is to make the whole
body an eye, a tongue, etc. and if so as the Apostle says, where is the
hearing, are all teachers, are all interpreters? it is an argument from the
absurdity, as if ye would expect the foot to see, the hand to speak; In Saint
Paul's days it was said, Who is sufficient for these things? and shall all
persons think themselves so now; Saint Paul bids Timothy give himself wholly to
it: i. e. to meditation, study, reading, and not to entangle himself with the
things of this world, which might take him off, and may they now meet in
tradesmen and manufactures? and the office be performed without either? Is
there not a distinction made between the Church of Ephesus, and the elders of
it, ( Acts 20.) between the Church and the Angel of it, ( Revel. 2.) which if
it be not meant of one person, the Bishop (as Ignatius styles him so about
twelve years after, which was the judgment of the Primate) yet must at least
be collectively meant of the Bishop, and the Ministry of it; Is there not a
distinction between the Saints of Philippi, Phil. 1.1.
and the Bishops and Deacons, are there not some said to be over the 1 Ep. 5.12.
Thessalonians in the Lord, and preaching and admonishing called in special,
their work, as appropriated to them, for which he charge them to know them,
and to esteem highly of them; as the like in his last charge to the Church of
the Hebrews, (cap. ult. 7.17. Obey them that have the rule over you in the
Lord, and that watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, and if
that were the special office of the ministry, then to have curam animarum;
why not now? or where does it appear, the term is expired? I conclude this
point with an observation of the several steps of our declinings, or defections
of later years; First, we were offended at some titles of the Ministry, then
at the office it self; First, at such a Ministry so ordained, then at the
ordaining of any Ministry at all. First, the solemn Assemblies in public were
forsaken, and a retreat made into corners, then the Preachers themselves
slighted, called by Solomon the Masters of Assemblies: First, a ceremony in
baptizing of Infants scrupled at, then the Baptism of Infants themselves; nay,
the Sacrament of Baptism by water, called into question also; First, the
Communion forborne, out of offense to some gesture, now the Sacrament it self
neglected, and contemned, as if we may now live above and without Ordinances,
and without any ordained Ministry to administer each, as indeed the one must
follow the other.

This is the train laid to blow us up, what Jacob said after Joseph was lost,
and Benjamin must go too; All these things are against me, may be our
application for the Church. If any thirty years agone, should have foretold
that this Garden of God should have brought forth these weeds, that such
Tenants should have so prevailed among us, he would have been by the most
religious persons of that age, taken for one that dreamed; and they ready to
have answered for their Mother Church, as Hazael did for himself, when the
Prophet told him, what evil he should be the Author of.

Let us be of moderate spirits, and not run beyond the bounds of any president
in the Primitive times, walk not in ways not cast up; (Jerem. 6.16.) enquire
for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein; be not like those
in the next words, that said, we will not walk in them; but in new ones,
according to your own fancies. Let the Tribe of Levi be purged, but let not the
physic be so strong as to destroy them. Saint Paul magnified his own office;
this is but to support it from being trodden under feet, and the end is your
good, that in these distracted times, ye might not be without leaders, so
ordained and fitted, to guide your feet in the way of peace, and so much for
the first, A necessity of an ordained Ministry.

second observation is, that Ordination is not only an internal Call of God,
but an external of man; for so it is denominated by that very act, laying on of
hands, i. e. implying the hand of God is not all in the holy frame of the heart
of the person by his spirit, requisite in every true believer, but there must
be the hands of men in the designation of him in his name also. The first was
wont to be asked, the person ordained, Book of Ordination.
viz. Whether in his heart or conscience, he found himself truly called to the
Ministry, according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ. This persuasion of
his gave a capacity, but the authority actually conferred on him, was by the
imposition of hands, Ability and faithfulness were the qualifications, but the
commission to officiate, was transferred to Timothy (2 Ephesians. 2.2.) by that
means. Ye know those two memento's of Saint Paul to him, Neglect not the gift
(1 Timothy 4.14.) Stir up the gift of God which is in thee (2 Timothy 1.16.) by the
laying on of my hands, and of the hands of the Presbytery; if it should be
asked, What is here meant by the gift, I conceive there is no necessity of
understanding it, either of gifts of ability, or saving gifts of the Spirit;
for as the former doubtless were found in Timothy before his ordination, and
the latter from his childhood, and education; (2 Epist. cap. 3.15. cap. 1.5.)
so it is a doubt if it were in the power of Timothy to transfer either of
enlightens every man that comes into the world; and to that holy Spirit who
blows when, and where it lists, but the surest sense is to take it for the
authority given him for the officiating, and exercising these abilities, and
transferring of it unto others: And in this sense I grant gifted men may
preach, and perform other ministerial acts, i. e. who with the internal have
received this external power and authority also, according to Christ's
ordinance through imposition of hands.

Indeed the word (...) is often taken for internal abilities, and it is not
improbable, but at the solemn meeting of the Church of God, both Ministry and
people, in Fasting and Prayer, (which was the injunction of our Church, and
should have been the practice) to invocate God for the assisting grace of his
spirit, to be given to the person ordained, might be prevalent for that end;
and that the receiving accordingly of ordination, might be so far operative, as
to be a confirmation of the party the more, against errors and he^esies, in the
execution of it; The falling into which may possibly be the judgment of God
upon some, who of late days have run without it, which agrees with the
observation Chemnitius makes of Origin, who neglected Orders, and fell into the
like; and at last made himself incapable of them. But I say again, that (...)
in the forenamed place, is most safely to be understood of the gift of
authority to be exercised and transferred unto others by laying on of hands.

And it is further confirmed by the many examples that do abound, our Savior
gave his Apostles not only an inward call by his Spirit, but an open verbal
call before the people; Saint Stephen, a man full of Faith and the Holy Ghost,
yet presumed not to officiate, till he had imposition of hands from them;
Beware of making your selves Ministers, our Savior did not make himself a
Priest (Heb. 5.5.) it is the blot laid on Jezabell, that she made her self a
Prophetess, Revelat. 2.20.

It Is frequent to hear an ordained Minister called Antichristian, but consider
who deserves that Title, whether those that observe the rule of Christ, and
tread in the paths of the Apostles, or such, who, without any president in
Scripture, or in primitive times, are in this a law unto themselves. And do but
think what ill issue may in the future, be of this promiscuous presumption,
upon the offices of the Ministry, what doubts it may raise in our posterity,
in receiving of Baptism, by such as cannot answer to that question By what
authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority?

One objection common in the mouths of men is, Why do you stand so much upon a
ceremony, as laying on of hands is?

Apostle calls a Principle and a Fundamental, do not you call a ceremony,
according to that which was said, to S. Peter, That which God has cleansed,
call not thou common; for which we have both Precept and Example to three
successions; Paul, and Timothy, and those that succeeded him.

2. It Is a most honorable ceremony used upon other occasions, Jacob in
blessing of Ephraim, and Manasses, Moses in constitution of Joshua, Naamans
expectation of Elias healing him, our Saviors in blessing of the children in
the Gospel, Saint Paul's at the Holy Ghosts coming upon the disciples of Ephesus
in the gift of tongues. The Prophets of Antioch, upon the separating of Paul,
and Barnabas, for a special work designed unto, as others by way of
benediction and confirmation.

institution, though, how mean soever it is to the eye, yet it must be
observed, or else water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords Supper,
may fall under the like contempt. Circumcision was a carnal ordinance, yet (
Romans 3.) the Apostle checks those who questioned the profit or virtue of it.
The wax of the Seal has little worth in it self, but by the impression
affixed to the pattent, is of great consequence to the party, the like
application may be made to imposition of hands, the Seal of Ordination.

laying on of hands be granted as we have said, the question yet remains, By
whose hands?

Answ. Doubtless not by the peoples, for it does not stand with reason, that
any can transfer that authority, which they have not, The people may be said
after a manner, to give their votes in the election, as it was the former (and
ancient) custom, that they were asked if they knew of any impediment or crime,
Book of Ordination.
for which the party ought not be received into this holy Ministry, and desired
to declare it; and upon the objecting of any, the Bishop was to surcease, till
the party accused should clear himself. The people had liberty of allegation,
for, or against the person to be ordained, but it does not follow, that
therefore they had power in constituteing and ordaining. They are the persons
to whom the Ministers are sent; can they be the Senders? they have their
mission to them; can they have their Commission from them? we are Gods
Ambassadors, not theirs, neither do ye find any power this way derived or
committed from Christ to them, As my Father sent me, so send I you, says our
Savior to his Apostles, Lo, I am with you, and so with your successors, unto
the end of the world. Saint Paul says to Timothy, Lay thou hands, etc. to
Titus, I left thee behind, that thou should ordain (be it meant collectively
of the rest of the Ministers, as assistants with him also,) but no mention of
the people in that act.

That of Numb. 8.10. the people laid their hands on the Levits, is not meant in
their consecration, but dedication, or the donation of them to be consecrated
to the Lord, instead of the first born by Moses and Aaron; It was but as
Hanna's giving up her son Samuel to Eli, to be consecrated to the service of
the Temple, or like the presentation of a person formally under the hand and
seal of the Patron to the Bishop, to be instituted or inducted; such was this
of the Levites, only a signification of their act and deed under their hands,
in giving up their whole title and interest in them, to be set apart for that
end.

Matthias his election before the people, to be an Apostle ( Acts 1.16.)
alleged by some for the power of people in Ordination.

Peter only signifies to them what they were about to do, and doing it in
their presence, as in Saint Cyprians time, it was the custom to have the
Minister ordained, praesente plebe, sub omnium oculis, etc. in the presence of
the people, before the eyes of all, etc. like Eleazar invested by Moses with
the Priests garments, on the top of the Mount in the sight of the Israelites,
but the actions in setting two apart in casting the lots, prayer, etc. were the
Apostles.

Gods by a divine suffrage, expressed by lot according to the prayer of the
Apostles to God for it, and so it makes nothing for the peoples act in
ordination: and so much for the first Question, Whose hands must be imposed?

What if the ordainers, being of the Ministry, be found not to have been of
clean hands themselves, i. e. of evil lives, is their ordination good?

personal act, but an act of office, as it is not the learning of the Judge
makes any decree valid, but his authority and commission for it; A Popish Judge
gives a just sentence in Court, his sentence is not erroneous and
Antichristian: though himself may be so; his act is good in Law: how bad soever
he is in matter of Religion, and so the act of Ordination being an act of
office is not nulled, or voided by personal defilements; It was the error of
the Donatists, to put the virtue of Ministerial acts wholly upon the holiness
of the person ministering; no, as Saint Augustine, says, a foul hand may sow
good seed.

But there is one objection more to be answered, frequently in the mouths of
men, viz. Your Orders were derived from Rome, and therefore Antichristian.

contrary inferences are against us; The Papists say we have no lawful
Ministry, because we have it not from Rome, having renounced our subjection to
that See, others among our selves argue the same, from our being deduced from
it.

immediately after the Apostles time, (which the ancientest of the British
Writers extant do not grant, but aver, that we received it from such as came
from Jerusalem hither even in Tiberius his time) it is no disparagement to us,
Gildas.
for it was then a famous Church; see Saint Paul's Epistle to it, as Ignatius
after him. But if they mean since the corruption and Apostasy of it, we may
distinguish between from and through, as between the Fountain and Conduit, we
received it from the Apostles, though running through some corrupt times of
Popery, of which, since our reformation, it savours no more, then the Fish does
of the salt water, or as the three children in the furnace, when they came out
there, was not so much as the smell of fire found upon them.

Austine the Monk sent from Rome in Gregory the great his time, about 600
years after Christ; there were then no such defilements of doctrine in it,
that it should be a scandal to us either: And yet we were not then to seek for
an ordained Ministry, there having been for many hundreds of years, before
that, a flourishing Church among us, which the Saxons whom he came to convert,
had been the persecutors and destroyers of, as Gildas tells us, so that in
that, or the former, sense, the objection is not worth the answering.

later Centuries, when that complaint of the Prophet concerning Jerusalem,
might be appliable to Rome. How is that faithful City become a harlot? it was
full of judgment, righteousness lodgeed in her; but now murderers, etc. i. e.
Since the Bishop of Rome became corrupt in doctrine and worship.

For this, first we thus answer. While we were under the tyranny of the Bishop
of Rome, it does not appear that he ordinarily usurped, more then a mandatory
nomination of the Bishop to be consecrated, which out of a blind fear of his
excommunication was assented unto, but the consecration was not by him, but
other Bishops here within our selves. And I account the ordination or
consecration to be derived from such as gave imposition of hands, not from the
mandate for them to do it; Henry the eight, and the Kings succeeding, assumed
the like power in the nomination of the person (which accordingly might not be
gainsaid:) but from thence it cannot be argued, that our ordination or
consecration was deduced from them, for the Kings mandate served not to give
power to ordain (which those Bishops had before intrinsecally annexed to their
office) but only was a warrant to apply this power to the person named in that
Mandate. Now this being all which was usurped by the Bishop of Rome, in
relation to the consecrations of our Bishops in England, when we were under the
Tyranny of the Papacy, there is as little force for our deriving our ordination
from him also. And if those Bishops of Sidon, which (as Archdeacon De
Minister. Anglican.
Mason tells us) assisted in the first consecration in Hen. 8. as in Edward the
sixth's time, were not merely Titular, but had their consecration from the
Greek Church, which is altogether a stranger to the Sea of Rome; it would take
off somewhat from the pretense of a total derivation from thence.

But still it may be objected, that we have at least received our Ordination
from such as professed the Religion of Rome.

Religion of Rome, till the Council of Trent, which determined many years
after our falling off from the Sea of Rome: The Papists ask us, Where was our
Religion before Luther? we might reply, Where was the Popish Religion before
that time. It Is true, most of those poisonous errors were sown up and down
the world before, but not collected fully into a body, and so owned and headed
by the Papacy till then. For till that time, scarce any point we hold now
against them but there were some of their own Authors who held it also. So
that to speak properly the now Romish Religion in their new Creed, with other
appurtenances, was established since our form of ordination.

2. Suppose we received our ordination from such who were corrupted with Popish
errors, yet if they retained the Fundamentalls of Christian Religion, their
ordination may be valid: those like some part of the bark of the tree uncut,
may convey the Sap from the root to the preserving of life in the branches.
What Saint Augustine says of the Donatists in some things, mecum sunt, they
concur with me; in other things they are defiled, may be applicable to the
Church of Rome, and if so, why may we not receive through them, what was of
Christ's remaining in them, without being defiled with that corrupt part which
is their own? why may not there be in this a separation of the precicious from
the vile? And in our reformation we withdrew our selves no further from her,
then she has declined from her self in the Apostles time, and from the ancient
state and condition of it then, as one says well, Nostra Ecclesia ab hodierna
Romana Ecclesia contaminata recessit, ut ad pristinam, puram, Apostolicam,
Romanam accedere posset. We forsook the present corrupted Church of Rome, that
we might be nearer a kin to the first, pure, Apostolical Roman Church in the
primitive times.

3. In a word, we do affirm that neither their corruption in opinion, or
vitiosity of life, do, or did, void it to the party ordained; none doubts of
the Baptism of our forefathers administered by those of the like in the Church
of Rome, as if there needed any reiteration, by them who survived our
reformation: neither do we renew the orders received in that Church, when any
Priest is converted, and betakes himself to our communion, and why should it be
questioned here? Let the Seal be of Silver or brass, the impression is alike
valid, if affixed by order to the deed; Parents in generation convey to the
child what is essential to humane nature, not that which is accidental. A
maimed Father begets a Son like himself, as he was before he lost his arm; as
the circumcised did, and does an uncircumcised child: the like application may
be made, to the transferring of ordination in such a wounded, diseased,
Apostatized Church, as the Roman now is, and by such corrupted persons in life
and doctrine, continuing in it; so they do observe the Sea Bishop Bedels letter
to Wadsworth, p. 157.

My defense for your Ministry is, that the form, Receive the H^ly Ghost; whose
sins ye remit, are remitted: does suciffiently comprehend the authority, etc.


essentials in ordination; other superstructures or corruption in the
ordainers, does not null it, either to the persons themselves, or successors;
which might be further manifested by the p^actice of the Church in all ages.

Law, (the Priests of which the Jewish Writers say, were consecrated by laying
on of hands) had as much cause to stand upon succession as any; yet, ye find
often, that the Priests the sons of Aaron, and the Levites had corrupted their
ways, were defiled with Idolatry in Ahaz, and Manasses time, and others, as
bad or worse then the Sea of Rome; yet after a reformation, the succession
which was by their hands was not questioned; Though the Priesthood ran through
much filth, yet retaining the essentialls of the Jewish Religion, as
circumcision, etc. they were owned of God again in a successive ministration.
See in the height of their Idolatry, when they were offering their children by
fire, unto their Idols, yet by retaining the Sacrament, and covenant of
circumcision, their children are called the Lords children, Ezekiel. 16.20. Thou
have taken thy sons which thou have borne unto me, etc. thou have slain my
children, in causing them to pass through the fire, etc.

Savior Christ's time, there was as bad a succession as ever; in the Priests,
Pharisees, Scribes, Sadduces, etc. yet as he permitted their administering of
some rites for himself; whether of circumcision, or the offering made for him
in the Temple, at the purification, after the custom of the Law, in his
infancy, so at his manifestation about 30 years after, he sends those that
were healed by him to the Priests, to offer what Moses commanded; ye see he did
not determine against the office for the personal defilements of their
Predecessors, or themselves.

Gospel, about four hundred years after our Savior Christ, was not the world
so overrun with Arrians, that it groaned under it? (as St. Jerome says,) when
they had the commands of the Pulpits, ordaining of Preachers, children were
baptized by them, men put to receive the communion of them, as Hilary and Basil
say, the Orthodox were hatched under the wings of the Arrian Priests; yet upon
a reformation, and the renouncing of that heresy, we read not of any rejecting
of the succeeding Ministers, because they were derived through such hands,
which I conceive to have been as bad as the Bishop of Rome, and his followers.
The Church then was so wise as to consider, a jewel loses not his virtue by
being delivered by a foul hand, so neither is this treasure of the Ministry to
be despised, because it has passed through some polluluted vessels to us,
which is appliable for the saving harmless our ordination, though transmitted
through the Popish defilements of some persons; so much in vindicating the
ordination of the Church of England, from the scandal of being Popish and
Antichristian, with which by some ignorant and rash people, it is frequently
aspersed.

Let me conclude with this short admonition. Be not hereafter so unworthy, as
to blurre that Ministry, with being Antichristian, by whom ye have received
the knowledge of Christ; both by their translating of the Scriptures out of the
Originalls, into your Mother Tongue for your reading, and their labor, in the
exposition of them for your understanding, by whom you and your fathers have
been baptized, and instructed; Be not such ill birds, as thus to defile your
own nests; do not side with the agents of the Bishop of Rome, in thus
detracting and lessening the reputation and esteem of them. Let them not say in
their hearts, so would we have it, nor you with your tongues, unless in your
hearts you are Romish your selves.

Is it not strange, that those who have been so great opposers of the errors of
Popery, wrote so learnedly, and fully against them, who have applied, that in
the 2 Epist of the Thessalonians, concerning the man of sin, and that of
Babylon in 17. Revel. to the Papacy, as Bishop Downham, Abbot, Jewel, and the
late eminent Primate, with diverse others; that now they should (with their very
calling and profession) be styled Popish; can we think otherwise, but that the
hand of Joab (I mean the Jesuit) is privily in it. Is it not a wonder it should
so come about, that such as have been the greatest enemies to the Sea of Rome,
should be reckoned as members, and friends of it; and thus perpetually yoked
together as twins; nay trod under foot as unsavory salt, upon that very
account, as being Episcopal. Is this a just reward of their labor? in the
defense of your profession; thus to be aspersed by you, as Absolon to Hushay,
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Certainly those of the Sea of Rome, cannot
but smile within themselves, that they have thus covertly deluded us, and so
closely taken a revenge of those their adversaries.

How true is that speech of our Savior, A Prophet is not without honor, save
in his own country; other nations, French and German, magnify the Clergy of
the Church of England; by what is transmitted over Sea in many of their works,
only despised at home as the offscouring of the world; what a preparative
this is, to the expectation of the Papists, an able learned, ordained
Ministry, having been hitherto the stop to the introduction of ignorance and
superstition, which if removed, might flow in the more easily, which God in his
mercy prevent.

And thus I have endeavored to confirm the Primates judgment upon this place,
viz. that by laying on of hands, is meant an ordained Ministry.

The Primates judgment of the Sense and Use of the Form of words in the former
Constitution, at the Ordination of Priests or Presbyters, defended, and
enlarged. viz. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou forgivest, they are
forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain, they are retained. Which as an
Appendix to the former subject, could not well be omitted.
THey are the words of our Savior, John 20.22. to the Apostles, and why they
may not be continued to their Successors, (who are to succeed in that office of
the Ministry to the end of the world,) does not yet appear; and it is possible,
that the late offense taken against them to the disuse of them, may arise from
a misapprehension of the sense of them; The Primates judgment of which I think
fit to manifest, who in all his Ordinations, constantly observed them.

They consist of two clauses.

Receive the Holy Ghost.

2. Whose sins thou forgivest, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou do
retain, they are retained.

1. For the first; (Receive the Holy Ghost) We do not here understand the
sanctifying graces of the spirit: For the Apostles had received them before, in
that they were bid by our Savior, to rejoice, that their names were written in
heaven (the evidence of which is, heaven wrote in the heart here) and had his
witness, that they had believed, and had kept his word, for whom he had also
also prayed in that sense; Sanctify them through thy truth, John 17.

And if this had been the gift, there had been no particular thing given to
them, for all that will be saved, must in some measure partake of it. Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

And though it be the testimony of a good Christian, yet it is not a sufficient
warrant for him, to take upon him the Ministry.

extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, viz. Gifts of tongues, etc. For in that
sense the Holy Ghost was not yet given, till fifty days after. viz. the Feast
of Pentecost, but this was given upon the day of his Resurrection; So that a
third sense must be had, which was the Primates, as follows.

Receive the Holy Ghost] i. e. receive Ministerial power of officiating and
dispensing those sacred Ministrations, unto which the promise of the holy
Spirit is annexed, and through which, as the Conduit-Pipes, this holy water is
conveyed; not so much meant for their own benefit, as the good of others; In
this he gave them power as the Stewards of God, to be dispensers of holy and
spiritual things, to the benefit of such, over whom the Holy Ghost had made
them overseers, which is accordingly attributed to the Elders of Ephesus, whom
S. Paul had ordained.

Mr. Hookers gloss (in his Eccles. Polit.) is accordingly; Receive the Holy
Ghost, i. e. Accipite potestatem spiritualem, receive ghostly, or spiritual
Authority, in order to the souls of men now to be committed to your charge;
And if you mark the context, their Commission is here from the blessed Trinity;
the Father, and Son, in the verse before. As my Father has sent me, so send
I you. And in this verse, a reception of Authority from the third person, the
Father sends, Matthew. 9.38. Chap. 10.20. the Son, Ephesians. 4. here the Holy
Ghost, as Acts 20.

And so more fully thus. Receive the Holy Ghost, i. e. receive Authority from
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the efficacious preaching of the Word, and
Administration of Sacraments, by and through which, the graces of the holy
spirit in repentance, faith, forgiveness of sins, and the like; are ordinarily
wrought and confirmed to the hearers, and partakers of them: yet not excluding
it from being a Prayer also, viz. that the person thus authorized, might
receive such a spiritual assistance in it.

Receive first by way of donation in the name of Christ, as to the office; and
secondly, by way of impetration, as to the efficacious spiritual assistance of
him in it, which the accustomed succeeding prayer did confirm: which as it was
in both senses frequently effectual by the mouth and hands of the Apostles, so
has it been accordingly from age to age, in and by the Ministry succeeding,
and therefore why may not the same form of words be used at their Ordination
also.

Can we think this solemn reception of the Holy Ghost, in that sense as has
been explained, was only for the benefit of that age, and withdrawn totally
again in the next.

That his being with them thus by his spiritual assistance, to the end of the
world, was to determine with the death of the Apostles; some of which, (as
Saint James, Acts 12.) were not long after; No surely, this oil poured upon
their heads, descended further then so, even to the skirts of their garments,
in these days.

The third Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, has much in
confirmation of this. In the third verse, Saint Paul styles the Minister
ordained by Christ, his Amanuensis; ye are the Epistle of Christ ministered by
us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God. Christ the
inditer, the Minister is as the hand of a ready writer; or the Spirit is as the
ink, the Minister as the pen, through which it is diffused upon the fleshly
Tables of your hearts, and by saying us, he does not appropriate it to
himself, but gives the like to Timothy ordained by him, which he continues in
the sixth verse; God has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of
the letter, but of the spirit; as he calls the Word, the sword of the spirit
(Ephesians. 6.) committed into the hands of the Ministry, so the whole office is
called the Ministration of the Spirit, v. 8. the Ministration of
righteousness, v. 9. i. e. instrumentally, be it that of Justification, or
Sanctification, by which he says, it did exceed in glory that under the law;
The shining of Moses face, the glory of the Temple, and vestments of the
Priests were glorious, but yet had no glory in this respect, by reason of the
glory which excels; for if that which is done away were glorious, how much
more that which remains, is glorious. Now wherein lies this glory, but in
being by this Ministration, the Conduits through which the Spirit is conveyed,
and received, or being ( cap. 6.1.) coworkers together with him of it, even as
the glory of the latter Temple, by the presence of Christ himself, is said to
be greater then the former, though it had types of him in a more outward
glorious luster: it is therefore called v. 18. the glass of the glory of the
Lord, by which we are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord.

Which as it rebukes the Contemners of the office of the Ministry, so it
answers that frequent objection made against the use of these words, at the
Ordination to it; viz. That the Sanctifying graces of the spirit, were
sometimes lacking both in the Ordainers transmitting, and ordained the
recipients; It is answered, the Transmission, or reception of the Holy Ghost
here, is not meant in that sense, as to the resting of it in the persons
themselves, but as the conveyers of it, for the use and benefit of others, viz.
through these Administrations, which they are now by this authorized to
perform.

And that it may be so, ye see it in Judas, who by our Saviors Commission to
him through preaching, and baptizing, was the instrument accordingly of the
transferring of it, (i. e. remission of sins, etc.) unto others, without
partaking of it himself: our Savior calls him a Devil, and a son of
perdition, but yet in this Office, the Devils were subject to him; and he the
means of dispossessing of others; like Noah's Carpenters, who were instruments
to save others, but were drowned themselves. It Is probable, Saint Paul, or some
of the Apostles ordained Hymenaeus, and Phyletus, Phygellus, Hermogenes, and
Diotrephas, but as in neither of them does there appear any sanctified grace of
the spirit, so we do not read it caused any suspension of the virtue of their
ministerial acts to the receivers, or that the Apostles gave order for any
reiteration of them; personal faults, not voyding Acts of Office; and so, why
should the like be a prejudice to it in these succeeding Ages? Receiving
supposes a gift, but it is as the giving of a sum to a Steward by his Lord,
not to his own private use, but for the dispensing of it to the family.

And to say no more, there are some learned Interpreters, do apply that
passage, 1 John Chap. 2.20. to an ordained Ministry; ye need not that any man
teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you all things, and is truth;
Eadem unctio) non potuit luculentiore testimonio Pastores and doctores ornare,
a quibus illi instituti fuerant, and quotidie adhuc instituebantur, quam quum
ipsos diceret ab ipso Spiritu Sancto doceri, and jam antea esse doctos.
Beza's words upon the place, are these; the same anointing) he could not with
a more clear Testimony have adorned the Pastors and Teachers, from whom they
were instructed, and daily as yet are; then to say they were taught by the holy
Ghost, and had bin formerly, etc.

Piscator in loc. Vnctio docet] id est, ministerium verbi (i. e.) Spiritus
Sanctus efficax per praedicationem Evangelii, quare ministerium verbi in pretio
habendum est.
Piscators words are these, The anointing teacheth] i. e. the Ministry of the
word, or the Holy Ghost efficacious by the preaching of the Gospel, wherefore
the Ministry ought to be in a great esteem with us.

Ye see they do not understand by this Unction, or anointing, signifying the
Holy Ghost, an immediate teaching, or inspiration, as by some Enthusiasme, but
immediately through the Ministry, ordained for that end; by a Metonymy (as
they say) of the Adjunct; the ointment, for the hand, which applies it, or
delivers it to you, and the teaching you all things, is meant of all things
necessary to salvation; the credenda, and agenda, which by the Ministry had
bin so fully taught them, that they needed not to be taught by Saint John again
here.

If any shall object (as it has been unto me) that of Saint Augustine, lib.
15. de Trinit. cap. 27. Quomodo ergo Deus non est qui dat Spiritum Sanctum, imo
quantus Deus est qui dat Deum? neque enim aliquis discipulorum ejus dedit
Spiritum Sanctum, orabant quippe ut veniret in eos, quibus manus imponebant,
non ipsi eum dabant, quem morem in suis praepositis etiam nunc servet Ecclesia
etc. i. e. How should not he be God who gives the Holy Ghost? nay, how great a
God who gives God? for neither any of his disciples, gave the holy Ghost; they
prayed indeed, that it might come upon those on whom they imposed hands, they
did not give it themseles; which custom the Church now observes, etc.

double giving of the Holy Ghost by our Savior, the one on earth after his
resurrection, the other from heaven after his Ascension, upon the day of
Pentecost; now in relation to the latter in those extraordinary gifts of the
spirit, the words objected have their principal application, which does not
concern that we have in hand, which is only of the former being meant of
successive ministerial authority, for the ordinary dispensing of the office.

Secondly, whereas he says, the Church has observed that custom in
imposition of hands, to pray for the persons reciving of it, has bin formerly
acknowledged to be one sense of that clause, viz. by way of impetration; Take
the gift of the spirit, pro dono infuso, so we use the words per modum
impetrationis, take it pro officio, so we use it, per modum collationis,
ministerially conferring the power of executing the office of a Minister, and
there is no contradiction, but that in the same act, there may meet a collation
of the office with authority to execute, and an impetration for the persons
receiving an assistance of the spirit in the executing of it, which, in the old
injunction immediately followed, in a prayer, for the person ordained
accordingly, so that the custom and intention of our Church, is no other then
what was in Saint Augustines time, not presuming to give the Holy Ghost in the
latter sense, (only praying it might be given of God to him) but only in the
former.

So much for opening of the first clause in ordination, Receive the Holy Ghost,
which rightly understood, is not such a rock of offense, as some have taken it
to be, in the disuse of it.

The second clause is, whose sins thou forgivest, they are forgiven, whose sins
thou do retain, they are retained. At which, as much, if not more offense
has been taken, then at the former, (as if it savoured of Popery) which I
shall give you the Primates sense of also. That it may be retained in
ordination, and attributed safely to the office of the Ministry, without the
least savor that way, which no man that knew him, and what Popery is, but will
acquit him of the least grain of it.



1. The Ministers may be said to remit sins, by way of preparative to it; in
being the instruments (by preaching the word of reconciliation) to dispose men
toward it in bringing them to repentance, whereby they are capable of it.

Confirmation, in exhibiting the seals of remission in the Sacraments,
according as one well glosseth upon these words; It Is Gods act only to forgive
sins, but the Apostles are said to do it; Non simpliciter sed quia adhibent
media per quae Deus remittit peccata, haec autem; media sunt verbum and
Sacramenta; Fer. in loc.
not simply, but because they apply the means appointed of God for that end.
viz. the word, and Sacraments; What is there more in forgiveness of sins, then
in reconciliation of God and man; now ye find this given to the Ministry. 2
Cor. 5.18, 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word, or
ministry of reconciliation. Gods act only authoritate propria, by his own
supreme authority; the Ministers act potestate vicaria, as a substitute in
Christ's stead, and the word does include the Sacraments also, as in our usual
speech, the Letters Pattents does the Seal affixed to them, as the Ministry,
does the whole ministerial office.

3. Declaratively in testifying this grace of God, and declaring Gods good
pleasure accordingly upon repentance unto the person, like that of Nathan to
David, or Saint Peter to his Auditory ( Acts 3.) as Ferus says, Non quod homo
proprie remittet peccatum, sed quod ostendet and certificet adeo remissum,
neque enim alia est absolutio ab homine, (quam si dicat) En tibi, certifico te,
tibi remissa esse peccata, Annuncio tibi te habere Deum propitium, etc. Ferus.
lib 2. Comment. in Matthew. cap. 9. edit. Mogunt, 1559.
man does not properly forgive sin, but does declare, and certify that it is
remitted of God, so that absolution received from man, is as much to say,
behold my son, I certify thee, that thy sins are forgiven thee. I declare unto
thee that God is at peace with thee, (which I relate the rather out of him both
for his being a writer of the Chutch of Rome, and that this passage is purged
out of his book by them as erroneous, as may be seen by comparing the Edition
of Mentz, with the Edition at Antwerp, 1559, and 1570) Which agrees with that
in the Articles of Religion of Ireland, number. 71. God has given power to his
Ministers, not simply to forgive sins (which prerogative he has reserved
only to himself) but in his name to declare and pronounce unto such as truly
repent, and unfeignedly believe his Holy Gospel, the absolution, and remission
of sins.

But that ye may the more fully understand the Primates Judgment in this
point, whose authority prevails much with all good men, and how remote our
Church is from that of the Papists in the use of those words in ordination, I
shall give you some brief collections out of that Answer of his to the Jesuit
Malones challenge concerning this subject, and the rather to satisfy the
Reader, against the injury, which (among others) Doctor Heylene has done him
in this, as if his judgment were opposite to the Doctrine of the Church of
England.

First, the Primate complains of the wrong done by the Papists in charging us
with denying any power to be left by Christ to the Priests, or Ministers of the
Church, to forgive sins, being the formal words which our Church requires to
be used in the Ordination of a Minister, and there states the question between
them and us; That in the general, it was ever the doctrine of our Church, that
the principal office of our Ministry is excercised in the forgiveness of
sins, as the means, and end of it. The Question is of the manner of the
execution, and the Bounds of it, which the Pope, and his Clergy have enlarged
beyond all measure of truth and reason.

We say, that to forgive sins properly, directly, and absolutely, is Gods
propriety only; Esaias 43.25. Psalm. 32.5. produced by our Savior, Matthew. 9. to
prove his Deity, which is accordingly averred by all antiquity.

But the Papists attribute as much to the Bishop of Rome, affirming, In summo
Pontifice esse plenitudinem ^mnium gratiarum, quia ipse solus confert plenam
indulgentiam omnium peccatorum and computet sibi quod de primo principe Domino
dicimus, quia de plenitudine ejus nos omnes accepimus, de Regim. Principum,
lib. 3. cap. 10. inter opuscula Thomae, number 20. active and proxime efficit
gratiam justificationis, ut flatus extinguit ignem, and dissipat nebulas, sic
absolutio sacerdotis peccata etc. Bell. de Sacram. libro 2. cap. 1. de
poenitent. libro 3. cap. 2. Attritio virtute clavium fit contritio, Romans
Correctores Gloss. Gratiani de poenitent. did. 1. principio, etc.
That in him there is a fullness of all graces, and he gives a full indulgence
of all sins, that to him agrees that which we give to our Lord, that of his
fullness, all we have received; and not much less to the meanest Priest; viz.
That his absolution is such a Sacramental Act, that it confers grace; actively,
and immediately, and effects the grace of Justification, that as the wind does
extinguish the fire, and dispell Clouds, so does his absolution, sins, and by
it Attrition becomes Contrition.

We do not take upon us any such sovereignty, as if it were in our power to
proclaim war, or conclude peace between God, and man, at our discretion; We
remember we are but Ambassadors, and must not go beyond our commission, and
instructions. We do not take upon us thus to be Lords over Gods heritage, as if
we had the absolute power of the Keys. This were Popery indeed. No, we only
acknowledge a Ministerial limited one, as Stewards to dispense things according
to the Will of our Masters, and do assent unto the observation which Cyrill,
Saint Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, make upon these words of Ordination of the
Apostle; Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye forgive, shall be forgiven. viz.
That this is not their work properly, but the work of the Holy Ghost, who
remitteth by them; for as St. Cyril says Cui enim praevaricatores legis a
peccato liberare licet, nisi legis ipsius autori. in Joh. lib. 12. cap. 56.
who can free transgressors of the Law, but the Author of the Law it self?
Daturus erat D minus hominibus Spiritum Sanctum, ab ipso Spiritu Sancto
fidelibus suis dimitti peccata volebat intelligi; nam quid es homo, nisi ager
sanandus, vis mihi esse medicus, mecum quaere medicum. Homil. 23. Ex. 50.
The Lord (says St. Augustine) was to give unto men the Holy Ghost, and he
would have it to be understood, that by the Holy Ghost himself sins should be
forgiven to the faithful, what art thou O man, but a sick man? thou have need
to be healed; will thou be a Physician to me, seek the Physician togegether
with me. Ecce per Spiritum Sanctum peccata donantur, homines, ministerium suum
exhibent, non jus alicujus potestatis exercent, (de Sp. Sanct.) lib. 3. cap. 10.
Saint Ambrose; Lo, by the Holy Ghost sins are forgiven; men bring but their
Ministry to it, they exercise not the Authority of any power in it.

Now having acquitted our Church of Popery, in retaining these words in
Ordination, the Primate proceeds in showing the Ministers exercise of his
function, in this particular; viz. Forgiveness of sins in these four things.
1. Prayer. 2. Censures of the Church. 3. Sacraments. 4. The word preached.

1. Prayer, Jam. 5.14, 15. If any be sick, let him send for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him, and if he have committed sins, they shall
be forgiven him, and so shows it to have been the judgment and practice of
the Fathers and the ancientest of the Schoolmen, that the power of the Keys in
this particular, is much exercised in our being petitioners to God; for the
persons remission, not excluding the prayers of the whole Church in assisting
them with theirs, for which cause in public offenses, S. Augustine exhorts men
to show their repentance accordingly, that the Church might pray with the
Minister for them, for the more sure imparting of the benefit of absolution.
And that before Thomas Aquinas time, the form of absolution was by prayer for
the party, and that a learned man in his time found fault with that indicative
form newly introduced. Then the form being not, I absolve thee, but
absolutionem and remissionem tribuat tibi omnipotens Deus, the Almighty God
give unto thee absolution, and remission, etc. unto which the ancient Ritualls
of the Roman Church as the Greek, (according to that of Damascenes form, yet
retained) does agree; and it is the Primates observation, that the ancient
Fathers never used any Indicative form, but always prayer-wise; as ye have
heard, according to which were the ancient Liturgies of the Latin, and Greek
Churches; howsoever the Popish Priests now stand so much upon it, that they
place the very essence and efficacy of that their Sacrament in it, in the
first person, and not in the third.

Indeed our Church, to show it stood not upon forms, did in its Liturgy
observe each. 1. In the absolution after the general Confession it is only
declarative; At the communion it is in the form of a prayer, at the visitation
of the sick, it is both Declarative, Optative, and Indicative.

Censures of the Church, there is an exercise of this part of our function,
which we maintain against the Montanists and Novatians, who deny any
ministerial power of reconciling of such penitents, as had committed heinous
sins, and receiving them to the Communion of the faithful, which is contrary
to that of Saint Paul, (as it is generally expounded by antiquity) Gal. 6.1. If
any man be overtaken in a fault, (i. e. in a scandalous one) you who are
spiritual, restore (i. e. upon his repentance) such a one in the spirit of
meekness, as in the particular of the Incestuous Corinthian, whom, as in the
name and power of the Lord Jesus, he had bin excommunicated, by Saint Paul, and
the Elders there, so upon his repentance, he was in the same name, and by the
same power restored again, even by such, to whom was committed the Ministry of
reconciliation, 2 Cor. 27.10. etc. And indeed this loosening of men, is
generally by the Fathers accounted a restoring them to the peace of the Church,
and admitting them to the Lords Table again, as is evident by their frequent
expressions that way, which the Primate does declare.

In the administration of the Sacraments, which being a part of the Ministry
of reconciliation, and the Seals of the Promises must necessarily also have
reference to remission of sins, and so the ancient Fathers (of whom the Primate
alleges diverse) do hold, that as these words, whose sins ye remit, are
remitted unto them, etc. are a part of our Commission; so it is exercised by the
Ministers of Christ in the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Communion; yet so,
that the Ministry only is to be accounted man's, and the power Gods; it being
says Saint Augustine, Aliud est baptizare per ministerium, aliud per
potestatem and a^th^r^tatem,
One thing to baptize by way of Ministry, another by way of power, which the
Lord has retained to himself, as to the Authority of remission of sins in it,
according to that of John Baptists distinction between the external and
internal Baptism, he baptized with the Baptism of water, to the remission of
sins, but attributes that of baptizing with the Holy Ghost, to Christ only.

In the word of God preached, there is exercised this part of our function, in
loosing men from their sins, being a special part of this Ministry of
reconciliation, committed to us, as the Ambassadors of Christ here upon the
earth for that end; sinners are said to be holden with the cords of their own
sins, Prove. 5.12. The Apostles (says Saint Jerome) according to their
Commission given them by their Master, Whosoever you shall loose on earth,
shall be loosened in heaven; (which bears the same sense with remitting, and
retaining of sins here,) quos funes, and vincula, solvunt Apostoli Sermon Dei,
and testimoniis scripturae, and exhortatione. lib. 6. Comment. in Is. cap. 14.
Did loose those cords by the word of God, and Testimonies of Scripture, and
exhortations unto virtues Remjituntur peccata per Dei verbum, de Abel, and
Cain. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Saint Ambrose says the same, that sins are remitted by the word of God; etc.
And so calls the Levite, that interpreted the Law, a Minister of remission; As
the Jewish Scribes, by taking away this key of knowledge, are said to shut up
the Kingdom of heaven, so a Scribe fitted for the Kingdom of God in the
Ministry, is a means by it to open the door of heaven to them, by being an
instrument to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, etc. And
by applying the word unto the consciences of their hearers, the Ministers of
Christ did discharge that part of their function which concerns forgiveness of
sins; not only declaratively, but operatively; in as much as God is pleased to
use their preaching of the Gospel, as a means of conferring his spirit upon
the sons of men, and of working of faith, and repentance, whereby remission of
sins is obtained: thus John is said to have preached the Baptism of
repentance, Mark 1.4.
and to have given knowledge of salvation to the people, for the remission of
sins: and Saint James, cap. 5.20. says, he that converts a sinner from the
error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of sins.
This hiding, or covering, is meant forgiveness, as it is accordingly set forth
elsewhere. Romans 4.7. Jer. 31.28.
blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven, and whose iniquities are covered,
etc. Now, is there not as much offense in saying Ministers do save men's souls,
or save men from their sins, (the propriety of our Savior) as to say they
forgive them their sins, the turning men from their iniquities, is Gods act
alone, according to the frequent prayer in the Prophets unto him first, yet in
regard the word of reconciliation is committed to them as the ordinary means
of it, by a usual Trope of the Act of the agent given to the instrument, it is
attributed unto them, of which might be given many instances, Timothy (1 Ep.
1.4.) is said to save them that hear him, though there is but one Savior,
because he preached the word of salvation, by which they were saved, (Acts
12.14.) the word of God preached by the Apostles, is called by our Savior,
their word John 17.20. and that which is properly the work of God, is called
their work, 1 These. 5. The Corinthians who believed by Saint Paul's Ministry
are said to be his Epistle, i. e. the Epistle of Christ ministered by him, as ye
have it expounded in the next verse following; And so, why may not forgiveness
of sins be said to be the work of the Ministers, i e. the work of Christ
ministered by them; being so far honored, as to be called (...), Coworkers
together with him. According unto which is the judgment of Dr. Ward, that
Reverend and learned Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, in that determination
of his, ( in Comitiis an. 1637. mense October.) Potestas clavium extenditur ad
remissionem culpae, where are many of the like observations, which I found
enclosed in a letter unto the Primate, for his approbation, where I find
somewhat more then is in that which is printed. viz. 80. Sic argumentatur
Alensis. part. 4. q. 21. membr. 1. Paris potestatis est interius baptizare and
a culpa mortali absolvere. Sed Deus non debuit potestatem baptizandi interius
communicare, ne spes poneretur in homine, ergo pari ratione non potestatem
absolvendi ab actuali peccato, fundamentum hujus rationis habetur apud
Cyprianum de lapsis.

And the like may be said of the binding part of their office called here,
retaining of sins. Do we not read how the Ministers are sometimes brought in
like those seven Angels in the book of the Revelation, which pour out the
Vialls of Gods wrath upon the earth. Saint Paul says, 2 Cor. 10.6. he had
vengeance in readiness against all disobedience, yet vengeance is mine, I will
repay, says the Lord; what other sense can it be but this? he is said to be
the inflicter, because he was in Christ's name the denouncer? even as Jeremiah,
(cap. 1.10.) is said to be set over the Nations, and Kingdoms to pluck up, and
to pull down, to destroy, and to root out; because God had put these words in
his mouth, and was ordained by him as a Prophet to pronounce destruction to
them accordingly, or as Ezekiel (cap. 43.3.) is said to have destroyed the
City, by being said to pronounce destruction to it. The Primate observes, that
we often meet with these speeches concerning the Leprosy (which was a Type of
the pollution of sin) the Priest shall cleanse him, the Priest shall pollute
him (Lev. 13.) according to the Hebrew, and the Greek version; and out of
Contaminatione contaminabit eum, haud dubium, quin Sacerdos non quo
contaminationis Author sit, sed quo ostendat eum contaminatum. Hieron. lib. 7.
Esa. cap. 23.
Saint Jerome, that it is said, verse 44. the Priest with pollution, shall
pollute him, not that he is the Author of his pollution, but that he declares
him to be polluted, and unclean; whereupon the Master of the sentences, and
others do observe, In remittendis vel retinendis peccatis, id Juris and Officii
habent Evangelici sacerdotes, quod olim habebant, sub lege legales in curandis
leprosis. Hi ergo peccata dimittunt vel retinent, dum dimissa adeo, vel
retenta, indicant and ostendant. Ponunt enim sacerdotes nomen Domini super
filios Israel, sed ipse benedixit, sicut legitur in Number. Petr. Lomb. l. 4.
sent. did. 14.
that in remitting, and retaining of sins, the Priests of the Gospel have the
like power, and office, which the Priests of old had under the Law in curing
the Lepers, who therefore accordingly may be said to forgive, and retain sins,
whilst they show, and declare, they are forgiven, or retained of God Number. 6.
So the Priests put the name of the Lord upon the children of Israel, and were
commanded to bless the people in saying, The Lord bless thee: but it was the
Lord himself that blessed them; according to the next words, and I will bless
them.

And thus in these four things, I leave it to be calmly considered of, if the
Ministers have not power left them by Christ in relation to forgiveness of
sins, and with these limitations, whether that part of the old form of the
words of Ordination, might not be continued also, which seems to me to be
explained in the next following them; viz. And be thou a faithful dispenser of
the word, and Sacraments, etc. (through both which the graces of the Holy
Ghost, and remission of sins are conveyed, and sealed) in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. According as in the words at the
Communion used to the recipient, the former clause was added in Q. Elizabeth's
days, to give the more full sense of the latter. And let not any by this
Moderate expression, extenuate the office of the Ministry, as Bellarmine would
by this infer, that any Layman, Woman, or Child, may absolve as well as the
Minister, (as we have among our selves, too many of that judgment.) For it
consists not in speech, but in power, or Authority; he being as the officer
of a King, Authorized to make Proclamation of his pleasure: Every man may speak
one to another, to the use of edifying, but to them is given, 1 Cor. 10.16.
power to edification, God has made them able Ministers, not of the letter, but
of the Spirit. That from them it comes, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. not only in word, but in
power also; and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; which accordingly
has been experimentally found; that howsoever another may from the Scripture
show as truly unto the penitent, what glad tidings are there intended to him;
yet to drooping and doubting souls, it has not been so efficacious, in
quieting them, and giving satisfaction to their consciences, either in
sickness, deathbed, or otherwise; as by the Ministry ordained, and
commissionated for that end; That as it is their office to pray and exhort you
in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God; so having listened to that Motion,
and submitted your selves accordingly; it is their office to declare, and assure
unto you in Christ's stead, that God is reconciled with you, All which appears
to be the ancient doctrine of the Church of England, by what is publicly
declared in the exhortation before the Communion to be read sometimes at the
discretion of the Minister which is the recitd and approved by the Primate, as
follows.

And because it is requisite that no man should come to the holy Communion, but
with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with a quiet conscience, therefore, if
there be any of you, which by means aforesaid, (i. e. Private examination and
confession of sins to God) cannot quiet his own conscience, but requires
further Council and Comfort, then let him come to me; or some other discreet,
and learned Minister of Gods word, and open his grief, that he may receive such
Ghostly Council, Advice, and Comfort; as his Conscience may be relieved; and
that by the Ministry of Gods word, he may receive comfort, and the benefit of
absolution, to the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding of all scruple, and
doubtfulnesse.

And now let the Reader judge if Dr. Heylene has not cause to repent of his
rash censure of the Primate, (in his late book p. 108.) as if in this part of
his Answer to the Jesuit, he had (as he says) in this particular, utterly
subverted, as well the doctrine of this Church, as her purpose in it, etc. when
those two arguments which himself urges, from the words of Ordination, and the
exhortation at the communion, are produced and defended by the Primate also.
What would he have? he says the doctrine of the Church of England is, that,
The Priest does forgive sins authoritative by a delegated, and commissionated
power committed to him from our Lord and Savior, does not the Primate say the
same; that it is not only declarative, but designative, not only by way of
information out of the word of God (as another understanding Christian may do)
to the penitent, that his sins are pardoned, but he does it authoritative, as
having a power and commission from God to pronounce it to the party, and by the
seal of the Sacrament to assure the soul of the penitent, that he is pardoned
of God, which no other man or Angel can do, ex officio, but the Minister of
Christ, according to that of the Apostle; To us is committed the word of
reconciliation, this is the sum of the Primates judgment. He that would have
more, must step over into the Church of Rome for it.

I shall only make a trial whether Doctor Heylene will so conclude against Mr.
Hooker, as he has against the Primate; who in his sixth book of
Ecclesiastical Policy, consents fully with him, where after his declaring,
that for any thing he could ever observe, those Formalities which the Church of
Rome do so esteem of, were not of such estimation, nor thought to be of
absolute necessity with the Ancient Fathers, and that the form with them was
with invocation, or praying for the penitent, that God would be reconciled unto
him, for which he produces Leo, Ambrose, Sacerdos imponit manum subjecto,
reditum Spiritus sancti invocat, and indicta in populum oratione altari
reconciliat, etc. advers. Lucifer.
Jerome, etc. p. 96. He thus declares his judgment, viz. As for the
Ministerial sentence of private absolution, it can be no more then a
declaration what God has done, it has but the force of the Prophet Nathan 's
absolution, God has taken away thy sins, then which construction, especially
of words judicial, there is nothing more vulgar. For example, the Publicans
are said in the Gospel to have justified God: the Jews in Malachy to have
blessed the proud man, which sin, and prosper; not that the one did make God
righteous, or the other, the wicked happy; but to bless, to justify, and to
absolve, are as commonly used for words of judgment, or declaration, as of
true and real efficacy; yea, even by the opinion of the Master of sentences,
etc. Priests are authorized to loose and bind, that is to say, declare who are
bound, and who are loosed; etc. Saint Jerome also, (whom the Master of the
Sentences alleges) directly affirms, That as the Priests of the Law could
only discern, and neither cause nor remove Leprosies; so the Ministers of the
Gospel, when they retain or remit sins, do but in the one judge how long we
continue guilty, and in the other declare when we are clear, or free. (Tom. 6.
Comment. in 16. Mat.) So (says Mr. Hooker,) when conversion by manifest tokens
did seem effected, Absolution ensuing, (which could not make) served only to
declare men innocent. p. 108. When any of ours ascribes the work of remission
to God, and interprets the Priests sentence to be but a solemn declaration of
that which God himself has already performed, they (i. e. the Church of Rome)
scorn it. And so after much to this purpose, he thus concludes. p. 113. Let it
suffice to have shown how God alone does truly give, and private Ministerial
absolution, but declare remission of sins. And thus I leave Mr. Hooker under
Doctor Heylen's Censure, who has already concluded, that forgiveness of sins
by the Priest, only declarative, does not come up to the doctrine of the
Church of England. Though the reason he gives, because it holds, the Priest
does forgive sins authoritative, I do not see the force of, The former,
supposing the latter; for the Officer, whose place it is, solemnly to make
Proclamation of the Kings pardon, does it authoritative; nay, dares not do it,
unless he were authorized accordingly. And so much for the Primates judgment
of those words of Ordination. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou
forgivest, are forgiven, whose sins thou retainest, are retained.

The PRIMATES judgment of the Use of a set Form of Prayer, heretofore declared,
and now more fully enlarged, and confirmed; with the concurrence of the Votes
of such eminent persons who are so esteemed by the contrary-minded.
THis Subject has been so sufficiently discussed and determined by others,
that no new thing can be expected from me, only you have here the Judgment
and Approbation of this eminent Primate, which being of so great esteem with
all good men; it is possible now upon near an even scale of men's opinions in it,
his may be of that weight, as to give satisfaction.

First, that the Use of a set Form of Prayer, is not a setting up of any new
doctrine, as the Athenians judged of Saint Paul, appears in that it is the
practice of the Belgic Churches, for which ye have the determination of the
Divines of Leyden, Polyander, Rivetus, Walaeus, Thysius; in their Disput. 36.
de cultu invocat. Sect. 33. non tantum licitas sed and valde utiler esse,
contendimus, etc. and in magnis conventibus atientio auditorum per usitatas
formulas, non parum juvatur.
Synopsis Theologiae: And the resolution of Mr. Aims our countryman (who lived
and died a Professor of Divinity among them) in his cases of conscience, who
says, it is Licitum hoc esse manifestum est, ex approbata sanctorum praxi, quam
in praescriptis Psalmis, and benedicendi formulis, scriptura nobis commendat.
Vtile etiam and necessarium est quibusdam istiusmodi formam sequi, quamvis ex
libelloisit denotanda. l. 4. cap. 17. de oratione mentali and vocali.
lawful from the approved practice of the Saints in the Psalms, and other
Forms of blessing in the Scripture; nay profitable and necessary for some,
though it be read out of a book.

Then for the judgment and practice accordingly of the Reformed Church of
France, Ludovicus Capellus gives us a sufficient account of (who is Professor
of Divinity in the University of Somer) in one of his Theses lately published,
de Liturgiae formulis conceptis, or a set form of a Liturgy, where after he
has answered all the pretended arguments against it, which it seems he had
gleaned up out of some of our English Writers of late, he concludes Vbi sunt
e^uditi Pastores S. Liturgiae publica formula est apprime utilis and
necessaria, ad communem Ecclesiae aedificationem, etc. earum usus jure damnari
^on potest nec debet, cum semper and ubique, in universa Ecclesia Christiana,
toto terrarum orb, jam a plusquam 1300 annis perpetuo obtinuerit, etiamque
hodie ubique obtineat, nisi apud nov^tios, etc. Donec tandem nuperime exorti
sunt in Anglia, etc. de Liturg. concept. form. pa^s 3.
that it is very necessary both for the most learned Pastors and congregations,
as unlearned; and the edification of both, being used throughout the Christian
world in all ages, at least for these 1300 years, and is still at this day in
all places, excepting only (as he says) some of late with us in England, whose
censure of them is so severe, that it would be offensive in me to repeat it.

And surely the general custom and practice of the reformed Churches (which
Saint Paul urges, 1 Cor. 11.16. cap. 14.33.) cannot be contemned by any sober
Christian, unto which may be added, the judgment of diverse pious and eminent
men of onr own nation, and so esteemed by such as have asserted the contrary,
whose judgments being too large to be inserted here, I shall defer them till
the last, who do very fully concur with the Primate in it.

Calvin was a wise and learned man, now as Beza tells us, it was his constant
practice to use a set form of Prayer before Sermon, without alteration; So was
it his advice in his Epistle to the Protector of England, in Edward the sixth's
time, (which has bin mentioned elsewhere) for the establishing of a set form
of a Liturgy here, from which it might not be lawful for pastors to depart,
both for the good of the more ignorant, preventing of an affected novelty in
others, and the declaring of an unanimous consent in all the Churches. For
which practice and advice, he had sufficient warrant from the President of the
Ancient Fathers, in the Primitive times, which might be here also produced. And
doubtless the council of Eliphaz is is good, Job 8. Enquire I pray thee of
the former ages, and prepare thy self for the search of their Fathers (for we
are but of yesterday, and know nothing;) shall not they teach thee; etc. as
that of the Prophet Jeremiah (cap. 6.19.) ask for the old way, and walk
therein; which may well rebuke the presumption of some, who are so led by their
own fancies, that the Ancient Fathers are of no exemplary esteem with them.
Only I may safely reprepresent this to the consideration of any ingenuous
person; that if it were the practice of the Church of God in all ages for 1500
(or but 1300) years after Christ, not only of the vulgar, but of such as were
glorious Martyrs, and the most eminent Preachers of former and later years,
with whom the holy spirit did much abound, does not the assertion of the
contrary condemn the generation of the just, or at least argue a bold
presumptuous censure of the spirits of just men now made perfect in heaven.
This only by way of preparative to the Readers attention, that there is no
singularity in it.

2. See the warrants for it in the Scripture, i. e. in the Old Testament: (
Numb. 6.23.) the Lord gives a form of words to Aaron, and his sons, to be
continued as a perpetual Liturgy from age to age, for the blessing the children
of Israel, saying unto them, the Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make
his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace, etc. Numb. 10.35. Moses gives
himself a set form, at the rising and resting of the Ark. When the Ark set
forward, Moses said, Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let
them that hate thee, flee before thee; And when it rested, he said, return O
Lord unto the many thousands of Israel. Continued by David at the removal of
the Ark in his time, Psalm. 68.1. In the 26. of Deuteronomy. ye have two set forms
prescribed of God himself. First, to him that offers his first fruits, verse 3.
thou shall say unto the Priest, etc. verse 5. thou shall speak, and say before
the Lord thy God, etc. consisting chiefly of confession to the 11. verse, and
then to him that offers his third years tithes. verse 13. when, after a solemn
protestation of bringing all the hollowed things, paying his Tithes truly,
without diminution, or alienation, he is prescribed to say this prayer, before
the Lord his God, verse 15. Look down from thy holy habitation from heaven, and
bless thy people Israel; and the Land which thou have given us, as thou
swearest, etc.

The book of Psalms, some consisting of Petitions, some of Confession, some of
praises, (the several parts of prayer) what was the end of their composing and
collection, but as a Liturgy containing the several forms framed by the
Saints of God in several ages, and accordingly continued, and used in the
Temple, and Synagogues upon several times, and occasions; As that for the
Sabbath Day in special by the Title of it (Psalm. 92.) as Moses prayer was
preserved for the use of the Church (Psalm. 90.) to David's time, so was his, and
others, after the captivity to our Saviors time, some were used to begin the
service with; some to end it; some before the reading of the Law, and Prophets,
some between them and before the expositions of either, (as those who have
searched into those customs of theirs, tell us.)

Praise is the principal part of prayer, and for that, how often do you read
of Set Forms used by the most eminent Saints.

Moses after the delivery from Pharaoh at the Red Sea, pens a set form of
praise, for Myrian (Exodus 15 1.) unto which that of Rev. 15. relates where the
Saints in heaven, are said to use that form also; at the victory over their
enemies, they sang the song of Moses (1 Chronicles. 16.17.) Asaph and his Brethren
had forms delivered them by David, to thank the Lord with, (verse 35.) say ye,
save us O God of our salvation, etc. (2 Chronicles. 7.6.) Solomon, at the dedication
of the Temple, observes that form which was observed by his Father, praised be
the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever; at which, (signifying an acceptance
of it) the glory of the Lord filled the Temple, (2 Chronicles. 29.30.) Hezekiah
caused the Priests, and Levites, to praise God in the words of David and Asaph
the Seer.

No doubt, but these worthy reformers, Hezekiah, and Isaiah, were able to have
framed prayers and praises of their own; and that suddenly, (as Hezekiah seems
to have done at a special occasion in the Temple, 1 Kings 19.14. both of them 2 Chronicles. 32.20. in their private) but for the public settled constitutions, they
rather chose to use those Forms which were used in the Church many ages before
in David's time; see then a respect to Antiquity, not only in Doctrine, but in
the Forms of prayer framed by the Saints before them. And surely if it were
pleasing unto God then, according to the Counsel of the Prophet Hoseah to the
Israelites in their repentance, ( cap. 14.2. take to your selves words, and say
thus unto him?) why should it not be now? he being yesterday, and to day, and
the same for ever. (Ezra 3.10.) The like was observed after the Captivity, at
the repairing of the Temple, when Ezra appointed the Lord to be praised after
the Ordinance of David King of Israel. So much for the Old Testament.

Now for the New Testament, ye have a President for it; (which is above all
Presidents) in our blessed Savior, who gave a form to his disciples, ( Luke
11, 1.) When ye pray, say, not only (as Matthew 6.) say after this manner, or
say thus; but say this. In Saint Matthew, he gives a form to the people, and
disciples together, which was before he sent them forth to preach; (for that
was not, till cap. 10.) In Saint Luke he gives his disciples a Form, after he
had made them preachers and Apostles, cap. 9.1. and after the 72 were sent out
also, cap. 10.1. and both returned from preaching through the Cities of Israel,
see how both people and Teachers are allowed a set Form, and it seems John
Baptist had done the like by the ground of their requests, Teach us as John
taught his disciples. They were not then for New, and different ways from the
Church before, or coaetaneous with them, but for a conformity, that it might
appear John Baptist disciples, and they were one Church, and one body. A good
example for us to follow, not to aim at a Singularity, or a division between
other Churches, and us, but to draw as near as we can to a Conjunction with
them, in having one heart, and one tongue. Seek not ways never before thought
of, but tread in the steps of the precedent times, as the Disciples did here
teach us, as John taught his.

And the Reconciling of the Evangelists is easy, viz. It was our Saviors
mind, that it should be both a rule for all other, and said for a prayer also,
and that which is a rule for others, must needs be in the highest degree so it
self. A Standerd for any measure, dry or liquid, may be used for that measure
too; and so it is no contradiction, that the Lords prayer should be as the
measure for other prayers, and said for a prayer also.

And that it was so understood by the Fathers in the Primitive times; I shall
only represent unto you some of the words of Saint Cyprian in his Sermon upon
it, who lived about 250. years after our Savior: and died a Martyr. He exhorts
the people not to omit the use of the Lords prayer with their other prayers, in
which he has some such speeches as these, surely thou art more likely to
obtein thy request; cum qui habitat intus in pectore, ipse sit in voce, when he
that is in thy heart, is also in thy tongue: How can God but hear thee, when
thou come in the words of his Son, takes up the prayer sanctified by his
sacred mouth; If thou have no other prayer, use this; if thou have others, use
this also, and urge God daily in his own language; and with the words of his
beloved Son. Like him that catched up Alexander in his Arms to appease his
Father Phillips anger; so says he, take up Christ in thy Arms, make him thy
spokes-man, by taking up his own words; (that is with right understanding, and
affection.) By these, and the like expressions in that Father, may be seen,
what was the judgment and practice of the Primitive times, in relation to the
use of that form of the Lords prayer, which the Divines of Sicuti quoque tota
vetusta Ecclesia, id s^mper extra controversiam habuit, viz. Precaetionem hanc
Christi non esse tantum recte precandi normam, sed insuper qu^que rite precandi
formam. Synops. Theol. disp. 36. Sect. 33.
Leyden do aver clearly, that without controversy, the whole ancient Church
did always observe it, not as a Rule only, but a Form of prayer. It Is one
extremity to make an absolute necessity of the using it always, and an other
extremity not to use it at all. Our Church that in each service, at least once
owned it, as the principal, and parent of the rest, was free from any vain
repetition. So much for the first thing observable in our Saviors giving a
form to his disciples, which is a warrantable president for the Church to do
the like for her Members.

2. Our Savior gave himself a form of words, Matthew. 26.44. he went away the
third time, and prayed, saying the same words; it was at three several times,
and with some distance between each; and which is more observable, it was at
his Passion. In afflictions we are most apt for various expressions, yet even
then, he that was the Wisdom of the Father, and excelled in language, the
tongues of men, and Angels, and could have abounded in the variety of Elegancy,
yet varied not the phrase, but kept the same words; surely it was for our
example, and to teach us that prayer consists not in words, but in the
earnestness of affection; let no man except against the use of the same prayer
twice; Our Savior used it thrice, and (as the Apostle says) he was heard in
what he prayed, and it is the observation of the Imo Christum in cruce pendens
deprecationis forma, a Davide tanquam typo antea observata, usus est. Matthew.
27.46. Ibid.
abovenamed, that our Savior observed a set form of prayer upon the Cross,
used before by David, (Psalm. 22.1.) as in the Type, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me (as those words, Into thy hands I commend my Spirit; are out
of Psalm. 31.5.)

3. He does not only prescribe a form of words in prayer, but in the
Sacraments. 1. Baptism. ( Mat. 28.) Go and Baptize them in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Which Form of words, the ancient
Church ever observed without any variation, as containing (with the Element of
water) the matter and form of Baptism, and in the Lords Supper; the three
Evangelists give us his very words, used by him in the Consecration of it, and
is commended to the Church of Corinth by Saint Paul, who received it from the
Lord also, and surely are to be accordingly used by us.

4. It Is observable how he himself observed the set Forms, used by the Jews at
the Passover, both in prayer and praises, see Beza (on Matthew. 26.20.) and
Ainsworth (on Exodus 12.) granting it, and that the wod (...), John 16. ult.
should be rendered; having sung the Hymns or Psalms, which they say were a set
portion of Psalms of praises (which the Jews call their great Hallelujah)
from the 113. Psalm to the 118. as also diverse others of our learned Writers
conceive, ( Paulus Burgensis, Scaliger, Drusius, etc.

And can that of the Apostle (Col. 3.16.) exhorting to praise the Lord with
Psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, imply any other then a set form of
words, according to our custom, yet retained in singing of Psalms in the
congregation. And may not that of our Savior (Mat. 18.) Where two or three of
you shall agree together, touching any thing they shall ask, etc. imply that a
prayer, composed by the consent and unanimous agreement of the Church, to be
the more prevalent: put all these together, and are they not a Cloud of
Witnesses, at least to confirm, and support the weaker sort in knowledge and
utterance, who though of sincere hearts, yet cannot suddenly pour forth their
desires in fitting expressions, worthy (as they conceive) the ears of Almighty
God, but must make use of the pens, and forms of others, or of what they
have premeditated, and framed to themselves; surely in these, if their hearts
be, (as they may be) raised to a due height of holy affection, God accepts of
them.

The necessary requisites to a prayer, are such as these, That the person be
acceptable, that the matter be good; that it be done in the right manner (i. e.
with understanding with affection, and that rightly ordered, and qualified) and
the end rightly terminated, with a submission to Gods will, for the time and
measure, with the like, which I cannot now insist upon. But I never heard of
any Divine that has wrote of it, to have put in this for one. viz. That it must
be suddenly poured out, without premeditation of matter, form, or method.

Objection is this, that a set form is a limiting, or a stinting of the spirit
in prayer, which ought not to be.

unwritten Tradition, for if the spirit of a single Prophet in extraordinary
gifts, must be limited in a subjection to the greater number of the Prophets,
(1 Cor. 14.) why may not the spirit of a private Minister in these ordinary
gifts, be limited by the vote and consent of the whole Ministry.

Secondly, see the ill consequences of it. It must be appliable against singing
of Psalms in the spirit, which Saint Paul puts together with prayer, I will
pray with the spirit, and I will sing with the spirit, (1 Cor. 14.5.) diverse of
the Psalms are prayers, now if the set form of words in them, be not an
obstruction to the making a spiritual melody in your hearts to the Lord, why
shall it be a stop to the overflowings, and enlargements of the heart, and
spirit, in prayer.

Again, it must be of the like force against preaching in the spirit, that if
it be premeditated, or the Sermon be before composed, it cannot be in the
demonstration of the spirit and power, nor have any efficacious operation in
the hearers, which is both against our daily experience, and Solomon's
Commendation of the Preacher, (meaning it may be himself, Eccles. 12.) because
he was wise, he gave good heed, and sought out fit words, and set them in
order, even words of truth.

If the spirit was not obstructed in the pens of the Evangelists writing their
Gospels, or with the Apostles in their several Epistles, then; notwithstanding
both were done with labor, and studdy; why should our labor accordingly in
the word and doctrine, by the pen or premeditation exclude it now: and if a set
form does not stint the spirit either in singing, preaching, or writing of holy
things; why must it be so injurious only to the spirit of prayer.

3. But thirdly, if a set form be the stinting of the spirit, it must be either
in the speaker or hearer. 1. Not in the speaker, for his spirit may be the more
at liberty to spiritual fervent enlargements, when there is no obstruction, or
diversion by the work of the Invention in inditing of matter, and words, the
unaptnesse, and unreadinesse unto which in many, has so disturbed them, and
caused them to wander into such immethodicall impertinet ways, that they have
been far from the spirit of prayer.

2. Not in the hearers, for then it must ever be so stinted, for whether the
speaker uses sudden, or premeditated expressions, (which they cannot judge of)
the hearers are alike bound to mind what proceeds from his lips, so that if the
spirit be stinted with them in the latter, it is as much in the former. For as
the judgment is the freer to say Amen by the foreknowledge, and approbation of
the prayer, so the spirit and affections are at an equal freedom also; so that
this objection is of no value.

I shall only put this to consideration, whether that man's heart may be
accounted most spiritual, which can be daily enlarged, and his affections
lifted up in the use of the same words, or which cannot without the help of a
variety, like those weak stomachs, or distempered in their health, that cannot
relish one dish twice, but must at each meal, have the inventions of men
employed to give them various; nay, in danger of losing their stomach, if they
hear of them before they come suddenly before them; Now in this I would not be
understood, to discourage any persons in exercising themselves this way, and
striving to perfection in this gift, which I do much commend; only as those
that learn to swim, have help at first of some supporters, but afterward come
to swim without them. Children at first have their Copies, their paper ruled,
their hands held, but in time do it of themselves, and so there is an
expectation, that you that are of ability should grow in knowledge and
utterance this way: but for the weaker sort, is it not better they should use a
staff then slip, and are not the Major part of this kind, like men with weak
sights, needing the help of Spectacles. To whom, by denying them a set Form,
are we not injurious accordingly, Though those we call weak, may possibly, by
their fervency, and ardency of affection be said of, as Saint Paul of himself;
when I am weak, then am I strong, and Gods strength perfected in their
weakness.

The prevalency of a prayer being not in the elegancy and loftiness of the
style, but in the sighs and groans, and inward workings of the heart, like
that of Nehemiah, and Hanna, though their voice were not heard.

In a word, an Uniformity in the public prayers of the Church to be observed
in each congregation, would tend much to the unity of hearts and spirits among
us, which Saint Paul commends as the more excellent way, and the end of
coveting all gifts whatsoever, viz. a Composure of a Form for the public
service of God, by the joint assistance of the most learned and pious, from
which, the most eminent gifted person might not depart, more then the
inferior. I speak not of prayer before Sermon and after, (when each may take
their liberty, though therein the Dutch and French Church are strict also) but
of some consent in the manner of Administration of Baptism, the communion, and
other offices in the public, that might be owned by us all in Common, as the
form of the Church of England, which as it has been a means to continue a
unity in other reformed Churches at this day; so I believe would be a means for
the reducing it with us, even a settled peace both in Church and State; which
ought to be the prayer and principal endeavor of every good Christian. So
much for the declaring and confirming the Primates Judgment of the use of a set
form of prayer in the public.

Now unto his, for the more easy reception of it, I shall here add the votes
of some, whom the contrary minded (at least the most pious of them) will not
gainsay. I shall not mention the judgment and practice of the worthy Ministers
and Martyrs in Queen Mary's days; some of whom were put to death for
approving, and using the form which was then extant, being one of the Ralph
Allerton, John Rough.
Articles put in against them. Of these it will be said, they walked according
to the light then given them; I shall therefore trouble the Reader only with a
few testimonies of godly and eminent men, who lived within our own memory; some
of them reckoned among the Non-conformists, or old Puritanes, yet in this
particular fully concurring with the Primate.

Mr. Richard Rogers Preacher at Walbersfield in Essex, (whom I well remember,
and have often seen his constant attendance at the public prayers of the
Church) In his pious book entitled the seven Treatises.

In that Chapt. of public prayers. He thus begins. If that mind be in us,
with the which we have been taught to come to all holy exercises, and so to be
prepared for them; who doubts, but that we may receive much help by them?
yea, and the better a man is, the more he shall profit by them, etc. Some have
thought all set forms of prayer are to be disliked, and such only to be
offered up to God, as by extemporary gift, are conceived, and uttered; And that
the Minister should use no set form of prayer, but as they are moved by Gods
spirit.

I answer. It is a foul error so to think. For as there be necessary things to
be prayed for of all men, and always, and those are the most things which we
are to pray to the Lord for, so there may be a prescript form of prayer made
concerning all such things; which being so, what lets that in the reading of
such forms, either of confessing of sins, request, or thanksgiving; what
lets, I say, that the hearers hearts may not profitably go on with the same,
both to humble, to quicken and to comfort: For is the reading it self unpure,
when the Minister in his own behalf, and the peoples, utters them to God; I
speak not (ye see) of the matter of prayer, but of reading it, for if the
matter be erroneus, and naught, the pronounceing of it, makes it not good, any
more then the reading does; and if it be good and pure being uttered or
pronounced, the reading cannot hurt it, or make it evil. And as the Church in
the Scripture did, and does sing Psalms upon a book to God, and yet, though it
utter a prescript form of words, I hope none will say that it is a sin to do
so, the heart being prepared. In like manner to follow a prescript form of
words in praying is no sin, and therefore ought not to be offensive to any,
etc.

And further, they may know that in all Churches, and the best reformed, there
is a prescript form of prayer used, and therefore they who are of mind that it
ought not to be, must separate themselves from all Churches. Also, if a set
form of prayer were unlawful, then neither were the Lords prayer (which is a
form of prayer, prescribed by our Savior, himself) to be used. And so he
proceeds to persuade all good Christians to lay aside contention, and endless,
and needless questions about this matter, and with well ordered hearts and
minds to attend unto, and apply to themselves the prayers, which either before
Sermon or after Sermon are uttered, or the other, which through the whole
action of Gods worship, are read in their hearing, etc. So much Mr. Rogers.

Now this book of the seven Treatises, has been since epitomized by Mr.
Egerton, and entitled the practice of Christianity, which has an Epistle of
Doctor Gouge before it, in a high commendation of it. Now, at the conclusion of
that he has added, Certain Advertisements concerning prayer, in which, his, or
both their judgments in this subject, are declared accordingly. viz. That it
is lawful, and in some cases expedient, to use a set form of prayer. Question
(says he) is made by many of the lawfulness, or at least of the expediencie
of praying by the help of a book, or of using a prescript, and set form of
prayer. It is to be considered, that there be diverse degrees and measures of
gifts, both natural, as of grace; besides, some have been by custom more
trained and exercised in this holy duty then others, etc. which difference I
have observed, not only in private Christians, but also in some most reverend,
faithful, and worthy Ministers. Some using both in their public Ministry,
and in their private families; a stinted prayer, and set form of words, with
little alteration at all, except some extraordinary occasion have happened,
and yet both sorts so furnished with piety and learning, as I could hardly
prefer the one before the other.

Liberty in solitary prayers.
Moreover, whereas in respect of the place and company, there be three sorts of
prayer public in the Church, private in the family, and secret by a man self;
greatest liberty may be taken in secret and solitary prayer, because we are
sure (that if there be a believeing, humble, upright heart) God will not
upbraid any man for his method, order, words, or utterance. Yet in private
prayer we may not take so great a liberty, Less liberty in private prayer.
etc. and some well-affected, have been somewhat faulty and offensive in this
behalf: weak and tender Christians, (such as commonly are in a family) are not
so capable of that kind of prayer, which is called, conceived, or extemporate,
varying every time in words and phrases, manner, and order, though the matter
and substance be the same. Least liberty in public prayer.
But especially care must be had in the public congregation, that nothing be
done in praying, preaching, or Administration of Sacraments, but that which is
decent and orderly; because there, many eyes do see us, and many ears do hear
us; and therefore it is expedient (for the most part) to keep a constant form,
both of matter and words, and yet without servile tying our selves to words and
syllables, but using herein such liberty and freedom, as may stand with
comeliness, etc. And so he proceeds thus to direct men, that though a Book may
be used in private prayer, yet that it is much better to get their prayer by
heart, commending the use of the Lords Prayer, and the variety of other forms
of godly prayers in print, penned by foreign Divines, as our own countrymen;
as Mr. Bradford that blessed Martyr, Master Deering, Mr. Hieron, and diverse
others yet living, whose printed prayers are nothing inferior to the former.
And so because there ever have been, and still are many Babes in the Church of
God, which have need of milk, etc. and some of bad memories, and heavy
spirits, etc. he frames diverse forms of prayers to be used for Morning and
Evening in case of sickness, for the Lords day, etc. Thus much very
excellently, Mr. Egerton, approved by Doctor Gouge.

Mr. Arthur Hildersham, Preacher at Ashbie-delazouch in Leichestershire, upon
the 51 Psalm, p. 63. says thus. I dare not deny, but a weak Christian may use
the help of a good Prayer Book; better to pray on a book, then not to pray at
all. Certainly it is a spirit of error, that has taught the world otherwise.

First, our blessed Savior prescribed to his Disciples a Form of prayer, not
only to be to them and his whole Church a rule, and sampler, according to
which, all our prayers should be framed, (as appears, when he says, Matthew.
6.9. After this manner pray ye,) but even for them; to say, tying themselves to
the very words of it, as appears, Luke 11.2. when ye pray, say, our Father,
etc. By which answer of our Savior to his Disciples, it may also appear, that
John taught his disciples to pray, by giving them forms of prayer; to say, yea,
even in secret prayer. Matthew. 6.6.

2. All the best reformed Churches do now, and ever have used, even in public
Liturgies, prescript forms of prayer; and have judged them of great use and
necessity for the edification of the Church: And surely this argument is not
to be contemned by any sober Christian, as appears by the Apostles speech, 1
Cor. 11.16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom; neither
the Churches of God: So does he again press the example and practice of all
the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33.

3. This is no stinting, nor hinderance to the spirit of Prayer in any of Gods
people, no more then the singing of praise to the Lord in the words of David,
is now, and was in Hezekiahs time, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. or the joining in heart with
the words that another utters in conceived prayer: Thus far Mr. Hildersham.

Doctor Preston (who used a set Form of Prayer before Sermon) in that Sermon of
his preached before King James, Text, John 1.16. Of his fullness we have all
received, etc. p. 22. says thus. That a set form is lawful, much need not be
said, the very newness of the contrary opinion is enough to show the vanity
and falsehood of it. It is contrary to the approved judgment of approved
Counsels, learned Fathers, and the continual practice of the Church. He
instanceth in Tertullians time, and Origin, Saint Basil, Ambrose. Constantine
the Great prescribed a set form of prayer to his soldiers, and Calvine in his
83. Epist. to the Protector of England, says, that he does greatly allow a
set form of Ecclesiastical prayer, which the Minister shall be bound to
observe. But (as I said before) of the lawfulness of it, there is no Question.

How slight is that which is objected against the lawfulness of it; to wit,
That the spirit is stinted, when we are fetterd with words appointed?

I answer, The freedom of the spirit stands not so much in the extent of
words, as in the intention of zeal, wherein they are uttered. And if a set form
be lawful, then must a set form needs excel, which is dictated by Christ
himself, and is therefore more frequently to be used, and with all reverence,
both in mind and gesture; nor does this want the practice and approbation of
the Antientest, instancing in Saint Cyprian, and Saint Augustine, etc.

And for a further confirmation, see the same affirmed by him again, in his
book called the Saints daily exercise, set forth and approved by Doctor Sibbs,
(who himself used a set Form of Prayer before Sermon,) Mr. Davenport p. 80.
viz. Another case (says he) is, Whether we may use a set Form of Prayer.

Answ. I need not say much to you, for I think there is none here that doubts,
but that a set Form of Prayer may be used: you know Christ prescribed a Form;
you know there were certain Psalms, that were prayers that were used
constantly, and therefore no doubt, but a set Form may be used, and in the
Church at all times, both in Primitive times, and all along to the beginning of
the Reformed times, to Luther, and Calvin's time, still in all times, the Church
had set Forms they used, and I know no objection is of weight. One main
objection is this. That in stinted prayer, the spirit is streitned, etc. To
this he gives a threefold answer.

1. They that object it, do the same thing daily in the congregation, whose
spirits are limited and stinted by being hearers of him that prays.

2. It Is no general tie, but at other times in private, they may be as free as
they will.

3. The spirit or affections are not tied, or restrained hy a set form, there
may be largeness of the heart, though there be a limit of words; This is the
sum of the answer, which the Reader may have more at large there.

And thus I have given ye the judgment of these four eminent men in their
time, approved by three other equal with themselves, all fully concurring with
the Primate in this particular, which cannot but prevail much with such as have
been, or are otherwise minded at this day, I add no more, presuming that those
that will despise these, will set light by any other; and so much for this
subject, concerning a set Form of Prayer.

Now there are two other things, which upon this occasion might not be
unseasonable to speak a word of, according to the Primates judgment also. viz.
Of the length or brevity in prayer, and of the Gesture at it; in both which,
many of this age have gone astray.

1. For the length. In the public, all good discretion teaches ordinarily not
to be very large, (for we speak not now of extraordinary duties in public
Fasts) because in a congregation, all the Auditors are not of the like
strength. Some, (according to that distinction of John 1. Ep. 2.13, 14.) may be
Fathers, some young men, but others Children fitter for milk then strong meat,
that a long continuance at prayer may as ill suit with them, as putting of a
new garment to an old, or new wine into old bottles.

Jacobs speech in answer to his Brother Esau, when he would have had him driven
on his pace with him ( Genesis 33.13.) I will (says he) lead on softly according
as the Cattle with young, which are with me, and the children which are tender
shall be able to endure, lest if I should over-drive them one day, the flock
should die, may have its Moral application to the prudence of a Pastor this
way.

It Is very dangerous to cause a fullness in the worship of God, that for prayer
men should be apt to say, as those in the Prophet for the Sabbath, when will it
be done?

Solomon's caveat ( Eccles. 5.2.) against rash and hasty utterings, and
multiplying of words in the house of God, and his Council, upon it. Let thy
words be few, are observable, much may be spoken in a little, and it is true in
this, as other matters, vis unita fortior.

There is an excellent Epistle of Saint Augustines concerning this subject, (
Epist. 121. Probae viduae.) that (says he) is not a commendation that he was
long at prayer; there may be much speech, but little praying (multa loquutio
non multa precatio) while the affection is lifted up; like the hands of Moses,
so long the party prays, when that is heavy, the Act of prayer cease;
sometimes (says he) the work of prayer is rather done (gemitibus quam
sermonibus; fletu quam afflatu) with sighs, then words, tears, then lips.

The time when our Savior is observed to have used a prolixity, was in the
private, then whole nights in prayer, and the whole day till even, but not in
the public; respecting, it may be, the causes before mentioned. So much for
the length of it.

Secondly, for the gesture; Certainly, the most comely is kneeling, after the
example of David, (Psalm. 100. Ezra (cap. 9.5.) Daniel (cap. 6.10.) and the
pattern of our Savior, Luc. 22.41. he kneeled down and prayed, etc. whose
example Saint Stephen followed, ( Acts 7.6.) and Saint Paul (Acts 20.36.) For
this cause I bow my knees unto the Father, etc. (Ephesians. 3.14.) The humility of
the soul is principal, but that of the body must not be omitted; both being
bought with a price, God must be glorified in both; present your bodies as a
living holy acceptable sacrifice to him ( Romans 12.1.)

A second which is allowed, is standing, 2 Chronicles. 20.5. Jehosasaphat stood and
prayed, etc. ( Nehem. 9.14.) At a solemn fast, the Priests and people stood,
and confessed their sins: allowed by our Savior ( Marc. 11.25.) when thou
stand praying; sitting is no fit gesture for it: as even Cas. Cons. de Orat.
Amesius confirms it. Sessio non est gestus orandi, which is not justified by
that of David, (2 Samuel 7.18.) who upon the Message from God by Nathan, is said
presently to have went in, and sat before the Lord and prayed, or that of the
Israelites, (Judge. 20.26.) Who at their solemn Fasts are said to have wept, and
sat before the Lord till Even; because the same word is frequently, and as
properly rendered elsewhere; to remain, abide, or tarry in a place, as Genes.
27.44. tarrying with him, etc. Lev. 4.8. he shall tarry abroad, 1 Samuel 1.23.
tarry till thou have weaned him, etc. cap. 20.29. thou shall remain at the
stone, etc. and so here, both for David and the Israelites, the sense is, only
they continued or remained before the Lord in prayer and fasting, as that of
Matthew. 4. the people which sat in darkness, etc. can be meant in no other.
Our Saviors sitting at the right hand of his Father, has as well the sense of
standing, according to Saint Stephens vision of him, Acts 7.56. and that which
is said of the Apostles at the Passover, Mark 14.18, and as they sat and did
eat ((...)) signifies rather a lying down, leaning one upon another, and
according to the former instances, may imply as well a standing, which it is
probable was the ancient gesture; so that sitting may be taken, in the latitude
of any other gesture used at their remaining there.

Nay, standing is not so strictly limited, but it is sometimes taken for
kneeling, (2 Chronicles. 6.12.) It Is said, Solomon stood before the Altar, and
spread forth his hands toward heaven; yet verse 14. he stood, and kneeled down
upon his knees, and (1 Kings 8.54.) he arose from kneeling on his knees, That
woman which is said to have stood at Jesus feet, Luke 7.38.
and kissed them, and washed them with her tears, and wiped them with the hair
of her head, must imply a bowing down, at least to a kneeling.

A third, which in Scripture was accustomed with both the former, is the
lifting up of the hands, according to that of David in the Psalms. Let us lift
up our hands unto God in the heavens, Psalm. 28.1. Psalm. 1.41.
hear my supplication, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy Oracle, etc.
which is referred to in the New Testament, I will that man lift up pure hands,
(1 Timothy 2.8.) signifying that of David, unto thee do I lift up my soul: To
which we may add the lifting up of the eyes to heaven, according to the
example of our Savior (John 17. cap. 11.41. Mat. 14.19.)

Other unseemly postures of the hands, eyes, face, and the like; has no
example in Scripture, and even men's hiding, or covering of the face at public
prayer, seems to be against the order of the Apostle, and the then custom of
the Churches. 1 Cor. 11.7. for by the head there is not meant the hairy scalp,
but the face, both by several circumstances in it, and the acceptance of the
word elsewhere. 2 Samuel 15.30. David wept as he went, and had his head covered,
and all the people that were with him, covered every man his head, weeping as
they went; etc. here by the head must be understood the face, after the manner
of mourners, as on the contrary, that of our Savior to his Disciples, in token
of joy; lift up your heads, must be meant accordingly, And the face being the
seat of shame, the head must be so taken, Jer. 14.3, 4. they were ashamed and
confounded, they covered their heads, etc. unto which, some passages out of
Tertullian might be given, by way of confirmation.

Now for the better reception of this latter part of the Primates judgment,
concerning our outward reverence in the public worship of God, whether at
hearing of the Word or Prayer; so much neglected in these times; I shall here
add what I find in the foresaid Mr. Arthur Hildersham, in his Lectures upon
John 4. In the 26. Lecture he speaks much for the outward reverence of Gods
public worship in the Church. viz. That we should neither come into that
place, nor go out of it, as ye would in or out of a danceing-schoole; But in
our very comeing in, and going out, and whole outward carriage; we should give
some signification of the reverence that we bear to this place, and that we do
indeed account it the house of God; Exhorts men to come to the beginning of the
then public worship, or before it begins; and tarry till all be done: to be
present at the Administration of Baptism, and at the blessing pronounced by
Gods Ministers. Affirms, that there was nothing then done in Gods public
worship among us, but it was done by the Institution, and Ordinance, and
Commandment of the Lord; the particulars of which, he mentions.

In his 27. Lecture, he exhorts to a reverend gesture in prayer, kneeling as
the fittest; or standing, not sitting. And commending the reading of the
Scriptures in public; he says, At the hearing of the word read, some further
gesture, and outward signification of reverence is to be used, then is required
at the hearing of the Sermon; which he confirms by proofs out of Scripture
and reasons, too large to be related here. But he thus concludes. viz. So you
see the custom of our Churches in sitting bare while the Word is read, is
grounded upon good reason and warrant from the word of God, and such, as it
well becomes every one of Gods people to conform themselves unto.

Lect. 29. he complains of that irreverence thus. Some will not vouchsafe to be
bare at the reading of the Word, some will be bare at the Psalms, not at the
Chapters; and if they could justly pretend infirmity for it, they were to be
excused; but they will not be bare many of them, so long as the Text is in
reading: yea, every youth and boy in our Congregations, are wont to be covered,
while the Word is read.

But the chief abuse is, the neglect of kneeling in prayer, many that will
kneel at their own private prayers (which they make at their coming into the
Church) can never be seen to kneel at the common and public prayers. Many that
will kneel at the Lords prayer, will kneel at no other, wherein (though the
Lords prayer be in sundry respects more excellent then any other yet) there is
as much reason we should kneel at any other prayer, as at it; for the reason of
our kneeling, is not the excellency of the words used in prayer, but the
reverence and duty we owe to the person we pray unto, etc. This says that
worthy and judicious Writer Mr. Hildersham,) I can but wonder, upon what
pretense such a man could be silenced, (as he wrote himself to the Primate;
Anno 1630.

I conclude only with an exhortation to decency, and a reverent comeliness in
our solemn meetings, that devotion and prudence may kiss each other, that
while the soul is lifted up in prayer, the body may be humbled, and the whole
man presented to God as an acceptable sacrifice, that unity and uniformity in
doctrine and worship; may be found among us, and that we may all be of one
heart, and one mind. Consider what has been said, and the Lord give us
understanding and moderation in all things.

A CHARACTER of Bishop Bedell late Bishop of Kilmore, in Ireland.
UPon the occasion of publishing this Sermon of his (on Revel. 18.4.) I have
thought fit to give this exemplary character of him. Somewhat of his life is
already extant, within that of Sir Henry Wottons, the enlargement of which, I
leave to the prudence of others, only thus much in brief.

He was Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridge, where he was one of the eight
that commenced Batchellours of Divinity of that house in one year: whereof
Bishop Hall and Doctor Ward were two, between whom and him, there was a
continual intercourse of Letters to their last. From that College and
University, he had that Character given him of learning, and prudence, that he
was chosen to go with the Ambassador Sir Henry Wotton unto Venice. What the
fruits of his some years being there produced upon Padre Paulo, and other
learned men, sufficiently appears by the testimony given of him in a letter of
the Ambassadors hereunto annexed. The Interdict of Venice (wrote by the foresaid
Author,) he translated out of Italian into Latin, for whose use he also
translated the book of Common Prayer into Italian, and made an English Grammar
(which I have seen writ with his own hand.)

After his return from Venice, were wrote those learned Letters of his to Mr.
Wadesworth, who at the same time, going with the Ambassador into Spain, had
been withdrawn to the Sea of Rome, whose temper and meekness of style to an
Apostate, I wish were so far exemplary with some Writers among our selves, as
to abate that heat and bitterness, which has broke forth in matters of less
consequence.

At his Benefice of Horningesh-earth near St. Edm. Bury in Suffolk, he
continued long in great esteem, sometimes chosen by the Diocese to be a member
of the Convocation.

Upon the death of Sir William Temple Provost of the College in Dublin, the
late Primate wrote earnestly to him to accept of it, being unanimously chosen by
the Fellows. During his abode there, he performed the duty of the Catechist,
and preached a Lecture Sermon once a week in Christ Church.

He was not long Provost, but he was promoted to be Bishop of Kilmore, where (I
being then the Dean) it gave me the occasion to be more known to him.

In relation to the Liturgy of the Church of England, he gave this direction;
viz. to observe whatsoever was enjoined in the Rubric without addition or
diminution; not to be led by custom, but by rule. And in special, he ordered
that the whole Doxology to the blessed Trinity, Glory be to the Father, etc.
should be always read by the Minister alone, without the respond of the
people, and the like for the Psalms: Te Deum, etc. with the rest, appointed to
be read between and after the Lessons, though the custom had prevailed
otherwise in most Churches.

The Communion Table was placed by him, not at the East end, but within the
body of the Chancell, and for other Innovations elsewhere introduced, he
observed them not. His judgment being, that those were as well
Non-conformists, who added of their own, as those who came short of what was
enjoined, as he that adds an inch to the measure, disownes it for a rule, as
well as he that cuts an inch off.

He was a careful observer of the Lords Day both in the public and private, at
one of the clock in the afternoon; he had then the Book of Common Prayer read
in the Irish tongue in the Church for the benefit of the Irish; at which he was
constantly present himself, who in that little space had obtained the knowledge
of the language. And as the New Testament had been long before translated into
Irish; so had he caused the Old Testam. to be accordingly, and was almost ready
for the press.

And Whereas Doctor Heylene has censured the late Primate very liberally for
his approbation of the Articles of Ireland, he must take Bishop Bedell into the
number also, who was so much for them, that I was present when, at the
examination of an Mr. Thomas Price then Fellow of the College of Dublin, who
afterward suffered much in the same Diocese by the Rebellion of I^eland, and
is yet living in Wales.
able Minister then to be ordained, he did in the Church examine him in each, or
most of the Articles, in a solemn meeting of the Clergy of that Diocese for
that end, at least 2 full hours, whereby our votes might be also given for his
approbation.

At his Courts of Jurisdiction, he frequently sat himself; where he caused
always some of the Clergy, (if any were there) to sit covered on each side of
him, with liberty to give their opinion in each case, and at a sentence, he
asked their votes man by man: In some degree reducing then his Episcopal to a
Synodicall Government, according to the Primates proposal by way of
accommodation an. 1641. It was his custom usually on the Lords days, to
preach upon those select portions of Scripture commonly called the Epistles and
Gospels of the day.

At the Visitations, he usually preached himself. The Procurations were
bestowed in defraying the charges of the Ministers, and the rest given to some
pious uses.

After dinner and supper, a Chapter, was constantly read at his Table, and some
time spent by him in opening some difficulties in it.

The public Catechism, he had branched out into 52 parts; whereof, he
appointed one to be constantly explained in the Afternoons in each Church,
within his Diocese.

He was very indulgent to the Irish Natives, in the preferring and encouraging
of them for the Ministry; and yet such was their Ingratitude (i. e. the Popish
party) that in that horrid rebellion, 1641. they exempted him not from their
rapine; but seized upon his cattle, pillaged his house, ransack't and spoiled
his Library; put him into a Castle, standing in a Lough, (called Lough-outre)
about a mile and a half from his house, where he was imprisoned that winter.
And at length being permitted to come out, died in a poor house of one who was
an Irishman, and a Protestant, and continued faithful to him; by whose means
an Hebrew manuscript Bible of his, (which he brought from Venice) was
preserved, and is now in Emmanuel College Library in Cambridge.

He was buried acccording to his own appointment in the Churchyard of the
Cathedral of Kilmore, where he had caused his wife and son some years before to
be buried. His judgment being against burials in Churches, as an abuse
introduced by pride and superstition.

I conclude only with this, if the Moderation of this Bishop had been observed
elsewhere. I believe Episcopacy might have been kept upon its wheels.

A Letter of Sir Henry Wottons to the late King, in the behalf of Bishop Bedel,
when he was desired by the Archbishop of Armagh, to accept of the Provostship
of Dublin College in Ireland, which has been lately published in the Life of
Sir Henry Wotton.
May it please your most Gracious Majesty,
HAving been informed that certain persons have by the good wishes of the
Archbishop of Armagh, been directed hither with a most humble Petition unto
your Majesty, that you will be pleased to make Mr. William Bedell (now resident
upon a small Benefice in Suffolk) Governor of your College at Dublin, for the
good of that society; and my self being required to render unto your Majesty
some testimony of the said William Bedell who was long my Chaplain at Venice in
the time of my employment there; I am bound in all conscience, and truth (so
far as your Majesty will vouchsafe to accept my poor judgment) to affirm of
him that I think hardly a fitter man for that charge, could have been
propounded unto your Majesty in your whole Kingdom, for singular erudition and
piety; Conformity to the rites of the Church, and Zeal to advance the Cause of
God wherein his Travels abroad were not obscure in the time of the
Excommunication of the Venetians.

For may it please your Majesty to know that this is the man whom Padro Paul
took, I may say, into his very soul; with whom he did communicate the
inwardest thoughts of his heart; from whom he professed to have received more
knowledge in all Divinity, both Scholastical and positive, then from any that
he had ever practiced in his days, of which all the passages were well known
to the King your Father, of most blessed memory. And so with your Majesty's
good favor, I will end this needless office; for the general fame of his
Learning, his Life, and Christian temper, and those religious labors which
himself has dedicated to your Majesty, do better describe him, then I am able.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Servant, H. WOTTON.


A Postscript.
Mr. Thomas Pierce has in an Appendage to a late book of his, printed five
Letters wrote unto me by him, in each of which I cannot but much acknowledge his
respects to me. To the four first I gave little else but brief returns of the
like to him, which consisting chiefly, either in the asserting of the nearness
of his judgment to the Primates, or the remoteness of Mr. Barlees, I did not
conceive it fitting for me to interpose, and where there was a professed full
agreement, it was no good office in me to make a difference. Now for those, the
cause rendered of his not publishing them is good, there being nothing (as he
says) needful, or of concernment, in any one of them, Only to the fifth of
his, wherein three Certificates are published as testimonies to confirm his
former assertion of a late change of judgment in the Primate, with other
applicatory passages from thence, I did return him a larger answer in this
Letter following, (excepting some few circumstantiall alterations) having then
no imagination that either of them should have bin made public. And I have as
little mind to it now, only by the provocation of diverse of my Friends who
conceive the Primate suffers in the interpretation of many by the silence of
it, I have been compelled upon this occasion, to put forth this brief defense
of him without any offense to Mr. Pierce. For his Appendage (wherein his
respects to me are rather increased then lessened) I have thought fit to clear
one passage. He says I have spoken indiscriminately of Universal Grace, and
Universal Redemption, and the place he quotes for it, is out of my second
Letter to Mr. Barlee, p. 64. in these words, viz. But that by an Universal
Redemption should be understood, an Universal Grace, etc. will not be attested
to have heen affirmed by the Primate, etc. does not this clearly imply a
distinction to be made between them; I am sure I then so intended it. And
therefore that which he adds immediately after. viz. That there is a wide
difference between them, I do fully concur with him in it. Yet it seems to
me, that himself puts them together often indiscriminately, as in the page
before this, thrice in one page, 86. and p. 88. l. 32. as in his Philanth. p.
15. and elsewhere. And if I have in any other place done it, as in the title of
the Letter, I was led to it by him. In this we have no disagreement, and I wish
this following Letter may not occasion any, which I am forced thus to publish,
as follows.

Doctor Bernards Answer to Mr. Pierces Fifth Letter containing three
Certificates, produced by him to justify a late change of judgsment in the
Primate of Ireland.
SIR,
I Owe you many thanks for the labor you have taken in your last Letter of the
28. of January, in transcribing the Certificates of those learned persons,
which (supposing to have been rightly apprehended by them, without any mistake
of him, yet) favorably interpreted, do not seem to me necessarily to argue
what you have apprehended, and concluded of the change of judgment in the
Primate, which I shall now ingenuously give you my sense of, without any desire
of further dispute or contention about it.

First for Doctor Waltons, where he says, My Lord Primate did declare his
utter dislike of the doctrine of absolute reprobation; I conceive it may be
understood of the Supralapsarian opinion, which makes reprobation to be
antecedent to the fall of Adam, and not only as a Praeterition, but a
Predamnation for actual sins. That he held the universality of Christ's death,
not only in respect of sufficiency, but also in regard of efficacy, so that
all men were by that made salvable (for so much efficacy I do not deny) differs
not from that which his letter published, does testify,) and that the reason
why all men were not thereby saved, was because they did not accept of
salvation offered, is also granted, if it be according to his judgment rightly
understood, viz. of those to whom the Gospel is preached; not of Pagans, and
Infidels.

That the grace of Conversion was not irresistible, but that men did often
resist and reject the same, may well stand with my Lord Primates Judgment, and
no ways opposite to this. viz. That it is so effectual, that by the decree of
his election; It is not resisted by the elect, and therefore his dissent from
Geneva (as Doctor Walton certifies) is to be understood of Beza, not of Calvin;
nor of the Sublapsarian (as I have intimated before) and I conceive his
concurrence with Bishop Overall, which he averreth him to have professed, is to
be understood as I have expressed it: for you know that Bishop Overall
distinguished the Remonstrants opinion, and that which he is pleased to call
the opinion of the Puritans; (which title I wish he had spared) from the
doctrine of the Church of England, which joins the universality of redemption
with the special intention of God, effectually to save the elect. This for
Doctor Waltons Certificate.

Now for Mr. Goninges, which seems (by the Preface of it) to have bin given you
after your publishing the Lord Primates change of judgment; somewhat of that
may be safely granted; viz. The sincerity of Gods universal call of all sinners
to whom the Gospel was preached, which is the sum of what he affirms to have
heard, from him in the public, but for that which he says he received from
him in private, viz. That God, together with his word preached, did give
internal grace to all that are called by it, that they may repent if they will,
yea they all can will, etc. If the Primates words were not mistaken by him, (as
they might the more possibly by the distance between the hearing, and the date
of his certificate to you) I suppose this was the sense of them, viz. That by
internal grace he did not understand more, then that there are some good
motions offered unto the hearts of sinners, which if they did not extinguish
and resist, and thereby draw upon themselves a further guilt, they should be
seconded with more effectual grace; and, that upon their disobedience, God
does justly leave them to themselves, and does not superadde that special
grace, whereby their Wills are changed, and their conversion wrought. As for
posse non resistere, it is consistent with actual resistance, which is taken
away by special grace, and thus far I conceive he might hold with Bishop
Overall; so much for Mr. Goninge.

For Mr. Thornedicks Testimony, I see not wherein it differs from the Lord
Primates Letter published, and needs no further answer. So that upon the whole
I do not find, even by these Certificates, so sure a ground, for your assertion
of my Lord Primates change of judgment, and his being of late a serious
convert, etc. as you have supposed; The first pretend but little, the last
less, and the middle not much; thus interpreted: Howsoever for my self, had I
been an ear-witnesse of that which certifies the most largely, I should have
had more caution then to have adventured to signify the judgment of so
eminent a person, under hand, and seal, (as you say you have it) without his
knowledge, or consent, whether when he was living, or since his death,
especially in that which should seem to imply a contradiction, to what he had
before said and wrote.

For that Objection of the 32 Article of Ireland, that Article may very well
admit of some preparative motions tending to conversion, but not the actual
grace of conversion; and may also be understood of denying an actual call of
all men, which are out of the Pale of the Church, or that the works of the
creation and providence do lead men, or enable them to come to Christ, as some
French Divines have lately taught.

For that inconsistency employed by you, from what I have affirmed of my Lord
Primates judgment. viz. That Massa corrupta was the object of predestination,
it will well consist with his judgment of universal redemption, expressed in
his letter. And, the decree of reprobation, supposed to be ex intention
speciali, does not deny a salvability of all men, but only an effectual grace
to be given to work their conversion, and may also consist with universal
redemption, and possibility of salvation, because reprobation is only negatio
specialis gratiae, non nudae sufficientis.

As for Goteschalchus, the Primate relating the truth of the story, and his
opinion, is not thereby obliged to every particular of them, and if there were
any mistakes of Mr. Barlees from thence, or that large Catechism going under
his name, does not concern me to take notice of:

For that which you mention of Mr. Vaughans relation in the life, and death of
Doctor Jackson, of the care which the Primate took, (being (as you say) a
Mourner at his funeral) to have his writings very religiously preserved.
First, I have viewed the place, and find some mistake in the words, which are
only thus; viz. The Bishop of Armagh, (being at his funeral) much desired his
papers might be carefully preserved. But secondly, I do not believe the Primate
meant, or approved those works of Doctor Jacksons, wherein he professes
himself to be for the Arminian way, as he does in the Epistle Dedicatory of
those Books which he dedicated to the Earl of Pembrook, and which were
answered by Doctor Twisse. Other works it may be, that learned man might have
of other subjects, which might be useful to posterity, which the Primate might
have a care of, but I do not believe they were any of that nature; and the
rather because they must be meant of such works which were not extant at his
death, and not of those which were already printed, as you seem to apply it.
Besides, it does not appear, the Primate then understood what subjects they
were of; And therefore, that which you have immediately added of your own; viz.
That such inestimable (...) might not be wanting to posterity, but might
perform their work of bringing religion into its wits, (which the Reader might
possibly mistake, in apprehending them to have been the Primates words) and
your somewhat severe application to him, from thence, and what Mr. Barlee had
said of Doctor Jackson, seems to want a foundation here.

For that which you write in your Postcript concerning my saying, that the
doctrine of St. Augustine was confirmed, or inclined unto by the Primate in his
works, if you observe the whole discourse, it is only in relation to Pelagius
and his disciples, and limited to those points in debate concerning the
Primates judgment, whereof universal redemption and free will, were
mentioned; not that by it I had obliged the Primate to be of Saint Augustines
judgment in all points besides: And for that particular of perseverance, which
you instance in, it came not into my discourse in either of my Letters to Mr.
Barlee, what he or Mr. Baxter have produced of the Primates apprehension; what
was Saint Augustines judgment in that point, cannot argue it was therefore his
own; Indeed, Saint Augustine is variously conceived in it, in his several
Tractates, and where he has some expressions tending to the final falling
away of some who have been regenerated and justified; he is thus salved by
others, who understand him either, de justificatis Sacramento tenus, or judicio
charitatis, that they were such, or of some predispositions to regeneration, in
some Moral reformation; not of a spiritual real conversion, which he denies to
any reprobate.

Now in this variety of senses, you should have done better then thus, to choose
the worse; for the Primates judgment, who was against the Total and final
falling away of those, who were effectually called, truly regenerated and
sanctified, according to the 38 Article of Ireland; And thus I have touched the
principal materials in your Letter.

For that you say, some have endeavored to gain credit to their Calvinistical
opinions by their unjust usurpation of the Primates name. I could wish those
hard expressions tending so much to the distaste of Calvin, might be abated;
whom diverse of the most eminent Writers, and learned Fathers of our Church,
(whom I suppose you reverence) have had in great esteem; and usually name him
with honor.

I might quote diverse, as Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Davenant,
Mr. Hooker, Doctor Ward, etc. but Bishop Andrews shall suffice, who in his
determination against usury, (a case wherein he dissented from Calvin yet) thus
writes of of him. Calvino (illustri viro nec unquam sine summi honoris
praefatione nominando) etc. i. e. Calvin an excellent man, never to be named
without a Preface of the highest honor. I wish that spirit of meekness and
charity found in those old Bishops, were doubled upon us in these days, when
we are as much (if not more) called unto it; The contrary may possibly be
grateful to the Sea of Rome, but I do not see what advantage it can be to us.
For his discipline, you may take your liberty, which may well be distinguished
from his doctrines. And for the Primate, though I cannot say he was of his
judgment in all points, yet he had a due respect for him.

For that which you object again to me, as you did in your third Letter, viz.
my acknowledgeing an enngagement to Mr. Barlee for his readiness offered, (in
his first Letter unto me) to clear the Primate, etc. did not deserve a
repetition, being it was in my first to him, when he was as much a stranger to
me, as I was to you: only, let me say thus much of him. How far he had
disagreed in his book from the Primates judgment; I shall not now enquire, but
after the receipt of that tractate, wherein he read what his was; he wrote thus
unto me ( December. 21. 1657.) viz. It is true, there be some minutiae, about
which I am not satisfied, and shall be glad to have an amicable conference with
you. However as to the rei summam, I do so perfectly agree with the most
venerable Primate, as that I dare discharge you from all fears of ever having
him exposed to my pen, and censure, etc. which I do the rather thus punctually
repeat his words, because in short you have mentioned it from me in your fourth
Letter. And when I had read you both, meeting in the Primate, I thought it my
part to sit down in silence.

In a word, you have with much industry viewed, and reviewed the Primates
judgment in that point, which has been published, but I wish I did not find
you making that use of it, to endeavor to confirm your former assertion of a
change in him, in which I am not in the least shaken in mind by what has
passed between us, but must still conceive (contrary to your expectation in the
beginning of your Letter) there was a mistake wheresoever it lights, which
being so gentle an expression, and which we are all subject unto, I see no
cause of any offense, either to your self, or Certifiers.

I shall entreat you to let the venerable name (as you style it) of that good
man rest in peace, without any further strife of tongues or pens; and let us
leave his judgment to his works, which do undoubtedly testify of him: and for
any further dispute of this subject between us, I wish this might be the last,
as it is the largest; and that neither by this, nor any other, the least breach
may be made between us, as to love, and friendship, which upon all occasions,
shall ever ber readily manifested by

Grayes-Inne, Febr. 9. 1657. Your assured Friend and Servant, N. BERNARD.


FINIS.

