AN INFORMATION FOR MR. WILLIAM DELL THE (RIGHT REFORMER) As he is pleased to
style himself: (being the first to our best remembrance that ever assumed that
TITLE.) OR, An Answer to his Reply upon Mr. LOVES CONTRADICTIONS. Together with
the Answer unto his Epistle Dedicatory to the PARLIAMENT. By Umfrevile.

LONDON, Printed for the better edification of Mr. Dels selected and peculiar
people. 1646.

AN ANSWER UNTO MR. WILLIAM DELL THE RIGHT REFORMER His Epistle Dedicatory TO
THE PARLIAMENT.
SIR, your Epistle, Janus-like, has two faces, one looks toward the
Parliament, to make them yours, the other toward your selves to make yours
theirs; in your Sermon you break their heads, in your Epistle you bind them
up: You flatter them with a seeming voluntary acknowledgement of their power,
and your free submission thereunto; in your assertion of the power of the
Gospel, you utterly enfeeble it: how comes it I pray to pass, that the just
power of Magistracy is not consistent with the Kingdom of Christ? and why may
not the one support the other? seeing that both ought to be held of Divine
Right and institution, Touch not mine anointed, by all the expossions of the
best that ever exposited, is meant of both.

But Mr. Dell, q^^^ore, with what ^^ce durst you term the Presbyterian
Government (not only here established by Authority of the High Court of
Parliament, but made choice of, erected, constituted, embraced, maintained and
submitted unto, from the very dawning of the Gospel, and departure from Romes
Idolatry, by all the Reformed Churches of Christendom, as, That of France,
Germany, Scotland, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweadland, Geneua, etc. who all Vna
voce, have approved of this Discipline and Government as the most consonant to
the word, and most opposite to the Romish Hierarchy (in that none but Priests
ruling the Roast, this consisting of a mixed temper, of Ministers and
Lay Elders, one poysing and balancing the too much powerful influence of the
other.) How durst you, I say, give the reigns so far unto your Anarchicall
passion, or rather fury, as to call the said Government, The last prop of
Antichrist in this Kingdom? yea, and that to the very face of those that were
by their power, not only the promoters, but only erectors of it: Has the
Parliament, Mr. Dell, no better credit with you, than to be esteemed the
Erectors of the last prop of Properie in this Kingdom, for these six years
space? Tantum sudavit and alsit, in the pulling down of Popery, and of late, in
lieu of recompense have they given it new props?

Truly Sir, I fear me, very few of that honorable House, like no better of
your Epistle then they did of your Sermon: if any do, I must needs confess
that I fear it the more: and whether a man may more wonder at Mr. Dells
impudence or ignorance, I cannot say, who indevoureth to indeare the Parliament
unto him, by scandalizing and disparaging the Government now generally
thorough-out the whole Kingdom established by them, and not that temere and ex
improviso, but after long demurring, serious consultation, deliberate debate,
neither without the advice and counsel of the best and choycest Divines
throughout the Reformed Churches, and especially of the Kirk of Scotland, our
united Brethren; and the better to gain credit unto his design, Mr. Dell does
his utmost to increase the dislike, that some perhaps in the Parliament might
have against this already settled Government, he sticks not to write that it
threatens even the Parliament to dispute its superiority with them, and to make
the supreme Magistracy of the Kingdom to stoop under their lore.

Who would have thought that after so much talk in the Sermon Of the
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, of the exaltation of the Gospel of Christ; the
Word of Faith, Truth, and many the like good things; he should fall to such a
malicious falsehood, in the Epistle Dedicatory? charging it with an aim at a
power Paramount and predominant over the first Constitutors and Voters of it;
which how far swarving from truth, let all men judge who have either known or
observed the behavior of such, that by election have been interessed in the
Presbytery, whether Ministers or Laics, let their deportment, I say, be duly
considered, in what dutiful respective manners it ever has been toward this
High Assembly, not leaving excepted the Venerable Assembly of Divines, who
never yet concluded any thing to be published concerning Reformation either in
Church matters, or in manners, but in all humility they first presented it to
the view of the Honorable House, attending usually at the House of Commons
door, and in their Theses submitting themselves sometimes to alteration, and
limitation, always unto approbation of the Honorable Houses: which I dare
affirm Mr. Dell, will not avouth that his Independent, and the rest rabble of
Sects that crowd themselves under that name, either have done, or are about to
do, for then I think we should hardly have such diversity of Conventicles and
diversities of Faiths breached in them by approvement of Parliament, as at this
day we have, so notoriously known unto all: That in one street in London every
Child shall lead you to three; And where you shall have such stuff commended
to you, by way of Divine inspiration, to be believed and taken up as
dogniatical points of Faith, and with a (...) (none of Gods children, not
comprehended in the Buttery scrowle of election in case of refusal) That a man
which has only the usual knowledge of the ordinary principles of Christian
Religion, if not out of mockage, yet out of a feeling compassion, must needs
say, having heard them; Surely the blind leads the blind into the ditch.

Another passage in Mr. Dells Epistle Dedicatorie is this:

He likes not the spiritual power supporting by the temporal; it is
Antichristian he says and Papisticall; Mr Dels assertion smells not much of
antiquity, (as neither his Sect) for he may read in the Annals of the Christian
Prinitive Church, long before any point of Popery was hatched, that men notable
for sanctity in those times did passionately implore the aid and inte^mise of
the sword temporal toward the defense of the true Christian verity, and the
depressing, yea, extirpating of known Heresies, as in the business of that
Arch-Heretick Arius (and some that are of the Independent crew hold the same
damnable tenants, or else they have much wrong) all men know that Constantine
the great interposed his authority more then in any thing else, and not only
his authority but his Pains, in the extinguishing and condemning of that
Heresy, or otherwise it had spread its contagion farther, and with a more
peremptory Vogue: and moreover if there had been nothing worse found among the
late Bishops, then that saying, no Bishop no King, nor more displeasing to God,
or impeaching the progress of the Gospel, for ought I know they might have
stood still, although Master Dell may be pleased to be put in mind that he
whose familiar speech it was, (no Bishop no King) was no Bishop but a King, and
a King the very Paragon for learning and wisdom of all those this Island ever
saw: a Prince that was of opinion, that the licentious liberty of Sectaries
would produce as much danger to temporal Monarchy and State Government, as
ever could or would the Pontisiciall Tyranny, both agreeing in the pulling
down of civil Magistracy, though differing about the manner: and let Master
Dell be told that the interposition of the civil power, or the requesting the
assistance of the same, in the maintenance of the undoubted faith of Christ, or
an external Ecclesiasticke discipline, consonant to the same (without which it
is imposible for the Orthodox doctrine long to consist, discipline being the
nerves and sinnews by which a Church stands, as the doctrine, the food by which
it is fed and nourished) is neither the head nor the toe of Popery.

And let me be bold to ask Master Dell one question, to what purpose tends his
large invective against the Presbyteriall Government now erected? what, to have
none? I could not be so ill persuaded of tho man: whether then? marry to
withdraw the Parliaments countenancing prorection from the Presbytery, and to
place it upon them, that is the enlarging of the power of Christ's Kingdom, the
exaltation of the Gospel of Christ, the propagation of the elect people, which
I suppose the good man means: lo then see all well. May it please the
Parliament to Vote down the Presbytery, as the last prop of Papory in this
Kingdom, for interlacing it self with the temporal power, and craving its
aid and succors against those that would bring in aparchicall confusion, first
into the Church, then into the state, and eadem opera, let them be pleased to
Vote Master Dels chosen flock the only Christians, and his Government of Gods
Church; (if he knew first himself what it were or should be) let the
Honorable Houses, I say, but be pleased to do thus, and behold, omnia been,
the power of Christ's Kingdom mightily enlarged, the exaltation of the Gospel
wonderfully furthered, etc. hinc illa lacryma, now I perceive what makes the
world flock so fast unto Independency; what power or authority soever supports
them, stands for the enlargement of the power of Christ's Kingdom, the
exaltation of the Gospel, the Privileges of Christ's chosen people, for the
beauty of Saints, and what not? but let them beware that seek for supportation,
not only against them, but even by them, they are at least, but the last prop
of Antichrist in this Kingdom: who would wonder if all the world now turn
Independent? seeing that one that depends on them may better steal a horse,
then a man of another mind look over the hedge: but to be more serious, the
baddest actions have ever made show of the best pretensions, the foulest
Heresies have styled themselves by the most specious titles; the Arians would
be called by no other name but Catholic, although their cursed Blasphemy
impugned the mainest point in all Christianity: it is an old saying, the Devil
does never show his Cloven-foot at first; Schism is like the Panther, whose
skin being of a sweet sent, and beautiful spotted color, whereby he draws
many other beasts toward him, which approaching near, are forthwith affrighted
with the ugliness of his head; wherefore the better to be master of his prey,
he discovers not that till he have them in his power: it is a truth infallible,
that Schisms and Faction evermore in their first rising put on the face of
woman, but in their growth that of a lion: the behavior of the Anabaptists at
Magdeburg in Germany, though long since, yet by reason of other Sects in these
our days, not much different in opinions, and less in practice, is a fresh
revived in our memories; good God, what Sanctity, piety, humility, simplicity
did those Juglers show at first? what charity and contempt of worldly mucke? so
that they drew the whole Generality of the City after them, with the selfsame
saying in their mouths which sometime the Samaritans used toward Simon Magus,
surely these men are the great power of God; at length when their poor
deceived proselites began to grow numerous, they possessed them that the power of
the civil magistrate was Heathenish and Antichristian; that Christ's true
Disciples must be all equal; neither were they defective in alleging
Scripture for this their project, ill understood and worse applied. Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world say they, he that will be the greatest amongst
you, let him be as your servant; the Kings and Princes of the earth bear rule,
and exercise power over them, but with you not so. Do not rich men trouble
you, bringing you into judgment says St. James. What conclusions draw they
from these texts? why surely that all civil Magistracy is Antichristian,
(though those that bare it at that time in that town were known to be zealous
maintainers of the Gospel) it must have nothing to do with Gods chosen; they
that did desire to be supported by it in matter of faith, or for their better
strengthening did request the countenance of the same toward the bearing up of
the Church discipline established in that famous City: from these infusions
what follows? The Comminalty rises against their lawful Magistrates; not
only degrades them but butchers them; next the Ministers drink of the same
cup, for no other fault, but that fearing the storm approaching, and
advertising the civil Magistracy of its growth and proceeding, they besought
them for the suppressing of this swelling faction, and upholding of the
anciently settled Government in that Church; but because they sought the
maintenance of the lawful Ecclesiastic Government by the civil sword (which
then was a toe or a finger of Antichrist, as it is now) therefore they tasted
of the same sawee with them: but what did the good Anabaptists after this? what
did they not? but to particularise what the History mentions, they fell
afterward upon their own proselites, cut the throats of them, seized not
only the goods of all Citizens, but the state it self, brought a text of
Scripture to warrant it, though themselves would be thereof the expositors, The
meek shall inherit the Earth: This story wants no application. Men must not
look so much upon the words and shows as the practices of raisers of factions;
and as touching Master Dell, although thorough the whole course of his Sermon
there is great talk of the spirit of meekness, the spirit of humility,
obedience, and the like; and in the close of his Epistle Dedicatory, much
assurance offered unto the Parliament of his utmost endeavors, in relation to
obedience to their authority; yet see how Master Dell has thwarted both, in
his practice; he virulently lasheth Master Love, twits him in the teeth, with
his discerning people, charge him with menaciny of the Parliament in case of
desertion from them, puts him in the number of the fingers and toes of Anti
Christ: this action of Master Dell daming expressly the party rather rescents of
nature then grace, of gall then meekness, of malice then charity; nay, rather
then Master Dell will miss to lash him, he will hazard the reputation of the
close to his Epistle, and venters the questioning of his obedience to the
Parliament so vehemently and seriously by him protested: for does Mr Dell print
his sermon in obedience to the Honorable House? I am given to understand the
contrary; that the House ordered him neither thanks nor order to print it, but
forbid both: yet Mr. Dell out of an humble obedience, if not to them, yet to
Christ, will print it, and with an Epistle Dedicatory to the House also: to
speak bonaside and sublata larva, I think three were the causes that prevailed
with Mr. Dell to print his Sermon, though misliked, though forbidden.

First, that he might be beforehand with Mr. Love in the Press, though he had
had the precedence of him in the Pulpit, and to forestall men's judgments, both
toward him and his Sermon, a thing much practiced in this clashing Age, to cry
whore first. The second reason of the Printing of his Sermon was his zeal, to
show his dislike in the Press, as he had often done before in the Pulpit of
the Presbyterian form and Rule, as a prop of popery, and obstacle to the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: desiring rather then that (or any
other should stand) there might be none at all, and so the peculiar people may
do and live as they list, who should control them that have the spirit of
illumination and inspiration ad nutum? yet this puts me in mind of what I read
in one place of Samuel, And then there was no King in Israel, what follows?
Vnusquisque fecit qued fibi visum fuerit, Every one did what was right in his
own eyes, and that was wrong enough I believe. The third respect, for which Mr.
Dell published this Sermon, was, I believe, because he was not licensed by the
House to publish it, Nor no thanks returned him for it, Mr. Dell following the
Trade wind of his Faction, must needs do it the readier for that; and reason
enough he had to put him forward, for his party has never gained more credit
than by crossing Authority: And had Mr. Dells discourse been such that might
have been thought worthy to have been Licensed by the House, it would never
have purchased him that repute amongst his as now it has; for nothing is cried
up amongst them, Nisi quod nititur in vetitum.

But what means Mr. Dell, by that pathetick Latin Theme in the foot of the
frontispiece to his book? Theologum me creed in regno veritatis natum, ero
itaque, etc. What reason had Mr. Dell, tam gravem proferre sententiam in
materia tam levi; Mr. Dell gives the Alarm here, tanquam Annibal ad portas, as
if all were in danger to be lost, true piety trampled under foot, true Religion
banished, Christ's Kingdom vanquished, unless all strike sale unto
Independency, whereof he professes himself an asserter ad wortem and sanguinem
usque I find in all ages that all Innovators are of Bruce his temper, quicquia
volunt valde volunt; rather then they will want their wills, Coelum terra
miscendum.

FINIS.
A Confutation of Master DELLS Reply unto Master LOVES Contradictions (as he is
pleased to term them).
MAfter Dell Prologues in butter and honey, puts Master Love in great hopes of
his conscientious dealing: He will not wrong him (forsooth) in any measure, in
what he said, and to the end he might not, he spares not to set down the
warrantable course he took, he would not trust his own memory (that might
have bin as weak as his wits) therefore he repaires to one who took Master
Loves notes in short hand, Honestaratio, it is fair hitherto: But will Master
Dell say and hold? does he wrong Master Love in no manner of way throughout his
reply? no, not in the very paring of his nails; not in a little vinegar
language? No sure; they may believe that will: but they that shall observe
diverse passages in his strong Polymickes, must needs confess that Master Dell
falls three farthings in a penny: but ad rem. Master Love says (and he says
true) that the begun reformation is cried down with confidence by some that
would have neither that nor any other settled and firmly established to which
the whole national Church should submit: to this Master Dell, being Lupus in
fabula, and convinced by the verdict of his own Conscience, as those that are
told of in the Gospel man by man til the woman was left alone knowing himself
not only one, but the Master one of those Master Love meant (as of purpose he
would make it known to all the world, in his late worthy Sermon) Enters the
list, takes up the bucklers, and replies in this manner. That the Kingdom of
Christ is Spiritual, the Reformation of it answerable: That Master Love has
bin so blind or worse as to affirm that the Preaching of the Spiritual and
glorious Reformation is to preach against all Reformation. Is Master Dell so
madish, foolish, knavish or worse, as to charge Master Love with such a
notorious falsehood? Is not Master Love known to be as Jealous, painful,
laborious and active in th'advancing the kingdom Spiritual of Christ as he?
Has he not pressed the glorious Reformation as far as he? Is Master Dell
either so masiciously ignorant or ignorantly malicious that he should not blush
to write that Master Love affirms, That the Reformation which Jesus Christ
works in the faithful by his Spirit is no Reformation at all? Is your
sottishnes so brasend that it durst commit such a Signal scandal to the
Press touching a brother and fellow Minister in the Gospel? When Master Love
preached for outward Reformation and a settled decent visible Government in the
Church did he preach against the inward? Or in the judgment of all
understanding, learnd, honest and pious men is it not inordine to the Inward?
When Master Love deservedly spoke against your Chymericall whimses, pusht he at
the gracious operation of Christ in the heart of any particular man, think
ye? Sir, Master Love averreth that you (as all that know you, know you do)
oppose at outward civil discipline in the Church: that's his aim, your reply
has nothing unto this, quitting you of this imputation: (You know it sits to
fast to you to be shaken off) but instead of clearing your self of this, you
clap a false aspersion upon Master Love, and which is Nihil ad Rombum, as wide
as York from London, from a reply ad oppositum, That he forsooth denies
Spiritual Reformation; well replide Master Dell, to what Master Love
contradicts not, you have returned a very able reply (Let able men judge of
it) but to what Master Love contradicts indeed, you reply nothing at all.
Master Love contradictes your chalk, you would choke him with your reply in
cheese; Master Dell you shall be no replier for me. Master Love informed that
Honorable Audience no more then the world knows, that you not only snarle and
bark at, but would bite and rear in pieces all Christian Civil Discipline
and Church Regiment if you could; Master Love proceeds, and tells you as if all
were comprehended within the narrow heart of man: and very well truly, for if
every man's heart may pass for his own acquittance, and none should judge and
control our outward conversation and behavior but our selves, men would
quickly have the title of the play in their mouths, A mad world my Masters;
But to this Master Dell replies. When the heart is reformed all is reformed
(from top to toe, no such matter, Master Dell, though the heart be reformed,
yet all may not be reformed. Master Love accuses you rightly enough yet:
Master Dell, men may observe in these times as bad believers and good men
(namely many Religious and Votaries as they call them in the Church of Room,
both men and women, diverse of them leading most innocent and harmless lives,
and which if the root from which they spring were right, might justly be
termed holy.) So on the contrary, true believers, and none of the best livers.
Some wonderfully I dare say enlightened yea and inspired with the Spirit of God,
who I will be bold to say had from God a large share of saving Graces, I and in
whole hearts (I write it with confidence) the Spiritual kingdom of Christ was
certainly by himself erected: Yet of their living very loose that I may not
say scandalous: as these men pass down the streams of this life and in the
stearing of their course approach too near the Anchors or Sands of offense:
whereby they are in danger to be either split by the one, or Swallowed up by
the other; would not the public and visible Boy of discipline established in
the Church point unto these men the true Channel of a righter, and safer
conversation? and shall we bring a Text or two of Scripture to confirm this?
Our Savior in the Gospel, as touching an obstinate and refractorie brother,
said to us expressly dic Ecclesiae, and in case of refusal to submit in all
dutiful obedience unto it, whether for admonition or censure, (according to
the nature of the failing) Sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus et Publicanus. What is
this Church but the chosen and selected members, the heads of the Tribes (as I
may so call them) men Eminent for piety, and Signal abilities of government
and discretion, which are constituted and set up by the whole Christian
Congregation and Assembly, whether National or Provincial, Ad causas
cognoscendas, to judge of order, direct, reform, yea, and censure too if need
so require, the exorbitant swarvings of their inferior and younger brethren?
and what means ( Dic, tell) but complain? if no other remedy, if private
admonition will not suffice, si longius Serpit malum, if he proceeds in
detrimentum totius, if by his stife-neckednesse others also may or do fall into
carelessness, Why, Dic Ecclesiae ut Curet illa ne res-publica Christiana inde
damno afficiatur; that the sinnews of the Churches body be not thereby loosened.

The Apostle Saint Paul, in the close of one of his Epistles gives express
order to mark such as walked disorderly. What meant he by those words (mark
such?) Surely, some Emphasis, some restraining coercive power was in them. But
does Master Dell, and his Peripatetick (Comrade, that (walking) I do not say
(Wandering light) Master Hugh Peter's, the miraculous new Gospeller, That famous
Centaure or Horseback Preacher, do these two great Pillars of this late forged
building (the new peculiar people of God) presume to say and preach likewise
that they have no need of any outward Government they? These men have no dirt,
no, not upon their clothes they, much less in their skin: Gods chosen amongst
whom can be found neither blur nor blot they, and then I pray what need of any
Church Government on them, I mean these Darlings and Favorites of God, who have
as great an impossibility from erring as the Pope: They are so far in Gods
books that they can hardly get out: Homines omni exceptione Majores, they; I
remember that sometime the Lacedemomans boasted, that they had not any Whores
amongst them: no by no means they: yet by the Laws of their State they were
permitted Concubitum promiscuum, every man to hold his Neighbors wife as dear
as his own, and so in honest plains they were all Whores: I will forbear
application at this time.

Mr. Love infers the racing our the first Article of the Covenant from Mr.
Dells positions, if they took place: and well he might make such an inference:
for that Article obliges me, besides other things, to maintain a Discipline in
our Church, conformable unto the Discipline of the best Reformed Churches of
Christendom, and namely, to that of Scotland.

Mr. Dell to this Replies, That he had rather the whole Covenant were raced
out, then the least truth contained in the word of God. Mr. Dell by these
words, seems to have a mind to set Gods word and the Covenant together by the
ears; as if they were opposita at the least, if not contraria, that they could
not both well cotton, and were Mr. Dells power as good as his will, I should be
loath to trust him ( foenum enim portat in cornu) but God sends hungeing cattle
short horns: this game is too strong for Mr. Dell, he will give it over,
(there may be danger in it) the Fox loves no Grapes, not he.

Mr. Dell bath better remembered himself; complies, and tells you, That he likes
the Covenant well enough; does he, does he? I am very glad of it: but stay, Mr.
Dell has not done yet, give him leave I pray to say out his say: Mr. Dell does
not like the Covenant absolute and simpliciter, he has never a well, or well
enough for it in that sense: how then? why marry he likes the Covenant well
enough, according to the true pretention of it: oh now I see the Asses ears,
through the Lions skin, for what I pray, was not this a principal intention of
the Covenant, to link the new Reformed Church of England, in the bend of
unity, not only of Doctrine, but also of outward Discipline and Government,
with the best Reformed Churches of Christendom, and namely with that of our
brethren of Scotland? this I confess aperta front, to be the intention of the
Covenant; as it is plainly specified in it. Mr. Dell does he like it according
to this intention? I fear not: Mr. Dell. may give the Covenant some
construction apart, as well as expound the Scripture a part, I mean in a
sublime illuminated inspired way, never heard of before this day and erect a
new people apart if it please him: But Mr. Dell must have a Reformation
according to Gods Word, why is the Reformation settled by Covenant, not
according to the word, and shall not more be found for it in the word, then for
any other?

It may easily be gathered from his discourse: otherwise why does he fall with
such a feud upon Master Love for maintaining the Reformation such as now it is
established by Covenant, telling him that he would reform without the word,
yea against the word, (Oh frons perfricta) Oh what aforchead has this man!
without any secular power, lo then what troubles Master Dells sore eyes, he is
diseased to see the present Reformation in the Church bore up and supported by
temporal and Secular power, he likes neither the supporters, neither the
supported: he would rather then his life make a rent the one from the other,
Master Dell has cond his lesson divide et impera, he cannot thrive in his
fishing except these waters be troubled, Illi quieta magna merces: and to
effect this omnem movet lapidem, he spares not for falsehoods; first he tells
Master Love that he reformes not only without, but against the Word; to bring
Master Love out of conceit with the people, he tells the Magistrate that the
Presbutery will not suffer the power in their hands, but would feign tugge it
out and get it into their own and rule the roast forsooth as they please) and
thus he writes to withdraw the Magistracy from the Presbutery, and to put
suspicion, if not envy into their heads, but to conclude this his third Reply:
Does not Mr. Dell read no where in the Prophet Esaias, Kings shall be thy nursing
Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers? is not this spoken of the Church? and
is not the meaning of that, the time should come that the great Potentates of
the earth should maintain, cherish, support, and countenance the outward
profession, government, and disciplinary exercise of the true Gospel, (without
which the Gospel can have no sure progress (nay, no repute in the world)
punishing, bridling, and mateing by their secular power, now in a spiritual
and christian hand, all refractary flyers out, all inordinate and extravagant
opposers, either in dogmaticall points or manners?

Mr. Love says that Saint Paul's setting all things in order, that was a Church
order, and sure it was: to this our Replier spurs a question, and demands what
outward or secular power Paul had to set the Church in order: had Saint Paul
none good Mr. Dell? Did Saint Paul exercise no outward power in the Church,
during his abode upon the earth? read you not what order he gave unto Timothy
concerning the choosing of Elders, and what his carriage should be in the
rebuking of an Elder?

Does he not write unto the same Timothy, what Widows he would have chosen in
the Church, and what not? did he not sharply reprove the whole Church of
Corinth, in two matters? The first concerning their dissolute behavior in
their coming to the Lords Table; the second, for their going to Law one with
another, and the trying of their differences before unbeleeving Judges, whence
did accrue much scandal to the profession of Christ, and did he not give
express order for the redress of both? and was this done without a powert and
thinks not Mr. Dell that this power was likewise obeyed? or conceives Mr. Dell
that all Christians were haile-fellow well met with Saint Paul in point of
ruling and directing in the outward face of the visible Assemblies of the
Church or does Mr. Dell take that Text of Saint Paul for Apocrypha or no, Where
the Apostle makes a Clymax, though not a Hierarchy in Government of the
Church, saying that God had ordained some Doctors, some Pastors, some Teachers
in the church: and all for the building up of the body of Christ? if Mr Dell
takes these words for Scripture, as I know not whether he will or no, sure I am
many of his Gang, have of late chalked through the Bible, what they will have
go for Scripture and what not, but if he admit of this passage of the Apostle
for Scripture, he must needs grant that Saint Paul speaks of an outward
visible government in the Church, I mean amongst men, and that for the building
up, enlarging, not binding up the invisible kingdom of Jesus Christ in men: but
I have not done with S. Paul yet, had he no outward power in the Church? no, To
cry all Government down under heart Government, and all Reformation as carnal,
because the civil Magistrates hand is to it, is not only against the Doctrine
of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2.2. Pray for Kings, etc. but Mr. Love it is against all
other places of his Epistle, Where upon occasion he mentions the civil
sword, as namely that in Romans 12. where the Apostle disputes at large the
prerogative of civil power, above the rest, all others being delegative from
him in his own Dominions. Obey the higher powers, says that great St. Paul,
because none but of God. Therefore obey the King as chief, and Lord Paramont,
and others as his Lieutenants. St. Paul, or rather the holy Ghost by St. Paul,
sticks not to give reason of this obedience: He bears not the Sword in
vain. God has not given it to him for nothing, he has not committed it into
his hand only to contemplate it, to gaze upon it, Tanquam ignem in pariete
depictum, no such matter; he has Commission from God to put it in practice, to
be active with it, Ad sust inendos bonos, ad coercendos malos: What returns Mr.
Dell to this: Mr. Dell pro imperio suo does not hold this contradiction of Mr.
Love worth his reply. Non vacas exiguis rebus adesse Jovi, Aquila non capit
museas: 'twere a disparagement for Mr. Dell to answer a contradiction so full
of Chinks as this, and therefore he transmits This Mr. in Israel (Thus out of
his abundant respect unto Mr. Love, and out of a conscientious circumspection
not to wrong him in the least measure, as he gives us to understand in his
Prologue, he is pleased to flowt him) he puts him over, I say, to be answered
by Babes and Sucklings: only for his better instruction, he will vouchsafe to
give Mr. Love the sense of the Scripture impertinently alleged by him; for the
holy Ghost (I take it) whispers The right Informer in the ear (as the Pigeon
did sometime the Imposter Mahomet) all the right sense of any place of
Scripture, he needs not pump for the Exposition of any difficult or knottie
passage of the Bible, he, The right Informer, has a privilege from erring in
expounding any text of holy Writ ascribed to him ex ass: Innocentius, Paulus,
Vrbanus, Bonifacius, not any of Christ's Vicars General ever had the like, no
not e Cathedra, does Mr. Dell, the right Informer, give the sense, never doubt
it, Ipse dixit, it is out of hunger and cold: let us hear then from Mr. Dell the
Interpretation of that text wherein Mr. Love (he says) was so grossly mistaken
that he is forced to turn him over unto babes and sucklings for an Answer. Why,
the evident sense of that place is this (says the Oracle) That Christians
should pray for Kings and Governors, that God would so incline their hearts,
that whilst we live in godliness under them (your godliness is in late sensu
Mr. Dell) they would suffer them to live in peace: (you will never live in
peace (you) Mr. Dell; is it likely that a Sect which comprehends under it
omnium speude dogmatum colluviem, a common shore of all what is naught, will
ever endure peace) and not make us fare the worse in the world for our interest
in the kingdom of God. Has no body interest in the kingdom of God but you Mr.
Dell? have you mor opolized Heaven? what mean you by (our) interest in the
kingdom of God, so emphatice and exclusive spoken? but lets look a little
nearer into this evident sense Mr. Dels familiar has given of that text, 1 Timothy 2.2. why Kings and Governors must indeed be prayed for, but how? not so
much for themselves as for others: who are they? marry those that have the
only interest to Gods kingdom; and who they are, or at least whom is meant
that they are, Mr Dell can tell you better then I: but may not Kings and
Governors, especially Christian, that have submitted their Scepters and Powers
under the obedience of the Gospel, given their names to Christ, be meant by the
Apostle, to enforce godliness? it is true Mr. Dell, to bend the heart, to carry
the mind, to kindle in the affections a true love of god linesse, to make the
will strike sail unto it, that is beyond all humane reach, and only opus
altissimi: yet notwithstanding the earthly Powers may and ought to constrain
all wilful disturbers, either of the sound doctrine, or the external
wholesome discipline of the Church, unto an open and outward Conformity with
the General Assembly, and to provice, take such course, that if they will do
no good, they shall do no harm: This the Civil Power may do, And in so doing,
does greatly, no question, for the welfare of the prosperity of the Gospel:
and without all doubt, when the Apostle in 1 Timothy 2.2. gives that charge of
praying for Kings and all in Authority: his meaning was, that we should pray
that they might use every branch and limb of their Authority to the
furtherance not only of Christ's spiritual kingdom, but also of his visible
(and as I may so speak) temporal kingdom (I mean the company of men openly
professing his Name) here upon earth; That they might exercise their Power
directive, and prorective toward all that in quiet and humble obedience (in all
outward appearance) struck sail to the outward ordinance of preaching the
Gospel; and to the General received Discipline as the square of their manners:
toward the opposers, disquieters, and open violaters of either of these, Kings
and Governors should use their power both coercive and vindictive: and that so
they may do (without offense unto Mr. Dels evident sense to the contrary) I am
persuaded by this text of the Apostle, I am both counseled, exhorted, and
warranted to believe.

But yet before I have quite done with this Mr. Dels fifth Reply, I must dwell a
little longer upon his evident sense of that place; for to me it appears that
Mr. Dell has evidently shot at his own ends; and played his own game, and that
of all his other Sectaries by such a gloss. Mark then 2 things mainly
considerable in this his interpretation of that place. First, that Kings and
Governors are not to be prayed for gratia sui, for their own sakes, but only
that those which have an interest in the kingdom of Christ, may live in peace,
and not sare the worse for them: as for praying for them any otherwise, either
for their glorious, victorious and prosperous Reign over us, for their
succeeding posterity, that their Rule may be advantageous to the enlarging the
visible kingdom of Christ in the world, the better for the erecting the
invisible; to pray for Kings and Governors in this regard Mr. Dell holds it
not needful, neither does the forenamed Text make for it.

The second to be observed in his commenting upon that Text, is, that the
meaning is not that the Magistrate should enforce godliness, but protect us in
godliness: lo you there, all that a Civil Magistrate must do, must be only
to protect Mr. Dels peculiar people in godliness: that's enough for him, he
needs trouble himself no farther. But to stand for any ourward Christian
Polity, to maintain them that in order to the inward promotion of the Gospel
submit to it: to suppress (if no other mean will prevail) even by the power of
the Sword, those that (to the hazard of Christian unity, and reproach of the
very Christian faith) tumultuously and seditiously gainsay it: for the Civil
Magistrate to put his hand to this, he does ultra crepidam: Mr. Dell tells us
plainly, that the Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.3. has another evident sense, viz. of
protecting men in godliness; (such as every private Conventicle is pleased to
set up) not the enforcing men unto godliness, namely, to yield outward
submission, quiet obedience, and filial respect unto the Doctrine public
taught, and discipline practiced in the face of the visible Congregations.

They have no power for that, if Mr. Dell be a friend to the civil power, let
those be judges whom it most concerns; but it is a point of my creed, that
those that wonld exclude them in one, would justle them out of the other, laid
it in their hands: strange it is that order should be commended thorough all
the creation, order in the vegetive creature, for place the elements have their
situation according to the nobleness of their quality, order in the sensitive
employed and prized by men according to the valuation of their instincts, order
in the rational: men having callings, some to command, some to obey, according
to the excellencies and advantages of gifts the one above the other: order in
Heaven, there being degrees of perfection and glory given not only to the
Saints by God, but even unto the Angels themselves, if not above yet beyond
their fellows: order in all State-Government, Monarchical, Aristocraticall,
Demotraticall, yea amongst the Turks, Moors, Tartars, Indians, Persians,
Muscovites, although Infidels or as bad, yet even in all their Idolatrous and
vain worship: they have some order which they hold, and by which they set the
compass of the mistaken and blind devotion: nay there is order in Hell, that
formidable place could not endure without order. If Satan be divided against
himself be cannot stand: even in Hell God holds an order in punishing, so then
shall there be, is there an order universaliter thorough the creation and Gods
triple Monarchy, and only a Chaos of Anarchy and confusion in the Government
of his visible body the Church? quis furor ocives quae tanta est dementia
secli? if God be Deus ordinis the God of order, and there can be no order
without government: let all men see what master builders these are, and what
work they are likely to make, that deny outward government in the outward
Church, without which it cannot subsist: your sixth reply unto Mr. Loves Sermon.
tantum mutato nomine de te apprime narrari possit, a covering fox your own
cup, for let your very babes and sucklings be judge who justle out the
Magistrate. You that will acknowledge his power only in temporal, and call it
the power of the Nations (in some opposition to that of Christ's as I guess) or
those that acknowledge it from heaven, to be very good as issuing from the
fountain of all goodness, those that earnestly desire the heart and hand of a
godly civil Christian power, as a restorative for the souldring maintaining,
and establishing of all the outward members of the visible company into one
compacted perspicuous building who most justles out the Magistrate, he that
acknowledges his power both in Church and State; or he that clara voce denies
either that de jure, he should have, or de facto ever had power in the one
(both gross untruths) and but faintly grants it in the other? Good Sir,
ascribe not your own work to our hands, set the saddle where it should be: Good
Sir, have you not made it a chief part of your business now for a long while
together: Have you not openly vaunted in your Presses and Pulpits, that you
have had the chiesest share in laying Monarchical Government in the dust? Did
you, I mean the Independent Tribe, not brag, and openly crack it in Taverns,
Ordinaries, and where not, that God had made you the head Instruments of
quelling the Kings power? And I am bodily afraid that you are diligently acting
how you may put your work in a forwardness to deal with the other. I heard a
Bird sing a very strange note from NewCastle, if I may be so fortunate as to
get the dictie for your satisfaction, I shall not spare to publish it. Now
because you would not be mistrusted your selves in casting off the yoke of the
Civil Power in reference unto Church Discipline, you publicly slander the
Presbytery, for tugging it out of their hands, and getting all into their own.
We see clearly through all your slender devices Mr. Dell, in his 7. Reply to
what Mr. Love quoteth out of Ezra 7.26. that who would not do the Law of God
and the King, should be speedily executed: To this Mr. Dell replies, more suo,
far wide of the intention either of his Adversary, or King Artaxerxes: for Mr.
Love to prove that the Temporal Power has to do with the constitution or
stablishment of the visible Church, brings this place of Ezra to confirm it,
and well to the purpose, now pray hear with what Exposition Mr. Dell is
inspired (from a spirit I wot) as touching the force of this place. First that
the Magistrate may make a Decree for all that are minded of their own free will
to build the spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ, etc. Risum teneatis amici?
Would you not pardon any man, Mr. Dell, that should take the Chin cough by
laughing at this Exposition? Is it not apparent not only from the named Text,
but from the precedent and subsequent story, that the great King having heard
of the beautiful and glorious Temple at Jerusalem, and as it is likely having
the particular model of it from Ezra, or at least some acurate description, he
being an able man diverse ways, pricked on perhaps with some sense of Religion,
perhaps with some goade of honor and kingly ambition (though we deny not but
that Gods peculiar providence was in it) to be the second founder of such a
glorious structure, the like when reof had been but once seen before upon earth:
and to this end sends strict Edicts to all his Lieurenants and Governors of
his Provinces, to furnish the Jews with materials for an House and earthy
building, if Timber, Stone and money be materials. Mr. Dell says, He sent them
to build the spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ: I perceive, Mr Dell, you have a
rare gift in giving the sense of Scripture: that can turn lime and sand into
the spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ; could you not make the ears of an Hare
to be horns, think you Mr Dell?

The second force that Mr Dell draws from this place is, That Artaxerxes ought
to permit this to be done, according to the Law of the Spirit of life in our)
bearts, (your hearts) True, Mr. Dell, you have got all into your hearts, and
not to enforce upon us any Clergy Constitutions. Dixit Phythagoras: Could any
Exposition come nearer to the mark? is not Mr Dell as right an Expositor as an
Reformer? But stay, can it be collected from these words, That the King made a
Decree that all the Israelites, Priests, Levires, and all, in any of his Realms
which would, might go up to Jerusolem to build and restore that wonderful
Structure: and according to its ancient model, if possibly it might be done,
and had disbursed money for the maintenance of continual sacrifice, the only
support of the Priests, did he not mean that the Priests should renew their old
Clergy Constitution, and attend the usual accustomed charge of Gods House; for
so many hundred years put in due and care full practice by their predecessors?
sure he meant nothing else.

Mr Dell says that the third end of Artaxerxes his Decree was to deter men,
and so us, from hindering and resisting this work. What work? of the building
of the Temple at Jerusalem? That I believe it was. Immo vero aliud: no, no,
another work, which Mr Dell says has his authority from Heaven. Mr Dell
scorns to go behind the door, he means his own work now afoot: But to put an
end to this Discourse, I cannot but much marvel that the man in this manner
should make so little scruple of making the Scripture a nose of wax; and of
staulking it to all his imaginations, though never so far in its own sense
estranged from them.

FINIS.

