NOLI ME TANGERE Is A THING TO BE THOUGHT ON Or Vox carnis sacrae clamantis ab
Altari ad Aquilam sacrilegam Noli me tangere ne te perdam.

Vidit offensus oculus supremi

Percutit extensa manus supremi

Animadvertit in peccatorem poster^s pl^ctendo

Advertit peccatorem in progr^diendo

Aspicit peccatorem in peccando

Acceptat sacrificia peccatorem condonando

Accipit peccatorem sacrificia comburendo

Aquil^^ ni^^

Por^^^ ad pullos in nido

Offam rapit Aquila carbone adh^erente.

Sancto numini caro sacra

Ignis Sacer

Ardet carbone nidus quo perit soboles impiae (...)

ALTAR

W. Marshall sculp ^^^^


NOLI ME TANGERE: Or, A THING TO BE THOUGHT ON. SCILICET, Vox carnis sacrae
clamantis ab Altar ad Aquilam sacrilegam, noli me tangere, ne te perdam.

Percutit extensa manus supremi

Vidit offensus oculus supremi.

Animadvertit in peccatorem posteros plectendo.

Advertit peccatorem in progrediendo.

Aspicit peccatorem in peccando.

Acceptat sacrificia peccatorem condonando.

Accipit peccatorem sacrificia comburendo.

Aquilae nidus.

Ignis Sacer.

Sancto numini caro sancta.

Offam rapit Aquila carbone adhaerente.

Portat ad pullos in n^do.

Altar.

Ardet carbone nidus quo perit soboles impiae genitricis.



Eccles. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has
no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed; better it is thou
should not vow, than that thou should vow, and not pay: Suffer not thy
mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before the Angel that it was
an error, wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and desrroy the work of
thine hand. Malachi 3.8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me a but ye
say, wherein have we robbed thee? in Tithes and Offerings^ ye are cursed with a
curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation. August. de tempore,
Sermon. 219. Iustissima consuetudo Domini est, ut si tu illi decimam non dederis,
tu ad decimam revoceris. August. Hom. 48. ex lib. 50. Hom. Majores nostri ideo
copiis omnibus abundabant, quiae Deo decimas dabant, and Caesari censum
reddebant; modo autem quia discessit devotio Dei, accessit indictio fisci:
noluimus partiri cum Deo decimas, modo autem totum tollitur: hoc tollit fiscus,
quod non accipit Christus. Noli me tangere: OR, A Thing to be thought on.
THE Thoughts of one, that has no relation for the present, to, nor any
expectation for the future, from the Bishops, or Cathedralls, unless it be
this; that the one would preach oftener in the other, and both of them govern,
and be governed better hereafter, than heretofore; laboring to advance the
Gospel, to promote Religion, to oppose error in Doctrine, and viciousness in
manners; that our Church may be called a Praise and Beauty all over the world,
and become terrible as an Army with Banners, to all Heretics and Sectists,
that, like Foxes spoil our Vines, and like little Foxes destroy our tender
Grapes. Which Reformation he prays for in a way of righteousness, that it
may have the blessing of the just upon it.

Aelian has this Story: Aelian. lib. 5. cap. 16. Var. Hist.
When a certain boy, who had stolen away a golden plate that fell from Diana's
Crown, was brought in judgment before the Areopagitae: those Judges caused
Cock-hall Bones, Rattles, and the golden plate to be laid before the Child, in
whom perceiving an inclination again to the golden plate, rather than to the
Rattles, and other things more suitable to his Childhood, without pity to his
infancy, they condemned him to death, as a Sacrileger; thinking it sit to crop
that sin, and wickedness which they discerned to be in him, being yet but in
the Blade and Herb.

The Desires, Discourse, and Thoughts of some men are to abolish Episcopacy,
and the Cathedral Churches, and to take away their Lands, and to give them to
the King, or to use them for the necessity of the Commonwealth, or to mend
with them the maintenance of preaching Ministers, or alienate them to some
other persons or employments, it matters not greatly with them to whom, or to
what, so they can sweep the Clergy of their Revenue that remains, as
heretofore already has been done in some other part of their Maintenance.

Now if the true cause of these Desires were discovered, it would appear to
be such a disposition of mind as was in Aelians Boy, and a natural
inclination to Dianas golden plate, as wise King Henry the eighth told a
Courtier that was busy this way. Mr. Fox relates the Story in this manner.

After the riches and treasures of the Monasteries were brought into the Kings
hands; in the dissolving whereof many Cormorants were sed and satisfied; yet
not so fully but that in few years they began to wax hungry again; and no
more being to be looked for out of the Abbeys, they began to tickle the Kings
ears with the rich revenues of the Bishops Lands; and set Sir Thomas Seimor, a
Knight of the privy Chamber on work to promote it. He complains in the
Kings ears; that Archbishop Granmer feld Woods, and let Leases to enrich his
wife, and her kindred, keeping-little Hospitality, and that it was the opinion
of many wise men, that it were fitter the Bishops should have a yearly stipend
in money out of the Kings Exchequer, than be troubled with the temporal
affairs of their revenues, being an impediment to their study and pastoral
charge, and his Highness to have their Lands and Revenues to his proper use;
which beside their yearly stipend, would be no small profit to the King. The
wise King finding him by the sent, sends the Knight over to Lambeth, to bid the
Archbishop come over in the after noone to the King. The Knight finds the
Archbishops Hall full of people, some of the poorer sort, others of
indifferent quality: all the tables covered for Dinner for them; and being
carried up to the Bishop, after his Errand done, the Bishop makes him stay
Dinner with him among personages of good quality at his Table, which was
furnished as might beseem a Prince. The Knight after Dinner returns to the
King, falls down before him on his knees, acknowledges the injury he had
done the Bishop, being abused by the misreport was made unto him by others. O
Sir, quoth the King, have you found the truth out now? He was a very varlet
that told you that tale; but I perceive which way the wind blows. There are a
sort of you to whom I have liberally given of the revenues and possessions of
the suppressed Monasteries; which, like as you have lightly gotten, so you have
unthriftily spent, some at Dice, others on gay apparel, and other ways
worse, I fear: and now you would make another Chievance of the Bishops Lands,
to accomplish your greedy appetites: And so charged him he might hear no more
of that marter.: So far Mr. Fox. Now in these Catchpoles see the cunning of the
Devil, that is called Sacrilege, the very unclean Spirit, that breaths the
same motions now in the minds of our Burres and Tenterhooks. Is he not a
devout Devil, and careful of Gods Service, that it may be well performed by
the Clergy? For, for this purpose he will take away their Lands, that they may
follow their studies, and not be encombred about them. Is he not careful of
the Clergy, that they may have an honest competent Stipend? Is he not careful
of the Kings profit, that he may have the Bishops Lands to his Highness use
and commodity? The very Spirit of many of our people at this time, to the same
purpose, but in an higher degree of Sacrilege: for whereas they sought only
after the Bishops Lands, these seek after the Cathedral Churches also; evil
proceeding always to more evil, and waxing worse and worse in time. But all
these goodly pretenses are hypocritical, and the masks of vile iniquity and
holy Theft: for it was not the Clergies profit they looked at, for that they
grudged them; neither the Kings commodity, for that was but their Shooinghorne
to draw him on to fit their foot; but it was their own covetousness, by which
they sought to satisfy their pride, riot, wanton and greedy Lusts; being
herein like unto the Master of their Art, the Traitor Judas, that grudging
Christ the woman's ointment, as a waste, would willingly have had it sold,
pretending that it might have been given to the poor; not that he cared for
the poor, but was a Thief, and carried the Bag; into which if he could have
got the ointment, he would have wiped the poor of it, and licked his own
fingers, which were already in Christ his pocket, and itched after Mary's cost
bestowed on his Lord and Master. Such were these Harpies, and such are many
now, talking in their very streine; who if they fail of their desired
ointments, will not stick, rather than fail, to sell the Lord Christ Jesus
himself, as Judas did, for thirty pieces of silver. Now nothing is wanting to
these men's deserved punishment, but a grave Bench of such Judges as the
Areopagitae, who adjudged the sacrilegious boy to death.

Surely, this is a mighty disgrace to the Religion we profess, that since the
Reformation, all men's Thoughts do run, even in times of greater labor, and
learning in the Church, than heretofore, to pill and poll the Ministry, and
bring it to uncomely and deformed Beggerie; the sweetness of the bread of God,
as William Rufus said, begetting a greater desire of it (since the statute of
Dissolution) even as the sucking of the sheeps blood begets desire of blood,
and brings that desire in the Mastive, into a trade of ravening and devouring,
after he has once rasted the sweetness of it. So that, as the old Patriarch
Jacob said of his Children, when Benjamin was sent for by Joseph into Egypt,
Ye have bereaved me of my Children, Genesis ^2.36.
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin also; all these
things are against me. So may the Clergy of England complain and say: ye
have taken away my Tithe and my Glebe, and many other profits are not, and now
ye will take away the rest of my Revenue: all these things are against me,
may the Church of England say; unless putting up that prayer of the Patriarch,
she prevail in it with God: Genesis 43 14.
Now God Almighty give me favor in the eyes of the men, that they may send
back that that is taken away already, and let That alone that yet remains.

Certainly, there is such a Sin as Sacrilege to this day; and if this be not
that sin; I am deceived by Solomon: Prove. 20.5.
It is a snare to the man who devoureth That that is holy, and after vows to
make inquiry, (id est) That which is consecrated and devoted, and so separate
to any service of God in his Church, will prove a snare to that man. Now it is
out of humane power by Donation to God, that shall, after such Donation, fall
on Enquiries, whether such a Service or Employment be needful; and then
concluding it is not, to alienate and take back again to humane usage, That,
that is thus devoted, and so devour it: which was his intention, when he entered
into his Inquiry.

Certainly, the Sin of Sacrilege is great, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? By which it appears
to be as bad at least as is Idolatry. And this place is specially to be
noted, by them that pretend mainly against Superstition and Idolatry, and yet
are hotly set for sacrilege.

Idolatry has been ever bountiful in the service of Idols: Hos. 2.8.
Thou have taken my Flax and my Wool, my Corn and mine Oil, my Silver and
my Gold, and prepared them for Baal. Ezekiel. 16.
And we read of decking and adorning of Idols in most costly manner. 1 King.
18.19.
And we read also of liberal and honorable maintenance for Priests that
served about the worship of these Idols. Iezabel allowed many hundreds of them
an Ordinary at her Table. Genesis 41.22.
And in the great seven years Famine of Egypt, when all the Egyptians lands
were sold to Pharaoh for bread, only the Lands of the Priests Joseph did not
buy; for the Priests had a portion of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which
Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their Lands.

Now this the Devil attempts not to hinder, neither cries he out, ad quid haec
perditio? because it advances his Kingdom. But sacrilege with us strikes at
the root of Gods true service and religion, being a means in time to introduce
Barbarism, to destroy Learning, and to ruin the worship of the true God. And
this is the reason why the Devil is so busy (hearing of a Reformation and
purgation of the Church from superstitious Roman Dregs; (which is as it were an
abhorring of Idols) to advance Sacrilege, and set that on foot, as a thing
well serving his turn, to strike withal at root and branches of true piety
and religion, that it may not prove so much a Reformation, as a Destruction
thereof in the later end. Which course Julian the Apostata himself thought
fittest to extirpate the Christian Name and Faith.

Certainly, the sin of Sacrilege is dangerous more ways than one. Dangerous
it is to private men that commit it. Psalm. 83.12.
Make them like a Wheel, as stubble before the wind, persecute them with thy
tempests, fill their faces with shame, let them be troubled and confounded for
ever, who said, Let us take the houses of God to our selves in possession.
Ananias and Saphira were smitten dead for this sin. And Peter's speech teaches
us what it is, saying, While it remained, Act. 5 2.5.10. Verse. 4.
was it not thine own? and when it was sold, was it not in thine own power?
implying, when it was once devoted, it was not in their powers to take it back
again: which thing because they did, in keeping back part of the price, they
were smitten and perished with untimely Death. And the punishment of Achan is
notorious, that for taking a wedge of Gold, Ios. 7.
and a Babylonish Garment from among the devoted things of Jericho, was stoned
unto death.

Dangerous is it also to more public persons, even to the heads and principal
members of the Commonwealth, the Kings and Princes thereof. We read how
Belshazzar, in a great Feast sends for the golden Vessels which his Father
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple at Jerusalem, Dan. 5.
to drink Wine in them himself, his Princes, his Wives and Concubines: Now,
Verse 5.
at the very instant appeared the Fingers of an Hand, on the plaster of the
wall of his Palace, where he sat; which the King seeing, his countenance was
changed, and his mind so troubled, that his joints were loosed, and his knees
smote one against the other; Verse 26.
and the Fingers wrote these words on the Wall, God has numbered thy Kingdom,
and finished it, thou art weighed in the Balance, and art foundwanting; thy
Kingdom is divided from thee, and given to the Medes and Persians: Then mark
the end of Sacrilege, In that night was Belshazzar slain. Verse 26.
Which present exemplarie judgment fell upon him immediately upon the private
misusage of the sacred Vessels, at his own Table, that had been consecrated
and devoted to the service of Gods Temple. And his Father Nebuchadnezzar, that
brought them away, out of the Temple at Jerusalem, was thrust, by God, out of
his Kingdom, Dan. 4.21.
and driven from the sons of men, and had his heart made like unto a Beasts
heart, and his dwelling was with the wild Asses, and he was fed with Grass,
like Oxen, and his Body was wet with the dew of heaven, till seven times, that
is, seven years had passed over him.

And he that shall look into story shall find fearful examples of his
justice, on-Sacrile-dgers, who spares not Kings in his wrath, when they will
sin proudly, in this kind against him.

Our own Annalls tell us of King William Rufus, and his Nephew the Son of
Robert Duke of Normandy; both slain, in hunting in that same Forest, that the
Conqueror, his father, and grandfather to his Nephew, had made, and himself
had augmented, with the utter ruin of many Chappells, Churches, and religious
houses.

And it may be observed, that Henry the eighth, (in whose time the Statute of
Dissolution was, and the Tithes alienated by Statute, in revenge of the Popes
delaying his divorce, rather than for any other reason) was met withal by God:
for all his posterity, though they came respectively to enjoy the Crown; yet
were they written childlesse, and he quickly, in them, turned out of the Kingly
possession, and the Crown transferred to a branch, that sprang from his father
Henry the seventh, under whose shadow we have had rest for many years, and
have cause to pray, that God would make that branch to flourish, and bless and
water the Buds of it, that they may thrive and prosper in Princely virtue,
Dignity and Honor, while the Sun and Moon shall shine in heaven.

But the forementioned judgments on Sacrilegious Princes considered, do
discover unto us, That those that talk so much of taking away the Lands of the
Church, and returning them to the Crown, from whence they say they came (and
from whence, no doubt, but some of them came indeed) deal childishly with God,
who expects our Vows should be paid and kept; for he has no delight in Fools
that are off and on, Eccles. 5.4.
in and out with him; giving now, and anon taking away what has been formerly
given, like foolish Babes: and also deal injuriously with the King, seeking to
enrich his Crown, with That that will shake it on his head, and endanger both
himself, and his Royal Progeny and posterity to such fearful judgments as
have been executed, even on Kings, for similar sin. So that of such men,
however their Tables please the Sacrilegious multitude, and whatever paint of
Eloquence may seem to speak, of their Respects and service this way for the
King: yet Truth will never say of them, they be of the number of those, that,
for the grace of their lips shall have the King their friend; who is wise, like
an Angel of God, in discerning Sacrilege to be a sin detestable before God,
and therefore holds it odious to his Princely heart.

And it is dangerous also to the Commonwealth it self. This sin in Achan
became not only a snare to himself, in which he was taken, and held unto
destruction; but all Israel was troubled by the sin of that one Achan, and
the army of Israel discomfited, again and again, before the men of Ai, till
such time, as, by their solemn humiliation, and the death of Athan, the
Sacrileger, Ios. 7.
the iniquity was purged, and the Lord appeased.

Neither let any man think that this will take away the nature of sin from
the alienation of Church Lands, that it is done by a national Assembly of the
States in Parliament; whose proceedings and Sanctions must be by rule from
God; otherwise, they become more out of measure sinful, than actions of like
quality in private men. The Laws of State are not therefore just, because
enacted by the State; but when they agree with the common Rules of Justice,
that God has given to every son of man. The truth is, many proud and
foolish men do Idolize a National Assembly, as if it had not a superior Rule,
to which it ought to frame all its Actions and Decrees; but, like a kind of
omnipotent creature, (like the Pope to the Canonists) it were a Lord God upon
earth, and might enact, with Justice, according to its own Vote and Will;
which is a singular dotage, a profane contempt of God, the high and Sovereign
Lawgiver, and a mighty derogation to the true worth and piety that is in the
Breasts (of many, I am sure) of our wise and godly Patriots; who have so
learned Christ, that they will make his Will their Rule and Law, and his Glory
their ultimate and small aim.

It will not therefore, I say, take from sacrilege the nature of sin, that
it is committed by a National Assembly, giving their Sanction thereunto: but
it will increase the evil, and make it a National sin, involving the
Commonwealth therein. First, Psalm 83.12.
in her Nobility, as, Make their Nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, yea, all their
Princes like Zebah and Zalmunnah, that say, Let us take to our selves in
possession the houses of God in the Land; and lap up the Gentry, the Citizens,
the Knights and Burgesses, the whole Commons, and all the Commons of England,
yea, the whole Nation in the sin; for so says God, Ye are cursed with a
curse, even the whole Nation, for ye have robbed me; and ye say, Psalm. 3 8,
9.
wherein? for they would not believe it, more, than many of our people at this
present; yet God tells them, They had robbed him in Tithes and Offerings: A
thing which Heathens would not do to their Idols: Will a man spoil his god,
says the Lord? that is, He will not: Yet ye have spoiled me, in Tithes and
Offerings, says the Lord of Hosts, that has an Host to avenge himself at
pleasure, on the most mighty Sacrilegers; for he is stronger than the Hills,
or Mountains of Robbers. Add unto all this, That it will make it the more
sinful in that it shall be committed by a Law; which should be enacted for
the prevention of sin, and not for the commission. Psalm 94.
Shall the Throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, that frames mischief
by a Law? Shall not the people thus fall under the judgments which God has
threatened to them, that walk after unrighteous Ordinances, and the Lawgivers
themselves be branded, as Jeroboam was, that they make the people sin? The
Lord threatens the people thus, Thou shall sow much, Mich. 6.15.
but thou shall not reap: thou shall tread the Olives, but thou shall not
anoint thee with the Oil; and sweet Wine, but shall not drink Wine: Verse 16.
now see the reason of this threatening, For the Statutes of Omri are kept, and
all the works of the house of Ahab. and ye walk in their Counsels, that I
should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants an hissing. And see the
issue and danger of their naughty Laws, as the Prophet Hosea sets it forth
more fully in the Lawmakers themselves: Hos. 5.10.
The Princes of Judah are like them that remoove the Bounds, (id est, The
Land-markes, to encroach on others Lands) therefore I will pour out my wrath
upon them, like water: Verse 11.
And in the people; They are oppressed and broken in judgment, because they
willingly walked after the Commandment: therefore I will be to Ephraim a
moth, and to the house of Judah like rottenness. And for any thing we know,
the sweeping away of Tithes and Things consecrated heretofore, although by a
Law, have brought some of the common pressures and calamities, for which there
are such perplexed thoughts of heart, or, at least, have made our miseries the
more heavy and grievous, from the hand of God.

However, certainly it is a thing inconsistent with Reason, That Things
Consecrated to Gods service, in the intention of the Donor, although with some
Error about the Service, should be taken altogether away from God, and
alienated to any private usage, and personal service of men incapable of
attendance on any holy employment.

And it is a thing senseless, That any Layman should have the Tithes, the
only maintenance, appointed by GOD to Levi, while his Tabernacle stood, for
his service thereabouts; and after to Christ in his Ministers, for their labor
in his service, as long as Christ does live, which is, for ever, Heb 7.8.
where one difference betwixt the Leviticall Priests and Christ, is placed in
this, That they, under the Tabernacle, take Tithes that dyed; But here, he
takes them, of whom it is said, He lives for ever. Of which Text this is the
meaning, That Tithes are not a Leviticall and mutable maintenance, but the
eternal maintenance of Gods service, used, before the Law, when the Priesthood
was in the Father of the Family, for the provision of Sacrifices, Genesis 28 20.
according to the intent of Jacobs vow; stated on (not first invented for)
Levy, during Levies Service: But when the body came, which was Christ, and
Levi, with all his typical service, was to be abolished, then ceased not the
Tithes, in right, (though in practice, by reason of the Paganism of Princes,
in whose Dominions the Christian Faith sprang up, they were not paid in the
Church) but were transferred to Christ, and his Servants and Ministers, to be
their Maintenance, as long as Christ should live, which is, for ever. This
seems to me, the true sense of the place: And, indeed it is a senseless
thing to think, That God has left the Ministers of his Gospel, whose service
is more honorable than that of Levi, both for clear Revelation of Christ, and
also for labor and pains: 2 Cor 3.9.
for the Levites were but Butchers to the Ministers of the Gospel; 1 Timothy
4.13. 5 and 16. and 1 Timothy 5.17. and 1 Timothy 4.2.
and their labor was bodily, that tended to preservation of their health; in
which they continued notwithstanding but from five and twenty years to
fifty. But ours is mental and verbal, and never at an end: That God, I say,
should leave these Ministers to the mercy and charity of men, to be provided
for, by the Alms and charitable Benevolence of the ill-disposed people of the
last times; whom he foresaw so to love their pride, pleasures, and lusts,
that they would rake and scrape, by hook and crook, not only one from
another, but from his Heavenly Majesty also; although the Laws of former
generations, had as firmly estated, and established him in his possession, as
the Laws of Man, with the Curses and Imprecations of those that endowed God
Almighty, could possibly estate, and give an interest unto him.

And the rather, if we consider that he foreknew, that even many, that would
profess Religion, in an exacter way than others, would yet pretend, his
Ministers should have a competency, (as Sir Thomas Seymor, before mentioned,
did to Henry the eighth) which when it should come to their Standard, would
be a base unworthy Salary, able only to preserve a Minister alive, in a
thousand wants, while he does live, and to leave his Wife and Children to
beg after his disease. And the Lord fore-knew the ungodly Reason would be
pretended, viz. That Riches in the Clergy are not suitable to the simplicity
of Christ, and his Apostles: A plausible thing with foolish people, That, since
Christ dyed on the Cross, never think a Minister in his Element, unless he
be in prison, or on the pillory. But alas! was the poverty of Christ and his
Apostles, any part of their simplicity? Because our Savior, that was Heir to
the Crown, which was usurped by Herod, was kept from it, must a Minister, that
has an inheritance, be put by it, and it be given to another, because it is
more agreeable to the simplicity of Christ, who was so dealt withal? I had
thought our case, living under Christian Kings and Laws, had been different
from the case of Christ, that came to be a man of nothing, by voluntary
subjection, to work out our Redemption; and, neither to teach us, to become
begging Friars, nor you to become cruel persecuters, and crafty and bloody
Herod's. And I did think, and do think, That there is no thing necessary
concerning the simplicity of Christ and his Apostles, but binds every common
Christian, to the very Kings and Princes, as well as the Ministers of Christ:
neither do I see any thing, in the Scriptures to the contrary, nor in right
reason: neither why hundreds and thousands by the year, should be thought fit
enough, for an ordinary Gentleman, or Citizen, sometimes a Dunce and a sordid
fellow too, and suitable enough to the simplicity of Christ and his Apostles,
in them; and that there should be no suteablenesse in Ministers, as wise, as
godly, as charitable as other men, unless they be kept down in beggary and
poverty. It is a thing has guld the world much, in point of Church Government,
That the Apostles times, and matters of fact, incident to their condition under
persecutors, are accounted Rules for the Kingdom of Christ: whereas Laws be
our Rule; and their examples bind us no farther, than the things they give us
examples in, be examples of moral Duties charged upon us by Divine precept,
the only thing commands a duty, Romans 3
and forbids a sin, and makes it transgression sinful.

It were therefore a worthy work, and fitting a Parliamentary Reformation, to
think of restoring the Tithes to the proper owners (for now they are in an
improper hand) rather than of taking away the residue of the Lands, that having
escaped the Talons of the Harpie, remain yet to the Clergy: especially
considering, That the Impropriations are one maine cause of scandalous and
ignorant Ministers, in many places of the Land; which thing (blessed be God)
the Parliament proposes a redress of; and which, how the impropriators will
answer to Christ, in the day of judgment, (when all the souls that have
perished, through want of sufficient maintenance for a sufficient Miniestry, by
reason of their Sacrilege, shall be required of them) let them bethink them.

The Lands of Cathedral Churches are the Bequests of men dead long ago, with
fearful Imprecations made against those, That should alter their Wills and
Testaments. Now the Apostle says, If it be but a man's Testament, Gal. 3.15.
no man alters it. No man? Why, there be many men now set that way, and they
pretend zeal in Religion, and a purpose of doing God service, in so doing too:
Why then says the Apostle, No man alters a man's Testament? Surely, his
meaning is, no man ought, or, no honest man will alter the Testament of a man
that is dead, his Will being made lawfully, though happily, not so wisely, or
conveniently, as it might have been, nor to so good a purpose as he might
have bestowed his goods and Legacies, or Lands: for, That which he might
lawfully have done with his goods, while he was alive; there is no reason, if
he bequeathed them to the same purpose, when he dies, but his Will should
stand and remain to that use, after his Death, as intemerate, as if he were
now present and alive, to dispose his Beneficence.

But you will say unto me, They may be better employed in some other use, as,
to mend the maintenance of preaching Ministers; and that now they serve only
to support idleness.

And I say unto you, if you fancy any thing better, or know any other good
work, either better in truth, or better in your conceit and esteem, on Gods
Name, give something of your own to the maintenance thereof, permitting them
that be dead, to enjoy their own Will and Desire, in that, in which they put
you to no charges.

We know, that Christ our Lord, who was Wisdom and justice it self, Matthew.
20.15.
in that Parable, takes it for an undoubted Maxim, that a man (in a lawful
way) may do what he will with his own: for, giving a penny to him, that
labored but one hour, and a penny also to him, that endured the heat of the
Day; when this man murmured, that the former was equally rewarded; the Master
pleads his own lawful liberty, for the disposure of that which was his own,
contesting with the murmurer, as a man of an evil eye, at his goodness and
bounty to the other; and maintains his own displeasure, in that he had not
injured the other by his liberality. By force of which passage, this is
emergent, That if men be disposed to honor some of the Clergy, although not
laboring so sweatily in the work of the Ministry as others do, if the
conferred honor be of their own charges, there is no reason, why any man's
Eye should be evil at their goodness, who, by the common right of Nature and
Nations (that hold propriety against Anabaptisticall community) may do what
lawful thing they will, with that that is their own, even as others do daily;
who, though they give nothing to the Clergy, yet commonly leave estates of
great amount to men, that obtaining these estates, give over all employment,
laborious and profitable in the Commonwealth, and live idly and like Drones;
and yet no man questions the gift of their friends, nor their unprofitable
life, although they be but burdens to the Earth; nor talk they of a better
employment of the things that have been bequeathed to them; notwithstanding the
Persons, peradventure, be Idiots, Sotts, debauched persons, and such as be not
only idle and unprofitable, but wicked and noxious to those among whom they
live, basely wasting and consuming in drunkenness, whoredom and riot, that
great substance thus befallen unto them: many of which kind of men we have,
that call themselves Gentlemen, who are not of the worthy descended Gentry of
the Land, but a disgrace to that Name and Title: and yet no man grudgeth them
the fortunes left them by their Benefactors, sometimes no kin to them at all;
much less does any of the people wish, or once speak of the taking from them
that that they possess; but think it both just and reasonable they should
still enjoy that that was given to them; and the contrary injurious both to the
living and the dead.

Secondly, this is that that makes men so barren in these days, in giving any
thing to the Ministry, or to other pious support of Gods service; because they
see no assurance, the things they would should continue to the end of the
World, shall continue three Generations after them; but, on the contrary, that
the Wills of Men of former times, be altered, perverted, reversed by succeeding
times, according as they fancy, and to save their own purses, or to enrich
themselves and their posterity on the maintenance, God calls, his own portion.

Thirdly, I say, they gave their Lands to such and such a Church; for such, or
such a service of God, that in their dark times was most in use, and in their
intention, and as they were instructed, most honorable to God. Now, if we in
times of greater light, see better service may be done to God, by the same
Persons, viz. Deanes, Cannons, Brebendaries, in the same Churches, thus
endowed; on Gods Name, let us reform those Persons, and put them on such
employment, as is competent with the will of the dead, in the same Churches
which they endowed; and not take away the maintenance that is consecrate to
Gods service, nor that service neither to which it was given, but only
superadd some service to the former remembering the charge of God to Moses, That
Eleazar should take the Brazen Censures of the seditious Levites, Numb. 36.37.
which God appointed them not to make, nor appointed that service to be so
performed by them; yet must they be searched and scraped out of the Dust and
Ashes of the burning, to make broad plates for a covering for the Altar, and
not to be turned to any private use; for, says the Text, They are hallowed
(that is, consecrate) to the Lord, although in a strong and a preposterous way.

Now this may be done with the Cathedrals, in my apprehension, with great glory
and beauty to the Christian reformed Religion, in this, or some such way.

First, Where every Cathedral has Revenues enough, to maintain the Deanes,
Canons, Prebend, without any other Benefices, that have cure of Souls; let
them drink the water of their own Cisterne, without drawing from any other
Well, and be denied the possession of any Ecclesiastical endowment, and kept
to their motions within their own Sphere, id est, their Cathedrals.

Secondly, Whereas every Prebend that has a Corp, might afford a sufficient
maintenance, but that it is let out at present in a long Lease, for a small
Rent; some one singular Prebend, now and then, making benefit of a great time,
to whose Let it falls; the less living bravely on the Lease in the mean time,
and the Prebend having little yearly Income; It would do well to raise a
yearly maintenance of one hundred, two hundred, or three hundred pound per
Annum, or, as much as the Prebend will bear. And where the Prebend will not
bear it, as in small Prebends, or those that have no Corpse, to put two or
three of them together, and so lessen the number of them, or let the bigger
help the lesser, that so there may be a sufficient maintenance for every
Prebend, without any other Ecclesiastical Living.

This may be done, by letring the Prebends to the Tenants in Fee Farm for
ever, only yielding such an Annual Rent, as the perpetual Inheretance were
worth to purchase; unless we can be content with patience, to suffer the
Leases to run out nearer their end, till they would afford sufficiency of
maintenance; which were the better way of the two, to produce a sufficiency for
so excellent a work, as this may prove, if wise men have the handling of it.

Then let every Deane, Canon and Prebend, be bound to residence at the
Cathedral Church, and therein to Preach duly in his course. Where let there
be two Sermons every Lord's Day, and two every Holyday, and one every other
week day; and these Sermons to be preached by themselves in their turns, and
not by Substitutes; the case of sickness, necessary absence, or other
inavoydable employment or impediment only excepted.

Fourthly, Let these Prebends, when any of them is void, be fetched out of one
of the Universitie; in their turns; out of one Universitie this time, and out
of the other the next time, of the Fellows of the Colleges, of the best
Learning and Life, that be willing to leave the Universitie and let them have
liberty to marry and attend their study at the Cathedral, to Preach, to answer
all Books of Controversies that come forth, and be ready by often preaching and
study of Divinity, to come abroad into the Church, to some pastoral charge,
when they shall be called.

Thus shall the Church, when any Church is void, have place, in every part of
the Kingdom to repair unto, to fetch a Man prepared and fitted for the
Ministry, in a pastoral charge. And so also shall many, that have not a
capacity to live unmarried in the Universitie, find a relief hereby, to
sustain them in honorable sinlesse Matrimony. And many good Scholars, whose
Gifts languish and die in the Universities, without any benefit to the public
(because as the poor man at the Poole, they have none to help them out, to
the Service of the Church) shall be brought forth, by this means, to the great
benefit thereof.

Or, if it be not thought so fit, to make the Cathedralls Colleges of young
Divines: it may, to my apprehension, do very well, or rather better, to make
them Colleges of old Divines. Numb. 8.24.
God gave Moses charge concerning the Levites, that they should not go in to
wait on the Service of the Tabernacle till twenty five years of age; and that
from the age of fifty, they should cease waiting on that Service, and should
serve no more, but Minister with their Brethren in the Tabernacle to keep the
charge, and shall serve no more, id est, tanquam milites emeriti, they are
exempted from the carrying of Burdens and other laborious works, and are now,
ad placitum, in respect thereof; only overseeing about the Tabernacle, and
directing the younger Levites, or helping them voluntarily, as it seemed good
to them, and as they found themselves able; without that tie and obligation,
that lay upon the younger. Which has in it, no doubt, a morality, referring to
the Ministers of the Gospel; whose labor is more consuming than that of the
Levites, and requires a maturity of judgment; in which respect, Saint Paul
would not have a Minister be (...) so also requires it that strength of body
and mind, that in age (and the infirmities, that a sedentary and studious life
brings on affiduous and diligent Preachers) are withered and decayed. Now it is
neither fit that a Minister, when he is worn out by labor, should live in
want; nor that any particular Flock, should want a pastoral supply, which
some may, possible, be unfit and unable to, by age or sickness. Therefore now
if it may so seem good, it were not amiss, That the Cathedralls (every
Prebend being made a sufficient maintenance) might be a place of rest and ease
to those old Veterani, that have served in the Ministry; who may be chosen (in
case of unfitness to a pastoral charge) into the Society of the Prebends (as
any Prebend shall fall void) out of the Ministers of the same Diocese, where
the Cathedral is: upon which choice, he may give over his pastoral charge to
one younger, stronger, and more fit and able for the constant duties of a
pastoral Ministry; and find both a remission from labor, in his age and
infirmity, and attend upon the daily service of God in the Cathedral, and
perform the duty of preaching therein; which will not befall him so often, by
far, as is requisite in him that has the charge of a Congregation; which
requires constant and unintermitted labor. And here also, by this means, may
younger Ministers or any other, in doubtful and difficult cases of Conscience,
find resolution from experienced Divines; who, being many of them together,
shall be able to give the better satisfaction. Yet I think it not fit, in my
opinion, to deprive any, that are in present possession of any dignity in the
Church, of that dignity so long as they live, be they young or be they old; but
that the usage projected, whichsoever of the twain it be, may begin in them
that are in present possession; considering, that what they have obtained, they
have obtained it in a way established, in their time, by the Law of the Land.

And because the badnesse of our Government in the Church, comes from the
badnesse of the Governers, and that, from the bad Election of the Bishops. To
prevent future mischief, it were good to reduce the Election of Bishops
again, unto the Election of the Clergy, to whom of right it belongs, to prefer
one of themselves to that Gosernment (for peace and order sake) which is in
them all in communi, by the ordinance of Christ, who bequeathed the Keys
equally to them all and the prelation of one above the rest, is questionless,
an Ecclesiastical, not a Divine Ordinance. It were therefore fit, when any
Minister is chosen into the number of the Prebends, that he be chosen of the
Clergy of the Diocese, a man of good Life and Learning, and one that has bin
laborious in his Ministry, and not under the age of fifty years. And then,
That the Deane and Chapter, with the Prebends of the Church, may have the free
Election of the Bishop out of themselves, as of old they have had, and whereof
there remains yet a show, (though a mere show) in the Writ of Congedeleire,
or, at least, that they may nominate two or three, and the King to prefer which
of the two or three shall seem pleasing to him. By this means shall the
Bishop be, in the fairest probability, a fit Governor; and the Clergy the more
willingly and freely live under his Government, in whose Election they have had
some hand and stroke; and the Bishop be the less likely to comply with the
mere will and pleasure of Courtiers, whether Clericall or Laicall, by whom now
they are brought into their Bishoprics, and with whom they must comply or be
removed to a worse or poorer Bishopric than that they now possess. Against
which, provision would be made, and it provided, That no Bishop upon
displeasure be put from his Bishopric, nor removed to a worse, dum been se
gesserit; so shall they freely and without fear discharge their Conscience,
both in Government and in Parliament: only the case of their removal,
carrying themselves well, would be thus ordered, That what Bishop soever dies,
all the Bishops inferior to him in place and order of Dignity, may be
removed, the next to the dead succeeding the dead, and the next him etc. and
the now Bishop to come into the love and meanest Bishopric: so shall we not
have young men set up in the highest Bishoprics, to the envy and disgrace of
the elder, and more fit for superior places: so shall the younger by time, be
fitted for places of greater dignity, and more concernment in the Church; and
so shall the Revenue of the King be the more augmented, (with the contentment
of all the Bishops) by so many removes. And it would also be provided, That the
Archdeacons and the Deanes of the Cathedral Churches may be chosen by the
Cathedral Churches themselves, out of the Prebends, formerly chosen by the
Clergy of the Diocese, into the number of the Prebends: so shall the
Convocation be brought into a better state than now it is, when both the
Bishops, Deanes and Archdeacons shall at the first bringing of them into the
number of the Prebends, be chosen after fifty years of age, of the best men of
the Clergy, by the whole Clergy; who, upon knowledge of their labors and
deportment in the Ministry, have worthily elected them for it cannot but be
supposed, that such men will be more sensible of the good of the Church, than
young fellows, that by gaping at the Court for these preferments, being proud,
vain, idle, and often wicked and vicious, altogether unfit for, and unworthy
of such high Dignity and preferment in the Church; and more unfit and unable to
govern others, that never yet knew how to govern themselves; and most
uucapable of advancing Gods glory, and the salvation of the people, or to
promove and further the preaching of the Gospel; these being things they never
thought of, sought after, or were acquainted withal.

Fifthly, and for the daily Service of the Cathedrals, it is the Service of
God, although, to speak the truth, it is in some part not fitly carried: and
it is that Service, for the performance whereof, some part of the Lands were
given. It would there. fore be continued, but read plainly and distinctly, as
in other Churches, without counterfeited voices, or the mixture of Music or
musical Responces in Prayers, that are of an higher strain than to be played
withal: yet the Music not to be altogether abolished, but used only before
or after, or in the middle; and alone, or in the singing of Psalms and other
Hymmes or Spiritual Songs, or whenever for their sakes that delight in
Music, as David did; yet so, as it be no abufing, darkning of, or dishonor
to the Service of God, or the understanding of the People. And for the
Singingmen, they are Musicians, and Music is a lawful and a laudable
Science; and some of them employ themselves in the time they are not employed
in the Church, in teaching Music to others. And the Choristers, being poor
Men's Children, become by being taken into the Church, silii charitatis, and by
the care and charge of the Church, may be bred up, for the service of it in
Music, if they be fit thereunto; and may be also bred to writing and
cyphering by the Singingmen, who would be chosen fit for that purpose; that so
the children, whose voices fail, or are, for their capacity, unfit for the
Service of the Church, may be placed out to Apprentices, to some honest Trades,
and Occupations, by the Church, at her own charges.

This, or some such way may be taken, for restoring of the Cathedrals, and
making them profitable to the Church. But to abolish or destroy them, is just
such a reformation, as if Almighty God, seeing faults in mankind, to amend
them, should sweep mankind, at once, from the face of the Earth, as he did in
the time of Noah; but promised to do so no more. Now if any choose rather to
be like unto God, in the execution of that judgment, than in his repenting of
it; liking no way but at once, to sieze on all, and to sweep it away; let him
take heed God sweep not him and his posterity, his House, and Name, and Memory
from off the Earth, Psalm. 83.12.
That he be no more mentioned among the Sons of Men. Remembering withal these
dreadful Imprecations: on which, who so will read the brief, but excellent
Paraphrase, of that learned Knight, Sir Henry Spelman, in his Treatise, De non
temerandis Ecclesiis, written to his Uncle, by occasion of a complaint he made
of the unprosperous success he had in building upon a piece of Glebe,
belonging to an Impropriation he had in his hands; it would move his Heart,
unleffe it were more hard and senseless than the neither Millstone. Of which
nature also is the Prophetical curse of good old Jacob, on the sacrilegious
enemies of Levi; against whom (after he had described Levies Office, To teach
Jacob Gods Judgments, and Israel his Law; to put Incense before him, and whole
burnt Sacrifice on his Altar: and then put up a Prayer for Levi, thus, Bless,
O Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his Hands) he does thus
Prophetically denounce Judgment against his Enemies, Smite through the Loins
of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him that they rise not
again.

And it is a thing to be thought on, That many ancient Families (as some
intelligent men have observed) who inherited the Lands of their Ancestors longa
serie diducta a Majoribus; when they took in some of the spoils made in Tithes
and Globe, by the Statute of Dissolution; their possessions quickly spued out
of the old possessors of them as a loathsome thing; the Bread of God proving as
the Bread of deceit, gravel in their Teeth; and the Portion of Gods Ministers
becoming like Antimony, or some such poison; that, drank into the Stomach,
provokes such a nauceous abhorrence in it, that it never rests till it has
emptied it self both of the poison that troubles it, and of whatsoever else
before lay quietly, and inofsencively therein.

I could therefore wish, That all our Gentry that would preserve their
Inheritances, without ruin to their posterity; would beware they bring not any
spoils of the Church into their Houses, lest they be spoiled by them: for they
are like the Eagles Feathers, by which the Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics
signify, pernitiosa potentia; for they are said to consume all Feathers among
which they be mingled, as Pierius relates of them.

And to preserve them from this sin, That they would have a Tablet hang up
always in the Dining Room, where they ordinarily take their repast; in which
should be drawn an Altar with Flesh and Fire on it, for Sacrifice, with an
Eagle ready to take wing, having in her Talons a piece of Flesh, with a burning
coal at it, and something beside it, and higher than the Altar, a tall Tree,
with an Eagles Nest in it,, and the Heads of her young ones discovered above
the Nest, and the Nest flaming with a light fire about them, with this
Infcription over the Altar, Noli me Tangere, ne te and tuos perdam: For things
belonging to the Altar, will certainly prove a snare to the devourers of them;
and like the Gold of Toulouse, or Seius Horse, as learned Master Seldom says,
in his Review, ever fatal to the unjust possessors of them.

Concerning the increase of Preaching Ministers maintenance by these Lands, as
some would have it; I say, it is the shame of our Church and Nation, That in
all this time, there is not one able Preacher in every Congregation of the
Kingdom but that in many places, the people sit, as it were, in darkness and
in the shadow of Death, through want of preaching. And also a shame and sin it
is, there is no better provision for them in many places where they be already:
for there ought to be an honorable maintenance for every Preaching Minister as
a reward of the Gospel of Christ, the Lord and Possessor of all the Earth. And
enough would be for them in every place; but for the cursed plague of
Impropriations, together with the unjust and Antichristian customs,
prescriptions, exemptions from Abbey Lands, and such like tricks of the Popes
Legerdemaine; which, even men, that in things of an indifferent nature, cry out
of Rome and Antichrist, can here be content to tread the step, the idle Monks,
and filthy Nuns, the crawling Vermin of the Pope, did tread before them,
without any scruple of their conscience. The Tithes are the most proper
maintenance of the Miristery: and it were fit every Cock should transfer the
Water of its own proper Cisterne: and to endeavor some increase of Preaching
Miuisters maintenance in every poor Vicaridge of the Kingdom; that way were
to do it the right and proper way. But while men talk of maintenance for able
Ministers, and think not of allowing any thing, to that purpose, out of the
Tithes that have bin unjustly taken from them heretofore, and are yet as
unjustly and unconsionably detained from them, in hands improper for them; but
think to mend them out of other Lands of the Clergy; who will think this
talk the talk of Men truly Religious, and not rather an imitation of the
Pharisees Hypocrites, That lay heavy burdens on other Men's shoulders, which
they will not put forth one of their own fingers to touch, Mat. 23.4.

When A^ranah offered David his Threshing-foore to build an Altar on, and
diverse other things munificently for the Sacrifice; David would not receive it
of gift, but would buy it, and pay for it; saying, God forbid I should offer
Sacrifice to God of that that costs me nougth, 2 Samuel 24.24. And shall we
think we have acquitted our selves well in Reformation, by taking away the
Lands and Glebe and Tithe given formerly by others, or by giving part of those
Lands to the maintenance of painful Ministers that were well enough content
with the Tithes and Glebe they had before, if we could have let them alone, and
nor have gone on in the deformity the Pope had brought upon them; but been
content to have taken them away from the Abbeys, in the Dissolution, and have
restored them to every Pastor and Vicar, which was our duty; and the defect
whereof, will continue a Sin upon our Nation, while the Impropriations
continue, which yet I do not see any desires of amendment in: For, though we
talk of nothing more then Reformation; yet we think of nothing less than
effecting any part thereof by any cost of our own, but of robbing Peter to pay
Paul, and in stead of making any restitution of that violently taken away
before, we bethink us of feizing into our hands the possessions left behind,
that hitherto have escaped our fingers, which other before us, have bequeathed
to the Service of God, without any burden of one penny to be laid on our
shoulders. A practice, doubtless, discovering no true and hearty good will to
the Preachers of the Gospel; but an evil eye at the prosperity of the Clergy:
which some express, when they say, If their Revenue were less, they would be
better, and do more Service to Christ and his Church: Deuteronomy. 33.10.11.
Whereas, I know not, why there should be supposed an inconsistence of Grace,
and a desire to glorify God with riches, more in a rich Clergy Man, than in a
rich Layman: and Times, and Histories, and experience afford us examples of
rich Ministers, as painful as any that be poorer; and of as idle and wicked,
and proud poor, as be any of the rich, and of as ungodly rich men of all other
conditions, and as unprofitable, as griping Usurers, as vile Oppressors, as
cruel and unjust Lords to their Copyholders and Tenants, as ordinary violaters
of Parliamentary Laws, as well as of Divine Laws, as any rich Clergy Man that
was ever in the Church. Certainly sirs, if a Man have Riches, he may do that
good he cannot in poverty, and go the more cheerfully through his calling,
if God sanctify his Riches by his Grace; without which, it is not poverty that
makes a Man the better. The truth is, both Riches and Poverty are Rocks; on
which many split, both Ministers and People: and Agars Prayer is best, To be
fed with food convenient. And if, letting that alone, to the Clergy that be
Rich, that God has given them, Men would take care, that poor Ministers,
might be taken off from the distractions of Poverty, by their cost, that ought
to be at the cost; all the preaching Ministers in the Kingdom would thank
God, and think they had lived to see that happy day, which many have defired
to see, but never saw; and which, I fear, mine eyes shall never see, while
they enjoy the light of the Sun.

It would therefore be a good work of us, to pray God our Parliament would
bend themselves this way; a way that would be much for the honor of that great
assembly, for the safety of the King and State, the Land and Nation, and the
preserving it from the fearful Judgments, of that God, that has threatened a
curse on a whole Nation, for this sin of Sacrilege; He being a God that
professes to hate Robbery for burnt Offering; and to let that alone, that yet
the Church enjoyes; and to think of some way for the reduction of Tithes, the
proper maintenance of the Pastoral Ministry again to the Church, for their
support and encouragement, that labor in Preaching.

First, beginning with the Bishops and Cathedral Impropriations, and restoring
the Tithe to every Pastor where it is impropriate, together with such Glebe, as
belongs to every impropriate Church respectively; considering, That these are
not part of the Lands given them by pious Men, but a continuation of the
Sacrilege, and violent Ablations of the Pope; whose sin is but maintained
alive to this day, in the Impropriations, what Statute Law soever have
succeeded, to confirm the retention of these sacred spoils; Mutavimus fures
non furtum.

Secondly, and for themselves. First, either restoring them freely again, as
some pious and conscientious men have done, and as they may do, by an Act,
with greater Justice, than they can take one foot of ground from the Church;
because Church Lands are the gift of others, given lawfully, of that that was
in their power to give only, and with which no Man may meddle, now it is given
more than before, when they were alive and possessed it; but the Tithes have
been violently taken away, by their own Act, and are acknowledged (both by the
invented Law-terme of Appropriation, and by the common name, more properly
given them in ordinary speaking, viz. Impropriations) to be improperly handled
or usurped.

Secondly, or else by setting on foot the Teoffees for Impropriations (one of
the best works that has been undertaken, in this last age of the world) that
they, in time, may buy them in if (at least) any man will now give money to that
wotke, which may be doubted, if the Lands remaining should be alienated; for
how can they expect the good they aim at shall continue, and the Tithes not be
taken away again, after they have bought them with their own money, and
returned them to the Ministry a second time, if they shall see so little
regard had to things already bestowed on them, at the cost of others* and so
small consideration had of Christ's Ministers, and such a low account made of
them, as men de faece plebis, not worthy, peradventure, to be compared with the
grooms or horsekeepers of great Personages; but rather to be likened to the
dung of their stables, which the Grooms (who are nost ad haec idones) were
wont to sweep away from the face of the earth, and cast it to the Dunghill,
the filthe of the World and the ofscouring of al things, as the Apostles were
accounted by Pagans, when they lived amongst them, a people unworthy of any
esteem, or thought, both base of birth and breeding, not only humi-serpent,
but like Job his abjects, the sons of villains and bondmen, more vile than the
Earth they crawle upon, fit for nothing, but to be exposed to the spoil and
rapine of catch and snatch, worthy only to be bought, sold, undone, and
beggerd, given away at the pleasure of men, as men unworthy of that common
Justice, that all other Subjects enjoy even the very Sacrilegers themselves, in
their Impropriations: which many men do think, though erroniously, can with
no Justice be taken from them. Yet it were good to set up these Feoffers* if,
peradventure, God may move the Hearts of men to give to the work, and leave
the success to God; that so, in time, by Gods blessing, the Impropriations may
be bought in: and in the mean time, till they can be bought in, the Feoffees
may advance, as they did sometimes, in a just and godly way, the honor of the
Gospel, by sending painful and godly Ministers into many great Congregations,
starved before, by reason of the Impropriations; which, without question, are
one of the unjustest and absurdest things, and one of the greatest sins of
the Land, at this day. I except not Non-residency, though it be one of the
great banes of the Church, and rubb in the way of the clear and free passage
of the Gospel, by the preaching of it: which it might have gotten into, before
this time, since the rise of it in this Nation, had such godly care been taken
for it, as ought to have been taken that way. And if the furtherance of this
work, concerning the reduction of Impropriations be approved; two things would
be thought on, very availeable to advance it.

One is, the removing that great rub in the way, to many, that are willing,
freely to restore Impropriations, that is, the License of Allienation, that
they may not be put to great charge, in purchasing Licenses to restore the
Tithes to the Church; and also to facilitate the Feoffees, in their buying in
what they buy; that the money entrusted with them, may go the further, in
accomplishing their intention that give this way.

The other thing is, that a certain rate may be set on the purchase of
Impropriations, not to be exceeded, and that it may not be Lawful, for any
man, upon the tender of that value, to refuse to part with his Impropriation:
without which provision, covetous men, when they see the work begin to thrive,
will take advantage, to inhance the value of their Impropriations, or on other
respects, refuse to part with them, in places that are most Populous. and where
there may be the greatest good done, by a Preaching Ministry; and so, either
prevent the maine intention of our Parliament; which is, To settle a Preaching
Ministry, and to advance the knowledge of Christ Jesus, or at least, retard
the work, and make it move forward more slowly than is convenient.

God grant the Parliament the assistance of his Grace and Blessing, to atchieve
this great work, in an holy and just way. But for the things that yet remain
to the Clergy, God grant them wisdom, to see the Injustice and Impiety of
the Peoples desires this way; who are, for the most part, led by wicked
Passions and distemper, rather than by reason and Religion; especially, at this
time, wherein the Brownists much increase, and abundance of People look that
way, and, with all their might, cry down the Maintenance of Learning; desiring
an Anabaptisticall Liberty, to do every man what he lists: which Liberty will
not be obtained, till the Clergy be brought to live on Alms; which is the
thing they aim at, and call it, a Maintenance ordained by Christ. But I hope,
the wisdom of our Sages, being of a sublime and Noble strain, will be
enabled to discern that Inscription, that is written on all things consecrated
and devoted to God; (which, after devoting, he accounts his Portion, and Sacred
to himself) Noli me Tangere, ne te pardam; that they may fear, and Learn to
do no more presumptiously in this kind, as some have done, that have gone
before them; who have given their account before now, to that Judge, to whom,
they also shall give account, in due season.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. lin. 28. for to that man. Now it is. read to that man now it is. p. 7.
l. 1. for to humane usage. That it is, r. to humane usage, that that is. p. 11.
l. 9. for Tables, r. Fables. p. 17. l. 1. for disease, r. decease. p. 20. l.
25. for displeasure r. disposure. p. 22. l. 20. for Cannons, r. Canons. p. 23.
l. 5. for strong r. wrong. l. 23. for time r. fine. l. 24. for less. r.
leaser. p. 24. l. 5. for tenants r. tenants. p. 25. l. 9. for honorable
sinlesse. r. honorable and sinlesse.p. 26. l. 16. for possible, r. possibly. p.
29. l. 22. for elected them for, r. elected them. For. l. 24. for by gaping r.
lie gaping. p. 31. l. 2. for to Apprentices. r to be Apprentices. l. 30. for
Jacob r. Moses. p. 32. l. 15. for spued out of the old possessors, r. spued out
the old possessors. p. 34. l. 5. for from Abbey lands, r. Abbey lands. p. 36. l.
22. for Agars, r. Agurs.


