The daily Examination, and Arraignment of Sins; gathered out of the most
Reverend the Primate of Ireland's Sermon at Lincoln's Inn. December. 3. 1648.
THe necessity of daily examination, appears by these Reasons. 1. Because
green wounds are easily cured; and nothing fester's so quickly, or so fowly, as
sin: When David's heart had presently smote him for cutting off the skirt of
Readiness robe, he heard no more of that: but that sin with Urias his wife,
wherein he soaked so long, brake his bones, as appears by his prayer, Psalm.
51. 8. 2. Thou do help thy memory by this (my Soul!): for if in one days
account many sins be forgotten, how many must be forgotten, if thou leav it
to be the account of many days? 3. Sin divided thus into parcels, is more
easily deal't with, as a massy Tree cut out into Billets, or smaller pieces.
4. Thou do by this means (my soul!) prevent Satan's accusation: that Accuser
of the brethren does (no doubt) bill thee daily; what a comfort will it be for
thee (my Soul!), that thou have been sueing out thy pardon, ere he could com
to put in a charge against thee. 5. O my Soul, Thou look daily on every
thing else that thou have, on thy House, Land, Cattle, Clothes; on whatever thou
have, that may be impaired, or improoved daily; what a shame is it (my Soul!)
thy self should be less considerable to thy self. 6. Thou art permitted to
live but to this purpose, whatever worldly ends of living thou propose to thy
self: and thou know not, if thou neglect this, whether any more time will
be given thee. See Revel. 2. 21. 7. If thou perform this exactly, and
constantly every night and morning, thou will (my Soul!) have but one day to
answer for all at thy parting hence: O what an eas would that be to a dying
man!

When these, or the like Reasons, have convinced thee of the necessity of this
Examination, and affected thy heart with a desire thereto, proceed after this
plain manner.

Examine thy Thoughts Words Actions
by these 3. words Tit. 2. 12 Soberly Justly Godly
thus: O my Soul, have I been To be SOBER, is generally to observe a mean in
all things, and to moderate our selves in our passions, d^sires, meat, drink,
clothes, mirth, discourse, and all our actions. Examine thy self, whether thou
have according to these particulars, been sober in thy thoughts, words, deeds
this day: where thou find thou have, give God thanks, and beg perseverance;
where thou find the contrary, beg pardon, and resolv for the future against
it.
SOBER in my Thoughts Words Actions?
To be JUST, is, in thought, word, and deed, to do that right thou would
be don to, and the Scriptures require, to the person, soul, body, name,
estate of every man; to render their dues to all, whether superiors,
inseriors, or equals: examine by these particulars how just thou have this day
been, and according as thou find thy self, proceed, as directed in the
description of Sobriety.
JUST in my Thoughts Words, Actions?
To be GODLY, is, to know God, to use, and improov our knowledge of him, to
remember him, trust and hope in him, to have love and zeal to him, joy in him,
to be thankful, obedient, patient toward him, to fear him, and humbly to
submit unto him, to reverence and honor him, to be sorry for offending him,
to serve and worship him, to pray, read, and hear his word, and that rightly, to
sanctify his name, and glorify him, in whatever he is made known to me by:
examine thy self, whether thou have don according, or contrary to these
particulars, and then proceed as above directed.
GODLY in my Thoughts Words Actions?

Dwell on each of these, and recollect all places, companies, businesses,
wherein thou have been this day employed, especially examine thy Thoughts,
when thou wast alone. Words, when in Company. Actions, both ways.

Especially my Soul, thou art to find out thy master-sin; in order to which,
thou commonly committest most of thy other sins: as if covetousness be thy
master-sin, there is no other sin which thou will not do, to fulfill its
desires; thou will dishonor God, swear, violate the Lord's day, be
disobedient to Superiors, murder, commit adultery, steal, bear fals-witness,
to gratify thy covetousness. And so if pride, or any other sin be thy master
sin. If thou would know it,

It Is that, 1. Thy Thoughts are most conversant about; as when David awoke he
was presently with God; so art thou with thy master-sin. 2. Thou can not
endure it should be touched, either by the own examination, or others reproof.
When thou have found this Ringleader of thy sins, go to God with strong
cries, beg earnestly of him; O my God, give me grace to be deeply sorrowful
for what is past, to resolv presently against it, and for the time to com, to
endeavor by all means, that this chief enemy of my soul, may not be
readmitted.

Thy sins of the day being discovered, thou art to discover the hainousness
of them, lest that thou pass them over too slightly; Therefore they are to be
tried and arraigned, by considering these following Points, and saying to thy
Soul,

1. O my Soul, thou have by the sins of this day, forsaken God, whom thou
should have simply stuck to, as being most excellent, and amiable in
himself, and most bountiful also unto thee.

2. Thou have forsaken him for inconsiderable things, for profit with Judas,
for pleasure with Esau; how wicked do thou think them, for what they did,
and what can thou think of thy self doing the same things? O my soul, thou
have left God for transitory things, that (if they were permanent) can neither
satisfy nor save thee from Death or Judgment; and the lesser thy motive was,
the greater is thy sin; especially if thou have sworn, which is a sin men do
gratis commonly, and for no advantage, whose doom is to be seen, Psalm. 25. 2.

3. Thou have offended against thy God's precept (O my Soul!), and he seems
to speak unto thee, as he did to Adam, have thou eaten of the Tree I forbad
thee, Have thou thought, and spoken, and don this day what I forbad thee?

4. O my Soul, thou have not offended against his precept only, but
notwithstanding his help to observe it, he gave thee grace, and thou did not
use it; a little grace goe's far, and thou might have thereby kep't God's
word, Rev. 3. 8. but thou have (my Soul!) received the grace of God in vain.

Having found the hainousness of thy sin, If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged. 1. Cor. 11. 31.
and thy self thus guilty, what remain's (my Soul!) but that thou sentence thy
self and say, O my Soul, how can it be but that God for sake's thee also, and
take's away his Spirit, Graces, Angels, from thee, leaving thee without guide,
or protector, to be worried by the Devil, the world, and the flesh? Think
whether thou can sleep in such a case; O then (lest vengeance overtake thee,
and to recover thy former interest in God) betake thee quickly unto him, in
this or the like Prayer.

Blessed Lord!
I Have often this day by intemperance, unrighteousnes, and ungodliness, in
thought, word, and deed, forsaken thee my God, notwithstanding thy Precept yea
thy help of Grace to observe it; and this I have don for inconsiderable things,
so that I am now to be forsaken by thee, to be bereft of thy direction, and
defense, and to be left, to the disposeing of the enemies of my soul and
body; yet O Lord, thou have graciously vouchsafed me power to survey my
condition, to examine my sins, whilst yet cureable, and to be dealt withal,
before the Divel's accusation has drawn down thy vengeance; whilst I am
permitted to live, and dureing this time accepted, this day of salvation, Good
Lord perfect what thou have begun, give me an unfeigned sorrow for what is past,
and an earnest purpose to amend; O let me recover thy good will, that I may
rest in thy favor. Dear Father, I long to renew that friendship, I ^ad with
thee ere these my sins had broken it, Thou that have brought me from my sins,
to these desires, bring these desires to perfection; reunite me to Thy self,
and then ravish my heart so with thy excellencies, that I may never more lust
after the pleasures, profits, honors of this world so, as to lose that ^mitie
which thou shall this night vouchsafe me: Hear Lord, and answer these my
petitions, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Grudg not to bestow the pains of a life, that will quickly end, to compass
that life which shall never end.


