Upon the COALPITS about NEWCASTLE upon Tine.
ENGLAND's a perfect World; has Indies too.
Correct your Maps; Newcastle is Peru.
Let th'haughty Spaniard triumph, 'till it is told
Our sooty Mineralls purify his Gold.
This will sublime and hatch th'abortive Oar
When the Sun tires, and Stars can do no more.
No Mines are current unrefin'd and gross:
Coals make the Sterling, Nature but the Dross.
For Metalls ( Bacchus-like) two Births approve,
Heaven's heat's the Semele, and ours the Jove.
Thus Art does polish Nature; it is her Trade:
So every Madame has her Chambermaid.
Who'd dote on Gold? a thing so strange and odd,
It Is most contemptible when made a God.
All sins and mischiefs thence have rise, and swell.
One Indies more would make another Hell.
Our Mines are innocent, nor will the North
Tempt poor Mortality with too much worth.
They Are not too precious; rich enough to fire
A Lover, yet make none Idolater.
The moderate value of our guiltless Oar
Makes no man Atheist, nor no woman Whore.
Yet why should hallowed Vesta's glowing shrine
Deserve more honor then a flaming Mine?
These pregnant Wombs of Heat would fitter be
Then a few Embers, for a Deity.
Had he our Pits, the Persian would admire
No Sun, but warm's Devotion at our Fire.
He Would leave the trotting Whipster, and prefer
This profound Vulcan 'bove that Wagoner.
For, wants he Heat or Light? would he have store
Of both? it is here: and what can Suns give more?
Nay, what is that Sun, but (in a different name)
A Coal-pit Rampant, and a Mine on Flame?
Then let this Truth reciprocally run,
"The Sun's Heaven's Coalery, and Coals our Sun.
A Sun that scorches not, locked up in the Deep;
The Bandog's chained, the Lion is asleep.
That tyrant Fire, which uncontrolled does rage,
Here Is calm and hushed, like Bajazet in the Cage.
For in each Coal-pit there does (couchant) dwell
A muzzled Aetna, and an innocent Hell.
Kindle the Cloud, you will Lightning then descry,
Then will a Day break from the gloomy sky:
Then you will unbutton though December blow,
And sweat in the midst of Iceicles and Snow:
It Is Dog-dayes then at Christmasse: thus is all
The Year made June and Aequinoctiall.
If Heat offend, our Pits afford us Shade.
Thus Summer's Winter, Winter Summer made.
What need we Baths? what need we Bower or Grove?
A Coal-pit's both a Venti-duct and Stove.
Such Pits and Caves were Palaces of old:
Poor Innes (God wot) yet in an Age of Gold.
And (what would now be thought a strange Design)
To build a House, was then to Undermine.
People lived under ground: and happy dwellers,
Whose joviall Habitations were all Cellars!
Those Primitive times were innocent, for then
Man, who turned after Fox, but made his Den.
But see a Fleet of Rivals trim and fine,
To court the rich Infanta of our Mine!
Hundreds of grim Leanders dare confront,
For this loved Hero, the loud Hellespont.
It Is an Armado Royal does engage
For some new Helen with this Equipage:
Prepared too (should we their Addresses bar)
To force their Mistress with a ten-yeare's war:
But that our Mine Is a common Good, a Joy
Not made to ruin, but enrich our Troy.
Thus went those gallant Heroes of old Greece,
(The Argonauts) in quest of the Golden Fleece.
But O, these bring it with them, and conspire
To pawn that Idol for our Smoke and Fire.
Silver's but Ballast, this they bring ashore,
That they may treasure up our better Oar.
For this they venture Rocks and Storms, defy
All the extremities of Sea and Sky.
For the glad purchase of this precious Mould
Cowards dare Pirates, Misers part with Gold.
Hence it is, that when the doubtful Ship sets forth,
The knowing Needle still directs it North:
And Nature's secret wonder (to attest
Our Indies worth) discards both East and West.
For it is not only Fire commends this Spring;
A Coal-pit is a Mine of every thing.
We sink a Jack-of-all-trades Shop, and sound
An invers'd Burse, an Exchange under ground.
This Prot^us-earth converts to what you would ha'ce;
Now you may weav't to Silk, then coyn't to Plate:
Or (what is a Metamorphosis more dear)
Dissolve it, and 'twill melt to London Beer.
For whatsoever that gaudy City boasts,
Each Month derives to these attractive Coasts.
We shall exhaust their Chamber, and devour
The Treasures of Guild Hall, the Mint, the Tower.
Our Staiths their morgag'd Streets will soon divide;
Blathon owe Cornhill, Stella share Cheap Side.
Thus will our Coal-pit's Charity and Pity
At distance under-Mine and Fire the City.
Should we exact, they would pawn their Wives, and treat
To swap those Coolers for our sovereign Heat.
'Bove Kisses and Embraces Fire controuls:
No Venus heightens like a Peck of Coals.
Medaea was the Drudge of some old Sire,
And Aeson's bath a lusty Sea-coal Fire.
Chimneys are old men's Mistresses, there innes
A modern Dalliance with their meazled Shinnes.
To all Defects the Coal-heap brings a Cure;
Gives Life to Age, and Raiment to the Poor.
Pride first wore Clothes; Nature disdaines Attire:
She made us Naked 'cause she gave us Fire.
Full Wharfs are Wardrobes; and the Taylour's charm
Belongs to the Collier, He must keep us warm.
The quilted Alderman with all is Array,
Finds but cold comfort on a Frosty day.
Girt, wrapped and muffled, yet with all that stir,
Scarce warm when smothered in his drouzy Furr.
Not proof against keen Winter's Batteryes,
Should he himself wear all is own Liveryes*
But Chil-blains under Silver Spurrs bewailes,
And in embroidered Buck-skins blows his Nails.
Rich Meadows and full Cropps are elsewhere found;
We can reap Harvest from our Barren ground.
The bald, parched Hills that circumscribe our Tine,
Are no less fruitful in their hungry Mine.
Their unfledged tops so well content our Palats,
We envy none their Nosegaies and their Sallads.
A gay, rank Soil (like a young Gallant) grows,
And spends it self, that it may wear fine Clothes.
Whilst all its worth is to its back confined;
Ours wears plain Outsides, but is richly Lined.
Winter's above, it is Summer underneath;
A trusty Morglay in a Rusty Sheath.
As precious Sables sometimes interlace
A wretched Searge, or Grogram Cassock-case.
Rocks own no Spring, are pregnant with no Showers;
Crystal and Gemms grow there in stead of Flowers:
In stead of Roses, Beds of Rubies sweet;
And Emeralds recompense the Violet.
Dame Nature, not (like other Madames) wears
(Where she is bare) Pearls on her Breast or Ears.
What though our Fields present a Naked sight?
A Paradise should be an Adamite.
The Northern Lad his Bonny Less throws down,
And gives her a Black Bag for a Green Gown.
FINIS.

