THE SAINTS EXPECTATION AND REWARD A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL of that Learned and
Faithful Minister of Christ Mr. THO: WIBOROW June 10th 1652.

Preached at Enfeild in Staffordshire, By MICHAEL THOMAS Minister of Gods Word
at Stockden in Shropshire.

Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that man is
Peace. Psalm. 37. 37. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance.
Psalm. 112. 6. Blessed are the Dead that Dye in the Lord. Revel. 14. 13. LONDON,
Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Princis
Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

(...) 2 Epist. Pet. 3d. chap. ver. 13. Nevertheless we according to his
promise look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells righteousness:
THE first word of this Text invites us to look back to somewhat that went
before, at the third Verse, the Apostle gives a prophetical caveat concerning
a sort of scoffers that should come in the last days, mockers at Religion, not
only bending all their wit and learning to dispute against it, but deciding
those that spoke of the coming of the Lord. Where is the promise of his
coming, say they, ver. 4. 'twas (...) says Aretius, a mocking, and scoffing
question, which argued not only the proud wickedness, but the deep security
of their hearts. Now against these Saint Peter bends his main forces, and in
this Epistle stirs up his dispersed Countrymen the Jews, to stick close to
that Doctrine which was delivered by the Prophets and Apostles. For assure your
selves (says he) that as this World had a beginning and once perished, so
hereafter it shall have an end, and whatsoever these scoffers think, be
consumed with fire. Verses 6, and 7. Neither think ye this time long a
coming, for though it seem so to us, it is otherwise with God. Deo nihil est
aut prius aut posterius, say the Schoolmen, Gods actions are not measured by
the rule of time, those things which are past and future are present to him,
for one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day ver. 8.
It Is the patience and long-suffering of the Lord which does as it were set back
the clock of time, that we might take the advantage of the means, and
opportunities of grace, to repent and be provided against that day comes: For
come it shall, and that suddenly, as a thief in the night, ver. 9. and appear
it shall, and that terribly, when the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat: verse 10 but howsoever
this universal combustion shall ruin the frame of this world, and involve
those desperate wretches in it, that rest their hearts upon it; yet to us who
have obtained the precious faith through the righteousness of Jesus Christ, it
shall not occasion the least trouble; let the foundations of the Earth sink
away under our feet, let our habitations totter about our ears, let the air
fail our nostrills, or the Heavens to give us light. Nevertheless we according
to his promise look for new Heavens. and seq.

This Text in the general purpose, and design of it, presents to us this
observation. That a righteous man has both helps and hopes to depend upon,
when the whole world fails him. A Doctrine very proper and necessary to be
discussed in these sad times, we see by sad and daily experiences, that the
tenure of our Earthly poslessions is fickle and uncertain, those Tabernacles of
our flesh wherein our souls dwell are continually decaying and mouldring away,
and therefore the spirits of holy men had need to be supported with their
future hopes, by the consideration of those glorious Mansions that are
preparred in Heaven for them. And when I have discussed this general
observation, I proceed to speak of these five particulars.

First, that the Estate of a Christian in this life is an inheritance: it is not
in possession but in reversion. Expectamus: we look for. The second is, that
this inheritance will certainly devolve and fall to him for his Evidence, for
it is Gods promise: We according to his promise look for. The third is the
substance of the inheritance. Heaven and Earth. The forth is the quality of the
inheritance. New Heavens and a new Earth. The fifth is the excellence of the
inheritance, wherein dwells righteousness.
I shall guide your Christian attention through these particulars, and collect
thence such notes of as may be proper to our selves, and suitable to this
present occasion.

I begin with the general observation. That a righteous man has both helps
and hopes to depend when the whole world fails him.

'Twas a blessed Metaphor which the Holy Ghost put into the mouth of St. Paul,
Pondus gloriae: When he said that our afflictions are but light, because there
is an exceeding and an eternal weight of glory attending on them, for were it
not for that exceeding weight of glory, no other weight in the world were able
to turn the scale, or weigh down those infinite weights of affliction which
oppose us here; we read in the book of Exodus that God sent upon Pharaoh pestem
valde gravem, a very heavy pestilence, 9. 3d. in the eighth chap. Mus^am valde
gravem. God called in but the fly to vex the Egyptians, and even that fly was
an heavy burden to them. The distressed Church of the Jews complained Lament.
3. that God aggravasset compedes, had made their fetters and their chains heavy
to them, and the workmen in the harvest. Math. 20. complain that they had born
the heat and burden of the day. David and Solomon both cried out and said,
that this work is vanity and lightness when we see all is weight and burden,
and heaviness and oppression; what man that lives may not say, and that truly,
trouble and heaviness are fallen upon me, so that were there not a weight of
future glory to counterpoise it, we should all sink into nothing.

And that which multiplies the sadness of this consideration, is, that still
the best men have the most heavy afflictions laid upon them. No sooner do we
hear God say of Job that he had found a just man, one that feared God and
eschewed evil, but immediately God grants a Commission to Satan to bring in
the Sabeans and Chaldeans upon his servants and cattle, fire and tempest upon
his children, and loathsome diseases upon his body. Although God gave that
testimony of holy David, hat he was a man according to his own heart; yet we
may read several crosses that befell him in the miscarriages and disobediences
of his Children. Yea, our blessed Savior himself, of whom God testified at his
baptism, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Yet we find that
beloved Son led up by the spirit to be tempted in the Wilderness. Math. 4.
Afterward you may hear God ratifying the same testimony at his transfiguration.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, and yet find that Son
forsaken of his Father, and given over to Scribes and Pharisees, and Publicans
and Herodians, and Priests and Soldiers, and People and Judges, and Witnesses,
and Executioners, and he that was called the beloved Son of God, and made
partaker of the glory of Heaven in this world, in his transfiguration, was made
the sink of all corruption, the receptacle of the pollution of all the sins of
the world, as if he were no Son of God, but mere man; as if he were no man but
a contemptible worm: such is the miserable condition of mankind: As though the
greatest weakness in the world were man, and the greatest fault in man were to
be good. Man is more miserable then any other Creature, and good men more
miserable then any other men.

Solomon speaks of a sore evil that was under the Sun, and this was it, that
all things come alike to all, that there is but one event to the righteous and
to the wicked; in times of common and public calamitity when God plats an
overflowing scourge for a Nation, it is oftentimes seen that some stripes do
light upon the backs of the righteous: Good King Josiah slain in the wars,
as well as wicked Ahab; and this is an evil of vexation, because sometimes weak
Christians are offended that it is so, and the glory of God seems to be
obscured, when it is so; but yet God, who best knows how to repair his own
honor, suffers and appoints it so, that the just and the unjust are wrapped up
in the same judgment together. The Corn you know is as much beaten in the
thrashing as the chafe, or the straw is: and the just are as much chastned in
this world as the unjust; of which proceedings of God, Aquinas gives this
account, All things, says he, happen alike to all, quantum ad substantiam
bonorum and malorum, sed non quantum ad finem: In regard of the substance of
good and evil, so all things happen alike; but not in respect of their end;
because righteous men by these visitations are humbled, and brought into the
way of blessedness, whereas by them wicked men are hardened, and go on more
stubbornly in the ways of their iniquity. Gods purpose in sending out these
messengers of wrath, is, but to declare his indignation against sin; and when
his children perceive that sin is so odious and contrary to his nature, they
grow by degrees into the same hatred and detestation of it: and then it is that
the Lord takes them into his especial protection, and will be their help and
comfort when the whole world fails them.

And this was that privilege which the Prophet David sang so triumphantly,
Psalm 91. Who so dwells under the defense of the most high, shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty. The Argument of that Psalm, says Musculus, is the
confidence and affiance of a righteous soul upon God; the particulars of every
confidence, holy David describes from the first to the fourteenth verse; under
these metaphorical terms, of a secret place and a shadow, are set forth the
care and providence of God: as if David had said, it is true, that troubles will
befall the people of God, but God has a secret place to secure them; the fire
of tribulation may be kindled round about them, but God has a shadow to
refresh them, be the judgment of what nature soever, God has suitable
deliverances for his people: are they in poverty or nakedness? the Lord will
cover them with his feathers; are they sick and sore at heart? he has healing
under his wings; are they pursued with the sword? the Lord will be their
buckler; are they afraid of the pestilence? that (...), as the LXX read it,
that evil Angel, that destroys evening, and morning, and at noon day, yet it
shall not come nigh his dwelling; thousands shall fall upon his right hand, and
ten thousand upon his left, but the Lord shall give his Angels charge over him,
to keep him in all his ways. And all these deliverances David found in
himself, and declares, that God fashioned him in his Mothers womb, and took him
thence, and was both his hope and his help afterward, he did often break the
snare of the hunter, defeating the malice of Saul and the rebellion of Absalom,
and carried him through diverse tribulations, and at length laid him in his
grave, full of days, riches, and honor. The holy Scripture abounds with
examples of this kind, that God has been a shield and buckler to his people,
and has satisfied them with long life and salvation, that have put their trust
in him.

And for the great comfort and encouragement of his people, the Lord has told
them, that he will be a father unto them, see Psalm 103. Like as a father
pittieth his children, so will the Lord pity them that fear him. See Malach.
3. 16. They shall be mine, says the Lord, in that day when I make up my
jewels. In that day, That is, in the day of trouble and desolation, when the
Lord shall put a difference between the righteous and the wicked, in that day
they shall be mine, and that love and favor which a tender Father shows to
an obedient son, so will spare them. Why? they are my Jewels, says God, my
precious Treasure, and though like Jewels, they may have flawes and faults in
them, and yield not that brightness and luster they should do, yet I will cut
them, and polish them, and lay them up in the Cabinet of the grave, and bring
them out on the glorious day of resnrrection: but because of the two parents,
for the most part, the love of the Mother is most tender; therefore it has
pleased God to ascertain his people of his tender care over them, even in that
notion, Isa. 49. 15, 16. Can a Mother forget her sucking child, and not have
compassion on the son of her womb? If she could, yet I will not forget thee.
But what is there provided to keep them in Gods remembrance; I have graven thee
upon the Palms of my Hands, says the Lord there: That phrase, says Alvarez,
imports perpetuam recordationem, a constant remembrance, never to be blotted
out; as we use to say of a thing that is nigh, and near to us, pro manibus est,
it is at hard: But there is more in that phrase then so; there are some Divines
conceive, that our Savior now in the state of glory, retains the scares and
wounds which he received in his body here on earth for the redemption of
mankind. 'Twas the saying of Saint Cyprian, The Lord Christ, says he, does
st^ll retain the print of the nails in his hands and feet, that the offering up
of his body for a sacr fice, might every day be as powerful in the sight of
God, to appease his wrath toward mankind, as it was on the day of his passion.
Ostendit filius patri vulnera, says Aquinas, Christ shows his wounds to his
father, and they are as so many wounds pleading and making intercession for
penitent sinners. So that these words, that God will remember his people more
tenderly, then a mother can her child, that the names of his Elect are written
in the palms of his hands in such bloody characters, that no time can deface:
how strong an argument may this be to every Christian, that Christ will be a
friend, and stick to him when the whole world shall fail him?

Saint Ambrose observing those many names and relations, by which the Lord is
pleased to own his people, breaks forth into this meditation, Omnia Christus
est nobis, Christ is all in all to us. Is thy conscience wounded, Christ is a
Physician; are thy sins many and grievous? Christ is righteousness; do thou
walk in darknesser Christ is light; would thou go to heaven? he is the way;
do thou fear death? Christ is the life. Vide quot titulorum generibus tui
gratia Christus insignitur, says that father: See how many names and titles
Christ takes upon him for thy sake, who in his own Essence is but one God, that
in all the changes and chances that may befall us in this life, we may have
some name and notion of God to lay hold upon, and to sustain us in the day of
adversity.

But some carnal heart perchance may say, if the Lord be the help and the hope
of his people, how is it that they are oftentimes brought into such straits,
that they know not which way to turn themselves; we might satisfy this and the
like objections, if we would but consider of these things: First, it is very
meet that every child should honor his Father, that every servant should
glorify his Master: In the afflictions of his holy ones, the Lord lets the
wicked see, how much they will suffer for his sake, and not forsake him, that
they will not leave their integrity, though they lose all the world beside.
Do thou still retain thine integrity, says Jobs wife to him? Do thou fear
such a God as has stripped thee of all thy earthly comforts? Oh, says Job,
shall we receive good from the hand of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil?
The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Again, it is not meet that children and servants should receive correction from
their Parents and Masters to remember them of, and to obtain them in their
duty. Secundi successus abducunt a Deo and sanctimonia, says Hyperius;
prosperity and happiness do estrange or hearts from Godliness, and slacken
us in all duties of devotion. this corruption, David acknowledged in his own
nature, Man being honor, has no understanding: And further, Before I was
afflicted I went wrong, but now I will keep thy testimonies: The Vine will grow
empty and wild except it be pruned, and so will the best man except the Lord
sometime shake his rod over him. Irascitur Divina Benitas in hoc soeculo ne
irascatur in altero. Almighty God will be angry with us in this world, that he
may favor us in the next, and in mercy corrects us here, that he may not
consume us in vengeance hereafter.

And thirdly, It is not meet that every one should wear the badge and
cognizance of his profession. Luther was wont to say, Qui non est crucianus,
non est Christianus: He that is not crucified to the world, and the world to
him, is no Christian and some stories tell us, that the primitive Christians
had an Hieroglyphick, Crucem coronatam, a Cross with a Crown upon it, and it
had this inscription. Toll crucem (...) ^^bere coronam, you must bear the
Cross if ye would wear the Crown^ if we be the members of Christ, we must
conform to our head, and partake with our fellow members, we must not expect
that God should strew carpets for our nice feet to walk into Heaven, and make
that way smooth for us, which all the Patriarchs and Prophets, and Apostles,
and Martyrs, yea and Christ himself found so rugged and bloody; the gate of
Heaven is straight, and we must strive to enter into it, we must be disposed
and prepared in mind, cherfully to part with any thing we enjoy, when it shall
please the Lord to call for it; This is the race we must run, this is the
course we must finish, and yet we may not say within our selves, this is an
hard saying; are these the helps and hopes that a righteous man has to depend
upon whent he world fails him; surely we mistake our selves if we look for
any other, for the estate of a Christian is an inheritance, his happiness is
not in possession but in reversion, which is the first of those particulars I
propounnded to consider when I had handled the general observation.

Expectamus says the Apostle, there are some better things we look for then we
possess here. I am persuaded a great part of that trouble that befalls the
children of God in this life arises from a mistake, because our Savior says,
that the meek shall inherit the Earth: therefore when meek and holy persons are
driven from their house and home, when their earthly possessions are taken from
them by violence, hereupon they are cast down and troubled, as if they were at
once oppressed by men and forsaken of God: but this I say is a mistake.
Righteous men look upon the world as if it were their own, when they have a
good title to it, yet they have the least share in it: the wealth of a
Christian is not in possession: it is true what Solomon says, Wisdom is good
with an inheritance; that man that is Dives and Lazarus too: He to whom God
has given both riches and religion, wealth and grace to manage it, goodly and
fair is that man's lot God has done so to some, but he does not promise to do
so to all, when the Sons of Zebedee were presented by their mother to our
Saviors favor to sit one on his right hand, the other on his left in his
Kingdom, they received no other answer but this, can ye drink of my Cup, that
is, can ye suffer with me? can ye power out your blood for the profession of my
Gospel: The Crown of of Martyrdom was all the honor which our Savior offered
to those ambitious Disciples. Our Savior told Pilate that his Kingdom was not
of this world, our estates then lie not on this old earth, but in those new
Heavens that we look for Neither do we find in Scripture that the Saints held
by any other tenure: Saint Paul says of Abraham, that he did but so^ourn in
Canaan as in a strange Country: he and his Children dwelling in Tents, for he
looked for a City that had foundations, whose builder and maker was God: So
Jacob describes his own life, and calls it but a Pilgrimage. So David confesses
that he was but a stranger and sojourner as all his Fathers were: from whence
proceeded these humble acknowledgements of these holy men but from this
consideration, that their estates were an i^heritance, which as yet they were
not in possession of, but (...) assure themselves of the reversion; and this
note may (...) things.

First, if the Lord have given us wealth or other accomodations, or
contentments in present possession, it should move us to thankfulness How much
are those men bound to God, to whom he has given the Earth in possession, and
Heaven in reversion? how should they endeavor to honor the Lord with their
substance, who has obliged them by so many mercies? And secondly, patience and
contentedness are virtues that are required of those that are poor in this
world; that man is too covetous that will not be satisfied unless he have
Earth and Heaven too. Let us consider our selves, that while we are in this
world we are heirs indeed, but in our nonage, we have a title to any good thing
this world has or the next but God who is our Guardian has it in his hands,
and allows only something for our present maintenance, but when the few and
evil days of our pilgrimage be expired, then we shall possess a City that
has foundations, which is purchased and prepared for us, and which shall
extremely be estated on us, for the evidence we have to show for it is Gods
promise, which is the second particular we are to consider. We according to his
promise look for new Heavens and a new Earth.

Man has diverse ways and means of apprehending things, that which we
apprehend by sense we call our knowledge, that which we know by argument we
call our reason, that which we know by trial is our experience, but that which
we receive for the authority of him that delivers it is, called faith. God has
promised eternal life to all them that are in Christ Jesus, of this the
authority of the word of God informs me, and my faith pitches upon it and there
it rests. It was well said by Theophylact. Orationis fundamentum and basis est
Fides. Fidei vero Dei promissio. The foundation of prayer is faith, for without
faith prayer is ineffectuall: but the foundation of our faith are the promises
of God in Christ Jesus, and God was pleased to take that way of assurance for
the comfort and support of his people. So St. Paul expresses it, God being
willing to show to the he^rs of his promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it with an Oath. Only for this reason that we might have strong
consolation, such a consolation as will be a Tower and Fortress of defense:
such a support as will hold up our heads amidst the raging floods, either of
worldly afflictions or Satan's temtations; For all the promises of God are Yea
and Amen in Christ Jesus, whatsoever the Lord promises shall certainly come to
pass; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but his word shall not pass away.
And therefore if we would advise soundly for the good of our souls, we should
endeavor to be familiarly and intimately acquainted with the promises of God.
It Is reported of one of the Rabbis Saadiah, that he could tell how often every
letter in the Hebrew Alphabet was used in the whole Bible, and such knowledge
argued great study and meditation in the Scripture. The troubles of a Christian
heart are very many, both for number, variety, and bitterness, and there is
only one ingredient that can sweeten them all, and that is the promises of
God. Can we remember what the Lord promises, that the seed of the righteous
shall be blessed: that the Lord in his holy habitation will be a Father to the
Fatherless, and a Judge of the Widow: to set those that are solitary in
families, as it is, Psalm. 68. 5. There is marrow in that promise, sufficient to
strengthen every Christian heart, that does digest it by faith: can we
remember it, and not be comforted? or who that considers those words of Saint
Paul to the Ephesians, That the Lord is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we can ask or think. Ephesians. 3. 20. Here Is a large patent for comfort,
when trouble and anguish comes upon us, when all our affairs for this life are
in a desperate and forlorn condition, when matters go so ill with us, that we
know not which way to turn our selves: if then the Lord should put us to our
choice, and bid us bethink our selves, and ask for those things which we
conceived would be most comfortable to us; yet the Lord is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think: the Lord is not only better able
to provide, but he knows what is better for us then we our selves, and willl
in due time administer it abundantly to all those, that cast their care, and
rely upon him. He is the Lord faithful and true, that keeps covenant and
mercy with the righteous, and their seed, and that never turns his face from
them whose eyes are toward him. Forasmuch then as the Lord has passed his
promise for all things, both of this life, and that which is to come, let us
treasure up in our memories a plenteous store of these precious promises, that
in all the troubles and disquiet of our hearts, we may have a cordial ready to
revive our fainting spirits: What though we be harrowed with oppressions, and
racked with persecutions? What though our estates be taken from us; nay,
suppose the fire were kindled that must dissolve the world, or death ready to
dissolve us, yet what can discourage us if we believe this promise, that a new
heaven, and a new earth are provided for us, and shall everlastingly abide with
us, which is the next particular, and calls for your Christian attention.

But I foresee neither the time nor your patience will admit to consider these
particular branches of the Text apart, we are yet to speak of the substance,
and the quality, and the excellency of the inheritance of righteous men, but
of these, much need not, neither indeed can be said: I know that some
interpreters have made this text the foundation of that question, whether after
the general dissolution of these heavens and elements by fire, there shall
result new heavens and a new earth out of the ashes of the old world: there are
great Authors on both sides, and it is not for me to put in my head among the
wise, as the proverb is, being mindful of what Peter Martyr speaks in this
question, In re^^^m dub^a nil pertin^^^ter est assere^dum: In such a doubtful
case, we must not determine ra^^ly: It may be sufficient for us to know, that
in these new heavens and earth there is that joy and bliss, which no tongue
can express, nor heart imagine, it is the business only of our faith to
believe that great goodness of the Lord that we shall see in the land of the
living. Saint Peter tells us 1 Pet. 1. 4. That our inheritance in heaven is
incorruptible, and undefiled, and such an one as (...) not fade away. Pareus
gives us a criticisme upon the place: that term in the original (...), which
we read incorruptible, he conceives should be (...), indiminishable which
term would much advance our heavenly inheritance; we observe of earthly
inheritances, how great soever they be, they do not wholly descend upon the
heir; the more children their are in a family, into the more portions must the
inheritance be divided, and every division is a diminution: But this
inheritance which Christ has purchased for us, is given whole and entire to
every son of God. Tanta est singulis, quanta est omnibus, says Saint
Augustine, every blessed soul enjoyes the whole heaven, and all the comforts of
it, which are the rather enlarged, by the multitude of those that partake of
them. And again, it is such an inheritance, wherein dwells righteousness.
It Is a nice, but a profitable note, that both Beza and S^rrarius make,
conceiving the original (...), to refer rather to the persons then the
place, they render it thus: We in whom dwells the righteousness of faith,
look for new heavens and a new earth: And admitting of this translation, it may
rouse our souls and consciences to consider, whether true and saving
righteousness dwell in us or no, for it is that only that must give us title to
that inheritance. Saint John in the Revelation tells us, that there shall in no
wise enter into the new Jerusalem, anything that defiles, or works
abomination, or marketh alie. Holy persons we must be, as we hope to ascend
into the holy hill of the Lord. Or consider the words as we read them, that
righteousness referres to the place, and even that will exast the excellency
of it: Here in this world, righteousness does but sojurne, there it dwells;
here it has but a Tabernacle, there a Mansion; here it is mixed with manifold
infirmities, there it is perfect, and in the greatest eminency; here but in
some, there in all; here but for a time, but there for ever: The
unrighteonsnesse of this present evil world, makes all those that belong to
heaven to desire to be dissolved: These are those days in which we may take up
that cry of David, H^lp Lord, for the godly man cease, and the faithful
fail from among the Children of men; they speak with vain tongues, and
slattering lips, and double hearts, and are full of all unrighteousness: So
that we may say, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they do not only
rest from their labors, but are secured from all violence and
unrighteousness, they neither know nor feel the evils that are done upon
earth. Into which blessed state, our confidence is, the soul of our Brother
here disceased is translated, in the honor of whose memory I must yet beg a
few minutes, to show you in how many respects he was an example of the Text,
and both in life and death, a very eminent practiser of it.

I remember what Pliny said of Antoninus, Pictores pulchram absolitamg, faciem
raro nisi (...) pe^us effingunt: An exact and comely face is seld^me drawn, but
with some dissadvantage. Persons of great parts and gifts cannot with
sufficient right and justice be represented by one of meaner abilities: I may
say of him, what Nacianzen said of Saint Basil, (...), here wants his own
tongue, to speak his own stor^; that elegant and pious tongne, which you have
so often heard resounding the praises of God in this place. Yet since David
tells us, that there is an honor due to all the Saints of God, to such as live
and die in his holy faith; and since Providence put me upon the work (for I
sought it not) as I loved and honored him living, it is some addition to my
sorrow for his death, that I cannot discharge this funeral rite in a measure
answerable to his just desert: In that great variety of graces which shined
eminently in him, I cannot tell which to select and present first. It was the
Fate of this reverend person to live in such times, wherein this Prophecy of
Saint Peter in this Chapter, was over-abundantly fulfilled: He foretold, that
there should be scoffers and jesters in divine things, in matters appertaining
to God and religion: For now in these days, excellency of wit, lies in
prophannesse, and he is reputed a good spirit that dares abuse God and holy
things; that person is esteemed good company, who by his scurrile wit, makes
his company the worse, or keeps them from goodness: This being the air and
complexion of the wit of these times, I have been both an eye and ear witness,
that profane wit has oftentimes been a matter of vexation to him, but never
of mirth that I could perceive. It pleased God to carry him through various
fortunes, and yet to support him with cheerfulness, and a true Christian
constancy in all. It was an inverterate disease, no calamity of these times,
that occasioned his death: He has given many testimonies of his firm faith in
the Doctrine of our Text, that a righteous man has both helps and hopes to
depend upon, when the world fails him; He saw, and had experience of many
failings in the world, and worldly things: His estate failed him, which in the
beginning of these troubles was full and plentiful: His friends failed him,
and proved unfaithful: His health and strength failed him, and let his body
fall into his grave like ripe fruit from a tree: and in all these deficiencies
and faultrings of the world, he bore up a true Christian head, glorifying God
in great patienee and integrity, submitting to his holy will, as well in his
losses as in his gains, blessing God, both when he gave, and when he took
away: He made the only right use of all his afflictions, by considering that
they were sent to teach him holy obedience, to fear God and to eschew evil, in
which important lessons, he was so good a proficient, that like a dutiful
servant, he had learnt to carry the Cross of his Master Christ Jesus after
him. Those staunch and reserved affections which he had to earthly things, did
abundantly testify that he placed his wealth and treasure in his reversions in
heaven, not in any thing that he did, or could possess here on earth, he
accounted himself but a stranger and a pilgrim in this world, and therefore
was content, though his Tabernacle were pitched and removed in diverse places:
He was assured, that God in his good time, would provide an hiding place for
him, either on the earth or in the grave, supporting himself with Luthers holy
resolution: (...) Calo, aut sub Calo, that he should either be under the
protection of heaven, or in the possession of heaven: His hope and belief in
the watchful providence of God was always strong, being rooted on that
immovable foundation, the promises of God, of which he treasured up such store
in his memory, that he could at any time look a danger, or death in the face.
No doubt the contemplation of his Celestial inheritance, those new heavens,
and new earth whereof he is now possessed, did ravish his soul with an holy
thirst and longing after them: for the joy that was set before him, he could
endure the cross, and despise the shame, and suffer the contradiction of
sinners, in high charity commending them to the mercy of God, in that prayer,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And lastly, as if he had
been of Beza's judgment, in the reading of this Text, that none but new
creatures should be admited into these new heavens, his heart was set upon
righteousness, endeavoring always to keep a conscience void of offense
toward God and also toward man. Piety, and learning, and modesty to meet in
one man was hard and rare, and these met in him; his piety appeared in his care
for Gods true worship, and in a discreet zeal for his house; he had a desire to
bring all men into that way, which in his conscience he thought would lead to
heaven. Nazianzen complained of some that did (...), Fit their faith to the
times, and so make it as Saint Hilary censures it, Fides temporum, non
Evangeliorum: a Faith molded to the humor of the times, not according to the
Doctrine of the Gospel. He was none of those his care was to please Christ,
and to preach him; so that to the last gasp' he was constant to the worship of
God, and faithful in it* For his learning, I must profess my self an
incompetent censor of it; so far as I was able to judge, he deserved the name
of Tri-^or, as well as Quintus Ennius, he understood those three languages,
Greek and Latin, and Hebrew, in a good measure. In answer to Aarons Urim and
Thummim, there were written and combined in his breast, Sci^ntia, and
Conscientia, Learning, and integrity; he was able both by his learning and his
life to confound the adversaries of the truth of Christ: These were the
evidences of his righteousness toward God; and for his righteousness toward
man, I am confident he might have gasp'd out the Prophet Samuel's challenge,
Whose Ox, or whose Ass have I taken? Yea, and added that of Saiu Paul, I have
wronged no man, I have corrupted no man, I have defrauded no man, I have
coveted no man's silver nor gold, nor apparel; he was contented with such
things as he had, remembering that promise of the Lord Let your conversation be
without covetousness: for I will never leave you, nor for sake you: It pleased
the Lord to raise him friends and supplies even in his lowest state, whose
charity and compassion no doubt the Lord will both remember and reward, when
they shall have most need of it. And in great testimony of his love and care
over him, the Lord was his shield and buckler when both the Sword and the
Sickness raged round about him, and has brought him to his grave in peace, in
a good old age, where we are now to disposse the remains of him, till the
consummation of all things, when it shall please God to say, Come again ye
children of men; and collect the bones and dust of deer and divided friends,
and unite them together in a blessed and glorious resurrection.

The speech at the grave.
WElbeloved friends we are met here to pay those Christian respects which we
owe to the corpse of our deceased Friend: the bodies of Christians are the
members of Christ, yea, they are the temples of the holy Ghost, and are
therefore in a decent manner to be interred and laid up in their long home the
grave. This reverend brother of ours was a Preacher while he was living, and
now, though dead, is preaching to us his farewell sermon, and his Text is Hodie
mihi, cras tibi, this is my day of burial, to morrow may be yours. The Lord in
the death of every man performs the desire of Dives in the parable: He sends
one from the dead to admonish us that all flesh is grass, and the glory of man
but as the flower of the grass, to remember us of that irreversable statute,
and the penalty of it that it is appointed for all men once to die, and after
death to come to judgment: It Is not the least of the Lords mercies when he will
convey the consideration of serious matters to us in such obvious and familiar
notions, to remember us of our frailty and mortality, and make the grass of
the field a looking-glass wherein we may see our selves, and learn that as
every g^^sse of the field proves, there is a God that made it: So every grass
shows what man is, and that there is a God that will turn him to destruction.
Some Authors have told us that a swarm of bees fighting, are no way sooner
appeased then by throwing dust amongst them. Mankind is a swarm of Bees that
busy themselves and buzze about the World, and are too often fighting and
quarrelling, and an handful of dust taken into serious consideration, would
quiet them all, dust is the emblem of man's original, and his end, from whence
he came and to what he must return: Dust has a medicinal quality to cure all
the diseases of the soul, especially the tympany of pride: When hair is sweet
through pride or lust the powder does forget the dust, we should not so far
disparage the workmanship of God as to mend our faces by art* if we did
consider that ere long the dust of the Grave would spoil our complexion: when
Saint Augustine stood by the Temple of ^ulius Caesar, He cries out, Ubi nunc
pulchritudo Caesaris: what is become of Caesar's goodly person? he spoke it not
by way of triumph as insulting over the ashes of that mighty conqueror, but to
convey an instruction to all mankind, that were every Son of man as comely in
person and as great as he, as high in arms, and as glorious in honor; yet his
foundation is in the dust says holy Job, and must say to corruption, thou art
my Father, and to the worm, thou art my Mother and my ^ister. Though our bodies
are as I said the temples of the Holy Ghost; yet they will come to
delapidation, and moulder into rubbidge and dust; our bones will be scattered
about the graves mouth like so many chiphs of a man that heweth wood, and our
dust may perchance be mingled with the dust of the high wa^, the materials of
our bodies which we so love and pamper now will be trodden down, like the mire
in the stre^t if we would every one say, and say often to our selves in those
words of Job. The grave is ready for me, I am now in the beauty and flower of
my youth, but know not how soon I may be cropped and wither; certainly such
meditations would make much for the advancement of piety in all our ways to
remember our end, and so to live every day as if it we^e our last day. There
passes a story of Ben Syra a Jew, that when he was about twelve years old, he
requested his Tutor to teach him the law of Moses He answers, Child you are to
young to learn or understand that Law: but the child replies, Sir, I have (...)
in down in the Churchyard among the graves, and I find that many are dead who
were not so tall nor old as I, and I would be loath to die before I had learnt
the law: this Jews child may teach us Christians a good lesson, to take heed
we do not die before we have learned the Law of God, and that danger we can no
other way avoid but by meditating in the law day and night, and by making the
statutes of the Lord our guide and counselors.

I am so charitable as to think that the confluence of friend and neighbors
to this funeral has no other design but to honor the memory of our reverend
friend, and let me remember you of one point of honor ye may do him, which
perchance you think not of, that is to become his converts, that at the last
day when he shall arise, he may present himself and you before the Lord, and
say, these are the children which I have begotten in my ministry, these are
those souls whom I have instructed and confirmed in the faith, these are they
that in life and death have held forth the testimony of Jesus Christ, this were
truly to honor him, to make him shine like a star of the first magnitude in
the firmament of glory. And let this funeral solemnity give you occasion when
you depart hence to say: Mr. Wiborough did me much good while he lived, but
more when he was dead, the sermons that I heard from his mouth wrought much
upon me, but his funeral sermon more, when his breathless corpse preached to
me, and bid me prepare for my dissolution, when his dust spoke to me and bid me
bury all those sins whereof he reproved me in the grave with him: so great
are the respects and affection which this Gentleman did deserve of us all, that
I think you could be as well content to hear more of him as I to speak, but I
must conclude with that of Nazianzen, the Sea says, he does not need the
rivers that yet run into it: so neither does he need mine or any others praise,
he has fought the good fight of Faith, and finished his course, and is now
gone to receive his Crown of righteousness, as for his body we commend it to
the grave, beseeching the Lord to sanctify this and all other spectacles of
our mortality to us, and by them to teach us so to number our days that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom.

FINIS.

