SCRIPTURES OPENED; AND Sundry Cases of Conscience resolved, in Plain and
Practical Answers TO SEVERAL QUESTIONS, Upon the Proverbs of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes, Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, and Daniel. By that faithful
Servant of JESUS CHRIST, William Thomas Master of Arts, Late Rectour of the
Church at Vpley, in the County of Somerset.

Mark 4. 1. When he was alone, they that were about him, asked him of the
Parable, -- And he answered -- Jesu bone! quo illa fervore? quo studio intenta
erat divinis voluminibus? quaestiones and proponens and solutas recondens in
Scriniolo pectoris sui. Hieronym. ad Oceanumde Fabiola. LONDON, Printed for
Sampson Evans, Bookseller in Worcester. 1675.

The Epistle to the Christian and Religions Reader; with an Advertisement or
two, touching the Reverend Author and the following Work.
DEad Parents live in the Natural Issue of their Bodies; Dead Pastors in their
Spiritual Offspring, those Babes brought forth by their Soul-travels, who are
the Epistle of Christ 2 Cor 3. 3.
ministered by them, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the Living God,
not in Tables of Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the heart: And many times
they live among Survivours in the Posthumous Children of their brains, more to
be valued by far than the fruit of the Womb, in that they prove a more Lasting
Monument to the memory of their Fathers, and much more fruitful in propagating
a Holy Seed in the Church from Generation to Generation.

The Author of these ensuing Questions and Cases being dead Heb. 11. 4.
yet speaks by and lives in them both: God honored him with the Success of
his publick-Ministerial Labors whilst Living. Many (we doubt not) went to
Heaven from under his Ministry before their Spiritual Father, Cor. ^. 14.
leaving him for a while to provide for the younger Children of the Household of
Faith at Vbley, who are now growing, and going after their Father and Spiritual
Brethren to their Heavenly Fathers House; blessing God for him who (through the
Blessing of God) proved so effectual an Instrument of their Translation out of
an estate of Sin and Misery (d) into an estate of Sanctity and Salvation. Now
he is Act. 26. ^8,
dead, he lives again and speaks also by the mouth of the Son of his Old Age;
perfectly formed before his death, but left to the Midwifry of our care (as the
bequest of his Special Love) to be brought forth by a Timely and Seasonable
publication. Pity! such a Benjamin should be strangled in the birth, or being
born should die again without doing some signal Service for the Seed of Jacob.
Oh that he may usher them into the acceptance, and show them the face of Jesus!

To which end we desire thee (Christian Reader) not only to make what is here
offered of thy Company, but also of thy Council, by taking all down to dwell
with thee, yea in thee by diligent Reading and Meditation. All is but little
for bulk, but less than all is big, and goes with much matter of worth and
weight; no less useful for the direct aspect it has upon the Practical parts
of Godliness according to truth, than grateful by reason of the variety and
brevity; many short lines being herein drawn in different colors but all
meeting in the Center of that Truth which is after Godliness. Tit. 1. 1.


But it needs not large Letters of Commendation from us to procure it a welcome
Entertainment: It will sufficiently commend itself to the truly Conscientious;
and it is sufficient to say here, Toll, lege. He that will read what is
written with an enlightened eye, must needs see so much Sanctity in it joined
with so much Sobriety, so much Art mixed with so much Divinity, so much matter
crowded together in so few words, such depth of Judgment in such plainness of
Speech; that after he has lightly tasted of that Spirit which animates the
whole and every part, will (questionless) thirst after a full draught and cry,
Give, Give.

Therefore, not to hinder thee from passing along thorough the Porch of a brief
Preface into the House, and viewing the several Rooms adorned with the Glory of
Divine Truths, we shall only advertise thee of these following particulars.

That these Miscellanies of Expositions, Questions and Cases, are presented to
public view as they were left to us by that Holy man Mr. William Thomas
without any Addition, Substraction or Alteration. The very same body now
appears in the very same dress into which it was put by the Reverend Author
now with God; except any excesses or literal defects happen to it by the press,
or a question or two be Transplaced for Methods sake or the greater advantage
of the Reader.

That these Questions and Cases were no other than Family-Exercises either
propounded by him, or to him, and answered by himself, only when alone with
those of his own house: and being Houshold-impartments were designed to be
imparted to the household of Faith; for the assistance of younger Ministers by
furnishing them with many materials for buildings; but especially for the help
of Householders and all honest-hearted private Christians, who have too little
time to lay out in Reading the voluminous discourses of Casuistical Divines, or
consult with many Interpreters about the sense of such Scriptures as are hardly
understood, 2 Pet. ^. 16.
easily wrested, and here clearly opened. The great plainness and familiarity
of the Phrase and Style, together with the direct tendency every particular
has to practice, are undeniable evidences that the whole was intended for the
profit of such people.

That some of these things are laid out more largely as the matter required,
and time gave leave; others are confined within a narrower compass; for the
same difficulties occur not in every case, nor intricacies in every Question or
Scripture: but there is nothing offered that cost the Author nothing. All his
Writings smell of the Lamp, and these Answers and Resolutions are full of
Labor. Though this Workman never liked the expense of precious time on formal
curiosities, and was wont to be much displeased with those Preachers who
conformed to the tedious builders of Diana's Temple for the magnifying of their
Art; yet he was always very curious of his matter, and thought that what grew
up in a night like Jonah's Gourd Jonah 4. 6, 7.
, was fit to continue no longer than it did which perished in a night: He that
builds for Eternity had need be considerate in his preparations, and constantly
industrious in his works.

To end, whatsoever is here presented to thy view is the Child of many Prayers
as well as much Meditation; and the Father of it (whilst Living) was as
frequent with the Father of Lights Jam. 1. 17.
for a blessing on it; as Augustine's Mother for her Son. He miscarried not,
but was a Shining Light in the Firmament of the Church. We trust this will not
miss the Author's ends on thee, which were Gods Glory and thy Good, by leading
thee into the Land of Light, and leaving in thee an increase of Light. For the
attaining whereof we shall be daily Suitors at the Throne of Grace, and most
ready to manifest our selves the helpers of thy Faith, and

Thy Servants for Jesus Sake. John Chetwind, Rich. Fairclough, William Rawlins.


A Table of the Scriptures, that are opened more largely in this Book, and of
the Questions that are grounded on them.
Proverbs
CHAP. 10. 11, 19. If abundant words (like a Well) be good, how then is there
sin in many words? Page. 1. Chap. 11. 26. Is it absolutely unlawful to withhold
corn from public sale? Page. 8. Chap. 13. 22, 24. What course should Parents
take to provide well for their Children? Page. 15. Chap. 17. 22. What helps are
there for that mirth which is so commodious, and so much commended? Page. 19.
Chap. 23. 1, 2, 3. What Rules does Solomon give concerning feasting and carnal
lusts? Page. 33. Chap. 23. 4, 5. What counsel does Solomon give for the
restraint of Worldly lusts? Page. 42. Chap. 25. 8. 9, 10. What Is Solomon's
advice concerning the vice of Strife and Contention? Page. 49. Chap. 28. 14.
What is there in fear that by reason of that a man should be pronounced
blessed? Page. 54. Chap. 28. 14. What hardness of heart is that which makes men
fall into mischief? Page. 60.


Ecclesiastes.
Chap. 1. 2. What does this Book (in sum) hold forth to us as concerning
Vanity? Page. 67. Chap. 7. 10. Does Solomon absolutely bind us up from saying
the former times were better than these? Page. 73. Chap. 7. 16, 17 What may
Solomon mean by just Overmuch, and wicked Overmuch? Page. 79. Chap. 9. 1, 2. Is
it absolutely so that all things come alike to all? Page. 89. Chap. 9. 7, 8, 9.
Are the words of these verses the precepts of Solomon? or the sayings of
sensualists? Page. 97. Chap. 5. 5. What grounds are there for the continuance
and use of Vows in Gospel Times? Page. 108.


Isaiah.
Chap. 9. 6, 7. What Is the Reason that Christ is so much mentioned in the
Prophecies of the Old Testament and promises of Church-Deliverances? Page. 165.
Chap. 38. 3. What course are we to take for deathbed comfort? Page. 189. Chap.
40. 18. Why does the Lord speak so much in his Word against Idolatry and
Idolaters? Page. 205. Chap. 42. 1. 3. What is meant by Christ's bringing forth
judgment unto Truth or Victory? Page. 199. Chap. 45. 23: Whence is it that the
bowing of every Knee to God is so remarkably, yea with a Divine Oath,
prophesied of in this Text? Page. 210. Chap. 45. 23. latter part: How is
swearing an evidence and special Character of subjection unto, and owning of
the true God? Page. 214. Chap. 53. 1. What Is the reason why so few in all ages
have entertained the Gospel? Page. 223. Chap. 63. 17. How can God be said to
cause to err, and to harden the hearts of his People from his ways? Page. 238.


Jeremiah.
Chap. 36. 11. How is Judah said to be worse than Israel, especially in
Josiah's days so eminent a Reformer? Page. 244. Chap. 3. 16. Why is it said in
so many words, the Ark of the Lord shall be no more minded? Page. 249. Chap. 6.
16. What is the way to Soul-Rest? Page. 255. Chap. 7. 21, 22. Did not God
command Sacrifices and ceremonial things in the time of the Old Testament?
Page. 262. Chap. 12. 5. What may be the meaning and use of these enigmatical
words? Jer. 12. 5. Page. 266. Chap. 20. 14. How is it possible so holy a man as
Jeremy was, should speak so strange words? Page. 271. Chap. 28. 2, 3, 4. When
one Minister says one thing, and another (with as much confidence) says the
contrary, How shall People know which to believe? Page. 278. Chap. 29. 7. Why
should the People of God seek the Peace of Babylon wherein they were miserable
Captives under a cruel Tyrant? Page. 283. Chap. 31. 31. Whence is it that
Jeremy speaks of a New Covenant, and what does be say of it? Page. 289. Chap.
36. 5, 6. What are the Duties of a fasting day, especially of a public fast?
Page. 311. Chap. 38. 1, 2. How could the People d^liver themselves to the King
of Babylon, and yet keep fidelity to Zedekiah their own King? Page. 316. Chap.
38. 37. Did Jeremy well in giving such a partial answer to the Princes, or is
he to
(...)

Family-Instructions in the resolving of Scripture-questions. Most of them out
of the Proverbs of Solomon.
Prove. 10. 11, 19.




Quest. IF abundant Words (like a Well) be good: How then is there Sin in many
words?
Answ. First, No doubt but a Righteous Mouth is a springing Well of living
Water; * 2 Chronicles. 32. 8.
and the fuller that Well, and the freer that Spring is, the better it is. All
therefore should be careful that they do not hinder themselves or others of
this Water.

This may be done diverse ways, viz.

1. On their part whose Mouth is a Well, and that are able to supply much life
unto others, because a Stone is rolled on the wells mouth, Genesis 29. 2, 8, 10.
And there be some good men to whom there is not an easy access; Hence the
Sheep of Christ are not watered as they might and should be (especially the
weaker and lower of them that cannot roll the stone from the wells mouth),
albeit, when the stone is rolled away, there will be water enough.

2. On their part that have need to come to the Well, and that are near to it;
And that two ways:

1. For want of provocation and giving occasion to speak; As Pumps be diverse
times dry for want of putting some water in to get up more.

2. For want of prosecution, and taking some more pains to procure and pump out
that which is to be had in abundance, and yet, not with ease nor without
ability and diligence in enquiring, asking questions, 1 Kings 10. 1, 3.
moving doubts. There be some John 4. 11.
deep Draw-wells; and if men have nothing to draw with, How shall they come by
the water? See for this, Prove. 20. 5. with Prove. 18. 4.

3. Too much on both parts, because the wells be stopped with earth, as Genesis 26.
15. that is, because for want of an heavenly mind; want of conscience to redeem
the time, and make the best of every good opportunity, common conference comes
in so fast, and is relished so well, that spiritual wells are not looked after;
and if men of good minds open their mouths and something spring forth, it is
like water spilt on the ground, lost because not prized, and so there is scarce
any care to bring a Vessel to receive and keep it.

But, for all this, Righteous men as they ought to have, so they will have many
good words; for they speak often one to another, Mal. 3. 16. and in many such
meetings there cannot be few words; Ministers especially are to use many words,
Eccles. 12. 9. Acts 2. 40. and 20. 11.

Nor are words sinful, merely because they are many; for there is a sinful
silence as well as a sinful speaking; and to speak too-little, a fault as well as
to speak too-much, 1 Kings 1. 6.

This may be said with respect to the 11 verse. Secondly, for the 19 verse, It
is true also, that in the multitude of words there wants not Sin. It is not
said, In the multitude of righteous men's words (whose mouth is a wellspring of
life), nor, in many words that be spoken with good advice; but in many words,
when no restraint is put upon the lips, and when the mouth is not watched and
governed by the wisdom that is in the heart; Eccles. 5. 3.
then it is true, that it is like an overflowing River that gathers dirt. It is
not to be denied but that many words may be spoken by some men to very good
purpose, as by Paul, Acts 28. 23. but yet, Take people as they are ordinarily
(yea, put diverse good people among them) and experience will tell us, that it
is neither easy nor usual to speak much of much weight, the tongue in many
being too quick for the head, and the mouth running before the mind; And
herein, this is to be observed, that albeit much may be spoken well, out of
occasion, and when there is a business that requires it; yet when words are
multiplied out of a talkative disposition, and a mind to speak rather than a
just cause of speaking, then sin is not like to be wanting, but in many things
it does and will show it self; Namely, In these Particulars:

1. In speaking much of other men's Persons, whom, if talking people dislike,
they quickly call their good, evil; If they Isa. 5. 20:
like; their evil, good. And (howsoever) they are more bold and busy with
others behind their back, than they would be, or could defend if they were
before their face.

2. In speaking of other men's matters; for which, if they come to suffer (as
diverse times they do) there is little comfort for them, because the Rule is that
none should suffer as a busy body in other men's matters, 1 Pet. 4. 15. What
have thou to do with another man's business any more than with another man's
Servant, Romans 14. 4.
to judge and thrust in thy Verdict without any just cause and call?

3. In speaking of things generally, irregularly, viz.

1. Untruly, because hastily, without due enquiry. Any slight Report and Tale
will serve the turn to set a work the tongue of a sudden speaker. We may see
this fault in worse men, as the misbelieving Jews, Matthew. 28. 15. yea, and
herein, a want of wariness in better men, as in the holy Brethren, John 21. 23.

2. Unwisely, unsavourily, unseasonably without due consideration of
circumstances, and so unacceptably, Prove. 10. 32. (as diverse will huddle up a
great deal of business, and mar all by not-minding how they do it) such words
are like a Cart that is off its wheels, or a Door that is off its hinges, when a
word spoken upon his wheels, Prove. 25. 11. is like Apples of gold in pictures
of silver; Not as Vinegar on nitre, Prove. 25. 20.

3. Idly and unprofitably; a world of words that do no good in the world, and
cart-loads, in buying and selling, Matthew. 12. 36. Here Is folly by heap;
whereas, He that refraineth his lips is wise; that is, He that refraineth from
speaking.

1. What he ought not, Psalm. 73. 15.

2. When he ought not, Psalm. 39. 1. Amos 5. 13.

3. As he ought not, Prove. 26. 4. See Jude v. 9. there was a real ac^usation in
Michael's Prayer, The Lord rebuke thee; but he forbore a railing accusation.

Now, To abstain from speaking, when a man cannot, or list not, is no virtue;
To abstain, when a man should not abstain, is a vice, and may deprive others of
that which is as precious as Silver, ver. 20. as necessary as food, ver. 21. as
desirable as life; as before in this Verse, where the lips are called a
Wellspring of life.

But, To refrain so, as to be able to say, This I might, this I could;
especially, this I would, and have a great mind to speak; but I forbear,
because I find it is not fit to speak it; this is true Wisdom.

Prove. 11. 26. He that withholds Corn, the People shall Curse him: but
Blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells Corn.
Qu. IS it absolutely unlawful to lay up Corn; or to keep it at any time from
the Market?
Answ. The Answer may be Affirmative and Negative.

1. Affirmative]; In diverse Cases Corn may be laid up and withheld from
public Sale; As

1. In a way of prudence for the public good; so in great Cities (as in
London) there are several Granaries for the Supply of poorer people at an
easier rate if Dearth should arise; unto which may be referred the taking in of
Corn in a greater quantity, into a City like to be besieged; for, in such a
case Nature and Reason teaches Men to keep what they can from the Enemy, 2 Chronicles. 32. 4. and to get and store up all that is needful for themselves, 1
Kings 20. 22.

2. Every Man is to lay up and keep what is necessary and convenient for the
sustenance of himself and Family, and Relations (though out of his Family);
for, not to do so is against the Humanity of Heathens, and the Faith of
Christians, that teaches to love and take care for, those especially that are
more nearly related to us, 1 Timothy 5. 8. Prove. 27. 27. 1 Timothy 5. 16. Joseph had
reason out of a special respect to his Father and Brethren, that their lives
might be preserved, to keep in store the Corn of Egypt, as well as for other
public uses, Genesis 45. 7.

3. Even in time of Scarcity, Men are not to have all that they would have, but
to be stinted, that Provision may hold out the better if the Dearth should
continue and grow to a greater height, Genesis 45. 6.

2. Negative]; Corn should never be withheld.

1. Out of infidelity, and distrust of any return of plenty, 2 Kings 7. 1, 2,
3. 1 Kings 17. 13, 14. especially when there is a present and grievous want of
Provision among many poor people, 1 John 3. 17. To keep from others ready to
starve that I may get more is murder 1 John 3. 15, 17.
; their necessity is to be preferred before my gain and utility; yea, their
extremity before my lesser necessity, 2 Cor. 8. 2. 1 Kings 17. 9, 11. See Jer.
37. 21. even in a starved City, a Jeremy (though a Prisoner) should have Bread,
Prove. 3. 28.

2. Nor out of Covetousness Luke 12. 15.
, and a greedy desire of a greater price: To project to sell any thing dearer,
merely because a man gapes after gain is unlawful at any time; for it sets up a
self-end, Jer. 47. 5. Luke 12. 21. Jam. 4. 14. To be provident to discharge a
Duty is good, as to make honest provision for my self and Family; to pay debts,
2 Kings 4. 7. to help those in necessity. And to trouble a man's house for want
of judgment or care to order things discreetly, is a sinful thing, Prove. 11.
29. and 13. 13. But providence to discharge a Duty is one thing, projecting and
fore-casting to satisfy a lust, is another thing, and a wicked thing, Luke 12.
18, 19. See 1 Kings 21. 7, 8. Micah 2. 1, 2. Jam. 4. 3.

And to this evil withholding and With-holder, that which follows in the
Text is to be applied, viz. the people shall curse him; which they often do,
sinfully, but yet, if they do not curse causlesly, it may light heavily on them
that give occasion to it, as that Scripture shows, Exodus 22. 23. -- Mal. 2. 2.
Job 31. 16, 22.

But Blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells Corn; Albeit (perhaps)
not from the poor (who are more ready to curse when they want than to bless
when they abound), yet it may be expected from God, on them that out of
Conscience and Charity, sell Corn; for God uses to supply those more
abundantly, who freely part with that they have for others support, as Prove. 3.
9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 31. 10. Mal. 3. 9, 10. This is more considerable in our Land,
where Corn is Meat and Drink both.

Quest. May I not take my opportunity to sell when things be at the best Rate?
Answ. Yes, So it be without my detaining from others (with others that do as I
do) that sustenance which at present they dearly want. And therefore I may do
so, and take the advantage of a greater price, because I am to use all lawful
providence for my maintenance, and the increase of my Estate, Prove. 27. 23.

Obj. But if I withold to a dearer time, then the Market will be dearer at
present than if I brought in, and so the poor will fare the worse.
Answ. 1. If every man should bring out at one time, it would be so much dearer
for poor people at another, because there would be less to be brought or bought.

2. If Corn-Masters should still bring in to the Market, and sell away their
Store when there is more Plenty, this would make people groan the more if God
should send Scarcity, because there would be less to supply their need when
it is grown far greater.

3. It Is very fit that the Husbandman should live (by whose Industry all other
men live, Eccles. 5. 9.) as well as they that have nothing to husband, (which
even the Scripture it self minds us of, 1 Cor. 9. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 6.) which yet he
could not do (with that advantage to his Estate that is needful for his
encouragement) if he sold off all at the lowest rate.

Out of what has been spoken, there may be observed for our further use, these
following Things.

1. The wretchedness of many poor people; If you withold Corn, they quickly
curse; But if Sermons be withheld from them, What complaint is there? though
the one be a perishing, the other an ever-enduring nourishment, (John 6. 27.)
yea, How many have declared a lust to the old Law, that is, to Popery, because
then all was cheap, and they might have Corn and Belly-stuff at an easier rate
than now, though their Souls starved? But if a Man after Gods own heart (Acts
13. 22.) will curse for any thing, it is for being unjustly kept off from Gods
own House and spiritual Table, 1 Samuel 26. 19. See Job 23. 12.

2. See here what a fearful thing it is in Ministers (and woeful to them, 1 Cor.
9. 17.) to withold from poor people (that receive the Gospel) the Corn of
Heaven, Psalm. 78. 24. Isa. 30. 24. and not bring it forth on the Lords
Market Day day, Rev. 3. 18. Often People curse where God does not; but in this
Case, God will curse though People do not Mal. 2. 2, 7, 8, 9. Isa. 56. 9, 10.
-- Famine is the worst of Judgments, Lam. 4. 9. a Famine not of Bread but of
the Word of God, is the worst of Famines* Amos 8. 11, 13. because the Soul is
the best of Man, Mat. 16. 26. To affamish the Soul therefore, is the worst of
Murders, to the least of which the curse of God is due, and denounced, Deuteronomy.
27. 24.

3, And this also shows that it is not a safe but a sad and dangerous thing for
any righteous persons (whose lips should feed many, Prove. 10. 21.) to withold
from their Company that holy Conference which (like the Staff of Bread) might
be a great stay to them, and keep them from fainting. If thou (says Bernard
Super Cantic. Sermon. 18. Fol. 134.
) being adorned with the gifts ^^ knowledge and eloquence, do through fear
sloth, or an indiscreet humility, bind up by an unprofitable and damnable
silence that good Word which may profit many truly thou art cursed, because
thou hide^ Corn from the People.

4. If the Blessing of God shall be on him that sells Corn, and takes Money
for it, How much more on them that cast their Bread upon the Waters, Eccless.
11. 1. and give Bread-corn to them that cannot live without it, and yet have no
Money to give them for it?

Prove. 13. 22. A good Man leaves an Inheritance for his Childrens Children.




Qu. WHat course should Parents take to provide well for their Children?
Answ. They shall provide well for them by being themselves good Persons and
good Parents.

First, By being good Persons]; For therein is contained, a seeking of Gods
Kingdom and his Righteousness, whereupon outward things are added, Matthew. 6.
33. And what is added to the Fathers Estate, comes by ordinary course to the
Child, 2 Cor. 12. 14. It Is a good man that leaves an Inheritance to his
Childrens Children as David did, 1 Chronicles. 29. 28. Psalm. 89. 27, 29. as Job did,
Job 42. 15, 16. When the Wealth of the Sinner is laid up for the Just, as we
see of old it was, 2 Samuel 12. 8. 2 Chronicles. 20. 25. Esther 8. 2. Thus it is the
rather, because a good Man uses his own good endeavors to augment his Estate.
And that two ways; For,

1. He uses a good Conscience in getting what he has, in a lawful, solid, and
approved way, and not by vanity and unlawful shifts, which whosoever uses may
look to have his Estate diminished, ver. 11. and not to hold out to the third
Heir, as the good Man's gettings do, v. 22. Prove. 20. 21.

2. He uses labor and diligence, and that is followed with increase, ver. 11.
By this means a poorer Man has much Food; for by his diligence, he begets
experience and discretion for the ordering of his Affairs. When he that has
more, has less, to wit, for want of judgment to make the best of that he has,
Prove. 13. 23.

Secondly, By being good Parents], so they provide well for their Childrens
good in two especial Ways.

1. By their godly Instructions and wise Laws, as here, v. 1. and v. 14. and
chap. 3. 1. The Fathers Piety is the Child's Portion; inasmuch, as by his good
Education, he walks in Gods way to make him godly; and if once he can be
brought to godliness, that godliness will (according to Gods Promise, 1 Timothy 4.
8.) bring in enough of the things of this life. A sanctified Son shall have a
satisfied Soul, and it is the belly of the wicked that wants, v. 25. Yea,
however the Children of a godly Father prove, yet we find an outward advantage
for Wife and Children, when it could be said, Thou know thy Servant (the
Husband, the Father) feared the Lord, 2 Kings 4. 1.

2. By their loving, resolute, discreet and seasonable Correction]. To spare
the Rod is to spoil the Child, v. 24. for as the Earth is full of briars and
thorns, so are Children, of corruption by Adam's Sin, which quickly shows it
self in actual Sin. Now as it is some sharp Instrument that must get out briars
and thorns; so some severity must be used to get out sinful foolishness, Prove.
22. 15. Hence arises a necessity of correction, and that for instruction and
better education; For who would sow among thorns?

A special circumstance of this correction is the using of it betimes; for by
that means it works more easily, while the Child is tender, and Vice not
settled; and more effectually, the Cure being most thoroughly wrought, and the
return of the Disease best prevented by taking it at first. This is so
necessary that Solomon says here, He (and so that seemingly-loving She) that
spares the Rod, hates the Son; not that there is the affection of hatred in
them, but there is the effect of it on the uncorrected Child. And while
fondness works as ill an effect as the worst hatred would do, Is it not justly
called hatred? What could Parents do worse, if they hated their Children never
so much, than to bring them to the Gallows, and thither forbearing the Rod, and
timely rebuking of their vicious disposition, brings them, there to make a
Sermon (with a Rope about their neck) and that against their Parents, for
suffering them to have their will so much in the beginning of their time,
warning all other Parents to take heed of the like child-pleasing, and
child-undoing course.

Which also should teach all Children to submit to correction; for if one
should ask them, Whether would you have your Parents love you or hate you? what
Child has so little wit, but will answer, he would have their Love? he must
not therefore refuse their Rod.

Prove. 17. 22. A merry Heart does good like a Medicine; but a broken Spirit
dries the bones.
Qu. WHat Helps are there for that Cheerfulness that Solomon so much commends?
Ans. This may be answered

1. More generally. 2. More particularly.
First, More generally, with respect unto, and by the opening of this Text. As
to which, it may be observed, that even an heart, naturally merry, and cheerful
by constitution and natural temper, Or outward satisfaction, 1 Kings 4. 20.
is a good Medicine, Dr. Physicians,
Whereas by Sorrow of Heart, Men are much broken, Prove. 15. 13.

Quiet, Dr. Diet, Dr. Merryman, are all good and the last not the least help to
Health.

But that merry Heart, which is the best Medicine, is that Heart which the
Light of Gods Countenance rejoiceth, Psalm. 4. 6, 7, 8. Nehem. 8. 10. and which
arises from a good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

This merry Heart makes us (like a Medicine) to be in better plight in the
whole man as appears in the Countenance, (Isa. 2. 18.) which the Heart
cheareth up, makes cheerful, and (as the Hebrew Expression is) Goodeneth Prove.
15. 13. Bonificat. (...)
. Hereupon also, it makes us more able, vigorous and dexterous in all our
actions, Nehem. 8. 10. whence we find in Scripture, that weak Isaac calls for
savoury Meat Genesis 27. 4.
, (such as would refresh his Heart) that he might the better bless his Son. And
Elisha calls for a Minstrel that his Heart being composed and quickened, he
might be fitter to receive the Prophetical Inspirations, 2 Kings 3. 15. so that
it concerns all Christians in point of Conscience to labor to be cheerful.

1. In regard of God], because he loves a cheerful Giver, requires joy in his
service, Deuteronomy. 16. 14. Isa. 56. 7. and utterly dislikes tears on his Altar,
Mal. 2. 13.

2. In regard of Men, because otherwise, they will be injurious and tedious to
Society; for not only Princes love not to look upon Mourners (and therefore
Mordecai must keep off, Esth. 1. 2. and Nehemiah is questioned, Nehem. 2. 2.)
but even Parents themselves do not well endure puling and crying Children, but
because they be so troublesome to every body they must be had out of the room.

That which is opposed to this merry and cheerful heart, is a broken spirit,
which is so far from doing good to the body like a Medicine, as that (like the
worst Disease) it dries the bones, it preys upon and consumes that natural and
radical moisture whereby life is preserved. Albeit there be many ailings, yet
while a man can say I am heart-whole, though we be sorry for his pain, yet we
fear not his life; for, a sound Heart is the life of the Flesh, Prove. 14. 30.
but when the Spirit is once broken, (and broken it is by the sorrow of the
Heart, Prove. 15. 13.) then the bones will rot, and unless it can be healed,
there is little hope of any long life, and no hope of health; for, a Spirit very
sad, will eat no Bread, 1 Kings 21. 5. Or, if Bread and Sustenance be taken,
yet the Body will not prove and thrive with it, 2 Samuel 13. 2, 4.

So much being spoken of the hurt of a broken spirit here, and the good of a
broken spirit other-where, Psalm. 51. 17. (though the Word in the Original be
not the same) it gives occasion of adjoining to this general explication,
these two Rules.

1. Avoid Sadness], that is, all that sorrow (whatsoever it be) that is not
according to God and his Word, 2 Cor. 7. 9. But as the former part of this
Verse favors not sinful Mirth, because that ends in the most heartbreaking
sorrow, Prove. 14. 13. as we see in Belshazar, Dan. 5. 4, 5. So the latter part
says nothing against godly Sorrow; nor is it to be spoken against.

1. Because it is a Duty, (Joel 2. 12. Jam. 4. 9.) and God has not appointed
Duties to kill Men; therefore his Comforts are at hand to take away the
extremity of the grief, 2 Samuel 12. 13. Joel 2. 13, 14. yet even this Sorrow
also may be harmful by the excess of it; but so it is not a Duty, but the
Device of Satan is to be looked upon in it, 2 Cor. 2. 7, 11.

2. Because godly Sorrow is a special means of getting that glad Heart spoken
of in the former part of the Verse, inasmuch as it is followed, not only with
pardon of sin, (2 Samuel 12. 13. Psalm. 51. 17. and outward comfort, (Joel 2. 17,
18, 19.) causing joy, ver. 23. but also with conversion to God, amendment of
life, and everlasting salvation, 2 Cor. 7. 10. so that such may rejoice that
they were made sorry, ver. 9.

2. See to thy sadness], that it be upon just and considerable reason; Let an
hundred hearts be broken for a going into Bathsheba, Psalm. 51. Tit. v. 17. Let
a Nehemiah look sad and spare not, for the dilapidations and desolations of the
Church of God, and the broken Walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 1. 3. and 2. 3. But,
to break a man's heart for disasters, happily conceited, and in imagination only,
or at least, of small consideration; as, because others esteem me not as I
expect, content me not as I desire, because every thing frames not [point-vice]
as I would have it; because others look not upon me as I would they should, or
as they were wont to do, Genesis 31. 2. this, in the judgment of nature, is a
folly and madness, and in the judgment of Scripture, murder; for such sorrow
dries the bones, as it is here, wastes the marrow, and causes death, 2 Cor.
7. 11. Look what Paul said to the Corinthians, If I make you sorry, Who shall
make me glad? 2 Cor. 2. 2. that may be said in this case: If I break and bear
down my spirit, What shall bear up me? for it is the spirit of a man that
sustains his infirmity; but where the spirit that should bear up, comes to be
born up it self as a broken thing, that wounded spirit, Who can bear? Prove. 18.
14.

Wise are they that so govern their joys and sorrow, as to be able to say [for
their joy], It is meet we should make merry and be glad, Luke 15. 32. And [for
their sorrow] as Nehemiah did (in the greatest presence, and with the greatest
confidence), Why should not my countenance be sad? Nehem, 2. 3. there is all the
reason in the world for it; And yet we must never sorrow as they that have no
hope, 1 These. 4. 13. Ezra 10. 2.

This is the general Answer.

Secondly, Helps to Cheerfulness will be better discerned and more affected by
inquiring into sadness; And namely into the causes, effects, and cure thereof.

1. The Causes of Sadness are;

1. Natural], a black and melancholy constitution inclining to sadness upon
every, yea, upon no occasion, unto which there is a great addition; and whereof
there is a more dismal operation, by Satan that knows our tempers, and labors
to make use of this humor for his own advantage, by sinking the spirits of
such Persons, hindering their service, and tempting them by sadder thoughts to
sadder and horrid acts.

2. Moral] arising from some cause that we think reasonable, whether outward or
spiritual.

1. Outward] As an earnest and excessive longing after what we have a mind to,
when it is not to be had, 1 Kings 21. 3, 4. -- or Fears of wanting what we
shall need; This divides, depresseth, teareth and tireth the heart with
thoughts and cares and doubtings, Luke 12. 23, 25, 29. or of losing what we
have, Genesis 32. 7, 8, and 42. 36, 38. -- And generally, any afflicting thing
that we do, or are like to undergo, Mark 4. 38, 39, 40. Isa. 37. 3.

3. Spiritual]; As the apprehension of our horrible sin, dangerous guilt, the
Wrath of God, and those dreadful things that do accompany it, 2 Kings 22. 19.
Nehem. 8. 9. Mat. 27. 3, 4. Acts 2. 37, and 16. 39. yea, or the hiding of Gods
Face from those who have formerly enjoyed it; who know not how to want it, nor
(now) how to have it, Psalm. 30. 7. Job 34. 29.

2. The effects of sorrow and deep sadness.

1. The general Effect of it, is that it makes the heart to stoop, Prove. 12.
25. and (as it is here) to break.

2. The particular Evils that arise from it, are,

1. Spiritual; viz. the hindering and discomposing of the heart to and in all
holy Duties and the exercises of Religion, Levit. 10. 19. as Hearing the Word,
Exodus 6. 9. -- Meditation] it is hard to heave up an heavy heart; sorrow clips
the wings that it cannot mount up to Heavenward -- So also, watching and
praying, Luke 22. 45. -- or thanksgiving, though there be never so great
occasion of it, Nehem. 8. 9. Besides that the burden is so great, as that it
presses sinful nature to take unlawful courses to get it off, as it did Saul,
on whom God laid a heavy burden, and he went to the Devil to obtain ease, 1 Samuel 28. 5, 7, 15. And this also hinders Men in their particular Calling (for
the heavy-hearted are slack-handed); It makes them unfit to appear in, and very
uncomfortable to humane society, as David's sorrow by reason of the death of
Absalom did him, 2 Samuel 19. 1, 4, 5.

2. Outward: It dries the bones; for even as in joy, the blood is dispersed
through all parts of the body, Prove. 15. 30. so in sorrow, the blood being
recal'd by nature that looks most to the vitals, and most noble parts, the
bones (wherein notwithstanding the strength of the body lies) are left without
moisture, and marrow, and vigor, Prove. 3. 8. Besides, it is injurious to a
Man's Name and State, as we see in Joabs too rough and rude, but not altogether
unreasonable, speech to dejected David, 2 Samuel 29. 5, 6, 7. yea, sorrows pierce
Men through, 1 Timothy 6. 10. cause death, Genesis 42. 38. and of all deaths, the
most dismal, as we see in Achitophel and Judas that so made away themselves,
unto which Satan has often tempted sad spirits not without some sad prevailings.
Now

3. For the Cure of this Disease.

1. If it proceed from nature and constitution, natural and reasonable means
are to be used, as Physic, full Imployment]; for when sad persons are
solitary, and left to the workings of their own hearts, their thoughts, like
circles after a stone is once thrown into the water, multiply, are widened and
enlarged in their heart-straitning way -- And to both the former may be added
the variety of cheerful company: I mean, with a calling, employment and
business among them; for idleness, vanity, luxury, are not a Medicine for
Sorrow, but the matter of it; or if they be, they are like to prove at last a
Medicine worse than the Disease.

2. For moral Sadness, arising from saddening occasions and occurrences, Reason
will be a remedy (as with David, 2 Samuel 19. 8.) against the excessive degrees
of it, and continuance of it; as we see in the same David, 2 Samuel 12. 22. Hence
Elkanah so reasons the case with Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 8.

Reason and discretion will teach us not to be sad.

1. Out of humor, to be affectedly sour.

2. Out of fancy and fear of this or that which now is not, and perhaps will
never be.

3. Out of feebleness, faint-heartedness, for every trifling thing that should
be leaped over, and devoured, Prove. 24. 10.

4. Out of tenderness, delicacy, (Deuteronomy. 28. 56.) as if the wind must not blow
upon us, but we must be exempted from the common troubles of mankind, and be
like Adonijah, None must displease us (nothing must displease us) at any time,
1 Kings 16. In all this there is Will, self-will, Tit. 1. 7. (...); But where is
the Reason? Why do we not judge of our selves that which is right? Luke 12. 57.

3. Religion is the most Sovereign Medicine for all manner of Sadness. As

1. Hearing the Word See Act. 2. 37, Sad: and Ver. 41, Glad.
], Isa. 40. 1. and 50. 4. Hence Christ, seeing and foreseeing his Disciples
heaviness, preached so many heavenly Sermons upon the approach of his Passion,
John 14. and 15. and 16.

2. Receiving the Sacrament], Baptism made glad the Eunuch, Acts 8. 37, 39. and
breaking of Bread the first Christians, Acts 2. 42, 46.

3. Prayer, 1 Samuel 2. 18. Psalm 25. 17, 18.

But that which makes all effectual, is the grace of Faith, Heb. 4. 2. John
14. 1. Romans 15. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

The former things mixed with Faith, help,

1. In outward Troubles]: As,

1. In all outward Wants], the believing that God is a Father, that He knows
all our necessities, Luke 12. 30. and will supply them, Phil. 4. 19. 2 Samuel 12.
8.

2. In outward Losses and Abatements], the believing that God can give us much
more, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. or the same again, 1 Samuel 30. 19.

3. In Danger of Life], the believing that God knows how to deliver, 2 Pet. 2.
9. and does do it, 2 Chronicles. 18. 31.

More particularly, the believing,

1. That no Evil can come upon us but according to the will of a good God, 1
Pet. 4. 19. Acts 21. 14.

2. That we need such trials, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

3. That God will make all work for good, Romans 8. 28.

4. That God will help us to bear all the evil till he bring the good, 1 Cor.
10. 13. Psalm. 55. 22. Isa. 40. 27, 28, to the end. Isa. 41. 10.

3. In spiritual Troubles].

Herein Faith reviveth by looking upon,

1. The Name and Nature of God, which quickens Prayer for the Pardon of Sin,
Exodus 34. 6 7, 9. -- Psalm. 79. 9. and 25. 11.

2. The Covenant and Promises of God, Heb. 8. 12. 1 Samuel 30. 6. Jer. 50. 21. 1
John 1. 9. and 2. 1, 2.

3. The Experience of the Church and Children of God, (yea, of the greatest
Sinners) whereby a Probatum is put upon this Medicine, Numb. 14. 19. 1 Samuel 12.
20. 2 Samuel 12. 13. Luke 7. 47. and 18. 14. Acts 2. 37, 39, 41.

These Comforts will be better communicated and improved, and this Faith much
more fortified, by conversing with godly and cheerful Company, Mal. 1. 13, 14,
15 -- 16. For faint-hearted Persons make others faint-hearted, Deuteronomy. 20. 8. But
faithful and lively Men put life into others, 2 Chronicles. 22. 7, 8. Ezr* 10. 2, 3,
4, 5. 2 Cor. 7. 5, 6, 7. Prove. 12. 25. and 15. 23. and 16. 24.

The Helps spoken of before against Sadness, are Helps also unto Cheerfulness.

Especially, the Spiritual Helps, and the joy of the Lord, (Nehem. 8. 10.) will
be our strength in all Conditions, and in all the Duties required of us, (2 Chronicles. 15. 7, 8, 12.) and the most effectual means to keep us from sinning, 1 Samuel 26. 9, 10, 11. And from fainting, Psalm. 27. 13, 14. and 4. 6, 1, 2.

Prove. 23. 1, 2, 3. When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently
what is before thee; And put a Knife to thy Throat if thou be a Man given to
thine Appetite: Be not desirous of his Dainties, for they are deceitful Meat.
Qu. WHat Rules are there given by Solomon for Rulers and daintier Feasts, and
to keep us from being under the power of lusts fortified by such Feasts?
Answ. Before this question be answered, it may be needful to answer another
question, and that is, Why so glorious a King, and Penman of Scripture as
Solomon was, should descend so low as to Table-talk (as it were) and
restraining of appetite?

Now for satisfaction in this and the like Cases, It may be observed:

1. That Scripture-Writers have a special respect to men's Souls and Salvation,
yea, to their outward good also; and in order thereunto, give Rules for their
ordinary behavior, that by pleasing their Senses they may not hurt their
Souls, or Bodies, or Estates. Solomon is ever and anon looking into, and
speaking of, disorderly Families, faults and feuds of near Relations, the
sluggards Field; Sureties folly, the sin and mischief of Tale-bearers; of angry
and contentious Persons, etc. And the truth is, the work of a Minister (unto
whom Solomon, acting the part of a Prophet may be a Pattern) I say, the work of
a Minister lies much in this, to be a Guide and Monitor in reference to the
ordinary carriages and miscarriages of those with whom he has to do; who
either will take no notice of, or find ways to shift from general instructions,
and things spoken in the air. And we see he that was greater than Solomon, even
our Lord Jesus Christ purposely applies himself to Table-discourse, Luke 14. 7,
to v. 15.

2. Is it a small matter that People make their belly their God, when that ends
in damnation? Psalm. 3. 19.

3. Here Is a higher business than ordinary; for Solomon's scope seems to be to
warn Men, not to affect advancement to the Courts of Princes; or if See for
this Mercer, Jun. Lavat. in Loc.
they be advanced (as Prove. 22. 29.) to look to themselves as those that be in
a brittle and dangerous condition. More particularly, his intent may be, to
move Men to consider seriously the common error, and attractive to the Courts
of Kings and Company of great Men; to wit, the promotions and pleasing
provisions that are there; I shall have the honor to fit with Rulers, (Esther
5. 12.) I shall fare as they fare, and enjoy with credit all the contents of
nature. Now it is a great folly to intrude into, or aspire unto the Court, and
high Places upon these Considerations; not only in respect of Men's Souls (Psalm.
141. 4.) but of their State, the standing is very uncertain, the Meat on the
Table is deceitful; the Ruler, even when they sit at Table with him, draws out
their dispositions, pries into their purposes, detects their insufficiencies,
observes if they any way be like to thwart his Pleasure and Designs, and then
he will deal with them thereafter. Hence many, that might have lived
comfortably, plentifully, and honorably in their own Places and proper Seats,
have ruined themselves by looking after things too high for them.

This may serve to show there is nothing here unworthy the Wisdom of Solomon,
or the Spirit of Wisdom by which he spoke.

But what Solomon speaks of Rulers-Feasts (and afterward of Misers-Feasts, v.
6.) has matter of Caution in it in reference to Feasting (especially to
greater and higher Feasts) in the generality, wherein our carnal lusts stir so
strongly, that it is not easy to keep them within due bounds.

To come then to the Question propounded; There are two Rules laid* down here
to prevent Excesses, viz. Consideration and Mortification.

1. Consideration], consider diligently For matters of content are matters o^
consideration; yea, of so much the greater consideration because of the
content. Hence when Jobs Children Feasted, the Father Sacrificed: If the Feast
be greater the danger is greater, and so the consideration should be more
diligent: Should a Man mind nothing at Feasts but Mirth and Meat? sure, a man's
Bread there should be the Bread of carefulness, not as it is with covetous men
out of worldliness, Psalm. 127. 2. but (as it is with wary and godly men) out of
watchfulness; for it is a Sin, and a Brand lying on sensual men, to feed
without fear, Jude v. 12.

This consideration should be of what is before us, that so we may not give our
selves liberty to take of every thing, but make our choice, and take that which
is offered to us, or which is fit for us, in such a measure as is fit, with
respect to Religion, which requires we should eat and drink to the glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10. 81. and to the health of our bodies, not eating or drinking
that which will distemper us; and to civility and modesty that we may not reach
after any thing otherwise than becomes us, to please our palate; yea, to our
credit and reputation, that we may not so enlarge our selves by too free a use
of the Creatures, as to fall into babbling, unwise discoveries of our selves, or
any indecent carriage. Lastly, we should so look to that which is set before
us, as to look to our selves, and see we do not so over-charge our hearts with
many things, or with any thing, as to fall into security and a mindlesness of
that last and great day, Luke 21. 34. Matthew. 24. 48, 49.

2. The second Rule in sitting a^ Feasts (especially greater Feasts) is t^
study mortification; for that which i^ within makes us err in that which i^
without. This Mortification is to b^ exercised in two Things, viz. in rulin^
James 4. 1
our natural appetite, v. 2. and inord^nate desires, v. 3.

1. Our Appetite] else, a Rule^ Feasts, and an unruly appetite both, wi^^ make
bad work.

This is something strangely expresse^ Put a Knife to thy Throat, if thou be
Man (not only to whom an appetite given, but) given to appetite, as Psalm. 5*
19. To put a Knife to the Throat, is ^^ put a force upon a man's self to forbea^
and not to devour greedily what his a^petite desires: It may be best express^
(as I conceive) by our Saviors sayin^ Pluck out thy right eye; cut off thy
rig^^ hand, Mat. 5. 29, 30. Not only the Kin^dom of Heaven, but the Kingdom ^^
Hell, and the work of Satan within (1 John 3. 8.) should suffer violenc^ I say,
within us; for Christ's meaning not that we should offer violence to a^ natural
part or member of our bodi^^ (that were murder, and against the sixth
Commandment) but his purpose is to show that that vitiousness and sinfulness
should be removed, whereof the several parts of the Body are the Instruments.
Be very choice of the natural eye, but pluck out the lustful eye; of the
natural hand, but cut off the injurious or furious hand, (1 Samuel 24. 13.) so,
preserve the throat; for that [via vitae] preserves thy life; but cut the
throat of thy concupiscence and sensuality, cut the throat of the old man; Let
nothing go down thy throat that conscience cannot, or should not concoct and
digest: Suffer not thy throat to be an open Sepulcher, and like the Grave that
is never filled, Prove. 30. 16. In sum, constrain thy self to continency, and
impose upon thy self a moderation in the use of creature comforts, namely, of
Meats and Drinks, whereof we have two rare Examples.

1. Of David, that absolutely refused to drink the Waters of Bethlehem, which
he so exceedingly desired, 2 Samuel 23. 16, 17.

2. Of Daniel, who would not let any portion of the Kings Meat or Wine go down
his throat, as conceiving a defilement in it, Dan. 1. 8.

Mortification is seen in restraining,

2. Our inordinate Desires], Be n^^ desirous of his Dainties: Not but that a
man may come to a Feast (where dainties are) if he be desired, but he mus^ not
come (I do not say absolutely, With but) out of a desire of Dainties, bu^ upon
a clear call, and for better ends and reasons; as Prove. 18. 24.

Unto this, the words following d^ powerfully persuade; for they are a
deceit^ful Meat. This may be understood of the thing, that is, of dainty Meats
and Drinks, whereby we are soon deceived and beguiled of our temperance,
according to that other Proverb, chap. 20. 1. Wine is a mocker, strong Drink is
raging; and whosoever is deceived thereby (as many are) is not wise: But it
seems to be referred more properly to the Person, that is, to the Person
inviting, and with whom the Guest sits; for it is not said, Be not desirous of
Dainties, but of his Dainties. The like whereunto is spoken afterward (v. 6,
7.) of the Niggards Feast; for there is a deceit also in his Meats, that is in
Him, there being one thing in his mouth, and another thing in his mind;
Experience shows that Feasts have been often made Trains and Traps to draw and
ensnare men in, Romans 11. 9. When Absalom means to make an end of Amnon, he
makes him a Feast, 2 Samuel 13. 27, 28.

It Is no wonder if great Politicians speak lies at one Table, Dan. 11. 27.
speak fair one to another when they be feasting together, the better to
accomplish their mischievous Designs; yea, inferior Persons, Worldlings and
Churles will sometimes invite others, and make them eat and drink to get a good
Bargain, and make a prey of them; by which means a man that loves Dainties, and
considers not that they are Baits, is caught before he is aware; and when he
sees he is in the Snare, he is ready to vomit his sweet Morsels, and is deeply
displeased with himself that when he thought he received a kindness, and many
sweet words were exchanged, even then he was doing himself a mischief. Yea, How
many crafty Fellows, get simple men to the Alehouse and bestow drink on them,
that they may the better cozen them, and when they be in their drink, get any
thing of them?

Now all this arises from desire of Dainties, and taking pleasure in these
ensnaring things. The Birds feeding from Bush to Bush, is harder than at a
Pit-fall, but it is not so deceitful. If thy Provision at home or in a meaner
place, be slenderer, yet Remember, it is safer.

Prove. 23. 4, 5. Labor not to be Rich; cease from thy own Wisdom.




Qu. What Counsel does Solomon give for the Restraint of worldly Lusts?
Answ. His Counsel is sum'd up in this, Labor not to be Rich: But more
particularly, there are in that which Solomon says here, three Things held
forth, viz.

1. An Error. 2. The Root of that Error. 3. The Remedy and Way to get out of
it.
First, An Error, to wit, laboring to be Rich], wherein it is supposed that
seeking of riches is laborious; worldliness is cumbersom: Men say, Religion is
a hard Trade, and though they drudg all the week, yet that which troubles them,
is the Lords day labor; Yea, to tie and confine a man's self to a conversing
with God in religious Exercises all that day, is (with some) to use himself
worse than he would use his Horse; which is not only a childish thing, (for
just so Children are aggrieved that they are kept to School, they had rather go
to plow) but an injurious slander put upon Religion: for, Is not Christ's yoke
easy, and his burden light? Are not all the paths of Wisdom, paths of
pleasantness? Prove. 3. 17. Mammon is the hard Master not Christ, and the
[improbus labor] importunate labor, and most burdensome; yea, and most
dangerous drudgery is in the inordinate pursuit of these earthly things,
Eccles. 5. 17.

I say, such a laboring as this, is supposed; But that which these words
evidently import and mind us of, is, that there is an error in this; for
Solomon says, Labor not, and so does Christ, John 6. 27. Not but that a man
may labor in his Calling to increase his State: But here are two Things,

1. The Action, Labor. 2. The End, to be Rich: Now, there is an Error in both
these.
1. In the Labor when it is excessive; that is, when there is,

1. Such a labor of the heart, as that the whole stream of a man's affections
runs world-ward, and that so violently as that he will have no Nay; he will be
rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9. or else he will be sick and die, 1 Kings 21. 4. 1 Samuel 25.
37.

2. Such a labor of the head, as that a man is ever plotting and plodding
about the world, Psalm. 49. 11. Luke 12. 17, 22. even when he should hear a
Sermon, Luke 14. 18. yea, when he does hear it, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Luke 12. 13, 15.

3. And such a labor of the hand and body, as that a man can neither eat his
meat nor sleep with quietness, Eccles. 4. 8. and 5. 12, 17. -- Psalm. 127. 2.

2. In regard of the End] when a man makes it his ultimate end, and chief aim
to be rich, This cannot be good; for Wisdom must be the principal thing, Prove.
4. 7. And our labor should be,

1. In obedience to Wisdom requiring us to be diligent in our Calling, Prove.
27. 23.

2. For the assisting and adorning of Wisdom; because Wisdom is good (that is,
shows it self to be good) with an inheritance, Eccles. 7. 11. and 9. 16. for
thereby a Man is enabled to put forth his Wisdom in the doing of good, as David
and Solomon did in preparing for, and building the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 2, 3.
and 28. 20, 21.

Secondly, Here is laid down the root of this Errour], to wit, an Error in
judgment, which is this, that the Wealthiest man is the happiest man; and
therefore he is the wisest man that bestows his labor, so as to get the best
outward estate about him; And so indeed, worldly men judge, (Psalm. 10. 3. and
49. 18.) though God say, Thou fool, Luke 12. 20. and both Scripture and Reason
refute that Error.

For, 1. The Wealth of the world helps not to peace, but pierces, Job 20. 22.
Mat. 27. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 10.

Nor 2. To life, but drowneth Men in perdition and destruction, Luke 12. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 9. This error in judgment Moses was most clear from, and carried
himself accordingly, Heb. 11. 25, 26. and all Men should cease from; Cease from
thine own Wisdom; It Is a wisdom of our own, descends not from above, but is
earthly, Jam. 3. 16. Gods Wisdom says, This their way is their folly, Psalm. 49.
13. And what is our wisdom to Gods? when every one is brutish in his own
knowledge, Jer. 10. 14.

Thirdly, There is added, v. 5. the remedy of this Error, which is to
understand well, and consider of the Vanity of Riches, viz.

1. The Vanity and littleness of them They are not. There Is no such Excellency
Carthwr.
in them, they are the least things Luke 16. 10. Nay, there is (as it were) no
entity in them; they are in a day o^ extremity like Job's Friends, then they
are Nothing, Job 6. 21, clear contrary to the judgment of the world, that says
^ rich Man is a substantial Man, as if other Men were but Accidents; when it is
not the Rich but the Righteous that is more excellent than his Neighbor Prove.
12. 26. and the holy Seed (whether rich or poor) is the substance, and
subsistence both of the Church and the World, Isa. 6. 13. Mat. 24. 22. O why
will thou set thine eyes, or let thine eyes fly (as it is in the Original,)
upon this Nothing? And it is rightly said thine eyes; for the World is mostly in
a worldlings eye, and all the good he has from his Goods, is the beholding of
them with his eyes, Eccles. 5. 11. either his eye is after the World that he
may have it, or on the World when he has it; he loves to contemplate it, and
roll his eye upon it; and that is his Reward.

2. The Vanity and Instability of them]; for Riches certainly (if the true God
may be believed) make themselves wings; which is true two ways:

1. Because they be things of themselves, corruptible by rust, moth, etc. Mat.
6. 19.

2. Because they be things corrupting with pride and working to oppression,
Psalm. 73. 6, 8. Obad. v. 3. and so they may be said to enforce God to take them
away. Experience has still confirmed the uncertainty and volubility of these
earthly Riches, especially ill-gotten, a^ they use to be when the eye flies
very swiftly after them, Prove. 28. 20. The Father oppresses, deceives,
encroacheth, and so leaves a great State to the Son; so the Eagle is a great
Bird, but hat^ wings, such are Riches ill-gotten: The Father, by his unjust
courses helped them to wings, and then, the dissolute So^ lets them fly (as an
Hawk) and make^ himself merry with the Flight: Bu^ they fly also as. an Eagle,
high, and cannot be taken; swiftly, and cannot be over-taken, and that toward
Heaven for God takes them away: Hell gather^ them, and Heaven scatters them.
Bu^ howsoever gotten, ill, or well, they ar^ but earthly Treasures, Mat. 6. 19.
an^ so, subject to many casualties and way (like wings) of diverse sorts that
man carry them away from us. Now wha^ wise Man (that has eyes in his head
would let his Heart lie, and let his Eye^ fly upon such flying things?

Prove. 25. 8, 9, 10.






Qu. What Is Solomon 's Advice concerning the Vice of Strife and Contention?
Answ. Solomon here advises two Things.

1. Not to be hasty in striving. 2. To be careful of debating as a special
Remedy against that striving.
First, Not to be hasty in striving]; Go not forth hastily to strive] as Men
that have a mind to it, who hasten to what they long after. They that haste
most use to do worst and speed worst; for in all things agreeable to corrupt
nature, nature speaks first and worst: And though right Reason, and especially
sanctified Reason and Grace, may afterward speak better things; yet a former
engagement is a great detainment from obeying later and better thoughts; for
such is the pride of sinful Man, that he will rather adventure upon the danger
of prosecuting a worse way, than incur the dishonor of changing, though it be
for a better; when he has once gone forth hastily, he is very loath to make a a
retreat, though back again be the better way.

For help in this Case; a Man that is about to go out in a striving way, shall
do well to entertain a fourfold Consideration.

1. In point of Justice, whether the Cause be right, else that general Rule,
Mat. 7. 12, forbids contending for Victory in it.

2. In point of Religion, whether it be of moment, else there should be rather
a taking of Wrong than a raising of trouble about a trifle, 1 Cor. 6. 7.

Yea, and in point of Reason this is to be considered also, that more may be
spent in time and charge than the matter is worth.

3. In point of Charity, whether an offer of peace and friendly agreement have
been made, Heb. 12. 14. Deuteronomy. 20. 10. for it is not meet to deal as delighting
in War, Psalm. 68. 30.

4. In point of Providence, whether there be a probability of prevailing, (the
cause being good, and a good cause being like to find favor) else better
forbear, and (foreseeing an ill Success) prevent Strife by patience, than end
it with shame. Know well what thou do at first, lest (as Solomon here says)
thou know not what to do at last.

Secondly, Solomon advises to debate the cause, where three Things are
intimated:

1. That it is good to end Differences. 2. By what Course. 3. With what Caution.
1. It Is good to end things privately]. If there be a Strife, yet Go not forth,
Go not far, not to the Court, to the Bench; rather Go in, than go forth, that
is into thy Neighbors house, or into a Neighbors house; that is likest to put
an end to Strife, and prevent that expense of time and money, yea, of love and
charity also which every Lawsuit carries with it; yea, more evil than men
given to strife are aware of: For Law-ing is like Building, that will cost
twice so much as a man thinks of beforehand.

2. The course is Debating; That Is the best Composer of Controversies; for,
They commonly arise (at least, rise to get higher) not so much out of a desire
to try what is right and obtain what is just (in which debating and the opening
of all things as indeed they are, is very helpful); As from,

1. Misprision; Now a patient and unpartial debate, discovers and removes all
mistakes.

Or, 2. From Passion; and Debating (especially neighbourly and with offended
neighbors themselves) calls up Reason to judge of the Controversy and cries
down Passion.

3. The Caution is, Debate with him himself; without necessity, Go not further,
Mat. 18. 15. For Contention gone forth, is like water broken out, Prove. 17. 14.
the further it runs, the deeper and fiercer it is to go further from an end;
peace is soonest made when fewest meddle, Fermin.

But in special, the warning is, Discover not a secret to another, Prove. 17. 9.
If happily (thy Neighbor and thou not agreeing between your selves) the matter
be propounded to another that will be indifferent to both, then keep close to
the matter, if any thing (not honorable to thy Neighbor) has passed secretly
between thee and him when you stood upon good terms; or if there have been some
worse and more passionate passages in the heat of Contention, which touch not
the cause, and no man knows but thou and he, discover not any such secrets
(that are besides the business) to a third person, to ingratiate thy self and
cause, to make him the more on thy side, by making thy Neighbor vile; for such
blabbing, such unfaithfulness, enmity, and inhumanity, will put (not thy
Neighbor, but) thee to shame before a good-natured Person (whether an
Arbitrator or an Auditor only); And whereas by such an one, thy Neighbor's
infirmity will be buried and kept secret, he will blame and shame thee for want
of secrecy; and that infamy of thine for such malice and treachery, shall not
turn away.

O How many when they be at a Debate, that should and might reconcile them
(being drunk with anger and spleen) vomit up all, discover all nakedness,
striving so far to shame every Man his Adversary, as that they shame themselves
eternally!

Prove. 28. 14. Happy is the Man that fears always.
Qu. What is there in Fear that a Man for that should be counted Happy?
Answ. Fear is of diverse Sorts, viz.

1. Natural], arising from the Principles of created (not corrupted) nature;
and therefore, not bad nor good, morally; as to fear Fire, Water, a
Drawn-Sword: This is in Beasts (incapable of Reason, and therefore of sin) as
well as Men; in good Men as well as in bad; yea, in Christ himself, Heb. 5. 7.
who feared that which (looking to humane infirmity) might have overwhelmed him
for ever; therefore fearing, he prayed, O let this Cup pass, or let it not
prevail to swallow me up. Others, out of this fear, avoid the evil feared, by
discretion; God's Children, by Religion; others, when they cannot by prudence
prevent and avoid such evil, seek by fortitude to bear them; but Gods Children
strive by grace and heavenly consolation to prevent or to endure them, Rev. 2.
10. as David (we may say, as Christ) who, fearing sets the Lord before him, and
so concludes, that because He is at his right hand, he shall not be
overwhelmed, but raised, Psalm. 16. 8, 9, 10, etc. and Psalm. 56. 3.

2. Corrupt or Criminal], or penal; for Fear inordinate is,

1. A Sin], because it is accompanied with distrust of Gods goodness, despair
of his mercy, and makes Men to fly from him as an Enemy, Genesis 3. 10. Isa. 2.
10. yea, to fight against him, 1 Samuel 4. 7, 9.

2. A Punishment], and a miserable one too, Deuteronomy. 28. 65, 66, 67. Isa. 33. 14.
Jer. 20. 3. a punishment fit for Devils, who believe and tremble, and like to
Hell; for Fear has torment, from which Gods Children are delivered in part
here, and shall be perfectly hereafter, Psalm. 112. 7. Prove. 28. 1. Jer. 17. 18.
Heb. 2. 15.

3. Spiritual], because wrought by the Spirit, which is the Spirit of the Fear
of the Lord, Isa. 11. 2. Or Filial (because in the Sons of God, in them only,
and well-becoming them) whereby the Children of God, considering Gods Majesty,
Mercy, Justice, etc. and their own sin and unworshiness, fear before him, Mal.
2. 5. This Fear has a Threefold Object, viz.

1. God] to be feared.

1. As the great King, for his incomparable excellency and eminency, Jer. 10.
7, 8, etc. Dan. 5. 19. Rev. 1. 17.

2. As a Father, for his Mercy and Goodness, Mal. 1. 6. Psalm. 130. 4. Hos. 3.
5. and therefore to be obeyed, 1 Pet. 1. 14.

3. As a Judge that will and must meet with Rebels; and therefore is not to be
provoked; See 1 Pet. 1. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.

2. Sin] that it may not be committed; See Genesis 20. 11. Numb. 12. 8. Esth. 7.
5. yea, that Duty may not be un-performed, nor ill performed, but sin of
omission avoided, Exodus 5. 3. Mal. 1. 14. Hence it follows, that since I am
to be afraid of Sin, I must be afraid of my Self in whom there is such a root
of corruption, Deuteronomy. 11. 16. Luke 21. 34. Deuteronomy. 29. 18. and of Satan, the
Prince, (Ephesians. 2. 2.) and of wicked men, the Instruments of tentation, 1 Cor.
10. 12. Prove. 5. 8.

3. The punishment of Sin] to be feared so, that it may not be procured, as Job
did, Job 31. 3, 23.

Now, It Is true, that wicked men Fear, but it is out of an evil conscience, not
fearing so as to prevent the evil feared (there was never any in Hell that so
feared it as to use all means to prevent coming to it) but so, as that the
thing they fear comes upon them, for want of taking a due course to free
themselves from it, as the Thief fears the Halter, and yet procures it; but
Gods Children fear to bring by their Sin sad things on themselves; and
therefore so fear in the time of their prosperity as to prevent adversity; as
Exodus 9. 20.

Quest. But how is it possible that Fear should have such an hand in Man's
Happiness?
Answ. Because though Fear be found in all as the same created affection, yet
it is not of the same effect; Fear in the godly is a defense from evil, Prove.
14. 16. and 16. 8. in the wicked, it is a taste of Hell; it betrays, or at
least over-looks the succors that reason affords, much more the helps that
grace offers; and sometimes, instead of laying hold on the Promises, lays hold
on an Halter (as Judas) or invites another to take away their life. Yea, Saul
takes a Sword and falls upon it himself for fear lest the uncircumcised
Philistims should come and thrust him through, 1 Samuel 31. 4.

An holy Fear is of another nature, and has these Commodities and Happinesses
in it.

1. It is a good Counseller]; Fear occasioneth counsel, and counsel safety,
Prove. 3. 7. Holy Fear says, How shall I with my ten thousand look the Lord in
the face that comes against me with his twenty thousand? Hereupon he that
fears God, having (by the help of his fear) thus consulted, seeks peace by
Jesus Christ; So Jehosaphat's fear suggested a wise course for his welfare
here, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3.

2. It is a good Watch]. As a fearful Dog is against Thieves. It Is the fearful,
See Prove. 3. 29.
that is the most careful Servant night and day: Fear gives warning, and so we
betake our selves to our Hold, Genesis 32. 9, 10. Psalm. 40. 3.

3. It Is a good fortifier]. It makes Gods Children do as they that confine on
the Sea, or on an Enemy's-Country, where the greatest fortifications are, and
every thing looked to whereat an Entry might be made; so Men fearing God look
to every thing, as the mouth, Psalm. 39. 1. the eye, Job 31. 1. the hand, 1 Samuel
24. 13. even as Noah feared and made an Ark, Heb. 11. 7.

4. It Is a good Monitor] or Master of Ceremonies, minding us of our duty and
distance: As it is said, serve the Lord without fear, that is, distrustful
fear, (if you have that you be too far off); so it is said also, Serve the Lord
with fear, Psalm. 2. 11. for we must not be too bold, Psalm. 89. 7.

Fear therefore must be still with us; we must be in it all the day, Prove. 23.
17. and yet Faith and Fear are, and ought to be joined together, that as we
ought not to be too bold, so we may not be base, Psalm. 56. 3. and 147. 11.

5. It Is a Life* prolonger], and that with peace and happiness, Prove. 19. 23.
and 22. 4. Eccles. 8. 12, 13.

Prove. 28. 14. Latter part. -- But he that hardens his heart shall fall into
mischief.
Qu. WHat hardness of heart is that whereby a Man falls into mischief?
Answ. In general: All that wilful hardening of a Man's heart which is against
the fear of God mentioned in the former part of the Verse, upon the want
whereof all sin and judgment is bottomed, Mal. 1. 5. For as the fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom and welfare; so a fearless and daring heart is the
beginning of all folly and misery, Prove. 14. 16.

Particularly, There is a mischievous hardness of heart:

1. Against the Commandment of God, which every wise man fears, Prove. 13. 13.
and they that are appointed to mischief and destruction despise, Jer. 44. 16,
17.

2. Against the reproofs, admonitions and warnings of the Word: By this it
appeared that God was determined to destroy Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. See for
this, 2 Chronicles. 36. 12, 14, 15, 16, 17. Isa. 48. 4. Jer. 44. 4, 5, 10. Ezekiel. 3.
7. Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13. In special, Prove. 29. 1.

3. Against the threatenings of God, and those judgments that wise Men see are
coming on apace, Nehem. 9. 29, 30. Isa. 5. 19. Jer. 5. 12. Prove. 22. 3.

4. Against the judgments of God already executed, Jer. 5. 3. Zeph. 3. 7. Amos
4. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

5. Against the mercies, merciful offers, promises and providence of God, Isa.
7. 11, 12, 13, 17. Amos 2. 9, 14. Romans 2. 4, 5.

6. Against the gracious Works of God: O how grievous was their hardness of
heart that could not abide that Christ (of whose power and doing good every
where, they were convinced) should speak a word to restore a withered hand on
the Sabbath day, when themselves would not lose or be losers in, an Ox or an
Ass for want of looking on them on that day! Mark 3. 5. with Mat. 12. 11, 12,
13.

7. Against the holy ways of God, Mal. 3. 13, etc.

But yet this hardness of heart may further and more distinctly be known by the
words used to express it:

Namely, It is expressed,

1. By a word signifying hardness arising from dryness (...). Romans 2. 5.
; So, a Person hard-hearted is one that wants the moisture of grace, whereby he
receives heavenly things as a stone, which is wet for present, but dry
presently, having not (as the Earth has) any moisture in it self.

2. By a Word signifying that which is hard by Custom (...). Ephesians. 4. 18.
, through callosity, brawniness and often beating upon it, as the Highway by
often treading on it. And (indeed) the hard heart is the Devils Causey-way, and
Sin is the Devils Foot whereby he treads on it, and makes it hard, Heb. 3. 13.
Jer. 13. 23. And whereby it is fitted for the Wrath of God, which (like the
thunderbolt) spares that which is soft, and rends that which is hard, 2 Kings
17. 19.

Now, that it may appear that every Man falls thus into mischief by his own
fault, it is said, He that hardens his heart]; For whose heart is hardened,
it is his own fault: It Is thy hardness, Romans 2. 5. It Is of men's own making; for
it is said, They made their hearts as an Adamant-stone, Zech. 7. 12.

For though God be said to harden, yet he hardens not properly, positively,
efficiently, causally; (that is the cause which produces the effect out of its
proper virtue); Let no man say when he is hardened, I am hardened of God, (as
Jam. 1. 13.) for He infuseth not hardness, He makes not that heart hard that
was soft before, but leaves men in and to their own hearts; the consequent
whereof because it is hardness, therefore God is said to harden. Thus he may be
said to harden, though not efficiently; yet consequentially by dereliction, and
withholding that softening grace which He is not bound to give; yea,
judicially He hardens by Tradition, giving up by his just judgment,
hard-hearted, impenitent and obstinate men to the power o^ Satan, that by him
they may be hardened 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.

Thus for Wicked Men.

God is said also to harden his Children, Isa. 63. 17. but that is only because
for a time, he gives not out unto them that accustomed influence of his grace
which they have formerly felt and so they be like the Earth which though there
be moisture in it, yet, i^ for a longer time it want the dew o^ Heaven, it
grows dry and hard. This is not a wilful hardening in them, but ^ woeful
hardening to them; whereof therefore they complain to God, yea and both humbly
and faithfully plead and expostulate with him, in regard of the promise of a
soft heart they have from him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 36. 26.

Notwithstanding which, God sometimes leaves them dry and hard; Namely, for two
Reasons.

1. For some foregoing Sin]. David was so hard of heart, that he apprehended
not what Nathan intended till he said, Thou art the Man, 2 Samuel 12. 7. This
came of his Adultery, Murder, Dissimulation.

2. For a trial and discovery of Humane Infirmity] when a man thinks highly of
himself, or the Church of him, as in the Case of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.

O let us take heed of the deceitfulness of Sin, (Heb. 3. 13.) of going a
little, and a little further; That hardens. A wise man says not, I never eat
Flints or Mil-stones, therefore I shall never have The Stone; but purges
humors and crudities from the Stomach, because they (being impacted) will
breed the Stone; so a wise Christian is wary and provident to prevent and
remove every corrupt thing, which by pleasing and polluting the heart for the
present, has a tendency in it, to the hardening of it.

But the Man here spoken of, that is devoid of the Fear of God, is careless,
m^^dless of the misery and mischief of an hard heart; and therefore walks in
those ways merrily, that makes his heart like the Highway; yea, rather than
fail, he will make that Mercy of God that should lead him to repentance, Romans
2. 5. an help to his hardening; for he says God likes my courses well enough
(when he prospers) Psalm. 50. 21. And (however) thinks with himself, God will be
merciful at last (albeit God profess he will not, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20.) yea,
though Mercy and hardness of Heart be opposed the one to the other; God is
said, Romans 9. 18. to have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens;
that is, takes not away that hardness of heart which they have of themselves,
but gives them up to it; so that, if hardening, no Mercy; What then? Why,
Wrath by heap, if that hardness of heart be continued in, and instead of Mercy,
everlasting Mischief, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6.

Scripture-Questions out of Ecclesiastes.
Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of Vanities (says the Preacher) Vanity of Vanities, all
is Vanity.
Qu. WHat does this whole Book hold forth to us concerning this Vanity?
Answ. It sets forth this, that all is Vanity, save only the Fear of God and
keeping his Commandments. In sum, Out of God, all things are Vanity.

Now there is a Vanity of Sin, for Sin, and by Sin.

First, Of Sin]; for Sin it self is Vanity, as Idolatry, Oppression, and an
evil and unjustifiable course of life. See Jer. 14. 22. Romans 1. 21, 22, 23.
Psalm. 62. 10. Prove. 13. 11. Isa. 5. 18.

1. Sin is Vanity in three Respects.

1. Because in its Nature, it is a Nothing, a Privation ((...)) a defect, no
positive thing, no substance; for God made Substances, and all he made was
good; but Sin is (figmentum Cordis nostri, Genesis 6. 5.) an imagination and
device of our own, Eccles. 7. 29.

2. Because it deceives the Sinners expectation, giving him, instead of
satisfaction looked for, (2 Samuel 13. 15, 29.) bitterness, either in repentance,
or in damnation, Prove. 11. 4. Jer. 2. 19. Romans 6. 21.

3. Because it makes the Sinner himself become vain or a Vanity. If Idols be
Vanity, the Idolatry is so too; for He is like them, Psalm. 115. 8. And
therefore Man is mortal and vanishes away, because he is sinful; yea, Man in
his best estate, since Sin came into the world, is altogether Vanity, Psalm. 39.
5. What a poor vain thing is the Prince of Devils by reason of Sin? Beel-zebub
the god of Flies, the great Humble-Bee, and all other Devils under him, little
Bees or Flies.

Secondly, For Sin], This Vanity is found in the Creatures that be not sinful,
they being appointed for Man's content, profit, honor, but are abused by sinful
men to covetousness, intemperance, vainglory -- and so become Vanity.

This Vanity of the Creatures appears in Four Things:

1. IN that the Curse of God is on them; I went by and cursed his habitation
(says Job), to wit, for the dwellers sake; so the Earth is cursed for Man's
sake: yea, the Air is poisoned by the Constellations of Heaven, and the Stars
in their courses fight against Sisera, Judges 5. 20. A Curse is on the Heavens
in a sort for Man's Sin.

2. IN that they be in Bondage, Romans 8. 20, 21. and in a groaning condition, v.
22. for as it is a great trouble to loyal Subjects to be enforced to serve
Rebels and Enemies to their Sovereign; so it is to the Creatures to feed and
cloth and cherish wicked Men; yea, not only serving Man a Sinner, but Man in
sinning, Numb. 22. 30. 32. Things made for natural necessities, are abused to
carnal excesses; from this they desire to be free.

3. IN that they fail Men in their ends, not for which God has appointed them,
but which they (without God) set to them. They look they should secure them in
the day of trouble, Prove. 18. 11. but that they shall not, Prove. 11. 4. and for
full satisfaction from them, whereas the Creatures should not have satisfied
Adam in innocence, Man being a Creature not satisfiable with any thing but that
which is heavenly, and he being to be translated for his satisfaction.

4. IN that they tend to dissolution:

For 1. They perish in the using, Colos. 2. 22. eat meat and it is gone, no more
meat can be made of that which is eaten, Ground arable wears in the using.

2. At length they come to utter consumption, 1 Cor. 6. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 12.
Things must go at the Kings price; Put the Kings price on these things, weigh
them in the balance of the Sanctuary, and then call them Vanity, as the
Preacher here does.

Obj. Preachers say so, but Do wise Men think so?
Answ. Solomon was not only a Preacher, but a King in Jerusalem, ver. 1. yea,
the wisest King that ever was, 1 Kings 3. 12. yet he says so, ver. 2. Redeem
thy self from Vanity by doing the will of God, 1 John 2. 17. and the Creatures
by employing them to good and holy uses, Luke 16. 9.

But (instead of this) there is Vanity.

Thirdly, By Sin], that is, unwise man adds to the Creatures Vanity, and
moreover, to his own vexation, by his continual miscarriages about the
Creatures:

Namely, 1. IN excessive toiling and moiling about them (as many have done
about the Philosophers Stone, that turns (as they say) all to Gold) to get that
supposed good and happiness which it is not in them to give, And is not that a
Vanity to labor extremely to get that which can never can be had?

2. IN being over-solicitous for keeping that, the loss whereof cannot make
them miserable, nor the holding of it, happy; Is not this a vexing Vanity?

3. IN regard of the use of the Creature, either in excess by voluptuousness,
or in defect, by miserableness; And is not this a monstrous Vanity?

4. IN regard of men's own End; for after all the employment of Wit, strength,
state and time, about these earthly things, there is [then, that is, at death]
no difference (in regard of these externals) between Wise Men and Fools,
between Rich Men and Beggars; yea, between Men and Beasts, Job 13. 28.

5. IN regard of the leaving of all after their end; for Who shall bring a Man
to see what shall be after him? Eccles. 3. 22. He that has heapt up never so
much, knows not to whom he shall leave it, whether to a Friend and Relation, or
to a Stranger; whether to a Wise Man or a Fool: To be sure, the hard labor is
his, but what he has got by it, may fall into the hands of a Drone or
dissolute Spend-thrift. Now for a Man to labor excessively to maintain
another idleness, and to pinch himself sordidly to maintain another
prodigality, has much of Sin in it, and of Vanity by Sin.

Eccles. 7. 10. Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were
little better than these? for thou do not enquire wisely concerning this.
Qu. Does Solomon absolutely bind us out from saying, the former days are
better than these, or from questioning the present times?
Answ. 1. He says, and the Spirit of God says, Say not], say not thou, What
is the cause? for it is the manner of impatience to be asking Questions * Job
3. 11, 12. Genesis 43. 6. Jer. in loc.
, as if no good answer could be given; but the answer of the Preacher is to
forbid them to ask, because it is but a foolish Question.

For 2. He says, that they that say so make not a wise enquiry concerning this.

But for further instruction and satisfaction, the Question may be answered
Negatively and Affirmatively.

First, Negatively, in two Things:

1. Solomon's meaning is not that some times are not worse than others; for
Christ's own words (if we speak of affliction) show the contrary, telling us of
such tribulation as was not from the beginning of the world to that time, no
nor ever shall be, Mat. 24. 21. And (if we speak of Sin) the description of the
last times by the Apostle, shows the contrary, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Nor is it his meaning, that if the Times be corrupt, they should not be
disliked, and the iniquity thereof reproved and cried out against, or the
calamity thereof bewailed; for that is a Duty, Isa. 58. 1. Ezekiel. 9. 4. Jer. 13.
17.

Secondly, Positively, in diverse Particulars.

1. A Man must not complain of the Times, as looking for a felicity in this
world, and to enjoy such Times as will have nothing in them to complain of.

2. None should quarrel with the present Times out of vain respects, out of an
humor of worldliness and discontentedness, when the Times they complain of are
in truth better than the Times they commend, and the Time they commend worse
than the time they condemn. Thus, the Scribes and Pharisees made as if their
Fathers days and doings were worse than theirs, Mat. 23. 30. when their Fathers
killed the Servants of God only, but in their time, the Son of God was slain,
and by their hands. And so some old ignorant creatures have used to proclaim
the Times of Popery here in England better than the latter Times of the Gospel,
because then all things were cheap; when the cause of their saying so, is the
regarding of their Purse or Paunch more than their Souls.

3. Neither should any question the times so as therein to question the wisdom
and righteousness of Gods Government, by whose Providence it is that some Times
are better and some worse, Psalm. 31. 15. Amos 3. 6. See Mal. 2. 17. and 3. 13,
14. Job 1. 22. and 24. 1. and 34. 29.

4. Neither should thou, if the Times be sadder, and the days wherein thou
live be gloomy days, torment thy self with excessive grief, or pine away with
sorrow, Josh. 7. 7, 10. Acts 27. 22. Ask not only the Times, Why are you so
heavy? But thy Self, Why am I so heavy? Psalm. 42. 11.

5. Leave not thy Station, 1 Cor. 7. 24. Nehem. 6. 11. Amos 7. 14, 15. neglect
not thy Calling out of a despairing mind, but go on in thy way, and wait upon
God in thy place in an evil world; use piety, study repentance, Zeph. 2. 3. Get
away every Achan, Josh. 7. 11. yea, use prudence; Be silent, Take heed what
thou say, and to whom, Amos 5. 13. and to whom thou committest thy self, John
2. 24. Acts 9. 26. but yet Take heed of leaving the work committed to thee to
do, Mark 13. 34, 35. Acts 5. 25, 28, 29, 42. And if there should be any
withdrawing for a time upon some special occasion, be able to say as David; Is
there not a Cause? 1 Samuel 17. 29. Take heed of questioning the Times so as that
God should question thee (though thou be hardly dealt with) for a Runaway.
Remember the Angels questioning of Hagar flying from her Mistress, Genesis 16. 8,
9, with v. 6.

6. Do not so examine, pry into, and pore upon the evils of the Times as to
forget the good of the Times. These last Times are the best that ever were in
regard of Gospel-manifestations, Mat. 13. 16, 17. and yet they are the worst,
to wit, in regard of the rage of Satan and wicked men, Rev. 2. 10. Rev. 12. 12.
John 16. 2.

7. When Times be at the worst, if thou question the Cause, do not question it
with indignation (as if the world were ungoverned, or thy mind were to put in
Interrogatories against the great Governor thereof, Job 3* 4. 7, 8.) but do it
for information, and then, if thou enquire wisely, thou will find the cause of
worse Times to be the sins of the Times, Jer. 30. 14, 15. Mic. 3. 5. Turn
therefore thy questionings and quarellings with the Times unto an examining of,
(this is a wise enquiry, Mica 6. 9, 10, etc.) a mourning for, and a reforming
of, (as far as thy power reaches) those evils of sin that cause the Times to
be so evil, Deuteronomy. 31. 29.

8. Do not so complain of bad Times as to lay aside all hopes of better, Jer.
30. 7, 17. Jer. 33. 23. Psalm. 42. 11. Still hope in God, Ezra 10. 2.

9. If there never come good Times in thy time, instead of froward Queries
about, make a good use of, exercise suffering graces in, learn some good
Lessons from those evil and castigatory Times (Mica. 6. 9.) into which it has
pleased God to cast thee; Ephesians. 5. 16. Thou ought always so to live (says
Hierom in loc.) as that the present days may be better to thee than the days
that are past* Psalm. 119. 71. Hereupon, unto thy Question, What is the cause
why the former days are better than these? This Answer may be returned, That
thy way^ may be better than if the days had been better.

Nec vetus saeculum praesenti praeferas, quia unus utriusque Conditor est Deus,
Vi^tutes bonos dies viventi faciunt, viti^ malos. Hieron. in loc.

Eccles. 7. 16, 17.




Qu. What Is Solomon 's drift in this double counsel? Or what does he mean by
[overmuch righteous] and [overmuch wicked]?
Answ. Sure, it has reference to his observation in the Verse going before,
viz. That a just Man perishes in his righteousness, and a wicked Man
prolongeth his life in his wickedness, according to which these Verses must be
interpreted.

The Question therefore may be answered,

1. Negatively], certainly when it is said, Be not righteous overmuch, it is
not to give a check to any strictness which the Word of God requires whether in
opinion or practice; for No man can be over-righteous by sticking close to the
Rule of Righteousness, any more than the Mason by rearing his Wall precisely
according to his Rule and Plummet; Nay, to diminish from the Word, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
to depart from the way of the Word to the right hand or the left, is a
destructive thing, Deuteronomy. 5. 32. and 6. 14, 17. Psalm. 125. 5.

2. Positively]. The former being not Salomon's meaning, the Question is what
his purpose is in these words. There is therefore a double more probable
interpretation.

The first respects the subjects or the persons here spoken of with respect
to their carriage and behavior under Divine Providence.

The first Advice then is,

1. Be not righteous overmuch], that is, considering that a just Man perishes
in his righteousness, do thou look to thy righteousness, that thou may not by
any mistake therein expose thy self to a perishing condition: If Men perish in
a good righteousness by others, Do not thou destroy thy self by a bad and
overgrown righteousness.

Now, This Error and excess in Righteousness may arise two ways.

1. In matter of Opinion], by adding to the Word, setting up, and standing
stiffly upon that which the Word of God does not warrant; but, though it may
seem to be an high thing, and to have much of righteousness in it, yet, being
well searched, there is nothing in it but a wisdom and righteousness of a man's
own making. Thus Saul and the People spared for Sacrifice, wherein they 1 Samuel
15. 15, 22.
might seem religious, but they held before themselves a false light, viz. that
to sacrifice was better than to obey: Thus also Peter (by mistake and meaning
to be righteous) was righteous overmuch, when he said, Not so Lord, Acts 10.
14. That which seems high righteousness may be high unrighteousness if a Man
make himself his own Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 11, 12.

Upon this it may be inferred, Why should thou destroy thy self? for such a
danger there is if a man do not conceive and think right things, but speak and
act upon misconceits; as we see in the Friends of Job Job 42. ^^, 18.
, against whom Gods Wrath was kindled, so that there needed a Sacrifice that
God might not deal with them according to their folly, which deserved
destruction; and yet they thought they pleaded the cause of God and the cause
of Righteousness; but God says, they spoke not right, they were overmuch
righteous in ascribing so much to humane righteousness, as to think God must
still make much of such in an outward way; and therefore that Job could not be
a righteous man, because God dealt so severely with him. This made God angry,
unto which destroying is next, Deuteronomy. 9. 20. Thus he that would not smite the
Prophet (albeit that might seem an unrighteous and horrid thing, yet) because
he preferred his own reason before the special command of God at that time, was
slain by a Lion, 1 Kings 20. 35, 36. John Baptist seems to say there was no
seemliness in Christ's being baptized by him, and there seemed to be good reason
for it; but Christ lets him know that what he thought was not right, but it
became Him to be baptized of John upon the account of righteousness, Mat. 3.
14, 15. And John thereupon, yielded quickly, and so prevented that dreadful
check, which was returned over-righteous and over-resolute Peter in the like
case, John 13. 6, 7, 8. Any Man that suffers or is destroyed for this fault,
though it be by the hand of God, yet may be said to destroy himself, because
himself is the cause of it, as Hos. 13. 9.

2. In matter of practice and carriage] so he is righteous overmuch, that is,
rigid overmuch in his dealing with others under the pretense and name of
righteousness; as Saul must needs kill Jonathan, under a pretense of zeal for
God, in regard of the (improvident) curse under which he had bound the People,
though Jonathan heard it not, 1 Samuel 14. 27, 28, 29. And such a kind of zeal he
had in slaying the Gibeonites, (as seeming to respect the honor of God's
people with whom such were not fit to be mixed) whereby he destroyed seven of
his Sons (a part of himself) 2 Samuel 21. 2, 6, 9. So the Corinthians, that were
negligent at first, did over-do at last, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8.

The Second Advice is,

Be not overmuch wicked]; Where

1. We may observe (as in the former Precept) that Solomon's meaning here is
not to give way to any to be wicked in some less degrees; no more than it
follows that a Man may be angry as much as he will till the Sun go down,
because Paul says, Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. Or
that men need not pay less Tithes, so they look to weightier matters, because
Christ frowns upon the hypocrisy that was in the one while they omitted the
other, Mat. 23. 23. ye ought (says Christ) to have done the greater and the
less both; so all wickedness (whether little or much) is to be avoided, because
it makes us liable to the Curse of God, Gal. 3. 10.

2. This then may be the meaning; Do not, because a wicked Man prolongeth his
days in his wickedness, give thy self the rains, to be wicked in the highest
degree, over and above what is in other wicked men, Jer. 5. 28. so that this
seems to agree with what Solomon says afterward; Because Sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. to be brimful of wickedness.

But, Be not wicked overmuch (says the Wiseman) neither be thou (in being so
wicked) foolish, and an enemy to thy self: For, this sinning with an high hand,
however God prolong the life of other wicked men, may make him cut off thee out
of hand, Psalm. 55. 23. Numb. 25. 7. 8.

Now, If the words in these two Verses be taken in their latitude; the former
Precept may be extended to all those that in any thing overshoot themselves by
leaning to their own wisdom (yea, howsoever they aim at righteousness and
holiness in it) so far as to go beyond that which the Wisdom of God will
warrant.

And the latter Precept may also be applied to all those, who leaning to their
own foolishness, enlarge themselves in wickedness, under the hope of impunity.

But yet, There is a second Interpretation of these words, which seems more
agreeable to the context, which arises not so much from the consideration of
the persons here spoken to, in reference to their carriage or miscarriage under
Divine Providence, as to the censure of these persons in regard of God himself
that orders out these Providence, inasmuch as they run cross to the sense,
and corrupt reason of shallow men.

And then, The meaning of the former Precept, will be this; when thou see a
just man perish in his righteousness, Be not thou overmuch righteous, to wit,
in charging God foolishly, as if he did not govern the world equally, Job 1.
22. (He Is always righteous overmuch, that makes as if God were not righteous
enough), Why should thou destroy thy self, by quarrelling his
administration? Job 9. 4. and 34. 17. and 33. 12, 13.

Hereupon, the Second Precept will sound to this sense; when thou see a
wicked man prolong his days in his wickedness, Be not thou wicked overmuch; as
if God did let all alone, and so wink at the carriage of men, as that they may
be as bad as they will, and yet fare never the worse, Psalm. 50. 21. Zeph. 1.
12. Mal. 2. 17. and 3. 14,15.

In brief, it may be said, that these two Sayings set forth two sins:

1. The accusing of Providence, because the just perish, expressed by, Be not
righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise, as if thou could devise
a wiser way of ordering the world.

And 2. The abusing of Providence, and of Gods Patience toward wicked men unto
all licentiousness, expressed by, Be not wicked overmuch.

Unto both these Extremes, the Psalmist (upon the same workings of Providence
that are here described, ver. 15.) shows our proneness, who on the one side
are ready to condemn the generation of the righteous, that is, to charge God
because he puts them under such bitter Providence, Psalm. 73. 13, 14, 15.
And on the other side, are ready to warp and nod toward the profane world
because they prosper, Psalm. 73. 10, 11, 12. If godly Men go so far, no marvel
if the ungodly come quite over too, and are bold in both these Extremes.

Suitable hereunto is the close that follows, v. 18. Take hold, suffer not to
slip, say to thy heart, withdraw not thy hand from, the counsel given on both
parts in the former Verses; for it is the fear of God, and the reverent
observation of what God says in his Word, that will help a man to come clear
off from the evils and inconveniences of both the Extremes, and to walk in the
middle way, which is to be righteous according to the Rule though there be ruin
by it; and not to be wicked against the Rule, though Prosperity accompany it:
And again, This Fear of God will keep a man from uttering or acting any thing
against God or his Word, whatsoever tentation there be thereunto by his present
Providence. It is the Sanctuary (where the Fear of God is taught) that sets all
right, Psalm. 34. 11. Psalm. 73. 17, etc.

Eccles. 9. 2. All things come alike to all: There is one event to the
righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the good, so is
the sinner, and he that swears as he that fears an Oath.
Qu. IS it absolutely so that all things come alike to all?
Answ. It is so in regard of those outward things, as riches, poverty; health,
sickness; honor, dishonor; whereof Solomon speaks thus, to show the vanity of
Men that do so excessively desire those things which they may have whom Hell
shall have; yea, in Gospel Times, worse outward things befall the good than the
bad, because God will exercise and adorn their spiritual graces and comforts.

But howsoever the things of this life befalling good and bad men be the same
in themselves, yet if we judge of the works of God by the Word of God; there is
in regard of the Persons of good and bad men a very great difference, both here
and hereafter.

First, here] in regard of the Cause, Concomitants, and the End and Effect.

1. In regard of the Cause and Root out of which outward Dispensations do
arise. For,

1. As for good Men, if they have these outward good things, they have them out
of Gods love, (Jer. 31. 2, 3. 4. 20, 21.) and mercy, as Jacob had his two
bands, Genesis 32. 9, 10. and 33. 5. And if they want them, it is out of love that
they want them (as it is out of love that a Father will not fill his Child's
purse) because they would be like to be worse for them, Prove. 30. 8, 9.

2. As for bad Men, they have great outward enjoyments.

1. From Gods general Providence and Bounty, Psalm. 145. 9, 15, 16. Luke 6. 35.

2. Perhaps also out of respect to the prayers of some good Men to whom they
are called, and Gods good will to those dear Servants of his, Genesis 19. 21. as
Genesis 17. 18, 20. 2 Chronicles. 22. 9.

3. Because God has some great work for them to do; and therefore furnishes
them for it, and enricheth them by it, Isa. 45. 1, to v. 6.

4. Because God will not leave himself without witness, Acts 14. 17.

5. Nor them without Wages, 2 Kings 10. 30. Jer. 27. 6. Verily, they have their
Reward, Mat. 6. 2. Thus for the Fountain.

2. In regard of the things accompanying these outward enjoyments or
afflictions; For,

1. If we speak of good and comfortable things; Good men have,

1. A better Title to them, enjoying them in Christ, the Heir of all things, by
a more special and sweet right than any out of Christ have, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
Mat. 5. 5. who have them out of common kindness rather than Covenant-love.

2. And a gift and such grace from God to use them for Gods glory and their own
comfort as others have not, Eccles. 2. 26.

3. They have also much more content in the enjoyment of them, than worldlings
have, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. Prove. 10. 22. with Eccles. 5. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 6.

2. If we speak evil, that is, of afflicting things and an hard outward
condition, even in that also Good men differ very much from graceless men;

For, In all afflictions, 1. They that fear God have that gracious Presence of
God that others have not; whatever waves arise, yet Christ is in the Ship with
them; and if they be sick (yea, though of the Plague, that others dare not come
near them) yet God will be so near to them, as to make all their beds in their
sickness, turning and tossing, changing and altering it (as the Original word
signifies) for their greater ease, Psalm. 41. 3. Or, If they be in Prison, it is
better with them than with other men. Joseph and other the Kings Prisoners were
bound in the same Prison, but the Lord was with Joseph in a far more gracious
manner than with them, (Genesis 39. 21, 22, 23.) making him the Ruler there, and
all he did to prosper.

2. The Godly, in their distress have such promises as others have not, yea,
even in regard of the things of this life, 1 Timothy 4. 8. as, that he will
strengthen them on their bed of languishing, Psalm. 41. 3. and lay no more upon
them in any kind than they shall be able to bear, and will find out a way for
them, 1 Cor. 10. 13. and make all to work for good unto them, Romans 8. 27. such
Promises are good men's Privileges, Isa. 3. 10, 11. Eccles. 8. 12, 13. for unto
a wicked man God says, What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth?
Psalm. 50. 16.

3. And the Children of God have such Providence also, and workings of Gods
hand for their support and refreshing (however their troubles be very great) as
others have not. Thus Jacob observes and speaks as if he were exceedingly
comforted with the Lords rebuking of Laban in his behalf, Genesis 31. 42.
Jehosaphat and Ahab were in the same Battle, but Ahab though he sought and
thought to avoid the danger by his disguising was slain, and Jehosaphat, by the
hand of Heaven was rescued; for it was the Lord that helped him and moved the
Enemy to depart from him, 2 Chronicles. 18. 29, 31, 33.

4. They have grace also to keep them from that sin into which others (being
pressed with affliction) ^all, Psalm. 125. 3. John 17. 15. David was persecuted
by Saul, and Saul was prosecuted and afflicted by the Philistines; but mark the
difference, Saul goes to a Witch, falls all along in despair, and at length
kills himself: But David could never be drawn to kill Saul, and in all his
persecution God kept up his Spirit. The Rod of that wicked Saul did not so rest
upon him as to deject him, Psalm. 11. 1. or infect him so, as to make him put
forth his hand to wickedness, Psalm. 125. 3. See 1 Samuel 28. 7, 8, 20. and 24.
13. and 26. 9, 10, 11.

5. They have such a Comforter as the world knows not, and that is the Spirit
of God, which dwells in them, and shall be with them, John 14. 16, 17. so
that in whatsoever Prison or pressure they are, therein that Comforter is with
them also; and being the Spirit of Truth, it comforts them still by one Truth
of Scripture or other, Psalm. 119. 50. unto which is added his inward Seal and
Witness with their Spirits, of their good and happy estate, Romans 8. 16, 17.

6. Whereas worldly Men, when their troubles are very great, are sunk in
despair, Gods Children when they are in the highest distress here, have their
highest comfort in their Redeemer most imprinted and engraven upon their
hearts, Job 19. 25, 26, 27. 28.

Thus there is a difference in what accompanies the disasters of good and bad
men.

3. There is a difference in the end, effects and consequences of the condition
of good and evil men; for the afflictions of good men build them up
spiritually, Psalm. 119. 71. and keep them from being condemned with the world,
1 Cor. 11. 32. And are their way to glory, Acts 14. 22. But the prosperity of
the ungodly slays them, Prove. 1. 32. because thereby they sin so much the more,
Psalm. 73. 6, 9. and so lay up for themselves a greater treasure and measure of
wrath against the last day, Romans 2. 4, 5.

These things make a great difference here.

Secondly, If all things be alike here, yet nothing shall be alike hereafter,
Mal. 3. 28. but all unlike; There shall be a different Name, Sheep and Goats,
Blessed and Cursed; a different Hand, right and left; a different Sentence,
Come ye Blessed, and Go ye Cursed; a different Portion, Everlasting Fire, and a
prepared Kingdom: And Lastly, far different Company; the Devil and his Angels,
must be wicked Men's Companions, together with all their wicked Companions in
Sin unrepented of here: But all that truly fear God, shall be with the Lord of
Glory, with the Holy Angels and glorified Saints for evermore, Mat. 25, 34. 41.
1 These. 4. 17, 18.

Eccles. 9. 7, 8, 9. Go thy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine
with a merry heart; for God accepts thy works.

Let thy Garments be always white, and let thine Head lack no Ointment, etc.


Qu. ARe these the words of sensual Men; or, Are they Solomon 's wise and
serious Sayings?
Answ. 1. They are not to be taken as the words of sensual Men, devising,
presenting, and allowing to themselves the utmost carnal pleasure; for though
the the things spoken of be so fully set forth in a way pleasing to nature,
that they seem to be the very same things that an Epicure would have, if he
might have his will; yet these following things may be observed which make for
the contrary. For,

1. Carnal and voluptuous Men do not use to speak altogether in such a language
as is here used:

As 1. Laying this down, in the first place, that what they make merry withal
shall be truly their own [thy Bread, thy Wine], but often they eat and drink, and
dance with what they can get of other men's, as 1 Samuel 30. 16. 1 Kings 21. 7,
16. Amos 4. 1.

2. Nor do they build their mirth upon this ground, that God accepts their
works; perhaps, they may think so in a way of presumption, (as Psalm. 50. 21.)
but not in true construction, or upon any real and solid proof of Gods
acceptance; as will appear by opening these words [God accepts thy works]
which may be taken two ways.

1. In a generality, and in way of supposition; as if he had said, It appears
that God favors thee, blesses and prospers thee in thy employments and
enjoyments; therefore Be merry.

Or 2. Particularly, and in a way of approbation, in regard of the cheerful use
of the Creatures here spoken of: [now] God accepts thy works, that is, He is
well-pleased with what thou now do, whilst thou eatest and drinkest, and
make the best of these earthly enjoyments; as He was pleased with Esther's
Feasts and royal Apparel; even these outward works God accepts when his glory
is respected in them, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

Now, which way soever the words be taken, carnal and graceless men look not to
Gods acceptance.

3. Whereas [the days of the life of thy Vanity] is here once and again
mentioned, carnal and jovial men, (enjoying the fullness of outward things do
not look on this life as a life of Vanity, but rather as a state of Felicity.
Solomon's aim in all this Book, is to prove all things below to be Vanity; and
when he has said all, prosperous worldlings will not be persuaded it is so.

4. Here is laboring under the Sun, and a Precept conjoined, ver. 10. to do
that which there is occasion to do, 1 Samuel 7. 10. with our might. Now Epicures
are rather voluptuous than vigorous, and do not use to impose upon themselves
hard labor, though thereby they might fare better.

Thus it may appear by the words spoken, that sensual and brutish men do not
speak them.

2. It may further appear, because if Solomon had inserted this as spoken by
men given up wholly to earthly delights, and encouraging themselves in the
pursuit of carnal pleasure, then it is very probable he would have joined with
it some rebuke or other of it, and caution against it, as chap. 11. 9. but
instead of that, he is ever and anon mentioning this joyful use of our
enjoyments as the best thing that is to be had from them, that is, while the
joy is joined with, and made subservient unto the serving of God in our places,
which in the tenth Verse is intimated, and still to be supposed; See chap. 2.
24. and 3. 12, 13, 22. and 5. 18. and 8. 15.

Quest. What difference is there then between Epicures and Frolicks; and Men
that fear God in the free use of outward Enjoyments?
Answ. 1. A good Man is afraid to please himself with that (though he long
never so much after it) which he conceives is not so well come by; as we see in
David that would not meddle with the waters of the Well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel
23. 16, 17. But wicked and sensual Men, drink the Wine of the condemned, that
is, they make merry, not with their own Wine, but that which they have procured
by Fines and Amercements laid on Men unjustly condemned, nor do they use their
own clothes, but the clothes of others laid to pledge, Amos 2. 8.

2. An Epicure uses the Creature so as to exclude and shut out the Service of
God: when God calls to mourning he goes to feasting, Isa. 22. 12. But a good
Man so as to assist Service; when Jehosaphat has all abundance, his heart is
lift up in the ways of God, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6.

3. A Sensual Man uses the good things he has, so as to nourish sin, feeding
himself like an Horse, and then neighing after his Neighbors Wife, Jer. 5. 8.
but good Men so, as to prevent and reason against it (as Joseph did, Genesis 39.
8, 9.) because God has so mercifully provided for them, Ezra 9. 13, 14.

4. Epicures mind and make much of themselves, but quite forget the affliction
of Joseph, Amos 6. 6. But good Men when they prepare most for themselves, are
mindful of those for whom nothing is prepared, Nehem. 8. 10. or, if they be
wanting this way, they say (as the fullyfed Lepers when their Brethren were
under so great want) We do not well, 2 Kings 7. 8, 9.

5. An Epicure uses the Comforts of the Creature, so as to dissweeten Heaven,
and so as that the things of God have no relish with them, Job 21. 14, 15.
Psalm. 119. 70. But a good Man, so as to sweeten the Earth, and to give an allay
to the bitterness here below, Prove. 31. 6, 7.

Hitherto of the Answer of this Question Negatively. These are not the Words of
Sensual Men.

2. (To Answer it Affirmatively) I say, They are Solomon's own words, yea, the
words of the Spirit of God by which he wrote this Book, which may appear, and
be proved diverse ways.

1. From the cause of such an use of outward things as Solomon here speaks of;
for it proceeds from a special Gift of God, Eccles. 5. 19. which God gives
to Men good in his sight, and that in distinction from Sinners, Chap. 2. 24,
26. It cannot therefore but be good; yea, good and comely. Chap. 5, 18.

2. From the things to which this cheerful use of the Creatures in all this
Book is opposed; It is not opposed to a moderate use (for this also must be
moderate though free) but to a covetous, niggardly, sordid and vexatious
enjoyment of them, which is indeed a notenjoyment of them. This we see, chap.
2. 22, 23. where the vexation and sorrow is put down first, and such counsel as
this after, ver. 24 So also chap. 5. 17, 18.

3. From the thing aimed at in this hortatory permission, and (seemingly)
carnal counsel; which is not,

1. To shut out spiritual joy, (which is of all other the most necessary and
the most noble, Luke 10. 20. Romans 14. 17. Phil. 4. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 8. for Solomon
says otherwhere, that a merry heart (which proceeds especially from the
sight of Gods Countenance, Psalm. 2. 7, 8. and from a good conscience), is a
continual Feast, Prove. 15. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

2. Nor is it Solomon's mind here to shut out sorrow and moderate mourning; for
he has before (chap. 7. 2, 3, 4.) preferred sadness before laughter, and the
house of mourning before the house of mirth.

3. Nor does he allow any such Creature-content, or extent of rejoicing
therein, as will hinder a man in his Calling here; for he would have a man to
be a mighty Doer in it, ver. 10. nor such as will make a man secure and
unmindful of the last day; for that he declares himself against, chap. 11. 9.
and 12. 14.

But His intent is only to show that a man must neither affect, nor send for
sadness by cares, fears, or discontents with such providence as do not please
him; nor be therefore sad and dismal, because he will not make use of the
Creatures that would make him cheerful: That therefore which he advises to,
is, to make the best of the world, to afford our selves what is to be had from
it for our more comfortable living in our Calling, and, for the generality, and
when God calls us not away from it by special occasions of abstinence and
mourning, to delight our selves in, and refresh our selves with, the great
goodness of God in these outward things, Nehem. 9. 25. Genesis 18. 5.

4. From the manner of Solomon's speaking here, which may put us in mind of
diverse limitations, whereby what is said here is to be regulated and restrained.

As 1. In regard of the things here named and to be rejoiced in, that they
should be our own (as was said before) that is honestly come by; Not stolen
Bread or Wine, Prove. 9. 17. Amos 4. 1. Not Apparel pulled off others backs,
Mica. 2. 8. Not a strange Woman, but ones own Wife whom he loves, and ought to
love and take all pleasure in; of which Solomon speaks other-where, with larger
and more express allowances than are mentioned here, Prove. 5. 15, 19. yet does
he not mean that we should so solace and make much of our selves with that
which is our own as Nabal did, 1 Samuel 25. 11. grudging others any part in it
who need it, Prove. 31. 20. and may justly expect it; for Solomon's Precept
afterward is, Cast thy Bread upon the Waters, Give a Portion to seven, and
also to eight, chap. 11. 1, 2.

2. A limitation is here to be understood, in regard of the measure and manner
of using joyfully our enjoyments; for Solomon is an enemy to excess, Prove. 23.
20, 21. Albeit therefore he mentions here a liberal use of the Creatures, yet
he allows not an unlimited use; yea, This is a certain Truth that no man can
use the Creatures joyfully that uses them excessively: for then, they
over-charge the heart, distemper the body, and trouble the conscience, Luke 21.
34. Prove. 23. 29. Mark 6. 21, 22, 26. We must not think that Solomon gives such
a liberty to others as he would not take himself; Now though he himself gave
himself to search, find, and take a trial of the utmost of Creature-delights;
yet still he kept his acquaintance with wisdom, chap. 2. 3, 9. the Rules and
Bounds whereof therefore, he gives no other man leave (here) to transgress.

3. And a limitation may be here gathered from the time, expressed thus, The
days of the life of thy Vanity which he That is, God.
has given thee under the Sun; whereby he does not mean that since a man can
enjoy these transitory comforts only in this poor and vain life; therefore he
should live like an Epicure with them, Isa. 22. 12, 13. but that, since in this
life only we can have the comfort of them (as it is, ver. 6.) therefore we
should take it while we may have it, and sweeten the days of our vanity with
it; And withal minding us, that He speaks all this, not as if there were not a
greater Happiness to be looked after (there where there shall be no Sun, Rev.
22. 5. yea here, under a better Sun, Mal. 4. 2. Cant. 2. 3.) but that, as to
our outward state here in this world, there is nothing better than to walk in
the fear of the Lord (for that is the great thing that Solomon supposes and
proposes in this Book, chap. 12. 13.) and with laboring in our Callings
(which here he expresses) and (thus walking and that we may the better thus
walk) take that lawful comfort from the Creatures which is to be had from them;
so that I think Solomon means no more than what is said elsewhere, viz. That we
should serve the Lord with joy, in the abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

Eccles. 5. 5. Better it is that thou should not Vow, than that thou should
Vow and not pay.
Qu. SInce Solomon gives such a liberty for not Vowing, it may be demanded what
use there is especially of Vowing, and what Grounds there are in Gospel Times?
Answ. The answering of this requires the distinguishing of Vows; which are of
three Sorts.

1. Ceremonial], which (according to the will of God, Psalm. 76, 11.) were made,
and were, by express Command, to be paid by the People of God in the Old
Testament; and in those Times and to that People, were a part of the Worship
See Ainsw. on Levit. 27. 1.
of God; because the matter of them was (then) commanded of God, as the vowing
of Sacrifices, Psalm. 66. 13. and Presents to be brought to the place of the
Name of the Lord of Hosts, the Mount of Zion, Isa. 18. 7. Such Vows as these,
or the Vowing of such things as these are now abrogated: these being Times of
Reformation, and another sort of Church-administration, Heb. 9. 10.

2. Moral], as to walk in obedience to God, Psalm. 119. 106. and to perform the
Duties required in his Word, both in the Old and New Testament, which we are
apt to let slip, but may hold the faster by helping our infirmity by a Vow: of
which nature the Vow of Baptism is, and subsequent Covenant renewings for the
better performing of it.

3. Ministerial, auxiliary, subservient], wherein the matter is not (as it is
in the moral Vow) a thing commanded, but some indifferent thing; as to give so
much to the poor, to abstain from such or such Meats or Drinks, in both which
God gives a liberty; yet there may be need of restraining a man's self in the
latter, that is, in this or that Creature wherein he uses to exceed, and to
bind himself in the former, that is, in devoting some sum to the poor, that he
may not be so defective as nature (without such a bond) uses to be, and is
still like to be, in the Duty of Charity.

Now for the lawfulness, expediency and suitableness of a Vow to the will of
God, these two latter ways, that is, for me to Vow, to do what God requires,
and to use all helps that will truly and in reality assist me to do it the
better, there are these grounds.

1. There is a Ground in nature there having been the custom of vowing in all
Nations, because nature has implanted this in Men, when they desire, or have
obtained any special benefit from God, to testify their thankfulness in some
voluntarily-vowed retribution. Me Tabula sacer votiva paries indicat humida
suspendis^e vestimenta potenti Maris Deo. Hor. 1. Carm. Od. 5.
This we find in the Mariners, who being put in fear of the true God, did not
only offer a Sacrifice to him for the present, but did also make Vows, whereby
they did some way or other engage themselves to him for the time to come Jona
1. 16.

2. A further Ground of this and ^ better, will appear from Scripture:

As 1. From Isa. 19. 21. They shall vow a Vow unto the Lord and perform it* It
is spoken of the Egyptians, that should be called into the Church, and so has
respect, especially, unto Gospel Times* Acts 8. 27, 37, 38.

2. From diverse Passages in the Psalms As 1. Psalm. 50. 14.] where God sets
aside and sleights (as it were) things ceremonial, ver. 8. 13. and yet speaks
of Vows, as things of another nature, and of perpetual use, as the service of
thanksgiving is, Heb. 13. 15.

2. Psalm. 65. 1.] Unto thee shall the Vow be performed, where the words
following, Unto thee all flesh shall come, ver. 2. seems to carry it covertly
to the Church of the Gentiles, and so to Gospel Times.

3. Psalm. 76. 11.] Vow and pay, Bring Presents to him that ought to be feared;
so that the fear of God infers Vowing (in some sense) and bringing Presents
unto God, as even nature it self teaches Heathens to bring Presents to those
whom they fear, reverence and magnify, and so to God himself when they are
once converted; See Genesis 32. 18. 2 Chronicles. 32. 23. 1 Kings 10. 25. Isa. 18. 7.

But concerning these Scriptures, this is to be observed:

1. That as they express a ceremonial Duty as the matter of the Vow, so they
belong to the Jews and not to us; as when Sacrifices were vowed, or the giving
of this or that to the use of the Temple. It is observed that their voluntary
Sacrifices were for the most part vowed things Calv. in Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
; See Levit. 7. 16. Psalm. 66. 13, 14. and 116. 17, 18. Judge. 11. 31. And diverse
things they Vowed, on special occasions for Gods use, and for the service that
was then in use, (as Numb. 21. where it is supposed that the persons being
destroyed, their Goods were confiscate to the Lord, as Josh. 6. 19. so 1 Samuel
1. 11.) such things concerned those times.

2. As they implied and contained in the substance and end of them, a moral
Duty, so they are left on recotd for our direction and imitation; not in regard
of the specialty which they vowed As in Sacrifices without which their
thank-Vows were never paid in public, Moller in Psalm. 56. 13.
, but in regard of the generality, and that real duty, which in their vowing
was intended, as to strengthen our Faith in God for any special thing that we
have cause to desire, which seems to have occasioned that Vow, Numb. 21. 1, 2.
because it was so sad a thing that a Canaanite should take any of Israel
captive; wherein they might think God would relieve them, when they renounced
their own private gain if they got the better, and vowed they would do that
which was so agreeable to the will of God, Josh. 6. 17. 24. as concerning those
cursed Canaanites, and whereby (if they did as God would have them do at
Jericho, Josh. 6. 19. God should be (in a sort) a gainer; unto this confirming
of our Faith, we may add also inciting and assisting of our selves in the Duty
of thanksgiving: Of this, that Vowing that we read so often of in the Psalms
Calv. Instit. l. 40. S. 4.
is to be understood; and unto these two ends, the Vow of Jacob, Jepthah,
Hannah, and others Psalm. 132. 2, 3. with 2 Samuel 7. 2. So 1 Chro. 4. 10.
may be referred.

So that the thing which is to be collected from the Scriptures that speak of
Vowing in the Old Testament, is,

1. As to the Jews; that they were to Vow (such of them as had just cause See
Perkins Cas. c. 14. Howbeit not all Jews had a command to Vow in the Old
Testament, but only such as had just cause to make a Vow, otherwise they had
liberty to abstain from Vowing. Deuteronomy. 23. 22.
to do it) and (absolutely) to perform their Vows, and bring Presents to God
according to the prescribed way of God, that was in use and in force in those
times.

2. As to us; to look to the substance, that is, to vow obedience to God in our
Baptism (which is a thing that belongs to all); And to Vow otherwise (as we
find just occasion upon due deliberation) in the way and according to the Rules
of the New Testament, that is, for our help in doing the will of God,
testifying of our thankfulness; yea, the Jews also were to look principally
unto that substance of obedience which is required both in the Old and New
Testament; for God never regarded their outward Sacrifices as they were a
complement, (Jer. 7. 22. Micah 6. 6, 7, 8.) but as in them they made a
Covenant, (Psalm. 50. 5.) offered and engaged themselves in all holy obedience
that they might become his humble Servants for the great favor and mercy he
afforded them; In this David is plain, when he says, O Lord, I am thy Servant,
Psalm. 116. 16.

To illustrate this in one instance; Jacob (to help his Faith, when he was in a
strait, and to assist and declare his thankfulness beforehand) Voweth three
things. The First is, Moral, Then shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28. 20, 21.
The Second is, Ceremonial, This Stone shall be Gods House; that is, a place
holy and consecrated to God for his Altar-worship, Genesis 35. 7. The Third is,
Ministerial, auxiliatory, testificatory; that is, a voluntary engagement to
declare his thankfulness in giving without fail unto God the Tenth of all that
which God should give to him.

The First of these belongs to us who are bound to make every special mercy a
new obligation, accession, and attractive to assist us (unto whom God can never
be dear enough) in loving the Lord and cleaving to him, Psalm. 116. 1, 2.
whereunto it is not unlawful for us, but may be useful to us, to bind our
selves by a special Vow upon special occasion; or by a special renewing of our
Baptismal-Covenant before God, and re-obliging our selves thereunto.

The Second, of building an Altar and offering Sacrifices, belonged to the
Times of the Old Testament.

As to the Third, that which concerns us therein, is, to testify our
thankfulness when God frees us from our great fears, and grants our earnest
desires, by honoring the Lord with our Riches, and by Vowing (if we be
convinced that such an help is needful to prevent our trifling with God) to
give some considerable part of our Estates to such uses as whereby God may have
it most. Now if we shall thus Vow and engage our selves beforehand in a kind
of conditional way, we must always see that our meaning be not to indent with
God, as if he should have nothing from us unless we have what we need from him
(God should have been Jacob's God though he had not granted his request); but
it must be to wrestle with God the better, and to strengthen our weak faith as
concerning the hearing of our prayer; it being an argument to move the Lord to
do for us, or (to speak more properly) to persuade our selves and make our
selves believe he will do for us, because we are sincerely willing to bind our
selves to do for him: Not because our doing is any thing to him, (Job 35. 7.
Psalm. 16. 2.) but because we have cause to hope that God will crown that grace
of his in us whereby we are willing to do things of moment for him, and are
careful to provide for his glory when he provides for our comfort.

Hitherto of Grounds of Vowing from Nature and Scripture; There may be added
another Ground, viz.

3. From Reason agreeable both to Nature and Scripture; For Vows rightly made,
as they are great Declarations of our reverent thoughts of God, so also they
may be great assistances to us in the Duties we owe unto him, inasmuch as they
proceed from weighty causes (for light matters are not the matter of a Vow),
and the Bond thereof is so strait a Bond, that Conscience trembles to
transgress the bounds to which by a Solemn Vow, we have confined our selves.
It Is good Discipline that keeps all in order, and Vows discreetly made are a
Christians voluntary Discipline, and the hedge of Holiness * Votum est Sepes
Sanctimoniae.
, whereby he restrains himself from extravagancies; as on the other side, he
lays by them a willing constraint on himself, to do those important Duties
which nature otherwise is untoward unto and treacherous in. Now if a Vow be an
assistance, (truly and justly so) it is, as it were, demanded in the Duty it
assisteth, which supposes and imposes the getting of all helps for the better
performance of it. Yea, This Vowing has so near and so helpful a conjunction
and consociation with Prayer, that they pass in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
under the same Name Neder, (...), Votum.
; the Reason whereof is, because when we desire any thing more ardently, we are
still ready to add a promise to the prayer that in that way we may look to have
it the more hopefully. Hence it is that David says, Thou (O God) have heard my
Vows, Psalm. 61. 5. that is, Prayers made with Vows, and which were afterward
paid with thanksgiving, Psalm. 116. 12, 17, 18.

By these things the lawfulness of a Vow appears, and that there is therein an
agreeableness with the will of God revealed in his Word. Now,

If the Question further be, Whether there be any command for this Vowing?

To this I Answer, that, though there be everywhere commands for the performing
of lawful Vows when they were made, yet I find not any-where (no not in the Old
Testament where Vows are most mentioned) any very clear Command for the making
of them Ad Ceremonialia illa Vota non quidem ex mandato tenebantur, erant enim
libera and spontanea; sed tamen certo Verbo prescriptum erat, quae and quomodo
Deus in hoc genere sibi voveri vellet. Chemnit. Exam. p. 3. c. 60.
, but still they are spoken of as voluntary things; only there is one place
where the expression looks likest to a Command, to wit, Psalm. 76. 11. Vow and
pay; To which two Things may be said.

1. That it is not a Command or Imposition, but a Supposition, Vow and pay,
that is, If thou Vow, be sure to pay. As when it is said, Be ye angry and sin
not, Ephesians. 4. 26. It is not a Command to be angry, but to see to it, if there
be anger, that it be not sinful anger; and though the repetition in the latter
part of the Verse, Let all that be round about him bring Presents to him, seem
to be indeed a Precept, yet that also may be thus understood: If thou do Vow
the presenting of any thing to him, then do not dally with him, but be sure to
bring it to him (as Jacob said, I will surely give the Tenth, Genesis 28. 22.)
whereof the Reason follows, for he ought to be feared; and therefore must not
be mocked, which is agreeable to that in Eccles. 5. 7. Be not vain in thy Vows
so as not to provide for the performance of them, but fear thou God.

2. That which may be said to that Scripture, Mr. Perkins lays down thus; If
David speaks of Moral Duties, then Perkins Cases of Vows, page 97.
the Command concerns every Man; because the thing commanded is a part of Gods
Worship: but if it be meant of Ceremonial Duties, it binds the Jews only;
howhowbeit not all, but only such as had just cause to Vow; for otherwise they
had liberty to abstain from Vowing, Deuteronomy. 23. 22.

Unto which Answer of his, this also may be annexed, That if it be taken for a
Precept to such Persons as have just cause to Vow for Moral Ends, then (though
the matter of the Vow be different in the Old and New Testament) yet in regard
of the End, it is resolved into a Moral Vow, and so may be extended unto the
Times of the Old and New Testament; but then it must be considered, that (being
so taken) it is not a Precept in the generality binding all Men, but only such
and such Men as have just cause to Vow for the help of their infirmity in the
doing of that which God requires.

So that the substance which can be gathered from that Scripture in reference
to Gospel Times, is, that it binds Men to bind themselves in a generality to do
the will of God according to their Baptismal Vow; and further, that it binds
them to Vow that in indifferent things, which they find necessary for
themselves for their better fulfilling of the will of God, as namely, for the
thankful acknowledgment of the goodness of God in great and glorious
deliverances, such as that Psalm speaks of, ver. 10.

And if the Words be taken thus, that is, for Vowing obedience, and Vowing
assistance; the obedience that God requires, and that assistance which (as to
us) the obedience requires (according to the Rules of the Old Testament to the
Jews, and the order and way of the New Testament, to us) I see not but they
are, and continue still a Command for Vowing Vota Moralia eadem sunt in veteri
and novo Testamento, Chemmit. exam. par. 3. c. 60.
; I say, a Command extended to all in regard of the Moral Obedience, and to all
again in regard of the necessary assistance for that Obedience; I mean, in the
generality, but not this or that assistance in the particular; which though
this or that Man may be bound to, in regard of himself, because he cannot be so
obedient, unless he take up and bind upon himself such an help; yet other Men
are free that need it not, or that can better help themselves otherwise.

In short, (if I could be brief in a Question exposed to so many interposings)
A Vow or Votive Promise is twofold, General and Personal.

1. General] in, and in the renewing of, our Baptismal Covenant; as the Jews
were bound in, and did often renew their Circumcision-Covenant (which was the
same, for the substance of it, with ours in Baptism; the Covenant of Grace
being ever the same) I say, they did often renew their Circumcision-Covenant;
Namely, under Moses Exodus 24. 7.
, Joshua Josh. 24. 25.
, Jehoash 2 King. 11. 17.
, Asa 2 Chro. 15. 12.
, Hezekiah 2 Chro. 29. 10.
, Josiah 2 Chro. 34. 31, 32.
; yea, and in their Sacrifices generally (though sometimes it might be done
more expressly and eminently) they that were Saints, Gods favorites, and that
weighed well what they did, made a Covenant with him, and put to their Seal (as
it were) that they would be his faithful Allies.

Hereunto, there is subordinate, yea, in this is included, another general
Bond, to wit, to use (as has been often said before) all needful helps for the
performing of that Obedience and Duty, to which there is a prae-ingagement in
the Covenant of Baptism, and a re-ingagement in the renewings thereof. That we
are and are to be thus bound, may appear from the Exposition of the Ten
Commandments, and that extent that is ascribed to every Precept, to wit, that
Vid. Rivet Explic. Decal. p. 6.
where any sin is forbidden, there the cause and occasion of that sin is
forbidden also, as in the forbidding of Adultery, Riot and Luxury Jer. 5. 8.
is therewithal forbidden; and on the contrary, where a Duty is commanded,
whatsoever is necessary for the performance of that Duty, is therein
comprehended, as when the first and second Commandment require the worshipping
of the true God according to his Word, it requires the forbearing of that
Communion with Idolaters that will hinder it Deuteronomy. 7. 4.
, and to join our selves with those with whom we shall have opportunity and
assistance for 2 Cor. 6. 14.
it, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 16.

This may serve to show that every Man is tied to that without which he shall
not be able to do the will of God as he may if he take that help; as Joseph may
be said to be bound to forbear (as he did, Genesis 39. 10.) the company of his
tempting Mistress; not that it was a sin (in it self) to be with her, but if he
had not avoided that, he would have been in more danger of lying by her.

There is, besides this General,

2. A Personal solemn Promise or Vow that may be made, of using such or such an
help, (being a bodily exercise, or something in it self indifferent) needful
for such or such a person, which yet another may not need; And this it concerns
those only to betake themselves unto, who are upon good and serious
considerations, convinced of the need of it for their proper help, and that
there will be a want in their Obedience to God if they bind not themselves to
it; yet herein they are so to limit themselves in regard of the thing and the
time as their necessity, with respect to the Moral Obedience they owe to God,
requires; avoiding the censuring of any others that take a greater liberty, in
whom things are not so circumstantiated as in themselves.

Unto all that has been spoken in this Question, (which by reaching out for
further information and satisfaction has been so tedious) I shall for
conclusion of the Question whether Vows be required, add this distinction, viz.
That in a Vow there are two Things.

1. An implicit but a sincere purpose of heart to do what is required of God,
and what we need as an help thereunto, Psalm. 119. 57.

2. An explicit formal Vow in the presence of God that we will certainly do it,
Genesis 28. 20, 22.

The former of these is so necessary, that to desire any grace of God, without
a purpose to use the means which God puts into our hands for the obtaining
of it; or to seek any good from God (especially any special mercy) without Vid.
Ames Cas. c. 16. lib. 4. quest. 2.
a sincere intention to serve and glorify him, if we obtain it from him, is no
less than (in a sort) to mock God.

As for the latter more express and solemn Vowing, though so serious a thing be
to be done with all good advice, and in matters of greater moment; yet that it
is lawful, and sometimes expedient, and that we cannot do better than put such
a Bridle upon our selves to restrain us from those un-approved things unto
which our natures are fiercely carried, this, I say, is ackowledged Ri^^
Explic. Decal. p. 101. Calv. Instit. l. 40. c. 13. S. ^.
. Now why it should not be required of us also, when, in true judgment,
conscience and experience, we find the need of it, and that our weakness
exacteth it of us, I (for my part) do not see; yet, because I would be far from
imposing any thing that God imposes not, I leave it to those conscientious
Christians to consider of, that are under the convictions of the need they have
of it, and the help they have by it.

That which remains, is, to answer diverse Objections.

Obj. 1.] The Old Testament gives a full liberty not to Vow, Deuteronomy 23. 22. And
there is no mention of a Vow in the New Testament, save only of Paul 's, (Acts
18. 18. and 21. 23, 24, 26.) which appertains to the Old-Testament-Service,
and which he did undergo and yield to, not as required of God, but as willing
to condescend to the Jews, in a thing wherein at that time there was an
indifferency, for the winning of them the better to the Gospel, by showing his
respect to the Law of which they were so zealous: What then is there in
Scripture binding to Vowing?
Answ. 1. For the Old Testament, it was showed before how often they entered
into Covenant with God, which was (for substance) but a pursuance of their
Circumcision-Covenant wherein they were all bound. As for Psalm. 76. 11. it has
been spoken to already. Now to that in Deuteronomy. 23. 22. If thou shall forbear to
Vow, it shall be no sin to thee; this Answer is given So Al worth in Deuteronomy. 23.
22.
: It shall be no sin, that is, not so great a sin to forbear Vowing as to break
a Vow, as it is expounded, Eccles. 5. 5. And so it is like that, John 15. 22.
otherwise, Negligence and Unthankfulness is sure sinful, Luke 17. 17, 18.

2. As to the New Testament, It Is true; There is no express Precept for Vowing,
but the Question is not of the Name, but of the thing; And so it is answered*
Sharpii Curs. Theolog. De Vot. Quest. 1. Col. 1932.
, that for Moral Vows, they are contained in the Moral Law (as helps for the
better performing of all the Duties thereof) which Law continuing in the New
Testament, the necessary assistances to our obeying thereof are therein
included. The principal part of Jacobs Vow (which he saw he needed and which
God accepted and answered) was plainly Moral, viz. then shall the Lord be my
God, and why we should not say so, and Vow so, upon a special mercy received or
to be received, Who can tell? As to Ministerial Vows of this or that outward
thing they are of an inferior nature, and have been spoken to before, as
things wherein there is a greater liberty, and yet from which (as the case may
stand) we are not altogether set free.

Obj. 2.] But why should any Vow be made for the keeping of Gods Moral
Commandments, when it is impossible for us to observe them?
Answ. 1. We see David vowing that, Psalm. 119. 106.

2. Calvin Answered Instit. 1. 40. c. 13. S. 6.
very remarkably, that such Vows are made under and with respect unto the
Covenant of grace, wherein is contained the aid of the Spirit of God for the
keeping of all the Commandments of God acceptably; and also, remission of sins,
when we cannot keep them perfectly. This may serve to answer what can be
objected against our Baptismal Covenant (wherein all are required of God to
engage) which is to keep Gods holy will and Commandments all our days; As also
against the subsequent renewings of the said Covenant.

Obj. 3.] But if all be vowed in Baptism, then the thing is done, What need any
more? The repeating thereof may be counted superfluous.
Answ. Not so; for though by that first Covenant, and by Gods Commands of
Obedience in it, we be sufficiently and eminently bound to our Duty, yet (in
regard of our selves) we are not so assistingly obliged as we may be by our own
additional engagements; I do not mean that we can add unto, or augment the
Divine Bond, but only that it is by our Vow more acknowledged of us, and by
every new engagement, more fastened upon us, and we gird closer to our selves
the Lords Bond, which, without that, hangs looser. If I consider my self, in
regard of God giving such and such Precepts, then the matter stands thus; He
binds and I am bound: But if I look on my self with respect to my after-vowing
to observe these Precepts, then the matter stands thus; I am bound, and I also
bind: and so God may say, if I fail, not only I condemn thee out of my own
mouth, having given thee a Law which thou have broken, but out of thine own
mouth (O thou evil, and unfaithful Servant) because thou did resume that Law,
and lay it down to thine own self and soul, and yet have transgressed it; as 1
King. 2. 42. Thou said, that is, thou closedst in it, which is done more by
an after-vow.

Hence Joshua when the people were ready and resolute to engage, says, Ye are
Witnesses against your selves, Josh. 24. 21, 22. to wit, in binding themselves
to what God bound them; so that more weight lies upon us to keep us from
lifting up our souls to vanity, and to restrain us from exorbitancy by our own
engagements; and another Argument and Motive is added to our walking uprightly;
In regard of our selves therefore, they are not superfluous; no more than it is
that a Debtor renews his Bond, though he were bound as strongly in the old
Bond as in the new; for by a new Writing and Sealing there is a new sense of his
Debt, and instigation to the payment of it. And in regard of others, Vows of
Thankfulness to God set before the eyes of Men, may confirm their Faith in
regard of the Mercy for which we testify our thankfulness, and may also be for
their imitation, and to teach them to glorify God when they receive the like
favors from him; Besides, that it is not to be forgotten that when Infants are
baptized, they are not able to conceive of any Covenant; and therefore had need
to have it taught them, and understandingly and voluntarily (perhaps many years
after) to bind themselves in their own Persons to the performance of that
Covenant, unto which notwithstanding they were bound when they were baptized.

Obj. 4.] God loves willingness, and that which is done freely: now Vows bind,
and take away freedom.
Answ. The willingness and liberty that God likes, and that we should always
retain, is a liberty that is opposed to constraint, 1 Pet. 5. 2.

Obj. But the Apostle says, not of necessity, 2 Cor. 9. 7. and Vowing lays a
necessity, and leaves no liberty of going back, Judge. 11. 35.
Answ. The necessity there spoken of, is the same with constraint; for it is
opposed to what a Man purposes in his heart, that is, to what a Man chooses by
his own free will, upon some consideration or other by which he is
overpowered; Now, albeit when a Man has vowed, there is a necessity of
payment (as of a Debt to which a Man has willingly engaged himself) yet there
is not such a necessity as wherein there is an enforcement; for it is supposed
he is willing to pay that binds himself to pay; nay, it proves him the more
willing; for therefore he binds himself, because he is willing to do what he is
in danger not to do unless he tie himself to do it. He that is unwilling to do
a thing, must needs be more unwilling to bind himself to do it. We do good
works willingly, and yet we are Debtors to the Spirit (Romans 8. 22.) and so
bound to do them necessarily. The necessity of Debt, is not against liberty,
but of coaction. When it is said (in the Original) (...), Necessitate them to
come in, Luke 14. 23. it implies not any violent constraint, but over-powering
Reasons and Convictions drawing in the Will: Paul says, A necessity is laid
upon me, 1 Cor. 9. 16. and yet says immediately after, If I do this thing
willingly, I have a reward, ver. 18. else not, if against my Will; but
howsoever, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me, that is, I lie
under a necessitating dispensation. There is a necessity to serve God, and yet
His service is perfect freedom, 2 Cor. 3. 17. And there is this difference
between necessity and coaction, that the coaction is with grief, but the
necessity if the Vow be well made (as Jepthah's was not; and therefore required
not performance but repentance; I say, the necessity) is undergone, by a good
heart, with joy. Now, As for Ministerial Vows of external exercises or
assistances, there is no necessity in regard of the matter of them, the thing
being in it self free, but in regard of the Subject, there is a necessity of
performance incumbent after the Vow made. And yet what was indifferent before,
remains indifferent, even to him, in regard of his judgment (and therefore he
may not condemn others if they do what he must not do, or do not what, by his
Vow, he must do); only, in regard of the use, he lies under his voluntary Vow,
and so cannot take that liberty that another man may.

Obj. 5.] He that vows, lays a snare for himself, and brings upon himself a
double guilt, if he fail: the one, in that he does not that which he conceives
himself in duty bound to do; the other, in that he has broken a Vow whereby he
tied himself to do it.
Answ. 1. Every Man is to be so well advised before he enter into a Vow, as to
see it to be a thing that will help him, not hamper him; and a Spur to prick
and prompt him to his Duty, not a Sword to wound him.

2. The first of these Guilts, to wit, in that he does not the Duty, (whereof
he was convinced, and therefore Vowed) is not to be imputed to his Vow, but to
his security and carelessness in not doing his Duty, which is heightened indeed
because it continues after a Vow.

3. It cannot be avoided but that in such Cases there will be a double Guilt,
(which falls out also in the Vow of Baptism to which we are all bound); But
then, we must know that a thing good in it self and acceptable to God (as the
Vow here supposed to be) and also which may be of excellent use Utilitatem suam
habent eximiam, quod nimirum hominis animum in bono confirmant, and a male
agendo nos cohibent, Baldw. Cas. De Votis, p. 281.
, is not to be condemned or laid aside, because of an evil that by accident
adheres, or rather is fastened by our own fault and the tentation of the Devil
to it. Things in themselves good are not to be laid aside, because of an
accidental evil; for then even our eating and drinking must be let alone, or at
least, Physic (which is more like Vowing) because there is an easy and
frequent mis-acting therein: Rather therefore, when we fail in such a Case,
there should be a double fault, a double acknowledgment, a double repentance,
in which way a double pardon may be hoped for; and it may be better hoped for,
because the fault is doubled by means of that Vow wherein we bound our selves
out of a willingness to do the will of God.

4. It is here to be considered, that as there may be a Snare on the one hand,
that is, in Vowing, so there lies also a Tentation on the other side, that is,
in leaving a Man's self loose. To shun Covenants and Engagements, is a secret
contributer to Security; for then the idle heart is apt to say, If I go on as
before, though I be defective in Duty (as all are) yet I do not add to it
breach of Covenant; for I make none; as profane people use to say: Though I be
loose and run out at times, yet I am no Hypocrite; for I make no such
Profession as they do: But such may know that it is the mark of a dishonest
Man, to be loath to renew his Bond, because thereby he knows he shall be tied
more than before, and if he break, be more blamed. Creditors like those Men
betrer that are ready to renew their Bonds, though they fail after, because it
shows a good nature, an honest mind, and a willingness to pay if they were
able. Nor is it in vain to Vow though we fail; for even because of that failing
a gracious person is so ashamed and confounded The breach of our Vow will so
pierce our hearts, as ^^ fortify us against ^^w Assau^^s. Dod Sermon. on Pr^.
28. 13.
, that he does at last set himself to do what he has Vowed to do with a
greater confirmation of mind, and so makes good his Vow at last, the rather
because he has not made it good before; as he that has often promised to pay
a Debt and failed, even for very shame pays at last.

Obj. 6.] If it be required of God to make a Vow about things indifferent, then
it is a sin not to make it; But who will say, it is a sin, not to Vow to
obstain from such Meat or Drink, or not to Vow, after the receiving of a
special mercy, to give, in way of thankfulness, such or such a portion to the
Poor, or good uses?
Answ. It Is true, that things indifferent (as indifferent) are not the proper
matter of a Vow, but only as they are a needful and an apt assistance for the
doing of that which is not indifferent, but required of God as a Christians
Duty. Such Vows are not made by the necessity of any Precept, in regard of the
things themselves, but upon a supposed necessity of them as a means (to such or
such a person) for the accomplishing of that Moral End for which they are
intended and entered into. We cannot say, it is necessary to Vow an abstaining
from the use of Wine, or the giving of such a sum of Money to good uses, or
that it is a sin if the one or the other be not done; but we may and must say
that Temperance is necessary; and real Thankfulness is necessary; and
therefore, supposing a man to be convinced within himself that he cannot attain
the temperance, or shall fail in the thankfulness without tying himself to such
means and helps, I cannot see (and yet I speak with submission, in a thing
wherein others are so shie) but that in such a case it will prove a sin to such
a man to forbear such a means to him necessary for the accomplishing of such
Ends; for, Is it not a sin in a Man not to respect as he ought God's Ends, and
consequently, not to use all those good means that God has put into his hands
to serve God better, and give God what he requires of him, especially if he and
others have found by experience the benefit of such a course?

The ground of this Vowing is, the mutability and inconstancy of the will Vid.
Chemnit. p. 3. c. 6. exam. Council: Trid. p. 30. and cap: 7. p. 31.
of Man in better and harder things, which therefore needs a peculiar and
strait Bond to keep it firm. It Is usual with us in our straits to be strait
with our selves, and to entertain diverse holy and self-denying purposes; but
being set free from trouble, we grow remiss, secure (like Lot's Wife) look back
to what we like: Now for the preventing of this security, a Vow is of great use
(yea, in those things wherein we are bound before by the command of God)
because thereby, which way soever we go, we carry about with us, a
commonefaction and spiritual munition in our consciences to arm us against the
evil and violent inclinations of the flesh, the instigations of Satan, and
those affected pretenses that are apt to arise in our corrupt hearts, to make a
looser way look well enough. Mr. Dod Ubi supra.
well observes, that the true reason why Satan is so violent in tempting, and
we so weak in resisting, is, because we hang off, halt between two opinions,
and have faint resolutions of forsaking sin; and therefore (says he) if no
better means will serve the turn, we must bind our selves by a solemn Vow and
Covenant to labor and strive against our principal and most dangerous
corruptions. Much has been spoken of the lawfulness and expediency of a Vow,
how it is continued and how far it may be urged in the new Testament,
whereunto, since this Subject is already so far prosecuted, some other things
may be more distinctly and succinctly annexed, that the whole Argument may be
better comprehended.

The First Enquiry.
Quest. What is a Vow, and how distinguished?
Answ. A Vow is a voluntary and serious Promise made unto God, with a solemn
engaging and binding our selves to him, to do what we have promised in his
presence.

There are many other Descriptions, but they are rather of a right and
regulated Vow, than of a Vow; yet Jepthah's Vow is called a Vow.

Now for this Description. It Is true, that a Vow lies essentially and
fundamentally in the purpose of the heart represented before God; but yet a
single purpose, without a promise, is distinguished from a Vow, because every
Vow has a Bond in it. There may be a purpose of heart presented before God,
and that with a mind to perform it; but if there be not a will Latin Votum a
Voluntate dicitur, quia a deliberatione proficiscitur. Scharp.
and intention to oblige our selves unto God for the performance thereof, it
does not bind as a Vow does.

This Vow and Promise is to be made not to Saints or Angels, but to God, whose
interest is concerned in it, who alone knows the heart where the Vow is
bottomed, and to whom it properly belongs to punish all those whoever they be
that deal falsely in their Vow and Covenant; See Deuteronomy. 23. 21.

And what an engaging of our selves there should be to perform when and what we
have once Vowed, we may see in David, Psalm. 119. 106. and in Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.
28.

This Vow may be made either in express words, or in the mind only if it be
supposed to be done with a mind to bind; For as to God, who is the Searcher of
all hearts, it is all one * Rivet. Explic. Decal. p. 103.
whether the tongue speak, or the heart only; as we may collect from Hannah's
speaking in her heart, wherein, when she Vowed, the work was at least, most and
principally, Polan. Syntagm. p. 632.
and for the substance done, 1 Samuel 1. 11, 13.

Now, A Vow, as to the distinction thereof, is,

1. Common and Universal of all the People of God, made first in the Sacrament
of initiation, which is now the Sacrament of Baptism, (for albeit Infants
cannot then make it themselves, yet it is made for themselves, so as that when
they come to age, they are by that transaction bound to perform it); And this
Vow is renewed in the Sacrament of Confirmation, that is, of the Lords Supper,
in a special manner; for it may, and is to be done otherwise also.

2. Singular, of this and that Man voluntarily and occasionally binding himself
(whereof the former Description is given).

And this is twofold also.

1. More General], when a Man, upon this or that special and weighty occasion
or reason, ties himself in the presence of God to do those things that are
required of him, and imposed on him by the Word of God, as Jacob and David did,
Genesis 28. 21. Psalm. 101. 2, 3. (see the Contents) and Psalm. 119. 106.

2. More Special], which is not a Moral Vow, (as the former was) for the
performing of any thing commanded, but it is (as has been said) a Ministerial
Vow, subservient to the Moral, and may be described to be, a voluntary engaging
of our selves to some outward work in it self not required, but useful to us
that that which is a worship of God, may be better performed; or, It is a
Vowing of an arbitrary and indifferent thing for a Moral End.

The Second Enquiry.
Quest. What then are the Ends and Reasons of a Vow?
Answ. They are such as these.

1. To assist us in our Obedience (our doing of good or forbearing of evil) in
in those things wherein we find it most difficult: As suppose, a Man find
himself very averse and shifting from selfexamination, and that required
saying, What have I done? Jer. 8. 6. it may give him just reason to tie himself
to some times of Humiliation, (as once a month, or still, before the Sacrament)
that the Duty of Repentance may not be quite thrust out of doors, while it is
(from time to time) thrust into Corners, and though it be not denied yet it is
still delayed and omitted: Accordingly, there may be just cause to bind ones
self, even by Vow, to set times apart for reading Scripture and Prayer, lest
otherwise we be strangers to our Bible and to our God. So, if a Man be given to
his appetite, and has found himself often to offend, and to offend his
Conscience that way; or that such Meats and Drinks (as Wine) have been unto
him, grievous provocations to sin; or that he has been therein often caught by
such and such tempting Company; Here a good ground is laid of laying, by Vow
(in regard of such Things and Persons) a restraint upon himself, that he may
not for want of fasting, (Numb. 30. 15. 1 Cor. 9. 27. Jer. 35. 6.) or binding
out himself from what is pleasing, but not necessary, lie in that sin which it
is necessary, by all good means, to rid our selves of. Unto this Head the Vow
of the Nazarites heretofore may be referred, wherein Holiness and a special
separation of themselves from all worldly pleasures and the ordinary delights
of other Men unto the Lord, Numb. 6. 2, 5. was intended and kept strictly to,
for the time of their Vow; whereupon they were highly esteemed, Lam. 4. 7. and
the people were or might be, happy in them, because they were Patterns of
holiness, Amos 2. 11. Now the Rule of these external and auxiliary things, is,
that they must not be Vowed absolutely, and in a separation from their End (as
if Religion were to be placed in observing this or that day, in abstaining from
this or that Meat, or that any thing were merited by these observances), I say,
they are not to be Vowed absolutely as if there were any necessity, or holiness
in the observance, but relatively, as they are helps of obedience.

2. To assist us in our Prayers, and comfort our hearts in the time of great
Affliction, as Jacob vowed, and Jepthah, and Hannah, partly at least, to
strengthen their Faith in Prayer, (unto which something has been spoken before
See before, p. 115, 116.
), it confirms the heart much in expecting good from God, when there is a
declaration of our good affections to him, and that he shall be a gainer, (if
we may speak after the manner of Men) in his glory by granting those things
which make for our comfort.

3. To assist us in our thanksgiving Sic intelligendi sunt omnes loci in
Psalmis, qui de Votis loquuntur, Calv. Instit. ubi supra.
, Psalm. 50. 14. which appears to be more real, if we do not only offer the
Sacrifice of praise unto God, and the Calves of our lips, but also do good, and
distribute, considering how pleasing to God that is, Heb. 13. 15, 16. Thus God
had not only a Song from Hannah, but a (Vowed) Son, 1 Samuel 1. 11, 27, 28. and
2. 1, 11.

4. To assist us in our Charity, whether in respect of our Brethrens spiritual
edification, 1 Cor. 9. 20. (which was the thing that Paul intended in that Vow,
Acts 18. 18. as he did also in the circumcising of Timothy), or whether it
respect their bodily relief; in which regard a Man may Vow to lay aside so much
when the Lord prospers him, and there is a time of greater gain, for the
maintenance of the Ministry and the use of the Poor Genesis 28. last.
; or to lay aside a little weekly, because otherwise that will come heavily
from us, which in that way (it being dedicated to God aforehand) we shall far
more freely and cheerfully communicate, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.

The Third Enquiry.
Quest. In what manner are we to Vow, or what Considerations and Conditions are
to be had, and observed in Vowing?
Answ. 1. We must Vow nothing but what is possible and feasible]. Not to keep
all Gods Commandments perfectly, as if we were in a state of innocence, when
now the Law is too weak to save us, because we are too weak to keep it, Romans 8.
3. or, when we have been once angry, never to be inordinately angry again; for
the best Men will still be subject to the like passions with other Men, Jam. 5.
17. Acts 15. 39. (though they be not passionate alike) but that which we do
engage into (if we vow wisely) is, a sincere care, and diligent endeavor
(according to the strength God shall give (which we are to beg of him,) and
with a due consideration and sense of the infirmity under which we labor and
groan) to observe all that God requires of us, that is, without partiality,
though not without imperfection, and to keep our selves from our iniquity,
really and without guile, though it may so fall out that we shall be foiled
against our will, and to our grief; and in that case it must be with rallying
again, and renewing the Fight against those Lusts that fight against our God
and our Souls, and our Vows.

2. It must be what is lawful]; Not (as they Vowed, Acts 23. 12.) to kill Paul;
so Judges 17. 3. Nothing must be Vowed against Gods Word; for that is to bind
our selves to a sin, John 3. 4. Nor which is inconsistent with our Callings as
for a Man to Vow himself into a private life when he is called to be a
Magistrate, or upon some color of piety, or to pursue some self-pleasing
design, to forsake Wife and Children whom he is called to take care of. Nor
which is against Charity, as that rigid Oath of Saul was, 1 Samuel 14. 24, 29.
Especially, against Gods honor, Deuteronomy. 23. 18.

3. It must be of things in our power, that is, which we may attain (in
ordinary course) by the diligent use of the means, and the blessing of God
thereupon. If a Man should Vow a single life all his life, when, though he have
the gift of Continency now, yet he knows not how long he shall have it, may
make his single life become a very sinful life; unto which it may be added,
that, as the things, so the Persons that Vow, must be in their own power. There
must not only be a freedom of Will and Election in those that Vow, but a
freedom of Condition Rivet. ex. Number. 30.
. For Children living with their Parents, to Vow Marriage with such or such
against or without their Parents consent, is to do that which they have a will
to do, but not which they have a power to do: for they are under the power of
their Parents, to whom it belongs (as the Scripture Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Genesis 38. 26
still speaks) to give them in Marriage. And they do much worse that suffer
themselves to be drawn into a Vow, and withdrawn from their Parents by Popish
Seducers.

There Is enough in this and the former Rule against Romish Vows, they being
against the Word of God; Namely,

1. The Vow of voluntary Poverty, whereby, leaving the property they have in
their goods, they bind themselves to live by begging, Deuteronomy. 15. 4. which is
against Agurs Prayer, Prove. 30. 8, 9. and a thing whereby they put themselves
upon that tentation which Agur therein expresses.

2. The Vow of perpetual Chastity, which is against that Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.
9. How few are there in whom those burnings are not, though in different
degrees and at different times? In which regard for a Man to bind out himself
from Gods Remedy, What is it but to tempt God?

3. The Vow of regular Obedience, directly against that Scripture, Ye are
bought with a price: be not the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. for in that Vow
they bind themselves, even in the things belonging to the worship of God, to be
obedient to their Superiors Will; yea, to eat, drink, sleep, be apparelled,
according to a Rule given them, wherein Luther relates that in his time there
was such rigor, that if a little Flesh would save his life that was tied to
Fish, he must not take it; and that he saw many, strong for their age, yet so
extremely pale and weak (walking with a Staff to sustain themselves) that he
wondered at it, and asked them how it came to pass that they were so wan and
weak; They answered, by their Watching. And why (says he) Do you not Sleep
then? Their answer was this, It is not permitted to us to do so. Luther in Genesis
13. 9.

And besides this unlawfulness, they consider not how little power they have to
bear what they bind themselves unto; which also adds to the unlawfulness.

4. We should bind our selves by a Vow then only when it is truly needful for
us, and in such things as wherein we see just and great cause to lay a willing
constraint upon our selves for God, and our Souls good; For (as has been said)
a Vow in external things is grounded very much upon a conviction within our
selves, that, howsoever others may do well without it (and therefore are not
bound as we are to it), yet we cannot want it without being wanting in the Duty
we owe unto God, unto which we are bound and prae-obliged by our Moral Vow
also: We are not to make Vows trivial things, but to use the highest Medicines
in the highest Maladies.

5. Vows must be very deliberate, not rash, as they that Vow they will never go
into such an House again, nor into such Company; They will swear away their
Healthing and Gaming, but it is all in passion, perhaps in an Alehouse, not as
in Gods Presence; it is while they feel the smart of these things, and so a new
tentation carries them to their old course, Prove. 23. 25. whereas every prudent
purpose is established by counsel, Prove. 20. 18. and Men should make a Vow
(which is not like to be made good without fighting) as they make War, that is,
with good advice. It Is a condemned thing to be like that headlong Herod, that
suddenly and wantonly bound himself to give any thing that a Dancing. Damosel
would ask, and so to do that which was highly against God's Law, and sadly
against his own Conscience, Mark 6. 22, 25, 26. Or, to be like Saul, who, in
all haste, brake off from his enquiring of God, and bound the People under a
Curse to eat no Food till the Evening; which was not only against Charity (as
was observed before) but against wisdom and all good advice; for the matter of
the Oath hindered the end of the Oath, to wit, a greater slaughter of the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 14. 24, 30. At least, it is (or may be) to be like Jepthah,
that by his more zealous than advised Vow brought himself into a Snare, and
which (as it is observed out of Justin Martyr Per Ares. Loc. 114. de Votis.
) God suffered him to fulfill, that Men might have an example to warn them never
to make a Vow to God indefinitely (...).
, and in such a latitude that they bind themselves to they know not what.

We are therefore to cast perils beforehand, both in regard of the difficulty
of the thing we would bind our selves to, Josh. 24. 19. and in regard of the
infirmity of Humane nature; for though the Spirit (in a day of Solemn
Humiliation especially) be willing of any good thing, yet the Flesh is weak,
Mat. 26. 41. And hereupon to enter upon such an action and obligation, with
much humility and sense of the need of the Lord's going along with us in it,
John 15. 5. Judges 5. 8. as also, with David's Prayer, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. not
with Peter's Presumption, Mat. 26. 35. And with Faith also; for our own best
resolutions are but like Readiness Armor to David: we must set about such a
business (as he did) in the Name of the Lord. It Is an holy and hopeful thing to
say, O Lord, I Vow, because I would not let sin have dominion; and therefore,
Lord, perform thy Promise, wherein thou have said, Sin shall not have dominion,
Romans 6. 12, 16.

Obj. If the Case be so, and there must be so much ado, then it is good not to
Vow at all, as Mat. 19. 10.
Answ. That does not follow, any more than that did which the Disciples spoke
concerning Marriage; for as all cannot be without the help of Marriage, Mat.
19. 11. so neither can some live so religiously and holily without the help of
a Vow: But that which follows is only this; therefore we should not vow
rashly at all; wherein Calvin speaks very solidly, when he says, That nothing
is more advisable than to be very sparing in Vowing, because they that Vow
with levity, do either quickly repent of their Vow, or else undergo it with
such servility as is in them that do things by force; and if they pay and
perform their hard task, it is with much trouble and tediousness, whereby the
business is marred, and loses all its grace and beauty. Calv. in Deuteronomy. 23. 22.

Let all Christians therefore be very observant how they Vow, that they may not
entangle themselves, and yet not omit that considerate Vowing by which they may
so advantage themselves; And let them Remember, that they may Vow diverse things
profitably, wherein there is not such a difficulty and hard Discipline as in
some other things there is. This will appear if we review and imitate Jacob's
Vow; Who says,

1. Then shall the Lord be my God], Vow thou so too, upon the obtaining of a
singular and signal Mercy to serve the Lord only, to cleave unto him firmly, to
walk before him circumspectly, and more exactly by the help of his grace.

2. I Will make him an Altar], I Vow to have Prayer in my Family, and to set
apart some time for private Prayer.

3. As Jacob Vowed the Tenth, so may thou, I will give the Lord a part of my
Goods, confecrate such a Sum to him, lay by me in store ^ Cor. 16. 2.
something for him, and for his poor Servants. All this is something, and yet
no more than what may be done cheerfully; yea, with much more cheerfulness and
comfort of Conscience, than if it were let alone.

Now indeed, the Vowing against a special and natural corruption, is another
matter. If we have fallen once and again into such evils, we may not Vow never to
be overtaken more; for sin we shall while we are here; and if any sin overcome
us, it will be our natural and constitution-sin: but we may Vow, not to give
way to it for the natural pleasure that there is in it, or out of diffidence or
distrust of the power of God for getting the better of it, or as, lying down in
despair, because of such Goliah's: we may also Vow, carefully and watchfully to
avoid the occasions that may (with attending on our Calling) be avoided, of
falling into them; (as Joseph would not be with her, Genesis 39. 10. and yet went
into the House to do his business, v. 11.) as also, to use all good means to
keep our selves from our iniquity. It Is but a folly for a Man to Vow he will
never be overcome by a powerful Enemy; but yet to use all good means not to be
overcome, that he may, and usually Men do resolve upon; so here, if such
company, meats, drinks, dalliances, compliances, give strength to a Master-sin,
and make it more Master; all such things one may zealously (and yet
cautelously) Vow against: And, let this be the caution; Try for a time (as the
Nazarites Vow was temporary), as, for a week, a month, a quarter; and in such a
measure, (not the highest and hardest degrees at first). Thus by disusing, thou
may by little and little (and so more and more) wean thy self from, and give
a Bill of divorce unto those things that hurt thee and hold thee, and which
thou have been longer (as it were) married unto. Thus People by keeping away
one from another a week, a month, a year, at length grow out of all
acquaintance, and can live one without another well enough.

Unto this Fifth Caution (which being so manifold) has detained me thus long),
I add,

6. That a Vow must be free, that is, (as to these auxiliary and external
engagements) Christian liberty must still be preserved, and the Vow must be
made and continued according to the reason and occasion whereupon it is
grounded. To Vow abstinence from Wine and strong Drink for ever, is to lay a
Snare to catch a Man's self in; Age, or incidental Weakness may as much need it,
and be enlivened by it as Youth was defiled by it; yea, a young Timothy may be
so weak, as that Paul will be so far from wishing him to make a Vow against
Wine, because of his youth, that he admonishes and advises him to the
moderate use of it, because of his weakness.

The Fouth Enquiry.
Quest. What Rules and Helps are there for, and Reasons of the strict
performance of Vows being once made?
Answ. 1. If Vows be made unlawfully and rashly, they bind indeed, But to what?
To Repentance (as was said before of Jepthah's Vow) not to performance; we must
not make Laws to our selves against Gods Laws: If a Father or an Husband might
make Vows of none effect, (Numb. 30.) How much more God? It Is a sad thing for
Christians to make such Vows as they cannot with any comfort keep or break; Not
keep, because they be rash; not break, because they be Vows; like Children,
that out of fear, promise what you will. Men that over-vow, are like Men that
over-purchase themselves, whereby they grow miserably in Debt, and (happily) are
forced to sell the Land again to pay the Debt. So inconsiderate Vowers are
miserably troubled, finding it impossible to perform, and being therefore
forced even to unpromise again (though it be as dismal as to part with
purchased Land) that they may have some peace (by Gods mercy pardoning their
rashness upon repentance) in withdrawing from their Vow, who could have no
peace under the obligation. Men may quickly make such Vows as no honest and
wise Christian will be their surety for the payment of. How many show zeal in
Vowing, and then grow wise after when they come to performing? When on the
contrary, Wisdom should be put to making of our Vows and Promises, and Zeal to
the Performance.

But though, in some Cases we may be prohibited, and in other Cases disabled to
do what we have Vowed, whereupon an impediment will be put to the performance;
yet such is the reverence of a Vow, and so scandalous the breach (if it be
public) among Men, and so dishonorable to God, to play fast and loose with
him, that, though it be not made so advisedly as it should be, yet carnal
difficulties, worldly discommodities, private and personal dissatisfactions
should not beat us off from the performance of it, because they will not bear
us out in it, Psalm. 15. 4. Judge. 11. 35, 36.

2. If they be lawful and holy Vows, wherein we bind our selves to things
pleasing to God, and helpful to godliness, then we may say with Jepthah, I have
opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back, Judge. 11. 35. In this the
Scripture is very express, Deuteronomy. 23. 21, 23. And in particular, in this Text,
Eccles. 5. 4, 5, 6. So Psalm. 76. 11.

And hereof there are these Reasons.

1. Because Religion being it self a Bond; a Vow is the Bond of that Religion;
so that though the thing Vowed were a thing free before the Vow, yet it becomes
a matter of Religion to do what is vowed when it is vowed. The matter Vid.
Rivet: and Ames Cas. ut supra.
of a Vow, that is, the thing which is vowed, may be, in it self, indifferent;
but a Vow (as a Vow) and in the formality of it, appertains to the Worship of
God. He that Vows against drinking Wine for such a time, does not worship God
immediately in forbearing to drink Wine; but yet he worships God in that
abstaining by accident, because he stands bound under the Religion of a Vow,
and for the honor of that God to whom the Vow is made, so to do; which will
further appear in the next Reason.

2. Because God owns the thing vowed], Acts 5. 4. Was it not thine own? -- in
thine own power? But it was not so after he had sold the Land, and brought the
Money to God, and devoted it to him as the whole of that Money he sold his Land
for. So Psalm. 56. 12. Thy Vows are upon me, O God: Not that God makes Vows, but
they are God's when we have made them before him and to him. This even Heathens
saw by their Light; and ^amnabis ^u quoque ^otis. Vir^il. Eclog. ^.
therefore accounted them that had Vowed guilty of their Vow till they had paid
it, and that they lay damned of that Vow, and as Persons condemned under it and
by it, if they neglected to pay it.

3. Because the breaking of a Vow contains many sad and shameful things in it.
As 1. Foolery and mockery, Eccles. 5. 4. and Vanity, ver. 7. 2. Flattery and
hypocrisy, Hos. 6. 4. Psalm. 78. 33, 34, 35, 36. and so the losing of ones
credit with God, Psalm. 78. 8, 9. 10. v. 37. 3. Perfidiousness, because a Solemn
Covenant is broken. ^ee Moller (...) Psalm. 66. 13. ^ereator ^^idam ^ortuus
concidit, Quest. 30. Libras quas pauperibus legaverat egrotus ^eddere ^ecusavit
^ Morbo ^iberatus.
4. Profaneness, because it is made in the Presence, and unto the Majesty of
God, and yet is broken and slighted, Eccles. 5. 6. Gal. 6. 7. 5. Want of the
fear of God, Eccles. 5. 7. 6. It makes God to blast a Man's Enterprises, and
destroy the work of his bands, because of the error of his Voice, Eccles. 5.
6. Behold how fearful the consequences of this fickleness are, Jer. 34. 16, 17.
Any thing will serve to witness for God against such Men, Josh. 24. 27.

Quest. In what manner is a Vow to be performed?
Answ. 1. Wholly], Not as Monks, that perform their Vow in not-marrying, but
therefore are the more unchaste, and live in all impurity.

2. Speedily, Deuteronomy. 23. 21. He gives twice that gives quickly.

3. Freely and chearfully], Praises should be as ready and as hearty as the
Prayers that were made when the Vow was made; and therefore Musculus Loc. Com.
De Votis; Preces nostrae dum aegrotamus non sunt Votivae, ideoque sanitati
restituti, nullam Voti redditionem proponimus neque per nos, neque per aliquem
publicum Ministrum Ecclesiae.
upon this occasion, blames them that when they be sick, desire public
Prayers, and yet take no care to have public Thanks returned to God when they
are recovered: The real acknowledgment also of their thankfulness should be
freely rendered, as we see in Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 27. for God loves a cheerful
giver. And therefore there should be providence in Vowing, that the performance
may not come with an Alas, as it did from Jepthah Judges 11. 35.

Quest. What Helps be there for the performing of what is vowed rightly, though
performed hardly?
Answ. 1. Part with thy Lusts], As People go to Fairs and Markets, and there
sell what they are loath enough to part with, that they may pay what they owe;
so Go to the means of Grace; Perhaps, the Minister may bid so fair See Ezra 10.
2, 10, 11, 12. Hope of good, fear of evil prevailed to make them return to
their old Covenant-Command, Ezra 9. 10, 11.
, as that thou will part with those corruptions that hinder the performance of
thy Vows. If it were so, and corruptions were once mortified, How easily would
Vows be performed?

2. Borrow of Friends and Neighbours], so People use to do that they may not
disappoint their Creditors, and make forfeits to their Landlords; converse with
godly Christians that are honest themselves in their dealing with God, and
would have all others to be so also. And let all Christians lend what And to
keep their new Covenant. An Ezra may ^^ much.
help they can, that their Fellow Christians may pay their Vows. Abhorred be
they that give the Nazarites Wine to drink, Amos 2. 12, and entice others to do
contrary to their Vows and Engagements; They be like the Devil, Acts 5. 3. Genesis
3. 4, 5.

3. Abate from ordinary Delights]; for that is needful for the performing of
extraordinary Engagements. As those that have an hard Fine to pay, abate for a
time, in diet, apparel, and other (notnecessary) Expenses; so must they that
make strict Vows, and mean to pay them, from carnal contentments, as from
Revels, Feasts, or put a Knife to their Throat if they be there, and be given
to appetite, Prove. 23. 2. so, if given to anger, rather forbear good than speak
evil, Psalm. 39. 2. O How did David's Light and holy Understanding overcome his
longing! 2 Samuel 23. 16, 17. So did the Rechabites obedience their natural
content: which obedience to their Father, God did highly commend and reward,
Jer. 35. 14, 18, 19.

4. Pray earnestly to God, that strength may be given from him for the
performing of that Vow, (howbeit hard to flesh and blood) that was made not
only before him, but for him, 1 Kings 8. 57, 58. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18.

This is honesty to keep thy word: and this will be thy comfort, as it is to a
Man when his great Fine is paid, though he have pinched to pay it.

Obj. Oh, but I have broken Vows!
Answ. If wilfully, it is a fearful sin, Isa. 24. 5. but yet not unpardonable;
for God pardons iniquity, transgression and sin, that is, sins of all sorts and
degrees; If weakly, God is merciful; for even Men are so in this Case; when a
Man out of an honest mind willing to pay, binds himself firmly to pay at such a
time, yet is not able by all the shift he can make to do it: Here the Creditor
blames his inconsiderateness (perhaps) in making him believe he would pay and
yet disappointing him, but he passes it over for all that, and loves to see
such a disposition to discharge a Debt, and says, I see, this poor Man is as
willing to pay as to promise if he were able; I take that well, and pass by his
Nonperformance now; He will pay when he has it: even so, he will speed well
with God that can say, truly, Lord, thou know I I would pay if I had it, and
will pay, if I can get wherewithal to do it.

Scripture-Questions out of Isaiah.
Isa. 9. 6, 7. For unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be on his shoulders; and his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor,, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace, etc.
Qu. What Is the reason why Christ is so often mentioned in the Promises of the
Old Testament, and Prophecies of the outward deliverances of the Church?
Answ. 1. In general]. 1. Because without Christ, it is impossible any good
should be vouchsafed to us; For, since the Fall of Man, our state is sum'd up
in this, God against us; for that is the fruit of sin, Jer. 21. 13. Zech. 11. 8.
Romans 5. 10. only in Christ, there is again, God with us, Isa. 8. 8, 10. and 41.
10.

2. Because in and through Christ all good is given out from God unto us, 1
Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Romans 8. 32.

In particular], That this may appear so to be, Christ is here set forth, in
his Person and Office; and that as both of them make for his Peoples good.

1. In his Person]; For Behold here, It is said,

1. A Child is born], There Is Christ's Humanity; for He was Marie's Child, Mat.
2. 20. that is, of her substance, though conceived by the power of the Holy
Ghost; He was also fed and bred up with Butter and Honey, as other Children
used to be in that Land that flowed with Milk and Honey, Isa. 7. 14, 15. This
Child (like the Youth or Child) David, 1 Samuel 17. 33, 42. masters and destroys
all the Goliah-like Enemies of the Church.

2. A Son is given], There Is his Divinity, Luke 1. 35. which they that had eyes
saw well enough, John 1. 14. The Child is born, but the Son, that is, Christ
(as the Son of God) is not born but given; yet it is true that that holy thing
that was born of Mary is truly called the Son of God, Luke 1. 35. that being
ordinarily ascribed to the Person that properly belongs to either nature, so
that holy thing, is that holy Person, said to be born of Mary, because (as Man)
he was so, but (as God) he was given not born; And when God gave him forth unto
us, it is under this Name, The Son of God, Psalm. 2. 7. Heb. 1. 5.

3. A Child is born, and a Son is given, to us. There Is our felicity; for God
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. This shows what is meant by this [Us],
that is, all Believers, whether before or after Christ, and whether they be
Jews or Gentiles, Acts 15. 11. Luke 2. 10, 11.

O How many be there that believe there is a God, but not that he is a Father
to them? that there is a Christ, but cannot say or show that he is given to
them? Happy that Man that can say in the presence of Christ, My Lord and my
God, John 20. 28. and that Woman that can say and sing in the presence of God,
My Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, Luke 1. 47.

2. Christ is here set forth In his Office]. The government of all Mat. 28. 18.
, especially of the Church is upon his shoulder; He has the Keys to lock and
unlock, do and undo Joh. 5. 22.
as he pleases, Isa. 22. 22. Rev. 1. 18. and 3. 7. He has no such yoke or
staff as is an instrument of oppression (as Isa. 9. 4.) but a Key and Ensign of
Rule and Domination; and under this great work and weight of Government he puts
his own shoulder; Albeit he use Instruments, Prove. 8. 15, 16. yet he is no
nonresident, He sees, oversees, and perfectly orders all himself.

Unto both these is adjoined for the Churches further consolation and
confirmation, a fuller description of Christ's Person and Government.

1. Of his Person], which well follows upon the mention of his Government,
because it shows how excellently and abundantly he is qualified for the
managing of it. But it is also of general use; For, As God set his Name
[Almighty] before Abraham to assure him of all covenanted mercy; and as he did
more largely spread his Name before Moses to set forth the goodness and the
glories of his Nature; and both in reference to, and for the behoof of his
Church: So here, the Name of Christ is like Ointment poured forth, Cant. 1. 3.
and his several Attributes reckoned up to ascertain the Church of all desirable
things in and by him.

He is therefore said to be,

1. Wonderful], Not only in his Person (a Child in a Manger, and yet God; God,
and yet lying in a Manger, Luke 2. 12, 18.) Nor only in his Wisdom and
Understanding, Luke 2. 47. and in his Preaching, Luke 4. 22. John 2. 46. Nor
only in his miraculous Works, Luke 9. 43. but especially in regard of the
gathering, governing and protecting of his Kingdom and Subjects, John 14. 12.
in relation whereunto, strange things have been, are, and will be done in the
World, Psalm. 77. 13, 14, 15, 16. with Mica. 7. 15. Zech. 8. 6. especially, the
work of Redemption is filled with Wonders, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 3. 16.

2. Counseller], Isa. 11. 2. Not only because he is acquainted with his Fathers
Counsels, John 1. 18. and 5. 20. as Privy Counselors are with State-matters,
and because in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 3.
So that He can say, Counsel is mine, and sound Wisdom, I am Understanding,
Prove. 8. 14. but especially because he reveals (as the great Prophet of the
Church) the whole Counsel of God, Luke 7. 30. Acts 20. 27. Mat. 11. 25, 26, 27.
Not only as far as is necessary for their salvation, but for their direction
also, consolation and confirmation in all their concernments; He it is that
says of Himself, I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths
of judgment, Prove. 8. 20. and that for our great benefit, ver. 21.

3. The Almighty God], True God, equal with the Father, 1 John 5. 20. John 5.
17, 18. and as Mediator also, God-man, John 20. 28. Luke 1. 47. He must needs
therefore be Mighty, (Psalm. 50. 1.) yea, Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. Now, as God said
to Abraham, I am the Almighty God, (Genesis 17. 17. that is, I am so for thy use;
so it is here; Christ is the mighty God, that is, as a Priest, Mighty to bear
the whole Wrath of God, Isa. 53. 4. to save us, his Blood being the Blood of
God, Acts 20. 28. And (as a Prophet) mighty in Word, and working mightily
therein by the operation of his Spirit, Gal. 2. 8. whence it is that there are
so many Believers (Acts 2. 41.) when there could not be one, but by that
exceeding great power whereby God raised up Christ, and Christ raised up
himself from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. Romans 1. 4. As a King also the power of a
God shows it self in him to the rejoicing of the hearts of all his Subjects,
Isa. 52. 7. Zech. 9. 9. It Is he (chiefly) who is that Mighty one that God has
laid help upon, that he might be the mighty King and Helper of his Church, for
the overthrow of all the enemies thereof, Psalm. 89. 19, 23. yea, the strength
of Jehovah is not only with him, Psalm. 110. 1, etc. but in Him, Exodus 23. 21.
and that Name is on him, Jer. 23. 6. that he might throw down all spiritual
Enemies, Sin, Satan, Death and Hell, 1 Cor. 15. 57. Col. 2. 15. Heb. 2. 14. He
is not only a Counselor, but mighty to execute all his Counsels, and to
overthrow all the Counsels of the Adversaries of his People, Isa. 8. 10.

4. The Everlasting Father], so he may be said to be two ways, 1. Because he is
(together with the Father and the holy Ghost) the Author (which this word
[Father] signifies, Genesis 4. 21. Job 38. 28.) and the giver of eternal Life,
John 10. 28. and all lasting and everlasting good things, 2 These. 2. 16. yea,
(as Mediator) He in special, is the procurer thereof, and the person in whom it
resides, John 17. 2. 1 John 5. 11, 12. 1 John 5. 20. 2. He may be thus called
in respect of the care and kindness he has for his people who are (often) like
shiftless Children, Job. 29. 16. He ever looks to his little Children; He has
an everlasting Kingdom, and as Kings are Fathers of their Country, so is he of
his Church; but They only for a time, He for ever: But, besides both these
(which are ordinarily mentioned) Christ is more properly a Father, because he
has a Seed and abundance of Children (Heb. 2. 13. Psalm. 110. 3. Acts 2. 41.)
purchased by his Death, Isa. 53. 10. begotten by his Resurrection, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Ephesians. 2. 6. for whom he has purchased, and (as an Everlasting Father)
provided an everlasting Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. And in the
mean time he takes such a Fatherly care of them here, as that no Man shall hurt
them, Acts 18. 10.

5. The Prince of Peace]. He (as a Priest) procures our peace, Ephesians. 2. 16,
17. (the chastisement of our peace being laid upon him, Isa. 53. 5.) He (as a
Prophet) preaches peace, Ephesians. 2. 17. Isa. 57. 19. Job 3. 4, 29. He (as a
Prince) works peace for his People, by taking a course with all their
Adversaries, Mica. 5. 5. and bestows peace on them, even that peace which
passes all understanding, Psalm. 68. 18. Gal. 5. 22. Phil. 2. 7. When he left
the world, Peace was his Legacy, John 14. 27. and now he is in Heaven, he is
doing that which he went for, that is, preparing Mansions for his Disciples
wherein there shall never be any molestations, John 14. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 57. 2.

How great a comfort is there in all this for all His? To us a Child is born;
That Is set first, and that brings all other comforts near to us; He has
married himself to our nature, and so He is our Goel and next Kinsman; Hereby
we are extremely near to God, and God is unspeakably near to us: Hence, To us a
Son is given; for He is not only a Child and Son of Man, but the Son of God.
This admits us to the blessed enjoyment of all his following attributions, The
Government is upon his shoulders; He that is our Child and our God is the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Revel. 1. 5. having all power given him in
Heaven, and in Earth, and in Hell, for our use, Mat. 18. 28. Revel. 1. 18. For
the managing of which princely Power for our best advantage, He is Wonderful,
in his Works, Exodus 15. 11. Counselor, in his Word; the Mighty God, for the
bearing of our sins on the Cross, and disburthening us of them; as also, for
the bearing down of all our Enemies, and freeing us from them, John 16. 11. and
so He is the Prince of Peace; commanding peace for us, Psalm. 44. 4. and working
peace in us, so that our hearts and minds are kept safe and quiet as in the
strongest Garrison through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4. 7.

Ver. 7. Hitherto of our Saviors Person. In this Verse follows the
Description of his Government, which is the perpetual stay of the Church of God
in this diversely and (often) very sadly governed world, but, looking to Christ
the Supreme Governor, Eccles. 5. 8. all is well, or shall be well, all is
right, or shall be set at rights at that last and great day. Meanwhile, He
moderates the worst things, and makes them to those that are his, the best
things, Romans 8. 28. This Government is described by the extent, peace,
relation, administration, and perpetuity of it.

1. By the extent and amplitude of it]; for it is a thriving and still
-increasing thing; Christ's Kingdom is still coming Mat. 6. 10.
and coming on, which was especially by the coming in of the Gentiles, Psalm. 2.
8. Isa. 49. 18, to v. 24. But still, and even unto the end of the world,
wheresoever the Gospel is preached, some are added, Acts 2. 47. and 11. 24. See
Mat. 13. 31, 32, 33. All other Kingdoms and Monarchies have their decreases,
but Christ's is still on the growing hand; yea, He gains by what he loses, the
Blood of Martyrs being the Seed of the Church.

2. By the peace of it Luke 2. 14.
]; for the Kingdom of God is peace, Romans 14. 17. and Christ the King is the
peace, Mica. 5. 5. More particularly, in and by the Kingdom of Christ, there is
a Personal and Social peace.

1. A Personal peace], and that diverse ways; For so there is a peace, 1. Of
Justification, by the righteousness of Christ, which is a main thing in the
Kingdom of Christ, Romans 14. 17. and which, being purchased with his Blood as a
Priest, he does as a royal King, bestow on all those tha^ are his, Psalm. 66.
18. Isa. 45. 24. And by this Justification through Faith, there is inward peace
filling the heart with joy in all outward troubles, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. 2. There
is the peace of Sanctification by those gifts and graces which Christ, as an
ascending King Psalm. 66. 18.
bestows upon all those that are His by the Spirit Gal. 5. 22. Fruit of Spirit,
peace.
of grace (Job. 7. 39.) and by which he rules in their hearts and souls; for
the Kingdom of God is within us, Luke 17. 21. This peace of Sanctification has
two branches; for it arises,

1. From the mortification of our Lusts, which when they prevail there is
fighting, 2 Samuel 24. 10. but when they are prevailed over, much tranquillity of
mind as we see in David, who was freed from grief of heart, and greatly
rejoiced in God when by Abigail he got the better of his irregular passion, 1 Samuel 25. 31, 32, etc. Thus Christ rules when the peace of God rules in our
hearts, for the subduing of all those unruly passions that are the make-bates
between Man and Man, Col. 3. 15.

2. Peace arises, not only from the subduing of our Lusts, but from the
quickening of us to newness of life, from an holy frame of heart, and a lively
exercise of Christian graces in our whole carriage. Thus by Faith there is
perfect peace, Isa. 26. 3. and by the testimony of a good conscience in the
faithful discharge of our duties, much rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and by
patience, a possessing of our souls in peace, Luke 21. 19.

3. There is a Personal peace of relation, union and interest in Jesus Christ;
as Men are much quieted if they have a friend nearly related 3 John 10. 6. 1 Samuel 11. 9.
and dearly affected to them, and that is able in every condition to give them
help, that has enough in him for their use. Thus it is with us in regard of
Christ; yea, much better than thus, inasmuch as his love and power is
infinitely greater, and the union between us and him nearer (though spiritual)
than that of our kindred according to the flesh; therefore Christ (that his
troubled Servants may have peace) calls them to himself, John 16. 33. Phil. 4.
4, 12, 13.

4. There is the peace of inward consolation by that Spirit which is the
Comforter, to allay and take away all heart-trouble, John 14. 26, 27. Hereby
Jesus (as Jonathan, 1 Samuel 23. 16.) strengthens the hands and hearts of his
Servants in God.

5. There is the peace of expectation; Let not your hearts be troubled (says
our Savior, John 14. 1, 2, 3.) for, I go to prepare a place for you, that
where I am ye may be also; look to that in all troubles here, and quiet and
comfort your hearts, 1 These. 4. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 14.

6. Of sustentation mean-time, Acts 18. 10. Psalm. 73. 23, 24, 26.

Thus of the personal Peace.

2. There is, by a reigning Christ, a social-Peace, or a society-Peace; And
that, 1. By our own Regeneration, whereby our spirits are made peaceable
toward others. 2. By others Conversion whereby their spirits are made
peaceable toward us: Both these we find, Isa. 11. 6, etc. Thus was the raging
spirit of Saul calmed, and thereby the whole Church also had much more rest and
quiet, Acts 9. 31. yea, by the convictions of the Word upon the hearts of wiser
Men (though they be not converted) there arises a peace to the People of God
by an overruling Christ; and Thus by Gamaliel's counsel (upon a ground of
Religion, to wit, that it was dangerous to fight against God, Acts 5. 39.) that
bloody company were so convinced, that the Apostles had their lives, and were
dismissed with a comfortable measure of peace. Unto all which we may add, that
Christ (to whom all power is committed) bends and binds the hearts, tongues and
hands of Enemies, as Genesis 31. 42. and 33. 10. raises up instruments, and
orders out benign Providence as he pleases for his Churches peace. Hence
something they do against the Children of God, and more they cannot do, though
they would never so fain, and though they be never so like to do it; as we see
in Herod, Acts 12. 2 3, 4, 5, 6 -- 11.

Hitherto of the Peace of Christ's Kingdom.

3. Christ's Rule and Dominion is described, by the relation it has unto
David]. Here therefore is (as it were) the Heraldry of the Holy Ghost,
describing this King as lineally descending from David; This was of great use
to the Jews, because all their Covenant-comforts 2 Samuel 23. ^.
and precious Promises were laid up in the House of David, 2 Samuel 7. 26, 29. 2
Kings 19. 3, 4. 1 Chronicles. 14. 2. yea, and is so to us Gentiles also Luke 2. 32.
; for the main Promises of the Covenant of Grace are made and belong to the
people of God in all Ages Ezekiel. 37. 26. Acts 2. 39. Luke 2. 10.
, which people of God we Gentiles now are Romans 9. 25.
, over whom Christ the Son of David is as their King and Shepherd, Ezekiel. 36.
24. John 10. 16. Romans 10. 12. Hos. 1. 10, 11. In sum, There Is no comfort for
sinners, but in a work of Redemption and Reconciliation; none can be merry
solidly, but they that can sing that new Song, Revel. 5. 9. There Is no
Redemption but by the true Messiah and his Sacrifice, Dan. 9. 26. John 8. 24.
Acts 4. 12. This true Messiah must be of the House and Lineage, and sit upon
the Throne of David, Luke 1. 32, 33. and 2. 4. By this Description therefore we
see where to fix our comfort, there being no sitting upon the Throne of David
since this Child was born, but by this Child and Son of God only, to whom is
given Dominion and Glory, Dan. 7. 14. Mat. 20. 18. yet we must remember, that
He sits on the Throne of David as David did, reigning outwardly and subduing
Enemies as he did: His Kingdom is not a worldly Joh. 18. 36.
but a spiritual Kingdom Romans 14. 17.
, wherein he rules by his Word and Spirit, Psalm. 110. 2, 3. Mat. 12. 18. Luke
17. 21. only while he rules thus in his Church spiritually, he rebukes the
wickedness of the world as he sees good outwardly, Psalm. 110. 6, 7. Acts 12.
20. yea, and of the Church also, Acts 5. 5, 10, 11. and 13. 11.

4. The Government of Christ is described by the manner of the administration
of it]. His Kingdom is a well-ordered and established Kingdom as the Covenant
with David was, 2 Samuel 2. 3, 5. Christ in person did set things right in the
Temple, John 2. 15, 16. And has set an order in his Church, Mat. 18. 15. John
20. 23. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Timothy 3. 2, etc. and 5. wholly, and Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7,
etc. yea, for See Heb. 9. 10.
outward things, 1 Cor. 11. 2, etc. 34 -- and 14 throughout, Col. 2. 5. It is
also an all reformed.
established Kingdom, so that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it, Mat.
16. 18. nor any true Member of it, Luke 22. 32. John 17. 15. 1 Pet. 5. 10. with
v. 8, 9. This appears because all those things are in it whereby the Throne is
established, as right Laws and righteous Executions of Heb. 1. 8, 9.
Judgment in regard of his Enemies, and Justice in regard of his Subjects.

5. It is described by the perpetuity of it]: It is for ever and ever, Dan. 7.
14. Luke 2. 33. Heb. 1. 8. As long as this world lasts, Christ does 1 Cor.
15. 24.
and will administer it (as Mediator) as now it is; and ever after, the Kingdom
will continue in a glorious state, 2 Timothy 4. 1. and 2. 12.

All this is sealed and assured by the zeal and ardent love of the Lord of
Hosts, which is the cause of it; and again, by the zeal and vehemence of spirit
that is in the Lord of Hosts for his own glory, his Churches welfare, to pay
his Enemies their Wages, to make good his Truth, and perform his gracious
Promises made to his people. When God puts on the cloak of zeal, as 2 Kings 9.
20. and 20. 15. he will thoroughly plead the cause of his Church, Jer. 50. 34.
vindicate the honor of this great King, and see that all shall be well, though
for present, it be never so ill, Isa. 59. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18-20. and 63. 5, 6.
Our zeal is often seen in promising and professing; It were better show it as God
does his, in performing.

That which yet remains to be more particularly spoken to, is, why Christ is so
much spoken of in Promises and Promises of the Churches Deliverance; whereof
these Reasons may be given.

1. Because Christ is the foundation of fallen Man's recovery 2 Cor. 1. 20. Isa.
49. 8.
, of the covenant of grace, and of all the grace and comfort of that covenant,
which contains all good in it, as the Mine of Mercy. He is therefore
mentioned and described immediately after the Fall in that first grand Promise,
Genesis 3. 15. revealing man's restoring upon this ground, that the Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent (that caused the Fall) by the
Serpents bruising of his heel; that is (principally) by our Saviors Death,
whereby he was destroyed that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb.
2. 14.

After which Promise, Christ and the good things we have in and by Him, are
still brought in and represented.

As 1. To Noah, to assure the restoring of the world after the Flood had
drowned and destroyed all; for Noah built an Altar Genesis 8. 20, 21.
, offered Burnt-offerings, from which the Lord smelt a sweet savor, and so
resolved never to destroy all again, as he had once done; This was not because
the Lord in the blood of Beasts, but because the sacrificing of them was a type
of the Sacrifice of Christ, who gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2.

To assure this further, God established a Covenant with Noah, and with his
Seed, and with every living Creature, Genesis 9. 9, 10, 13. whereof the Rainbow
was a sign, which is applied by Isaiah, chap. 54. 9. to the Covenant of grace,
showing that it issued from that.

2. To Abraham, saying, In thee and in thy Seed, all the Nations of the Earth
shall be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 18. which, by the Apostle Paul, Gal. 3.
8, 16. is applied to Christ.

3. Christ, and his Redemption is set forth in their Deliverance out of Egypt,
where He that appeared to Moses under this Name, I am that I am, Exodus 3. 14.
appears to be Christ by the same title (in effect and as further unfolded)
given to Christ; yea, taken to Him by Himself, Revel. 1. 4. So in Exodus 23. 20,
21, 23. He is described as their Deliverer out of Egypt: yea, therefore they
were delivered, because He (in a sort) was delivered in them, as being to come
of them, Hos. 11. 1.

4. (To omit the Covenant of God with David, Psalm. 89. 28. 2 Samuel 23. 5. which
is intimated in their Deliverance from the Assyrian, 2 Kings 19. 34.) Christ is
often mentioned in the Prophecies of their Deliverance out of the Captivity, as
is manifest, not only in this Text, but in diverse other Scriptures, and namely
in these following, Isa. 7. 14. and 8. 8, 10. and 10. 27. Jer. 23. 5. to v. 9.
so Ezekiel. 36. 25. Dan. 9. 17, 26. Micah 5. 2, 5. Zech. 9. 11. in which last
place Christ is described with a [Therefore] v. 7. to show that therefore they
were delivered out of Captivity, because such a King was to come in fullness of
time, the virtue of whose Redemption extended it self backward, and so it does
forward, unto all Ages of the Church, as that from which the Deliverance
thereof issues. Hence Deliverance out of Babylon so much excels Deliverance
out of Egypt, because of the nearer connection of it with Christ; yea, because
his Coming and Kingdom is wrapped up in it.

Thus of the first Reason.

2. Because the great Deliverances in the Old Testament, were types and
forerunners of our full Redemption by Jesus Christ; as they issued from it, so
they were like John Baptist to it, that is, sent before, to give the Jews (a
people much taught by the eye) such notice of it as was suitable to their time
and state. This we may see in their Deliverance out of Egypt, which being set
before the Ten Commandments of the Moral and Eternal Law of God, as a motive to
the observation thereof, would be of little weight with us, who were not
delivered out of Egypt as they were, but that our Deliverance out of the
spiritual Egypt, and out of the hands of all our spiritual Enemies, was
signified by it, and is presented in it; as the Paschal Lamb instituted upon
that Deliverance, evidently shows, Exodus 12. 46. John 19. 36.

The like we may say of their Deliverance out of Babylon, which (as the casting
of Jonah upon the dry Land, after his being three days and three nights in the
Whales belly, Mat. 12. 39, 40.) set before them a rising and a raising Christ,
which they might look upon, in their bringing out of the grave of Babylon as
the sign and earnest thereof, unto which we are led by the Prophets manner of
expressing that Deliverance, Isa. 26. 19. Hos. 6. 2.

3. Because the comfort of the Church and People of God, is completed only in
Jesus Christ: For 1. He only can free us from all Enemies, Luke 1. 74. and
namely, from spiritual Enemies which are the greatest, and which do endanger us
everlastingly, over all of which he has triumphed (Col. 2. 15.) and so may we
in him, Romans 8. 33, 34. Nor is there any but He that can obtain eternal
Redemption and Salvation for us, Heb. 9. 12. Acts 4. 12. Isa. 45. 17, 22. 2.
And in him only satisfaction is to be found; because as he freeth us from every
kind of Enemy, so he surnisheth us and supplieth us with every kind of comfort;
for with Him we have every thing, Romans 8. 32. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. so that if
his People be in never so much outward affliction, yea without Deliverance, yet
they may overskip (as it were) that kind of comfort, and pass from it to
spiritual, Phil. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4, 5. whereof so much is procured to them
through our Lord Jesus Christ, as that they may glory in tribulations, Romans 5.
3. Phil. 4. 7. yea, if there be a dimness in spiritual comforts they may pass
from them to eternal; unto which the Redemption of Christ extends, and wherein
it is accomplished, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. 1 These. 4. 18.

4. Because none can partake in spiritual Deliverance, nor in outward
Deliverance (in mercy) but only such as are in Christ Jesus: It Is true, that
they out of the Church may be said to be delivered by Him, as the Ruler of the
whole Earth, Zech. 4. 14. 2 Kings 5. 1. Amos 9. 7. Mat. 28. 18. John 5. 22. And
wicked Men in the Church are (together with those that are good) delivered by
Him, as the King of the Church, Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27, 28. with Jer. 23. 6. Psalm. 2.
6. so the Pool of Bethesda cured whosoever it was, that stepped in first after
the troubling of the Water, (without any difference, it seems, between good and
bad) and whatsoever Disease he had, he was delivered from it, John 5. 3, 4. for
that healing Water remained as a Monument of Gods owning them as his People.
But though Christ has wrought still (Josh. 5. 13, 14, 15. John 5. 17.) in the
Deliverance and Preservation of the Church wherein there is corn and chaff,
that is, in outward Deliverances; yet none are delivered spiritually, but only
such as are in him as their Head; Nor are any but they delivered outwardly in
special mercy, though they partake in common kindness and Creature-mercy, Psalm.
145. 9. or Church-mercy (it is not in member 1 Cor. 3. 23.
mercy); for where should they have any such mercy that have not Christ Jesus,
and that are expressly excluded out of his Prayers? John 17. 9. Wicked Men have
a great deal to answer, for their comforts and Gods loving kindness, (such as
it is) which (if they repent not) ends in a greater treasure of wrath, Romans 2.
4, 5. whereas the Deliverances of Gods Children present Heaven to them, because
they proceed from that love which reaches to Heaven, and ends (or never
ends) there. Hence Paul argues himself into Heaven upon an outward
Deliverance from Nero, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18.

5. Because all that are in Christ shall be delivered outwardly (if it be good
for them, Psalm. 34. 7, 10. 2 Cor. 1. 10. 1 Timothy 4. 10.) And (without fail)
spiritually, and eternally, Mat. 1. 21. Romans 8. 1, 2. John 17. 15. 2 Timothy 4. 18.

Yea, This is the comfort of the People of God in all successive troubles to
the end of the world, that God will still sample his former and ancient
Deliverances, and work time after time, for their enlargement, Isa. 11. 11.
Isa. 51. 9, 10. and 65. 13, 14, 19. Micha. 7. 15. the end whereof, (and the
evidence whereof) is this, to serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of their life, Luke 1. 74, 75. and to
rejoice in this Lord always, Phil. 4. 4.

Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3. Hezekiah was sick unto Death, Then turned his face to the
wall, And said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before
thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight.
Qu. WHat course are we to take for Deathbed comforts?
Answ. 1. We must not pin our Faith upon any Party; nor order our ways by any
men's way which they have chosen to themselves, though they appear never so
godly. Hezekiah builds upon that here, not that which is proper to a party
and such a company of Gods people, but he builds on (not in way of merit, but
to show his meetness for mercy) that which all the people of God in common
consent in; that is, a sincere walking with God according to his will. It will
not be enough to say at the last day, or in the last of our days, such and such
men were of this mind; and therefore I (seeing them godly) was of their mind;
but the comfort will be, I still strove to be of the mind of God revealed in
his Word, and of the mind of other good People as far as they were of his, and
no further; We must remember, it is a duty to take heed, not only of the
errors of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 3. 17. but of the godly (their errors being no
part of their godliness). If Peter say, Not so, Lord, Acts 10. 14. Thou shall
never wash my feet, Lord, John 13. 8. others must not come and say so because
Peter said so; even a Peter, when he is not right in his head, or not right in
his foot, Gal. 2. 14. is not to be followed. It Is good following Hezekiah in
the former Chapter, and in this; but not in the next, where he is tempted and
overcome by a visit and message of high honor, but worse to him than the
message of death here. The Rule is to follow godly Persons in that which is
godly in them; for therein we have God and his Word going before us, but not in
their unapproved opinions and ways. Follow them in the light, but not in the
dark. As if a Person be Orthodox, and right in his judgment, and live an
heterodox and ungodly life, a man may hear what he says, and do well to be of
his judgment, but must not do as he does, Mat. 23. 3. nor live as he lives; So
on the contrary, every one is to be godly like those that are godly: There, the
Rule is, Do thou likewise, Luke 10. 37. but if such godly persons err in their
judgment or practice, then the Rule is, Think thou, Do thou otherwise, Ephesians.
5. 7, 11. Be not carried away with a Barnabas out of the right way, Gal. 2. 13.

Quest. But how shall I that am weak and ill able to judge, be of Christ's mind
when so many differ about the mind of Christ?
Answ. 1. Take the Bereans course, Acts 17. 11. and Paul's Counsel, 1 These. 5.
21. Search Scripture, Try by Scripture. They who have a little skill in Money,
yet having received a piece of Gold, can try what it is by the weight.

2. Take David's course, that is, still be praying to God for knowledge, and to
set him in the right way. It requires skill to use the weights of a good eye to
see the wonders of the words, and that is had by Prayer, Psalm. 119. 18, 34. 36.

3. Take Cornelius Acts 10. 31.
his course who did both fast and pray, and in that way came to know by Peter
that Jesus the Son of Mary was the true Messiah; But here, still Remember, when
any thing is doubtful, not to resolve first, and pray to God after (as they,
Jer. 42. 20.) such make as if they meant to make God of their minds; but go to
God first, and resolve after according as God shall direct. It Is horrible to
think that God should be of our mind, but it is an holy Prayer to desire of him
that we may be of his mind.

Quest. What shall we say to those things wherein not only ordinary Persons
differ, but even the best Christians, and the best Ministers also?
Answ. 1. Stick fast to that wherein all that are godly agree, and wherein we
agree with them, Phil. 3. 16. that is, Keep close, and with full consent and
intent, to the main grounds of Religion, which breed good blood and spirits,
and delight not in controversies that fill the head with air, and if by
disputes a dram of Truth happen to be had, yet it is usually with the loss of
an ounce of Love and Ccharity.

2. In things wherein Learned and godly Ministers differ, stand still, and
engage not therein before it be clearly determined out of the Word of God. And,
if it still remain undetermined, then think it a matter of less moment, which
thou may let alone without thy souls hurt; but if thou be over-busie with
things uncertain, it will distract thee, and take thee off from more profitable
employment in things certain; curiosity is a great enemy to edification.

Hitherto of our first way for comfort at our last day, which is a sincere
walking in that way wherein all Gods Party consent, and have ever found
comfort. But,

2. We must not go (if we mean to have comfort when we are going out of the
world) upon a Covenant of Works, that is, we must not be at that pass, to hope
for or lose our hold of Heaven, if we do not carry our selves exactly,
according to that which the Law of God requires of us: For Man is not now
innocent, as he was when first made, and so able to keep the whole Law
perfectly, but he is fallen from that state, and become so weak and unable to
keep the Law, as that the Law also is weak, Romans 8. 3. and unable to comfort
him; but instead thereof pronounces a curse against him, Gal. 3. 10. so that
he that will not be comforted before his carriage be such, as that his
Conscience (looking upon the Law) cannot except against it; that person (I say)
can never have comfort, and that is the ordinary case of them who complain of
trouble of Conscience: for that they say, is, such and such sins are committed;
all services are weakly performed, my Repentance is dull, heart hard, faith
feeble, life unprofitable (for howsoever some that are far gone and have lien
long in trouble of mind, deny they have any goodness, yet commonly, and upon
examination, all their complaints pitch and settle upon the degrees of it). Now
such defects there will ever be while we are Travelers, and till we come to
that place and happy home wherein the souls of just men are made perfect, Heb.
12. 23. Eccles. 7. 20.

Yet, Here we must take this caution along with us, to wit, that we are not
(for all this) to lay aside the Law, as if, in matter of comfort there were no
respect to be had to it; for we are to look upon good works prescribed by the
Law as the helps of our comfort, and great helps also, because they do evidence
our faith and fear of God, Genesis 22. 12. and without them we cannot look to be
saved, Jam. 1. 14. -- 2. 14.

But then, we must remember that we are not to pass judgment our selves, and
pronounce a curse upon our selves from the strict sentence of the Law, as if
that curse should be inflicted on us, only (to humble us the more, and make us
the more to prize Jesus Christ) we may set it before us as that which is
deserved by us, but carried from us by Christ that was made a curse for us,
Gal. 3. 13.

More particularly, that we may hold our Comfort. 1. We are not to passsentence
upon our selves, and to judge of our spiritual estate by our miscarriage
particular actions, but according to our general course, because it is not this
or that (that is done upon occasion, tentation, or in a passion) I say, it is
not this or that, or diverse things so done, that shows the frame of our heart
(according to which God judges, 1 Kings 8. 39. Jer. 17. 10.) but what we do
generally and constantly, Acts 13. 22. He has a good heart and is one of Gods
heart, who fulfils all Gods wills, that is, generally; though herein and
therein he be overtaken sadly, 1 King. 15. 3, 5. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. with 2 Chronicles.
15. 17. 2. Much less must we refuse to take comfort because of our failings,
and comings short in the growth and degrees of Grace, for that we shall ever do
while we are here; and if that should hinder comfort, a Paul himself could not
take it, Phil. 3. 12. If therefore every miscarriage be lamented, and it be our
grief, and we look upon it as our shame to come short of our duty, then Act.
13. 22
God and we are of one mind, (for no man is grieved for what he loves and has
a mind to) then we love what God loves, and hate what God hates; albeit
sometimes what we would, we do not, but what we hate, that we do, Romans 7. 15.
then what is better in us, will more and more wear out the worse; and so there
will be still a going on to perfection, and that pressing toward the marks,
which is a goodmans Heb. 6. 1.
mark, Phil. 3. 14.

Q. But if it be so dangerous and dismal to go by the Law, and a Covenant of
works, what must we go by then, to get comfort in the evil day?
A. By the Covenant of Faith and Grace, wherein our Salvation and Consolation
lies, 2 Samuel 23. 5. 2 These. 2. 16. Now when we come for comfort to this
Covenant, there are three things to help us to it.

1. Here Evangelical obedience, that is, the doing of all that God requires of
us with sincerity and according to our ability, is accepted, 2 Cor. 8. 12. He
that walks as David (and here Hezekiah) did, that is, in integrity of heart,
and uprightness, according to all the Lord commands 1 King. 15. 5
him; shall be sure to speed well, though there be (as in David) diverse falls
and failings.

2. To those that belong to God, and to whom the whole Covenant of Grace
belongs, God has in that Covenant of Grace promised the Grace of his Spirit
for the performing of the foresaid evangelical and acceptable Obedience, Jer.
31. 33. Ezekiel. 36. 27.

3. Whereas there may be and will be still, diverse failings and miscarriages,
God has in the same Covenant also promised that they shall be forgiven,
forgotten, and not mentioned against them, Heb. 8. 12. Jer. 50. 20.

Q. But how shall I know that I am in such sort in that Covenant.
A. 1. By the fear of God in thy heart, Jer. 32. 39, 40.

1. Which they that belong to God, know they have, Genesis 42. 18. and can boldly
profess it, 1 King. 18. 12. and that in the presence of God himself, Neh. 1.
11. Psalm. 119. 38. as being well able to make proof of it both to God and men,
Genesis 22. 12. 1 King. 18. 13. Neh. 5. 15.

2. By the well-ordering of thy life, Cor. 6. 11
seeking and making it thy design to keep his precepts; upon this thou may
say, I am thine, Psalm. 11^. 94.

3. By worshipping God in spirit, and when all is done, rejoicing in Christ only
as thy confidence: Circumcision is the ^m. 1. 9.
mark of the Covenant, and such only are the truly circumcised, Phil. 3. 3.
Romans 2. 29.

Obj. But Hezekiah here seems to go by a Covenant of Works, for that he speaks
of is walking and doing?
A. But consider three things:

1. That he speaks of that as the evidence of his faith and goodness not as the
ground of his comfort. It expresses his capacity, not his claim.

2. What he says, supposes, and includes in it the Covenant of Grace, for
how came he by this truth, but by faith purifying his heart? Act. 15. 9. It is
not natural, Jer. 17. 9. Psalm. 51. 6. but accompanies that great
Covenant-mercy, the forgiveness of sin, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. And how came he to walk
so well but by his faith, Gal. 5. 6. whereby he did in contemplation of Gods
All Sufficiency, perform his part of the Covenant, which is, to walk uprightly,
Genesis 17. 1.

3. He clears all himself, v. 17. by imputing his life, and miraculous recovery
not to his life, and good profession, v. 3. but to Gods love to his Soul, by
which he cast all his sins behind his back, and so the Sun and he went back.

Isa. 42. 1, 3. with Mat. 12. 20.
Q. What Is meant by Christ's bringing forth judgment, and that unto truth or
victory? for so it is said, v. 1. He shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles. v. 3. He shall bring forth judgment unto truth.
A. By judgment is meant in Scripture, not only the administration of Justice,
but a just administration of all things, or a setting of every thing right, as
Psalm. 94. 15. Judgment shall return to righteousness; that is, Whereas the
ordering and carriage of things here below has seemed to swerve from, take its
leave of, and go away from righteousness, God will so bring things about, that
it shall apparently, and in the sight of all return to it again; all shall see
the Government of God, and the Righteousness of God met together, and follow
them with joy. Now to show judgment, or bring forth judgment, is to lay down
the Law for setting every thing right that is out of order. This is done by the
preaching of the Word, and in special the doctrine of the Gospel, which is the
just and right rule of Faith and life, and so may be expressed by the name of
judgment, which signifies both a right state and frame of things, and the
right rule and means by which they are so framed; as Judgment and Government in
a Land, includes the Laws which are the rules of Ruling.

But to come nearer, the Gentiles before Christ's coming, were, and all men
naturally are, out of order four ways:

1. In respect of their Understanding, Romans 1. 21. Ephesians. 4. 18. It Is true of
every natural man, There is none that understands, Romans 3. 11. Jer. 10. 14.
Hereupon Christ sends his Law, his Gospel (which go under the name of right
judgments, right ways, Neh. 4. 3. Psalm. 45. 6, 7. Act. 13. 10.) to open their
eyes, Act. 26. ^. 52. 15.
18. and 17. 23, 29. Saul, though bred up at the feet of Gamaleel, was foolish
and mad, till Christ by Gospel-revelation made him wiser, Tit. 3. 3. Act. 26.
9, 11. Gal. 1. 16.

2. In regard of their Affections, Ephesians. 2. 3. In all men (before Conversion)
diverse lusts and pleasures have the mastery, Tit. 3. 3. Now as the
Understanding is set right by the Doctrine of the Gospel, so are the Affections
by the directions and Grace of the Gospel; for the Gospel of Grace teaches us
to deny all worldly, and to abstain from all fleshly lusts, 1 These. 4. 3, 4, 5.
Isa. 11. 6.
Tit. 2. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 2. 11. And the Grace of the Gospel enableth us so to
do. Thus men are freed from the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2
Pet. 1. 4. So that in those in whom the Gospel prevails, 1 Cor. 12. 31.
the best things are their desire, Isa. 8. 12, 13.
the holy God is their fear, sin is their sorrow, Christ is their joy, Heaven
is their 2 Cor. 7. 10.
hope, Tit. 2. 13. Phil. 3. 3.


3. In regard of their conversation and actions. Before Christ comes and brings
forth judgment, there is all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. See Romans
3. 10. to v. 19. But the precepts of the Gospel, and the learning of Christ,
set men right in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Tit. 2. 12. Ephesians.
5. 8, 9, 10, 15.

4. In regard of their Consolations. Before men be acquainted with Christ, food
and fruitful seasons make them glad, Act. 14. 17. Now Christ sets men right
this way by bringing them to walk in the comforts of the holy Ghost, Act. 9.
31. and 13. 48, 52. Briefly, Christ did set the Gentiles in order both in
respect of their Religion, Gal. 4. 8. 1 These. 1. 9. and their Conversation, 1
Cor. 6. 11. As for those in the Church he brings forth judgment whereby all
they might be set in order, (and much more orderly we may say they are than
those out of the Church, by the convincements of the Word), but because many
are dealt with in a way of means only without inward grace, therefore they are
like Simon Magus, they are not right, Act. 8. 21.

By bringing forth judgment to truth, may be understood the ministering of true
judgment, or of judgment according to the truth of the Word, (as judgment among
men is a true judgment when it is administered according to the true meaning of
the Law.) For, Christ was all for truth, Joh. 18. 37. As he was a Minister of
the Circumcision for the truth of Isa. 43. 10. My Servant is my Witness.
God, in his preaching, so as he is the King of the World, and his Church, he
is the administrator of judgment according to the truth revealed in the Word,
and so he brings forth judgment to righteousness, Psalm. 94. 15. It is in Matthew
[to victory] and that is all one, and follows upon the other, for truth will
be always victorious. Now there is a double judgment:

1. By the revelation of the Word, this is victorious two ways: 1. In the
World, for how did the Gospei conquer and prevail there notwithstanding all
Psalm. 110. 2, 3.
encounters? Act. 19. 20. Col. 1. 6. 2. In the Elect, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Act.
2. 37.

2. By the operation and regeneration of the Spirit in the hearts of Gods
Children. As for others, judgment is brought forth to them, but as for them, it
is brought forth within them, for the Kingdom of God is within them, Luke 17.
21. Yet in them there is a combat, the part unregenerate rises up, and is
loath the Spirit should be the Judge and King, and lay down the Law, Gal. 5. 17.
but Christ brings judgment into victory, by making the regenerate and judicious
part, the faith and grace of his children to prevail over all their corruptions
and tentations, See Psalm. 119. 33.
Romans 8. 2. 1 John 5. 4. and 4. 4.

But here it must necessarily be added, that this word judgment contains also
the execution of judgment, and Christ's judiciary proceeding for his Church, and
against his and their enemies, Psalm. 110. 5, 6, 7. For he rides in his Majesty
prosperously (conquering and to conquer) because of truth, whereby his enemies
fall under him, Psalm. 45. 4, 5. He executing upon those that are obstinate, the
judgment written, Psalm. 149. 9.

This is done, 1. Here, Act. 13. 11. Thus Julian confessed himself overcome,
Vicisti Galilaee.

2. At that last and great day, wherein all shall be completed, the Spirit
convinces the World of judgment now, and that because the Prince of this world
is judged, Joh. 16. 11. Christ has taken order with him already in his own
Person, and by his Death taken away his power from him, Heb. 2. 14. yet is he
reserved to a further judgment, even the judgment of the great day, 2 Pet. 2.
4. Jude v. 6. When Satan shall be fully trodden under the feet of the lowest
member of Jesus Christ, Romans 16. 20. Yea, and all enemies generally shall be
put under the feet of Christ and them, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. 2 These. 1. 6, 7. He
will bring forth also their judgment to light, and their Psalm. 37. 6.
righteousness as the noonday. Then shall there be a full revelation of the
righteous judgment of God in Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 5. Act. 17. 31.

Isa. 40. 18. and 41. 21. and 42. 17. and 43. 9. And Chapter 44. 9. and 45. 20. and
46. 1.
Q. Why does the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah (and otherwhere) speak so much
against Idolatry and Idolaters?
A. In general, for the same reason for which so much is spoken also (in so
many foregoing Chapters in this Prophecy, and so in other Scriptures) of
Sennacherib King of Assyria, and of his besieging Jerusalem, of his insolency,
and of his ruin; to wit, because in this the great question, the grand case is
handled, that is, Whether God (who was then the God of the Jews) be the only
true God? Unto this Sennacherib opposed his Idol-god, or gods, as if greater
than Jerusalem's God, as also his second god, (or rather his first upon which
he did most really rely) that in the strength of his Army, and of the arm of
flesh, for of that he bragged most, Isa. 36. 8, 9. and 37. 11, 12. Hereupon the
great God pleads for himself, the conelusion and result whereof is (as to
such enemies as Sennacherib was), Be still and know that I am God, Psalm. 46.
10. Isa. 37. 20, 29. And as to Idols, There is no God else besides me, Isa. 45.
21. Jer. 10. 11, 12, 14.

This is a matter of so great importance, that no marvel if much be said of it,
for whereas other Sins oppose the Word and revealed Will of God, this sin of
Idolatry does not only oppose that, as it is made known in the first, and
second great Commandments of the first Table, but also does more immediately
and eminently strike at the very nature and essence of God. In particular there
are two reasons that may be given why the Lords Prophets are so copious in this
Argument, in special, Isaiah.

1. Because though Sennacherib were so worsted and destroyed in the Temple of
his god, to show the difference between his Idol, and the true God, by beating
him on his own dunghill, and killing Sennacherib under his nose; yet Isa. 37.
37, 38.
afterward the Babylonians prevailed so far as to conquer and captivate the
whole people of God, destroy Jerusalem that was the City of God, and burn the
Temple that was the House of God, which the World observing, (Babylon
especially, Jer. 50. 11.) and withal being still ready to ascribe such
successes to their Idols, as Judge. 16. 24. Isa. 46. 1. they might therefore
imagine that their Heathen gods were of so great power that the God of Israel
(on whom they professed they rested for their safety) was not able to stand
before them: Hence the Lord declares that what Heathens did, and the great
victories they obtained was not by the power of their Idol-gods, but by his
power, and for the fulfilling of what he had before hand purposed and
determined, Isa. 37. 26, 27. And that he at length would be revenged on them
and all their graven images, Isa. 46. 1, 2. Jer. 51. 44, 52.

2. Because the Church and People of God being under so heavy judgments, so
woeful a captivity, and that for so long a time, they might thereby be tempted
to question the Omnipotency, the Goodness, the Righteousness of their God, and
so let go their Faith and their God, which was their life, Hab. 2. 4. Hereupon
the Lord uses so many weighty words, propounds so many unanswerable
arguments against all Idols, describes so fully the folly and madness of
Idolaters, and prophesies Isa. 46. 7, 8.
of so many executions upon the enemies of his Church, and upon the Idols of
those enemies, that hereby the Faith of his People might be confirmed, and
their hearts established in an holy and firm confidence in his All Sufficiency,
notwithstanding all the sad and long-lasting calamities that should come upon
them, yea, in the midst and height of them, which was the use of that excellent
and animating Song which the Prophet Isaiah left with them, chap. 26.

It is not to be spoken what weak and corrupt creatures we are, (as these
Scriptures show, Isa. 40. 27. and 45. 9. and 49. 24. and Jer. 33. 24.) and how
apt to idolize it with Idolaters, when they have eminent successes, and we are
under hatches. If Ezekiel. 20. 32.
Amaziah bowed himself to the gods that could not deliver their own People, (2 Chronicles. 25. 14, 15.) how much more will men be apt to do so when those gods seem
to carry all before them, and the People of God to be delivered into their
hands to do what they will with them? No marvel therefore if God speak so much
in so great weakness, and to prevent so great wickedness. Even as our Savior,
in the 14, 15, 16, Chapters of St. John, spoke abundantly and admirably before
hand to stay the hearts and prevent the offense of his Disciples in regard of
those heavy things that were to befall him suddenly, and them shortly, in and
from an evil World. For so provident is God our Savior for his Churches peace,
that he lays in Comforts and Cordials before hand, that by a continual recourse
unto them, their fainting spirits may be revived in the midst and weightiest of
Soul-depressing sufferings. Even as sometimes he sent a man before, that is,
Joseph; and a woman before, to wit, Psalm. 105. 16, 17. Esth. 4. 14
Esther, when a sore Famine was to come upon them, and a sorer destruction was
to be plotted by Haman against them; so still he sends Ministers before, (as
here Isaiah long before their last Captivity) that (on the one side) such great
troubles might be (and so still may be) expected, because of the certainty of
them, Jer. 28. 2, 14. and his People might not be deluded by vain presumptions;
and (on the other side) by a pre-discovery of the comforts in them, and the
happy issue of them, might not fall into unworthy, and heart-sinking dejections
and despairs, Joh. 16. 1, 4.

Isa. 45. 23. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out in righteousness
and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow.
Q. WHence is it that the bowing of every knee to God is so remarkably (yea
with a Divine Oath) Prophesied of in this Text?
A. For opening this Text, observe that as the Gentiles were invited to Christ,
ver. 22. so in this verse their coming-in, and coming under God in Christ, is
asserted and assured. The sum therefore is this, That it is a certain truth
that every person and creature shall be subjected to the Government of God in
Christ.

Now to God our Savior there is a threefold Subjection:

1. By External Profession; so Ananias, Sapphira, Simon Magus, and false
Brethren, yield a formal but a feigned Gal. 2. 4.
Subjection, as Psalm. 13. 44.

2. By real Conversion; so Saul, the Jailer, and others submitted, Act. 2. 37,
41. Act. 9. 6. and 26. 30.

3. By an overruling Power; so all Men, Creatures, and Devils, are and shall
be put under his feet, Mat. 28. 18. Revel. 1. 18. Isa. 60. 12.

The particular here expressed of bowing the knee, is an External Declaration
of this Subjection, like that of kissing the Son, Psalm. 2. 12. and shutting the
mouth at him, Isa. 53. 15. as Job 29. 9, 22.

See of this bowing the knee, Genesis 41. 43. Judge. 5. 12. Psalm. 22. 29. This was
eminently accomplished in the subduing power of Gospel-preaching after our
Saviors Resurrection and Ascension, and shall be most universally and fully
accomplished at the last day when all shall stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, Romans 14. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 15. 25, 27.

The Confirmation and further Explication of this we have, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.
where by bowing at the Name of Jesus, (it is not said at the naming Nomen, non
est vox Jesus quae appellatio erat in nativitate, sed sublimitas quae erat post
resurrectionem.
as if that were a duty of the Text, but at the Name), I say by bowing at the
Name is meant the acknowledgment of the dignity and eminency, and to be subject
to the authority of that person; as Name is taken otherwhere, Act. 4. 12. Ephesians.
1. 21. So in all languages, Jaceb sine nomine truncus. In the Kings Name
denotes his Authority and Political Name, not personal appellation, which only
declares who it is that is invested with the Regal Power.
Bowing the knee therefore may signify in general that office which is due
from every Creature as subjected to an exalted (though sometimes a depressed
and despised) Jesus, Act. 5. 31. with Isa. 52. 14. and 53. 3. But withal it
denotes an outward manifestation of Subjection, because it must be to the glory
of God, Phil. 2. 11. So that the body must not be bowed to an Idol, when
Protestants come into Popish Countries on pretense the heart is kept for God
Nicodemitae inter Deum and Diabolum partiuntur, ut animam alteri assignent,
corpus alteri, dum Missis intersunt.
: But on the contrary, our bodies must be given to God, and to Christ who is
God; which the Scripture urges, not only from the power which Christ has over
us, but from the price he has paid for us, 1 Cor. 6. 20. This is in the letter
seen in bowing the knee in Prayer, Psalm. 95. 6. Luke 22. 41. Act. 20. 36.

Obj. God is a Spirit, and in Gospeltimes will be worshipped in Spirit, Joh. 4.
Calv. tract. Theolog. page 728.
23, 24. why then will not that suffice?
A. True, in Spirit; that is, 1. Without the carnal and worldly Ceremonies of
the Law, Heb. 9. 1, 10. 2. Without Hypocrisy, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 32. 2. 3.
In Spirit, that is, not only outwardly but especially in wardly, Romans 1. 9.
Phil. 3. 3. But it is not in Spirit without the body, for our whole selves are
to be offered to God, Romans 12. 1. the body by name; and we must yield our
members servants to righteousness, Romans 6. 12, 13, 19. where by members may be
meant the natural faculties of the soul, exercising their operations by the
members of the body, Jam. 4. 1.

Use. Let us therefore bow to God and to our Lord Jesus Christ, to some
purpose, which is done three ways:

1. By entertaining the Doctrine of Christ as a Prophet, hearing him, and by
being taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21. bringing our thoughts
and natural wit in obedience to him, and to it, 1 Cor. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

2. And his Commands as a Lord, against our natural and corrupt will, 1 These.
4. 1, 2. Act. 4. 19, 20. Gal. 1. 16. and that both in doing and in suffering,
Act. 9. 6. and 21. 13. Phil. 1. 20. The Martyrs bowed the knee in the most
eminent way when they would rather yield their bodies to the fire, than worship
a breaden God.

3. And cleaving to his Sacrifice for Life and Salvation, as he is a Priest,
with the renouncing of our own righteousness, in point of Justification, and
bowing and submitting humbly to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. Paul bows
the knee very low, and sets up Christ very high, when he says, I desire to be
found in him, not having mine own righteousness, etc. Phil. 3. 9.

This bowing the knee is justly thus extended as being applied to, and verified
in those things that have no bodily knees at all, Phil. 2. 10.

Yield to Christ (Oh Christian) willingly, lest his force come upon thee; in
the Magistrate, Romans 13. 4. in the Ministry, Luke 10. 10, to 17. 2 Cor. 10. 6.
especially from himself more immediately, Mat. 21. 44. 1 Cor. 10. 9. This
Julian felt. Put thy neck therefore under his easy yoke that thou may not
feel his iron rod, Psalm. 2. 9. Bow thy knee lest he break thy back, be willing
to be his friend and servant, lest thou be forced to be his footstool, Psalm.
110. 1.

Isa. 45. 23. latter part. Unto me -- every tongue shall swear.
Qu. HOw is Swearing an evidence and special character of subjection to, and
owning of the true God?
A. For Explication of the words: By every tongue, is meant, the World in
common that comes in to Jesus Christ, Gentiles as well as Jews; every tongue of
all Tongues, Nations, and People, Rev. 7. 9. shall swear, that is, by me, or by
my name, Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Or to me, or to the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 19. 18. that is,
to my honor, or with respect to me in it. So that the sense and sum, and
intent of the word is, That in the religion of an Oath there is the
acknowledgment of a God, Jer. 16. 14, 15.

For 1. all swear by the gods they own and serve; as the Athenians by Isis, the
Egyptians by Garlic and Onions, which they accounted gods; so Laban swear by
the God of Abraham, of Nahor, and of Terah the Father of them both, of whom it
is said that they served strange gods, Josh. 24. 2. But Jacob swear by the Fear
of his Father Isaac that is, whom his Father Psa. 2. 11:
feared and served, Genesis 31. 53.

2. When the Worship of God is commanded, Swearing is commanded with it, and is
an expression of it, 2 Ephesians. 1. 5. Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Swearing when and as
we ought.

3. This is the way of Gods People, hlding forth in it all Obedience, Jer. 12.
16, 17. And when the People of God are described, Swearing by him is their
character, Psalm. 63. 11. Isa. 19. 18. and 65, 16.

4. God will be avenged on those who join any other with him in this special
part of his Worship, Zeph. 1. 4, 5.

Q. What Religion is there in an Oath?
A. It gives God the Glory: 1. Of his Omniscience.

1. It being an acknowledgment that God is the searcher of all hearts, and
knows when a man swears, whether his meaning be true or fallacious, and the
thing he swears be true or false, Josh. 22. 22, 23, 24. An Oath is Gods binding
of men to true dealing, because of his all-searching; and supposes that he
knows and observes, and is witness how all matters are carried between
parties and parties; whence it is that men do, and ought, Exodus 22. 11. so to
acquiesce, and rest satisfied with it; see Josh. 2. 12, 14. Genesis 31. 49, 50.
Mal. 2. 14.

2. And the honor of his Authority to judge, such as they have to whom appeals
are made, Act. 25. 11, 21. Genesis 31. 53. Genesis 14. 22, 23. and 18. 25.

3. And of his Justice in determining; for an Oath refers to God for the doing
of right between parties that may do one another wrong, Genesis 31. 53. 1 King. 8.
31, 32.

4. And of his Power in executing; for an Oath is such an appeal as calls to
God to take cognizance of the business, and deal with him that swears by his
Name according to his behavior in it, punishing him that violates his Oath, 2 Samuel 2. 1, 21. Ezekiel. 17. 19. And on the contrary, rewarding him that is right
in this and other parts of his Worship, Psalm. 63. 11. and 15. 1, 4, 5. Jer. 12.
16. for this is so special a part of Divine Worship, that it is used to set
forth the Worship of God in the Generality, Isa. 19. 18.

Obj. Whatsoever is said of this in the Old Testament, yet Christ in the New
says, Swear not at all, Mat 5. 34.
A. 1. Negatively: Swearing is not there forbidden absolutely:

1. Because this Text speaks of New-Testament-times, as appears by the reciting
of the first part, Phil. 2. 10. yea confession to the glory of God may be said
to be set down; v. 11. as answering the latter part of the verse here wherein
Swearing is mentioned; Swearing to God being (when it is rightly, and holily
performed) a good and great confession of what makes much for the glory of
God. 2. Because this denial of an Oath contradicts not only many Texts in the
Old Testament, but also a plain New Testament-Scripture, viz. Heb. 6. 16. 3.
Because that which is commanded in the Old Testament, not as a Ceremonial, or
Judicial thing, but upon Moral grounds, and for Moral ends (as an Oath is for
the acknowledgment and honor of God (as here) and for the good of our
Neighbor (as Psalm. 15. 4. or for a man's own indemnity (as Exodus 22. 11.) that
is still to be continued, Mat. 5. 17. Christ came not to take away every Law,
nor any Law wherein there is a Moral Obligation, as referring to a Moral
Commandment, as an Oath does to the first, second, and third.

2. Affirmatively: and so it may be said, that universal sayings are not always
to be taken universally, but according to the subject matter, which if it be
restrained in other parts of Scripture, that restraint is to be supposed though
it be not expressed; as that general saying of becoming all things to all, is
to be restrained to things indifferent, 1 Cor. 9. 22. Again, vid. Riv. in 3. in
praecept. Decal.
it is the manner of Scripture when a question is propounded, to omit that
which is granted, and insist on that which is controverted. Now this Swear not
at all, is limited, and the universality taken off, by the requiring of the use
of an Oath in other Scriptures; and lawful Swearing also is here omitted, and
unlawful (which our Savior was to reprove) is spoken to; so that swear not at
all, is no more but this, not at all corruptly, perversely, and namely,
according to the corrupt Doctrine and Practice of the Scribes and Pharisees,
especially in two things, Creature-swearing and common Swearing.

1. Creature-swearing, about which also, there were two faults among the
Pharisees:

1. That they taught men to swear by the Creatures, or indulged the use of that
kind of swearing; and therefore Christ (as also James) says, Neither by
heaven, nor by earth, Mat. 5. 34, 35. Jam. 5. 12. so neither by any part of a
man's self, as head, hand, heart, for these are Creatures, and not God; and
therefore Christ speaking of such swearing, Mat. 23. 16. does not approve those
forms of Swearing Ames. Cas. de Juramento. Non formas approbat faciendas, sed
factas ob igare docet.
, but only shows that he that so swears is bound by it when the Oath is once
taken. A man must Swear by a greater than himself, Heb. 6. 16. but the
creatures are less: now it is true that some Learned Divines admit a kind of
relative Swearing by the creatures (namely such whereon there is an apparent
impression and appearance of God himself, as Temple, Altar, Heavens, etc.)
because though these creatures be named, the Oath is not terminated in them but
directed to God; yet an Oath being a part of Gods Worship, and Swearing being
to be by the Vid. Rivetum hanc quaestionem ^udite discutientem, (...) ^ertinm
proeceptaem ^ecal.
God of truth, Isa. 65. 16. it is dangerous to name the creature, as it is
absolutely unlawful religiously to invocate a creature in relation to God. And
if the Oath be directed to God (as Math. 23. 21.) what need the creature be
named? Besides the Superstition and Profaneness, that uses to be in such Oaths.

2. The second fault in the Pharisees about creature-Swearing was, that they
made some of those Oaths binding, and others not-binding, according as
themselves pleased; yea, they made those less binding, and made men more
debtors (in regard of the higher nature of them) to a careful performance of
them, Math. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. or (as some express it) they held it
was not such an Oath as would make a man perjured, if the Name of God were not
directly used in it, but the name of a creature: well therefore might our
Savior say, Swear not at all, viz. so abusively.

2. The other Corruption was in their common Swearing, unnecessarily, Idly
without a due call and cause. Unto this that of our Savior is applied, Matt.
5. 37. where (for the preventing of Rash Swearing) he says, let your word or
communication, that is, your ordinary Communication in your dealings one with
another, be yea yea, (when a matter is to be affirmed) and Nay Nay, (when it is
to be denied,) and what is above these, that is, is added by vain and
superfluous Swearing, comes of evil. The Pharisees (it seems) made as if there
was no fault in Swearing; so they Swear truly, and did not forswear themselves,
Math. 5. 33. Whereas it is a great fault to Swear lightly, and profanely.

No reason therefore to abandon an Oath, wherein

1. So much honor is done to God: For though an Oath be for men's use, yet it
is to God also and to his Glory, being in the reverent taking thereof a Solemn
* Genesis 24. 3.
act of Religion and a setting forth of God in his glorious and incommunicable
Properties.

2. And so much right is done to men, Eccles. 8. 2. Josh. 14. 9. 12. as to
Rahab the Harlot, the Gibeonites and others.

3. And so much peace is established, and controversies ended among men, Heb.
6. 16.

4. And when thereby, so much Satisfaction and Security is given in cases of
doubt, fear, and greater concernment. See 1 Kings. 18. 14, 15. 1 Samuel 20. 42.
Jer. 38. 16.

5. And which is so subservient to Religion, which is more a binder by the bond
of an Oath, 2 Chronicles. 15. 14, 15. Ruth. 1. 17. Nehem. 10. 29. 1 King. 22. 14.

6. And which is (in general) the great bond of humane Society, and Justice
between man and man, Genesis 21. 23, 24. and 26. 28, 29, 31.

Sure men might in the Court as well as in the Church, exceedingly glorify
God, did they mind, contemplate, reverence, tremble at, and act conformably to
those God-exalting Attributes that appertain to the Religious use of an Oath.

Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord
revealed?
Qu. What is the Reason why so few have in all Ages, entertained the Gospel?
A. In the first place it must be considered that this [who has believed] does
not exclude all; But rather include some, yea many, Act. 41, and 4, 4. and 21.
20. Col. 1. 6. that is, very many, if they be considered apart: but it shows
that they are but few, in comparison of those who reject the report. Now, the
Prophet (after this complaint of incredulity) sets forth the Reason and the
Remedy of it.

1 The Reason of it,

It is, because there be so few to whom the arm of the Lord, that is, that
eminent Power of the Lord, and the Excellency residing and putting forth in the
Person and Kingdom of Christ, is Revealed.

Wherein two things are included, viz.

1. That there is a great might in the Gospel, for the arm of the Lord, is in
it, Romans 1. 16. and 15. 18. Gal. 2. 8. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. 2
Cor. 4. 7. * Ps. 98. 13.


2. But this arm is hid and revealed to few, John. 1. 11, 14. It Is like the
River Siloah that runs softly, and is not so much observed, Psalm. 46. 45. Isa.
8. 6. or like the host compassing Dothan, not discerned till God, opened men's
eyes, 2 King. 6. 7.

Qu. How comes it to he thus hid?
A. By the Lowness of Christ's Person and Condition.

1. By the unsightliness of Christ to a worldly Eye, as to his person, Isa. 52.
14. Which is applicable also to his Kingdom and concernments; for as his
Person, Isa. 42. 2. so his Kingdom, is not of this World; Neither he, nor it,
come with observation, Luke 17. 20, 21. or any outward pomp. Which appears in
the description we have here of his coming into the world, 1, 2. for he did
come and grow up before him; that is, before the Lord, (conceive it, according
to his counsel and purpose in his sight, and with his support) as a Tender
Plant. Look to God, and there was before him, Power enough; But look to men and
the outward appearance, and he grew up as a little weak plant and Rod, Isa. 11.
1. and as a Root out of a dry ground, that does not thrive by the moisture of
the ground; no more does the Messiah and his Kingdom rise up and flourish in an
ordinary way, but by a dew frow the Lord, Mica. 5. 7. Which as it waits not
for, so it is not exposed to, the eye of the ordinary sons of men; He came into
the world when the Family of David was very low. So that this Prophet, speaking
of Christ's appearing does not mention the Kingly state and royal Family of
David, but says, he shall come out of the Stem of Jesse, Isa. 11. 1. Act. 13.
22. Whose Family was (in comparison) mean, whence it seems to be that when they
had a mind to shake off the Government which God appointed should reside in his
Family, they express themselves thus; neither have we inheritance in the Son of
Jesse, 1 King. 12. 26. No marvel therefore if the world could see nothing that
would take with them, in this (outwardly) hopeless Shrub, wherein the meanness
was apparen^ and palpable, but the arm of heaven hid and undiscernible.

2. By the meanness of his Condition while he had his abode in the world.

1. This is here described; 1. Negatively: He has no form nor comeliness; which
is not to be understood of Christ's Feature and Complexion (which was no doubt,
as other men's that are not deformed, he being not any way stained with Sin,
and, being it is like, of a more exact temper of body) but the uncomeliness is
to be applied to his condition, and to his form and face also when spit on,
buffetted, Isa. 50. 6. He (and so his Kingdom) were both of them beautiless to
a carnal eye. No marvel therefore if they that judged according to the
appearance, Josh. 7. 24. were unwilling to own him, and if such be still averse
from his Kingdom and ways, Psalm. 2. 3. Matt. 13. 55, 56, 57. Luke 19. 14. for
only called men choose Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 22, 23, 24. O how many Learned men can
see a beauty in Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, and (perhaps) in great Augustine
(not in his Sanctity, but in his Learning and Sufficiency.) And yet if a man
preach in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, he will be accounted by
men that are graced with Learning, but not made wise by Grace, a passing poor
Preacher, and his Sermon a dry Sermon.

2. This is described affirmatively: As Christ had but little (in outward show)
of that which was desirable. So he did in his Life, Course, and whole
Administration of his Office, lie under that which was, to a carnal eye,
horrible; For (verse. 3.) He was despised, despighted, and rejected of men, Joh.
9. 28. yea, of his own Citizens, Luke 19. 14. and at last, a Barabbas was
preferred before him; he was, a man of Sorrows, made up of them (as it were)
and made (more than all other men) acquainted with grief, Heb. 4. 15. Mark. 3.
5. Matt. 26. 37. Luke 22. 24. Heb. 5. 7, 8. We (Jews, that were his own, Joh.
1. 11.) hid our faces from him, (as from an horrid Sight, Joh. 19. 15.) Away
with him, Away with him, we cannot abide the Sight of him, Mark. 14. 65. He was
despised, and we esteemed him not, Matt. 27. 39. to 44. and v. 63. and Matt.
27. 20. to v. 24.

Indeed, he was made, and made himself of no Reputation, Phil. 2. 7.
Accordingly, his Ministers and chief Officers, as they were, at first poor
Fishermen, so still they are Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. (so called, not
only with respect to man's Common, but to their own personal condition, which
is commonly more contemptible than that of other men,) yea, and the Subjects of
Christ's Kingdom are such also, men of no, or of low, note and name, 2 Cor. 3.
26, 27. No wonder therefore if the men of the world be loath to join themselves
to so mean a Christ and a Church and Company of men of so small account, Joh.
7. 48, 49.

Hitherto of the Reason of the Complaint. See Psalm. 28.

Now 2 of the Remedy; for the Prophet here does not only complain of, but
excuse and take off the Scandal of the cross, and so shows how we may help our
selves against all low thoughts arising from the low things of the Kingdom of
Christ.

This is done by declaring the true cause, and the singular good issue and
success of our Savior's low, sad, and suffering Condition.

1, Cause. It was not for any fault in him, which if it had, he might have been
the worse thought of, but it was not, v. 9. his Judge upon a full hearing of
all that could be alleged against him (when he spoke very little for himself)
was his witness that there was no fault in him, Mat. 27. 24. Luke 23. 4. 14.
22. Joh. 19. 38. If any ask therefore how it came to pass that Christ had such
coarse and cursed usage: the answer and sure truth is, He has born our grief
and carried our Sorrows, v. 4. What he endured we procured, we did eat the
sower grapes and his teeth were set on edge: the sorrow was his, but the sin
ours; yet this is granted, that We (Jews) did esteem him Stricken, Smitten of
God, and (deservedly) afflicted (as Mat. 26. 65, 66. Joh. 10. 33. and 19. 17.)
But v. 5. it was Jews mis-judging to think God was an Enemy to him for that
which was evil in him; the thing true and certain is, that he was wounded Joh.
20. 25. 27. for our transgressions: bruised (indeed of the Lord v. 10.) but it
was for our iniquities, Chastised, Mat. 27. 26. but for our peace, and that
with his stripes we might be healed: We were the wandering Sheep, v. 6. and He,
the suffering and Sacrificed Lamb: We went our way, He bare our woe, and like
David 2 Samuel 24. 17. loves to have all laid upon himself, as all was laid in
the old Law, on the innocent Sacrifice, Levit. 1. 4. and 16. 21. And never was
any Sheep or Lamb so quiet under Shearing and Slaughter as he was, who opened
not his mouth, but, even to admiration, kept it shut, Mat. 27. 14.

2. And as he took his suffering patiently, v. 7. So (if we look to the Issue)
he was taken from it gloriously, v. 8. He was taken from prison, that is from
all the Heb out ^^ the shutting up after 36.
Straits wherein his Soul was shut up, Mat. 26. 37, 38, and 27. 46. as also
from the grave wherein his body was laid, Psalm. 16. 10. Act. 2. 24. an Angel
descending, rolling away the Stone from the door of the Sepulcher, and
attending him in his coming out of prison, and from Judgment; that is, as from
all those pressures that he was under by the Justice of God as he was our
Surety, so from all that which he was adjudged unto by the Injustice of men,
God making known his innocence in his resurrection that fully justified him, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Being thus rescued and risen, his Exaltation goes on, for who shall
declare his generation, that is, the eternal duration of his person? Rev. 1.
18. Isa. 53. 13. and the increase, continuance, and perpetuity of his Kingdom,
Psalm. 110. 2, 3. There Is a depth in these things of Saviour-exaltation, and
such a multiplication of marvelous things that we cannot attain the wonders
that are in them, and if we should declare and speak of them, they are more
than can be numbered, Psalm. 40. 5. Which Christ's Sufferings and low estate are
fo far from making an objection against, that they are the very reason of this
his Advancement; for, thus it was, and therefore, 1 Pet. 1. 11. Phil. 2. 8, 9.
God thus highly exalted him (in these and his following Eminencies) because he
was cut out (as a tree cut down of the land of the living, Joh. 19. 33. Mat.
27. 63. and from the inhabitants of the world, Isa. 38. 11. not for any fault
of his, Psalm. 59. 3. 15. Joh. 25. but for the transgressions of God's people,
and v. 9. for this reason also, that is, because we were wicked, and had
procured to our selves that wages of Sin which is death. He, that is God, made
his grave with the wicked; that is, God permitted and determined (Act. 4. 28.)
that he should die and be prepared for the Grave by his being numbered amongst
transgressors, v. 12. but withal, he took order in and at his deaths (for his
death contained many deaths in it) that he should be honorably and remarkably
buried in a new Sepulcher purposely provided by Joseph of Arimathaea a rich
man, Mat. 27. 57. that by that act of Providence (as we may say) he might be
distinguished, and in some sort, exempted from the number of common
Malefactors, as there was great reason why he should, because (to resume that
mentioned in the latter end of v. 8.) He had done no violence, nor was any
deceit found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. yet v. 10. it pleased the (gracious)
Lord (upon our account) to bruise him and put him to grief; but for glorious
ends in respect both of him and us.

3. Success And so follows the Success of our Savior's humiliation and
passion, and resurrection.

Use 1. A numerous posterity; when thou shall make his Soul, that is, himself
(wherein his Soul had a great part, Mat. 26. 38. and traveled much, v. 11.) an
offering for Sin, he shall see his seed, Psalm. 27. 30. Joh. 12. 32. 1 Pet. 1.
3. Act. 2. 41.

2. Perpetuity: He shall prolong his days, and live after death in his person
and conserved Church, Romans 6. 9, 10.

3. Prosperity: the pleasure of the Lord, that is, the gathering of the Church
out of all Nations (a work arising from Gods will and pleasure, and wherein he
takes pleasure) shall prosper in his hand, by his hand or power in Heaven and
from Heaven, 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 7. and 14. 24, 25. Gal. 2. 8. Col. 1. 29. and in
the hand of the Minister here on earth, 2 Cor. 4. 7. Act. 19. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 13. Mark. 16. 20. Heb. 2. 4. Of this Prosperity there is set down,

1. The measure, v. 11. He shall see the travel of his Soul, that is, the fruit
of the travel of his Soul, and of the pains of Death he sustained, (like the
pains of a traveling Woman, especially if they he referred to his Soul-sence of
the wrath of God) This fruit of what he has born for man's Salvation, He shall
see in so great measure (not only in his own glory in heaven, but in the
glorious fruit thereof in all the world Col. 1. 6.) that he shall be satisfied,
and receive full content in it.

2. The means by which the Kingdom of Christ is so prosperous, and that is, by
the word of the Gospel spread abroad in the world and received by Faith: By his
knowledge, that is, by the Gospel-Manifestation of Jesus Christ, as the Lord our
righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. shall my righteous, (1. Joh. 2. 1. a
righteous-making, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 5. 19) Servant justify many, that is, all
that believe, Act. 13. 39. for he shall bear their iniquities, and in that way
(the just suffering for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18.) they shall be made just,
Romans 3. 25, 26. for justice must be satisfied by a propitiatory sacrifice
before sinners can be justified, 2 Cor. 5. 21 None made Righteous but by
Christ, made sin for them, Luke 18. 13, 14. Joh. 33. 24. Behold then what
Christ has gained by his Suffering, when he sees thereby so many begotten to
him; So many justified and saved by him, yea by him as a Servant; for Christ
justifies not only as God but as man (that is, as Mediator in which regard he
is a Servant and at command, Isa. 52. 13. John. 14. 31.) and by working perfect
righteousness for us in our flesh: So that we are saved not by works (Tit. 3.
5.) but by words, Act. 11. 14. and are justified, not by any thing we can do,
but by what he has done and suffered for us, laid hold on by Faith, Joh. 17.
20. as it is made known to us in the doctrine of the Gospel, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3

Now besides this posterity, perpetuity and prosperity, there is accrewing unto
Christ from his low estate, the highest Glory, v. 12. Therefore, that is,
because he has poured out his Soul unto Death, he was numbered with
transgressors, Mark. 15. 28. bare the Sin of many, Mat. 26. 28. and made
intercession for the transgressors, Luke 23. 34. In a word, because he has
fully undergon and done all that was to be don and suffered by him according to
the will of God, and that with much patience and a gracious intercession, for
those that took away his life; Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great, that is, I will highly exalt him, Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 89. 27.
John 3. 35. make him higher than the Kings of the earth, yea give all into his
hands, John. 3. 35. and he (being perfectly Victorious over all enemies) shall,
as Conquerors use to do, divide the spoil with the strong; as great and strong
and the most Victorious Warriors use to do: if they divide, he shall divide
also with and above the best of them; see Ephesians. 2. 21. Col. 2. 15. Now all
this is for our benefit also. If Joseph have all in his hand, Jacob shall not
want a portion; when he divides the spoil, we shall fare the better, for he
receives to give us, Psalm. 68. 18. yea, they that tarry by the Stuff, and are
willing but not able to do as others do, shall have a part in the Son of David's
spoil, 1 Samuel 30. 24. If he live after the pouring forth of his Soul unto
death, we shall live also, John. 14. 19. 2 Cor. 13. 4. and because he was
numbered among transgressors, and no intercession of Pilate (or his Wife Mat.
27. 19.) could get him off, but die he must, therefore he ever lives to make
intercession for us, which without a sacrafice and blood he could never have
done, Heb. 7. 25. and 8. 9. 24, 25.

The Review of all this will show fully how little a reason there is to be
offended at the Cross of Christ, at any meanness, shame or sorrow that befell
him: And that, upon the Consideration of these particulars; For

1. All of it was necessary in regard of the will and love of God. It pleased
the Lord thus to bruise him, v. 10. and it was also Voluntary in regard of the
love of Christ, John 3. 16. Luke 22. 15. John. 10. 15. 17, 18. and his will to
do his Fathers will, Heb. 10. 7.

2. It was necessary in regard of us, for we could be saved no other way and
delivered from our lost Condition, any more than there was cure to be had in
the wilderness any other way but by the brazen serpent, John. 3. 14, 15. John.
11. 50. Act. 4. 12.

3. And therefore, all that was laid upon him, was not for any fault in him,
but was for our faults, by reason of our sinful and damnable Condition, that he
might suffer in our place and stead, and as our Surety, what we deserved, and
thereby prevent our perishing.

4. This way of God was as effectual as necessary for man's restoring and
redemption, Heb. 9. 12. and 10. 14.

5. Albeit he lay (upon this ground) under all this shame and suffering, yet
the Lord put much honor upon him in his sufferings, as many other ways, Joh.
18. 6 Matt. 27. 17. 52, 53, 54. so by Pilate's commanding his body to be
delivered to a decent and distinguishing and choice burial, Mat. 27. 58. But
afterward, in and by his resurrection he was much more glorious, there being
thereby an admirable increase, Ps. 110. 3. of his seed, and after it an
everlasting abiding in life, both in his Person and in his members.

6. After he had endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12. 2. and
outgrown it all by his resurrection, He triumphantly ascended into Heaven, and
there sits on the right hand of God, dividing his spoils, giving gifts to
men, even to the rebellious also, communicating all the rich privileges of his
passion, together with the benefits of his Kingly Power, exercising also his
ever-abiding Intercession in the behalf of all true Believers. Now considering
thus the cause of the low estate of the Messiah, and the honor and benefit
that follows thereupon to him, and flows therefrom to us, what reason can there
be of rejecting; how great reason is there of receiving the Gospel-report?
especially considering further, that if any reject the report upon pretense
that God's way to save them is not good enough, they cannot possibly escape
everlasting damnation, Heb. 2. 3. John. 3. 28. 36.

Isa. 63. 17. O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear? Return for thy Servants sake the tribes of thine
inheritance.
Q. HOw can it stand with the holy reverence of God that ought to be in the
Servants of God, to fasten such erring and heart-hardening upon him as this
verse expresses?
A. For the opening of this Scripture these things may be first observed in the
generality; viz.

1. That Gods Children are subject to erring, and some obduration, and may be
(at times) grievously under desertion, and the sad sense of a gone-God, Hos. 5.
15.

2. They are in this condition (which puts a difference between them and bad
men) with much complaining, Exodus 33. 34. Psalm. 143. 7. Joh. 20. 13.

3. They complain to God who alone can help it, and has bound himself to his
praying Servants to order the matter otherwise, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 37.

Obj. But they seem not only to complain to God but of God?
A. What they say, they pray; that is, they speak it not peremptorily but
submissively, and are upon their knees (as it were) all the while they speak
it: It is not a stout and stomachful imputation, as if God were in fault for
it, but an humble and faithful expostulation, because it belongs to God to
deliver from it, of which expostulation and wrestling with God, there is
special reason, inasmuch as this erring and hardening may be said to be of God
diverse ways; viz.

1. Permissively; whereas he might hinder it, prevent it, and all the occasions
of it, by his power.

2. Privatively; when he might withstand it by his grace.

3. Paenally; as an act of his Justice, Ezekiel. 20. 39. (which in a measure and
for castigation, may be exercised upon his Children.) But where ever these
things are, we must remember that the hardness is ours though the hardening be
Gods; and if there be erring upon any temptation, the error is our own, but
leaving to it, yea giving up is ascribed to God, Romans 1. 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.

4. Occasionally; for there is a Providential hardening and causing to err, God
putting men into such a condition (and that justly) as these here into a
seventy-years Captivity, whereby their hearts are mightily deaded and apt to
deviate:

As 1. By the removal of Gods Ordinances and spiritual help, Psalm. 74. 9.

2. By being cast among Idolaters, profane men, subjected to a power, and
compassed with a company tempting to sin, Ezekiel. 20. 25, 32.

3. By being put into a joyless and hopeless estate, under wicked and cruel
enemies, living in all ease and prosperity, Zach. 1. 11. Psalm. 73. 10. Hab. 1.
13. Propitious and prosperous Providence is a quickener, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6.
Paenal, and dejecting Providence is a deader, Isa. 64. 7. Psalm. 137. 4. Now
hereby God may be said (in a sort) to cause to err, not that God is the author
of any sin (which it is horrible to imagine) but because God is the orderer of
such Providence, as whereupon through man's weakness and corruption, sin and
wandering from the right way ensues: Hence David says, That they that drove
him from the inheritance of the Lord, said, Go serve other gods, 1 Samuel 26. 19.
Not that they said so, but expelling him from the Ordinances of God, and
forcing him to fly for his life among Idolaters, amounted to that; because of
the great temptation there was in it. See Deuteronomy. 28. 64.

But besides that erring and hardening may be said to be of God in these
respects which are common to wicked men, there are some respects wherein this
complaining and humble casting of these things (in a sort) upon God, is proper
to the Children of God, who are imboldened to do it.

1. In regard of Gods Covenant, in reference whereto it may be said that they
err, not only when God could hinder it, but when he has bound himself to
hinder it, Isa. 30. 21. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Since therefore he has promised to make
them go in the path of his Commandments, he is humbly questioned by his erring
and grieving servants, as if he made them go out, for how could they go out if
he caused them, and made them to go in? Psalm. 119. 35. So hardening from his
fear, is put (by the boldness and familiarity of Faith) upon his account,
because he has promised to get hardness out, and put his fear in and into the
hearts of his Children, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Jer. 32. 40. Hereupon faithful and holy
men press God with these grievances, so as no wicked men can who have no right
to the Covenant, and to whom, if they should plead as they do here, God might
say, I withhold from you what I am no way tied to give you; and if you be in an
erring and hardened state, what do you tell me of it? (to wit, continuing in a
state of unbelief and ungodliness) I am not bound by any promise I have made to
help you who regard not the conditions of the Covenant on your part, Psalm. 50.
16. Lay not the blame upon me if you live and die in a sad state, it is you that
are enemies to your own good.

2. In regard of Gods wonted ordinary dealing with his people, whereupon they
may say, Why do thou cause to err, for want of working as thou was wont to do
to hinder it? Will thou forsake the work of thine own hands? Psalm. 138. 8. Is
not thy former an engagement for thy future working? Phil. 1. 6. Now wicked men
cannot plead this, that God has begun to build, they are not able to design a
better time, and to say, Lord, it was not wont to be so; but as for Gods
children, an inchoation is an obligation, Isa. 59. 21. Ezekiel. 39. 29. They may
say, Work (O our God) as thou wast wont in us and for us, Isa. 26. 12. Withal
since they had a promise of return out of the Captivity (wherein while they
were shut up, their hearts were much shut up as the earth in an hard frost when
a thaw opens it), therefore they might say and pray, Return, O Lord, and
graciously alter our sad and heartless condition, so will we not go back, and
err from thy ways: O quicken us and we will call upon thy Name, Psalm. 80. 14,
18. Our hearts shall not be hardened from thy fear; some life in our condition
putting life into our affection, we will stir up our selves to take hold of
thee, Isa. 64. 7.

Now that this Prayer belongs to the faithful appears (as by the fervency of it
all along, so) by this very complaint, for none are grieved with erring that
have not a mind to go in the right way, nor does a stone complain of its
hardness; complaint of hardness shows there is some softness, and a desire of
Gods return, a lothness to live without him.

Scripture-Questions out of JEREMIAH.
Jer. 3. 6. The Lord also said to me in the days of Josiah the King, Have thou
seen that which backsliding Israel has done? she is gone up upon every high
mountain, and under every green tree, and there has played the harlot.

Israel has justified her self more than treacherous Judah.


Qu. How can Judah be said to be worse than backsliding, and (for their Sin)
divorced and destroyed Israel; especially in the days of Josiah when there was
so eminent a reformation?
A. 1. Negatively: The Reason is not because Judah was in every respect worse
than Israel, for it is said Judah did rule with God, and was faithful with the
Saints; that is, Gods Government in the posterity of David, was preserved among
them in the civil State; See 2 Chro. 13. 8. to v. 13. And for matters of
Religion, (though there were foul defections, Yet) they kept to the Ordinances
and Officers which God had appointed, and which were transmitted to them by the
Saints their faithful Forefathers, when as Israel constantly followed the
Calves (which destroyed them, Hos. 8. 6.) and fell quite from God to the
Idolatry of Baal, 1 King. 18. 21.

2. Affirmatively: This may be spoken of Judah;

1. Because they were exceeding Sinful; For.

1. They fell into that Idolatry whereof Israel was guilty; It is said here,
not only that Israel played the harlot, v. 6. but that Judah went and played
the harlot also, v. 8. See what is said before of Judah, v. 1, 2. and Jer. 19.
4, 5, 7, 13. See also 2 Chronicles. 33. 9. Ezekiel. 16. 47.

2. They were eminently guilty in looking after forbidden Confederacies, and
trusting to Egypt and Ashur and foreign aid, Jer. 2. 18. Isa. 7. 20. and 8. 6.
Ezekiel. 23. 11, 12, 13. 30, 31.

3. They were abominable in their practice, as we see, Jer. 7. 6. 9, 13. Ezekiel.
16. 49, 51, 52. It is expressly said, Neither has Samaria committed half of thy
sins, v. 51.

2. Because the sin of Judah admits many aggravations beyond that of Israel,
viz.

Because they had more means of doing well than Israel had; for they enjoyed
the Ordinances of God, and had Priests and Levites of God's own appointing that
instructed them, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. and Prophets that warned them that they
should not do as Israel did, Hos. 4. 15. And whereas the Kings of Israel were
generally wicked they had better Kings to rule them, and when they fell into
Sin under worse Kings; They had diverse godly Kings to reform them, as Asa,
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, yea Manasseh at last, 2 Chronicles. 33. 15, 16.

2. Because they saw Isreal's Sin, and knew how by the Messengers of God it was
cried out against; which if they had had any Zeal for God would have made them
to have abhorred it, for that is the nature of goodness and the fear of God, when
men make void his Law, to love it the better, and keep closer to God, because
they see others run away from him, Psalm. 119. 126, 127, 128. Ruth. 1. 15, 16,
17. Josh. 6. 68.

3. Because they saw before their eyes the fearful Judgment of God upon Israel,
that was ruined, carried into Captivity, (2 King. 18. 9. 11, 12.) and it is
said here, to have a Bill of divorce given her, v. 8. by which they ought to
have been warned; but, though they saw all this, yet they went on still in
their evil way, Ezekiel. 23. 9, 10, 11. Nay, they did not profit by their own
Corrections, Zeph. 3. 1. 27. Jer. 2. 30. Isa. 1. 5.

4. Because of their pride; They were not humbled before God, nor brought to
stand in awe of him notwithstanding all their Sin, and the fury of the Lord
poured forth upon them for it, Jer. 44. 6. 10. but said, they were innocent,
Jer. 2. 35. and bore up themselves as if all were well, by the Temple of the
Lord, and their outward performances: This pride, whereby Judah was apt to
boast of their integrity being compared with degenerate Israel, much heightened
their Sin, Jer. 7. 4. 10, 11, 15. See Isa. 65. 5. and 66. 5.

5. Because of their Hypocrisy, Isa. 9. 17. For though they turned to God in
Josiahs days, yet we find here, that it was not with all their hearts but
feignedly, v. 10. It was backsliding Israel, but Treacherous Judah; and
Treachery may be said to be worse than Apostasy, because it looks better, and
yet is not better, but is made worse by a mocking of God. It Is true that Josiah
was a glorious Reformer, but the Reformation was His, not Theirs; it was buried
in Josiahs grave: and as they were very bad before that Reformation, so they
continued to be so in heart still, and therefore their last destruction is
fixed on the sin of Manasseh, wherein they had a part, 2 Chronicles. 33. 9. and
whereof they did not really repent (notwithstanding that Josiah made them (in
and for his time) to serve God) but continued though (then) good in show, still
bad in truth, Ezekiel. 4. 6. and so in the Captivity they paid for all together.
See 2 King. 24. 3, 4. Jer. 15. 4.

Hence it follows, 1. That all Sins are not equal, Joh. 19. 11.

2. That the best of Gods people (in some respects) may be (in other respects)
the worst, for the Ordinances and Means that they enjoy, the Mercies wherein
they partake, and the Judgments whereof they are the beholders and wherein they
are partners, together with the greater professions which they make, make them
the chief of Sinners, Matt. 11. 20. to v. 25.

3. That, howsoever people in the days of a Josiah, and when a Spirit of
Reformation works vigorously, cry up Reformation with their mouths, yet
their hearts are often against it, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. and they abhor to subject
themselves to divine discipline, only they are made (for a time) to do that to
which they have no mind, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.

4. And when Reformation is professed, rejected, and Sin resumed, then, a
Nation is in danger to go more and more down the wind, till they run into utter
ruin, as the Jews did after Josiahs days. Reformation either prevents, or
preceeds ruin.

Jerem. 3. 16. And it shall come to pass, when ye be multplied and increased in
the Land, in those days says the Lord, they shall say no more, The Ark of the
Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they
remember it, neither shall they visit it, neither shall it be done any more.
Qu. Whence is it, or what is meant by it, that it is said, with such variety
of expressions, that when the People of God be multiplied and increased in the
Land, the Ark of the Lord should be no more mentioned or minded?
A. These words are two ways expounded.

1. To show that when they returned out of Captivity and increased and
multiplied in their own Land, there should then be a great unity between the
House of Judah, and the House of Israel (as is said v. 18) notwithstanding the
great difference between them and their continual opposing one another from the
days of Rehoboam unto the Captivity; all which time Israel was lift up, as by
their outward prosperity, so by their invented Pompous Service at Dan and
Bethel against Judah. And Judah, on the other side, took heart against Israel,
by their retaining and enjoying of the Ark and Ordinances of God, 2. Chron. 13.
8. to v. 13. But being returned to their own Country, they should so far profit
by the Captivity, as (renouncing all Idols) to join together in the same
instituted Service at Jerusalem, Hos. 14. 3. Amos 5. 5. Hos. 2. 17. Whereas
ever since the revolt of the ten Tribes, the controversy between them and Judah
was maintained (as controversies use to be, John. 4. 9.) by their several ways
of worship, 2 Chronicles. 13. 8. etc.

2. But the words are by the greater number of Expositors understood thus; viz.
that by multiplying and increasing in the Land, is meant the increase of the
Church by the preaching of the Gospel, and the Law and Doctrine which went forth
from Jerusalem, Isa. 2. 3. And the nation of the Jews unto whom first the
Gospel came, Act. 13. 46. And so the meaning of the words is conceived to be
this; That the Messiah being come, and the Gospel being preached among the
Gentiles, all the ceremonies of the Law figuring out the things of the Gospel
(whereof the Ark was chief, Isa. 4. 21, 22.) should cease and be abolished; and
the multitude of the Christian Church, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles
(but owned by the Jews from whom that Word by which the Gentiles were
converted, proceeded Isa. 49. 20, 21, ^2.) should meet together to call on the
name of the Lord, Romans 10. 12, 13. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Act. 9. 11. as it is said here
v. 7. They shall come to the name of the Lord, even to that name, Act. 4. 12.
and 15. 14. The former exposition makes the words a Prophecy of the Uniting of
Judah and Israel in the Old Testament Service appointed of God. The latter
holds them forth as a Prophecy of the Uniting of Jews and Gentiles, by the
taking away of the Partition Wall of Old Testament Worship by which they had
been so long separated the one from the other.

This latter exposition seems the more probable:

1. Because the using of so many expressions (as it were) for the outing of the
Ark, may be conceived to suggest and signify rather the decay and vanishing of
the Old Testament Worship, Heb. 8. 13. than a concurrence in it; and that in
the days of the Messiah, when by the preaching of the Gospel Believers should
be multiplied, Act. 5. 14. all those old ceremonial things that formerly were
highly prized (because ordained of God, and of very good use to the people of
God then should (as the words import * c Marg.
in the last part of this verse) be no more magnified, as they were before, by
the peoples visits from all parts; I say, they should be no more magnified, nor
mentioned in comparison with that Worshipping of God in spirit and truth which
the Gospel should bring in, Job. 4. 23, 24. Phil. 3. 3, 4, 5, 8. So that will
be somewhat like that other Prophecy (extended also to Gospel Times) Jer. 23.
7, 8. They shall no more say, The Lord lives that brought the children out of
Egypt, but that brought them out of the North, that is, one should not be named
(as it were) on the same day with the other. No more should the Old Testament
Administration being compared with the New Testament Constitution, at the time
of Reformation, Heb. 9. 14. or rather (because the deliverance out of Egypt is
ever to be remembered as a real help to Faith and Obedience in all ages) it is
like that of the Prophet Haggai, Chap. 2. 7, 8* 9. who informs us that the
latter House should be incomparably, greater than the former; because though
there was abundance of Silver and Gold in the first Temple built by Solomon,
yet the second Temple was far more glorious and desirable, because Christ the
desire of all Nations came to it: So that the more of Christ there is in any
thing the less considerable it makes any other thing wherein he is not, or
wherein he is less; what was the Ark to Noah (the Jewel laid up in that Cab
net) O what is any Ark, and how unworthy to be named in comparison of Jesus
Christ!

2. This latter Exposition may be preferred, because though the Tribe of Judah
returned out of Captivity and did increase and multiply in their own Land; yet
the body of Israel did not return (albeit there were some of that body mixed
with them) to join with Judah in the Temple-Service.

3. Because it is said here that all the nations shall be gathered to the name
of the Lord, v. 17. which tho some apply to the ten Tribes as being a numerous
company, 2 Chronicles. 13. 8. yet because of the latitude of the expression, and the
use of it in other parts of Scripture, it seems more properly to denote all
Nations generally, or all nations indifferently, and so to include both Jews
and Gentiles meeting together and closing one with another in the Evangelical
Worship, in that new Jerusalem, which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26.

Yet these two Expositions may be in some sort conjoined, if we make the
Conjunction of the Jews and those of Israel that returned with them out of
Captivity and their associating one with another in the Jerusalem-worship, a
glympse, Forerunner, and fore-shewer of that greater gathering together both
of Jews and Gentiles in the latter days.

So that the desires of all Nations in Gospel Times should be, not the shadows
of Christ, but Jesus Christ himself and that Name of his which is as Ointment
poured forth, of so good a savor that they have hard hearts, yea harlots
hearts that are not taken with him, for they that are Virgins do therefore love
him, Cant. 1. 3.

Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the way, and see and ask for the
old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your Souls.
Q. What Is the way to Soul-rest.
A. It is Gods way; Its he that guides to the way of peace, concerning which
two things may be inquired. Luke 17. 9.


1. How Peace is had in Gods way. 2. What that Peace is that is so had.
1. Q. What is to be done to get rest in Gods way?
A. It Is had by standing still to find it, and by walking in it when we have
found it.

1. By standing, and searching to descry Gods way; as doubtful Travelers stand
still (as being at a stand) to observe Coast of the Country, look all about,
ask of all about them, or that come near them, that so they may get the
knowledge of the right way; So are we to look about into the whole Word of God
when we doubt what to do, and make all enquiry Joh. 3. 59. Joh. 16. 19.
to find out Gods way, Isa. 8. 20. Mal. 4. 4. Besides, the words here used
Stand, see, ask, Seem to show that God grants men a liberty to look all about;
and if they can find a better way than his is, and a way that will bring them
more rest than his will, then let them take it, as Josh. 24. 15. Ruth. 1. 15.

If any enquire further, How may we be directed in this search the better to
find out Gods way? The Text will herein resolve us, by setting before us two
marks and Characters of it: For it is,

1. The old path] as old as Moses, yea as Adam, elder than all sin and error:
For Gods way was first delivered to innocent Adam, before sin entered into the
world, yea that it might not enter and so his trouble might be prevented, and
there might be no hinderance of his rest; But man went out of Gods way, brake
his law, lost his ease; yet did God of old, even immediately after the sin of
man, reveal his Gospel Truth for the recovery of that rest, Mat. 11. 28. which
man by his sin and breaking the Law had lost, Genesis 3. 15. The oldest way (older
than the Devil who abode not in the truth, John 8. 44. and therefore was after
it) is the way of truth, made known by the God of truth, and carrying a light
in it, serving and sufficing to discover every false way; concerning which we
may say as our Savior does, From the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8.

2. It is the good way] and that three ways, to wit, as being good, making
good, and bringing good.

1. As being good] that is, good in it self, and so it must needs be because it
is the way of God, Ps. 18. 30. Romans 12. Isa. 39. 8.
2. Micah 6. 8. Psalm. 119. 140. The word and way of Jehova is like the gold of
Havilah, Genesis 2. 11. yea, good above the finest gold, Ps. 119. 127.

2. Making good] for they that walk in the law of the Lord do no iniquity,
Psalm. 119. 1, 2, 3, 9. The way of truth and of the God of truth keeps us from
every false way, if we follow it, Psalm. 119. 104. The very end of Preaching the
Word, and holding forth the way of God, is to make men's ways and doings good,
Jer. 18. 11.

3. Bringing good] Job 22. 21, 22. Good comes by acquaintance with God, and
laying up his word in our hearts, and turning to his way, v. 23. In doing of
that which is good men possess that which is good, Deuteronomy. 6. 18. see 2 Chronicles.
31. 20, 21.

2. Peace is had in Gods way by Walking in it, Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33. No man
dispatcheth a journey to do himself good by knowing the way but by going in it:
If men say (as here they do) we will not Luk 12. 47. 48. John 13. 17.
walk, v. 16. then there is no rest; any more than a traveling Woman has, but
fear oneveryside, which way soever they walk, v. 24, 25. Peace and Wickedness
can never stand together, Isa. 57. 20, 21. but as many as walk according to the
rule of the Word, Peace shall be on them, Gal. 6. 16.

Thus how Rest is had in Gods way.

2. Qu. What is that Rest and Peace that is so had?
A. To this I answer, that it is a Peace of Heart and Conscience, or a
Soul-rest, founded on the knowledge and belief of the word and way of God, with
the ordering of our way and walk according to his word and will, Ps. 119. 165.

1. Its founded on the faithful knowledge of the Word of God (supposing such a
walking in conformity thereunto as is before mentioned). In the knowledge of any
truth, there arises to the lovers of truth much quietness of mind, and
heart-rejoycing, * (...)
much more does the truth of God which is more certain, more sweet and more
excellent, give content to an holy heart, as it did to David, Ps. 119. 14, 16,
29, 30. to Christ's Disciples, John 16. 18, 19, 29, 30, and to Paul, 1 Cor. 2.
2. Phil. 3. 8. Now when Faith does further fix upon, not only the truth but the
goodness of the Word (especially of the word of promise) that is an exceeding
great stay, and settledness to the shaking heart, as we see in the words of the
Lord delivered by Hezechia, on which they leaned when they were ready to fall
and faint, 2 Chronicles. 32. 7, 8. so also in the words of Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 15. 7,
8. whereby also David took heart in the utmost extremity, 1 Samuel 30. 6.

In this way, that is, the faithful knowledge of Gods way, followed with
walking therein, much and manifold Rest and Comfort arises to the heart and
conscience; as namely,

1. By Illumination, and that Light which guides our feet into the way of
peace, Luke 1. 78. and thereby sets the heart in a state of peace, Act. 20.
24. Bonds and afflictions made no Commotions in Paul's heart because he was in
that way, and still finishing the course of his Ministry, which he received
from the Lord Jesus. More particularly, Divine Light quieteth us: 1. By
resolution when we are in the dark in our judgments, and full of perplexing
thoughts; thus it was with the afflicted Prophet that was so grieved in heart,
and puzzled with wicked Psalm. 7. 3. verse. 21.
men's Prosperity, whom the Sanctuary cured and fully quieted, Psalm. 73. 16, 17.
28. 2. By conviction and revocation, when by corruption and tentation, we are
rushing into ways and works of darkness. Thus was David's heart styled and filled
with rest, and rejoicing when Abigila took him off from his furious purpose,
and set him right, 1 Samuel 25. 31, 32, 33. See the like, Josh. 22. 33.

2. By Justification, through the Revelation of the Righteousness of God made
ours by Faith, that is, such a Faith as works by Love, which is the old and
good and great way of Salvation, in which whosoever walk, peace shall be (sure)
on them and in them, Gal. 6. 16. with chap 5, 6. Romans 5. 1. Luke 7. 50.

3. By Sanctification, which is through the truth, Joh. 17. 17. and the
knowledge and acknowledgment of Gods way, which is the way of Holiness, Isa. 35.
8. which whosoever walk in, they shall have great quietness of mind both in
life and in death, Psalm. 25. 12, 13. Isa. 38. 3. Besides, that 2 Cor. 1. 13.
when turbulent lusts are mortified (which is done in the way of God revealed
in the word, Psalm. 119. 133.) there is much Serenity in the Soul, as there was
in David's, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. yea every act of Holiness is followed with an
inward peace and acquiescence, Psalm. 119. 165.

4. By the comfortable State of things as to men's outward condition; for when
things go well, and there is a rest of State, there is much more rest in the
heart; and all goes well when men walk in Gods way, 2 Chronicles. 14. 5, 6, 7. and
15. 5. 15. Jer. 22. 15.
Is. 30. 15. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

5. There Is an unspeakable Soul-rest, by the assurance of that blessed State in
heaven, the assurance and enjoyment whereof is obtained in a way of Holiness,
Romans 6. 22. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Job. 19. 25. Tit. 2. 12, 13. Psalm. 16. 9, 10, 11.

Jer. 7. 22, 23. I spoke not to your Fathers, nor commanded them in the day
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning Burnt-offerings or
Sacrifices, but this thing I commanded them saying, obey my voice, etc.
Qu. Did not God command the Passover and other Sacrifices and ceremonial
things in the old Testament?
A. First, It Is clear that he did command them as things to be observed in all
the time of the old Testament for the education and assistance of that people,
who were best led by such outward things to those Spiritual things which were
therein held forth unto them. See the Commands, Exodus 12. 17. 42. and Exodus 13.
5. 10. 2 Chronicles. 30. 5. there was a writing for for the Passover: So also, 2 Chronicles. 35. 4, 6. And for other Sacrifices, we find the Lords precise order in
the book of Leviticus, Lev. 1. 2. so that it was a sin for them and against the
plain Commandment of God to omit that way of Worship; yea, Solomon declares
this as one difference between the righteous and the wicked, that the one
Sacrifices, and the other Sacrifices not, Eccl. 9. 11. yet,

Secondly, It may be said in diverse respects that the Lord did not command
them, that is,

1. Not for perpetuity and as things that he would have to continue in all
times, as he ever did, does and will, moral obedience; now therefore (in these
Gospel Times) there is Obedience prescribed, 2 Cor. 10. 56, but no Sacrifices
permitted; now there are Spiritual, not carnal Ordinances; now there is Truth
and not old-Testament-Types, Joh. 4. 23, 24.

2. God did never command Sacrifices abstractively, that is, as separated from
the Spiritual Substance, but in relation thereunto, and as fruits and
furtherances thereof. Sacrifices set before them

1. Their sin and guilt] The beast to be killed (in their room, as it were)
showed they deserved to die.

2. Their Savior and Ransom, for as they deserved to be killed in stead of the
beast (there is their guilt); so the beasts was killed for and in stead of them;
there is their rescue, and the type of their Redeemer. Now this being so, Gods
Command, and intent in regard of Sacrifices, was, that they should bring with
them 1. Repentance, in regard of their sin; Levit. 16. 21. 2. Faith in respect
of their Savior, Psalm. 4. 5. And he commanded no Sacrifices without and set
apart from these; so now we may say, God commands not fasting as it is a
forbearing of a meals meat, but as an help to repentance and prayer. They
therefore that abstract bodily exercises from their end, must go to him for
their wages that sets them a-work; for God commands them to do no outward
things in that nature; we find him therefore disclaiming all Sacrifices in that
sense, and as so used and abused, that is, offered to God instead of December
variis phrasibus Ames in Psalm. 50. 6, 8.
obedience; and says (as here) Who has required (or commanded) them? Isa. 1.
11, 12, etc. It Is another thing that the Lord requires, and that is Obedience,
Mic. 6. 7, 8.

3. As God did not command them solely and without Obedience, so neither
chiefly (if we put obedience and them together) and in that respect he may be
said not to command them, according to For, Hoc si illud conferatur, nihil est.
that, I will have mercy and not sacrifice; that is, My will is not to have the
one without the other, nor the one in comparison of the other: Hence God (where
he purposly handles this argument, to wit, Psalm. 50. 5, 8.) tells his people,
I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, (when yet the want of what is
required, is to be reproved) for God looks higher, and will have a Covenant
made and confirmed by Sacrifice; requiring Sacrifices only as appurtenances of
Covenanted Obedience. We may observe also in Scripture, that the spiritual
substance has been accepted without the outward Ceremony, even then when
Ceremonies were most in request, (2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19.) but when Sacrifice has
been pleaded without Obedience, or to be a protection for disobedience, God
has extremely disliked it, 1 Samuel 15. 21, 22, 23.

4. God never so commanded Sacrifices and outward Ceremonies, as if he would be
the God of the Jews, and they should be his people, and all should be well with
them, if they brought him Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings: he never agreed with
them upon such terms, but (as it is here said) upon the obeying of his voice,
and walking in all the ways that he commanded them, v. 23. See therefore how
the Covenant runs, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy
God, and what then? to walk in his ways, keep his statutes, and hearken to his
voice. Again, (on the other side) The Lord has avouched thee to be his
peculiar people, as he has promised thee, v. 18. But is that all? No; but,
That thou should keep all his Commandments.

Outward Exercises (though required Opus operatnm it but cadaver.
of God) are but the body, it is Grace that is in the Soul (and if it be there,
will show it self in the life) of the Servant, which is the Soul of the service.

Jer. 12. 5. If thou have run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee,
then how can thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace wherein
thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how will thou do in the swelling of
Jordan?
Q What may the meaning of these words be?
A. 1. Some take them as spoken by Calvin.
the Lord to his Prophet, to this end that the people might know by him what
they were to suffer from their enemies, from whom though they had suffered much
already, so that their Country was miserably wasted, and their City impaired
(which may be compared to running with the footmen) yet they must expect far
heavier things, even an utter desolation of their Country, destruction of their
City and Temple, and carrying away of themselves by the Chaldeans out of their
own Land, (which may be compared to contending with horses, because they
exceeded in strength all former enemies. This Jeremy must let them know that
they should not deceive themselves with a vain hope of Peace, but rather
prepare for the highest troubles. Hereunto is adjoined the sixth verse, as
showing the Prophet himself what he should still suffer from his own
Countrymen, So that whereas Jeremy was an earnest (though a modest) disputer,
ver. 1. these words may resolve and restrain him; for so has God appointed by
reason of the wickedness and incorrigibleness of his People, that wicked men
from without shall be prosperous in destroying them, Hab. 1. 12, 13. and wicked
men within the Church shall vex and persecute the godly Prophets and Party, and
so hasten their own ruin, when in the mean-time, God will sufficiently secure
his own, not withstanding all the treacheries of ungodly men. But,

2. Others carry the Comparison thus: Junius Trem.
in Judah there were two sorts, 1. Footmen, that is, men (in comparison) more
slow and low, and weak in their opposition; and (as it is in the latter part of
the verse) such as are like a land of peace not fortified, or formidable as
Cities of War are, or like the waters of Siloah that run softly, that is, are
less violent. 2. Horsemen, that is, swift and swelling Persecutors; both these
made up an Army to fight against God and his Servants only; these latter
observed no moderation, but were like Jordan when it rises up in his strength,
and overfloweth its banks and bounds; and like those waters, Isa. 8. 6. Whereas
therefore Jeremy complained much of the men of Anathoth, and reasoned the case
with the righteous God, how men so evil in their way could be so prosperous in
their condition; the Lord seems to tell him that he must not be over-tender,
but rather expect greater opposition than wonder at this; if he be wearied by
entering the lists with Countrymen, men of lower place, and power, and spirits;
how shall he hold it out to contend with the Court, with the Grandees there,
with their miry Dungeons, and continual threats of death, and slanderous
accusations, as if no man more deserved it? Jer. 7. 14. and 38. 4.

Now, though that description of the Assyrian, Isa. 8. 6. may seem to favor
the former sense (as also that Jer. 49. 19.) considering how like it is to the
close of this verse, yet this latter is chosen by most as the most plain and
proper means. And it is made the more probable by the Connection of the sixth
verse, with a for, mentioning the men of Anathoth, with whom weary Jeremy was
now running; as also because we find a like check given to the Prophets
despondency, Jer. 15. 18, 19.

This is not without use to us; we are always apt to think that still it will
be better; whereas when God declares himself otherwise in his word, and the
wickedness of a People discovers it self to all the World, it will be our
wisdom to think that (probably) it will still be worse; that when God begins he
will make an end, 1 Samuel 3. 12. and that the present troubles are but the
beginning of sorrows, Mat. 24. 8. Now if we cannot bear the beginnings, how
shall we bear the proceedings? If when there is some peace for present, a
mixture of trouble be intolerable to us, what shall we do in the overflowings
of Jordan, and all-overwhelming public inundations? If we cannot endure the
fire in Nebuchadnezzars face, Dan. 3. 19. how shall we endure his Furnace?

Q. What help is there to look increasing troubles in the face, and to bear up
when the Sea of this world is most boisterous?
A. The same grounds of Christian resolution and consolation will serve for
support in a greater as well as in a less affliction. That which Jeremy builds
upon, Jer. 20. 11. is sufficient to keep him in heart in the Court as well as
in the Country, among the Horsemen as among the Footmen. What makes men take
joyfully the spoiling of their goods (to wit, that they have a better and a
more enduring substance in heaven, Heb. 10. 34.) that also will make them
resist to blood, Heb. 12. 4. for that brings them quickly to that inheritance.
Less sufferings for Religion (as scourging, Act. 5. 41.) will not be cheerfully
endured, but upon those noble grounds, the Glory of God, 1 Pet. 3. 14. the name
of Christ, the honor, 1 Pet. 4. 14. and reward of those that suffer for Christ
and Christianity, Mat. 5. 11, 12. 2 Timothy 2. 12. And these things will make men
endure any thing, as the scourged Apostles, Act. 5. 41. did the cruelest
deaths, Act. 12. 2. Joh. 16. 19. with Act. 5. 29.

And as concerning any outward affliction, if we do by Faith take in those
cordials, Heb. 12. 6, to 12. to wit, that it comes from the love of our Lord,
ver. 6. from the hand of a Father, showing we are Sons (ver. 7.) and not
Bastards. ver. 8. Yea from the Father of Spirits (as well as of, and more
especially and eminently of, than of our flesh) who subjecteth us to his
correction, that we may live (v. 9) and not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor.
11. 32. Yea, that it is for our profit here as being made thereby partakers of
his holiness, (v. 10.) And possessed of the peaceable fruit of righteousness, (v.
11.) I say if things be believed, and withal that a rest remains for the people
of God, Heb. 4. 9. What will not be endured?

Not that all can endure alike, not but that a stronger Faith will bear great
afflictions with greater fortitude, as Stephen, Act. 6. 8, 15. (and therefore
we should labor to get more and more degrees of Faith) but the weakest true
Faith will bear all affliction, without an utter failing and falling from God;
as these Scriptures show, Luke 22. 33. Romans 14. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Rev. 3. 8.

Jer. 20. 14, to the end. Cursed be the day wherein I was born, let not the day
wherein my mother bare me be blessed, etc.
Q. How is it pssible that so holy a man as Jeremy was should speak such
strange and truculent words as these are, and that (as the Context has it)
immediately after his praising of God, and calling in others thereunto, ver. 13?
A. First, As for the latter part of the Question, some Expositors do not
conjoin v. 13. and 14. but take what is spoken from v. 14. to the end of the
Chapter, as that which arose from the impulsion of a new temptation. But Calvin
conceives that this is brought in to amplify the comfort he had from a
gracious God, by declaring how he was affected and transported with the
brutish carriage of ungracious men; so that the words though in the order of
the Text, put after the praising of God, v. 13. yet in order of time, and of
the story, go before, and show in what a miserable case, distress, and even
distraction he was before the Lord appeared to him for the setting of his
tormented spirit in some good order and peaceable frame. Briefly, till God gave
him satisfaction, no language was bitter enough to express his dissatisfactions.

Secondly, For the matter of his speech (as here it lies before us) it is as
high and as highly against the Rule as can well be imagined, and that both in
respect of himself, and of man, and of God himself.

1. In respect of himself, he curses the day of his Birth, when it is a
singular mercy of God for any man to have a being, for otherwise how could he
have an everlasting well-being? and men of note generally have celebrated their
Birthday, Mark 6. 21. with feasting and much rejoicing. Yea Gods mercy to
Jeremy was the greater, because before he came out of that womb out of which he
wishes here he had never come, God sanctified him, Gal. 1. 15, 16. set him
apart for an 1 Timothy 1. 12.
eminent service, and ordained him to be a Prophet, not only to the people of
God (to whom he was a Prophet properly) but to the Nations round about, to whom
his Prophesies reached, by whom they were taken notice of, Jer. 40. 2. and
among whom they produced high and most remarkable effects, Jer. 1. 5, 10.

2. In respect of man, that is, that man (which may be understood of this or
that man) that brought tidings to his Father, a man-child is born, making him
very glad. In such a case men might pay the Messenger, but Jeremy abhors the
Messenger and Message both, yea, the Messenger for the Message; and that in so
high and horrid a degree that he wishes him like the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the most dreadful examples of Gods Justice, as being utterly
overthrown without any repentance and restoration. And further prays, that
he may hear the cry (an hideous cry, Exodus 12. 30.) in the morning, that is,
early and unawares, Hos. 10. 15. and the shouting of noise (as of men overcome,
Exodus 32. 18.) at noontide, when others use to rest and recreate themselves, 2 Samuel 4. 5.

3. In respect of God; for in the two last verses, he quarrels with him,
because he did not kill him out of hand, and make his mothers womb his grave,
and because she did not carry in it a Conception of eternity; that is, that
should never be brought forth. When there was cause enough to say (considering
how much good, Jer. 18. 20. Jeremy did and would have done), O blessed the womb
that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck!

It may be observed in all this, 1. That there is a great deal that can by no
means be justified, that is greatly to be condemned, there being not only the
most direful and injurious cursing of a man, or men most innocent, but also
horrible blasphemy against God.

The Use whereof is, to show what wild and woeful Creatures we be, when once we
have given our selves the reins. Jeremy was a Prophet and a man of God, but he
was a man also; as a Prophet, he thundered out diverse imprecations against Gods
enemies, which we may account acts of obedience to the Spirit of God in him,
Jer. 20. 9. but here the man is become like one of us, he speaks like a very
corrupt man, and casts up a great deal of mire and dirt. Sure he was a man
subject to like passions with us, and so are we to like passions with him,
though usually we use not such dreadful and daring expressions, but we have
them in our hearts, they lie in our wicked natures, and out they come at times
(when we are much wronged and wrung, Prove. 30. 33.) as far as our wit will
reach (for all have not ability to be so mighty in words) and as far as shame
will suffer. O what need to watch and pray that the Peace of God may rule in
our hearts, and that we may be amicable, Col. 3. 15. when a Jeremy is so
unamicable and implacable!

2. Yet that something there is, I say, something to extenuate that which can
no way be excused: viz.

1. A natural temptation; because (as himself expresses it, v. 18.) he was
brought forth to such labor and sorrow, and his days Moses is put out of his
patience by a froward people, Psalm. 106. 33.
were consumed with shame. This, though it be no sufficient defense for him,
yet it may be looked upon as a mitigation of his fault among men that know
themselves to be in such sort moved (though not in such an height, because all
men have not the like fiery affections) with such V de anne sit alius loci,
Sens. 9.
temptations: Oppression and ignominy makes a wise man mad, and a godly man
fierce, 2 Samuel 10. 4, 5. and 12. 31.

2. A moral and spiritual foundation and rise of this his rising so high; there
was (as it is supposed, and it cannot be but that there was) some good at the
bottom, (as there was in Nehemiah's cursing and rough discipline, (Chap. 13.
25.) we may presume that it was not only his own case and barbarous usage; but
Gods cause that made him so to transgress his bounds, and to be zealous beyond
knowledge; herein he may be more excused than Job, who also cursed the day of
his birth, but it arose from his present misery, Job 3* 20, 24. but Jeremy
looks like Jonah that was so froward and high with God, because he supposed he
should be accounted a false Prophet by his threatening and Gods sparing of
Niniveh; so Jeremy saw here that not only his person was opposed but his
Ministry, and that therein God and all Religion was trodden under foot, which
was so horrible a thing to him that it was tedious to him to live, while he
lived longer and longer to see God and Goodness more and more trodden under
foot.

4. And this also may be added (that Jeremy may not be low in our eyes) that he
was a man of a most vigorous and keen spirit, his affections wrought like new
Wine, Chap. 4. 19. and 24. 9. the zeal of Gods house did eat him up, yea zeal
for God was at the bottom of these exceedings: No marvel if Luther and such
renowned Worthies that marched furiously for God, were sometimes too furious,
and if they that had so much of heavenly fire had something also of strange
fire; for the best have flesh in them as well as spirit, and it is an hard thing
for any man not to act according to his natural temper and constitution,
sometimes in a worse way as well as ordinarily in a better: O how extremely
dull are they in action that are free from the extremity of passion! O how may
our coldness and lukewarmness move us to put a charitable Interpretation upon
their words and actions that have been hot for Heaven, though now and then
scalding hot.

But though all this may be said for Jeremy, yet nothing can plead sufficiently
for such headlong passion, nor for any that imitate him in it, albeit they come
far short of the height of it.

Jer. 28. 2, 3, 4. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying,
I have broken the yoke of the King of Babylon; within two full years, I will
bring again into this place, all the Vessels of the Lord and all the Captives
of Judah, etc. v. 4.
Qu. When one Prophet said one thing, and another did (with as much confidence)
say a contrary thing, yea, when many speak good, and one Jeremiah, evil; How
could People know which to believe?
A. They might very well know, if they were not willing to shut their eyes; for,

1. The Prophets were but Interpreters of the Law of God; and tho they had
diverse immediate and particular revelations, yet all suited with, and confirmed
the written Word; Now that Law and Word of God, threateneth all evil to
Idolaters and men wicked and cruel in their carriage. The Jews therefore being
such at this time (as the Scripture often shows, and therein gives a reason of
the Judgments threatened against them, see Jer. 8. 15. and 20. 8. and 5. 19. and
13. 22,) I say, they being so abominably bad, they could not but judge (Looking
to the Word of God) Deuteronomy. 29. 24, 25. etc. and 31. 29. that they speak most
truly that speak most terribly to them.

Obj. But if a sinful people repent, good is still promised in the whole Word
of God, Deuteronomy. 4. 29, 30, 31.
A. True; but we find not that these false Prophets speak a word to move the
People to repentance (as Jeremiah still did, Chap. 18. 8, 11. and 26. 3.) And
so, they left them incapable of any good. And this will ever be the difference
between a true and a false Prophet, that a false Prophet promises a good
condition without urging the condition of Obedience, but the true Prophet
preaches all evil, if there be not amendment, and no good condition but upon
that condition.

2. This people were or might have been, convinced in their own Judgment and
Consciences, that Jeremy spoke true, and they that opposed him, untruths: For
1. unby assed and more judicious men, as namely the Princes, Jer. 26. 16.)
acknowledged, and that when this controversy was on foot; yea and all the
people said to the Priests and the Prophets that opposed Jeremy, that he did
indeed and truly speak unto them, in the name of the Lord their God.

2. Their own experience might set them right; for diverse Evils whereof Jeremy
had prophesied were already come upon them, Jechoniah, and many with him being
carried Captives to Babylon, and the vessels of the Temple also carried away
thither already: see Jer. 27. 16. and 28. 4.

3. They have here in this Chapter an evident and eminent example of the wrath
of* God upon, and in the Death of this wicked Hananiah, and that by the Word of
Jeremiah, declaring he should die because of his lying Prophecy, whereby in
stead of calling the people to Repentance and Submission to the King of
Babylon, (and therein to God himself) he taught them to rebel v. 16, 17. So
that the controversy was decided from Heaven, and it might easily be known
which was the truer Prophet, because God sent a sentence from Heaven (which was
speedily executed) against Hananiah by Jeremiah, and that because he
contradicted the truth that Jeremy had delivered.

3. Jeremy was not the first nor the only Prophet that threatened thus; Micah
and Vrijah have been named before who Prophesied according to all the words of
Jeremiah, Chap. 26. 20. yea the true Prophets generally speak successively such
things, so that Jeremy cannot be looked upon as single in what he said.

4. Jeremiah spoke usually and constantly the same sad things with the danger
of his life, Jer. 26. 8. but they that spoke smooth things had the applause of
the people, Micah. 2. 11. now it is liker that a sufferer should speak truth
than a flatterer. And though men may sometimes suffer for a falsehood, yet it is
not with that confidence and magnanimity with which they suffer that give
testimony to the truth of God, Jer. 26. 14, 15. Now for Ordinary Ministers:

1. Some perhaps are willing they should differ in points of Religion that that
may be an excuse for them for their being of no Religion till all be agreed,
yea (it may be) some that they may have somewhat to say to plead for a Pope to
determine all controversies.

2. Others are so unwilling that they should differ in any thing, that they
suffer themselves to be weakened in their Religion by some dissents among
Ministers the upholders of it; or (indeed) because they are not so careful as
they should be to seek that resolution that may be had, nor so willing as were
meet, to exercise Conscience in the strength of the general directions of
Scripture (wherein all agree) and with the most earnest prayers to God for the
determining of things to themselves as far as their necessity requires, and as
they are called to act.

Both these may know that the difference between learned and godly Ministers,
is in less things not so clearly determined in Scripture, and arises from
their weakness, and the different dispensations of God's Spirit, whereby some
of them have more light and sight than others can attain: But this is no just
cause of doubting of, nor impediment of Walking in, the necessary and saving
Truths and Ways of God, wherein the Scripture is clear, and the Ministers of
Christ consent.

Briefly, They that take the course that the Beraeans did, that is, search the
Scriptures, reverently, conscientiously, and sincerely, will never be deceived
by any lying Hananiah, but discern a clear difference between a Paul, preaching
in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of God, and all other erroneous
Teachers that bring forth the Brats of their own brain, and vent the inventions
and imaginations of their own corrupt hearts, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.

Jer. 29. 7. And seek the peace of the City whither I have caused you to be
carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof
shall ye have peace.
Q. Why should the people of God seek and pray for the peace of Babylon wherein
they were miserable Captives?
A. For the answer of this Question, two things are to be considered: 1. What
is meant by seeking, and seeking to God for the peace of that City. 2. For what
reason they were to do it?

First, In this seeking and praying for the peace of the City, two things are
comprehended.

1. Seeking, studying and praying for, the peace of the King, whose Subjects
now they were, because God delivered them, and expressly required them to
deliver themselves into his hand, Jer. 21. 8, 9. And Subjects are to pray for
their life, Ezra 6. 10. and welfare, whose Subjects they are, (albeit they be
Heathens and Tyrants), by Gods express command, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. Nor is it in
vain in respect of Subjects themselves; because by this means, 1. God is
engaged in his own way of Prayer, for their better governing, and that those
under them may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Hence even Pagan
Princes are restrained, and do less evil, and more good; as upon Daniel's
prayers, his and his fellows lives were saved; and they by his means (through
the good success of his and their prayers with God, relating to the King, and
the action then in hand) were received into favor and promoted, no doubt to
the benefit and faring better of the whole Church of God, Dan. 2. 18, 23, 46,
48, 49. In this way also King Ahasuerus reversed his own Decree, at least made
a contrary Decree, and so Esther, Mordecai, and the Jews were delivered, and
Haman hanged. Thus also praying, Neh. 4. 9. Nehemiah (Chap. 1. 11. and 2. 4.)
had favor and assistance from the Heathen-King for building the Walls of
Jerusalem. 2. Such Prayers may work for the Conversion of Church-oppressing
Princes (especially in Gospel Times wherein God would have all (of what Nation
or Condition soever) to be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 3. Howsoever, much has been
done in this way for Heathens conviction, and for the honor of the true God,
Dan. 2. 18, 47. and 6. 10, 26, 27.

Whereunto may be referred the obtaining of rain by the Prayers of a Legion
Fulmine^ Legio, Eusebius. l. 5 c. 5.
of Christian Soldiers under Aurelius the Emperor, when else his Army was like
to have perished, which was more than all their Heathen-gods could help them
to, Jer. 14. 22. 4. Yea, the praying Captives at length so prevailed, Jer. 29.
12, 13, 14. that they had free liberty to return out of Captivity into their
own Country and City to repair it, and to build a second Temple there, Ezra 1.
2, 3. and 6. 12, 15.

2. This contains not only praying for the King, on whom depends the welfare of
the State, but also for the State of Babylon, on which depended the welfare of
the King. This prosperity of the State may be set forth by the peace of the
City, the glory and safety of the State being therein seated, Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 6. is (in effect) to pray for Isreal's welfare,
and for the whole state of the Jews; for inferior places are the Daughters,
Ezekiel. 16. 48. the chief City is the Mother, and the Daughters stand or fall
with the Mother-city. If the principal City be left, though many other Cities
be taken, there may be a reparation, but all is lost when that is ruined, as the
Babylonish Empire was when this City Babylon was taken, Dan. 5. 30, 31. Func.
Anno Mundi 34 25.

Thus we see what they were to seek and pray for.

Secondly, Follows the reason why they were so to do, for in the peace
thereof ye shall have peace: So that when they prayed for the peace of Babylon,
they prayed for themselves, and for the Church of God now imbodied there; where
also they were (by Gods command here, v. 5, 6.) to build, plant, marry, and be
increased; and where they became (afterward) so well accommodated, that they
were loath to come from thence (though at Gods call) into their own Country,
beset with enemies; foreseeing that they might abide in Babylon with more ease,
Zach. 2. 6. But whilst Gods will was that they should be there, his will also
was that they should seek the peace of that which was now their own place; as a
man bound in Prison, has reason to pray for the preservation of the Prison,
lest if that be fired, he be burnt; and so Jonah and Paul for the preservation
of the Ships wherein they sailed.

This Command may mind us of some other things, viz.

1. That it is not unlawful, but allowed us to pray for our own peace and
prosperity, 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. but especially it is a great duty to pray for the
Churches peace, Psalm. 122. 6. and 51. 18. and 137. 5, 6. Yet is there a further
end to be aimed at in this, that is the glory and service of God, Psalm. 51. 19.
and 122. 9. Genesis 28. 21, 22.

2. That when we cannot have the peace we would have, we must pray to God for
the peace we may have. If we cannot have peace in Zion, we must seek (and
therefore thank God for Psalm. 50. 15.) peace in Babylon, peace in a Prison, and
praise God the more if he give it there, Act. 16. 25.

3. And we may mind this also, that it runs cross to this Command, not to wish
well to and pray heartily for the State and Land in which we live, especially
wherein we live, not as Captives, but as Natives. As he that provides not for
his own, so he that prays not for his own, comes short of Infidels, Jon. 3. 5,
6, etc. and (sure) of the Church here captivated among and under Infidels.

It Is true that when there is a sad difference, and dispute between two
Protestant Nations, there are two things (even by the prevailing party), to be
mourned for: 1. The weakening of the Protestant Party, and the advantaging and
encouraging of the Enemies of the Truth. 2. The greater misery of War which
they that are vanquished must needs sustain: But yet comparing one State with
another, if it be applied to the War between England and Holland, and the most
fierce Sea-sight, June 8, 9, 10, etc. we have reason to take comfort in, and
bless God for, the better success of our own, we being Protestants as well as
they, and this being the land of our Nativity. Briefly, we are in such a case
to rejoice with trembling; to rejoice, because of the undeserved favor of
Divine Providence, wherein we are preferred; and yet with trembling, because we
hew down a company that support true Religion together with our selves; and
because Victory is gotten at so hard an hand, that we may See Calv. in loc.
see our sin in our success.

Jer. 31. 31, to v. 35. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make
a new Covenant with the House of Israel and with the house of Judah; Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers etc.
Qu. Whence is it that Jeremy speaks of a new Covenant? what says he of it,
and how are we to judge of it?
1. A. First, he speaks of it, (after much said of an outward fullness) to set
forth that wherein the happiness of the Church especially consists; yea,
which their outward Promises pointed at and were to lead them to, and proceeded
from, to wit, the spiritual privileges of the Covenant of Grace, to be enjoyed
most in Gospel-days, and that by Israel, alienated from God, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. as
it were by their rent from the house of David, and captivated before Judah; yet
shall they (though not returning to their Land as Judah did) be conjoined, with
Judah* in the Spiritual comforts of the Covenant after the Messiah is come.
Ezekiel. 37. 17.

2. Secondly, that which he says of it, is, 1. First, that it is a new
Covenant, not for substance; for it was included and summarily set forth in
that old gray headed Promise, the first in all the Bible, Genesis 3. 15. And it is
by the same Grace and Covenant of Grace, that we and the Fathers are saved,
Act. 15. 11. Lazarus is taken into Abraham's bosom, and we shall sit in the
Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Isaak, Jacob, and all the Prophets, Luke 13.
28. and that by virtue of this Covenant which was their Covenant, Mat. 22. 32.
But though the substance be the same, yet there is diverse ways a difference;
and namely in two respects.

1. In regard of a new manner of Government, and thereby a new carriage and
management of this Covenant, the Sacraments and Seals of the Covenant being
different in the old and New Testament, and the Service also; that of the
Old Testament being external and carnal, Heb. 9. 10. this of the new,
spiritual, Joh. 4. 23, 24. yea the spiritual Law of God was then written only
in Tables of stone, so that the spirituality lay Romans 7. 14.
in the Law: But as the Tables on which the Law was written, remained stones
still; so the Heart (if we look only to that dispensation in which Grace was
given, but not by which) was left (notwithstanding all that the Law said) hard
and carnal: but now in this new Covenant, there is not only an outward word but
an inward spiritual work; and a print is left upon the spirit and inward parts,
so that a regenerate Person says truly, Thy law is within my heart, it is in
the midst of my bowels, Psalm 40. 8*

2. In regard of the measure of grace, much more is given, and it is given unto
more both Jews and Gentiles, Joel. 2. 28. with Act. 2. 16, 17. Matthew. 13. 17.
and from hence it is that there are more also of the fruits of the Spirit, Isa.
44. 4. and 61. 3. Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11.

2. Secondly, The benefits of this new Covenant may be thus sum'd-up.

1. Here Is Justification and pardon of sin, which though it be left to the last
place, yet it is the bottom-promise, and therefore it comes in with a For, v.
34. as the foundation of all, and from whence flows the main and marrow of the
Covenant, viz. I will be their God, and they shall be my people, v. 33. Now
people must needs be agreed before they be married, Amos 3. 3. So God must
forgive us before he received us, Hos. 14. 2. The Covenant of of Works says;
Thou must forbear sin, and do none: The Covenant of Grace says, I will forgive
sin and mark none, Ps. 130. 4, 3.

2. Here Is Sanctification] viz. as Sanctification is taken in it is latitude, as
1 Cor. 6. 11. so as to comprehend in it the whole work of Grace and change that
there is in the new creature; so we may refer to it that which is here
mentioned, v. 33, 34. to wit, renovation and illumination.

1. Inward and spiritual renovation, 2 Cor. 5. 17. I will put my Law into their
inward parts. In the Old Testament the Law was written in stone, and they brake
it, (though they had all the reason in the World to keep it, being newly
brought out of Egypt and God being such a Lord to them as that he was also an
Husband) Isa. 54. 5. Herein the Law was in no fault, Romans 7. 12. Nor were they
without fault; for their breaking of it arose from the rebellion of their
hearts, for which God paid them home and shook them off, Heb. 8. 9. But
notwithstanding that they, through their wilful and froward Covenant Breaking,
became altogether inexcusable; yet a further thing also is to be considered, to
wit, that that (more legal) Covenant required all things strictly, but gave not
from it self (as legal and considered as separated from this new Covenant)
strength to do any thing: That Ministry was but a Ministry of the letter,
wherein they might read much commanded, but it had no Spirit in it to help them
to keep it, and so it killed them for not keeping it, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Romans 7. 6. The
Lord therefore in this new Covenant, takes a new course; here is the Ministry of
the Spirit; whereby,

1. He makes the Tables himself (as he did the first Tables, Deuteronomy. 5. 22.)
only, whereas they were Tables of stone, now he makes fleshy Tables, Ezekiel. 36.
26. and having made them fit to receive his impressions,

2. He does in two Tables, to wit, the mind and the heart and bowels, write not
a new Law, but the same Law by his blessed Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 3. whereby the
heart of a regenerate man is formed and conformed in all Obedience to the holy
Law of God. So that he is not only commanded and kept in order by the Law in
his Book without, but by a suitable Law within, in his mind and heart, Romans 7.
23. and 8. 2. The Law says, this is thy duty; true, (says the regenerate
Person) for I find it written in my heart, and my duty is my delight. I delight
in the law of God after the inward man, Romans 7. 22. Psalm. 40. 8. Psalm. 37. 30,
31.

2. Besides this inward and spiritual renovation, there is added (we may say as
that from which renovation and regeneration comes; for Christ gives life by
giving light, Ephesians. 5. 14. and which also comes from regeneration and
renovation, Romans 12. 2) I say, there is added special illumination, the Spirit
in that way perfecting the work of Sanctification, v. 34. They shall no more
teach every man his neighbor, etc. that is, They shall be all taught of God,
John 6. 45. and by reason of the Spirit, (the inward Teachers, Joh. 2. 27.)
there shall be no such need as there was wont to be of outward Teaching.
Ordinary People shall be like Prophets, Joel. 2. 28. and Prophets did not use
to go to their Neighbors to seek knowledge; yet the meaning of this is not,
that in the time of the Gospel, there should be no seeking or getting knowledge
of others: For

1. The prophecy of Gospel Times shows they should call upon one another to go
to be taught, Isa. 2. 3.

2. We find in the history of the Gospel that Aquila and Priscilla took Apollo
(an eminent Preacher) to give him instruction, and that not without need, for
he knew only the Baptism of John, Act. 18. 25, 26.

3. The Apostle requires the rich and right in-dwelling of the Word of God in
the Colossians, that they might teach and admonish one another, Coloss. 3. 16.

4. And especially God that does nothing without need, appointed the Apostles
to go and Teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. and still they taught, Act. 20.
20. yea we find that they that were taught had need to be taught again, Heb. 5.
12. yea, to be put in remembrance of what they know, 2 Pet. 1. 12. And (to
strike all dead) God has appointed the calling of the Ministry for constant
Teaching to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. so that
the meaning 1 John 2. 27. is not absolutely, No need but no such need. As a
Child asks his Father and fellows about every thing, being come to discretion,
he does not so: But (for all that) every wiseman asks advice. The Jews were
children, We grown, who yet need to ask, but not as they. This will be more
fully resolved by observing that the Scripture uses to express that Negatively
which is to be understood only Comparatively: As I will have mercy and not
sacrifice; when yet sacrifice was expressly required, but not principally, Jer.
7. 22, 23. so Joh. 9. 41. and 15. 22. Thus we say, that a child of a quick and
pregnant wit needs not be still followed with teaching by his Master and his
fellows: No, he will learn of himself; that is, compare him with other dull
Children, and so it is true, he needs not be taught, that is, as they. And so it
is with them that have the discerning and enlightening Spirit of God within
them; they need not be taught the grounds of Religion, their A B C, nor any
saving Points thereof, with such ado as others need that want that Spirit; they
all know even the least of them, the little Children, 1 John 2. 13. They know
the Father, and those matters of Religion, that will not be beaten into the
heads of others that have far better natural parts than they, as manifest
experience shows, and Scripture also, Mat. 11. 25.

Q. But had the Church of the Jews and the Servants of God in the Old Testament
none of these things? How is it the same Covenant in substance, if they had not
these Substantials?
A. In two things; 1. They had them in the substance: As, 1. Justification and
pardon of sin, Numb. 23. 21. 1 King. 15. 5. Psalm. 32. 1, 2, 5. and 51. 14. Isa.
38. 17. 2. Sanctification, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. the law of Grace was in their hearts,
Psalm. 37. 30, 31. and 143. 10. Act. 13. 22. And though it be said, v. 32. Which
my Covenant they brake, yet there is no cause of understanding it of all
universally, though of many, 1 Cor. 10. 5. for the Apostle does over and over
again limit it, and show that some had more grace, 1 Cor. 10, 7. 8 9. And it is
expressly said when that provocation is spoken, Howbeit not all that came out of
Egypt, Heb. 3. 16.

Q. What then is the difference?
A. 1. In the Old Testament Justification was not so plain; it was obscurely
shadowed in Sacrifices, but the chief Sacrifice was not come, Heb. 10. 1. 9.
And it appears that those Sacrifices they had did not cleanse the Conscience,
that is, get off the guilt of sin, cause a clearness in it, 2 Cor. 7. 11. and a
freedom from all accusations, because the same Sacrifices were repeated every
year, not only for the sin of the year going before, but of former years also,
Levit. 16. 21. So that there was therein a remembrance made of sin every year,
and the guilt thereof was set before them in the Sacrifice; but now Christ
having offered his Sacrifice, the promise here is, their sin will I remember no
more; it is quite done away by the offering of Christ's Body once for all, Heb.
9. 14. Heb. 10. 10. Not that their sins were not pardoned in the Old Testament,
or that David was not (and all other faithful men with him) made white as snow,
Psalm. 51. 7. but that was not by virtue of those Sacrifices, (their sin
remained still for any thing they could do) but by virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice, Heb. 10. 5, 6, etc. And withal, they saw not their forgiveness so
clearly but that there was need every year to take a new view of it in their
Typical Sacrifices, presenting that Atonement of Jesus Christ, Levit. 16. 11.
And as Justification was not so plain; so,

2. Sanctification was not so plentiful; the Spirit that is poured now was but
dropped then; they had it as the Apostles had it when Christ lived, but O how
much more had the Apostles of it, and others also when Christ was glorified!
Joh. 7. 39. Act. 4. 8, 31. and 6. 3. This is the first part of the Answer.

2. These things were given in the Old Testament, but they were grounded on the
New; for the New Covenant is ratified in the Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 25.
which was shed in the fullness of time, from whence were derived all those good
things unto the Church of the Old Testament; and therefore the Jews are said
not to have them (in a sort) because they had them not but with reference to
that which was done after Christ's coming. See Heb. 11. 40. with Chap. 10. 14.
They without us, that is, without that done in the Gospel Times wherein we
live; could not be perfected, that is, justified and saved. As John Baptist is
said to baptize with water only, not but that the Spirit accompanied his
Baptism; but that was from another, that is, from Christ that came after: So in
the Old Testament they had Externals only, not but that they had Spirituals
also, but they were fetched from the work of Redemption in the New Testament,
Rev. 13. 8. which the outward things in the Old typified and set forth, and
were their best way to help them to that which they of themselves could not
help them to, to wit, the Spiritual good things of the New Testament, signified
by what was in the Old.

Objections from Scripture-expressions seeming to hold forth two Covenants.

Obj. 1. It Is said expressly, There was a Covenant made in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 5. 2.
when they came out of Egypt, Exodus 19. 4, 5. yet that Covenant is now
abolished, Heb. 8. 9. 13. therefore it seems it was not the Covenant of Grace,
for we know that is not now abolished?
A. 1. That Horeb-Covenant was a Covenant of Grace, as appears by the Preface
to the Ten Commandments, I am the Lord thy God, (a word of Grace), and by the
Promise in the second Commandment, of Mercy to thousands, though Sinners in a
strict sense. This is confirmed by the course that Moses took after that
Horeb-Covenant was published; which was (as we see Deuteronomy. 30. 1, 2, 3.) to
exhort them to Repentance, and to offer them Mercy upon Repentance, (which the
Covenant of Works does not admit, but exact perfect Obedience,) and to promise
them regenerating Grace, v. 6. which the Covenant of Works does not effect.

A. 2. When it is said that the Covenant made with them when they came out of
the land of Egypt is abolished, the meaning is, not that it is made void as to
the substance of it, but as to the managing and way of ordering of it in Old
Testament-times.

2 Obj. But we find other-where the very form of the Covenant of Works, viz.
This do and live, Levit. 18. 5. Exodus 19. 5. Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. Why should
a Covenant of Grace be set forth in the very tenor and terms of a Covenant of
Works?
A. 1. Indeed in that [This do and live] there is a repetition, resuming and
representing of the Covenant of Works for the Lords and his Peoples use; but
there is not therein intended an Obligation (such as lay in the Covenant of
Works) for then none of them in the Old Testament could have lived and been
saved, because they could not perform and do perfectly what the Law requires,
Gal. 3. 10. The thing therefore pointed at, is the Administration of the
Covenant of Grace in a legal way suitable to, and carrying a similitude with
the Covenant of Works; but it was in order to, and for the service of the
Covenant of Grace. It was not so much a Covenant [made] as [made known] and
made use of for the better inciting of that People to a recourse to the
Covenant of Grace, which alone was the standing and binding Covenant at that
time.

A. 2. Yet under (not coordinate with, but subordinate to), I say under that
Covenant of Grace there may be said to be another Covenant and Contract made,
that is, a subservient Contract, and that the bond of a Covenant (resembling
the Covenant of Works) did in some sort lie on that People.

But how were they bound? I answer two things:

1. That they were bound as to their sense; as we see in a Child put by the
Father under Tutors and Governors, Gal. 4. 1. there is the bond of the
Schoolmaster's Covenant lying heavily upon him, to wit, If you learn well and
do well, you shall have this and that, else a Ferula, a rod, etc. and I say,
this Covenant lies on the Child, and straitens him, and to his sense, (at least
so much to his sense) there is no other; yet all this while, there is a
Covenant of Grace and Love between the Father and the Child that is tied so
hard to it, but that is very dark, and in the Child's minority hidden from his
sight (by the Fathers wisdom) for his better education. So it is here, the Jews
were put under Moses his Discipline, and under the Law as a Schoolmaster. This
Law (with the rod of Ceremonies in its hand) was ever in the sight of the Jew,
by means whereof there was a bondage upon his Spirit, Romans 8. 15. to wit, the
Covenant of Gospel Grace being hid from him under the vail of the Law, and the
Paedagogy of the Old Testament; so that he could not look to the bottom, the
end, Romans 10. 4. and accomplishment of that Ceremonial frame, which is now
abolished, 2 Gor. 3. 13. But I add,

2. That they were not bound by that subservient and similitudinary Covenant,
as to their state; (1) So as that they were to stand or fall, live or die, be
saved or damned according to that Covenant; but when the Law was roughest with
them, they might take out a prohibition, and appeal to Christ unto whom the
Ceremonies were to give place at his coming, they being but accessories annexed
to the Covenant of Grace; and yet because those Jewish rites and prescripts
were instruments of administering it, therefore (says Calvin) the name of
Covenant is given to them, Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 11. s. 4.

3. Obj. That Covenant cannot be said to be broken that was never made and
stricken, but there was a Covenant differing from, and set on the other side of
the Gospel Covenant that is said to be broken, (and that is the Sinai -Covenant
made with them when they came out of Egypt, Jer. 31. 34.) therefore a different
Covenant was made and existent in the Old Testament, and namely on Mount Sinai.
A. It Is truee, there was a Covenant* made in the Old Testament (in manner and
with the terror of a Covenant of Works) pressing the exact observation of the
Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33. and promising a long and happy life in Canaan if
they kept it, and threatening all curses if they kept it not, Psalm. 105. 9, 10,
11. Jer. 11. 4. 5. and this Covenant they were bound to keep, or else might
look to be deprived of the blessings promised, Vid. C^yt. in Deuteronomy. page 173,
176.
and to undergo the evils threatened; and so they did, and therefore they
breaking it (especially in the second Commandment by their Idolatry) God
regarded them not, Heb. 8. 9. but sent many Judgments on them, and in the end
blew them with a Northern wind (as chafe and unregarded stuff) clean out of
Canaan: But though there were such an external and temporary Covenant (in wrapped
in the spiritual and everlasting Covenant of Grace) for the use of that people,
which they brake, and were outwardly broken in pieces for the breach of; yet
there was no such Covenant as that they should upon the breach of the Mosaical
Law, go absolutely to Hell, or expect Life and Salvation by the keeping of it;
for could they have had it no other way, they must all have perished. Therefore
it was not properly a Covenant of Works, wherein they were concluded and shut
up from all Grace; but wherein they were concluded and shut up, Gal. 3. 22.
that they might seek for that in a way of Grace, which they saw they could not
possibly have in a way of Works, And nodoubt many of those that were cast out
of the earthly Canaan (according to the threats of the legal Covenant) did by
the Grace of God through Faith and Repentance inherit the heavenly, and diverse
of them came again to the earthly also; yea diverse times, God remitted the
temporal punishments also upon their repentance, Deuteronomy. 4. 30, 31. and 30. 1. 2 Chronicles. 15. 4. and 12. 7, 8. 1 Samuel 12. 19, 20. which is manifestly the
indulgence of the Covenant of Grace, Neh. 9. 31. To draw up all: The conclusion
of the former argument is granted, to wit, That there was another Covenant,
that is, another managing and ministering of the Covenant of Grace under the
Old Testament than in the New, which goes under the name of another Covenant;
but this makes nothing at all against the standing Covenant of Grace, of
Righteousness, Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, which was, is, and shall be
in all Ages of the Church; for that legal Covenant stands under it, and
instead of fighting against it (unless it be by man's abuse of it) does Service
to it, the ceremonial things being types of Christ, the promised Canaan of
Heaven; And the moral law, unto the first Table whereof the ceremonies are
annexed, as their political Laws (going under the name of the Horeb-Covenant
Jer. 34. 13, 14.) were to the second Table; I say, the moral Law (so strictly
pressed upon them) was to urge them to betake themselves to Christ and the
Covenant of Grace; yea so also do the ten Commandments now by a moral
convincement, though not by a cermonial affrightment. The old Covenant did
indeed differ from the Gospel Covenant, that is, from the administration of the
Covenant of Grace in Gospel Times; but it was no way opposite to the Covenant
of Grace in the substance of it, but auxiliary to it.

4. Obj. We find Gal. 4. 24. two Covenants expressed.
A. That Doctrine is delivered to those that would be under the law, as appears
v. 21. that is, who did seek Justification by the Works of the Law; unto whom
there are always two Covenants to be presented.

1. The Covenant of Works in its proper nature and strict obligation to Death
and Damnation, if there be not perfect Obedience, I say, to such the Law and
Covenant of Works are to be presented, in their full and naked force (as Samuel
presented a King 1 Samuel 8. 10, 11.) to let them know when they are so willing
to be under the Law, what, and how servile and woeful a state it is that they
put themselves under.

2. The Covenant of Grace also is to be set forth, to let them know that they
are deprived of it through their own default, and by their adhering to the
Covenant of Works, and must be cast out as Adam out of Paradise, and Hagar and
her Son out of Abraham's family. Yea so it is still, they that will be saved by
their Works, or partly by Christ and partly by their Works, are excluded the
Covenant of Grace, and shall have no benefit by Jesus Christ, Gal. 5. 2. but
are remitted to the Covenant of Works and Act. 25. 12. Ibis ad mosen. with Act.
26. 32.
to Moses court (as Moses stands in opposition to Christ) to be tried there.

No doubt therefore there are two Covenants, that is, a Covenant of Works
before the fall and a Covenant of Grace since; but there are not (after the
fall) two binding Covenants, save in the sense before mentioned: for the
Covenant of Works and the Law, shall hold, none in Fetters that comes to
Christ; but if they will not come to him, that Law will surely hold and hamper
them, bind them hand and foot, and cast them into utter darkness. Howbeit in
this case, the Obligation of the Covenant of Works is acciedntal, because men
(through their ignorance and pride) refuse the Covenant of Grace that would
relieve them, Romans 10. 1, 2, 3.

5. Obj. In Heb. 8. 7, 8, 9. etc. there is a plain distinction of Covenants
first and second, and the Covenant which God made with them when he led them
out o^ the Land of Egypt, is said to be established on less excellent promises,
yea to be faulty, and that which was to decay, wax old, and vanish away: can
these things be said of the Covenant of Grace? if not then there was another.
A. The first and second administration of one and the same Covenant, are
called by the name of the first and second Covenant; as the name of Covenant is
give^ to Circumcision, Genesis 17. 9, 10. and the name of the New Testament is
given to the Cup in the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 25. to wit, because the Old
and New Testament was, and is, clothed, carried, administered and confirmed with
and by these Ordinances: Now these Accessories to the Covenant in the Old and
New Testament are so different, that there is the aspect of two Covenants, when
it is but the same Covenant in several forms and ordered in several ways
according to the state of the Church of God of old and in these last times. The
Jews began their day in the evening, the first part whereof therefore was dark,
the later light, yet it was but one natural day; and so but one Covenant of
Grace in the darker administration of the Old Testament, and the brighter of
the new. Now for the particulars mentioned in the Objection, the Apostle says
indeed;

1. That the second Covenant is better, as the Sun is better to us in Summer
than in Winter; for then it is veiled and clouded, but in Summer bright: So the
first administration was clouded with many ceremonies, ours is bright and
glorious; yet the same Covenant still, as the same Sun: And (better promises)
does not imply promises better for the matter, Heb. 11. 13. and substance, for
there cannot be a better promise than the first promise, Genesis 3. 15. which runs
through all the Old Testament; but better for the clearness, fullness,
sweetness, and efficacy of them under the second administration.

2 Whereas the first Covenant is said to be Faulty: (Faulty) does not signify
that which is less right but less perfect; not that which is less and inferior
as to approbation, (both being ordained of God) but as to operation, not less
justifiable but less clear and comfortable, notwithstanding all this the good
and glorious Covenant of Grace lay at the bottom.

3. As for decaying and vanishing away, that shows not a different Covenant;
for all the vanishing is in the administration, the substance is still left: To
conclude this prolix discourse, 1. The Covenant of Works (made with Adam in his
Integriry) was swallowed up in that Covenant of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. by which it
so ceased that no man can now be saved by it, because of his inability to keep
it: Nor shall be condemned by it, if by Faith he lay hold upon Christ that has
kept it; only it is resumed in the Old Testament, not as contracted for the
substance of it, but as presented for the service of it to the Covenant of
Grace.

2. There are two Cases wherein the Scripture makes the greatest difference
between the Old Testament-Covenant and the New.

1. When they be compa^ed together, to show what is proper to ^i her, as 2 Cor.
3. 6, 7, etc.

2. When the Old Covenant is adh^red to for Justification of life, as Gal. 3.
21.

But the former difference is only administratory, and the latter accidental.

Jer. 36. 5, 6. Jeremy commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up, I cannot go into
the house of the Lord; Therefore go thou and read in the roll which thou have
written from my mouth, the words of the Lord in the ears of the people in the
Lords house on the fasting-day. It may be they will present their supplication
before the Lord, and return every man from his evil way, etc.
Q. What are the Duties belonging to a fasting-day, especially a public Fast?
A. 1. The Word of God is to be read, Neh. 9. 3. but (more especially) those
parts of the Word are to be read; those Sermons to be preached and repeated,
that are most suitable to the state of the people at that time, as the Sermons
of Jeremy were to the present state of the Jews. The necessity whereof appears,
because when Jeremy could not preach publicly himself, he caused Baruch to
write out and read before the People the Sermons he had preached before, even
from the days of Josiah. And (indeed) the Word of God is the principal means of
effecting that which is intended in a Fast, to wit, Humiliation and
Reformation, 2 King. 22. 11. Act. 2. 37.

2. Every man should then set himself to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3.
Fast-days are Prayer-days, so here v. 37. the Fasting being considerable only,
as it is an assistance and evidence of Humiliation, and an appendix and
improver of the duty of Prayer. These Prayers (to make them acceptable and
effectual) must have in them a double Grace:

1. Humility; for (as it is here in the Original and in the Margent)
Supplications must fall, that is, fall low before the Lord, in the humble
confession of Sin, Neh. 9. 2. Luke 18. 13. this is plain in Daniels prayer,
Dan, 9. 20.

2. Faith, Jam. 1. 6. 2 Chronicles. 20. 10. For Prayers in Scripture are said not
only to fall, but to ascend, Psalm. 141. 3. Act. 10. 4. and by falling lower
from an humbled Soul, they ascend higher, and rebound as it were, the more
heavenward, 2 Chronicles. 30. 27. This Faith is necessary; for though humility and
repentance fit us for mercy, yet it is Faith that helps us to it; our comfort
is not bottomed on our Repentance, or Faith either (as it is a Grace in us) but
on the Mercy of God, which by the hand of Faith we lay hold upon, Isa. 1. 16,
17, 18. Repentance is the forerunner and a necessary duty, but our washing
needs washing, and our repentance pardon, and pardon arises from mercy, and
mercy is had and enjoyed by our coming to God, and making out unto him for it
by Faith, Joh. 6. 35.

3. Prayer, and any profession of Repentance we make therein will not serve the
turn, without amendment of life: every one must return from his evil way. What
had the Prodigals deliberation and resolution of returning to his Father been,
if he had not actually returned to his Fathers house, yea to the Laws of his
Fathers house; for we must suppose (which will well agree with such a Parable)
he came not thither only to receive a Robe, and a Ring, and shoos for his feet
to walk with like a Gentleman (nay, the usage of an hired servant would have
served his turn) but reverently and obediently to receive Commands also to walk
by. Indeed in the day of humiliation there is a sincere Resolution only, and a
serious engagement (as Ezra 10. 12.) but afterward there is (or should be) a
zealous Execution and real accomplishment, as Ezra 10. 14, 15, 16.

4. Fasting and Fear do well together, for it is the Fear of God (when his
anger appears in his threatenings) which much avails and prevails for the doing
of that which God requires of us, as namely for prayer, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. and
forsaking our evil way, Prove. 16. 6. But now there is a threefold Fear:

1. A Fear arising from the conviction of Gods power and justice, and our own
guilt, and accompanied with consternation; this is the Fear of ordinary men
living in the Church, and somewhat acquainted with Gods terrors, and that are
not yet fallen into an utter obstinacy, and this seems to be spoken of here, v.
16. the Princes feared (looking to God and his greatness) yet resolved to tell
the King, Looking to his greatness also, and provident (it seems) to keep a
correspondence with him; yet the godly among them had a gracious fear; others
were affrighted with punishment, but the ungodly came not thus far, v. 24.

2. A Fear arising out of conviction that men have to do with God, and
accompanied with indignation because they cannot abide that God should cross,
control, menace and straiten them. Somewhat of this seems to be in this King
Jehoiakim, who could not but know he had to do with God as well as with
Jeremiah, (considering how much of God appeared in and with Jeremy) but his
inward horror and hatred made him do as the Philistines did, that feared and
fought against God, 1 Samuel 4. 7, 8. so did Jehoiachim with his Penknife and
fire, and fury against Jeremy and Baruch. This Fear is in the worst men.

3. There is a Fear in the best men, arising from conviction of Gods terrible
Majesty, Psalm. 76. 7. accompained with an apprehension of his goodness, Hos. 3.
5. and working their hearts to an holy submission and obedience. Something of
this or like this we find in the Ninevites in a natural and moral way, Joh. 3.
10. and in the Church we find it in a better way, Ezra 10. 9, 10, 11, 12. This
is an encouraging Fear, Ninive says. Who can tell? Jon. 3. 9. the Church, Who
knows? Joel 2. 14. And sure, if Gods, It may be, v. 7. come to something,
then will our (May-bees) also. If we give him his expectation, he will give us
ours, Jon. 3. 10.

Jer. 38. 2. with Jer. 21. 9. Thus says the Lord, He that goes forth (or
falls) to the Chaldeans, he shall live.
Q. How could the People deliver themselves, and so the King and City, into the
hands of their and his greatest enemy, and yet keep the fidelity they owed to
their King?
A. 1. It was Gods will and counsel, Jer. 21. 9.
and command, Jer. 27. 12. Jer. 38. 20. that they (and their King also) should
yield themselves up to the King of Babylon; and the bond of our Obedience to
God, in an extraordinary case, takes away any other ordinary bond of Obedience,
crossing that; as the command to Abraham to kill his Son, took away the
standing bond both of the fifth and sixth Commandment at that time, and as to
him.

2. It Is answered that (out of such an Calv. in ^oc.
extraordinary case) as long as there is any ordinary way to save King, City,
Country, Subjects are bound to adventure their lives to the utmost for their
defense and preservation.

But as things stood here, two things were to be confidered, viz.

1. That there was no hope of keeping the City in a way of reason, the enemy
being so much too strong for them, all help failing them, and they being
utterly disabled to sustain the Siege, there being no more bread in the City,
v. 9. It Is usual to deliver up strong Forts that cannot be kept but with
greater loss to the supreme Governor upon the best conditions they can get.

2. The Case here makes all clear, for whereas when Jerusalem was besieged by
Senacherib, 2 King. 19. 32, 33, 34. the Lord said he would take away, and did
take away that proud enemy by one of the Heavenly Host, so that he returned by
the way he came, and did not, could not, come into the City: Here the case was
clean contrary, for God made known by his own Word, that it was absolutely
certain and resolved on in Heaven, that the Army of the Chaldeans should take
the City, and burn it with fire if they stood out with him. Albeit therefore it
were not yet actually done, yet it was all one as if it had been done because
it was certainly and suddenly to be done.

Now although Subjects are to stand for their King and Country to the utmost
drop of their blood as long as there is any hope; yet if there be none, but
Gods pleasure is revealed for their being under another King by giving him the
possession of all, they may and should yield to Gods will in it, to whom it
belongs to dispose of the Kingdoms of the World as he pleases, Jer. 27. 6,
7, 11, 12. And in such a case all Oaths and Obligations to the former King
cease, and the present powers that have got all into their hands, are to be
submitted to as long as it pleases God so to order it, though it be for the
space of seventy years; for why should we be the Authors of our death and
misery by our obstinacy? Jer. 27. 12, 13.

Q. If falling to the Chaldeans were according to the will of God, why does
Jeremiah himself so passionately disclaim that charge? Jer. 38. 13, 14.
A. It Is one thing to go forth by way of dedition and a voluntary yielding to
an enemy that cannot be resisted; another thing to abide in the City, and act
there for the enemy in a way of sedition and treachery. This last is that which
Jeremy disclaims, he acted not for the Chaldeans in what he said but for his
own People, who had no better way to save themselves than to lay aside their
weapons and animosity, and tender their submission (more to God than) to
Nebuchadnezzar.

Q. But what shall be said to the Fugitives that fell to the Chaldeans, Jer.
38. 19. and 39. 9. are they to be commended?
A. It Is one thing to fly out of Fear as those Run-aways did, another to yield
out of Faith and Obedience to God, which was the thing Jeremy persuaded, and
intended it should be done by the generality, not an inconsiderable company;
yet they that fell to the Chaldeans by flight, fared the better for it with the
enemy it is like (though they were captivated also, Jer. 39. 9.) but had they
fallen to him by Faith, they should have found favor with the enemy, and with
God also, as Jer. 39. 18.

Jer. 38. 27. Then came all the Princes to Jeremiah, and asked him, and he told
them according to all these words that the King commanded, so they left
speaking with him, for the matter was not perceived.
Qu. Did Jeremy do well in following the Kings command, and giving a sliding
answer to the Princes, or is he to be blamed for it?
A. 1. This may be taken into consideration, and serve somewhat for the better
weighing of this Question, that albeit Vid Calv. in loc.
Jeremy in his Discourse with the King and advice to him, speak according to
the Word of God, v. 21. and no doubt by the Spirit of God; yet we do not find
that he had any special Command from God to go and deliver these words unto
him, though he had formerly showed and said from God the same things for
substance, v. 21. Jer. 27. 12. It Is one thing for a Prophet to deliver Gods
mind (when a question is propounded to him) in way of Counsel, v. 15. another
to deliver it by special Command and as a Messenger sent from God to say such
words. This may be cleared by Paul's manner of speaking when the Corinthians
wrote to him to be resolved; sometimes he says, Not I, but the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.
10. sometimes, I not the Lord, v. 12. and 25. I have no commandment of the
Lord. Yet he spoke what was very agreeable to the Word of God, and as one that
had the Spirit of God, v. 40. but he had not such an express Command for one
thing whereof he speaks as for another: Now, if it were thus here (which I
leave to the Learned and judicious to judge of, then Jeremy might be less
resolute because less armed with a special Commission from God: and therefore
as he got from the King, Security for his life before he gave him counsel, v.
15. so here he takes the counsel the King gave him as the likeliest way to
secure it with the Princes; when in that which God gave him a direct charge to
speak, he did not use to cast any such perils, but showed himself most
courageous in the confidence of Gods sending him to speak all that he spoke in
their ears, Jer. 26. 15.

2. For the thing it self, he spoke that which was true; for we find before
(Chap. 37. 20.) that he did present his Supplication to the King, that he might
not return to Jonathans house, and perhaps he renewed the same Petition at this
meeting (though it be not expressed) to wit, that whatsoever opposition of him
should arise, yet he might not be put by his Adversaries into that dismal
Prison. It may be somewhat probable (I say) that Jeremy now renewed this
Petition because the King here mentions it; And if he did, why might not
Jeremy, speaking part of the Truth, conceal the rest, which it was not
profitable to the Princes to know (rather it might have put them on a great
sin, that is, the killing of Jeremy) and dangerous to himself to make known?

3. (To speak a little more fully and distinctly) The Princes might ask Jeremy,
either,

1. More loosely, viz. what he said to the King when he was within, and then,
the answer the King put into his mouth, might serve the turn, and excuse
Jeremy, it being truly spoken; or

2. The Princes might examine him strictly, of all that passed between the King
and him, according as the King describes it in v. 25. of this Chapter: If they
did so, Jeremy cannot be excused but will appear weak as another man; For

1. He went not to the King to present any Petition, but the King sent to him
to hear what he would say to him; v. 14.

2. If Jeremy did not present that Petition now, but it must rest upon this
that he did it in another meeting, at another time and at another place (for so
was that that is recorded, Chap. 37. 20. it was at another time, when Jeremy
was in the Dungeon, Jer. 37. 16. This, when in the Court of the Prison, Jer.
38. 13. And in another place; That in the Kings house, Jer. 37. 17. This in
Gods house, Jer. 38. 14.) I say, If Jeremy did not present that Petition at
this meeting, the business in that regard, is much more questionable on
Jeremie's part: But

3. Though he did present it now, and so spoke a clear truth (as to that point)
yet he spoke not all, nor the greatest part, but rather concealed all, that is,
that whole substance of the business, which they by their questioning with him,
desired to have discovered; I suppose therefore that they did not strictly
enquire of him, nor stay long upon the enquiry; for then, either he must have
been silent, and that Princes cannot bear (they look to have their questions
answered) Joh. 19. 9, 10. or he must have spoken some untruth, seigned
something that was not, and that a Jeremy could not bear; or else expose
himself to their cruelty and rage, of which notwithstanding the Text says
nothing, but rather declares that the business with the Prophet was calmly
concluded and left off, v. 27. yea, the matter was not perceived, and therefore
it is certain they did not get from Jeremy what passed between the King and him.
Indeed it is a wonder that the Princes (that did so eye and pry into Jeremy and
his motions, v. 25.) should handle such a matter as this, so slightly; but
herein the wonderful Power and Providence of God appears, that subtle and
fierce men are not always like themselves; God casts a mist before their eyes,
that they cannot find the door, Genesis 19. 11. and see their advantages: He
stupifies their minds (Herod sends not a Messenger with the wisemen to bring
him word where Jesus was, but trusts to them and is baffled, Mat. 2. 16.) Or he
calms their hearts, Genesis 33. 4, 10. or ties their tongues, Genesis 31. 29. and
makes them slubber over a business for his Childrens safety.

These words (the matter was not perceived) show (I think) that God caused that
to be concealed by which his holy Servant might have suffered.

Jer. 50. 4. In those days, and at that time, says the Lord, the Children of
Israel shall come they and the Children of Judah together, etc.
Q. How may it be brought to pass that there should be such an Union as is her
set before us in the conjunction of Israel and Judah?
A. 1. One rod, and a common calamity, laid upon differing Parties, may be a
good preparation to make them far asunder come together, as straggling sheep
run together when they be hunted, and when Beacons be set a fire, the whole
Nation gathers into a Body to save it self: the long Captivity wherein the Jews
were scattered, made them (no doubt) to long after a closing greater than
before, as soon as they might.

2. One Rule is the principal means of effecting and establishing it. There are
two Rules, viz. of Reason and of Scripture, wherein men concur as lines in the
Center, Act. 5. 40. and 15. 2. and 15. 31. But the Rule of Scripture prevails
most, because man's Reason is variable and fallible, and corrupt; but God is
one, his Name one, Zach. 14. 19. and his Word both pure and sure, Prove. 30. 5.
Psalm. 19. 7. Hence in that great Controversy about Circumcision, Act. 15. 2.
when the case was determined by Scripture, v. 15. there ensued a great and
general satisfaction, v. 31. and Act. 16. 4, 5. An Infallible Authority
commands Unity.

3. One Head, Hos. 1. 11. They that according to the Rule, get under the right
Head, will agree among themselves; Quae convenient in aliquo tertio, (in illo
tertio) convenient inter se. Many profess Christ, and talk of him, but few are
in him, else there would be more agreement, Ephesians. 4. 15. and 2. 15, 16. for that
Head keeps the Members in order, and has a staff of bands to rule them with,
Zach. 11. 7. Not but that they in Christ may through weakness, have fallings
out one with another; but when they have well bethought themselves they bring
their dissents to the arbitrament of their Head as he has revealed himself in
his Word. By this means dissents are abated, discord (though there be dissents
in judgment) prevented, and little things cannot keep them asunder, because
there are greater things to hold them together. When persecuting Saul was in
Christ once, Romans 16. 7. how did he agree with Christians, and contend for
agreement with his fellow members? 1 Cor. 1. 10. All that appoint themselves
one Head, gather together under it, Hos. 1. 11. Sure they that be of one Spirit
with the Head, 1 Cor. 6. 17. Ephesians. 4. 4. cannot be (if they be and act, like
themselves) of ill and sour spirits one to another long, however by occasion
and temptation they may be displeased till matters be debated, and the Spirit
be stirred up to do its work; for flesh will be always froward, Gal. 5. 20. but
the Spirit of God always meek, and for meekness.

4. One sanctified heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. where the substance is right, where
there is Grace in the heart sincerely stirred up and set a-work, there the heart
will teach right things, Jer. 31. 33, 34. and incline the affections to Love
and Union (because of the substance) though there be in diverse more obscure
things, and things of less moment, different persuasions. Unregeneracy foments
faction, Gal. 4. 29. but Grace and Peace go together.

5. One and the same public meeting place for respective Societies, that they
may be together present at, and partake in Gods Ordinances. Jerusalem was a
City compact together (not only in regard of their houses, but their hearts)
inasmuch as that was the place of common meeting before the Lord, Psalm. 122. 3,
4. but when some went to Jerusalem to worship, and others to Dan and Bethel;
and when the Jews worshipped at Jerusalem, and the Samaritans at Mount Gerizin,
no marvel if there were many a bloody battle, between the one and the other:
see 2 Chronicles. 13. 19. to v. 13. Joh. 4. 9.

6. A reverent respect to able and godly Ministers, one and another (Paul as
well as Apollo, Apollo as well as Peter) and a diligent attending on their
Ministry, and making recourse to them for resolution, Act. 15. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 1.
for Unity is the work of the Ministry, 1 King. 18. 39. Luke 1. 17. Ephesians. 4. 13,
14.

7. Earnest prayer to God for oneness of heart among the People of God, whereof
our Savior himself is an eminent Pattern, Joh. 17. 21, 22, 23.

In which Endeavors and Prayers for Unity we may be encouraged.

1. By old Prophesies and Promises, Isa. 2. 4. and 11. 13.

2. And Performances also, and a remarkable effecting of Union both in the Old
and New Testament, 2 Samuel 5. 2. 1 King. 18. 39. Act. 4. 32.

3. By the Power of God, in whose hands the broken sticks are made one, Ezekiel.
37. 19, 22. Yea, he can moot up enmities, and remove the root of them by
changing the heart, Isa. 11. 6. 1 Samuel 25. 32.

4. By consideration of the Glory of God, which as it is in much danger to be
obscured, and his Name to be blasphemed by the strife of Brethren, in the sight
of the Canaanite, Perizzite, and profane men, Genesis 15. 7. so will it be
promoted by their Unity, Act. 11. 18. This is Christ's reason when he prayed for
Unity, That the world may believe that thou have sent me, Joh. 17. 21. for how
shall the World (that knows not God) believe that Christ is sent from the God
of peace, when his followers and those that profess him, are a company of
froward men, and of a dogged spirit one toward another?

These things may move us to seek peace with respect unto God. Now, in regard
of our selves, we may add strength to our prayers and hopes of peace, by
getting,

1. Ability; by studying God and Scripture, for Ignorance is the mother of
Error, Mat. 22. 29. and Error the mother of Contention, and the makebate in
Church-society, Act. 15. 2, 24.

2. Humility; for Pride raises the storm, Prove. 13. 10. and Humility causes a
calm, Genesis 13. 8, 9. Judge. 8. 1, 2, 3.

3. Holiness; harden not others in their erroneous opinions, and peace-breaking
practices by an irregular life. They that will differ, defend their conceits by
standing on their Godliness, and standing to it that they on the other part are
not so godly: when yet it is not Godliness in many, for then they would not so
woefully as they do neglect the duties of the first Table; but it is a kind of
common honesty, wherein notwithstanding if others be wanting, they conclude
that they are not in the right in their judgments and way, and therefore they
will never agree with them. All this is but weak arguing, but it is a strong
argument to move those that are in the right to study Righteousness, and make
themselves amiable by being conscionable, and appear to be righter in their
thoughts by being better in their lives, that so others may be taken with the
beauty of true Holiness, and join themselves to them.

4. Christian conference with those that differ; for dissents are abated by
debating, Prove. 25. 8, 9, 10. that which keeps People from agreeing is that
they will not meet and treat. And it is observed that when men differing (I
mean humble and sober men) discourse one with another, their dissents are
brought into a narrow room: But such meetings are to be managed with care and
prayer, that they that are unsound in the Faith, may not make (by their parts
and subtilties) those unsound that are in the right, nor weaken them in the
truth; and (on the other side) that they may not hearten others in their
Errors with whom they confer, by ill handling a good cause.

5. A serious consideration how far they are gone whom dividing Principles have
unglewed and rent from the rest of Gods people, viz. to deny the Trinity, the
Deity of Jesus Christ, the Godhead of the Holy Ghost; to profess themselves
above Ordinances, and to forsake Family-piety, and those Religious Exercises
that Scripture-Saints could not live without. Be afraid of the first and lowest
step by the horror of the highest.

6. A great care in Christians to walk by the same Rule in those things
whereunto they have already attained, Phil. 3. 16. If nature be carefully
preserved and cherished, there is the more hope thereby of expelling turbulent
humors, and that the body will be quiet. When Bishop Ridley and Hooper
differed about Ceremonies, both of them being under suffering they grew to a
good agreement; whereof Ridley in his Letter to him, gives this reason, viz.
that (having looked over his Writings) he saw (that howsoever in some things
each of them abounded in his own sense, yet) they were of one and the same mind
for the substantial parts of Religion; and so he did with all love, close with
him, so will they one with another who confider how much God bears with in all
those in whom there is the substance of Religion, (though many failings) and
never separateth himself from them.

Jer. 50. 4. In those days, and at that time, etc.
Q What are those days, and what is that time whereof Jeremy here speaks?
A. This his Prophecy may have reference to three periods of time.

First, To the time of the Jews return out of Captivity: For which purpose we
may consider,

1. That in the first rent of the Kingdom, the Priests and Levites that were in
all Israel (being cast off by Jeroboam) came into Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles.
11. 13, 14. And after them out of all the Tribes of Israel, such as set their
hearts to seek the Lord came also to Jerusalem, v. 16. which it seems were no
small number, because of the strength that the Kingdom of Rehoboam received by
them, v. 17.

2. We find that in Asa his time they fell to him out of Israel in abundance;
as also, that Hezekiah afterward sent his Letters throughout all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 30. 1, 5, 6. and diverse of Israel came in, and made up a great
Congregation, v. 11, 13, 18.

3. Albeit many might come to the Passover and return to their own Country and
habitations again; yet it is very probable that when Tiglath pileser had
carried away so many of the Ten Tribes captives, 2 King. 15. 29. I say, between
that time and the taking of them away generally by Salmanasar, diverse of them
fled for refuge to Judah, and settled themselves there; and that seems to be
meant by strangers, 2 Chronicles. 30. 25. that is, such of the Ten Tribes, who
(besides the Congregation that came out of Israel by the present call to the
Passover) did by reason of Religion settle themselves in Judah, which Dioda^.
Jun. Trem. in 1 Chro. 9. 1, 2.
they might do also in latter times for their safety, being liker to fare
better in Judah, than with the Assyrian. All this makes it out that there was a
mixture of Judah and Israel before the Captivity.

Now, to apply this to the present purpose, the first remarkable time of their
coming more closely together, was, at their return out of the Captivity wherein
they had been scattered. The Israel-it's that mixed themselves with Judah came
(it is very like) out of the Captivity when they did, partaking therein of the
privilege of the better party to whom they had joined themselves; which
appears also in the genealogy of those that returned out of Babylon, among
whom not only Judah and Benjamin, but diverse of other Tribes of Israel, are
expressly reckoned, 1 Chronicles. 9. 3. Ezra 2. 2. and v. 70. albeit they dwelt for
present, not in the cities of Samaria, but of Judah.

Secondly, (to come to the second period) Although the ten Tribes (if we speak
of the generality and the Body of them) returned not out of Captivity (as Judah
did) to their own country; yet under Christ, (to whom this Coming, and
Covenanting is to be extended, as Jer. 50. 20.) they came together, when the
Gospel was preached, as under one Head, Hos. 1. 11. Hence we read, Act. 2. 5.
of Jews, out of every Nation under Heaven, they being scattered by the Assyrian
Babylonian, and other succeeding Kings into far distant places. There also we
find the Apostle speaking to the whole House of Israel, v. 36. and that at the
same time, three thousand were converted, that is, united together in Christ,
v. 41. That of St. James is clearer, who writes expressly to the twelve Tribes
scattered abroad, that is, scattered by the Assyrians and Babylonians or
Antiochus: So as that they returned not with others to their own Land; yet, to
the Faith of Christ they were converted, and therefore James writes to them as
to those who had received the Faith, though they did not, as they ought, show
it in the fruits. St. Peter also points to the same Persons when he writes to
the Strangers, 1 Pet. 1. 1. that is, to those of Judah and Israel, dispersed
here and there where they lived as Strangers, but yet he writes to them as
Persons come into Jesus Christ, and conjoined on that cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2.
4, 5, 6.

Thirdly, there is another period of time that we expect, and that is, when the
Jews shall be called and come together in a considerable Body, Romans 11. 25, 26.
unto and under Christ the Head of the whole Church; unto which time diverse
Learned men refer those prophecies Ezekiel. 37. 10, 12. Hos. 1. 11. Amos. 9. 14.
15. And, howsoever this Prophecy may be said to be fulfilled truly already, yet
there is cause to say that it shall be most remarkably completed then.

Jer. 50. 4. Weeping they shall go, and seek the Lord their God?
Qu. Wherefore should they go out of Captivity, and when they went to meet with
God, weeping, when partings cause weepings and meetings joy, Joh. 16. 6, 22.
with Matthew. 28. 8. Psalm. 126. 6?
A. Men (and so the Church) may weep, albeit there be cause of rejoicing before
them, for diverse reasons, namely, out of joy, or, because of Afflictions
accompanying their comforts, or for their sins.

First, men may weep for joy] and because of the Workings of Natural Affections
upon strange and un-expected comfortable changes and alterations; so it was
with Joseph's brethren; the revealing of himself to them (after a sad condition
before) was accompanied with weeping, Genesis 45. 13, 14. and 46. 29. Thus, when
Archedamus sent word of a great victory with much Loss to the enemy, but of
none on their part, the Spartans hearing of it, fell all a weeping; Vsq adeo
Lacrumae, tum laetitiae tum dolori sunt communes, Xenoph. Lib 7. Sect. 620.

Secondly, because of manifold afflictions accompanying their comforts: As here
in their return.

1. Because they had been so long absent from God, as Friends, met at last,
weep because they have wanted one another so long: When they ken'd a returning
God, it might well grieve them that they had wanted his sight Seventy years.

2. Because diverse of their brethren were scattered here and there, and abode
still in Babylon, as not able or not willing to return, Hab. 2. 6. Now every
creature mourns when it wants its company.

3. Because their Country was spoiled and wasted. A great Comfort it was to
see Jerusalem, builded as a City compact, Psalm. 122. 3. but to see it burnt
and broken and consumed, that was a weeping business, Neh. 1. 4.

4. Because they were to meet with so many Enemies and Oppositions in their own
Country; for though God made Heathen Kings to be for them; yet they had to do
with malevolent men round about them, Neh. 2. 10. that would do them all hurt
with all their heart, but no good, nor suffer to have any, but against their
will. This they might foresee when they went to Zion and grieve at it.

5. And especially, because the Temple was burnt, and the Lord had never an
House to dwell in with them; we may see the sadness of this in the mournful
posture of those fourscore men, Jer. 41. 5, 6. that are said indeed, to come
with Offerings to the House of the Lord; yet it is not probable that the news
of the burning of that House had not sounded so far as Sechem and Shilo: They
came therefore to present their piety, not so much in the House as in the place
where the Lord had had an House, which because it stood not now as before,
therefore they were so sad; for what is Canaan without Jerusalem? Jerusalem
without Zion? Zion without God? and where was God then (most eminently) but in
his Holy Temple?

6. Because, though after their return, there was a new Temple erected, yet
that fell so short of the former that they came therefore weeping, Ezekiel. 3. 12.
Hagg. 2. 33. To which we may add.

7. Because they were never like to see things in their Country restored to
any such Beauty as they had seen it in formerly; to wit, looking on things with
an eye of Sense, and most had not the eye of Faith to look to Christ, Hag. 2.
7. yea, all generally had a dim eye in those days as to things Spiritual.

Thirdly, There was cause enough to mourn for their Sin. In regard whereof,

1. There was a mourning making way for their coming out of Captivity, for the
Lord hears Ephraim bemoaning, and then resolves on their return, Jer. 31. 18,
19, 20,

2. When they came to their Country they had cause to weep for that so long
continued, and so like to be continued Desolation that was there because of
their Sin. It was mentioned before as a great part of their afflictions; but
here it is repeated as reflecting on, and the fruit of, their Sin; which they
saw they had great cause to lament when they had viewed it in that
Looking-glass, that is, in the Nations ruin: as Joseph's Brethren mourned for
the ill and most sinful usage of their Brother, when they were so harshly used
themselves. See Dan. 9. 8. 12, 13. 18. Ezra 9. 6, 7.

3. Though they rejoiced in the mercy they had in their return, yet even that
Mercy gave them cause so much to mourn for their sin against so good a God,
Romans 2. 4. Ezra 9. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14.

4. After they were come into their Country they sinned grievously on a sudden
and in many things, Hag. 1. 4. and so had reason to come to the House of the
Lord (it seems before it was quite finished) with trembling and weeping, Ezra
10. 1, 9. Nehem. 13. 7, 10, 17.

Howsoever therefore they returned rejoicing, Psalm. 6. 12, last; Looking to
their enjoyment of God and his Goodness toward them; yet it was with weeping
also, looking upon themselves and their Sin, the impressions whereof they saw
in their many-ways sad Condition. We find on the same day, weeping in one
respect, and great Mirth on another, Neh. 8. 9, 12.

But here three things may be added:

1. That this (as we said in the former question) may be referred to the times
of Christ, unto whom many came in weeping in regard of their Sin? Mark 9. 24.
Luke 7. 38. Act. 2. 37. and 16. 39.

2. And it may well be extended to that time when the Nation of the Jews shall
be called, (in futurum tempus complenda haec prophetia ad huc restat.
Oecolamp.) when no doubt they shall come in weepping for their infinite
despite done to him, whom they shall know then to be the true Messiah and not
a malefactor, Zech. 12. 10. and 13. 1. Then shall that pierce the Nation to the
heart which has pricked so many of the Nation already, Act. 2. 37. 41.

3. And it is ordinary for God's Children still, to come in to God weeping in
their first Conversion, yea and afterward also when they deal ill with God,
Psalm 51. 8. 17. Mat. 26. 75. for though they know their Sin to be pardoned,
yet it is a woeful thing Psalm 88. 15. to endure the hidings of Gods face, the
terrors and perplexities of Spirit that a pardoned Sinner (whom God will never
send to Hell) may be put to undergo; And withal, they mourn the more with tears
of Love because their sins are forgiven, Luke 7. 47. Lastly, In any special
strait which puts the Israel of God to a wrestling with God, how much, in how
many, is that wrestling accompanied with weeping as well as managed with
Supplication? Hos. 12. 4.

Jer. 50. 4, 5. They shall go and seek the Lord their God; They shall ask the
way to Zion with their faces thitherward.
Qu. What did the People of God intend in their flocking together? If it were
to seek the Lord what need so much ado? Is not he everywhere?
A. The Text expresses their great end to be to seek their God, and to enjoy
him by asking and traveling the way to Zion.

Here then is, 1. The end. 2. The way. 3. The firm setting of their faces to
walk in that way.

First, the end is to seek the Lord their God as the Wife does her own dear
Husband whom she dearly wants, Hos. 2. 7. Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. and 5, 6. John 20.
13, 15.

And the reason thereof is, because they and their God had been long separated,
Hos. 5. 14, 15. It Is true that God is everywhere even in Babylon, as we see in
the case of Esther, Mordecai, Daniel, and the three Children; Insomuch that
Heathen enemies could say, out of their observation, of Gods appearing for his
People, that if Mordecai were of the seed of the Jews, Haman should sure fall
before him, Esth. 6. 13. But yet, God is not everywhere as he was in Zion, of
which it is said, This is my rest for ever and here will I dwell, Psalm. 132.
14. Indeed, they saw his power in Babylon and his Providence, but not his Face
and Countenance, Isa. 8. 17. and 45. 15. Psalm. 80. 6, 7. Not but that they
might see God in their Captivity if they looked after him with an eye of Faith,
Dan. 6. 23. and thereby they lived while they were in that Condition, Hab. 2.
4. but they could not behold the beauty of the Lord in sensible manifestations
as they did in the courts of his House, Psalm. 27. 4. Thus therefore they seek
him that they may see his Power and his Glory, So as they have seen him in his
Sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 2. Therefore,

Secondly, Here Is the way to enjoy their God as they had done, that is, by
getting to Zion, which that they might do, they ask the way: Now there is a
double asking,

1. By way of Prayer, Mat. 7. 7. and so these Jews, when they had Liberty to
return from Babylon to their owncountrey, sought, that is, besought from God a
right way, that is, a safe and ready way to Jerusalem and Zion.

2. By way of enquiries, wherever direction might be obtained. And so, there
is a threefold asking the way to Zion, to wit,

1. To the earthly Zion, for they were to go thither by uncouth and unknown
places; which the eldest of them, though they had gone once before, yet it was
70 years ago, and then, perhaps, not in the direct way, but such ways as the
enemy pleased to carry them: And the younger never went it.

2. To the Spiritual mount Zion, that is, to the communion of the Christian
Church, Heb. 12. 22, 23. Gal. 4. 26. So diverse Jews of old have enquired how to
get into Christ, and come to a Christian State, Jo^. 9. 36. Act. 2. 36, 37, 38,
41. and 9. 6. And this also the so long rejected Jews will do, whenever it
shall please God to call them; they will believe, that is, come into Christ and
the Christian Church, Romans 11. 26, 27, 31. for Baptism (which is an ingraffing
into Christ and imbodying into the Church) still goes along with Believing,
Act. 2. 38. and Act. 8. 12, 13. 36, 37.

3. To the Heavenly Zion, which come in upon Coming to God and to Christ
Spiritually and by Faith, as the happy end of it, John 10. 27, 28. Luke 23. 42,
43. The Thief that thus applied himself unto Christ, has presently a promise
and a possession of paradise: He that is a good member of the Church shall
receive the blessing from the Lord, Psalm. 24. 3, 5. even Life for evermore,
Psalm. 133. 3. See Isa. 35. 10. coming to mount Zion first, brings to the
Spirits of just men made perfect: at last, Heb. 12. 22, 23. To this may be
referred the woman of Samaria, her enquiry of the place and way of worship,
John 4. 19, 20, 21. it is like it was as looking after her Salvation, and
therefore Christ tells her, Salvation is of the Jews, v. 22. and the way to it
is not to go to mount Gerizzim, but to mount Zion; so she calls out her City to
the Savior that was there, for Saviors come upon mount Zion, Obad. v. 21.

Thirdly, here is their firm resolution to come to Zion, set forth in their
carriage, posture and deportment: It is with their faces thitherward.

This implies three things: 1. That their intent was to get thither, as men
intend to travel thither whither they set See Luke 9. 51. Ezekiel. 4. 3.
their faces, not to that place on which they turn theirs backs.

2. Their great desire to be there; the way and the journeys end are in their
hearts, Psalm. 84. 5. Which is therefore accompanied with a suitable endeavor,
and a contending against all difficulties, Psalm. 84. 6.

3. And the constancy also of their Resolution to go on still till they come
thither, as they were wont to go from strength to strength till they met
together in Zion to appear before God there, Psalm. 84. 7. They did fill up to
follow after God, Numb. 14. 24. with, v. 4. It Is all summed up in this, that
God's Servants (especially after God and they have been long asunder) 1.
Greatly desire him, Isa. 26. 8, 9. 2: Earnestly feek after him, and early, Isa.
26. 9. using all means, sparing no Labor or Cost, 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. for the
enjoyment of him, Psalm. 63. 8. If God be not to be had in the Kingdom of
Israel, they put the Key under the door, and go to Judah, 2 Chronicles. 11. 16. 2.
They never rest till they have found him, Cant. 3. 4. If this be not he, they
will seek for another, Mat. 11. 13. John 20. 15. Moses cannot find him in
Pharaoh's court, and therefore he goes to seek him amongst Gods afflicted
people, Heb. 11. 24, 25. and there he found him.

They never lived with God really, that can live without him quietly.

Jer. 50. 5. Come, Let us join our selves unto the Lord, in a perpetual
Covenant that shall not be forgotten.
Qu. What was the main end of the People of God in seeking their God in Zion?
A. It was, 1. In general, to join themselves unto the Lord; 2. In particular,
to join themselves to him by way of Covenant, 3. And that a perpetual Covenant,
never to be forgotten.

First, to join themselves to the Lord] from whom they had been long disjoined
two ways.

1. By their Sin and Disobedience, Isa. 59. 1, 2. especially, the sin of
Idolatry, Jer. 2. 11. 13. Thereby they left their first Husband, Hos. 2. 7. and
joined themselves to Idols, Psalm. 106. 28. Hos. 2. 17. unto which we may add,
the sin of infidelity, and their resting on Heathen-help which was another
Idolatry; for they forsook God and fled to them, Isa. 57. 13. Jer. 2. 17, 18,
19. Hos. 7. 10, 11, and these things at last caused. God to depart quite from
them: Now when they returned to him, and meditated a Conjunction with him, then
they expressly renounced both these evils, Hos. 14. 3, 8. and bound themselves
by Covenant, to do all God's Commandments, Neh. 9. 29.

2. They were disjoined from the Lord by the ruin of Church and State, and
their long-continued Captivity, whereby they were set far from the Lords Land,
Hos. 9. 3. deprived of the Lords Ordinances, of the Lords wonted Protection, of
his wonted Provision, and that so far as that they did eat their own Children,
Lament. 2. 20. No marvel therefore if they set their Faces toward Zion, (when
God set them free from Babylon) for the re-enjoying of God and all his
Goodness. And thus also when Christ was come and the Gospel preached, they
glewed themselves unto the Lord (as the word is, 1. Cor. 6. 17) that were
before un-glewed; the Gentiles altogether, Ephesians. 2. 12. and the Jews in a great
measure; see Act. 17. 34. Gentiles glewed, and Act. 2. 41. Jews added, for the
converted both of Jews and Gentiles were Baptized, and thereby entered into an
Oath as it were, to stick fast unto Jesus Christ, as his faithful Servants and
Soldiers unto their Lives end: So also the rejected Jews (so long disjoined)
when the Lord shall please to call them, shall be joined to the Lord, or (as
the Scripture speaks) be grassed again, Romans 11. 23, 24.

Secondly, This joining is here said to be, by way of Covenant] And that

1. Because this has ever been Gods way of Conjunction with himself; to wit,
by a Covenant of Works before man's fall, and then a Covenant of Grace, which
has been since, and which will ever be, for it is an everlasting Covenant: so,
at Christ's coming, when the Jews were invited to Christ and to Christianity,
it was done by presenting unto them the Promises, Act. 2. 39. and they were
called upon under the Title of the Children of the Covenant, Act. 3. 25, 26.
when the Gentiles also came unto the Church, it was in a way of Covenant, and
upon Covenant-terms, thus expressed, I will call them my People that were not
my People, Romans 9. 25, 26. And the calling of the Jews at last we find to be
upon a Covenant-account, Romans 11. 27.

2. Because they needed greatly, and now expected a restoration by the pardon
of their sin, and restoring of their state, Jer. 33. 7, 8. Hos. 14. 4, 5. Now
the forgiving of sin, Jer. 31. 34. prevention of danger and recovery from
Church-calamity, Neh. 9. 32. has still been in a way of Covenant (Levit. 26.
42.) according to the Law of God called the book of the Covenant, 2 King. 23.
2. see 2 Chronicles. 15. 12. and 29. 10. 2 Chronicles. 34. 31, 32. Ezra 10. 2; 3. Neh. 9.
38.

3. Because a Covenant sets all right on both sides, binding man to the duty
that God expects, and in that way giving him an assurance of the good that
God promises: see Deuteronomy. 19. 16. to the end. Peace therefore and all good is
like to be had, nay, is sure to be had by Covenant-making, and
Covenant-keeping; for Covenant-mercy will never be wanting where there is a
care of Covenant-duty, Dan. 9. 4.

4. Because, at Christ's coming (to which this Prophecy refers) the whole
Church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, was to be joined to the Lord in a
New Testament, (Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12, 13. and 9. 15.) that is, in a
new-administration of the old and ever-abiding Covenant of Grace: So that
comprehending Gospel Times within this Prophecy, and those Jews that came in
them, there was a new Work to be done, and a new way of God to be walked in,
though not for substance; that is, a reformed and refined way, Heb. 9. 10. unto
which they that would then join themselves to the Lord must apply themselves,
Joh. 4. 23, 24.

Thirdly, this is described to be a perpetual Covenant never to be forgotten,
which is true of every Covenant made with God according to his will; but two
reasons may be given why this expression is here used, viz.

1. Because the old Covenant, that is, the Covenant in the old administration,
was broken and forgotten by the Body of the Jews, Jer. 31. 32 Heb. 8. 9. for
indeed, they turned it into a Covenant of Works, To. 9. 32 and so break
wilfully what they could not keep perfectly, whereby they were disregarded and
destroyed, albeit it was not so in those times with the faithful, who looking
upon it as a Covenant of Grace, did by Grace derive it from that done in
new-Testament-times, acceptably keep it, and obtained pardon through Christ for
the breaches of it. But now in the New Testament, there is (for those that be
really and inwardly within the Covenant) Grace to keep it, arising from what
has been done in these Gospel Times, and from Gospel-dispensations, when the
Law imposed an hard task and gave no straw or strength whereby to perform it,
Heb. 7. 19. And withal now there is a greater measure of Grace both for
Obedience and Perseverance, whereby the Covenant becomes more clearly, than
ever heretofore, a perpetual Covenant, not only in regard of the gracious
resolution of those that be in it to keep it and to keep close to God for ever;
not only in regard of a greater Power of Grace to make good this resolution,
but also by a clearer manifestation that God himself will make it good: for
thus the Covenant runs; I will make an everlasting Covenant, for I will not
turn away from them and I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall
not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. since therefore it cannot fail on either part,
it must needs be perpetual.

2. Because, the New Testament administration shall continue to the end of the
World, Matt. 28. ^0. 1 Cor. 11. 26. Heb. 7. 21, 22, 24.

Now in this coming in for this glorious end, they encourage one another, come
and let us join our selves, for they that come to God in good earnest love and
move to have many with them, Act. 26. 29. for Gods greater glory, Pro. 14. 28.
the better drawing in of others, and their own greater comfort by a greater
company: see Isa. 2. 3 Zech. 8. 21. etc. Joh, 1. 41, 42, 45. and 4. 28, 29

Lam. 3. 64, 65, 66. Render unto them a recompense, O Lord, according to the
work of their hands.

Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them; Persecute and destroy them in
anger from under the Heavens of the Lord?


Qu. Is it lawful for us to use such imprecations as these? or what use is to
be ade of them?
A. Justice on the desperate enemies of Gods truth and party is, (and by these
words may appear to be) lawfully desired of God. If we knew such and such
persons were and ever would be so, we might lawfully pray against them by name.

Now particular Persons are not known to be such by ordinary men, but by such
as have an extraordinary Spirit of discerning; such as the Prophets had: hence
there are such fearful imprecations, Psalm. 109. wherein there is an eye on the
Person of Judas, v. 8. Act. 1. 20. And such also as the Apostles had, and
therefore no wonder if Paul prayed against the Person, 2 Timothy 4. 14. of
Alexander Coppersmith, of whose wickedness there was not only an Experimental
manifestation, but the state of whose Person also might be known to Paul by
Divine Revelation, such as men have not in these days; And yet, from
experimental indications, and eminent evidences, that Julian the Apostate
committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, the Church, in those days prayed God
to confound him, (though he were their Liege Lord* and though they prayed for
other Heathen and persecuting Emperors;) and so he did.

Now there ought to be in those that pour forth such dreadful prayers, besides
a Spirit of discerning, an eminently-composed Spirit, having in it a pure Zeal
of Gods Glory: So it was with the Prophets; by the same Spirit whereby they
prophesied, by the same they prayed against the enemies of God and his People.
The Spirit of God came upon him, Zechariah the son of Jehojada, who concludes
thus with those that opposed him and slew him. The Lord look upon it and
require it, 2 Chronicles. 24. 22. and the Lord heard the prayer, v. 23, 24, 25. Thus
Paul filled with the Holy Ghost, so thundered against Elymas, that (albeit we
find not what he says formed into a Prayer, yet) it had, the same sad effect
as if it had been so, Act. 13. 9, 10, 11.

Now, we having not such a discerning Spirit, nor such a purity of Spirit, as
those extraordinary Servants of God had when they were about the Spirits work:
we may not take upon us to do as they did, but only pray in general; Lord, whom
thou know to be implacable enemies not belonging to thine election, cut them
off: See Psalm. 79. 12. Judge. 5. 31.

The reason why we may thus pray is the Word of God, which says concerning the
enemies of the People of God, that (vengeance and recompense belonging to God)
their foot shall slide in due time, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Now, when there is such a
promise suitable to the sad Estate and present necessities of the Church, why
may not we present a Prayer, (with respect to Gods Glory, and his Churches
Safety) suitable to that promise? so in the case here, the Prayer, v. 64. is
directly founded upon Jeremies prophesy and Gods promise, Jer. 51. 6. 24. 36.
56. And that v. 65. is suitable to Jer. 51. 29. The land shall tremble and
sorrow, so for praying for a curse, it is not without a Scripture-ground, Genesis
12. 3. Psalm. 109. 17. Nor that persecute and destroy them, v. 66. we find the
like, Psalm. 83. 15. 17.

So that there is sufficient reason of desiring revenge, Psalm. 94. 1. (so that
it be not with a distempered and selfish Spirit) upon all irreconcilable
enemies whatsoever; and these general Prayers of the Church are applied of God
to such particular enemies who-ever they be, and so they are in woeful case.

Obj. But the new Testament says, Pray for them that despightfully use you and
persecute you, Mat. 5. 44. Romans 12. 14. And Christ and Steven prayed for those
that killed them.
A. To this it may be said in general, That as the Love of God in Christ is
more revealed and shed forth in Gospel Times, so we should express more Love to
others, not only to good men, but to all men, 1 These. 3. 12. Tit. 3. 2. 4. Gal.
4. 12. 2 Cor. 12. 15.

Particularly. 1. We must take heed of praying against them that oppose
themselves against us furiously, out of ignorance, imitation and persuasion of
others, or out of passion and prejudice. Thus Christ prayed for those that
crucified him; Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34
So Stevens prayer, Lord lay not this sin to their Charge, Act. 7. 60. may seem
to respect those that did what they did against him out of a blind Zeal, for he
is very stern against those of them that were obstinate, v. 51, 52, 53, 54. And
whereas Saul is conceived to be converted by (and sure had the benefit of) that
Prayer, he declares that he obtained mercy because what he did ill, he did
ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 13, Unto all ignorant opposers, mercy should be showed
and meekness, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Tit. 2. 2. As also, to those that be instigated by
others, Mat. 27. 20. with Luke 23. 34. Gal. 5. 8. 10, 12. Paul declares good
thoughts of the troubled, but prays fearfully against the Troublers, Gal. 1.
7. Act. 13. 10 1.

2. The evil cause or course that wicked men defend against God and his People,
we may pray against but not so against their persons. We find not that David
prayed against, the Person, but against the Counsel of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15.
31. So the first Christians prayed not against the persons of them that sat in
Counsel against the Apostles, but against their proceedings, Acts 4. 29. Or, if
in such prayers, the Persons be sometimes mentioned, yet we find in Scripture
that it is in reference to their works, Neh. 6. 14. as a vile Person, is, and
ought to be contemned, Psalm. 15. 4.

3. Whatsoever is done in Scripture by the extraordinary Servants of God in,
extraordinary cases, yet it will be safe for us, in stead of mentioning
particular persons, to wrap them up in the general evil cause and course that
we ought to pray against, as Paul does, Gal. 5. 12. If particular persons come
under the general head of disturbers of the Church of God, and of enemies to
the Truth of God, then they justly fall under Church-imprecations; which yet
are not directed against this or that man, but in a generality, against this
and that man, without pointing to any, as enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and
Souls of Christians.

4. We are not to pray at all against our own private and personal enemies, as
seeking to be revenged of them (though we may pray that God would restrain
them, and defend us from their ^alice, Psalm 119. 121, 122.) This is the meaning
of the New Testament precepts, to pray for enemies, Mat. 5. 44. Romans 12. 14.
19, 20.

5. But against the enemies of God, his Cause, his Church, Psalm 94. 1, 2, 5.
we may pray, Judges 5. 31. Neh. 4. 5.

Yet not without limitation; as, 1. It must be done with a pure Zeal, that is,
not because we suffer by them, but truly and clearly and merely, and forthat
very reason because they are enemies to God and undoers of his People, when
else we wish them all good: So it was with Jeremy; he spoke good before God for
his people, Jer. 18, 20. yet see what dreadful prayers he made against them,
because they were such enemies to God that they sought to kill him that spoke
from God to them, that God might not kill them, v. 21, 22, 23. so Psalm. 74. 22,
23. their prayers against enemies are put on Gods account; as also, Psalm. 79.
6, 7, 10, 12.

2. It must be done not absolutely but orderly; that is, 1. we should pray for
their Conversion (for a Saul may be converted) 2. for their Restraint, that God
would change or check their hearts, as he did Esau's, Gen 33. 10. or bind their
tongues and hands as he did Laban's, Genesis 31. 29. But 3. the highest and
heaviest Prayers, are to be presented before God (and for God) against those
enemies of himself and his people that are incurable and ever will be
incorrigible: Who such be, the Lord knows and not we, and therefore we must
leave our Prayers with him, to do what he will with them; yea we may pray him
to confound and trouble them for ever rather than that he should not be known
to be most high over all the Earth. When we aim purely at that end, we may pray
against desperate enemies, that they may be put to shame and perish, Psalm 83.
16, 17, 18. and 129. 5. But all carnal and selfish mixtures, motives and
motions are to be abandoned: And we must know of what Spirit we are, Luke 9. 55.

Q. What use may we make of those prayers in Scripture which it is dangerous
for us to imitate, who have not the Spirit or Patience of Prophets?
A. 1. We may look upon them with much comfort, as Prophesies (though formed
into a Prayer) of the woeful state and end of the enemies of God and his People:
what is put into this Prayer here was put into Jeremie's Prophesy before (as
has been showed, p. 54.)

2. What they prayed more particularly, we may make use of in a generality, and
direct it against the Kingdom of the Rev. 1^. 6. 20.
Devil; which is no more than to pray, Thy Kingdom come; for how can the
Kingdom of Christ come, if the Kingdom of Satan do not come down?

Ezekiel. 3. 20. When a Righteous man does turn from his Righteousness, and commit
iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die etc.
Qu. How can God be said to lay a stumbling block before a Righteous man
backsliding?
A. First, it is to be considered that by a Righteous man here is not meant, a
man Righteous before God by Faith, through Christ's Righteousness imputed to
him, whereunto is ever joined the Righteousness of God in him, whereby he
becomes a new creature 2 Cor. 5. 17. for such never fall quite away, though
they often fall in the way. Adam fell after the first Creation, Eccles. 7. 29.
none so fall after the second, Ephesians. 4. 24, 25. and 2. 10. Jer. 32. 40. John 10.
28. Psalm. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 5. yet such an one may fall very low in regard of the
degrees of grace, comforts of the Spirit, and suavities of Religion: but one
Ezekiel or other will raise him up again. But by a justus dicitur (...) non
(...), quales sunt hypocritae et Apostatae de qualibus sic ait Augustinus,
credendum est quosdam de filis perdition is non accepto dono perseverandi usque
in finem aliquando fideliter ac ^uste vive^e ac postea ^adere, De ^orreptione
^t Great. Lib 17. Tom. ^0
righteous man in this place, (and upon supposition of a total and final fall)
is meant one righteous before men: As (1) In his own or other men's account,
Luke 15. 7 and 16. 15. yea, perhaps in good men's account; because charity
binds to think the best, 1 Cor. 13. 7. (2) By profession, Act. 8. 13. (3) By a
righteousness in matter of doctrine, Mark. 12. 32, 34. and in diverse parcels of
outward practice.

Secondly, by Gods laying a stumbling block before such a righteous man;
(righteous not by the Reality of Righteousness within); We may not imagine that
God puts any unrighteousness into any such man or any man; or that he inclines
his heart to any evil, James 1. 13. But two things may be understood by it.

1. In a more spiritual sense Gods leaving of a backslider to his own
backsliding heart; yea giving him up to it, Psalm. 81. 12. or to Satan, 2 These.
2. 10, 11, 22. yea farther God (in his just judgment) may raise up such
Providence as his corrupt heart will be sure to make a stumbling block of; a
Persecution, Matt. 13. 21. nay, the very preaching of the Word does it, and is
sent to do it as a just punishment of former wilfulness, Isa. 6. 10. Luke 2.
34. Matt. 21. 44. Men lay one stumbling block, Ezekiel. 14. 4. and God lays
another.

2. In a more outward sense, this may be understood, not as a stumbling block
of iniquity, as Ezekiel. 14. 7. But for iniquity; that is, as the punishment of
God upon them for their Backslidings, and a tottering in their state to utter
ruin; and (indeed) this and the former are both joined together in Isa. 8. 14,
15.

It is a very dreadful thing when God shall make any thing a stumbling stone to
a man either way; but more dreadful when he makes every thing, yea and many
things every way.

Yet such (though not all such) may by the means of Grace and Grace of God be
converted, and turn again, Luke 22. 32. as here by the terrors of God set
forth in the Ministry of his Prophets, and perhaps also by his punishment
brought upon them, (such Rods sometime beat folly out of the hearts of
bastards, drive wanderers into the right-way, as well as upright Walkers on in
it) and so by their repenting they may prevent utter and endless perishing,
Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31, 32. I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according
to his ways, says the Lord God: Repent and turn your selves from all your
Transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin: Cast away from you all your
Transgressions; For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the Lord God, therefore turn your selves, and live ye.

Ezekiel. 20. 25. Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they should not live.
Qu. How is God said to give statutes that were not good, and that tend to
death; when all his Laws and commands ever were and are good, Nehem. 9. 13.
Romans 7. 12.
A. 1. First some understood this of those Decrees and Ordinances of God, and
of those Judgments that tended to the ruin of that Rebellious state, which may
be said not to be good, because they were not good to them, as 1 Kings 22. 8.
So Tremelus in Loc.
not for them; and displeasing and destructive, for which see and consider
Ezekiel. 14. 21. Hos. 10. 10. Hab. 1. 12. Zeph. 2. 2. It Is the Lord that gives the
destroying sword a charge, and every Judgment a commission, Jer. 47. 7. But,

Secondly, This is generally taken otherwise, and it seems to be otherwise
meant here, v. 39. where they are bid go serve every one his Idol; that is,
they are left and given up to it, there being no hope of holding them from it.

Therefore this giving them Statutes that were not good, may comprehend these
things following.

1. That there were and they had such Statutes, that is, Statutes ensnaring
them to Idolatry and Profaneness; and that not so much at any one time, as in
the times of Idolatrous and wicked Kings successively; beginning with
Jeroboam's Calves, and continuing in the Idolatrous Statutes of Omri and Ahab,
and men of that stamp, Micha. 6. 16. Nor was it thus only in Israel but in
Judah also; as we see in the days and ways of that wicked Jehoram, who caused
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit whoredom, and compelled Judah thereunto,
2 Chronicles. 21. 22. and it is expressly said of Manasseh, that he made Judah to err
and do worse than the Heathen, 2 Chronicles. 33. 9.

2. That such Statutes may be said to be given of God, viz. providentially and
in course of justice: (1) By giving them those Idolatrous Kings in his anger,
who (together with their statesmen) would give and were left to give them such
Idolatrous Laws, Hos. 13. 10, 11. (2) By passing out in the same times, and
sending among them by his just Providence, such Priests and Prophets as by whom
the Idolatrous decrees of Princes were published and palliated, and they who
refused to obey them, were proclaimed factious and seditious men; as we read in
1 Kings 22. 13. Jer. 23. 13. 15. especially Kings 7. 10. Ezekiel. 14. 9. and 22.
26, 28. (3) By leaving the People to be ensnared by the Commands of the one and
the flatteries of the other; through their own fault in two respects, viz.

1. Through the darkness of their understanding, whereby they could not, yea
wilful blindness whereby they cared not, sought not, to discern the evils and
abominations of Laws crossing the Law of God

2. Through the vileness of their Affections or the servility of their wills,
whereby if they saw the evil of such things yet they did not shun it; but
submitted their necks to all yokes, were willing to walk after the Commandment,
and loved to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. Hos. 5. 11.

In all this there was, 1. A sinful part which was the Rulers, Priests,
Prophets, and Peoples, as has been already proved.

2. A Judicial part which was Gods, not by darting any darkness into their
understandings; but by not imparting any light, but leaving them to their
foolish and darkened hearts, Deuteronomy. 29. 14. Not by infusing any malignity into
their wills, but by not introducing any conquering Grace and Power. Now because
this paenal part is Gods, therefore he is said to give: So that God did not
give Laws not good, as a Lawgiver; but as a judge, by giving them into the hands
of those that gave them and promoted them, and by giving them up that would not
obey him to obey them: And thus it was also in the Babylonish Captivity with
this wicked Peoples good will and resolution to comply, Ezekiel 20. 3. 23. 9.
And thus it is still when an incorrigible Church is cast under Popish or Pagan
Governors. Oh! it is their just and saddest judgment to be given up to Laws
not good, that will not obey the holy, just, and good Laws of God: As an
enraged Father says to an incurable Son be gone, (Abi hinc in malam Rem) and so
leaves him to the Laws of Harlots and Varlots that will be his Companions,
Counselors, yea and Commanders also, Eccles. 7. 26. So God provoked punishes
by giving men up to themselves, and leaving them to their own hearts lusts,
Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Math. 23. 32. 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. How much better is it to
be given up to state-undoing, or body-tormenting judgments, than to be given up
to Soul-undoing Laws and Lusts? The greatest evil of suffering is less than the
least evil of Sin.

Dan. 6. 10. Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his
house and his windows being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled
upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks before his God, as
he did aforetime?
Q. What may be conceived to be the reason of Daniels opening his windows in
the time of prayer?
A. Of Daniels appearing, as he did in this great business these following
reasons may be given.

First, the state of the business, now in hand, which was this; when the
Presidents and Princes (that envied him) could find no fault or unfaithfulness
in him, in regard of his carriage in his place, and the Kings affairs, they
resolved to try whether they could find out any thing against him in reference
to the law of his God; for they saw well they had no other way to have their
will of him. This being their design, they so contrived and carried it on by a
Decree which they drew the King to confirm, that it was brought to this issue;
Either Daniel must desert the law of his God, or be exposed to the Den of
Lions: So that his case seems to be much like that of Mordecai, who was singled
out as Gods Champion to enter the lists with Haman, that was suffered to
procure a Church-ruining Decree, out of a purpose that the Lord had to advance
his Church and himself (the God of the Church) in the eyes of all the world;
This being the case with Mordecai, he will bow to Haman: This being the case of
Daniel, he will bow to God, come what will come of it. No marvel: since, for
him to yield or dissemble now, was to show that he durst not stand to the Law
and Worship of his God, and therefore utterly unlawful; the divine rule being
this, as to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's (which he had still done) so
to give unto God that which is Gods; which he was now to do, and not leave God
without witness, especially in a thing that was not only against the law of
Scripture, but of nature also; for against that it was to leave God un-served
(or un-served as to the notice of men* and so as not to dare to do it in their
sight) for a month together.

Q. But why then did not Daniel stand up against so ungodly a Decree, to hinder
the malicious proceeding of the Princes in it, and the Kings blind assent to it?
A. Because (it seems, through the subtilty of the Princes) he was absent at
the contrivance (when, if present, he ought to have spoken against it, and no
doubt would) Here it is said he knew the writing was signed, but we find not
that he knew any thing of it before; and now it was to no purpose for him to
stir, that being fully done which by the laws of State could not be revoked. It
being to no purpose therefore for him to go to the King (for he could not help
himself) v. 14. 15. he went into his house, and unto his God, nothing being now
left him but to consider what he was to do for God, and to wait what God would
do for him. But to go on

Secondly, we must consider Daniel's place and station; he was a public
person, observed by all, and that in reference to his Religion and the law of
his God, which he (being a kind Representative of the whole Church of God) must
either now stand to, or else the Worship and Glory of God must fall to the
ground in his own Church and amongst his own Company: Daniel therefore had
great cause to say (as Nehemiah, cap. 6. 11.) should such a man as I flee?
Should such a man as I Flinch? Thirdly, It may be added that it was his use and
custom to pray three times a day; In the morning before he went about his
business, at noon, and Meal-time, Act. 10. 9, 10. Psalm. 55. 17. And at night
when his business was dispatched, and he was to take his Rest. Having still
held (and held forth to the view of others) this course; it was no time for him
now to intermit it.

1. Because it is a duty lying in the bowels of Religion, so to divide our time
as to set apart daily some vacant times for the Service of God; at least, not
to leave him a month without daring to have it known that any prayer is made to
him: This is the more considerable here, because, by this decree, not only the
true God, but God in the generality, and any thing called God was excluded, and
the King only set up to be sought to for thirty days.

2. Because now there was more need to own God than at other times, there being
so few that durst do it: The less reason therefore there was why Daniel should
desist, whom all men knew to have done it.

Q But the question is about the manner of doing, viz. with his windows open;
what need that?
A. Yes, of that there was a necessity also, because it was observed before,
not only that he prayed, but that he used to pray in such a manner; which was
not in way of ostentation (it appears here it was his danger rather than his
Honor among those Heathens) but it was done in way of public Confession and
open acknowledgment of his God; and therefore it is said, he did it as
aforetime, and why so, but to continue completely the wonted acknowledgment now
there was more need of it than there was wont to be: Hence he now used all the
ceremonies and circumstances of Worship which he was observed to do it with
before; as

1. It was done in his Chamber, not in a low obscure Vault.

2. His windows being opened; not in a Secret corner of the room, or with
Shutting window-leaves; but all that opened their eyes might see what he was
about, and so he was more open to his after-accusation, v. 11, 13.

3. He kneeled upon his knees, a posture that speaks itself to them that behold
it, how that they are worshipping and praying to God that use it.

4. His windows were open toward Jerusalem; because there had been, yea and
there would be again God's special presence, (in the faith whereof, they might
Look thither, in this place wherein they were so far removed from it:) withal,
when the Temple was first built by Solomon, this looking toward Jerusalem and
that house, was put in, 2 Chronicles. 6. 20, 21. 37, 38. with respect to their being
in Captivity, as that which was still to be supposed, and (in special) to be
made use of when they were in such a condition. See Jonah 2. 4.

5. He observed the same times too, Praying and Giving thanks (notwithstanding
all the Lions) before his God, three times a day.

Th^s ^s Mordecai would neither bow nor budg, neither stand up nor move, nor do
Haman any reverence, Esther. 3. 2. and 5. 9. So Daniel will not leave an hoof
b^^ind him, nor abate an hair of his former homage to God; for he that in such
things yields at all, is like at last to yield all.

^ourthly* Had he not done thus, great (...) would have arisen in regard of
him^^^^ and others.

1. As for himself, whereas his body only would be endangered by disobeying the
Decree (and yet its conceived, he might Jun. in Loc.
have a Revelation from God to secure him, as to that;) Sure he had, a
corroboration) I say, whereas his bodily Life only was at Stake: If he had been
cowardly in this case, his Soul would have been endangered, according to our
Savior's threatening of denying those that deny him before men, before his
Father and the Angels, Mat. 10. 33. Luke 12. 9. affrighting also from the fear
of men, by the fire of hell, Mat. 10. 28. For Confession is necessary for
Salvation, Romans 10. 9, 10. And the Confession should becompleat also without
giving place in the least to the prejudice of the truth of God, Gal. 2. 5. 12.
and therefore much less of the true God.

2. As for others, his being off and on, would have been an horrible offense:
Both to the Heathen and the Jews.

1. To the Heathen, and those out of the Church (with whom he had to do in this
business) for would not they have said (if he had shrunk) that he had pulled in
his horns, the Lions had tamed him, he durst not stand to his tackling, to his
Religion, to his God, nor trust him with his Life; nor own him as a God able to
deliver him. In this offense, the King himself would have been the highest, for
he found Daniel so Faithful to him, and so Faithful to God, whom he served
continually, v. 20. (even then when he was to be thrown into a Lions Den for
it) that he declares himself to be convinced, that if his God were able to
deliver him, he would deliver him; So that the matter came to this Issue,
whether he believed his God was able to deliver him; what an horrible
stumbling block therefore would this have been to the King and dishonor to
God, if he had not stood it out? yea to Daniel himself as having less Faith
than his heathen King; whom he so much honored, save only that he preferred
God before him?

2. To those in the Church, who must need have been taught, yea compelled, Gal.
2. 14. to fall from God to Atheism if a Person so eminent for Piety as Daniel
was, had fallen before them upon all these considerations. Daniel did not say,
(and it had been an high sin in, him if he should have said) A lion is in the
way; therefore, he trusted to his God, ^. 23 contemned the Lions, and went on
(in full) with all compleatness and ^^ns^ancy in his holy way:

Which course of his, is abundantly confirmed of God, in that the same God that
so confirmed him by his Grace, miraculously preserved him by his Power, so that
the Lions tore his accusers not him.

And in all this, he most really, and most nobly fulfilled Christ's precept,
give unto Caesar that which is Cesars, and to God that which is Gods; So that he
could say (with a most clear and calm conscience) Before him, innocence was
found in me; And also, Before thee, O King, I have done no hurt, v. 22.

Dan. 6. 10. And his windows being open in his Chamber, etc.
Qu. Whether does Daniels example bind a man in such a case to pray so openly,
when the same duty may be performed secretly, and so the danger shunned?
A. In general; Danger may be shunned lawfully (yea and ought to be) if the
duty required of God may be performed entirely without running into that
danger; otherwise, when duty and danger meet, and the danger is necessarily
infolded in the duty, then duty must be preferred in obedience to Gods Command,
and the danger left to Gods Providence; as it was by the three Children Dan. 3.
16, 17, 18. Moreover (with respect to Daniel, and to speak to this matter more
fully) if we compare Daniels case with others, we must observe that in his
case, there was not only required, 1. an act of Religion, that is, the worship
of God in Prayer; but also, 2. an acknowledgment of Religion, and of the God he
prayed to: Briefly, Not only a worshipping of him, but a witnessing for him. In
regard of the former (and if nothing but that had been now required) it might
have been enough for him to have prayed to God in secret; that might have
quieted his Conscience as to the worshipping of God: But because he was also to
give a testimony to his God, and to his Religion; therefore a secret Worship,
would not satisfy the case, and reach to that duty which was now incumbent
upon him: Hence it will follow that wheresoever there is the like case, there
is an Obligation to the like course (at least for substance): when God requires
not only a prayer but a profession, and calls us forth to be his witnesses, we
must come into the open Court; for though his Worship be performed, yet the
secrecy of it, is a sacriledg, and robs God of his full due.

But otherwise a great difference there is, between the case here and other
more ordinary cases of confession: For

1. Here was a Catholic cause] It Is true that Daniels particular Person and
perdition was specially aimed at; yet their spite was not only against him: It
was the Law of his God also, which they sought to wound through his sides, and
make the Lions devour him and his Religion both.

2. This cause was to be managed before Heathens, that called in question the
Power of the God of Israel, and so it amounted and rose up to this height,
whether their Gods were as good as his, or his were the only true God: And this
became the Issue of it, Dan. 6. 26.

3. Here (as in the case of Mordecai) there was an eminent and extraordinary
(at least providential) Call; so that both of them were singled out to be the
Lords Champions, to enter the lists with his Pagan-enemies; And therefore the
same God that did (as it were) provoke the Devil to a combat with Job his
Champion, irritating Satan with his Commendation, Job 1. 8. So ordered the
matter also in Mordecai and Daniel his days, that those heroic Persons should
even dare the enemies of the Church to do their worst. Thus it was in the case
of Mordecai, more plainly, for that caused and provoked to a dismal Decree:
Now, its true that here in the case of Daniel, the Decree was passed before he
knew of it (or at least, was called to have any thing to do with it) and yet
the opening of his Windows before may be thought to provoke to it: But
(howsoever) so far Daniel stird the Coals, and blew up the fire that was made,
as to try it out to their teeth, and to do what he should (and what he was
accustomed) let them do what they could and the Lions to help them. The Cause
was most glorious and the Call was most clear.

4. God did arm (together with his call) those select Servants and Witnesses of
his, with extraordinary abilities and courage to carry on and hold forth to the
World, the Cause and Interest of God, and to fight as his combatants) so good
and glorious (though so dangerous) a fight: Now when God puts such a fortitude
into the Spirits of his Worthies (as into Luthers he did) this speaks (as it
were from heaven) to them more than to others, to stand up in the cause of God
like that renowned David, 1 Samuel 17. 26. 29. and Paul, Act. 17. 16.

By this it may appear that the cause and case here stands upon different terms
than are ordinarily presented in in the course of Providence: And therefore few
in all Ages, are so remarkably called out to Confession as Daniel was.

Yet is Confession and standing for God (as to the substance of it, and when
there is just cause for it) a common and a standing duty, Math. 10. 32, 33.

But it belongs not to the negative Precepts (like that, Thou shall not kill,
nor commit Adultery, nor steal, etc. unto the observation whereof all are at
all times bound) but it is to be referred to the Affirmative Precepts, (such as
those are, to pray, Visit the sick, give alms) which bind at all times, but not
to all times. The meaning then is not that a man must never forbear to give in
his testimony, or that a man is always bound to divulge what he thinks of
Religion, though a Den or Death will evidently follow upon it; but the time and
season when God calls for it, Rev. 2. 13. is to be observed: Then therefore
Elisha appeared for God, 2 King. 5. 28. and Gehazi (not observing the time) did
the contrary, v. 26.

Only, It belongs to the negative Preepts thus far, that there must never be a
perfidious dissimulation though we be not always tied to an open Confession;
nor always to the utmost Confession: If a man fly in time of persecution,
though this be not so high an appearing for God and Religion as resisting to
blood is, yet it has in it a real Confession (in Opposition to the enemies of
Religion) because he leaves his Country, Friends, State, and so suffers many
ways, rather than that the cause of God should suffer by his abiding under
tentation, and being drawn to any thing that should be a prejudice to it. The
question then will be double.

Qu. First, In what case a public and open Confession may be forborne?
A. 1. When it is not required of us by those that have Authority (though
perhaps, we be pressed to it out of a malicious petulancy) Prove. 26. 4. Mat.
27. 39, 40, etc.

2. Nor any just cause for it; but it will rather do hurt than good: Thus
Mordecai will not have Esther to show her kindred or her people, Esth. 2. 10.
for thereby (the Nation of the Jews being so hated of the Heathen, Esth. 9. 1.)
She and the Church of God might have fared the worse; but the same Mordecai at
another time told them he was a Jew, Esth. 3. 4. because then the cause of God
was to be tried, and all the world was to be given to understand that there was
no need to fear to own the name of a Jew. See Esth. 6. 13. when the Glory of
the God of the Jews lay at Stake.

For this reason Christ often commanded Silence to others, because it would
obscure his doctrine, (which he would have esteemed most) by a less
profitatable, seasonable, and less solid applauding of his Miracles; And
partly, because they did thereby so press upon him for bodily cures, that it
was an hindrance to his preaching, Mark. 1. 45. See Mat. 8. 4. and 9. 30.

And for this cause also, Christ was silent himself to admiration, Matt. 27.
12, 14. John 19. 9, 10. Some things being so frivolous that they were not
worthy an answer; but especially because he would not hinder his suffering by
his pleading and that real confession which was to be made by his death for the
Glory of God in the Salvation of mankind.

And in other cases Confession may be needless. 1. As: When it is done already,
and it is sufficiently known what our mind is, John 9. 27. and 18, 19, 20.

2. When it will (as in Christ's case it did, Mark 1. 44, 45.) hinder the
spreading of the doctrine of Religion, stir up Envy, and raise a greater
Persecution and Opposition, Act. 17. 10.

3. When he that offers Confession is no way able to maintain the cause of
Religion, and so like to make it more contemptible, (unto which some refer that
Mat. 9. 30.) or will shrink in the wetting, Act. 15. 38. wanting Faith and
Fortitude to bear the weight of the Cross, John 18. 8, 9. Hence they were
advised to flee (rather than stay and dissemble) in the Marian Persecution that
found themselves too weak for the fire.

4. When things are carried in a way of tumult, so that there is an eminent
danger to the person confessing (especially, if an eminent person) without hope
of helping the truth confessed, as Act. 19. 30.

Q. Secondly, In what cases is confession required?
A. 1. When called to it by authority, Mat. 10. 18. Joh. 1. 19, 20. especially,
more solemnly put upon it, and pressed to it, Matt. 16. 63, 64. John 18. 37.

2. When it is seriously demanded by others and may make for their edification,
by information and confirmation of the truth, 1 Pet. 3. 15.

3. When the cause of Religion, the Glory of God, the Salvation and Spiritual
good of others, calls us to it: As more particularly;

1. When Christ is to be acknowledged, and there are no others to do it, Job.
32. 11, 12. Luke 19. 40.

2. (As in this case of Daniel) when otherwise wicked men will be imboldened to
blaspheme and cry down the cause and truth of God, because none dare appear for
it. See Act 1. 8. with, Act. 4. 10. 18, 19, 29, 33.

3. When the weak will be offended and tempted by our silence and pusillanimity
to apostasy, or to that dissimulation, Hypocrisy, and timidity, that is next to
apostasy, Gal. 2. 14.

The Conclusion may be, the resolution and answering of some Questions and
Objections.

1. Q. We read of no such appearing of Daniel in the third Chapter, where there
was such another decree as this; why so much now and nothing then?
A. We must not think that he yielded then that is and was so faithful and
courageous now, and heretofore, Chap. 1. 8. but though he forbore toworship the
Image, yet the accusing of him was forborne there, (so as it is not here) and
that, it is very like, because he was in so high favor with the King (of whom
he had merited so much before (Chap. 2. 46.) that he was above their reach, and
they might rather fear displeasure by opposing him than hope to make the King
displeased with him. It was enough that Daniels companions that were then
singled out and accused, stood to it to the utmost; but here Daniel himself is
brought upon the stage.

2. Q. But how comes it to pass that here, there is no news of any standing up
besides Daniel, no not of Shadrach, Meschech and Abednego, that were men so
eminent?
A. 1. Perhaps those three, (that were not in the Kings Gate, as Daniel was,
but set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Chap. 2. 49.) might not be
now at ^and, and in sight of the Authors of this d^sign and the great Actors in
it; but ^^^ht be abroad in the Province, retaining their Place and Office in
this Kings time, as Daniel did his eminency, Dan. 6. 3.

2. It Is plain that Daniel was here the Person aimed at; It Is enough that when
they, in particular were produced and prosecuted, they were as forward to
adventure on the Furnace, as Daniel here was on the Den; (and burning their
executioners.)

3. Their miraculous deliverance (Chap. 3. 22. 28.) was so famous and fresh in
memory, that (though they were present, yet) it was not likely they should be
prosecuted anew in a case of the like kind. Gods signal providence at one
time, scare his enemies, and are his Childrens safeguard at another, Esther 6.
13. Act. 5. 11. 26. 39.

4. We do not read that either they, or any other of the Jews were so called to
an open Confession as Daniel was, because there was not (at least we find not
any such thing related) such open praying to God aforetime, used by, and
observed in, other Jews as it is recorded here concerning Daniel.

5. Here the case seems like that of David and Goliath, 1 Samuel 17. 9. Mordecai
and Haman; They two must try it out in the name of all the rest, and so others
might stand by, look on, and wait the issue of the single combat. In such
Projects, yea and Laws, wherein some persons are principally aimed at, others
(though they come within the compass of the Law) are less looked after. But had
the business succeeded as the plotters intended, and Daniel been devoured, then
others of his Religion, might have been like to have fared as he did; whereas
(God appearing so marvellously for the honor and safety of his Church and
Champions) it represented his people to all wise men, Esth. 6. 13. as a People
that it was dangerous for the greatest persons to contend with in the Cause of
God, that being to contend with God who will always get the better.

Obj. Faith suffices for Salvation. Act. 16. 30, 31. what need therefore of
such confession?
A. 1. It Is true that Faith alone is the Grace whereby we receive the
Righteousness of Christ for our being justified and saved, Romans 3. 24, 25.
Phil. 3. 9.

But then, Confession is required also upon another account, to wit, not as
that whereby Salvation is procured, for that is the Righteousness of Christ,
Romans 5. 21. but as the duty we must perform and the way we must walk in, for
the enjoyment of that Salvation (and happy Confession at the last day, Matt.
10. 32.) which Christ purchases, Faith believes, and the confessing Christian
(only, Mat. 10. 33.) enjoys.

2. There Is no opposition between these two, believing to Righteousness and
confessing to Salvation; for Confession with the mouth, is a fruit of Believing
with the heart; he that believes, will speak, Psalm. 116. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
(albeit there be many failings and faultrings, Psalm. 116. 11.) Faith therefore
suffices to Salvation, that is, such a Faith as includes Confession, and
detesteth denials, Mat. 26. 15. and falling away (Heb. 10. 38, 39.) And no
other Faith.

FINIS.

