A Third CONFERENCE BETWEEN O. Cromwell AND Hugh Peter's In Saint James 's Park;
Wherein, The horrible Plot is Discovered about the barbarous Murder of our late
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the I. of ever blessed Memory.

London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, 1660.

A Third Conference, wherein the horrible Plot is discovered about the
barbarous Murder of our late Sovereign Lord, King Charles the I. of ever
blessed memory.
Peter's having very lately received a strict command from O. Cromwell, (in a
special Message sent to him by a Succubus, one of the Infernal Pursuivants)
attends his pleasure once again in St. Jamse's park; where (after a little
respect) Cromwell appears to, and treats him, as follows. Cromwell, OH
Peter's! Peter's! What a wretched life did I lead, that I cannot rest from
troubleing thee (my dearest Familiar) now I am dead? Whatsoever is the matter
amongst you in England, I am very certain, that there never was such a sad and
mournful Court, in all the time of his infernal Majesty's Domination and
Principality, as now there is with us in Hell? When I came thither first, there
was never more triumphing and rejoicing amongst the infernal Orders and
Degrees, as then there was; as if all the infernal Dignities and Preheminences
under my dreadful Sovereign, depended solely on my presence, and without which
they would have sustained an irreparable loss in their Stations! Somewhat
there is in the wind more than ordinary; And therefore I prithee discover it
to me, that I may not be too much put to my trumps to pump for Intelligence?


Pet. Oh Sir, do you want your Intelligence now? Its no marvel indeed! As I
told you at our last Conference; If you were here again, it would bereave you
of all your Intelligence, and make you stark mad, to see how things go with us
now adays: You sent me with your thanks to my Lord General, in the Devils
name: But if you knew all, that's done now, you would say, that you had little
cause to thank him.


Crom. Why! prithee Peter's, what is the matter?


Pet. The matter! and manner, and form too is so, that I know not what to do
for my part. There Is no way of escaping left, either for you or my self!


Crom. For me! Why? I am safe enough, I Will warrant thee! And for the true love
I bear thee, I wish that thou were no worse than I; and then thou should be
free from all despair of escaping: But thou may be very confident, that thou
have no better refuge, than I my self have found.


Pet. Oh, but Sir, you had the luck to die in your bed, and to have a pompous
Funeral with all Princelike solemnities (never to be paid for!) Whereas, I am
yet alive (it is true) but how long I shall so continue, I am in very great
doubt: However the thoughts of my death, do not so much perplex me, as the
manner thereof, as it is universally concluded.


Crow. Why! what manner of death is it?


Pet. Not to be broyled like a Spitch-cock, as Saint Laurence was, nor to be
uncased of my skin, as the Archbishop of Spoleto was, but to be tortured and
torn in pieces with wild horses, as Ravilliac was.


Crom. Why as Ravilliac Peter's?


Pet. Because (as they say) that I had a principal hand and stroke in the
murder (as they call it) of the late King Charles: And you know, that Ravilliac
was a King killer, and Murdered Henry the fourth of France; and therefore he
was put to death with as much pain and torture, as the quality and notoriety of
his fact did merit.


Crom. Thou know in thy Conscience (Peter's) that there was none, that had so
great an hand in procuring his death, as thee and I. Did not we beguile the
Lord Fairfax, and all the rest of the innocent Officers of his Party, and
carried on the work by a Faction of our own without opposition? Who more than
we did incite the Members of the High Court of Justice, and Soldiers of the
Army to act in that Tragedy? Were not thou most intimately consulted with by my
self, my son Ireton, Tom-Harrison and Henry Martin, for the abridging and
shortning the Charge and Impeachment against the King; when as Dorislaus and
Cook had prepared a long draught of almost an hundred sheets of paper for a
Charge; which was not long since in the custody of John Phelpes, one of the
Clerks of that Court, if it be not still in his hands. Bradshaw (thou know)
would have made a tedious piece of business of it, by drawing into question
the death of King James, and the defeat at the Isle of Ree, with other
miscarriages in his Government; but thy policy concurred with ours to charge him
with Generals; because therein is the greatest latitude of evasion and deceit;
and so we resolved only to lay the Cause of the War in England at his door,
and make him the Author and Fomentor thereof: and principal Actor therein by a
general Charge, upon the reason of this maxim, that Frustra fit per plura,
quod fieri potest per pauciora; reserving particulars to our clandestine proof
by Witnesses (without any Oath) giving us private Information in the Painted
Chamber upon their bare words; And this we did to the end the King should never
know it, till it was too late for him; that so we might have the larger field
to fight against him, and prevent him from putting us to a formal Trial in Foro
Judiciali; And thus we assured our selves, that he would never own our
Jurisdiction, and then we should the sooner dispatch him for his Contumacy out
of the world. But art thou in fear to be put to death for that business? Why!
take my ghostly Counsel, Peter's. Take thee a sufflation of the powder of black
Poppey, and other Opiatick Powders up into thy Nose, as Miles Sindercombe did
to cozen me and the Hangman, and thou need not then be afraid of the
severing of thy members, but thou shall come entirely to me, soul and body in
thy whole skin, without any fracture, dislocation, or extension of any part.


Pet. Oh! but sir, It Is in a great many good men's mouths, that Sindercombe never
poisoned himself, nor ever took any Soporifick medicines, whereby to sleep his
last, as it was commonly said, that he did so; but that by some secret hand or
other, by your complotting with Barkestead (your Creature) that fellow was
stifled in his Bed, to prevent his telling of Tales next morning at Tiburn: And
so (they say) several of the Coroners Inquest were of opinion, who were
Inhabitants within the Liberty of the Tower of London; notwithstanding that
your then Lord Chief Justice directed them to find him a Felon of himself, at
his house in Lincolns Inn fields. And we also know, that the Doctors and
Chryrurgions were put to a stand and nonplus, and could not tell well, what to
make of it upon their Dissection. And Doctor Trig was always of opinion, (to
whom Barkestead first of all applied himself at the very midnight) that
Sindercomb was poisoned; and then let any man judge, how he came by his end!
And shall my lungs, that have been such imcomparable Bellows to blow the Coals
in these three Nations, be stifled and suffocated with a Pillow or Boulster?
No! I Will warrant you: I shall make a fairer end, than so for all that: But give
me leave to tell you (sir) Since the last time we conferred together in this
place, the people have been all overjoyed; And on Tuesday night the eight of
May instant, they made room for you at Tower hill, by digging up the body of
Sindercomb, and removing of it to some other place; not only burning the
Landmark, which you caused to be driven through him, (to show your right and
title to the ground) but the very Scaffold it self, whereon you caused Sir
Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, and many more to be beheaded; under which Sindercomb
was laid. Nay, more sir, That very day, the Son of the late King, by the name
of CHARLES the II. was proclaimed, with very great solemnity and rejoicing, to
be King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, both at Westminster, and
over all the City of London, by the joint Consent and Concurrence of the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, and there never was the like day seen in
London.


Cromw. What Is this! the Son of the late King proclaimed? Why then (Peter's) all
my Cunning has failled; me; and that is it, that vexes and disquieteth all our
Infernal Court, I Will warrant thee! But the wisemans sentence is verified,
Foelix criminibus nullus erit d^u: States built in Crimes shall soon be
overthrown. True it is, that the lust of ruling caused me to tumor to such a
monstrosity, that nothing could gratify my desires, but Ra^ines and Murders;
and yet thou know, how closely I pursued the example of Clopius the Roman
Tribune, and the Counsel of Machivel, ever to pretend Religion and Providence
for a Warrant for my Villainies; besides I never refused the daily suggestions
and motives used by thy self to me, for the more plausible and hypocritical
conduct of my affairs.


Pet. Truly (Sir) I have been always of opinion and judgment, that a man, who
will be in practice a skillful Fencer, must not always play at Sharps, or lay
on dry blows, but sometimes falsify a little for advantage: And my principal
Doctrine is, That an Ounce of Hypocrisy and prous fraud (by tried experience I
have found it) will carry a man out in some Passages, better than a pound of
downright honesty and good Conscience.


Cro. It Is very true, Peter's; that Hypocrisy and Juggling thou speak of, is
that which carried me with so much honor out of the World, into the highest
favor of my Infernal Sovereign; and no question, but in due time, and ere it
be long, it will send thee of an Errand to me; and then I shall (as of duty) be
grateful to thee for thy good services. Oh! how much I am indebted to thee for
Pimping so handsomely for me at Liecester; where thou know, I defloured a
young Virgin of a rare composure, and only by thy solicitation to her; by whom
I had a sinister daughter; which much troubles my Conscience, that I left it no
better provided for at my departure. Nay! And what do I not ow thee for thy
versutious Complements to my Lady Lambert, whose beauty and elegance bewitched
my affections, as thou well know; so that I could not forbear toying and
tickling her at my son Ireton's Funeral in Somerset House, before all the
Company! And what did we then privately at the Cockpit, I prithee?


Pet. Oh Sir, you made sweet work on it I Will warrant you! I Am sure, you have
made J. Lambert beetle brow'd ever since, and so damnable jealous of his Wife,
that he left her in special Charge with the Committee of Safety to keep her
Continent, in the time of his running on Frost-biting in the North last Winter,
to catch General Monk, when he could come at him.


Crom. To catch him! Why, do thou think that Lambert could ever catch him,
when I my self never could do it! Though Lambert has a long time had a jealous
head of his own, and not without good causes; yet I tell thee, I was too
cunning for him, and so was his wife too; for though he (like a proud ambitious
Fool) turned him self out of my favor; yet I never turned her out of mine; for
we two, however, kept close together. For what Cause do think did I make so
many Avenues and Recesses up and down at White Hall and Hampton Court, but for
the better convenience of my Letchery, although it was pretended for the
greater security of my Person; Else, why did I make that privy Recluse in the
Tilt-yard to pass toward Wallingford-house and the Spring-garden? But this,
thou know, I did to blind my wives eyes, whose Country-Butcher-like face
(thou can tell) did never so affect me, but that I always had my Hand maids
to be helpers to me, for the propagation of my Renown; or otherwise I had never
been called The Town-Bull of Ely, as I was, before ever the Wars began.


Pet. I Sir, you was always a notable Gamester, and good at that Sport; for I
have often heard, that you have played your Doublet and Breeches off many times
at In and In, rather than stand out.


Crom. But that was before my Conversion, Peter's! In the days of my
wantonness and youthful vanities! When Nan Chambers was my Chamber maid, and
Dol Marks had a clap by my brother Walton, (as she made the fool believe)
though I was the Father of it. An hundred more such Tricks, I have played in my
days; but let them pass: And now lets return to a little more serious
discourse. Prithee, What will become of my Wife and Family.


Pet. I profess Sir, I cannot tell certainly; but if I may guess by the
proportion and Analogy of Lex Talionis, they will not be left worth a Groat:
For you know, that you and they did what you could to reduce the late Kings
Family to the greatest exigences and extremities, that you could possibly
imagine, or invent in all the world; and you endeavored to bring upon them,
and all the Nobility and Gentry of the three Nations, all the Indignities and
Disgraces, that Milton, and Nedham, with the help of Jack Hall, and the Devil
to boot, could design or contrive: And what then can you expect, should be
done with them? For can they look for mercy, that never showed any, and acted
and executed nothing but injustice, with the greatest Barbarism and Impiety,
(as it is generally said all the world over.)


Crom. But I always suspected Dick and Harry to be Cavaliers.


Pet. Its no matter for that! Its enough that they were your Sons: You have
left such an ill name behind you, that the very word Cromwell will be as
infamous to all Posterity, as the memory of the late King will be blessed, as
most men are of opinion. If your sons have any wit left them (as you know they
never had much) they will take my course, and try to get beyond the Seas, if they
can. But I think it will be as possible for us, as it was for John Barkestead,
(without the help of Gyges his Ring,) to eat the Pies invisibly in Fetter-lane.
We are all lamentably put to it. There Is nothing but Hue and Cries after us:
Let us go where we will, we are very ill beloved, and no body will shelter us.
But I have a Plot in my head! If an honest Cavaleer will but marry my Daughter,
and get me a Pardon from the King, I Will give him money enough, and never meddle
with State matters again, so long as I breath.


Crom. What? wi^^ thou be a Turncoat too? Prithee, hold close to thy former
principles, and be honest and come to me! Leave me not now in the lurch for
shame? I tell thee, thy presence would much refresh the drooping spirits of all
my fellow Courtiers, as well as my own; for now we sit wailing and howling for
want of good Company; and thine would be very welcome to us. What should thou
dream of a Pardon! Twill never keep thee from me. All the money and Treasure,
that thou have juggled for, has but made our gates the more open for thee. Our
Porter, Cerberus ever nods his three heads at the very mention of thee: He
thinks it long till he sees thee, that he might direct and conduct thee to my
Lodgings of State in our Tartarian Court; for I have given him special charge
to do it upon thy first appearance there. If thou do not come quickly, Feak
will get the Start of thee, and be our confounded Bishop. But we had rather
have thee, then any one of them, for thou have more craft than twenty of them:
And therefore delay not thy coming Peter's. And for my part, if thou have not
had Invitations and Promises enough to encourage thee, I shall trouble thee no
further, nor will I spend time to no purpose.


Pet. Sir, I pray be not angry! I always was so much an honourer of your
Person, that I cannot keep at a distance from you for my very soul. My
obligations are great upon me to be just to you; And therefore I will be
honest, and never perplex my self any more with vain hopes of a Pardon or
Remission; (For I believe, Acts of Indemnity and Free Pardon will not be so
common again for us, as they were in your days) And its the chief part in a
wise man to be well resolved in himself: And therefore Sir, expect me very
suddenly, for I will come to you, whosoever stays from you.


Crom: Honest Hugh, I thank thee! And before I depart from thee at this moment,
Lets Dance for joy a Jig or two, as we were wonted to do in this place, in the
days of my Protector-ship, and sing an Infernal Canto to the Tune of, The
three merry Mariners.

A Song made and sung by Cromwell, both of them dancing to it.
BY Ruin and Blood
My Power once stood,
Which no body can deny, Boys!
To Murder the King,
And Misery bring,
What Instrument had you, but I, Boys.
To live by the Spoil, was my joy and delight;
And he that may get a Crown, will he not fight?
The Cries of the Poor
I valued no more,
Than a Woolf does pity his Prey, Boye's!
Its terror must keep
The Britains like Sheep,
Or else you can never 'um sway, Boys.
A merciful King for a Cipher shall stand,
But a rigorous Prince keeps his Scepter in's hand.

Peter's, It Is incomparable, my Lord!


Cromw. Now let me hear thy Phant'sie, Peter's.


Another Song made by Hugh Peter's,
to the Tune of the Beggars.
WHo will be brave Princes, and keep up their Rules,
Must bridle their Commons, like Horses and Mules;
For if the rude multitude once get ahead,
They Will not be reclaimed, or quietly led.
Its harder to keep it, though gotten with pleasure,
Than first to attain to a Kingdom, or Treasure,
Or treasure, or treasure, or treasure, or treasure,
Than first to attain to a Kingdom, or Treasure.

Crom. Oh brave Peter's! lets hear some more of this, Peter's.


Your Son lost his place, like a Cowardly Fool,
Fitter (than be a Prince) to be Groom of a Stool:
You left him three kingdoms, which you got by chance,
And he let 'um go, like a man in a Trance.
But England a Proverb has, and 's true, I tell 'ee:
What Is got over the Devil's back,
's spent under's belly,
His belly, his belly, his belly, his belly,
What Is got over the Devil's back,
's spent under's belly.

Cromwell. Thou Art in the right Peter's. Now I will sing to thee my last Farewell.

To the Tune of, Loath to depart.
My Park, Farewell! farewell, my Deer!
I must to Hell go,
I must to Hell go;
Look for me never again to be here
From Tartarus down below.

Pet. Stay my Lord, And take my valediction too, I pray.


Crom. Lets have it quickly, or I cannot stay.


Peter's. Tiburn! A dieu, till we do greet:
Twill not be long Sir,
Twill not be long Sir,
The Boys will be merry, when thou and I meet,
And the Bells shall ring, Ding, Dong, Sir.

Cromw. Be sure you make have after me, Peter's.


Cromwell departs out of sight. Peter's- Solus. If I was sure to be by the neck
suspended,
I would not care how soon I was dispatched
To follow him: The work would soon be ended;
But here is the Devil! If I once be caught;
I shall be tortured worse than on a Rack,
And torn in pieces like Ravilliac.

Finis, Funis. Funus.

