THE TRISSOTETRAS: OR A MOST EXQUISITE TABLE FOR Resolving all manner of
Triangles, whether Plain or Sphericall, Rectangular or Obliquangular, with
greater facility, then ever hitherto has been practiced: Most necessary for
all such as would attain to the exact knowledge of Fortification, Dyaling,
Navigation, Surveying, Architecture, the Art of Shadowing, taking of Heights,
and Distances, the use of both the Globes, Perspective, the skill of making of
Maps, the Theory of the Planets, the calculating of their motions, and of all
other Astronomicall computations whatsoever.

Now lately invented, and perfected, explained, commented on, and, with all
possible brevity, and perspicuity, in the hiddest, and most re-searched
mysteries, from the very first grounds of the Science it self, proved, and
convincingly demonstrated.

By Sir THOMAS URQUHART of Cromartie Knight.

Published for the benefit of those that are Mathematically affected.

LONDON, Printed by James Young. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, And most noble LADY, My dear and loving Mother, the
Lady DOWAGER of Cromartie.
MADAM,
FILIAL duty being the more binding in me, that I do owe it to the best of
Mothers; if in the discharge thereof I observe not the usual manner of other
sons, I am the less to blame, that their obligation is not so great as mine:
Therefore in that do presume to imprint your Ladyships name in the
Frontispiece of this Book, and proffer unto you a Dedication of that, which is
beyond the capacity of other Ladies; my boldness therein is the more
excusable, that in your person the most virtuous Woman in the world is
entreated to Patronize that, which by the learnedest men may happily be perused.

I am confident (Madam) that your gracious acceptance of this Present is the
more easily obtainable, in that it is a grandchild of your own, whom I thus
make tender of, to be sheltered under the favor of your protection; and that
unto your Ladyship it will not be the more unwelcome, for proceeding from the
brains of him, whose body is not more yours by generation, then by a most
equitable purchase are the faculties of his mind; the dominion which over my
better half you, by your goodness, have acquired, being, in regard of my
obedience, no less voluntary, then that of the other is for procreation
natural.

Thus (Madam) unto you do I totally belong, but so, as that those exterior
parts of mine, which by birth are from your Ladyship derived, cannot be more
fortunate in this their subjection (notwithstanding the egregious advantages of
blood, and consanguinity thereby to them accruing) then my self am happy (as
from my heart I do acknowledge it) in the just right, your Ladyship has to
the eternal possession of the never-dying powers of my soul. For, though
(Sovereignty excepted) there be none in this Island more honorably descended
then is your Ladyship, nor whose progenitors, these many ages past, have been
(on either side) of a more Noble extraction: Yet, laying apart Nobility,
beauty, wealth, parentage, and friends, which (together with many other gifts
of fortune) have hitherto served to adorn your Ladyship beyond others of your
sex, who for all these have been deservedly renowned; and (in some measure) not
esteeming that properly to be yours, the receiving whereof did not altogether
depend upon your own election: it is the treasure of those excellent graces,
wherewith inwardly you are enriched, that, in praising of your Ladyship is most
to be pitched upon, and for the which you are most highly to be commended;
seeing by the means of them, you, from your tenderest years upwards, until
this time, in the state of both Virginity and Matrimony, have so constantly,
and indefatigably proceeded in the course of virtue, with such alacrity fixed
your gallant thoughts on the sweetness thereof, and thereunto so firmly and
cheerfully devoted all your words and actions, as if righteousness in your
Ladyship had been an inbred quality, and that in your Will there had been no
aptitude of declining from the way of reason.

This much is sufficiently well known to those, that have at any time enjoyed
the honor of your Ladyships conversation, by whose most unpartiall reports,
the Splendor of your reputation is both in this, and foraine Nations accounted
precious, in the minds even of those, that have never seen you. But in so much
more especially, do the most judicious of either sex admire the rare and
sublime endowments, wherewith your Ladyship is qualified, that (as a pattern
of perfection, worthy to be universally followed) other Ladies (of what dignity
soever) are truly by them esteemed of the choiser merit, the nearer they draw
to the Paragon proposed, and resemble your Ladyship; for that, by virtue of
your beloved society, your neighboring Countesses, and other greater Dames of
your kindred and acquaintance, become the more illustrious in your imitation;
amidst whom, as Cynthia amongst the obscurer Planets, your Ladyship shines, and
darteth the Angelick rays of your matchless example on the spirits of those,
who by their good Genius have been brought into your favorable presence to be
enlightened by them.

Now (Madam) lest, by insisting any longer upon this strain, I should seem to
offend that modesty, and humility, which (without derogating from your heroic
virtues) are seated in a considerable place of your soul, I will here, in all
submission, most humbly take my leave of your Ladyship, and beseech Almighty
God, that it may please his Divine Majesty so to bless your Ladyship with
continuance of days, that the sons of those whom I have not as yet begot,
may attain to the happiness of presenting unto your Ladyship a brain-babe of
more sufficiency and consequence; and that your Ladyship may live with as much
health, and prosperity, to accept thereof, and cherish it then, as (I hope) you
do now, at your vouchsafing to receive this, which (though disproportionable,
both to your Ladyships high deserts, and to that fervencie of willingness in
me, sometime to make offer of what is of better worth, and more suitable to the
grandour of your acceptance) in all sincerity of heart (confiding in that
candor and ingenuity, whereby your Ladyship is accustomed to value gifts,
according to the intention of the giver) and in all duty, and lowliness of
mind, together with my self in whole, and all my best endeavors, I tender
unto your Ladyship, as becomes, (Madam)

Your Ladyships most affectionate Son and humble servant, THOMAS URQUHART.

To the Reader.
TO write of Trigonometry, and not make mention of the illustrious Lord Neper
of Marchiston, the inventer of Logarithms, were to be unmindfull of him that is
our daily Benefactor; these artificial numbers by him first excogitated and
perfected, being of such incomparable use, that, by them, we may operate more
in one day, and with less danger of error, then can be done without them in
the space of a whole week. A secret which would have been so precious to
Antiquity, that Pythagoras, all the seven wise men of Greece, Archimedes,
Socrates, Plato, Euclid, and Aristotle, had (if coaevals) jointly adored him,
and unanimously concurred to the deifying of the revealer of so great a
Mystery: and truly (besides them) a great many other learned men, who for the
laboriousnesse of long and various Multiplications, Divisions, and Radical
extractions of several sorts, were deterred from the prosecuting, and
divulging of their knowledge in the chiefest, and most noble parts of the
Mathematics, would have left behind them diverse exquisite Volumes, of an
incomprehensible value, if the Arithmetical equality of difference, agreeable
to every continued Geometrical proportion, had been made known unto them.

Wherefore, I am infallibly persuaded, that, in the estimation of
scientifically disposed spirits, the Philosophers stone is but trash to this
invention, which will always (in their judicious opinions) be accounted of
more worth to the Mathematical world, then was the finding out of America, to
the King of Spain; or the discovery of the nearest way to the East Indies,
would be to the Northerly occidentall Merchants.

What the merit then of the Author is, let the most envious judge: for my own
part, I do not praise him so much, for that he is my Compatriot, as I must
extol the happiness of my Country, for having produced so brave a spark, in
whom alone (I may with confidence aver, it is more glorious, then if it had
been the conquering Kingdom of five hundred potent Nations: for, by how much
the gifts of the mind, are more excellent then those of either body or fortune;
by so much the divine effects of the faculties thereof, are of greater
consequence, then what is performed by mere force of Arms, or chance of War.

I might say more in commendation of this gallant man, but that my discourse
being directed to the Reader, he will possibly expect to be entertained with
some other purpose then Encomiasticks; and therefore, to undeceive him of those
hopes (if any such there be) I will assure him, that to no other end I did
require his observance here, but to be informed by me of the laudable
endowments of that honorable Baron, whose eminency above others (wher-ever he
be spoke of) deserves such an ample Elogie by it self, that the paper, graced
with the receiving of his name and character, should not be blurred with the
course impression of any other stuff.

However the Reader ought not to conceive amiss for his being detained so long
upon this Eulogistick subject, without the variety of any peculiar instruction
bestowed on him; seeing I am certain there is nothing more advantageous to
him, or that more efficaciously can tend to his improvement, then the imitation
of that admirable Gentleman, whose immortal fame, in spite of time, will
out-last all ages, and look eternity in the face.

The Readers well-wisher. T. U.

An Epaenetick and Doxologetick Express, in commendation of this Book, and the
Author thereof.
To all Philomathets.
SEeing Trigonometry, which handsomely unlocketh the choycest, and most intime
mysteries of the Mathematics, has been hitherto exposed to the world in a
method, whose intricacy deterreth many from adventuring on it; We are all, and
every one of us, by duty bound to acknowledge our selves beholding to the
Author of this Treatise; who, by reducing all the secrets of that noble Science
into a most exquisite order, has so facilitated the way to the Learner, that
in seven weeks, at most, he may attain to more knowledge therein, then
otherwise he could do for his heart in the space of a twelve-moneth: And who,
for the better encouragement of the studious, has so gentilely expatiated his
spirits upon all its Actioms, Principles, Analogies, precepts, and whole
subjected matter; that this Mathematical Tractate does no less bespeak him a
good Poet, and good Orator, then by his elaboured Poems he has shown himself
already a good Philosopher, and Mathematician.

Thus does the various mixture of most excellent qualities in him, give such
evidence of the transcendent faculties of his mind, that, as the Muses never
yet inspired sublimer conceptions in a more refined style, then is to be found
in the accurate strain of his most ingenious Epigrams: so, on the other part,
are the abstrusest difficulties of this Science by him so neatly unfolded, and
with such exactness has he resolved the hardest, and most entangled doubts
thereof; that, I may justly say, what praise (in his Epistle, or rather
Preface, to the Reader) he has been pleased (out of his ingenuity, to confer
on the learned, and honorable Neper, does, without any diminution, in every
jot, as duly belong unto himself.

For, I am certainly persuaded, he that uses Logarithms, shall not gain so
much time on the Worker by the natural Sines and Tangents, as, by virtue of
this succinct manner of calculation, shall be got on him that knows it not,
how compendiously soever else, with Addition and Subtraction, or Addition
alone, he frame his Computations. However, he who, together with that of the
Logarithms, makes use of this invention, is in a way which will bring him so
straight and readily to the perfect practice of Trigonometry, that, compared
with the old beaten path, trod upon by Regiomontanus, Ptolomy, and other
ancient Mathematicians, it is like the Sea voyage, in regard of that by Land,
betwixt the two Pillars of (Hercules commonly called, the Straits of Gibraltar)
whereof the one is but of six hours sailing at most, and the other a journey
of seven thousand long miles.

If we then consider how a great many, despairing ever to get out (if once
entered) of the confused obscurity wherein the doctrine of Triangles has been
from time to time involved, have rather contented themselves barely with Scale
and Compass, and other mechanic tools and instruments, to prosecute their
operations, and in any reasonable measure to glance somewhat near the truth,
then, thorough so many pesterments, and harsh encumbrances, to touch it to a
point, in its most indivisible and infallible reality. And how others, for all
their being more industrious, in proving their Conclusions by the Mediums from
which they are necessarily inferred, are nevertheless (even when they have
bestowed half an age in the Trigonometricall practice) oftentimes so far to
seek, that, without a great deal of premeditation advisement, and recollecting
of themselves, they know not how to discuss some queries, corollaries,
problems, consectaries, proportions, ways of perpendicular falling, and other
such like occurring debatable matters, incident to the scientifick measuring of
Triangles; We cannot choose (these things being maturely perpended) but be much
taken with the pregnancy of this device, whereby we shall sooner hit to a minut
upon the verity of an Angle or Side demanded, and trace it to the very source
and original, from whence it flows, then another mechanically shall be able
to come within three degrees thereof, although he cannot, for the same little
he does, afford any reason at all; And so suddenly resolve any Trigonometricall
question (without pains or labor, how perplexed soever it be) with all the
dependances thereto belonging, as if it were a knowledge merely infused from
above, and revealed by the peculiar inspiration of some favorable Angel.

Besides these advantages, administered unto us by the means of this exquisite
Book, this maine commodity accreweth to the diligent Perusers of it, that,
instead of three quarters of a year, usually by Professors allowed to their
Scholars for the right conceiving of this Science, which (notwithstanding)
through any little discontinuance, is by them so apt to be forgotten, that the
expense of a week or two will hardly suffice to reseat it in their memories;
they shall not need, by this method, to bestow above a month, and with such
ease and facility for retention, when they have learned and acquired it, that,
if multiplicity of businesses, or serious plodding upon other studies happen to
blot it out of their minds, they may as firmly recover in one quarter of an
hour the whole knowledge and remembrance thereof, as when they had it best, and
were most punctually versed in it.

A secret (in my opinion) so precious, that (as the Author spoke of Marchiston)
I may with the like pertinencie avouch of him, that his Country and kindred
would not have been more honored by him, had he purchased millions of gold,
and several rich territories of a great and vast extent; then for this subtle
and divine invention, which will out-last the continuance of any inheritance,
and remain fresh in the understandings

of men of profound Literature, when houses and possessions will change their
owners, the wealthy become poor, and the children of the needy enjoy the
treasures of those, whose heirs are impoverished.

Therefore, seeing for the many-fold uses thereof in diverse Arts and Sciences,
in speculation and practice, peace and war, sport and earnest, with the
admirable furtherances we reap by it, in the knowledge of Sea and Land, and
Heaven and Earth, it cannot be otherwise then permanent, together with the
Authors fame, so long as any of those endure; I will (God willing) in the
ruins of all these, and when time it self is expired, in testimony of my
thankfulness in particular for so great a benefit, (if after the Resurrection,
there be any complementall affability) express my self then, as I do now,

The Authors most affectionate, and most humbly devoted servant J. A.

The Diatyposis of the whole Doctrine of Triangles.
The plane Triangles have 13. Moods. Planorectangulars 7. 1 Upalem. 2 Uberman.
3 Uphener. 4 Ekarul. 5 Egalem. 6 Echemun. 7 Etena^.
Planobliquangulars. 6. 1 Danarele. 2 There^abmo. 3 Zelemabne. 4 Xemenoro. 5
Shenerolem. 6 Pserelema.
The Sphericals have 28 Moods. Orthogonosphericals. 16. 1. Upalam. 2. Ubamen.
3. Uphanep. 4. Ukelamb. 5. Ugemon. 6. Uchener 7. E^alum 8. Edamon. 9. Ethaner.
10. Ezolum. 11. Exoman. 12. Epsoner. 13. Alamun. 14. Amaner. 15. Enerul. 16.
E^elam.
Of these 16. Mood (...) Moods of V^^^gen ^re prounded upon the Axi^^re of
Supro^^^.

The 8. of Pubkutetkepsaler on Sbaprotea: and the 5. of Uchedezexam on Proso



By these 16. Representatives, 1. Le^. 2. Yet. 3. R^c 4. Cle. 5. Lu. 6. Tul. 7.
Tere. 8. Tol. 9. Le^ 10. At. 11. Tul. 12. Clet. 13. Cret. 14. Tur. 15. Tur. 16.
Le (A. signifying an oblique Angle. E. the Perpendicular U. the subtendent C.
Initiall, the compleme^t of a side to a quadrant ^. final, the side continued
to the Radius or a Quadrant. I. left. R. right. and T. one of the top Triangles
of the Scheme) it is evidenced in what part of the Diagram the Analogy of my of
the 16. Moods begins, which being once known, the progressive sequence of the
proportionable Sides and Angles is easily discerned out of the orderly in
volutions of the Figure it self. Here it is to be observed, that as the Book
explaineth the Trissotetral Table: so this Trigonodiatyposis unfoldeth* all the
intricate difficulties of the Book.

Loxogonosphericals. 12. That the Schemes and Types of Triangulary Analogies
are not seated in the rooms, where they are treated of, I purposely have done
it; to the end, that being all perceived at one view, their multiplicity (which
would appear confused in their ^ispersed method) might ^^ot any way discourage
(...) der: besides that, this their ^eing together in their ^u^ order, and
rancked ^ecording to the exigence of the Sides or Angles, is such a furtherance
to the memory, and illustration to the judgment, that it makes Trigonometry,
which of all Sciences was accounted the abstrusest, to be in effect the most
(...) and (...).

Monurgeticks. 4 1 Lamaneprep. 2 Menerolo. 3 Nerelema. 4 Ralam^^^
Of the Disergeticks there be 8. Moods, each whereof is divided into four
Cases. Ahalebmane. 1. Alamebna Dasimforaug. Dadisfo^^ug. Dadisgatin. Simomatin.
2. Alamebne. Dasimforauxy. Dadiscracforeug. Dadiscramgatin. Simomatin.

Ahamepnare. (...) Dadissepamforaur. Dadissexamforeur. Dasimatin. Simomatin.
4. Ammaneprela Dadissepamfor. Dadisse^amfor. Dasimin. Simomatin.

Ehenabrole. (...) Dacramfor. Damracfor. Dasimquzin. Simomatin.
6. E^neral^la. Dacforamb. Damforac. Da^imat^m. Simomatin.

Eherolabme (...) Dacracforeur. Dambracforeur. Dacrambatin. Simomatin.
8. E^relome Dakyxamfor. Dambyxamfor. Dakypambin. Simomatin.






In Eruditum D. Thomae Vrquharti equitis Trissotetrados librum.
SI cupis aetherios tuto peragrare meatus,
Et sulcare audes si vada salsa maris:
Vel tibi si cordi est terrae spatia ampla metiri,
Huc ades, hunc doctum percipe mente librum.
Hoc, sine Daedaleis pennis volitare per auras,
Et sine Neptuno nare per alta vales.
Hoc duce, jam Lybicos poteris superare calores,
Atque pati Scythici frigora saeva poli.
Perge Thoma; tali tandem gaudebit alumno
SCOTIA, quam scriptis tollis in astra tuis.
Al. Ross.

POSITIONS.
EVery Circle is divided into three hundred and sixty parts, called Degrees,
whereof each one is Sexagesimated, Subsexagesimated, Resubsexagesimated, and
Biresubsexagesimated, in Minutes, Seconds, Thirds, Fourths, and so far forth as
any Computist is pleased to proceed for the exactness of a Research, in the
calculation of any Orbiculary Dimension.

2. As Degrees are the measure of Arches, so are they of Angles; but that those
are called Circumferentiall, these Angulary Degrees, each whereof is the three
hundred and sixtieth part of four right Angles, which are nothing else but the
surface of a Plain to any point circumjacent; for any space whatsoever about a
point, is divided in 360. parts: And the better to conceive the Analogy that
is betwixt these two sorts of graduall Measures, we must know, that there is
the same proportion of any Angle to 4. right Angles, as of an arch of so many
circumferential degrees to the whole circumference.

3. Hence is it, that the same number serves the Angle, and the Arch that
vaults it, and that diverse quantities are measured (as it were) with the same
graduall measure. Angles and Arches then are Analogicall, and the same reason
is of both.

4. Seeing any given proportion may be found in numbers, and that any two
quantities have the same proportion that the two numbers have, according to the
which they are measured: if for the measuring of Triangles there must be
certain proportions of all the parts of a Triangle, to one another known, and
those proportions explained in numbers it is most certain, all Magnitudes,
being Figures at least in power, and all Figures either Triangles, or
Triangled, that the Arithmeticall Solution of any Geometrical question,
depends on the Doctrine of Triangles.

5. And though the proportion betwixt the parts of a Triangle cannot be without
some error; because of crooked lines to right lines, and of crooked lines
amongst themselves, the reason is inscrutable, no man being able to find out
the exact proportion of the Diameter to the Circumference: yet both in plain
Triangles, where the measure of the Angles is of a different species from the
sides, and in Sphericalls, wherein both the Angles and sides are of a circular
nature, crooked lines are in some measure reduced to right lines by the
definition of quantity which right lines, viz. Sines, Tangents, and Secants,
applied to a Circle have in respect of the Radius, o^ half-Diameter.

6. And therefore, though the Circles Quadrature be not found out, it being in
our power to make the Diameter, or the semi-Diameter, which is the Radius of as
many parts as we please, and being sure so much the more that the Radius be
taken, the error will be the lesser; for albeit the Sines, Tangents and
Secants, be irrational thereto for the most part, and their proportion
inexplicable by any number whatsoever, whither whole or broken: yet if they be
rightly made, they will be such, as that in them all no number will be
different from the truth by an integer, or unity of those parts, whereof the
Radius is taken: which is so exactly done by some, especially by Petiscus, who
assumed a Radius of twenty six places, that according to his supputation (the
Diameter of the Earth being known, and the Globe thereof supposed to be
perfectly round) one should not fail in the dimension of its whole Circuit, the
nine hundredth thousand scantling of the Million part of an Inch, and yet not be
able, for all that, to measure it without amiss; for so indivisible the truth
of a thing is, that come you never so near it, unless you hit upon it just to
a point, there is an error still.

DEFINITIONS.
A Cord, or Subtense, is a right line, drawn from the one extremity to the
other of an Arch.

2. A right Sine is the half Cord of the double Arch proposed, and from one
extremity of the Arch falls perpendicularly on the Radius, passing by the
other end thereof.

3. A Tangent is a right line, drawn from the Secant by one end of the Arch,
perpendicularly on the extremity of the Diameter, passing by the other end of
the said Arch.

4. A Secant is the prolonged Radius, which passes by the upper extremity of
the Arch, till it meet with the sine Tangent of the said Arch.

5. Complement is the difference betwixt the lesser Arch, and a Quadrant, or
betwixt a right Angle and an Acute.

6. The complement to a Semicircle, is the difference betwixt the
half-Circumference and any Arch lesser, or betwixt two right Angles, and an
Oblique Angle, whither blunt or sharp.

7. The versed sine is the remainder of the Radius, the sine Complement being
subtracted from it, and though great use may be made of the versed sines, for
finding out of the Angles by the sides, and sides by the Angles: yet in
Logarithmicall calculations they are altogether useless, and therefore in my
Trissotetras there is no mention made of them.

8. In Amblygonosphericall^, which admit both of an Extrinsecall, and
Intrinsecall demission of the perpendicular, nineteen several parts are to be
considered: viz. The Perpendicular, the Subtendentall, the Subtendentine, two
Cosubtendents, the Basall, the Basidion, the chief Segment of the Base, two
Cobases, the double Vertical, the Vertical, the Verticaline, two
Coverticalls, the next Cathetopposite, the prime Cathetopposite, and the two
Cocathetopposites: fourteen whereof, (to wit) the Subtendentall, the
Subtendentine, the Cosubtendents, the Basall, the Basidion, the Cobases, the
Vertical, the Verticaline, the Coverticalls, and Cocathetopposites, are called
the first, either Subtendent, Base, Topangle, or Cocathetopposite, whither in
the great Triangle or the little, or in the Correctangle, if they be
ingredients of that Rectangular, whereof most parts are known, which parts are
always a Subtendent and a Cathetopposite: but if they be in the other
Triangle, they are called the second Subtendents, Bases, and so forth.

9. The external double Vertical is included by the Perpendicular, and
Subtendentall, and divided by the Subtendentine: the internal is included by
cosubtendents, and divided by the Perpendicular.

APODICTICKS.
THe Angles made by a right Line, falling on another right Line, are equal to
two right Angles; because every Angle being measured by an Arch, or part of a
Circumference, and a right Angle by ninety Degrees, if upon the middle of the
ground line, as Center, be described a Semicircle, it will be the measure of
the Angles, comprehended betwixt the falling, and sustaining lines.

2. Hence it is, that the four opposite Angles made by one line, crossing
another, are always each to its own opposite equal; for if upon the point of
Intersection, as Center, be described a Circle, every two of those Angles will
fill up the Semicircle; therefore the first and second will be equal to the
second and third, and consequently the second, which is the common Angle to
both these couples being removed, the first will remain equal to the third,
and by the same reason, the second to the fourth, which was to be demonstrated.

3. If a right line falling upon two other right lines, make the alternat
Angles equal, these lines must needs be Parallel; for if they did meet, the
alternat Angles would not be equal; because in all plain Triangles, the
outward Angle is greater, then any of the remote inward Angles, which is proved
by the first.

4. If one of the sides of a Triangle be produced, the outward Angle is equal
to both the inner, and opposite Angles together; because according to the
acclining or declining of the conterminall side, is left an Angulary space, for
the receiving of a parallel to the opposite side, in the point of whose
occourse at the base, the Exterior Angle is divided into two, which for their
like, and alternat situation with the two Interior Angles, are equal each to
its own conform to the nature of Angles, made by a right line crossing diverse
paralells.

5. From hence we gather, that the three Angles of a plain Triangle, are equal
to two rights; for the two inward, being equal to the External one, and there
remaining of the three, but one, which was proved in the first Apodictick, to
be the External Angles complement to two rights; it must needs fall forth
(what are equal to a third, being equal amongst themselves) that the three
Angles of a plain Triangle, are equal to two right Angles, the which we
undertook to prove.

6. By the same reason, the two acute of a Rectangled plain Triangle, are
equal to one right Angle, and any one of them, the others complement thereto.

7. In every Circle, an Angle from the Center, is two in the Limb, both of them
having one part of the Circumference for base; for being an External Angle,
and consequently equal to both the Intrinsecall Angles, and therefore equal
to one another; because of their being subtended by equal bases, viz. the
semi-Diameters, it must needs be the double of the foresaid Angle in the limb.

8. Triangles standing between two paralells, upon one and the fame base, are
equal; for the Identity of the base, whereon they are seated, together with
the Equidistance of the Lines, within the which they are confined, makes them
of such a nature, that how long so ever the line parallel to the base be
protracted, the Diagonall cutting of in one off the Triangles, as much of
breadth, as it gains of length, (the ones loss accruing to the profit of the
other) Quantifies them both to an equality, the thing we did intend to prove.

9. Hence do we infer, that Triangles betwixt two paralells, are in the same
proportion with their bases.

10. Therefore if in a Triangle, be drawn a parallel to any of the sides, it
divides the other sides, through which it passes proportionally; for besides
that it makes the four segments, to be four bases, it becomes (if two
Diagonall lines be extended from the ends thereof, to the ends of its parallel)
a common base to two equal Triangles, to which two, the Triangle of the first
two segments, having reference according to the difference of their bases, and
these two being equal, as it is to the one, so must it be to the other, and
therefore the first base, must be to the second, (which are the Segments of one
side of the Triangle) as the third to the fourth, (which are the Segments of
the second) all which was to be demonstrated.

11. From hence do we collect, that Equiangled Triangles have their sides about
the equal Angles proportional to one another. This says Petiscus, is the
golden Foundation, and chief ground of Trigonometry.

12. An Angle in a Semicircle is right; because it is equal to both the
Angles at the base, which (by cutting the Diameter in two) is perceivable to
any.

13. Of four proportional lines, the Rectangled figure, made of the two
extremes, is equal to the Rectangular, composed of the means; for as four and
one, are equal to two and three, by an Arithmeticall proportion: and the
fourth term Geometrically exceeding, or being less then the third, as the
second is more, or less then the first; what the fourth has, or wants, from
and above the third, is supplied, or impaired by the Surplusage, or deficiency
of the first from and above the second: These Analogies being still taken in a
Geometrical way, make the oblong of the two middle, equal to that of the
extremes, which was to be proved.

14. In all plain Rectangled Triangles, the Ambients are equal in power to the
Subtendent; for by demitting from the right Angle a Perpendicular, there will
arise two Correctangles, from whose Equiangularity with the great Rectangle,
will proceed such a proportion amongst the Homologall sides, of all the three,
that if you set them right in the rule, beginning your Analogy at the main
Subtendent, (seeing the including sides of the total Rectangle, prove
Subtendents in the partial Correctangles, and the bases of those Rectanglets,
the Segments of the great Subtendent) it will fall out, that as the main
Subtendent is to his base, on either side (for either of the legs of a
Rectangled Triangle, in reference to one another, is both base and
Perpendicular) so the same bases, which are Subtendents in the lesser
Rectangles, are to their bases, the Segment, of the prime Subtendent: Then by
the Golden rule we find, that the multiplying of the middle terms (which is
nothing else, but the squaring of the comprehending sides of the prime
Rectangular) affords two products, equal to the oblongs made of the great
Subtendent, and his respective Segments, the aggregat whereof by equation is
the same with the square of the chief Subtendent, or Hypotenusa, which was to
be demonstrated.

15. In every total square, the supplements about the partial, and Interior
squares, are equal the one to the other; for by drawing a Diagonall line, the
great square being divided into two equal Triangles, because of their standing
on equal bases betwixt two paralells, by the ninth Apodictick, it is evident,
that in either of these great Triangles, there being two partial ones, equal
to the two of the other, each to his own, by the same Reason of the ninth: If
from equal things (viz. the total Triangles) be taken equal things (to wit,
the two pairs of partial Triangles) equal things must needs remain, which are
the foresaid supplements, whose equality I undertook to prove,

16. If a right line cut into two equal parts be increased, the square made of
the additonall line, and one of the Bisegments, joined in one, less by the
Square of the half of the line Bisected, is equal to the oblong contained
under the prolonged line, and the line of Continuation; for if annexedly to the
longest side of the proposed oblong, be described the foresaid Square, there
will jet out beyond the Quadrat Figure, a space or Rectangle, which for being
powered by the Bisegment and Additionall line, will be equal to the nearest
supplement, and consequently to the other (the equality of supplements being
proved by the last Apodictick) by virtue whereof, a Gnomon in the great Square,
lacking nothing of its whole Area, but the space of the square of the Bisected
line, is apparent to equalize the Parallelogram proposed, which was to be
demonstrated.

17. From hence proceeds this Sequel, that if from any point without a
circle, two lines cutting it be protracted to the other extremity thereof,
making two cords, the oblongs contained under the total lines, and the excess
of the Subtenses, are equal one to another; for whether any of the lines pass
through the Center, or not, if the Subtenses be Bisected, seeing all lines from
the Center fall Perpendicularly upon the Chordall point of Bisection (because
the two semi-Diameters, and Bisegments substerned under equal Angles, in two
Triangles evince the equality of the third Angle, to the third, by the fifth
Apodictick, which two Angles being made by the falling of one right line upon
another, must needs be right by the tenth definition of the first of Euchilde)
the Bucarnon of Pythagoras, demonstrated in my fourteenth Apodictick, will by
Quadrosubductions of Ambients, from one another, and their
Quadrobiquadrequation^ with the Hypotenusa, together with other Analogies of
equation with the powers of like Rectangular Triangles, comprehended within the
same circle, manifest the equality of long Squares, or oblongs Radically
meeting in an Exterior point, and made of the prolonged Subtenses, and the
lines of interception, betwixt the limb of the circle, and the point of
concourse, quod probandum fuit.

18. Now to look back on the eleaventh Apodictick, where according to Petiscus,
I said that upon the mutual proportion of the sides of Equiangled Triangles,
is founded the whole Science of Trigonometry, I do here respeak it, and with
confidence maintain the truth thereof; because, besides many others, it is the
ground of these Subsequent Theorems: 1. The right sine of an Arch, is to its
cosine, as the Radius to the co-tangent of the said Arch. 2. The cosine of an
Arch, is to its sine, as the Radius to the Tangent of the said Arch. 3. The
Sines, and co-Secants: the Secants, and co-Sines: and the Tangents, and
co-Tangents, are reciprocally proportional. 4. The Radius is a mean
proportional, betwixt the Sine, and co-Secant: the Secant, and Cosine: and
the Tangent, and co-Tangent: The verity of all these* (If a Quadrant be
described, and upon the two Radiuses two Tangents, and two or three Sines be
erected (which in respect of other Arches will be co-Sines and co-Tangents) and
two Secants drawn (which are likewise co-Secants) from the Center to the top of
the Tangents) will appear by the foresaid reasons, out of my eleaventh
Apodictick.

The Trissotetras.
Plain. Sphericall.
Plain Trissotetras. Axioms four.
1. Rulerst Vradesso: Directory: Enodandas. Eradetul: Vphechet: 3. Orth. 1.
Obl. 2. Eproso Directorie: Enodandas 3. Ax. Grediftal: Dir. ^. Pubkegdaxesh: 4.
Orth. 4. Ax. Bagrediffiu: Dir. ^. 3. Obl. The Planorectangular Table: Figures
four*
1. Va* le Datas. Quaesitas. Resolvers. Up* Alem. Rad -- V -- Sapy Yr. 2. Ve*
mane Vb* em an. V -- Rad -- Eg So. Praesubserv. Possubserv. Vph* en er. Vb* em
an. Up* alem, or, Eg* alem. 3. Ena* ve Ek* ar ul. Sapeg -- Eg -- Rad Vr. Eg* al
em. Rad -- Taxeg -- Eg Yr. Praesubserv. Possubserv. 4. Ere* va Each* em un. Et*
en ar. Ek* ar ul. Et* en ar. E -- Ge -- Rad Toge. The Planobliquangular Table:
Figures four.
1. Alahe * me Da*na*re le. Sapeg -- Eg -- Sapyr Yr. 2. Emena*role The*re* lab
mo. Aggres -- Zes -- Talfagros Talzo. Praesubserv. Possubserv. Ze*le*mab ne.
The*re* lab mo. Da*na*re le. 3. Enero*lome Xe* me* no to. E -- So -- Ge So.
Praesubserv. Possubserv. She*ne* to lem. Xe* me* no to. Da*na*re le
Praesubserv. Possubserv. 4. Erele* a Pse* re* le ma. Bagreziu. Vb*em an. Final
Resolver. Vxi^q -- Rad -- (...) -- Sor. The Sphericall Trissotetras. Axioms
three.
1. Suprosca. Dir. uphugen. 2. Sbaprotca. pubkutethepsaler. 3. Seproso.
uchedezexam.
The Orthogonospherical Table. Figures 6. Datoquaeres 16.
Dat. Quaes. Resolvers. 1. Valam*menep Vp*alam. Torb -- Tag -- Nu Mir. Vb*amen.
Nag -- Mu -- Torp Myr. or, Torp -- Mu -- Lag Myr. Vph*an ep. Tol -- Sag -- Su
Sir. 2. Veman*nore Vk*elamb. Meg -- Torp -- Mu Nir. or, Torp -- Teg -- Mu Nir.
Ug*em on. Su -- Seg -- Tom Sir. or, Tom -- Seg -- Ru Sir. Uch*en er. Neg -- To
-- Nu Nyr. or, To -- Le -- Nu Nyr. 3. Enar*rulome Et*alum. Torp -- Me -- Nag
Mur. Ed*amon. To -- Neg -- Sa Nir. Eth*aner. Torb -- Tag -- Se Tyr. 4.
Erol*lumane Ez*^lum. Sag -- Sep -- Rad Sur. or, Rad -- Seg -- Rag Sur. Ex*^^
an. Ne -- To -- Nag Sir. or, To -- Le -- Nag Sir. Eps* on er. Tag -- Tolb -- Te
Sir. or, Tolb -- Mag -- Te Sir. 5. Acha* ve Al* am un. Tag -- Torb -- Ma Nur.
or, Torb -- Mag -- Ma Nur. Am* an er. Say -- Nag -- T^ Nyr. or, To -- Noy --
Ray Nyr. 6. Eshe*va En*er ul. Ton -- Neg -- Ne Nur. Er* el am. Sei -- Teg --
Torb Tir. or, Torb -- Tepi -- Rexi Tir.

The Loxogonospherical Trissotetras.
Monurgetick Disergetick.
The Monurgetick Loxogonospherical Table. Axioms two.
1. Seproso. Dir. Lame. Figures two. 2. Parses. Dir. Nera. Moods four.
Figures. Datas. Quaes. Resolvers. 1. Datamista Lam*an*ep rep. Sapeg -- Se --
Sapy Sir. Me*ne*ro lo. Sepag -- Sa -- Sepi Sir. ad 2. Datapura Ne*re*le ma. Hal
Basaldileg Sad Sab Re Regals Bis*ir. ab Parses -- Powto -- Parsadsab
PowsalvertiR Ra*la*ma ne. Kour Bfasines (ereled) Kouf Br*axypopyx. The
Loxogonospherical Disergeticks Axioms four.
1. Na Bad prosver. Dir. Alama. 2. Naverpr or Tes. Allera. 3. Siubpror Tab.
Ammena. 4. Niub prodesver. Errenna.
Figures 4. Moods 8.
Fig. M. Sub Res. Dat. Praen. Cathetothesis. Final Resolvers. 1. Ab A
Cafregpiq. La Up Tag ut * Op At Dasimforaug Sat-nop-Seud nob. Kir. A Meb Al Nu
ud * Ob And Dadisforeug Saud-nob-Sat nop. Ir. Na. Am Mir uth* Oph Auth
Dadisgatin Sauth-noph-Seuth nops Ir. Leb 2. Sub. Res. Dat. P^ae^.
Cathetothesis. Final Resolvers. Al Cafyxegeq. Ma La Up Tag ut * op at
dasimforauxy nat-mut-naud mwd Meb Al Nu ud * ob and dadiscracforeug
naud-mud-nat mwt Ne Ne Am Mir uth * oph auth dadiscramgatin nauth-muth-neuth
mwth

Fig. M. Cathetothesis. Plus minus. A A Sub. Re. Dat. Pr. Cafriq. Final
Resolvers. Sindifora. At Ma up Tag ut*Op At Dadissepamforaur Nop-Sat-Nob Seudfr
Autir. Ha Nep Al Nu ud*Ob And Dadissexamforeur Nob-Saud-Nop Satfr Eutir. And Ra
Am Mir uth* Oph Auth Dasimatin Noph-Seuth-Nops Soethj Authir. Mep 4.
Cathetothesis. Plus minus. Am Sub. Re. Dat..Pr. Cafregpagiq. Final Resolvers.
Sindiforiu. Aet Na Ma ub Mu Ut* Op Aet Dadissepamfor Tob-Top-Saet Soedfr Dyr.
Nep Am Lag Ud* Ob Aed Dadissexamfor Top-Tob-Saed Soetfr Dyr. Aed Re Reb En Myr
Uth* Oph aeth Dasimin Tops-Toph-SAEth Soethj aeth Sir. Fig. M. Cathetothesis.
Eb En Sub. Re. Dat. Pr. Cafregpigeq. Final Resolvers. Er Ub Mu Ut* Op aet
Dacramfor Soed-Top-Saet Tob. Kir. En Ab Am Lag Ud* Ob ad Damracfor
Soet-Tob-Saed Top. Ir. Lo En Myr Uth* Oph aeth Dasimquaein Soeth-Toph-Saeth
Tops. Ir. Ab 6. Cathetothesis. En Sub. Re. Dat. Q. Pr. Cafregpiq. Final
Resolvers. To Ne Ub Mu ut* Op aet Dacforamb Naet-Nut-Noed Nwd. Yr. Rab Am Lag
ud* Ob aed Damforac Naed-Nud-Noet Nwt. Yr. Le Le En Myr uth* Oph aeth Dakinatam
Naeth-Nuth-Noeth Nwth. Yr.

Fig. M. Cathteothesis. Plus minus. Eb E Sub. Re. Dat. Pr. Cafriq. Final
Resolvers. Sindifora. At Re Up Tag Ut* Op at Dacracforaur Mut-Nat-Mwd Neudfr
Autir. Er Lo Al Nu Ud* Ob and Dambracforeur Mud-Naud-Mwt Natfr Autir. And Mab
Am Mir Uth* Oph auth Dacrambatin Muth-Nauth-Mwth Neuthj Authir Om 8.
Cathetothesis. Plus minus. Er Sub. Re. Dat..Pr. Cacurgyq. Final Resolvers.
Sindiforiu. Aet Ab Re Ub Mu Ut* Op aet Dakyxamfor Nut-Nat-Nwd Noedfr Dyr. Lo Am
Lag Ud* Ob aed Dambyxamfor Nud-Nad-Nwt Noetfr Dyr. Aed Me Me En Myr Uth* Oph
ath Dakypambin Nuth-Nath-Nwth Noethj Aeth Sir.

THe novelty of these words I know will seem strange to some, and to the ears
of illiterate hearers sound like terms of Conjuration: yet seeing that since
the very infancy of learning, such inventions have been made use of, and new
words coined, that the knowledge of several things representatively confined
within a narrow compass, might the more easily be retained in a memory
susceptible of their impression (as is apparent by the names of Barbara,
Celarent, Darii, Ferio, and fifteen more Syllogistick Moods, and by those
likewise of Gammuth, A-re, B-mi, C-fa-uth, and seventeen other steps of Guidos
Scale, which are universally received by men of understanding, and that have
their spirits tuned to the harmony of reason) I know not why Logic and Music
should be rather fitted with such helps then Trigonometrie, which, for
certitude of demonstration, has been held inferior to no science, and for
sublimity and variety of object, is the primest of the Mathematics. This is
the cause why I framed the Trissotetras, wherein the terms by me invented,
without regard of the initiall letters of the words by them expressed, are
composed of such as, joined together, are of most easy pronunciation; as the
Tangent complement of a Subtendent is sooner uttered by Mu then by T C S; and
the Secant complement of the side required, by Ry, then (in the usual
apocopating way) by the first syllables or letters of Secant complement, side,
and required; and considering that without opening of the mouth no word can be
spoken, which overture is performed by the vowel, to all the sides and Angles I
designed vowels, that in the coalescencie of syllables, Sines, Tangents, and
Secants might the better consound therewith.

The explanation of the Trissotetras.
A. signifies an Angle: Ab. in the Resolvers signifies abstraction, but in
the Figures and Datoquaeres the Angle between: Ac. or Ak. the acute Angle. Ad.
Addition. AE. the first base: Amb. or Am. an obtuse Angle: As Angles in the
plural number. At. the double vertical, whether external or internal. Au.
the first vertical Angle: Ay, the Angle adjoining to the side required.

B. or Ba. the true base: Bis the double of a thing.

Ca. the perpendicular: Cra. the concurse of a given and required side: Cur.
the concurse of two given sides.

D. the partial or little rectangle or rectanglet. Da. the datas. Di. or Dif.
the difference: Dir. the directories. D. q. Datoquaeres. Diss. of unlike
natures.

E. a side: Eb. the side between: Enod, enodandas: Ereled. turned into sides:
Es, sides in the plural number: Ei, the side conterminall with the Angle
required: Eu, the second vertical Angle.

F. the new base, or angularie base, it being an Angle converted into a side:
Fig. figures: Fin. Res. final resolvers: For, or Fo, outwardly, often made use
of in the Cathetothesis: Fr. a subducting of a lesser from a greater, whether
it be Side or Angle.

G. An Angle or Side given: Gre, or aggre, the sum or aggregat.

Hal, or Al, the half.

I. Vowel, an Angle required: I Consonant, the addition of one thing to another
used in the clausuls of some of the final Resolvers. In, intus or inwardly,
and sometimes turned into. Iu, the segments of the base, or the segmented base.

K. The complement of an Angle to a Semicircle.

L. The Secant: Leg, one of the comprehending sides of an Angle. This
representative is once only mentioned.

M. A Tangent complement.

N. A Sine complement.

O. An opposite Angle, or rather Cathetopposite: Ob. the next cathetopposite
Angle, by some called the first opposite: Op. the prime cathetopposite Angle,
by some called the second opposite Oph, the first of the coopposite Angles:
Orth, an acute Angle: Ops, the second of the coopposits: Os, opposite Angles in
the plural number. Oe, the second base; Ou, the Angle opposite to the base.

P. Opposite, whether Angle or side: Par. a parallelogram or oblong. Praes.
praesubservient: Possub. possubservient: Pro. proportional: Prod. directly
proportional: Pror, reciprocally proportional: Pow. the Square of a Line:
Pran. praenoscendas.

Q. Continued if need be. Quaes. Quaesitas. Quae. Quaere, or Required.

R. The Secant complement, and sometimes in the middle of the Cathetothesis
signifies required, as always in the latter end of a final resolver it does
by way of emphasis, when it follows I. or Y. R. likewise in the Axiom of
Rulerst stands for Radius.

Ra. the Radius, and in the Scheme the middle angularie Radius.

S. The Sine, and in the close of some Resolvers, the Sum. Sim. of like
affection or nature: Subs. Subservient.

T. The Tangent. To. the Radius or total Sine, but in the Diagram it is taken
for the left angularie Radius: To. the right angularie Radius in the Scheme
proposed: Tol. the first hypotenusal Radius thereof. Tom. the second hyp.
Radius. Ton. the third hyp. Rad. Tor. the fourth hyp. Rad. Tolb. the basiradius
on the left hand. Torb. the basiradius on the right. Tolp. the Cathetorabdos,
or Radius on the left. Torp. the Cathetoradius on the right. Th. the
correctangle.

U. The Subtendent side. V. consonant, to avoid vastness of gaping, expresses
the same in several figures. Ur. the Subtendent required.

W. The second Subtendent.

X. Adjacent or Conterminal.

Y. The side required.

Z. The difference of Segments, and is the same with di, or dif. Nevertheless
the Reader may be pleased to observe, that no Consonants in the Figures or
Moods are representative save P. and B. and that only in a few; both these two
and all the other Consonants merely serving to express the order and series of
the Moods and Figures respectively amongst themselves, and of their
constitutive parts in regard of one another.

ANIMADVERSIONS.
IN the letter T. I have been something large in the enumeration of several
Radiuses; for there being eleven made use of in the grand Scheme, whereof eight
are Circumferentiall, and three Angularie, that they might be the better
distinguished from one another, when falling in proportion we should have
occasion to express them; I thought good to allot to every one of them its
own peculiar Character: all which I have done with the more exactness, that
by the variety of the Radiuses amongst themselves, when any one of them in
particular is pitched upon, we may the sooner know what part of the Diagram, by
means thereof, is fittest for the resolving of any Orthogonosphericall
problem: though indeed, I must confess, when sometimes to a question
propounded, I adapt a figure apart, I do indifferently (excluding all other
characters) make use of To, or Rad, or R only for the total Sine, which,
without any obscurity or confusion at all, I have practiced for brevities sake.

Likewise, it being my maine design in the framing of this Table, to make
alcapable trigonometrically-affected Students with much facility and little
labor attain to the whole knowledge of the noble Science of the doctrine of
Triangles, I deemed it expedient, the more firmly and readily to imprint the
several Datoquaeres or praescinded Problems thereof in their memories, to
accommodate them accordingly with letters proper for the purpose; which, if the
ingenious Reader will be pleased to consider, he will find, by the very letters
themselves, the place and number of each Datoquaere: This is the reason why my
Trissotetras (conform to the Etymology of its name) is in so many diverse
Ternaries, and Quaternaries divided; and that the sharp, mean, blunt, double,
and Liquid Consonants of the Greek Alphabet, are so orderly bestowed in their
several rooms, being all and every one of them seated according to the nature
of the Moods and Figures, whose characteristicks they are.

Thirdly, the Moods of the Planotriangular Table, being in all thirteen,
whereof there be seven Rectangular, and six Obliquangular, are fitly
comprehended by the three blunt, three mean, three sharp, and sour double
Consonants, the Hebrew Shin being accounted for one of them.

Fourthly, the sixteen Moods of the Orthogonosphericall Trissotetras are
contained under three sharp, three mean, three blunt, three double, and four
Liquids, which four do orderly particularise the Binaries of the last two
Figures.

Fifthly, the four Monurgetick Loxogonosphericals are deciphred by each its
own Liquid in front, according to their literal order.

Sixthly, the eight Loxogonosphericall Disergeticks are also distinguished by
the four Liquids, but with this difference from the Monurgeticks, that the
Vowels of A and E precede them in the first syllable, importing thereby the
Datas of an Angle or a Side. Now because these Disergeticks are eight in all,
there being allotted to every Liquid that characteriseth the Figures, the
better to diversifie the first and second Datas of each respective binarie from
one another, (in so far as they have reference to each its own Quaesitum) the
Figurative Liquid is doubled when a Side is required, and remains single when
an Angle.

Furthermore, in the Oblique Sphericodisergeticks, so far as the sense of the
Resolvers could bear it, I did trinifie them with letters convenient for the
purpose, according to the several cases of their Datoquaeres, whose diversity
reaches not above the extent of p. b. ph. and t. d. th.

I had almost omitted to tell you, that for the more variety in the last two
Figures of the Orthogonosphericals are set down the two letters of Chapter and
Shin, the first a Spanish, and the second an Hebrew letter. Now if to those
helps for the memory which in this Table I have afforded the Reader, both by
the Alphabetical order of some Consonants, and homogeneity of others in their
affections of sharpness, meannesse, obtusity, and duplicity, he join that
artificial aid in having every part of th^^ Chem^locally in his mind (of all
ways both for facility in remembering, and steadfastness of retention, without
doubt, the most expedite) or otherwise place the representatives of words,
according to the method of the Art of memory, in the several corners of a
house (which, in regard of their paucity are containable within a Parlour or
dining room at most) he may with ease get them all by heart in less then the
space of an hour: which is no great expense of time, though bestowed on
matters of meaner consequence.

The Commentary.
THe Axioms of plain Triangles are four, viz. Rulerst, Eproso, Grediftal, and
Bagrediffus.

Rulerst, that is to say, the Subtendent in plain Triangles may be either
Radius or Secant, and the Ambients either Radius, Sines, or Tangents; for it is
a maxim in Planangular Triangles, that any side may be put for Radius,
grounded on this, that from any point at any distance a Circle may be
described: therefore if any of the sides of a plain Triangle be given together
with the Angler, each of the other two sides is given by a threefold
proportion, that is, whether you put that, or this, or the third side for the
Radius; which difference occasioneth both in plain and Sphericall Triangles
great variety in their calculations.

The Branches of this Axiom are Vradesso and Eradetul.

Vradesso, that is when the Hypotenusa is Radius, the sides are Sines of their
opposite Angles; so that there be two Arches described with that Hypotenusal
identity of distance, whose Centers are in the two extremities of the
Subtendent; for so the case will be made plain in both the Legs, which
otherwise would not appear but in one.

Eradetul, when any of the sides is Radius, the other of them is a Tangent, and
the Subtendent a Secant. The reason of this is found in the very definitions of
the Sines, Tangents, and Secants, to the which, if the Reader please, he may
have recourse; for I have set them down amongst my Definitions. Hence it is
(according to Mr. Speidels observation in his book of Sphericals) that the Sine
of any Arch being Radius, that which was the total Sine becomes the Secant
complement of the said Arch, and that the Tangent of any Arch being Radius,
what was Radius becomes Tangent complement of that Arch.

The Directory of this Axiom is Vphech^t. which shows us, that there be
three Planorectangular Enodandas belonging thereto, viz. Vphener, Echemun, and
Etenar; as for Pserelema, which is the Loxogonian one pointed at in my
Trissotetras, because it is but a partial Enodandum, I have purposely omitted
to mention it in the Directory of Eradetul.

The second Axiom is Epros^, that is, the sides are proportional to one
another as the Sines of their opposite Angles; for seeing about any Triangle a
Circle may be circumscribed, in which case each side is a cord or Subtense, the
half whereof is the Sine of its opposite Angle, and there being always the
same reason of the whole to the whole, as of the half to the half, the sides
must needs be proportional to one another, as the Sines of their opposite
Angles, quod probandum erat.

The Directory of this second Axiom is Pubkegdaxesh, which declares that
there are seven Enodandas grounded on it, to wit, four Rectangular, Upalem,
Ubeman, Ekarul, Egalem, and three Obliquangular, Danarele, Xemenoro, and
Shenerolem.

The third Axiom is Grediftal, that is, in all plain Triangles, As the sum of
the two sides is to their difference, so is the Tangent of the half sum of the
opposite Angles to the Tangent of half their difference; for if a Line be
drawn equal to the sum of the two sides, and if on the point of Extension
with the distance of the shorter side a Semicircle be described, and that from
the extremity of the protracted Line a Diameter be drawn thorough the Circle
where it touches the top of the Triangle in question, till it occur with a
parallel to the third side, there will arise two Equicrurall Triangles, one
whereof having one Angle common with the Triangle proposed, and the three of
the one being equal to the three of the other, any one of the equal Angles in
the foresaid Isosceles must needs be the one half of the two unknown Angles.
This is the first step to the obtaining of what we demand. Then do we find that
the third side cutteth the sides of the greatest Triangle according to the
Analogy required, which is perceivable enough, if with the distance of the
outmost Parallel from the lower end thereof as Center, be described a new
Circle; for then will the Tangents be perspicuous and so much the more for
their Rectangularity, the one with the Radius, and the other with its Parallel,
which, being touched at an Angle described in a Semicircle, confirms the
Rectangularity of both. By the Parallels likewise is inferred the equality of
the alternate Angles, whose addition and subduction to and from half the sum
of the two unknown Angles make up both the greater and lesser Angle. Hereby it
is evident how the sum of the two sides, etc. which was to be proved.

The Directory of this third Axiom is th. only; for it has no Enodandum but
Therelabmo.

The fourth Axiom is Bagrediffiu, that is, As the Base or greatest side is to
the sum of the other sides, so the difference of the other sides to the
difference of the Segments of the Base; for if upon the Center of the vertical
Angle with the distance of the shortest side be described a Circle, it will so
cut the two greater sides of the given Triangle, that, finding thereby two
Oblongs of the nature of those whose equality is demonstrated in my
Apodicticks, we may infer (the Oblong made of the sum of the sides, and
difference of the sides being equal to the Oblong made of the Base, and the
difference of its Segments) that their sides are reciprocally proportional;
that is, As the greatest side is to the sum of the other sides: so the
difference of the other sides, to the difference of the Segments of the Base,
or greater side.

The Directory of this Axiom is th. and its only Enodandum, (though but a
partial one) Pserelema.

The Planorectangular Table has four Figures.
IT is to be observed, that Figure here is not taken Geometrically, but in the
sense that it is used in the Logicks, when a Syllogism is said to be in the
first, second, or third Figure; for, as there by the various application of the
Medium or mean term the Figures are constituted diverse: so does the
difference of the Datas in a Triangle distinguish these Trissotetrall Figures
from one another, and (to continue yet further in the Syllogisticall Analogy)
are according to the several demands (when the Datas are the same) subdivided
into Moods.

The first two vowels give notice of the Data's, and the third of what is
demanded, so that Uale (and euphonetically pronounced Vale) which is the first
Figure, shows that the Subtendent, and one Angle are given, and that one of
the containing sides is required. Vemane is the second Figure, which points
out all those problems wherein the Hypotenusa, and one Leg are given, and an
Angle, or the other Leg is required.

The third Figure is Enave, which comprehends all the Problems, wherein one
of the Ambients is given with an Oblique Angle, and the Subtendent, or other
Ambient required.

The fourth and last of the Rectangular Figures is Ereva, which stands for
those Datoquaeres, wherein the including Sides are given, and the Subtendent or
an Angle demanded.

Now let us come to the Moods of those Figures.
THe first Figure Vale has but one Mood, and therefore of as great extent as
it self, which is Upalem; whose nature is to let us know, when a plane right
angled Triangle is given us to resolve, whose Subtendent and one of the
Obliques is proposed, and one of the Ambients required, that we must have
recourse unto its Resolver, which being Rad -- U -- Sapy Yr shows, that if we
join the artificial Sine of the Angle opposite to the side demanded with the
Logarithm of the Subtendent, the sum searched in the Canon of absolute
numbers will afford us the Logarithm of the side required. The reason hereof is
found in the second Axiom, the first Consonant of whose Directory evidenceth
that Upalem is Eprosos Enodandum; for it is, As the total Sine, to the
Hypotenusa: so the Sine of the Angle opposite to the side required, is to the
said required side, according to the nature of the foresaid Axiom, whereupon it
is grounded.

The second Figure Vemane has two Moods, Ubeman and Uphener; the first whereof
comprehends all those questions, wherein the Subtendent and an Ambient being
given, an Oblique is required, and by its Resolver V -- Rad -- Eg So. thus
satisfies our demand, that if we subtract the Logarithm of the Subtendent from
the sum of the Logarithms of the middle terms, we have the Logarithm of the
Sine of the opposite Angle we seek for; for it is, As the Subtendent to the
total Sine, so the containing side given to the Sine of the opposite Angle
required. The reason likewise of this Analogy is found in the second Axiom
Eproso, upon the which this Mood is grounded, as the second Consonant of its
Directory gives us to understand.

The second Mood or Datoquaere of this Figure is Uphener, which shows that
those questions in plain Triangles, wherein the Hypotenusa and a Leg being
given, the other Leg is demanded, are to be calculated by its Resolver, which
(because the Canon of Logarithms cannot perform it at one operation, there
being a necessity to find one of the oblique Angles before the fourth term can
be brought into an Analogy) allows two Subservients for the achievement
thereof, viz. Vbeman, the first Mood of the second Figure, for the finding out
of the Angle, and here (because anterior in the work) called Praesubservient:
then Vpalem, the first Mood of all, for finding out of the Leg inquired, and
here called Possubservient, because of its posteriority in the operation: yet
were it not for the facility which addition and subtraction only afford us in
this manner of calculation, we might do it with one work alone by the Bucarnon
or Pythagorases Diodot, which plainly shows us, that by subducing the square
of the Leg given, from the square of the Subte^dent, we have for the remainder
another square, whose root is the side required. The reason of this is in my
Apodicticks: but that of the former Resolver by two operations, is in the first
Axiom, as by the first syllable of its Directory is manifest.

The third Figure is Enave, which has two Moods, Ekarul and Egalem. The first
comprehends all those Problems, wherein one of the including sides, and an
Angle being given, the Subtendent is required, and by its Resolver Sapeg -- Eg
-- Rad Vr, shows, that if we subtract the Sine of the Angle opposite to the
given side from the sum of the middle terms (I mean the Logarithms of the
one and the other) which are the total Sine, and the Leg proposed, we shall
have the Hypotenusa required; for it is, As the Sine of the Angle opposite to
the side given, to the foresaid given side: so the total Sine, to the
Subtendent required. The reason of this proportion is grounded on the second
Axiom Eproso; for K. the third Consonant of its Directory, gives us to
understand, that it is one of the Enodandas thereof.

The second Mood of Enave is Egalem, which comprehends all those Problems,
wherein one of the Ambients, and an oblique Angle being given, the other
Ambient is required: and by its Resolver Rad -- Taxeg -- Eg Yr shows, that if
we add the Logarithm of the side given to the Logarithm of the Tangent of the
Angle conterminall with that side, and from the sum if we cut off the first
digit on the left hand (which is equivalent to the subtracting of the Radius
whether double or single) The remainder will afford us a Logarithm (so near as
the irrationality of the terms will admit) in the Table of equal parts,
expressive of the side required; for it is As the whole Sine to the Tangent of
an Angle insident on the given side: so the side proposed, to the side
required: The reason hereof is grounded on the second Axiom, for the fourth
Consonant of its Directory shows, that Egalem is Eprosos enodandum.

The fourth Figure is Ereva, whose Moods are Echemun and Etenar.

The first, viz. Echemun, comprehends all those Problems, wherein the two
Ambients being given, the Subtendent is required, and (not being
Logarithmically resolvable in less then two operations) has for its Prae and
Possubservients the Moods of Etenar and Ekarul; for an Oblique Angle by this
Method is to be searched before the Subtendent can be found out, and by reason
of these several work^, this Mood is grounded on the two first Axioms, and is
an Enodandum partially depending on Eradetul, and Eproso. Yet, if you will be
pleased to be at the pains of extracting the Square root, you may have the
Subtendent at one work by a Quadrobiquadraequation as the Bucarnon does
instruct us, whose demonstration you have plainly set down in the fourteenth
of my Apodicticks.

The second Mood of this Figure is Etenar, which includes all those questions
wherein the two containing Sides being given, one of the Obliques is required,
and by its Resolver E -- Ge -- Rad Toge manifests, that, if from the Sum of
the Radius and Logarithm of the side given, we subtract the Logarithm of the
other proposed side, the remainder will afford the Tangent of the Angle
opposite to one of the given sides, the Complement of which Angle to a right
one is always the measure of the other Angle, by the fifth of my Apodicticks;
for it is, As the one Ambient is to the other Ambient, so the total Sine to
the Tangent of an Angle; which found out, is either the Angle required, or the
Complement thereof to a right Angle. The reason of this Analogy is grounded on
the second Branch of the first Axiom, as by the Characteristick of the
Directory is perceivable enough to any industrious Reader.

Of the Planobliquangular Triangles there be four Figures: Alaheme, Emenarole,
Enerolome, and Erelea,
THe first and last of these four are Monotropall Figures, and have but each
one Mood: but the other two have a couple a piece, so that for the
Planobliquangulars, all the four together afford us six Datoquaeres.

The Mood of Alaheme is Danarele, which comprehends all those Problems,
wherein two Angles being given and a Side, another Side is demanded, and by its
Resolver Sapeg -- Eg -- Sapyr Yr, shows, that, if to the sum of the
Logarithm of the side given, and of the Sine of the Angle opposite to the side
required, we add the difference of the Secant complement from the Radius, (by
some called the Arithmeticall complement of the Sine, and in Master Speidels
Logarithmicall Canon of Sines, Tangents, and Secants with good reason termed
the Secant; for, though it do not cut any Arch, thereby more Etymologically to
deserve the name of Secant, yet works it the same effect that the prolonged
Radius does) the operation will proceed so neatly, that if from these three
Logarithms thus summed up, we only cut off a Digit at the left hand, we will
find as much by addition alone performed in this case, as if from the proposed
sum the Sine of the Angle had been abstracted; for the total Sine thus
unradiused is the Logarithm of the side required. But such as are not
acquainted with this compendious manner of calculating, or peradventure are not
accommodated with a convenient Canon for the purpose, may, in Gods name, use
their own way, the Resolver being of such amplitude, that it extends it self
to all sorts of operations, whereby the truth of the fourth Ternary in this
Mood may be attaind unto; for it is Analogised thus, As the Sine of the Angle
opposite to the side given is to the same given side; so the Sine of the Angle
opposite to the side required, to the required side. The reason of this
proportion is grounded on the second Axiom, the first determinater of whose
Directory shows, that Danarele is one of Eprosos Enodandas.

The second Figure of the Planobliquangulars is Emenarole, whose Moods are
Therelabmo and Zelemabne.

The first comprehends all those Planobliquangular Problems wherein two sides
being given with an interjacent Angle, an opposite Angle is demanded, and by
its Resolver Aggres -- Zes -- Talfagros Talzos, shows, that if from the sum
of the Logarithm of the difference of the sides, and Tangent of half the sum
of the opposite Angles, be subduced the aggregat or sum of the Logarithms of
the two proposed sides, the remainder thereof will prove the Logarithm of the
Tangent of half the difference of the opposite Angles; the which joined to the
one, and abstracted from the other, affords us the measure of the Angle we
require; for the Theoreme is, As the aggregat of the given sides, to the
difference of th^se sides: So the Tangent of half the sum of the opposite
Angles, to the Tangent of half the difference of those Angles; which, without
any more ado, by simple Addition and Subtraction affords the Angle we
demand. The third Axiom and the Theorem of the Resolver of this Mood being but
one and the same thing, I must make bold to remit you to my Apodicticks for the
reason of the Analogy thereof, the only determinater of whose Directory being
th. points out the Mood of Therelabmo for the sole enodandum appropriated
thereunto.

The second Mood of this Figure is Zelemabue, which involveth all the
Planobliquangulary Problemes, wherein two sides being given with the Angle
between, the third side is demanded: and not being calculable by the
Logarithmicall Canon in less then two operations, because it requires the
finding out of another Angle before it can fix upon the side, Therelabmo is
allowed it for a Praesubservient, by virtue whereof an opposite Angle is
obtained, and Danarele for its Possubservient and final Resolver, by whose
means we get the side required. The reason of the first operation is grounded
on the third Axiom, and of the second operation on the second: but because this
Mood is merely a partial Enodandum, neither of the foresaid Axioms affords
any Directory concerning it, otherwise then in the two Subservients thereof.

The third Figure is Eneroloms, whose two Moods are X^monor^ and Shenerolem.

The first Mood of this Figure includes all those Planobliquangularie
Problems, wherein two sides being given, with an opposite Angle, another
opposite Angle is demanded, and by its Resolver E -- Sog -- Ge So, shows,
that if from the aggregat of the Logarithm of one of the given sides, and that
of the Sine of the opposite Angle proposed, we subtract the Logarithm of the
other given side, the residue will afford us the Logarithm of the Sine of the
opposite Angle required; for it is Analogised thus, As one of the sides, to the
Sine of the opposite Angle given: so the other side proposed, to the Sine of
the opposite Angle required. The reason of this proportion is from the second
Axiom, the sixth characteristick of whose Directory imports, that Xemenoro is
one of Eprosos enodandas.

The second Mood of this Figure is Shenerolem, which contains all those
Planobliquangularie Problems, wherein two sides being given with an opposite
Angle, the third side is demanded, which not being findable by the
Logarithmicall Table upon the foresaid Datas in less then two operations
(because an Angle must be obtained first before the side can be had) Xemenoro
Praesubserves it for an Angle, and Danarele becomes its Possubservient for the
side required. The reason of both these operations is founded on the second
Axiom, the last Characteristick of whose Directory inrolleth Shenerolem for one
of Eprosos enodandas.

The fourth figure is Erelea, which, being Monotropall, has no Mood but
Pserelema.

This Pserelema encompasseth all those Planobliquangulary Problems wherein the
three sides being proposed, an Angle is required. This Datoquaere not being
resolvable by the Logarithms in less then two operations, because the Segments
of the Base, or sustaining side must needs be found out, that by demitting of a
Perpendicular from the top Angle, we may hit upon the Angle demanded: the
Resolver for the Segments is Ba -- Gres -- Zes Zius, whereby we learn, that if
from the Logarithm of the sum of the sides, joined to the Logarithm of the
difference of the sides, we subtract the Logarithm of the Base, the remainder
is the Logarithm of the difference of the Segments, which difference being
taken from the whole Base, half the difference proves to be the lesser
Segment. This Theorem being thus the Praesubservient of this Mood, its
Possubservient is Vbeman, whose general Resolver V -- Rad -- Eg Sor, is
particularised for this case Uxiug -- Rad -- Ing Sor, which shows, that if
from the sum of the Logarithms of the total Sine, and of one of the Segments
given, we subduce the Logarithm of the Hypotenusa conterminall with the Segment
proposed, the remainer will be the Logarithm of the Sine of the opposite Angle
required; for the demitting of the Perpendicular opens a way to have the
Theorem to be first in general propounded thus, As the Subtendent to the
total Sine, so the containing side given to the Sine of the Angle required: or
in particular thus, As the Sine of the Cosubtendent adjoining the Segment given
is to the Radius, so is the said Segment proposed to the Sine of the Angle
required.

Thus far for the calculating of plain Triangles, both right and oblique:
now follow the Sphericals.
THere be three principal Axioms upon which depends the resolving of
Sphericall Triangles, to wit, Suprosca, Sbaprotca, and Seproso.

The first Maxim or Axiom, Suprosca, shows, that of several rectangled
Sphericals, which have one and the same acute Angle at the Base, the Sines of
the Hypotenusas are proportional to the Sines of their Perpendiculars; for,
from the same inclination every where of the one plain to the other, there
arises an equiangularity in the two rectangles, out of which we may
confidently infer the homologall sides (which are the Sines of the
Subtendents, and of the Perpendiculars of the one, and the other) to be amongst
themselves proportional. Its Directory is Uphugen, by the which we learn, that
Uphanep, Ugemon, and Enarul, are its three enodandas.

The second Axiom is Sbaprotca; whereby we learn, that in all rectangled
Sphericals that have one and the same acute Angle at the Base, the Sines of the
Bases are proportional to the Tangents of their Perpendiculars: which Analogy
proceeds from the equiangularity of such rectangled Sphericals, by the
semblable inclining of the plain toward them both. This proportion
nevertheless will never hold betwixt the Sines of the Bases, and the Sines of
their Perpendiculars; because, if the Sines of the Bases were proportional to
the Sines of the Perpendiculars (the Sines of the Perpendiculars being already
demonstrated proportional to the Sines of the Subtendents) either the Sine of
the Perpendicular, or the Sine of the Base would be the cord of the same Arch,
whereof it is a Sine; which is impossible, by reason that nothing can be both a
whole, and a part, in regard of one and the same thing; and therefore do we
only say, that the Sines of the Bases, and Tangents of the Perpendiculars, and
contrarily, are proportional. Its Directory is Pubkutethepsaler, which
shows, that Upalam, Ubamen, Vkelamb, Etalum, Ethaner, epsoner, Alamun, and
Erelam, are the eight Enodandas the reupon depending.

The third Axiom is, that the Sines of the sides are proportional to the Sines
of their opposite Angles: the truth whereof holds in all Sphericall Triangles
whatsoever; which is proved partly out of the proportion betwixt the Sines of
the Perpendiculars substerned under equal Angles, and the Sines of the
Hypotenusas: and partly, by the Analogy, that is betwixt the Sines of the
Angles sustained by several Perpendiculars, demitted from one point, and the
Sines of the Perpendiculars themselves. The Directory of this Axiom is
Vchedezexam, whereby we know that Uchener, Edamon, Ezolum, Exoman, and Amaner,
are the five Enodandas thereof.

The Orthogonosphericall Table consists of these six Figures: Valamenep,
Vemanore, Enarulome, Erolumane, Achave, and Esheva.
THe first Figure, Valamenep, comprehends all those questions, wherein the
Subtendent, and an Angle being given, either another Angle, or one of the
Ambients is demanded.

Of this Figure there be three Moods, viz. Upalam, Ubamen, and Uphanep. The
first, to wit Upalam, contains all those Orthogonosphericall Problems,
wherein the Subtendent and one oblique Angle being given, another oblique Angle
is required, and by its Resolver Torb -- Tag -- Nu Mir, shows, that the sum
of the Sine complement of the Subtendent side and Tangent of the Angle given,
(the Logarithms of these are always to be understood) a digit being prescinded
from the left, is equal to the Tangent complement of the Angle required; for
the proposition goes thus, As the Radius, to the Tangent of the Angle given:
so the Sine complement of the Subtendent side, to the Tangent complement of the
Angle required: and because Tangents, and Tangent complements are reciprocally
proportional, instead of To -- Tag -- NuMir, or, To -- Lu -- MagTir, which
(for that the Radius is a mean proportional betwixt the L. and N. the T. and
M) is all one for inferring of the same fourth proportional, or foresaid
quaesitum) we may say, Mag -- Nu -- ToMir, that is, As the Tangent complement
of the given Angle to the Cosine of the Subtendent, so the total Sine to the
Antitangent of the Angle demanded; for the total Sine being, as I have told
you, a mean proportional betwixt the Tangents and Cotangents, the subtracting
of the Cotangent, or Tangent complement from the sum of the Radius, and
Antisine residuats a Logarithm equal to that of the remainder, by abstracting
the Radius from the sum of the Cosine of the subtendent, and Tangent of the
Angle given, either of which will fall out to be the Antitangent of the
required Angle.

Notandum.

[Here always is to be observed, that the subtracting of Logarithms may be
avoided, by substituting the Arithmeticall complement thereof, to be added to
the Logarithms of the two middle proportionals (which Arithmeticall complement
(according to Gellibrand) is nothing else, but the difference between the
Logarithm to be subtracted, and another consisting of an unit, or binarie with
the addition of ciphers, that is the single, or double Radius) for so the sum
of the three Logarithms, cutting off an unit, or binarie toward the left hand,
will still be the Logarithm of the fourth proportional required.

For the greater ease therefore in Trigonometricall computations, such a
Logarithmicall Canon is to be wished for, wherein the Radius is left out of all
the Secants, and all the Tangents of Major Arches, according to the method
prescribed by Mr. Speidel, who is willing to take the pains to make such a new
Canon, better then any that ever hitherto has been made use of, so that the
public, whom it most concerns, or some potent man, well minded toward the
Mathematics, would be so generous, as to releeve him of the charge it must
needs cost him; which, considering his great affection to, and ability in those
sciences, will certainly be as small a sum, as possibly he can bring it to.]

This Parenthesis, though somewhat with the longest, will not (I hope) be
displeasing to the studious Reader.

The second Mood of the first Figure is Ubamen, which comprehends all those
Problems, wherein the Subtendent, and one oblique Angle being given, the
Ambient adjoining the Angle given is required, and by its Resolver, Nag -- Mu
-- TorpMyr, shows, that, if to the sum of the Logarithms of the two middle
proportionals, we add the Arithmeticall complement of the first, the cutting
off the Index from the Aggregat of the three, will residuat the Tangent
complement of the side required: and therefore with the total Sine in the
first place, it may be thus propounded, Torp -- Mu -- LagMyr; for the first
Theorem being, As the Sine complement of the Angle given, to the Tangent
complement of the subtendent side: so the total Sine, to the Tangent
complement of the side required: just so the second Theorem, which is that
refined, is, As the total Sine, to the Tangent complement of the Subtendent:
so the Secant of the given Angle, to the Tangent complement of the demanded
side. Here you must consider, as I have told you already, that of the whole
Secant I take but its excess above the Radius, as I do of all Tangents above
45. Degrees; because the cutting off the first digit on the left, supplieth the
subtraction, requisite for the finding out of the fourth proportional; so that
by addition only the whole operation may be performed, of all ways the most
succinct and ready. Otherwise, because of the total Sines mean
proportionality betwixt the Sine complement, and the Secant; and betwixt the
Tangent, and Tangent complement, it may be regulated thus, To -- Tu -- NagTyr,
that is, As the Radius, to the Tangent of the Subtendent, so the Sine
complement of the Angle given, to the Tangent of the side required. The reason
of the resolution both of this, and of the former Datoquaere, is grounded on
the second Axiom, and the proportion that, in several rectangled Sphericals
which have the same acute Angle at the Base, is found betwixt the Sines of
their Perpendiculars, and Tangents of their Bases, as is shown you by the two
first Consonants of the Directory of Sbaprotca.

The third and last Mood of the first Figure is Uphaner, which comprehends
all those Problems, wherein the Hypotenusa, and one of the obliques being
given, the opposite Ambient is required, and by its Resolver Tol -- Sag --
SuSyr, shows, that, if we add the Logarithms of the Sine of the Angle, and
Sine of the Subtendent, cutting off the left Supernumerarie digit from the
sum, it gives us the Logarithm of the Sine of the side demanded; for it is,
As the total Sine, to the Sine of the Angle given: so the Sine of the
subtendent side, to the Sine of the side required: and because by the Axiom of
Rulerst, it was proved, that when the Sine of any Arch is made Radius, what was
then the total Sine, becomes a Secant (and therefore Secant complement of that
Arch) instead of Tol -- Sag -- SuSyr, we may say, To -- Ru -- RagRyr, that is,
As the total Sine, is to the Secant complement of the subtendent: so the
Secant complement of the Angle given, to the Secant complement of the side
demanded. The resolution of this Datoquaere by Sines, is grounded on the first
Axiom of Sphericals, which elucidats the proportion betwixt the Sines of the
Hypotenusas, and Perpendiculars, as it is declared to us by the first syllable
of Suproscas Directory.

The second Figure is Vemanore, which contains all those Orthogonosphericall
questions, wherein the subtendent, and an Ambient being proposed, either of the
obliques, or the other Ambient is required, and has three Moods, viz. Ukelamb,
Ugemon, and Uchener.

The first Mood Ukelamb comprehends all those Orthogonosphericall Problems,
wherein the subtendent, and one including side being given, the interjacent
Angle is demanded, and by its Resolver Meg -- Torp -- Mu Nir (or because of the
total Sines mean proportion betwixt the Tangent, and Tangent complement)
Torp-Teg -- Mu Nir (which is the same in effect) shows, that if from the
sum of the Logarithms of the middle terms, (which in the first Analogy is
the Radius, and Tangent complement of the subtendent) we subtract the Tangent
complement of the given Ambient: or, in the second order of proportionals,
join the Tangent of the side given, to the Tangent complement of the
subtendent, and from the sum cut off the Index (if need be) both will tend to
the same end, and produce for the fourth proportional, the Sine complement of
the Angle required; for to subtract a Tangent complement from the Radius, and
another number joined together, whether that Tangent complement be more or
less then the Radius, it is all one, as if you should subtract the Radius from
the said Tangent complement, and that other number; because the Tangent (or
rather Logarithm of the Tangent; for so it must be always understood, and not
only in Tangents, but in Sines, Secants, Sides, and Angles, though for brevity
sake the word Logarithm be oftentimes omitted) because I say, the Logarithms of
the Tangent, and Tangent complement together, being the double of the Radius)
if first the Tangent complement surpass the Radius, and be to be subtracted
from it, and another number, it is all one, as if from the said number you
would abstract the Radius, and the Tangent complements excess above it, so
that the Radius being in both, there will remain a Tangent with the other
number-Likewise, if a Tangent complement, less then the Radius, be to be
subtracted from the sum of the Radius, and another Logarithm; it is yet all
one, as if you had subtracted the Radius from the same sum; because, though
that Tangent complement be less then the Radius: yet, that parcel of the
Radius which was abstracted more then enough, is recompensed in the Logarithm
of the Tangent to be joined with the other number; for, from which soever of
the Tangents the Radius be subduced, its Antitangent is remainder: both which
cases may be thus illustrated in numbers; and first, where the Tangent
complement is greater then the Radius, as in these numbers 6. 4. 3. 1. and 4.
2. 3. 1. where, let 6. be the Tangent complement, 4. the Radius, 3. the number
to be joined with the Radius, or either of the Tangents, and 1. the remainer;
for 4. and 3. making 7. if you abstract 6. there will remain 1. Likewise 2.
and 3. making 5. if you subtract 4. there will remain 1. Next, if the Tangent
complement be less then the Radius, as in 2. 4. 3. 5. and 4. 6. 3. and 5.
where, let 2. be the Tangent complement; for if from 4. and 3. joined together,
you abstract 2. there will remain 5. which will also be the remainder, when
you subtract 4. from 6. and 3. added together. Now to make the same Resolver
(the variety whereof I have been so large in explaining) to run altogether
upon Tangents, instead of Meg -- To -- MuNir, that is, As the Tangent
complement of the side given, is to the total Sine: so the Tangent complement
of the subtendent side, to the Sine complement of the Angle required, we may
say, Tu -- Teg -- ToNir; that is, As the Tangent for the subtendent, is to the
Tangent of the given side; so the total Sine, to the Sine complement of the
Angle required. All this is grounded on the second Axiom Sbaprotca, and upon
the reciprocal proportion of the Tangents and antitangents, as is evident by
the third characteristick of its Directory.

The second Mood of Vemanore is Vgemon, which comprehends all those
orthogonosphericall problems, wherein the subtendent, with an Ambient being
given, an opposite oblique is required, and by its Resolver, Su-Seg-TomSir, or
(by putting the Radius in the first place, according to Uradesso, the first
branch of the first axiom of the Planorectangulars) To-Seg RuSir, shows, that
the sum of the side given, and secant of the subtendent (the Supernumerarie
digit being cut off) is the sine of the Angle required; for the Theorem is, As
the sine of the subtendent, to the sine of the side given: so the Radius, to
the sine of the Angle required: or, As the total sine, to the sine of the side
given: so the secant complement of the subtendent, to the sine of the angle
required: or, changing the sines into secant complements, and the secant
complements into sines, we may say, To -- Su -- RegRir; because, betwixt the
sine and secant complement, the Radius is a middle proportion. Other varieties
of calculation in this, as well as other problems, may be used; for, besides
that every proportion of the Radius to the sine, Tangent, or secant, and
contrarily, may be varied three manner of ways, by the first Axiom of Plain
triangles, the alteration of the middle terms may breed some diversity, by a
permutat, or perturbed proportion, which I thought good to admonish the Reader
of here, once for all, because there is no problem, whether in Plain, or
Sphericall triangles, wherein the Analogy admits not of so much change. The
reasons of this Mood of Ugemon, depend on the Axiom of Suprosca, as the second
characteristick of Vphugen seems to insinuate.

The last Mood of the second figure is Vchener, which comprehends all those
problems, wherein the subtendent, and one Ambient being given, the other
Ambient is Required, and by its Resolver, Neg -- To -- NuNyr, or, To --
le-NuNyr, shows, that the sum of the sine complement of the subtendent, and
the secant of the given side (which is the Arithmeticall complement of its
Antisine) gives us the sine complement of the side desired, the Index being
removed; for the theorem is, As the sine complement of the given side, to the
total sine; so the sine complement of the subtendent, to the sine complement of
the side required: or more refinedly, As the Radius, to the sine complement of
the subtendent: so the secant of the Leg given, to the sine complement of the
side required: and besides other varieties of Analogy, according to the Axiom
of Rulerst, by making use of the reciprocal proportion of the sine-complements
with the secants we may say, To-Ne Lu-Lyr, that is, As the total sine, is to
the sine complement of the given side: so the secant of the subtendent, to the
secant of the side required. The reason of this Datoqueres Resolution is in
Seproso the third Axiom of the Sphericals, as is manifest by the first
figurative of its Directorie Uchedezexam.

The third figure is Enarrulome, whose three Moods are Etalum, Edamon, and
Ethaner.

This figure comprehends all those orthogonosphericall questions, wherein one
of the Ambients with an Adjacent angle is given, and the subtendent, an
opposite angle, or the other containing side is required.

Its first Mood Etalum, involveth all those Orthogono sphericall problems,
wherein a containing side, with an insident angle thereon is proposed, and the
hypotenusa demanded: and by its resolver Torp-me-nagmur or (by inverting the
demand upon the Scheme) Tolp. -- me -- nagmur shows, that the cutting of the
first left digit, from the sum of the Tangent complement of the Ambient
proposed, and the sine complement of the given angle, affords us the Tangent
complement of the subtendent required; for the theorem goes thus, As the total
sine, to the tangent complement of the given side; so the sine complement of
the angle given, to the tangent complement of the hypotenusa required. And
because the total sine, has the same proportion to the tangent complement,
which the sine, has to the sine complement, we may as well say, To-meg-Sanur,
that is, As the Radius to the tangent complement of the Ambient side; so the
sine of the angle given, to the sine complement of the subtendent required. The
progress of this Mood, depends on the Axiom of Sbaprotca, as you may
perceive by the fourth consonant of its directorie Pubkutethepsaler.

The second Mood of the third Figure, is Edamon, which comprehends all those
Orthogonosphericall Problems, wherein an Ambient and an Adjacent angle being
given, the opposite oblique (viz. the angle under which the Ambient is
subtended) is required, and by its Resolver To-Neg-SaNir, shows that the
Addition of the Cosine of the Ambient, and of the sine of the Angle proposed,
affords us (if we omit not the usual presection) the Cosine of the Angle we
seek for; for it is, As the Radius to the Cosine, or sine complement of the
given side: so the sine of the Angle proposed to the Antisins or sine
complement of the Angle demanded: now the Radius being always a mean
proportional betwixt the Sine complement, and the Secant, we may for To -- Neg
-- Sa Nir, say, To -- Leg -- Ra Lir, or To -- Rag -- LeLir: that is, As the
total Sine to the Secant, or cutter of the side given, or to the Cosecant, or
Secant complement of the given Angle; so is the Secant complement of the Angle,
or Secant of the side, to the Secant, or cutter of the Angle required. The
reason of all this is grounded on Seproso, because it runs upon the
proportion betwixt the Sines of the sides, and the Sines of their opposite
Angles, as is perspicuous to any by the second syllable of the Directory of
that Axiom.

The last Mood of the third Figure is Ethaner, which comprehends all those
Orthogonosphericall Problems, wherein an Ambient with an Oblique annexed
thereto, is given, and the other Arch about the right Angle is required, and by
its Resolver, Torb -- Tag -- Se Tyr, shows, that if we join the Logarithms
of the two middle proportionals, which are the Tangent of the given Angle, and
the Sine of the side, the usual prefection being observed, we shall thereby
have the Tangent, or toucher of the Ambient side desired; for it is, As the
Radius to the Tangent of the Angle given, so the Sine of the containing side
proposed to the side required: And because the Tangent complement, and Tangent
are reciprocally proportional, the Sine likewise, and Secant complement, for
To -- Tag -- SeTyr, we may say, keeping the same proportion, To -- Reg --
MaMyrs that is, As the Radius, to the Secant complement of the given side: so
the Tangent complement of the Angle proposed, to the Tangent complement of the
side required. The truth of all these operations depends on Sbaprotca, the
second Axiom of the Sphericals, as is evidenced by th. the fifth
characteristick of its Directory Pubkutethepsaler.

The fourth Figure is Erollumane, which includes all Orthogonosphericall
questions, wherein an Ambient, and an opposite oblique being given, the
subtendent, the other oblique, or the other Ambient is demanded: It has
likewise, conform to the three former Figures, three Moods belonging to it;
the first whereof is Ezolum.

This Ezolum comprehends all those Orthogonosphericall, Problems, wherein one
of the Legs, with an opposite Angle being given, the Subtendent is required,
and by its Resolver, Sag -- Sep -- Rad Sur, or by putting the Radius in the
first place, To -- Se-Rag Sur, shows, that the abstracting of the Radius from
the sum of the Sine of the side, and Secant complement of the Angle given,
residuats the Sine of the hypotenusa required; for it is, As the Sine of the
Angle given, to the Sine of the opposite side: so the Radius to the Sine of the
subtendent: or more refinedly, As the total Sine, to the Sine of the side: so
the Secant complement of the Angle given, to the Sine of the subtendent side:
And because of the Sines and Antisecants, or Secant complements reciprocal
proportionality, To -- Sag -- ReRu, that is, As the Radius to the Sine of the
Angle given: so the Secant complement of the proposed side, to the Secant
complement of the subtendent required. The reason of all this is grounded on
the third Axiom Seproso, as is made manifest by the third Syllable of its
Directory.

The second Mood of this Figure is Exoman, which comprehends all those
Problems, wherein a containing side, and an opposite oblique being given, the
adjacent oblique is required: and by its Resolver, Ne -- To -- Nag Sir, or more
refinedly, To -- Le -- Nag Sir, shows, that the sum of the Sine of the
Angle, together with the Arithmeticall complement of the Antisine of the Leg,
(which in the Table I have so much recommended unto the Reader, is set down
for a Secant) the usual prefection being observed, affords us the Sine of
the Angle required, and because of the reciprocal proportion betwixt the Sine
complement, and Secant; and betwixt the Sine, and Secant complement, the
Theorem may be composed thus: To -- Neg -- LaRir, that is, As the Radius, to
the Sine complement of the given side: so the Secant of the Angle proposed, to
the Secant complement of the Angle demanded. The reason of this is likewise
grounded on Seproso, as you may perceive by the fourth characteristick of its
Directory.

The last Mood of this Figure is Epsoner, which contains all those
Orthogonosphericall Problems, wherein an Ambient and an opposite Oblique being
given, the other Ambient is demanded, and by its Resolver, Tag -- Tolb --
TeSyr, or more elabouredly, Tolb -- Mag -- TeSyr, shows, that the
praescinding of the Radius from the sum of the Tangent of the side, and
Antitangent of the given Angle, residuats the Sine of the side required; for it
is, As the Tangent of the Angle proposed, to the total Sine: so the Tangent of
the given side, to the Sine of the side demanded: or, As the Radius, to the
Tangent complement of the Angle given: so the Tangent of the given side, to the
Sine of the side required: and because of the reciprocal Analogy betwixt the
Tangents, and Co-tangents: and betwixt the Sines, and Co-secants, we may with
the same confidence, as formerly, set it thus in the rule, To -- Meg -- TaRyr,
and it will find out the same quaesitum. The reason of the operations of this
Mood because of the ingrediencie of Tangents depends on Sbaprotca, as is
perceivable by the sixth determinater of its Directory Pubkutethepsaler.

The fifth Figure of the Orthogonosphericals is Achave, which contains all
those Problems, wherein the Angles being given, the subtendent or an Ambient is
desired, and has two Moods Alamun, and Amaner.

Alamun comprehends all those Problems, wherein the Angles being proposed,
the Hypotenusa is required, and by its Resolver Tag -- Torb -- MaNur, or more
compendiously, Torb -- Mag -- MaNur, shows, that the sum of the
Co-tangents, not exceeding the places of the Radius, is the Sine complement of
the subtendent required; for it is, As the Tangent of one of the Angles, to the
Radius: so the Tangent complement of the other Angle, to the Sine complement of
the Hypotenusa demanded: or, As the total Sine, to the Tangent complement of
one of the Angles: so the Tangent complement of the other Angle, to the Sine
complement of the subtendent we seek for. The running of this Mood upon
Tangents, notifieth its dependence on Sbaprotca, as is evident by the seventh
determinater of the Directory thereof.

The second Mood of this Figure is Amaner, which comprehends all those
Orthogonosphericall Problems, wherein the Angles being given, an Ambient is
demanded, and by its Resolver, Say -- Nag -- ToNyr, or more perspicuously, To
-- Noy -- RayNyr, shows, that the sum of the Logarithms of the Antisine of
the Angle opposite to the side required, and the Arithmeticall complement of
the Sine of the Angle, adjoining the said side, which we call its Secant
complement, with the usual presection, is equal to the Sine complement of the
same side demanded; for it is, As the Sine of the Angle adjoining the side
required, to the Antisine of the other Angle: so the total sine, to the
Antisine of the side demanded: or, As the Radius, to the Antisine of the Angle
opposite to the demanded side: so the Antisecant of the Angle conterminat with
that side, to the Antisine of the side required: and because of the Analogy
betwixt the Antisines, and Secants: and likewise betwixt the Antisecants, and
Sines, we may express it, To -- Say -- LaLyr; that is, As the Radius, to the
Sine of the Angle insident on the required side: so the Secant of the other
given Angle, to the Secant of the side that is demanded. Here the Angulary
intermixture of proportions gives us to understand, that this Mood depends
on Seproso, as is manifested by the last characteristick of Uchedezexam the
Directory of this Axiom.

The sixth and last Figure is Escheva, which comprehends all those Problems,
wherein the two containing sides being given, either the subtendent, or an
Angle is demanded: it has two Moods, Enerul and Erelam.

The first Mood thereof Enerul, contains all such Problems as having the
Ambients given, require the subtendent, and by its Resolver, Ton -- Neg --
NeNur, shows, that the sum of the Logarithms of the Cosines of the two Legs
unradiated, is the Logarithm of the Cosine of the subtendent; for it is, As
the total Sine, to the Cosine of one of the Ambients: so the Cosine of the
other including Leg given, to the Cosine of the required subtendent; and
because of the Co-sinal, and Secantine proportion, we may safely say, To -- Leg
-- LeLur. That is, As the Radius to the Secant of one shanke or Leg: so the
secant of the other shanke or Leg, to the secant of the Hypotenusa demanded.
The coursing thus upon Sines, and their proportionals evidenceth that this Mood
depends on Suprosca, the first of the Sphericall Axioms, which is pointed at
by the third and last characteristick of Vphugen the directorie thereof.

The second Mood of the last figure, and consequently the last Mood of all the
Orthogonosphericals, is Erelam, which comprehends all those
orthogonosphericall problems, wherein the two containing sides being proposed,
an Angle is demanded, and by its Resolver, Sei -- Teg -- TorbTir, or by
primifying the Radius, Torb -- Tepi-RexiTir, gives us to understand, that the
cutting off the Radius from the sum of the Tangent of the side opposite to
the Angle demanded, and the cosecant of the side conterminat with the said
Angle, residuats the touch-line of the Angle in question; for it is, As the
sine of the side adjoining the Angle required, to the tangent of the other
given side: so the Radius to the tangent of the Angle demanded: or, As the
total sine to the Tangent of the Ambient opposite to the angle sought: so the
Antisecant of the Leg adjacent to the said asked Angle, to the Tangent or
toucher thereof: and because Sines have the same proportion to cosecants, which
Tangents have to Cotangents, we may say, To -- Sei -- memir, that is, As the
Radius to the sine of the side conterminat with the angle required: so the
Cotangent of the other Leg, to the Cotangent of the Angle searched after: or
yet more profoundly by an Alternat proportion, changing the relation of the
fourth proportional, although the same formerly required Angle, thus, To --
Rei -- memor, that is, As the Radius to the Antisecant of the side adjacent to
the Angle sought for, so the Antitangent of the other side, to the Antitangent
of that sides opposite Angle, which is the Angle demanded. The reason hereof is
grounded on Sbaprotca; for the Tangentine proportion of the terms of this Mood
specifieth its dependence on the second Axiom, which is showen unto us by the
eight and last characteristick of its directorie Pubkutethepsaler.

Here ends the doctrine of the right-Angled sphericalls, the whole diatyposis
whereof is in the Equisolea or hippocrepidian diagram, whose most intricate
amfractuosities, renvoys, various mixture of analogies, and perturbat situation
of proportional terms, cannot choose but be pervious to the understanding of
any judicious Reader that has perused this Comment aright. And therefore let
him give me leave (if he think fit) for his memory sake, to remit him to it,
before he proceed any further.

The Loxogonosphericall Triangles, whether Amblygonosphericall or
Oxygonosphericall, are either Monurgetick or Disergetick.
THe Monurgetick have two figures, Datamista and Datapura.
Datamista is of all those Loxogonospherical Monurgetick problems, wherein the
Angles and sides being intermixedly given, (and therefore one of them being
always of another kind from the other two) either an Angle, or a side is
demanded: it has two Moods, Lamaneprep, and Menerolo.

The first Mood Lamaneprep, comprehends all those Loxogonosphericall
problems, wherein two angles being given, and an opposite side, another opposite
side is demanded, and by its Resolver, Sapeg -- Se -- Sapy -- Sir, shows,
that if to the Logarithms of the sine of the side given, and sine of the Angle
opposite, to the side required, we join the Arithmeticall complement of the
sine of the Angle opposite, to the proposed side (which is the refined
Antisecant) we will thereby attain to the knowledge of the sine of the side
demanded. The reason of this is grounded on the third Axiom, Seprosa, as you
may perceive by the first syllable of the Obliquangularie directory, Lame.

The second Mood of this figure is Menerolo, which comprehends all those
Amblygonosphericall problems, wherein two sides being given with an opposite
angle, another opposite angle is demanded, and by its Resolver Sepag -- Sa --
SepiSir, shows, that if to the sum of the Logarithms of the sine of the
given angle, and sine of the side opposite to the angle required, we join the
Arithmeticall complement of the sine of the side opposite to the given angle
(which is the refined Cosecant of the said angle) it will afford us the sine of
the angle required. The reason of this operation is grounded on the third Axiom
of Sphericalls, a progress in sines showing clearly, how that both this, and
the former, do totally depend on the Axiom of Seprosa, as is evident by the
second syllable of its directorie, Lame.

The second figure of the Monurgetick Loxogonosphericalls treats of all those
questions, wherein the Datas being either sides alone, or Angles alone, an
Angle or a side is demanded. This Figure of Datapura is divided into two Moods,
viz. Nerelema, and Ralamane, which are of such affinity, that upon one and the
same Theorem depends the Analogy that resolves both.

The first Mood thereof, Nerelema, comprehends all those Problems, wherein
the three sides being given, an Angle is demanded, and is the third of the
Monurgeticks, as by its Characteristick the third Liquid is perceivable.

The courteous Reader may be pleased to take notice, that in both the Moods of
the Datapurall Figure, I am in some measure necessitated for the better order
sake, to couch two precepts, or documents, for the Faciendas thereof, and to
premise that one concerning the three Legs given, before I make any mention of
the maine Resolver, whereupon both the foresaid Moods are founded, to which
Resolver, because of both their dependences on it, I have allowed here in the
Gloss, the same middle place, which it possesses in the Table of my
Trissotetras.

The precept of Nerelema is Halbasalzes * Ad* Ab* Sadsabreregalsbis Ir: that is
to say, for the finding out of an Angle when the three Legs are given, as soon
as we have constituted the sustentative Leg of that Angle a Base, the half
thereof must be taken, and to that half we must add half the difference of
the other two Legs, and likewise from that half subtract the half difference
of the foresaid two Legs, then the sum and the residue being two Arches, we
must, to the Logarithms of the Sine of the sum, and Sine of the Remainer,
join the Logarithms of the Arithmeticall complements of the Sines of the
sides, which are the refined Antisecants of the said Legs, and half that sum
will afford, us the Logarithm of the Sine of an Arch, which doubled, is the
vertical Angle, we demand; for out of its Resolver, Parses -- Powto --
ParsadsabPowsalvertir, is the Analogy of the former work made clear, the
Theorem being, As the Oblong or Parallelogram contained under the Sines of the
Legs, to the square, power or quadrat of the total Sine: so the Rectangle, or
Oblong made of the right Sines of the sum, and difference of the half Base,
and difference of the Legs, to the square of the right Sine of half the
vertical Angle.

The reason hereof will be manifest enough to the industrious Reader, if when
by a peculiar Diagram, of whose equiangular Triangles the foresaid Sines and
differences are made the constitutive sides, he has evinced their Analogy to
one another, he be then pleased to perpend, how, in two rows of proportional
numbers, the products arising of the homologall roots, are in the same
proportion amongst themselves, that the said roots toward one another are;
wherewithal if he do consider, how the halfs must needs keep the same
proportion that their wholes; and then, in the work it self of collationing
several orders of proportional terms, both single and compound, be careful
to dash out a divider against a multiplyer, and afterward proceed in all the
rest, according to the ordinary rules of Aequation, and Analogy, he cannot
choose but extricat himself with ease forth of all the windings of this
elaboured proposition.

Upon this Theorem (as I have told you) depends likewise the Document for the
faciendum of Ralamane, which is the second Mood of Datapura, and the last of
the Monurgetick Loxogonosphericals, as is pointed at by Nera the Directory
thereof. This Mood Ralamane comprehends all those Loxogonosphericall Problems,
wherein the three Angles being given, a side is demanded. And by its Resolver,
Parses -- Powto -- ParsadsabPowsalvertir, according to the peculiar precept of
this Mood Kourbfasines (Ereled) Koufbraxypopyx, shows, that if we take the
complement to a semicircle of the Angle opposite to the side required, which
for distinction sake we do here call the Base; and frame, of the foresaid
complement to a semicircle, a second Base for the fabric of a new Triangle,
whose other two sides have the graduall measure of the former Triangles other
two Angles: (and so the three Angles being converted into sides) the complement
to a Semicircle of the new Vertical, or Angle opposite to the new Base, will
be the measure of the true Base or Leg required, and the Angle insident on the
right end of the new Base in the second Triangle, falls to be the side
conterminall with the left end of the true Base in the first Triangle, and the
Angle adjoining the left end of the false Base in the second Triangle, becomes
the side adjacent to the right end of the old Base in the first Triangle. So
that thus by the Angles all andeach of the sides are found out, all which works
are to be performed by the preceding Mood, upon the Theorem, whereof the reason
of all these operations does depend.

The Disergetick Loxogonosphericals are grounded on four Axioms, viz.
1. NAbadprosver. 2. Naverprortes, Siubprortab, and Niubprodnesver: the four
Directories whereof, each in order to its own Axiom, are Alama, Allera,
Ammena, and Ennerra.

The first Axiom is, Nabadprosver, that is, In Obliquangular Sphericals, if a
Perpendicular be demitted from the vertical Angle to the opposite side,
continued if need be, The Sines complements of the Angles at the Base, will be
directly proportional to the Sines of the vertical Angles, and contrary: the
reason hereof is inferred out of the proportion, which the Sines of Angles,
substerned by Perpendiculars, have to the Sines of the said perpendiculars, so
that they belong to the Arches of great Circles, concurring in the same point,
and that from some point of the one, they be let fall on the other Arches*
which proportion of the Sines of the said Perpendiculars, to the Sines of the
Angles subtended by them, stoweth immediately from the proportion, which (in
several Orthogonosphericals, having the same acute Angle at the Base) is
betwixt the Sines of the Hypotenusas, and the Sines of the perpendiculars; the
demonstration whereof is plainly set down in my Gloss on Suprosca, the first
general Axiom of the Sphericals, of which this Axiom of Nabadprosver is a
consectary.

The Directory of this Axiom is Alama, which shows, that the Moods of
Alamebna and Amanepra are grounded on it.

The second Disergetick Axiom is Naverprortes, that is to say, the Sines
complements of the vertical Angles, in obliquangular Triangles (a
Perpendicular being let fall from the double vertical on the opposite side)
are reciprocally proportional to the Tangents of the sides: the reason hereof
proceeds from Sbaprotca, the second general Axiom of the Sphericals;
according to which, if we do but regulate, after the customary Analogicall
manner, two quaternaries of proportionals of the former Sines complements, and
Tangents proposed, we will find by the extremes alone (excluding all the
intermediate terms) that the Sines complements of the vertical Angles (both
forwardly, and inversedly) are reciprocally proportioned to the Tangents of the
sides, and contrariwise from the Tangents, to the Sines. The Directory of this
Axiom is Allera, which evidenceth, that the Moods of Allamebne, and Erelomab
depend upon it.

The third Disergetick Axiom is Sinbprortab, that is to say, that in
Obliquangular Sphericals (if a perpendicular be drawn from the vertical Angle
unto the opposite side, continued if need be) the Sines of the segments of the
Base, are reciprocally proportional to the Tangents of the Angles conterminate
at the Base, and contrary: the proof of this, as well as that of the former
confectary depends on Sbaprotca, the second general Axiom of the
Sphericals, according to which, if we so Diagrammatise an Ambly gonosphericall
Triangle, by Quadranting the Perpendicular, and all the sides, and describing
from the Basangulary points two Quadrantall Arches, till we hit upon two rows
of proportional Sines of Bases to Tangents of Perpendiculars, then shall we be
sure (if we exclude the intermediate terms) to fall upon a reciprocal Analogy
of Sines, and Tangents, which alternatly changed, will afford the reciprocal
proportion of the Sines of the Segments of the Base, to the Tangents of the
Angles conterminat thereat, the thing required.

The Directory of this Axiom is Ammena, which certifieth that Ammanepreb and
Enerablo are founded thereon.

The fourth and last Disergetick Axiom is Niubprodnesver, that is to say, that
in all Loxogonosphericals (where the Cathetus is regularly demitted) the Sines
complements of the Segments of the Base, are directly proportional to the
Sines complements of the sides of the vertical Angles, and contrary. The
reason hereof is made manifest, by the proportion that is betwixt the Sines of
Angles, subtended by Perpendiculars and the Sines of these Perpendiculars; out
of which we collation several proportions, till, both forwardly and inversedly
we pitch at last upon the direct proportion required.

The Directory of this Axiom is Ennerra, which declares that Ennerable, and
Errelome are its dependents.

Of the Disergetick Loxogonosphericals there be in all four Figures; two
Angulary, and two Laterall.
THe two Angulary are Ahalebmane and Ahamepnare: The two laterall are
Ehenabrole and Eheromabne.

The first Angulary Disergetick Loxogonosphericall Figure, Ahalebmane,
comprehends all those Problems, wherein two Angles being given with a side
between, either the third Angle, or an opposite side is demanded; and
accordingly has two Moods, the first whereof is Alamebna, and the second
Allamebne.

Alamebna concerns all those Loxogonosphericall Disergetick Problems, wherein
two Angles being proposed, with an interjacent side, the third Angle is
required; which Angle, according to the several Cases of this Mood, is always
one of the Angles at the Base, that is to say (in the terms of my Trissotetr
as) a prime, or next opposite, or at least one of the co-opposites, to the
Perpendicular to be demitted. And therefore, conform to the nature of the Case
of the Datoquaere in hand, and that it may the more conveniently fall within
the compass of the Axiom of Nabadprosver, an Angle by the first operation of
this Disergetick is to be found out, which must either be a double vertical, a
vertical in the little rectangle, or a vertical, or co-verticall (as
sometimes I call it) in one of the correctangles.

Thus much I have thought fit to premise of the praenoscendum of this Mood,
before I come to its Cathetothesis; because, in my Trissotetrall Table, to
avoid the confusion of homogeneall terms (though the order of doctrine would
seem to require another Method) the first and prime Orthogonosphericall work
is totally unfolded, before I speak any thing of the variety of the
Perpendiculars demission, to which, owing its rectangularity, it thereby
obtains an infallible progress to the quaesitum: but, seeing in the Gloss I
am not to astrict my self to so little bounds, as in my Table, I will observe
the order that is most expedient; and, before the resolution of any operation
in this Mood, deduce the diversity of the Perpendiculars prosiliencie in the
several Cases thereof.

Let the Reader then be pleased to consider, that the general Maxim for the
Cathetothesis of this Mood is Cafregpiq, the meaning whereof is, that, whether
the side whereon the Perpendicular is demitted be increased or not, that is to
say, whether the Perpendicular fall outwardly, or inwardly, it must fall from
the extremity of the given side, and opposite to the Angle required: however it
is to be remarked, that in this Mood, whatever be the affection of the Angles
(unless they be all three alike) the Perpendicular may fall out wardly.

The general maxim for the Cathetothesis of this Mood, as well as for that of
all the rest, is divided into four Tenets, according to the number of the
Cases of every Mood.

Here must I admonish the Reader, that he startle not at the mentioning of
four especial Cathetothetick Tenets, and four several Cases belonging to
each Disergetick Mood, seeing, to the most observant eye, there be but three of
either perceptible in my Trissotetr as; for, the fourth both Tenet and Case
being the same by way of expression in all the Moods, and being fully resolved
by the third Case of every Mood, it shall suffice to speak thereof here once
for all: The Tenet of this common Case is Simomatin, that is to say, when all
the three Angles in any of those Disergeticks are of the same affection, either
all acute, or all oblique, the Perpendicular falls inwardly, whether the
double vertical be an Angle given, an Angle demanded, or neither. Yet here it
is to be considered, that seeing Triangles may be either calculated by their
real and natural, or by their circular parts, or by both together, and that
for the more facility we oftentimes, instead of the proposed Triangle, resolve
its opposite; it is not the real and given Triangle, that in this case we so
much take notice of, as of its resolvable, and equivalent, the opposite
Triangle: as for example, If a Sphericall Triangle, with two obtuse Angles, and
one acute, be given you to resolve, it will fall within the compass of
Simomatin; because its opposite Sphericall is simply acute angled: and also if
you be desired to calculate a Sphericall Triangle with two acute Angles, and
one obtuse, it will likewise fall within the reach of the same Case; because
its opposite Sphericall is simply obtusangled. The reason of both the premises
is from the equality of the opposite Angles of concurring Quadrants, which that
they are equal, no man needs to doubt, that will take the pains to let fall a
Perpendicular from the middle of the one Quadrant upon the other; for so there
will be two Triangles made equilaterall: and seeing it is an universally
received truth, that equal sides sustain equal Angles, the identitie of the
Perpendicular in both the foresaid Triangles, must needs manifest the equality
of the two opposite Angles.

I have been the ampler in the elucidating of this Case, that, it overrunning
all the Moods of the Disergetick Loxogonosphericals, the Reader, in what Mood
or Datoquare soever he please to resolve this foresaid Case, may for that
purpose to this place have recourse; to the which, without any further intended
reiteration of this Tenet, I do heartily remit him.

The first especial Tenet of the general Maxim of the Cathetothesis of this
Mood is Dasimforaug, that is, When the given Angles are of the same nature, but
different from the required, the Perpendicular falls outwardly, and the first
vertical is a given Angle: the second Tenet belonging to the second Case of
this Mood is Dadisforeug, that is, When the proposed Angles are of different
affections, the Perpendicular is externally demitted, and one of the given
Angles is a second vertical: Yet this discrepance is to be observed between
the external prosiliencie of the Perpendicular Arch in this Case, and that
other of the former; that in the former, it is no matter from which of the ends
of the proposed side, the Perpendicular be let fall upon one of the
comprehending Legs of the Angle required, which Leg must be increased; for it
is a general Notandum, that the sustentative Leg of a perpendiculars exterior
demission must always be continued: but in this Case, the outward falling of
the Perpendicular is only from one extremity of the given side; for, if it be
demitted likewise from the other end, it falls then inwardly, and so
produces the third Tenet of this Mood, which is Dadisgatin, that is, If the
given Angles be of a different quality, and that the Perpendicular be
internally demitted, the double vertical is one of the proposed Angles.

The nature of the Perpendiculars demission in all the Cases of this Mood being
thus to the full explained, we may without impediment proceed to the
performance of all the Orthogonosphericall operations, each in its own order
thereto belonging.

To begin therefore at the first, whose quasitum (as I have told you already)
is a vertical Angle, we must know, seeing the work is Orthogonospherically to
be performed, that the forementioned praenoscendum cannot be obtained without
the help of one of the sixteen Datoquaeres; and therefore in my Trissotetras
(considering the nature of what is given, and asked in the Cases of this Mood)
I have appointed Upalam to be the subservient of its praenoscendum; for, by the
Resolver thereof, To -- Tag -- Nu Mir, (the subtendent and an Angle being
given; for one of the given sides of every Loxogonosphericall, if the
Perpendicular be rightly demitted, becomes a subtendent, and sometimes two
given sides are subtendents both) we frame these three peculiar Problems, for
the three praenoscendas; to wit, Utopat, for the double vertical, by the
means of the great Subtendent side, and the prime opposite Angle: secondly,
Udobaud, for obtaining of the first vertical in the little rectangle, by
virtue of the lesser subtendent in the same rectangle, and the next opposite
Angle: lastly, Uthophauth, for the first Co-verticall, by means of the first
Co-subtendent, and first coopposite Angle: all which is at large set down in
the first partition of Alamebna in my Table.

The first and chief operation being thus perfected, the vertical Angles so
found out must concur with each its correspondent opposite for the obtaining
of the Perpendicular, necessary for the accomplishment of the second operation
in every one of the Cases of the foresaid Mood; to which effect Amaner is made
the Subservient, by whose Resolver Say -- Nag -- Tw Nyr, these three
Datoquaeres, Opatca, Obautca, and Ophauthca come to light, and is manifestly
shown how, by any pair of three several couples of different Angles, the
Perpendicular is acquirable.

Now, though of this work (as it is a single one) no more then of the other
succeeding it in the same Mood, nor of the last two in any of the Disergeticks
in their full Analogy, I do not make any mention at all in my Table; but,
after the couching of the first operation for the Praenoscendas, supply the
rooms of the other two, with an equivalent row of proportionals out of them
specified, for attaining to the knowledge of the maine quaesitum: yet in this
Comment upon that Table, for the more perspicuities sake, and that the Reader
may as well know, what way the rule is made, as how thereby a demand is to be
found out, I have thought fit to expatiat my self for his satisfaction on each
operation apart, and Analytically to display in the gloss, what is compounded
in the Trissotetras.

And therefore, according to that prescribed method, to proceed in this Mood,
the perpendicular by the second operation being already obtained, it is
requisite for the promoving of a third work, that the said Perpendicular be
made to join with the second verticaline, the double vertical, and second
co-verticall conform to the quality of the three Cases, thereby to obtain the
Angles at the Base, for the which all these operations have been set on foot;
to wit, the next cathetopposite, (whose complement to a Semicircle is always
the Angle required) the prime cathetopposite, and the second Cocathetopposite:
for the prosecuting of this last work, Edoman is the subservient, by whose
Resolver, To -- Neg -- SaNir, we are instructed how to regulate the Problemets
of Catheudob, Cathatop, and Catheuthops.

Now these two last operations being thus made patent in their several
structures, it is not amiss that we ponder how appositely they may be
conflated into one, to the end, that the verity of all the final Resolvers of
the Disergeticks in my Trissotetras (which are all and each of them composed of
the ingredient terms of two different works) may be the more evidently known,
and obvious to the reach of any ordinary capacity, for the performance hereof,
the Resolvers of these two operations are to be laid before us, Say -- Nag --
TaNyr, and To -- Neg -- SaNir: and, seeing out of both these orders of
proportionals, there must result but one, it is to be considered, which be the
four ejectitious terms, and which those four we should reserve for the
Analogy required; all which, that it may be the better understood by the
industrious Reader, I will interpret the Resolvers so far forth as is
requisite: and therefore Say -- Nag -- ToNyr, being, As the Sine of one of the
Angles at the Base, or Cathetopposite, is to the Sine complement of a
vertical: so the Radius to the Sine complement of the Perpendicular: And the
other, To -- Neg -- SaNir, being, As the Radius, to the Sine complement of the
Perpendicular: so the Sine of a vertical, to the Sine complement of a
Cathetopposite or Angle at the Base; it is perceivable enough how both the
Radius, and the Perpendicular are in both the rows: nor can it well escape the
knowledge of one never so little versed in the elements of Arithmetic, that
the Perpendiculars being the fourth term in the first order of proportionals,
is nothing else but that it is the quotient of the product of the middle
terms, divided by the first, or Logarithmically the remainder of the first
terms abstraction from the sum of the middle two; so that the whole power
thereof is enclosed in these three terms, whereby it is most evident, that
with what term soever the foresaid Perpendicular be employed to concur in
operation, the same effect will be produced by the concurrence of its
ingredients with the said term, and therefore in the second row of
proportionals, where it is made use of for a fellow multiplyer with the third
term to produce a factus, which divided may quote the maine quaesitum, or
Logarithmically to join with the third term, for the summing of an Aggregat
from which the first term being abstracted, may residuat the term demanded,
it is all one, whether the work be performed by it self, or by its equivalent,
viz. the three first terms of the first order of proportionals, in whose
potentia it is: whereupon the fourth term in the second row being that, for
the obtaining whereof, both the Analogies are made, we need not waste any
labor about the finding out of the Perpendicular (though a subservient to the
chief quaesitum) but leaving room for it in both the rows, that the
equipollencie of its conflaters may the better appear, go on in work without
it, and, by the means of its constructive parts, with as much certainty
effectuat the same design.

Thus may you see then how the eight terms of the forementioned Resolvers, are
reduced unto six; but there remaining yet two more to be ejected, that both the
orders may be brought unto a compound row of four proportionals: let us
consider the Radius, which, being in both the rows as I have once told you
already, may peradventure, without any prejudice to the work, be spared out of
both. Thus much thereof to any is perceiveable, that in the first Resolver, it
is the third proportional; and in the second, the first, and consequently a
multiplyer in the one, and in the other a divider: or Logarithmically in the
second a subtractor, and in the first an adder: now it being well known that
division overthrows the structure of multiplication, and that what is made up
by addition, is by subtraction cast down; we need not undergo the
laboriousnesse of such a Penelopaean task, and by the division and abstraction
of what we did add and multiply, weave and unweave, build up, and throw down
the self same thing: but choose rather (seeing the Radius undoeth in the one,
what it does in the other (which ineffect is to do nothing at all) to dash the
one against the other, and race it out of both) then idely to expend time, and
have the proportion pestred with unnecessarie terms. Thus from those two
resolvers, four terms being with reason ejected, we must, for the finding out
of the last in the second Resolver, effectuat as much by three, as formerly was
on seven incumbent, which three being the first, and second terms in the first
row of proportionalls; and the third in the second, the two Resolvers Say --
Nag -- ToNyr, and To -- Neg -- Sanir are comprehended by this one Say -- Nag --
Sa -- Nir, that is, As the sine of one vertical to the Antisine of an
opposite; so the sine of another vertical to the Antisine of another opposite:
and though the second Resolver does import, that this other opposite is to be
found out by the Antisine of the perpendicular, and sine of a secondarie
vertical, yet does it in nothing evince the coincidence of the two operations
in one; because the first two terms of the Resultative Analogy, do
adaequatly stand for the perpendicular, which I have proved already, and
therefore these two in their proper places co-working with the third term,
according to the rule of proportion, have the self same influence, that the
Perpendicular so seconded, has upon the operatum.

Now, to contract the generality of this final Resolver, Say -- Nag -- SaNir,
to all the particular Cases of this Mood, we must say, When the given Angles
are of the same affection, and the required diverse, as in Dasimforaug, the
first case, Sat -- Nop -- SeudNob* Kir, that is, As the Sine of the double
vertical to the Antisine of the prime Cathetopposite: so the Sine of the
second verticaline (or vertical in the lesser rectangle) to the Antisine of
the next Cathetopposite, whose complement to a semicircle is the Angle required.

But when, the affection of the given Angles being different, the perpendicular
is made to fall without, as in Dadisforeug, the second Case of this Mood, the
Resolver thereof is particularised thus, Saud -- Nob -- SatNop * Ir, that is,
As the Sine of the first verticaline (or vertical in the rectanglet,) to the
Sine complement of the nearest Cathetopposite: so the Sine of the double
vertical, to the Sine complement of the prime Cathetopposite, which is the
Angle required.

And lastly, if with the different qualities of the given and demanded Angles,
the Perpendicular be let fall within, as in Dadisgatin, the third Case of this
Mood, then is the final Resolver to be determined thus, Sauth -- Noph --
SeuthNops * Ir, that is, As the Sine of the first coverticall, to the Cosine
of the first Co-opposite: so is the Sine of the second coverticall, to the
Cosine of the second Co-opposite which is the Angle required.

The original reason of all these operations is grounded on the Axiom of
Nabadprosver, as the first syllable of its Directory Alama gives us to
understand, which we may easily perceive by the Analogy, that is only amongst
the Angles without any intermixture of sides in the terms of the proportion.

The second Mood of the first Angulary Figure (that is to say, the first two
terms of whose datas are Angles) is Allamebne, which comprehends all those
Disergetick questions, wherein two Angles being given and a side between, one
of the other sides is demanded, which side (the perpendicular being let fall)
is always one of the second Subtendents, viz. in the first Case a second
Subtendent of the lesser Triangle, in the second a second Subtendent in the
great rectangle, and in the last a second Co-subtendent.

To the knowledge of all these, that we may the more easily attain, we must
consider the general maxim of the Cathetothesis of this Mood, which is
Cafyxegeq that is to say, that in all the Cases of Allamebne the Perpendicular
falls from the side required, and from that point thereof, where it
conterminats with the given side upon the third side, continued if need be; and
according to the variety of the second subtendent, which is the side demanded,
there be these three especial Tenets of this general Maxim, to wit,
Dasimforauxy, Dadiscracforeng, and Dadiscramgatin.

Dasimforauxy, the first especial Tenet of the general Maxim of the
Cathetothesis of this Mood shows, that, when the proposed Angles are of the
same quality and homogeneall, the Perpendicular falls externally, and the
first vertical is one of the given Angles, and annexed to the required side.

The second Tenet, Dadiscracforeug, which pertains to the second Case of this
Mood, shows, that when the given Angles are of a discrepant nature, and
heterogeneall, and that the concurse of the proposed and required sides is at
an acute Angle, that then the Perpendicular must be demitted outwardly, and one
of the proposed Angles becomes a second vertical.

The third Tenet is Dadiscramgatin, whereby we learn, that if with the various
affection of the Angles given, the concurse (mentioned in the preceding Tenet)
be at an obtuse Angle, the Perpendicular falls inwardly, and that one of the
foresaid Angles is a double vertical. This is the only Case of Allamebne,
wherein the Perpendicular is demitted inwardly, save when the three Angles are
qualified all alike, of which Case, because it falls in all the Moods of the
Loxogonosphericall Disergeticks, and that in Alamebna I have spoke at large
thereof, I shall not need (I hope) to make any more mention hereafter.

Having thus unfolded the mysteries of the Perpendiculars demission in all the
Cases of this Mood (as I must do in all those of every one of the other
Loxogonosphericall Disergeticks; because such Obliquangulars, till they be
reduced to a rectangularity (which without the Perpendicular is not
performable) can never Logarithmically be resolved) I may safely go on, without
any let to the Reader, to the three several Orthogonosphericall operations
thereof, as they stand in order.

The quaesitas of the first operation, which are always the praenoscendas of
the Mood, are in this Mood the same that they were in the last, to wit, the
double vertical, the first verticaline, and the first coverticall: and are
likewise to be found out by the same Datas both of side, and Angle here, that
they were in the former Mood; that is, for the side, by the first and great
Subtendent: the first but little Subtendent: and the first Co-subtendent: and
for the Angle, by the prime Cathetopposite, the nearest Cathetopposite, and the
first Co-cathetopposite: so that the Datoquaere sounding thus, the Subtendent,
and an Oblique Angle being given, to find the other Oblique, the Subservient of
this Computation must needs be Upalam, and its Resolver, To -- Tag -- NuMir,
which shows, that the subducing of the Logarithm of the Radius from the sum
of the Logarithms of the Sine complement of one of the first Subtendents, and
Tangent of one of the Angles at the Base, residuats the Logarithm of the
Tangent complement of one of the verticals required, and consequently involveth
within so much generality the particular resolutions of the Sub-problems of
Upalam, viz. Utopat, Vdoband, and Vthophauth, diversified thus according to the
variety of their praenoscendas, whereon, to speak ingenuously, I intend to
insist no longer; for, besides that the peculiar enodation of all the three
apart is clearly set down in my gloss on the last Mood, they are in both the
first partitions of the Moods of Ahalebmane to the full expressed in the Table
of my Trissotetras.

The vertical Angles, according to the diversity of the three Cases being by
the foresaid Datas thus obtained, must concur with each its correspondent
first Subtendent (notified by the Characteristicks of t. d. th.) for finding
out of the perpendicular, requisite for the performance of the second work in
every one of the Cases of this Mood. And to this effect Ubamen is made the
Subservient, by whose Resolver Nag -- Mu -- TorpMyr, these three Problems,
Vtatatca, Vdaudca, and Uthauthca, are made manifest, and the same quaesitum
attained unto by the Datas of three several Subtendents, and verticals. *

The Perpendicular being thus found out, must, for the surtherance of the third
operation, join with the second verticaline, the double vertical, and second
co-verticall, according to the nature of the Case in question, (the Datas being
the same with those of the third work of the last Mood) thereby to attain unto
the knowledge of the second little Subtendent, the second great Subtendent, and
the second Co-subtendent, the which are all the maine quaesitas of this Mood:
To the performance of this last operation, Etalum is the subservient, whose
Resolver Torp -- Me -- NagMur, teaches us how to deal with the under
datoquaeres of Catheudwd, Cathatwt, and Catheuthwth.

Now, the coalescencie of these last two operations in one, proceeding from the
casting out of the Radius in both the orders of proportionals, and leaing room
for the perpendicular, without taking the pains to know its value, as has
been shown already in the first Mood of the same Figure; it cannot be much
amiss in this place to give a further illustration thereof, and make the
Reader, by an Arithmeticall demonstration, feel (as it were) how palpable the
truth is of compacting eight proportionals into four; let there be then these
two orders of numbers, 4 -- 6 -- 812. and 8 -- 12. -- 1421. Where, we may
suppose eight to be the Radius, and twelve the Perpendicular (for such like
suppositions can infer no great absurdity) and then let us consider how those
terms do bear to one another, especially the 12. and 8. which, by possessing
four places, make up half the number of the proportionals. First, we see that
twelve in the first row, is nothing else but the result of the product of 6. in
8. divided by 4. And secondly, that 8. in the second row, casts down, by its
division, whatsoever by its multiplication it builded up in the first; upon
which observations we may ground these Sequels, that 12. may be safely left
out, both in the fourth, and sixth place, taking instead of it the number of 4.
6. and 8. in whose potentia it is: and next 8. undoing in one place, what it
does in another, may with greater ease void them both. So that by this
abbreviated way of Analogising, 4. and 6. alone in their due order before 14.
which is the third term of the second row, conduce as much to the obtaining of
the fourth, or if you will eighth proportional 21. as if the other four
terms of the two eights, and twelves, were concurrent with it. How plain all
this is, no question needs to be made, and therefore, to return to our
Resolvers (for the explicating whereof, we thought good to make this
digression) we must understand that the final Resolver, (in its general
expression) made out of them (they being as they are materially displayed,
Nag-Mu-TorpMyr, and Torp-Me-NagMur) is no other then Nag-Mu-NaMur, that is, As
the Sine complement of one vertical is to the Tangent complement of a
Subtendent: So the Sine complement of another vertical, to the Tangent
complement of another Subtendent: and Analytically to trace the running of this
operation, even to the source from whence it flows, by foysting in the
Perpendicular, and Radius, we may bring it to the consistence of the former two
subordinate Resolvers, whereof the first is, As the Sine complement of a first,
or a double vertical, to the Tangent complement of a first Subtendent: so the
Radius to the Tangent complement of the Perpendicular; and the second, As the
Radius, to the Tangent complement of the Perpendicular: so the Sine complement
of a second, or a double vertical, to the Tangent complement of a second
Subtendent, which is the side required, and the fourth proportional of Nag --
Mu -- NaMur. Whose generality is to be contracted to every one of the three
Cases of this Mood thus: If both the Angles given be of the same nature, they
being the first verticals, from which the Cathetus falls on either side,
increased according to the demand of the side, as in the first Case,
Dasimforauxy, we must particularise the common Resolver, in this manner, Not --
Mut -- NeudNwd * Yr, that is, As the Antisine of the double vertical, is to
the Antitangent of the first, and great Subtendent: so the Antisine of the
second vertical in the lesser rectangle, to the Antitangent of the second
Subtendent in the same little rectangle, which Subtendent is the side required.
For the second Case of this Mood, viz. Dadiscracforeug, we must say, Naud --
Mud -- NatMwt * Yr, that is, As the Sine complement of the first and little
vertical to the Tangent complement of the first, and little Subtendent: so the
Sine complement of the double vertical, to the Tangent complement of the
second and great subtendent. And lastly, for the third Case Dadiscramgatin, the
final Resolver is determinated thus, Nauth -- Muth -- NeuthMwth * Yr, that is,
As the Cosine of the first Co-verticall, is to the Co-tangent of the first
Co-subtendent: so the Cosine of the second Co-verticall, to the Co-tangent of
the second Co-subtendent, which is the side in this third Case required.

The truth of all these operations is grounded on the Axiom of Naverprortes,
as we are certified by the first syllable of its Directory Allera, which we may
perceive by the direct Analogy that is between the Sines complements of the
vertical Angles, and the Tangents complements, (and consequently reciprocal
'twixt them and the Tangents) of the vertical sides, which in this Mood are
always second Subtendents.

The second Disergetick, and Angulary Figure, is Ahamepnare, which embraces
all those Obliquangularie Sphericals, wherein two Angles being given with an
opposite side, another Angle, or the side interjacent, is demanded: this
Figure, conform to the two several Quaesitas, has two Moods, viz. Amanepra,
and Ammanepreb.

The first Mood hereof, which is Amanepra, belongs to all those
Loxogonosphericall questions, wherein, two Angles with an opposite side being
proposed, the third Angle is required, which is always a first vertical, a
second vertical, or a first co-verticall: to the notice of all which, that we
may with ease attain, the general Maxim of the Cathetothesis of this Mood is
to be considered, which is Cafriq that is to say, that in all the Cases of
Amanepra, the Perpendicular falls from the Angle required upon the side
opposite to that Angle, and terminated by the other two Angles, which side is
to be increased, if need be.

Now in regard, that besides the Cathetothesis of this Mood, and some three
more, to wit, all those Loxogonosphericals wherein the quaesitum is either a
partial vertical, or segment at the Base, there is a peculiar Mensurator,
pertaining to every one of the four, called in my Trissotetras the plus minus,
because it shows by the specieses thereof to the Moods appropriated, whether
the sum, or difference of the vertical Angles, and segments at the Base, be
the Angle, or side required, and so clearly leads us thorough all the Cases
of each of the Moods, that either by abstracting the fourth proportional from
an Angle or a segment, or by abstracting an Angle, or a segment from it, or
lastly, by joining it to an Angle, or a segment, with an incredible facility we
attain to the knowledge of the maine quaesitum, whether Angulary, or laterall.
Let the Reader then be pleased to know, that the Mensurator, or Plus minus of
this Mood, is Sindifora, which evidently declares (as by its representatives
in the explanation of the Table is apparent) that, if the demission of the
Perpendicular be internal, the sum; if exterior, the difference of the
vertical Angles, is the Angle required.

Seeing thus the notice of the manner of the Perpendiculars falling is so
necessary, it is expedient, for our better information therein, that we
severally perpend the three especial Tenets of the general Maxim of the
Cathetothesis of this Mood, which are Dadissepamforaur Dadissexamforeur, and
Dasimatin.

Dadissepamforaur, which is the Tenet of the first Case, shows, that when the
Angles given are of a different nature, and that the proposed side is opposite
to an obtuse Angle, the Perpendicular falls outwardly, and the first
vertical is the Angle required.

The second Tenet belonging to the second Case of this Mood, viz.
Dadissexamforeur, shows, that if the proposed Angles be of discrepant
affections, and that the side given be conterminat with an obtuse Angle, the
Perpendicular is demitted externally, and the demanded Angle is a second
vertical.

The third Tenet pertaining to the last Case of this Mood, to wit, Dasimatin,
evidenceth, that if the Angles proposed be of the same quality, the
Perpendicular falls interiourly, and the double vertical is the Angle
required.

Having thus (as I suppose) hereby evinced every difficulty of the
Perpendiculars demission in all the Cases of this Mood, I may the more boldly
in the interim proceed to the three rectangular works thereto belonging. Now,
it being manifest that the Praenoscendas of this Mood, or the Quaesitas of the
first operation thereof, are the same with those of the two Moods of the first
Disergetick Figure, to wit, the double vertical, the first verticaline, and
the first co-verticall; and that, without any alteration at all, they are to be
obtained by the same Datas, both of side, and Angle in this Mood of Amanepra,
that, they were in the former Moods of Alamebna, and Allamebne, without any
further specifying what these given sides, and Angles are (which are to the
full expressed in the last two forementioned Moods) I must make bold thither to
direct you, where you shall be sure also to learn all that is necessary to
know of the Subservient and Resolver of the first operation of this Mood, both
which, to wit, Upalam and To -- Tag -- NuMir, are inseparable dependents on all
the Angularie Praenoscendas of the Loxogonosphericall Disergeticks: And though
within the generality of this Subservient be compreded the peculiar Problemets
of Vtopat, Udobaud, and Uthophauth, which are all three at large couched in the
Trissotetras of this Mood; yet, because what has been already said thereof in
the foresaid Figure, may very well suffice for this place, the Readers
diligence (I hope) in the turning of a leaf, will save me the labor of any
further recapitulation.

The Praenoscendas, or the vertical Angles, according to the nature of the
Case, being by the foresaid Datas thus found out, must needs join with each
its correspondent opposite, specified by the characteristicks of p. b. ph. for
the obtaining of the Perpendicular, which in all the rest of the Disergetick
Moods, as well as this, is always the quaesitum of the second operation,
thorough all the Cases thereof. Of this work Amaner is the subservient, by
whose Resolver, Say -- Nag -- ToNyr, the three sub-problems, Opatca, Obaudca,
and Ophauthca, are made known, and the same quaesitum attained unto by the
Datas of three several both cathetopposites, and verticals, it being the only
Mood which with Alamebna, has a cathetopposite and vertical catheteuretick
identity. The Perpendicular being thus obtained, is, for the effecting of the
third and last operation, to concur with the next cathetopposite, the prime
cathetopposite, and the second cocathetopposite, as the Case requires it,
thereby to find out the main quaesitum; which in the first Case by abstracting
the fourth proportional, in the second by abstracting from the fourth
proportional, and in the third by adding the fourth proportional to another
vertical, is easily obtained by those that have the skill to discern which be
the greater, or lesser of two verticals proposed. To the perfecting of this
third work, Exoman is the Subservient, whose Resolver Ne-To-NagSir, instructs
us, how to unfold the peculiar Problems of Cathobeud Cathopat, and Cathopseuth.

Now, the nature of proportion requiring that of two rows of proportionals,
when the fourth in the first order is first in the second, that then the
multiplyers become dividers, and the dividers multiplyers: as by these numbers
following you may perceive, viz. 2 -- 4 -- 612. for the first row, and 12 -- 4
-- 155, for the second; of which proportionals, because of the fourth term in
the first rows being first in the second, if you turn as many multiplyers
into dividers as you can, and (where the identity of a Figure requires it) dash
out a multiplyer against a divider, you will find, the two foures by this
reason being raced out, and the two twelves (because of their being in the
power of the three first proportionals of the first row) likewise left out,
that this Analogy of 6 -- 2 -- 15 does the same effect, that the former seven
proportionals, for obtaining of the quaesitum, viz. 5. the reason whereof is
altogether grounded upon the inversion of a permutat proportion, or the
Retrograd Analogy of the alternat terms, whereby the Consequents are compared
to Consequents, and Antecedents to Antecedents, in the preposterous method of
beginning at the second of both the Consequents and Antecedents, and ending at
the first: therefore (as I was telling you) the nature of proportion requiring
that in such a Case the multiplyers and dividers be bound to interchange their
places, the Resolvers of the last two operations, viz. Say -- Nag -- ToNyr, and
Ne -- To -- NagSir, the first whereof being, As the Sine of a vertical Angle,
to the Sine complement of an Angle at the Base, or one of the Cathetopposites:
so the Radius to the Sine complement of the Perpendicular: and the second, As
the Sine complement of the Perpendicular, to the Radius: so the Sine complement
of one of the Cathetopposite Angles, to one of the verticals, may both of them
(according to the former rule) be handsomely compacted in this one Analogy, Na
-- Say -- NagSir, that is, As the Sine complement of an opposite is to the Sine
of a vertical: so the Sine complement of another opposite, to the Sine of
another vertical.

This foresaid general Resolver, according to the three several cases of this
Mood, is to be specialised into so many final Resolvers; the first whereof for
Dadissepamforaur, Nop -- Sat -- Nob -- Seudfr* At* Aut* ir, that is, As the
sine complement of the prime cathetopposite, to the sine of the double
vertical: so the sine complement of the nearest cathetopposite, to the sine of
the second verticalin; the which subtracted from the double vertical, leaves
the first and great vertical, which is the Angle required.

Next, for the second Case of this Mood, Dadissexamforeur, we must make use of,
Nob -- Saud -- NopSatfr, * And* Eut* ir, that is, As the sine complement of the
next opposite, to the sine of the first verticallet: so the sine complement of
the prime opposite, to the sine of the double vertical, from which, if you
deduce the first verticalm, there will remain the second and great vertical
for the Angle demanded.

Lastly, for the third Case, Dasimatin, we must, say Noph -- Sauth --
Nop^Seuth* jauth* ir, that is, As the sine complement of the first co-opposite,
to the sine of the first co-verticall: so the sine complement of the second
co-opposite, to the sine of the second co vertical, which added to the first
co-verticall, makes up the Angle we desire.

The verity of all these operations is grounded on the Axiom Nabadprosver, as
the second syllable of its directorie Alama, gives us understand, and as we
may discern more easily by the samenesse in species amongst the proportional
terms; for they are all Angles, the first, and third being Angles at the Base
(for these are always of the opposits) and the second, and fourth terms of
the vertical Angles, which vertical Angles in the final resolvers of this
Mood, are according to the foresaid Axiom, to the Angles of the Base directly
proportional, and contrarily.

The second Mood of the second Angularie figure of the Loxogonosphericall
Disergeticks, named Ahamepnare is Ammanepreb, which is said of all those
obliquangularie problems, wherein two Angles, and an opposite side being given,
the side between is required, and is always one of the basal-segments: to the
knowledge whereof, that we may the more easily attain, we must consider the
general maxim of the Cathetothesis of this Mood, which is Cafregpagyq that
is, that the perpendicular falls still from the given side, opposite to both
the Angles given, and upon the side required, continued, if need be, in all and
every one of the cases of Ammanepreb.

The Plusminus of this Mood, is Sindiforiu, that is to say, the sum of the
segments of the Base, if the perpendicular fall inwardly, and the difference of
the Bases, if exteriorly, is the side demanded.

The perpendiculars demission, being a Sine quo non in all disergetick
operations, it will not be amiss, that we ponder what the three several
tenets are of the Cathetothesis of this Mood, and what is meaned by
Dadissepamfor, Dadissexamfor, and Dasimin.

Dadissepamfor, the tenet of the first Case of this Mood, shows, that if the
given Angles be of several natures, and that the proposed side be opposite to
an obtuse Angle, the perpendicular falls externally.

The second tenet, Dadissexamfor expresses, that if the proposed Angles be
different, and that the side given be conterminat with the obtuse Angle, it
falls likewise outwardly.

But Dasimin, which is the third tenet signifies, that if the given Angles be
of the same affection, the falling of the perpendicular is internal.

This much being premised of the perpendicular, we may securely go on to the
orthogonosphericall works of the Mood; and so beginning with the first
operation, consider what the praenoscendas are, which are always the quaesitas
by the first operation obtainable, and in this Mood the Bases of the Triangle;
but more particularly to descend to the illustration of the Cases of
Ammanepreb, the praenoscendum of the first Case, is the first and great Base,
of the second, the first but little Base, and of the third, the first co-base.
Now, though these three praenoscendas, be totally different from those of the
three former Moods, yet are they to be acquired by the same, and no other
Datas; because none of the Angularie figures must differ from one another in
the Datas of their praenoscendas, as out of the definition of an Angularie
figure in the entry, of the second Mood set down, is easy to be collected:
these Datas being tendered to us of intermixed circularie parts, that is to say,
of both sides and Angles, the side being the first subtendentall, or great
subtendent, the first subtendentine, or little subtendent, and the first
co-subtendent: and the Angles the prime cathetopposite, the next
cathetopposite, and the first co-catheopposite; so that considering what is
demanded, and that the Datoquaere thereof must be expressed thus, the
hypotenusa, and an oblique being given, to find the Ambient conterminate with
the proposed Angle, we are, for the calculation of this work, necessitated to
have recourse to Vbamen, which, in the Table of my Trissotetras obtains the
room of its subservient, to the end, that by its Resolver Torp -- Mu --
LagMyr, being instructed how by cutting off the Logarithm of the Radius, from
the sum of the Logarithms of the M. of one of the first subtendents, and
secant complement of one of the cathetopposits, or Angles at the Base,
residuats the Logarithm of the Tangent complement of the Base required, we may
deliveredly extract, out of the generality of that proposition, the peculiar
Subordinate resolutions of these three Problemets of Ubamen, viz. Utopaet,
Vdobaed, and Uthophaeth, varied (as you see) according to the diversity of the
Praenoscendas, which being (as you were told already) the first Basal, or great
Base, the first Baset or little Base, and the first Co-base; I will not detain
you any longer upon this matter, but the rather hasten my transition to the
other work, that in the Praenoscendall partition of Ammanepreb, there is enough
thereof set down in the Table of my Trissotetras.

The Praenoscendas of Ammanepreb, or the three several first Bases, conform
to the various nature of the Cases thereof, being by the foresaid Datas happily
obtained, must concur with each its correspondent Cathetopposite
(discernable, in their several qualities, by the Characteristicks of p. b.
ph.) for finding out of the perpendicular, which is the perpetual quaesitum of
the second operation. The subservient of this work is Ethaner, by whose
Resolver, To -- Tag -- SeTyr, we come to the knowledge of Ethaners three
Subdatoquaeres, viz. Aetopca, Aedobca, and Aethophca, whereby we may perceive,
that the same quaesitum, to wit, the perpendicular is obtained by the Datas of
the three several both Bases, and Cathet opposite Angles.

This so often mentioned perpendicular being thus made known, must, for the
performance of the last and third work, join with the nixt Cathetopposite, the
prime Cathetopposite, and the second Co-cathetopposite, as the Case will bear
it, the Datas being the same in every point here, that in the last operation of
the foregoing Mood (as by the subservients, Exoman and Epsoner, is obvious to
any judicious Reader) thereby to obtain the maine quaesitum, which in the
first Case, by abstracting the fourth proportional from the first great Base,
in the second by abstracting from the fourth proportional, the first little
Base, and in the third by adding the fourth proportional to another segment of
the Base, is findable by any, that will undergo the labor of adding, and
substracting. For the acomplishment of this last operation Epsoner is the
Subservient, by whose Resolver Tag -- Tolb -- TeSyr, we are taught how to deal
with its three Subproblems, Cathoboed, Cathopoet, and Cathopsoeth.

These last two operations being thus to the full extended, it remains now to
treat how they ought to be in one compacted, or rather, for brevitie of
computation, we should compact them both in one, before we take the pains to
extend them: yet, because practice requires one method, and the order of
Doctrine another, we will, that we may be the less troublesome to the Readers
memory, go on (by ejecting some, and reserving other proportional terms) in
our usual course of conflating two Resolvers together. These Resolvers are in
this Mood, To -- Tag -- SeTyr, and Tag -- To -- ToSyr, the first thereof,
sounding, As the Radius, to the Tangent of one of the Cathetopposite Angles, or
Angles at the Base: so the Sine of one of the first Bases, to the Tangent of
the perpendicular: and the second, As the Tangent of one of the other
Cathetopposite Angles to the Radius: so the Tangent of the perpendicular, to
the sine of the side required.

Here may the Reader be pleased to consider, that in all the gloss upon the
posterior operations of my Disergeticks, I have been contented to set down
(as he may see in the last two propositions) the bare Theorems of the
Resolvers, conform to the nature of their Analogy, without troubling my self,
or any body else, with repeating, or reiterating the way, how the Logarithms of
the middle, and initiall terms are to be handled, for the obtaining of a
fourth Logarithm; all that can be desired therein, being to the full expressed
already in my ample comments upon the Orthogonosphericall Problems; to the
which the industrious Reader, in case of doubting, may (if he please) have
recourse, without any great loss of time, or labor: however, for his better
encouragement, I give another hint thereof in the closure of this Treatise.

But to return where we left, seeing out of these two Resolvers, To -- Tag --
SeTyr, and Tag -- To -- TeSyr, according to the rules of coalescency, mentioned
in both the Moods of Ahalebmane, both the Perpendicular and Radius may be
ejected without any danger of losing our aim of the maine quaesitum, it is
evident, that the proportion of the Remanent terms, is, Ta -- Tag -- SeSyr,
which comprehends both the last two Resolvers, and the three foresaid
Problemets thereto belonging, and being interpreted, As the Tangent of one
Cathetopposite Angle, to the Tangent of another Cathetopposite: so the sine of
one of the first Bases, to the sine of a side, which ushers in the side
required.

This general Resolver, according to the three several Cases of this Mood, is
to be particularised into so many final Resolvers; the first whereof, for
Dadissepanefor, is Tob-Top-SaetSoedfr *, Aet* Dyr, that is, As the Tangent of
the next opposite, to the Tangent of the prime opposite: so the Sine of the
first great Base, to the Sine of the second little Base; which subducted from
the foresaid first great Base, will for the remainder afford us that segment of
the Base, which is the side in the first Case required.

Then for the second Case, Dadissexamfor, the final Resolver is Top -- Tob --
SaedSoetfr * Aed* Dyr, that is, As the Tangent of the prime Cathetopposite to
the Tangent of the next opposite: so the Sine of the first Baset, or little
Base, to the Sine of the second and great Base; from which if we abstract the
foresaid first little Base, the difference or remainer will be that Segment of
the Base, which is the side demanded.

Lastly, for the Case Dasimin, the final Resolver is Tops -- Toph --
SaethSoethj* Aeth* Sir, that is, As the Tangent of the second co-opposite, to
the Tangent of the first co-opposite: so the Sine of the first co-base, to the
Sine of the second co-base; the sum of which two co-bases is the total Base
or side in the third Case required.

The reason of all this is proved by the third Disergetick Axiom, which is
Siubprortab, as is pointed at by the first syllable of its Directory Ammena,
and manifested to us in all the Analogies of this Mood, every one whereof
runs upon Tangents of Angles, and Sines of Segments, both to the Base
belonging: nor can any doubt, that hears the resolution of the Cases of
Ammanepreb, but that the habitude, which all the terms thereof have to one
another, proceeds merely from the reciprocal proportion, which the Tangents
of the opposite Angles have to the Basal-segments, and contrariwise.

The third Loxogonosphericall Disergetick Figure, and first of the Laterals
(that is, the first two terms of whose Datas are sides, what ere the quaesitum
be) is Ehenabrole, which comprehends all those Problems, wherein two sides
being given, and an Angle between, either a cathetopposite Angle, or the third
side is demanded. This Figure, conform to the two several Quaesitas, has two
Moods, to wit, Enerablo, and Ennerable.

The first Mood hereof, Enerablo, contains all those obliquangularie
questions, wherein two sides with the Angle comprehended within them, being
proposed, another Angle is required, which Angle is always one of the
Cathetopposites or Angles at the Base, that is, either the complement to a
Semicircle of the next Cathetopposite, the prime Cathetopposite, or the second
Cocathetopposite: to the knowledge of all which, that we may with facility
attain, let us consider the general Maxim of the Cathetothesis of this Mood,
which is Cafregpigeq that is to say, that the Perpendicular in all the Cases of
Enerablo falls from that given side, which is opposite to the Angle required,
upon the other given side, continued, if need be; and according to the variety
of the Angle at the Base which is the Angle sought for, there be these three
especial Tenets of the general Maxim of this Mood, viz. Dacramfor, Damracfor,
and Dasimquaein.

Dacramfor, which is the Tenet of the first Case, shows, that if the proposed
Angle be sharp, and the required flat, the Perpendicular must fall outwardly.

Damracfor, the Tenet of the second Case, signifies, that if a blunt, or
obtuse Angle be given, and an acute or sharp demanded, the demission of the
Perpendicular must (as in the last) be external.

Lastly, Dasimquaein, the Tenet of the third Case, shows, that if the given,
and required Angles be of the same nature, the Perpendicular must fall inwardly.

Having thus unfolded all the intricacies in my Trissotetras of the
Cathetothetick partition of this Mood, I may, without breaking order, step
back, to explicate what is contained in the preceding partition, and for the
accomplishing of the first Orthogonosphericall work of this Mood, consider what
its Praenoscendas are, and by what Datas they are to be obtained: but, seeing
both the Praenoscendas, and the Datas, together with the subservient, and its
Resolver, with all the three Subdatoquaeres; and in a word, the whole contents
of the first partition of this Mood of Enerablo, is the same in all and every
jot with the Praenoscendas, Datas, Subservient, Resolver, and Problemets,
contained in the first partition of the last Mood Ammanepreb; I will not need
to tell you any more, then that (the Trissotetras it self (though otherwise
short enough) showing that Ubamen is the subservient to the Praenoscendas: Torp
-- Mu -- LagMyr, its Resolver: and Vtopaet, Vdobaed, and Vthophaeth, the three
Subproblems both of this and the next preceding Mood) you be pleased to have
recourse to the gloss upon the last Mood, where this matter is treated of at
large; to the which, for avoiding of repetition, I do heartily recommend you.

The first work being thus expedited, we are to find out the Perpendicular by
the second, but so as that my direction to the Reader for the performance
thereof shall detain me no longer here, then the time I am willing to bestow,
in telling him, that the whole progress of this operation, as well as of the
preceding, is amply expressed in my comment on the last Mood, from which, what
ere is written of the Subservient, Ethaner, its Resolver, To -- Tag -- SeTyr,
or the under-problems, Aetopca, Aedobca, and Aethophca, thereby resolved, may
conveniently be transplaced hither, and reseated there again, without any
prejudice to either; Ammanepreb being the only Mood, which with this of
Enerablo has a basal and opposite catheteuretick identity.

The Perpendicular, by these means being found out, must be employed in the
last work of this Mood, to concur with the second Basidion, or little Base,
the second great Base, and the second Co-base, for obtaining of such
Cathetopposites as are, or usher the maine quaesitas, which in the first Case
is the complement of the fourth proportional (viz. the next Cathetopposite) to
a Semicircle; in the second Case the prime Cathetopposite, and in the third,
the second Cocathetopposite. For the perfecting of this operation, Erelam is
the Subservient, by whose Resolver, Sei -- Teg -- ToTir, we are instructed how
to unfold its peculiar Problemets, oedcathob, oetcathop, and oethcathops.

All the three operations being thus singly accomplished, according to our
wonted manner, the last two must be inchaced into one, and therefore their
Resolvers, To -- Tag -- SeTyr, and Sei -- Teg -- ToTir, must be untermed of
some of their proportionals: the which, that we may perform the more
judicionsly, let us consider what they signify apart; the first imports (as
in the last Mood I told you) that, As the Radius is to the Tangent of one of
the opposite Angles: so the Sine of one of the first Bases, to the Tangent of
the Perpendicular: the second sounds, As the Sine of one of the second Bases,
to the Tangent of the Perpendicular: so the Radius, to the Tangent of an Angle,
which either ushers, of is the Angle required.

Hereby it is evident, how the Radius is a multiplyer in the one, and a divider
in the other, and that the Perpendicular, which with the Radius is a multiplyer
in the second row, is in the power of the three first terms of the first row,
whereof the Radius is one, by virtue of all which, we must proceed just so with
these last two operations here, as we have already done with the two last of
the Moods of Alamebna, Allamebne, and Ammanepreb, and ejecting the Radius and
Perpendicular out of both, instead of To -- Tag -- SeTyr and Sei -- Teg --
ToTir, set down Sei -- Tag -- SeTir, that is, As the Sine of one of the second
Bases to the Tangent of one of the Cathetopposites: so is the Sine of one of
the first Bases, to the Tangent of one of the other Cathetopposites: which
proposition comprehends to the full the last two operations, and according to
the three several Cases of this Mood is to be individuated into so many final
Resolvers.

The first thereof, for Dacramfor, is Soed -- Top -- SaetTob * Kir, that is, As
the Sine of the second Basidion, or little Base, is to the Tangent of the prime
Cathetopposite: so the Sine of the first, and great Base, to the Tangent of the
next Cathetopposite, whose complement to a Semicircle is the Angle required.

The second final Resolver, is for Damracfor, the Tenet of the second Case,
and is Soet -- Tob -- SaedTop * Ir, that is to say, As the Sine of the second,
and great Base, to the Tangent of the next Cathetopposite: so the Sine of the
first Basidion, to the Tangent of the prime opposite, which is the Angle
required.

The third and last final Resolver, is for the third Case Dasimquaein, and is
couched thus, Soeth -- Toph -- SaethTops * Ir, that is, As the Sine of the
second Co-base is to the Tangent of the first Cocathetopposite: so is the Sine
of the first Co-base to the Tangent of the second Co-cathetopposite, which is
the Angle required.

The fundamental reason of all this, is from the third Disergetick Axiom
Siubprortab, the second Determinater of whose Directory, Ammena, shows that
the Mood of Enerablo, in all the final Resolvers thereof, owes the truth of
its Analogy to the Maxim of Siubprortab; because of the reciprocal proportion
tha^ is amongst its terms, to be found betwixt the Sines of the basall
segments and the Tangents of the Cathetopposite Angles.

The second Mood of Ehenabrole is Ennerable, which comprehends all those
Obliquangulary Problems, wherein two sides being given, with an Angle
intercepted therein, the third side* demanded, which side is always one of the
second Subtendent^* that is either the second Subtendentine, the second
Subtendentall, (...) the second Co-subtendent: to the notice of all which, that
we may the more easily attain, let us perpend the general Maxim of the
Cathetothesis of this Mood, Cafregpaq the meaning whereof is, that in this
Mood, whatever the Case be, the Perpendicular may fall from the extremity of
either of the given sides, but must fall from one of them, opposite to the
Angle proposed, and upon the other given side, continued, if need be.

Here may the Reader be pleased to observe, that the clause of the
Perpendiculars falling opposite to the proposed Angle, though it be only
mentioned in this place, might have as well been spoke of in any one of the
rest of the Cathetothetick comments; because it is a general tie incumbent on
the demission of Perpendiculars in all Loxogonosphericall Disergetick Figures,
whether Amblygonian or Oxygonian, that it fall always opposite to a known
Angle, and from the extremity of a known side.

Of this general Maxim, Cafregpaq according to the variety of the second
Subtendent, which is the side required, there be these three especial Tenets,
Dacforamb, Damforac, and Dakinatam.

Dacforamb, the Tenet of the first Case, gives us to understand, that if the
given Angle be acute, and that one only of the other two be an obtuse Angle,
the Perpendicular falls outwardly.

Damforac, the Tenet of the second Case, signifies, that if the given Angle be
obtuse, and the other two acute, that the demission of the Perpendicular is
external, as in the first.

Thirdly, Dakinatam, the Tenet of the third Case, and variator of the first,
shows, that if the proposed Angle be of the same affection with one of the
other Angles of the Triangle, as in the first Case, the Perpendicular may fall
inwardly.

The Cathetology of this Mood being thus expeded, the Pranoscendas thereof come
next in hand to be discussed, which are the first Bases, whose subservient is
Vbamen, and its Resolver, Torp -- Mu -- LagMyr, upon which depend the three
Subdatoquaeras of Vtopaet, Vdobaed, and Vthophaeth.

Thus much I believe is expressed in the very Table of my Trissotetras; and
though a large explication might be with reason expected in this place, of what
is but summarily mentioned there, yet because what concerns this matter, has
been already treated of in the last two Moods of Enerablo, and (...), the
whole discourse whereof may be as conveniently perused, as if it were couched
here, I will not dull the Reader with tedious rehearsals of one and the same
thing, but, letting pass the progress of this first work, with the manner of
which (by my former instructions, I suppose him sufficiently well acquainted)
will proceed to the Cathetouretick operation of this Mood, and perpend by what
Datas the perpendicular is to be found out.

To this effect, the Praenoscendas of Ennerable, to wit, the first Basal, the
first Basidion, and the first co-Base, being by the last work already obtained,
must concur with each its correspondent first subtendent, viz. the first
Subtendentall, the first Subtendentine, and the first co-Subtendent,
discernable in their several natures, by the figuratives of t d th. for the
perfecting of this second operation. The subservient of this work, is Uch^ner,
by whose Resolver Neg -- To -- NuNyr, the three subproblems Utaeta, Vtadca, and
Vthaethca, are made manifest: by virtue whereof it is perceivable, how the same
quaesitum is attained unto by the Datas of three several, both first
Subtendents, and first Bases.

The perpendicular being thus obtained, must assist some other term in the
third operation, for the finding out of the maine quaesitum; which quaesitum,
though it be different from the final one of the last Mood, yet is the
knowledge of them both attained unto, by means of the same Datas; the
perpendicular, and the three second Bases, being ingredients in both.

It being certain then, that the perpendicular must concur in the last work
of this Mood with the second Basidion, the second Basal, and second co-Base,
for obtaining the second Subtendentine, the second Subtendentall, and second
co-Subtendent; Enerul, is made use of for their subservient, by whose Resolver,
To -- Neg -- NeNur, we are raught how to deal with its subordinat Problems,
Catheudwd, Cathatwt, and Catheuthwth.

All the three works being thus specified apart, according to our accustomed
Method, we will declare what way the last two are to be joined into one; for
the better effectuating whereof, their Resolvers, Neg -- To -- Nu -- Nyr: and
To -- Neg -- NeNur, must be interpreted; the first being, As the sine
complement of a first Base to the Radius: so the sine complement of a first
subtendent, to the sine complement of the perpendicular. And the second. As the
Radius, to the sine complement of a second Base: so the sine complement of the
perpendicular to the sine complement of a second subtendent, which is the side
required.

Now, seeing a multiplier must be dashed against a divider, being both
quantified alike, and that all unnecessary pestring of a work with superfluous
ingredients is to be avoided; we are to deal with the Radius, and
perpendicular in this place, as formerly we have done in the Moods of Alamebna,
Allamebne, Ammanepreb, and Enerablo, where we did eject them forth of both the
orders of proportionalls; and when we have done the like here, instead of Neg
-- To -- NuNyr, and To -- Neg -- NeNur, we may with the same efficacy say, Neg
-- Nu -- NeNur, that is, As the sine complement of one side, is to the sine
complement of a subtendent: so the sine complement of another side, to the sine
complement of another subtendent; or more determinatly, As the sine complement
of a first Base, to the sine complement of a first subtendent: so the sine
complement of a second Base, to the sine complement of a second subtendent.

This theorem comprehends to the full both the last operations, and according
to the number of the Cases of this Mood, is particularized into three final
Resolvers, the first whereof for the first Case, Dacforamb, is Naet -- Nut --
NoedNwd*yr, that is, As the sine complement of the first Basal, or great Base
to the sine complement of the first Subtendentall, or great subtendent: so the
sine complement of the second Basidion, or little Base, to the sine complement
of the second subtendentine, or little subtendent, which is the side required.

The second final Resolver, is for Damforac, the second Case, and is set down
thus, Naed -- Nud -- NoetNwt*yr, that is, As the sine complement of the first
Basidion, to the sine complement of the first subtendentine: so the sine
complement of the second Basal, to the sine complement of the second
subtendentall, which is the side in this Case required.

The third, and last final Resolver is for Dakinatamb, and is expressed thus,
Naeth -- Nuth -- NoethNwth*yr, that is to say, As the sine complement of the
first co-base, to the sine complement of the first co-subtendent: so the sine
complement of the second co-base, to the sine complement of the second
co-subtendent, which in the third Case is always the side required.

The reason of all this is proved out of the fourth, and last disergetick
Axiom, Niubprodnesver, whose directer Ennerra, shows by its Determinater, the
syllable Enn, that the Datoquaere of Ennerable, is bound for the verity of its
proportion, in all the final Resolvers thereof, to the maxim of
Niubprodnesver, because off the direct analogy that, amongst its terms, is to
be seen betwixt the sines complements of the segments of the Base and the sines
complements of the sides of the vertical Angles; which in all this Treatise,
both for plainness, and brevity sake, I have thought fit to call by the names
of first and second Subtendents.

The fourth and last Loxogonosphericall Disergetick figure, and second of the
Lateralls, is Eherolabme, which is of all those obliquangularie problems,
wherein two sides being given, and an opposite Angle, the interjacent Angle, or
one of the other sides is demanded; and, conform to its two several
quaesitas, has two Moods, viz. Erelomab, and Errelome.

The first Mood hereof Erelomab comprehends all those Loxogonosphericall
Problems, wherein two sides with an opposite Angle being proposed, the Angle
between is demanded, which Angle is still one of the verticals, that is, the
first vertical, the second vertical, or the double vertical: to the notice of
all which, that we may the more easily attain, we must consider the general
Maxim of the Cathetothesis of this Mood, which is Cafriq the very same in name
with the general Cathetothetick Maxim of Amanepra, and thus far agreeing with
it, that the Perpendicular in both must fall from the Angle required, and upon
the side opposite to that Angle, increased if need be: but in this point
different, that in Amanepra, the Perpendiculars demission is from the Angle
required upon the opposite side, conterminat with the two proposed Angles, and
in Erelomab, it falls from the required Angle, upon the opposite side
conterminat with the two proposed sides: and, according to the variety of the
fourth proportional, which, in the Analogies to this Mood belonging, ushers in
the vertical required, there be those three especial Tenets of the general
Maxim of this Mood, viz. Dacracforaur, Damraeforeur, and Dacrambatin.

Dacracforaur, which is the Tenet of the first Case, shows, that if the given
and demanded Angles be acute, and the third an obtuse Angle, the Perpendicular
falls outwardly upon the third side, and the required Angle is a first
vertical.

Dambracforeur, the Tenet of the second Case, imports, that if the proposed
Angle be obtuse, and an acute Angle required, the third Angle being acute, the
Perpendicular must likewise in this Case fall outwardly upon the third side,
and the Angle demanded be a second vertical.

Dacrambatin, the Tenet of the third Case, signifies, that if the proposed
Angle be acute, and an obtuse Angle required, the Perpendicular falls
inwardly, and the demanded Angle is a double vertical.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that Sindifora is the Plus-minus of this
Mood, whereby we are given to understand, that the sum of the top Angles, if
the Perpendicular fall within, and their difference, if it fall without, is the
Angle required: and, seeing it varieth neither in name, nor interpretation from
the mensurator of Amanepra (the diversity betwixt them being only in this,
that the verticals there are invested with Sines, and here with Sine
complements) I must make bold to desire the Reader to look back to that place,
if he know not why it is that some Moods are Plus-minused, and not others; for
there he will find that Sindiforation is merely proper to those Cases, in the
Analogies whereof the fourth proportional is not the maine quaesitum it self,
but the illaticious term that brings it in.

The Praenoscendas of the Mood, or Quaesitas of the first operation, falling
next in order to be treated of, it is fitting we perpend of what nature they be
in this Mood of Erelomab, that if they be different from those of other Moods,
we may, according to our accustomed diligence, formerly observed in the like
occasions, appropriate, in this parcel of the comment to their explication,
for the Readers instruction, the greater share of discourse, the less that
before in any part of this Tractar, they have been mentioned: But if it be so
far otherwise, that for their coincidence with other proturgetick Quaesitas,
there can no material document concerning them be delivered here, which has
not been spoke of already in some one or other of our foregoing Datoquaeres,
it were but an unnecessary wasting of both time and paper to make repetition of
that, which in other places we have handled to the full; and therefore, seeing
the Praenoscendas of this Mood, to wit, the double top Angle or vertical, the
first top Anglet or verticalin, and the first Co-top-Angle, or co-verticall,
together with the Datas, whereby these are obtained, viz. for the side, the
first subtendentall, the first subtendentine, and the first co-subtendent, and
for the Angle, the prime Cathetopposite, the next Cathetopposite, and the first
Co-cathetopposite, and consequently the subservient Upalam, its Resolver To --
Tag -- NuMir, and their three peculiar Problemets, Vtopat, Udobaud, and
Uthophauth, are all and every one of them the same in this Mood of Erelomab,
that they were in the three preceding Moods of Alamebna, Allamebne, and
Amanepra (for these are the four Moods, which have an Angulary praenoscendall
identity) we will not need (I hope) to talk any more thereof in this place,
seeing what has been already said concerning that purpose, will undoubtedly
satisfy the desire of any industrious civil Reader.

The praenoscendas of the Mood, or the vertical Angle, according to the nature
of the Case, being by the foresaid Datas thus obtained, must needs concur
with each its correspondent first subtendent, determined by the figuratives of
t. d. th for finding out of the Perpendicular, of which work, Ubamen being the
subservient, by whose Resolver Nag -- Mu -- TorpMyr, the sub-problems of
Utatca, Vdaudca, and Vthauthca, are made known, if I utter any more of this
purpose, I must entrench upon what I spoke before in the second operation of
Allaemebne, it being the only Mood which, with this of Erelomab, has a
vertical, and subtendentine Catheteuretick identity.

The second operation being thus accomplished, the perpendicular, which is
always an ingredient in the third work, must join with one of the rere
subtendents for obtaining of the illatitious term of the maine quaesitum: or,
more particularly, by the concurrence of the Perpendicular with the second
subtendentine, the second subtendentall, and second Co-subtendent, according to
the variety of the Case, we are to find out three verticals, which, by
abstracting the first from another vertical, then by abstracting another
vertical from the second, and lastly by adding the third vertical to another,
afford the sum, and differences, which are the required verticals.

All this being fully set down in my comment upon the Resolutory partition of
Amanepra, in which Mood the maine quaesitum is the same as here (though
otherwise endowed) I need not any longer insist thereon.

For the performance of this work, Ukelamb is the subservient, by whose
Resolver Meg -- To -- MuNir, we are taught how to unfold the peculiar
problemets of Wdcathaud, Wicatha^, and Wthcatheuth.

All the three works being in this manner perfected, according to our
accustomed method, we will show unto you what way the last two are to be
compacted in one: for the better expediting whereof, their Resolvers Nag -- Mu
-- ToMyr, and Meg -- To -- MuNir, must be explained, the first being, As the
Sine complement of an Angle, to the Tangent complement of a subtendent: so the
Radius, to the Tangent complement of the side required: Or, more particularly,
As the Sine complement of a vertical, to the Tangent complement of a first
subtendent: so the Radius, to the Tangent complement of the Perpendicular: And
the second Resolver being, As the Tangent complement of a given side, to the
Radius: so the Tangent complement of a subtendent, to the Sine complement of a
required Angle: Or, more particularly, As the Tangent complement of the
Perpendicular, to the Radius: so the Tangent complement of a first subtendent,
to the Sine complement of a vertical, which ushers the quaesitum.

Now, seeing it falls forth, that the Perpendicular, which is the fourth
term in the first order of proportionals, becomes first in the second row;
and that in such an exigent (as I proved already for illustration of the same
point in the Mood of Amanepra) the multiplyers and dividers of the first row
must interchange their rooms, and consequently make the Radius ejectable,
without any prejudice or hindrance to the progress of the Analogy; and a place
being left for the Perpendicular in both the rows, without taking the pains
to find our its value, because it is but a subordinate quaesitum for obtaining
of the maine, and lies hid in the power of the three first proportionals,
instead of Nag -- Mu -- ToMyr, and Meg -- To -- MuNir, we may, with as much
truth and energy, say, Mu -- Nag -- MuNir, that is, As the Tangent complement
of a subtendent, to the Sine complement of an Angle: so the Tangent complement
of another subtendent, to the Sine complement of another Angle: Or, more
particularly, As the Tangent complement of a first subtendent, to the Sine
complement of a vertical: so the Tangent complement of a second subtendent, to
the Sine complement of a vertical illative to the quesitum.

This proposition to the full contains all that is in both the last
operations, and, according to the number of the Cases of this Mood, is
specialized into so many final Resolvers; the first whereof, for the first
Case Dacracforaur, is Mutnat -- MwdNeud-fr*At*Aut*ir, that is, As the Tangent
complement of the first subtendentall, to the sine complement of the double
vertical: so the tangent complement of the second Subtendentine, to the sine
complement of the second verticalin, which subtracted from the double
vertical, leaves the first vertical for the Angle required.

The second final Resolver, is for Damracforeur, the second Case, and is
expressed thus, Mud -- Naud -- MwtNatfr*Aud*Eut*ir, that is, As the tangent
complement of the first Subtendentine, to the sine complement of the first
verticalin: so the tangent complement of the second Subtendentall, to the sine
complement of the double vertical; from which if you deduce the first
verticalin, there will remain the second vertical for the Angle required.

The last final Resolver is for the third Case, Dacrambatin, and is couched
thus, Muth -- Nauth -- MwthNeuth*jauth*ir, that is, As the tangent complement
of the first co-subtendent, to the sine complement of the first co-verticall:
so the Tangent complement of the second co-subtendent, to the sine complement
of the second co-verticall, which, joined to the first co-verticall, affords
the Angle required.

The proof of the verity of all these Analogies, is taken out of the second
Disergetick Amblygonosphericall Axiom, Naverprortes, the second Determinater
of whose Directorie shows, that this Mood is one of its dependents; and with
reason, because of the reciprocal Analogy, that amongst its terms is
perceivable betwixt the Tangents of the vertical sides, which in this Mood are
always first subtendents, and the sine-complements of the vertical Angles;
that is tosay (according to the literal meaning of my final Resolvers of this
Mood) the direct proportion that is betwixt the tangent-complements of the
vertical sides, or rere subtendents, and the sine-complements of the vertical
Angles, for the proportion is the same with that, whereof I have told you
somewhat already in the Mood of Allamebme, the fellow dependent of Erelomab.

The second Mood of Eherolabme, fourth of the Laterals, eighth of the
Sphericobliquangularie Disergeticks, twelfth of the Loxogonosphericalls, eight
and twentieth of the Sphericals, and one and fourtieth or last of the
Triangulars, is Errelome, which comprehends all those obliquangularie
Problems, wherein two sides being given with an opposite Angle, the third side
is required, which side is always either one of the segments of the Base, or
the Base it self: to the knowledge of all which, that we may reach with ease,
we must perpend the general Maxim of the Cathetothesis of this Mood, which is
Cacurgyq that is to say, the Perpendiculars demission, in all the Cases of
Errelome, must be from the concurse of the given sides, upon the side required,
continued, if need be.

The Plus-minus of this Mood is Sindiforiu, which imports, that if the
Perpendicular fall internally, the sum of the segments of the Base, or the
total Base, is the side demanded: and if it fall without, the difference of
the Bases (the little Base, being always but a segment of the greater) is the
maine quaesitum.

The Mood of Ammanepreb is sindiforated in the same manner as this is; because
the maine Quaesitas, and fourth proportionals of both do in nothing differ,
but that those are sinused, and these run upon sine-complements.

The prosiliencie of the Perpendicular in all sphericall Disergeticks, being so
necessary to be known (as I have often told you) because of the facility
thereby to reduce them to Rectangulary operations, it falls out most
conveniently here, according to the method proposed to my self, to speak
somewhat of the three several Tenets of the Cathetothesis of this Mood, and
what is understood by Dakyxamfor, Dambyxamfor, and Dakypambin.

Dakyxamfor, which is the Tenet of the first Case, declares, that if the
proposed Angle be acute, and the side required conterminate with an obtuse
Angle, the demission of the Perpendicular is extrinsecall.

Dambyxamfor, the Tenet of the second Case, imports, that if the given Angle
be obtuse, and that the side required be annexed thereto, the Perpendicular
must, as in the last, fall outwardly.

Thirdly, Dakypambin, the Tenet of the last Case, signifies, that if the angle
proposed be sharp, and that the demanded side be subjacent to an obtuse or
blunt Angle, the Perpendicular falls inwardly.

Having thus proceeded in the enumeration of the Cathetothetick Tenets of this
Mood, according to the manner by me observed in those of all the former
Disergeticks, save the first, I am confident the Reader (if he has perused all
the Tractat until this place) will not think strange why, Dakypambin being but
the third, I should call it the Tenet of the last Case of this Mood; for though
in Alamebna I spoke somewhat of every Amblygonosphericall Disergetick Moods
general Cathetothetick maxims division into four especial Tenets,
appropriable to so many several Cases: yet the fourth Case, viz. that wherein
all the Angles are homogeneall, whether blunt or sharp, not being limited to
any one Mood, but adaequatly extended to all the eight, it seemed to me more
expedient to let its generality be known by mentioning it once or twice, then
(by doing no more in effect) to make superfluous repetitions; and, as in the
first Disergetick Case, for the Readers instruction, I did under the name of
Simomatin, explicate the nature thereof: so, for his better remembrance, have I
choosed rather to shut up my Cathetothetick comment with the same discourse
wherewith I did begin it, then unnecessarily to weary him with frequent
reiterations, and a tedious rehearsal of one and the same thing in all the six
several intermediat Moods.

It is not amiss now, that the perpendicularity of this Mood is discussed, to
consider what the praenoscendas thereof are, or the Quaesitas of the first
operation: but, as I said in the last Mood, that there is no need to insist so
long upon the explication of those praenoscendas, whereof ample relation has
been already made in some of my Proturgetick comments, as upon those others,
which, for being altogether different from such as have been formerly
mentioned, claim (by the law of parity, in their imparity) right to a large
discourse apart, I will confine my pen upon this subject, within those
prescribed bounds, and seeing the first Basal, the first Basidion, and first
Co-base, together with the Datas, whereby they are found out, viz. for the
side, the first subtendentall, the first subtendentine, and the first co
subtendent; and for the Angle the prime Cathetopposite, the next
Cathetopposite, and the first Co-cathetopposite (the Datas being both for side
and Angle the same here, that they were in the former Mood) then the
Subservient Ubamen, and its Resolver Torp -- Mu -- Lag Myr, with the three
peculiar Problemets thereto belonging, Utopat, Vdobaed, and Vthophaeth, are all
and every one of them the same in this Mood of Errelome, that they were in the
three foregoing Moods of Ammanepreb, Enerablo, and Ennerable, these being the
only four Moods which have a laterall praenoscendal identity, the Reader will
not (in my opinion) be so prodigal of his own labor, nor covetous of mine,
that either he would put himself, or me to any further pains, then have been
already bestowed upon this matter by my self for his instruction; and
therefore, leaving it for a supposed certainty, that the Praenoscendas, or
first Bases (according to the nature of the Case) cannot escape the Readers
knowledge, by what has been by me delivered of them; I purpose here to give
him notice, that these foresaid first Bases must concur with each its
correspondent first Subtendent, to wit, the first subtendentall, the first
subtendentine, and first co-subtendent, dignoscible by the Characteristicks of
t. d. th for obtaining of the Perpendicular, of which operation, Vchener being
the Subservient, by whose Resolver Neg -- To -- Nu Nyr, the Problemets of
Utaetca, Udaedca, and Uthaethca, are made manifest, as to the same effect it
remains couched in my comment upon Ennerable, which is the only Mood, that,
with this of Errelome, has a subtendentine and Basal Catheteuretick identity.

The second work being thus perfected, the perpendicular, thereby found out, is
to assist one of the rere subtendents, in obtaining the illatitious term of
the maine quasitum, correspondent thereto, discernable by the Characteristicks
or Figuratives of d. t. th or, more plainly to express it, the Perpendicular
must concur (according as the Case requires it) with the second
subtendentine, the second subtendentall, and second co-subtendent, (as you may
see in the last Mood, the Datas of the Resolutory partition whereof are the
same as here) to find out three Bases, which, by abstracting the first from
another Base, then by abstracting another Base from the second; and lastly, by
adding the third Base to another, afford the sum and differences, which are
the required Bases.

For the performance of this operation, the same Subservient and Resolver
suffice, which served for the last: so that Uchener subserveth it, by whose
Resolver Neg -- To -- Nu Nyr, we are instructed how to explicate the
Subdatoquaeres of Wdcathoed, Wtcathoet, and Wthcathoeth, or more orderly
Cathwdoed, Cathwtoet, and Cathwthoeth.

All the three works being thus accomplished, the manner of conflating the last
two in one rests to be treated of; for the better perfecting of which design,
the two Resolvers, or the same in its greatest generality doubled, viz. Neg --
To -- Nu Nyr, and Neg -- To -- Nu Nyr, must be interpreted: The truth is, both
of them, as they sound in their vastest extent of signification, express the
same Analogy, without any difference, which is, As the Sine complement of a
given side, to the Radius: so the Sine complement of a subtendent, to the Sine
complement of another side: but when more contractedly, according to the
specification of the side, they do suppone severally, they should be thus
expounded; the first, As the Sine complement of a first Base, to the total
Sine: so the Sine complement of a first subtendent to the Sine complement of
the Perpendicular: and the second, As the Sine complement of the Perpendicular,
to the total Sine: so the Sine complement of a second subtendent, to the Sine
complement of a second Base, which ushers the main quaesitum.

Now, the Perpendicular, and Radius, being both to be expelled these two
foresaid orders of proportional terms, for the reasons which, in the last
preceding Mood, and some others before it, I have already mentioned, and which
to repeat (further then that the sympathy of this place with that may be
manifested in the tranf-seating of multiplyers and dividers, occasioned by the
fourth term in the first rows, being first in the second) is altogether
unnecessary: in lieu of Neg -- To -- Nu Nyr, and Neg -- To -- Nu Nyr, we may
say, with as much truth, power, and efficacy, and far more compendiously, Nu
-- Ne -- Nu Nyr, that is, As the Sine complement of a subtendent, to the Sine
complement of a side: so the sine complement of another Subtendent, to the Sine
complement of another side: Or, more particularly, and appliably to the present
Analogy, As the Sine complement of a first subtendent, to the Sine complement
of a first Base: so the Sine complement of a second subtendent, to the Sine
complement of a second Base, illative to the quaesitum.

This theorem, or proposition, comprehends in every point all that is in the
two last operations, and, not transcending the number of the Cases of this
Mood, is divided into so many final Resolvers; the first whereof for the first
Case, Dakyxamfor is, Nut -- Naet -- NwdNoedfr*Aet* Dyr, that is, As the Sine
complement of the first subtendent all, to the Sine complement of the first
Basall* so the Sine complement of the second subtendentine, to the Sine
complement of the second Base; which subducted from the first Basal, residuats
the segment that is the side required.

The second final Resolver of this Mood, and that which is for the second Case
thereof, Dambyxamfor, is Nud -- Naed -- NwtNoetfr*Aed* Dyr, that is, As the
Sine complement of the first subtendentine, to the Sine complement of the first
Basidion: so the Sine complement of the second subtendentall, to the Sine
complement of the second Basall; which, the first Basidion being subtracted
from it, leaves, for Remainder, or difference, that segment of the Base, which
is the side demanded.

The last final Resolver of this Mood (belonging to the third Case,
Dakypambin, as also to the fourth, Simomatin, (if what we have already spoke of
that matter will permit us to call it the fourth) for Simomatin, together with
the third Case of every Mood, is still resolved by the last final Resolver
thereof) is Nuth -- Naeth -- NwthNoethj*Aeth* Sir, that is, As the Sine
complement of the first co-subtendent, to the Sine complement of the first
Co-base: so the Sine complement, of the second Co-subtendent, or alterne
subtendent, to the Sine complement of the second Co-base or alterne Base; which
added to the first Co-base, sums an Aggregat of subjacent sides, which is the
total Base, or side required.

The fundamental ground of the truth of these Analogies, is in the fourth and
last Amblygonosphericall Axiom, Niubprodnesver; (as we are made to understand
by the second determinater of its Directory Ennerra) for by the direct
proportion that, amongst the terms thereof, is visible, (viz. betwixt the Sines
complements of the subtendents, or Sides of the vertical Angles, and the
segments of the Bases, and inversedly) it is apparent, that this Mood does no
less firmly depend upon it, then that of Ennerable formerly explained.

Now, with reason do I conjecture, that, without disappointing the Reader of
his expectation, I may here securely make an end of this Trigonometricall
Treatise; because of that Trissotetrall Table, which comprehends all the
Mysteries, Axioms, Principles, Analogies, and Precepts of the Science of
Triangular Calculations, I have omitted no material point unexplained: yet
seeing, for avoiding of prolixity, I was pleased in my comment upon the eighth
Loxogonospherical Disergeticks, barely to express in their final Resolvers,
the Analogy of the terms, without putting my self to the pains I took in my
Sphericorectangulars, how to order the Logarithms,, and Antilogarithms of the
proportionalls,, for obtaining of the maine Quaesitas, and that by having to
the full explicated the variety of the proportions of the foresaid Moods, and
upon what several Axioms they do depend, thereby making the way more
pervious, thorough Logarithmicall difficulties, for the Readers understanding,
I deliberatly proposed to my self this method at first, and chose, rather then
dispersedly to treat of those things in the gloss (where, by reason of the
disturbed order, the correspondencie or reference to one another of these
Sphericobliquangulary Datoquaeres, could not by any means have been so
conceivable) to summon their appearance to the Catastrophe of this Tractat,
that, having them all in a front before us, we may the more easily judge of the
semblance, or dissimilitude of their proportionalities,, and what affinity, or
relation, whether of parity or imparity is amongst their respective
proportional terms: all which, both for intelligibility and memory, are
quicklier apprehended, and longer retained, by being accumulatively reserved to
this place, then if they had been each in its proper cell (though never so
amply) discoursed upon apart.

Here therefore, that the Reader may take a general view at once of all the
Disergetick Amblygonosphericall analogised ingredients, ready for
Logarithmication, I have thought fit to set down a List of all the eight
forenamed Moods, together with the Final Resolvers, in their amplest extent
thereto belonging, in the manner as follows.

Alamebna. Say-Nag-Sa Nir Allamebne. Nag-Mu-Na Mur Amanepra. Na-Say-Nag Sir
Ammanepreb. Ta-Tag-Se Sir. Enerablo. Sei-Tag-SegTir Ennerable. Neg-Nu-NeNur
Erelomab. Mu-Nag-MuNir Errelome. Nu-Ne-Nu Nyr.

These being the eight Disergeticks, attended by their Adaequat final
Resolvers, it is not amiss, that we examine them all one after another, and
show the Reader how, with the help of a convenient Logarithmicall Canon, he may
easily out of the Analogy of the three first terms of each of them, frame a
computation apt for the finding out of a fourth proportional, to every
several ternarie correspondent: and so in order, beginning at the first, we
will deal with Say -- Nag -- SaNir (which is the Adaequat final Resolver of
Alamebna, and composed (as it is appropriated to the first Mood of the
Disergeticks) of the Sines of verticals, and the Anti-sines of Cathetopposites)
and so proceed therein, that by adding to the sum of the Sine of a vertical,
and Cosine of a Cathetopposite, the Arithmetical complement of the Sine of
another vertical, we will be sure (cutting off the supernumerary digit or
digits toward the left) to obtain the Cosine of the Cathetopposite required,
which Cathetopposites and verticals are particularised according to the Cases
of the Mood.

The second is, Nag -- Mu -- NaMur, which, running upon the Anti-sines of
verticals, and the Co-tangents of subtendent sides, shows, that if to the
Aggregat of a first hypotenusall Cotangent, and vertical Anti-sine, we join
the Arithmeticall complement of the Anti-sine of another vertical, (observing
the usual presection) we cannot miss of the Co-tangent of the second
subtendent side required, which both second, and first subtendents have their
peculiar denominations, according to the Cases of the Mood.

The third Resolver is, Na -- Say -- NagSir, which, being nothing else but the
first inverted, runs the same very way upon the Anti-sines of
Cathetopposites, and sines of verticals: and therefore does the unradiused
sum of the Anti-sine of a Cathetopposite, the sine of a vertical, and the
Arithmeticall complement of the Anti-sine of another Cathetopposite, afford the
sine of the vertical, illatitious to the Angle required; which verticals and
Cathetopposites are particularised according to the variety of the Cases of
this Sindiforating Mood.

The fourth general Resolver is Ta -- Tag -- SeSyr, which, coursing on the
Tangents of all the Cathetopposites, and sines of all the Bases, evidenceth,
that the sum of the Tangent of a Cathetopposite, and sine of a first Base,
added to the Arithmeticall complement of the Tangent of another Cathetopposite
(unradiated) is the sine of the second Base, illative to the segment required;
which Bases (both first and second) and Cathetopposites, are specialised
conform to the Cases of this Sindiforiuting Mood.

The fifth Resolver is, Sei -- Tag -- SeTir, which, composed of the sines of
the second and first Bases, and the Tangents of Cathetopposites, gives us to
know, that if to the sum of the sine of a first Base, and the Tangent of a
vertical, we add the Arithmeticall complement of the sine of a second Base,
(not omitting the usual presection) we cannot fail of the Tangent of the
Cathetopposite required, which Cathetopposites, and Bases, both first and
second, are particularised according to the Cases of the Mood.

The sixth general Resolver is, Neg -- Nu -- NeNur, which, running along the
Co-sines of all the Bases and Subtendents, shows, that by the sum of the
Co-sines of a second Base, and first subtendent joined with the Arithmeticall
complement of the Cosine of a first Base (if we observe the customary
presection) we find the second Subtendent required, which both first and second
Subtendents, together with the first and second Bases, are all of them
particularised conform to the Cases of the Mood.

The seventh Resolver is, Mu -- Nag -- MuNir, which, coursing along the
Anti-tangents of first, and second Subtendents, and the Anti-sines of
verticals, shows, that the sum of the Anti-tangent of a second Subtendent,
and Anti-sine of a vertical, together with the Arithmeticall complement of the
Antitangent of a first Subtendent (the usual presection being observed) is the
Anti-tangent of that vertical, which ushers in the vertical required; all
which, both Verticals, and Subtendents, both first, and second, have their
peculiar denominations conform to the Cases of this Sindiforating Mood.

The eighth and last general Resolver is, Nu -- Ne -- NuNyr, which (running
altogether upon Co-sines of Subtendents, and Bases, both first, and second of
either, and is nothing else but the sixth inverted) shows, that the sum of
the Cosines of a second subtendent, and first Base, with the Arithmeticall
complement of the cosine of a first Subtendent, (observing the usual
presection) affords the Cosine of the second Base, illatitious to the segment
required; which Bases and Subtendents, both first, and second, are peculiarly
denominated according to the several Cases of this Sindiforiuting Mood.

Thus have I finished the Logarithmication of the general Resolvers of the
Loxogonosphericall Disergeticks, so far as is requisite, wherein I often
times mentioned the Arithmeticall complement of Sines, Co-sines, Tangents, and
Co-tangents: and though I spoke of that purpose sufficiently in my
Sphericorectangular comments, yet, for the Readers better remembrance thereof,
I will once more define them here.

The Arithmeticall complements of Sines are Co-secants; of Co-sines, Secants;
of Tangents, Co-tangents; and of Co-tangents, Tangents; each being the others
complement to the double Radius: but if such a Canon were framed, wherein the
single Radius is left out of all Secants, and Tangents of major Arches, then
would each be the others complement to the single Radius, and all
Logarithmicall operations in questions of Trigonometry so easily performable by
addition only, that seldom would the presectionall digit exceed an unit.

Having already said so much of these eight Disergeticks, I will conclude my
discourse of them with a summary delineation of the eight several Concordances
which I observed amongst them; for either they resemble one another in the
Datas of their Moods, or in their Proturgetick operations, or in their
dependence upon the same Axiom, or in the work of perpendicular finding, or in
their Datas for the main demand, or in their material Quaesitas (though
diversely endowed) or in their inversion, or lastly in their sindiforation,
which affinity is only betwixt two paires of them, as the first two amongst
two quaternaries apeece, and the next five between four couples each one, the
brief hypotyposis of all which is here exposed to the view of the Reader.

CONCORDANCES.
Datall. Datangulary. Datolaterall. 1. Alamebna. 3. Amanepra. 1. Enerablo. 3.
Erelomab. 2. Allamebne. 4. Ammanepreb. 2. Ennerable. 4. Errelome.
Praenoscendall. Vertical. Basall. 1. Alamebna. 3. Amanepra. 1. Ammanepreb. 3.
Ennerable. 2. Allamebne. 4. Erelomab. 2. Enerablo. 4. Errelome. Theorematick.
Nabadprosver Naverprortes. Siubprortab Niubprodnesver. 1. Alamebna. 1.
Allamebne. 1. Ammanepreb. 1. Ennerable. 2. Amanepra. 2. Erelomab. 2. Enerablo.
2. Errelome. Catheteuretick. Oppoverticall Hypoverticall. Oppobasall
Hypobasall. 1. Alamebna. 1. Allamebne. 1. Ammanepreb. 1. Ennerable. 2.
Amanepra. 2. Erelomab. 2. Enerablo. 2. Errelome. Datysterurgetick.
Cathetoverticall Oppocathetall. Cathetobasall Hypocathetal. 1. Alamebna. 1.
Amanepra. 1. Enerablo. 1. Erelomab 2. Allamebne. 2. Ammanepreb. 2. Ennerable.
2. Errelome. Zetetick. Cathetopposite Hypotenusall. Vertical Basall. 1.
Alamebna* S. 1. Allamebne* M. 1. Amanepra* S. 1. ammanepreb.* S 2. Enerablo* T.
2. Ennerable* N. 2. Erelomab* N. 2. Errelome* N. Inversionall. Sinocosinall
Sinocotangentall. Tangentosinall Cosinocosinall. 1. Alamebna. 1. Allamebne. 1.
Ammanepreb. 1. Ennerable. 2. Amanepra. 2. Erelomab. 2. Enerablo. 2. Errelome.
Sindiforall. Sindiforatall. Sindiforiutall. 1. Amanepra. 2. Erelomab. 1.
Ammanepreb. 2. Errelome.

THE EPILOGUE.
WHat concerns the resolving of all manner of Triangles, whether plain, or
Sphericall, Rectangular, or Obliquangular, being now (conform to my promise in
the Title) to the full explained, commented on, perfected, and with all possible
brevity, and perspicuity, in all its abstrusest and most difficult Secrets,
from the very first principles of the Science it self, made manifest, proved,
and convincingly demonstrated; I will here shut up my discourse, and bring this
Tractat to a period: which I may do with the more alacrity, in that I am
confident, there is no Precept belonging to that faculty which is not herein
included, or reducible thereto: and therefore (I believe) the judicious Reader
will not be frustrate of his expectation, though by cutting the thread of my
Gloss, I do not illustrate what I have written with variety of examples;
seeing practically to treat of Triangulary calculations, in applying their
doctrine to use, were to digress from the purpose in hand, and incroach upon
the subject of other Sciences; a privilege, which I must decline, as repugnant
to the scope proposed to my self, in keeping this book within the speculative
bounds of Trigonometry: for, as Logica utens, is the Science to the which it is
applied, and not Logic: So does not the matter of Trigonometry, exceed the
Theory of a Triangle: And as Arithmeticall, Geometrical, Astronomicall,
Physical, and Metaphysicall definitions, divisions, and argumentations, are no
part of the Art that instructs how to define, divide, and argue, nor matter
incumbent to him that teaches it: even so, by divulging this Treatise, do I
present the Reader with a Key, by means whereof he may enter into the chiefest
treasures of the Mathematical Sciences; for the which, in some measure, I
deserve thanks, although I help him not to unshut the Coffers wherein they lie
enclosed: for, if the Lord chamberlain of the Kings household should give me a
Key, made to open all the doors of the Court, I could not but graciously
accept of it, though he did not go along with me to try how it might fit every
lock. The application is so palpable, that, not minding to insist therein, I
will here stop the current of my Pen, and by a circulary conclusion, ending
where I begun, certify the Reader, that if he intend to approve himself an
Artist in matters of Pleusiotechnie, Poliechyrologie, Cosmography, Geography,
Astronomy, Geodesie, Gnomonicks, Sciography, Catoptricks, Dioptricks, and many
other most exquisite Arts and Sciences, Practical and Theoretick, his surest
course, for attaining to so much knowledge, is to be well versed in
Trigonometry, to understand this Treatife aright, revolve all the passages
thereof, ruminate on the Table, and peruse the Trissotetras.

A Lexicidion of some of the hardest words, that occur in the discourse of
this institution Trigonometricall.
BEing certainly persuaded, that a great many good spirits ply Trigonometry,
that are not versed in the learned Tongues, I thought fit, for their
encouragement, to subjoyne here the explication of the most important of those
Greek, and Latin terms, which, for the more efficacy of expression, I have
made use of in this Treatise: in doing whereof, that I might both instruct the
Reader, and not weary him, I have endeavored perspicuity with shortness:
though (I speak it ingenuously) to have been more prolixe therein, could have
cost but very little labor to me, who have already bin pretty well versed in
the like, as may appear by my Etymologicall dictionary of above twenty seven
thousand proper names, mentioned in the Lemmas of my several Volums of
Epigrams, the words whereof are for the most part abstruser, derived from more
Languages, and more liable to large, and ample interpretations. However
(caeteris paribus) brevity is to be preferred; therefore let us proceed to the
Vocabulary in hand.

THE LEXICIDION.
A.
ACute, comes from Acuo, acuere, to sharpen, and is said of an Angle, whose
including sides, the more that its measure is less then a Quadrant, have their
concursive, and angulary point the more penetrative, sharp, keen and pierceing:
Whence an acutangled triangle. Adaequat, is that, which comprehends to the
full, whatever is in the thing to the which it is compared, and for the most
part in my Trissotetras is said of the general final Resolvers, in relation
to the Moods resolved by them. It is compounded of Ad, and aequo, aequare,
parem facere, to make one thing altogether like, or equal to another.
Adjacent, signifies to lie near, and close, and is applied both to sides, and
Angles, in which sense likewise I make use of the words adjoining the,
conterminat, or conterminall with, annexed to, intercepted in, and other such
like, for the more variety, as adherent, bounding, bordering, and so forth: It
comes from Adjaceo, Adjacere, to lie near unto, as the words Ad and jaceo,
which are the parts whereof it is compounded, most perspicuously declare.
Additionall, is said of the Line, which, in my comment, is indifferently called
the Line of Addition, the Line of continuation, the extrinsecall Line, the
excess of the Secant above the Radius, the Refiduum, or the new Secant: it
comes from Addo, Addere, which is compounded of Ad, and do, to put to and
augment. Affection, is the nature, passion, and quality of an Angle, and
consists either in the obtusity, acuteness, or rectitude thereof: It is a
verbal from Afficio, affeci, affectum, compounded of ad, and facio. Aggregat,
is the sum, total, or result of an Addition, and is compounded of Ad, and
grex; for, as the Shepherd gathers his Sheep into a flock, so does the
Arithmetician compact his numbers to be added into a sum. Alternat, is said
of Angles, made by a Line cutting two or more parallels, which Angles may be
properly called so; because they differ in nothing else but their situation;
for if the sectionary Line, to the which I suppose the parallels to be fixed,
have the highest and lowest points thereof to interchange their sites, by a
motion progressive toward the room of the under Alternat, and terminating in
that of the upper one, we will find, that both the inclination of the Lines
toward one another, and the quality of the Angles, will, notwithstanding that
alteration, be the same as before; hence it is that they are called alternat,
because there is no other difference betwixt them: or, if alternat be taken (as
arithmetically it is) for that proportion, wherein the Antecedent is compared
to the Antecedent, and the Consequent to the Consequent, the sense will
likewise hold in the foresaid Angles; for if by the parallelisme of two right
Lines, cut with a third, two blunt, and two keen Angles be produced (as must
needs, unless the Secant line be to the parallels a perpendicular) the keen or
acute Angle will be to its complement, or successively following obtuse Angle,
as the other acute unto its following obtuse; therefore alternly, as the
Antecedents are to one another, viz. the Acute to the Acute: so the
Consequents, the obtuse to the obtuse. And if the Angles be right, the direct,
and alternat proportion is one and the same; the third, and fourth terms of the
Analogy being in nothing different from the first, and second. Ambient, is
taken for any of the legs of a rectangle, or the including, containing, or
comprehending sides of the right Angle: it comes from Ambio, Ambire, which is
compounded of Am and eo, i. e. circumeo: and more properly applied to both,
then to any one of them, though usually it be usurped for one alone, vide Leg.
Amblygonian, is said of obtuse angled Triangles, and Amblygonosphericall of
obtuse sphericals: It is composed of (...), and (...) angulus. Amfractuosities,
are taken here for the cranklings, windings, turnings, and involutions
belonging to the equisoleary Scheme; of am and frango, quod sit quasi via
crebris maeandris undequaque interrupta. Analogy, signifies an equality of
proportion, a likeness of reasons, a conveniencie, or habitude betwixt terms:
It is compounded of (...), aequaliter, and (...), ratio. Analytick, resolutory,
and is said of those things that are resolved into their first principles, of
(...), re, and (...), solvo. Antilogarithm, is the Logarithm of the complement;
as for example, the Anti-logarithm of a Sine is the Logarithm of the Sine
complement, vide Logarithm. Anti-secant, Anti-sine, and Anti-tangent, are the
complements of the Secant, Sine, and Tangent, and are called sometime
Co-secant, Cosine, and Co-tangent: they have anti prefixed, because they are
not in the same colume, and co, because they are in the next to it. Apodictick,
is that, which is demonstrative, and gives evident proofs of the truth of a
conclusion; of (...), and (...), monstro, ostendo, unde (...), demonstratio.
Area, is the capacity of a Figure, and whole content thereof. Arch, or Ark, is
the segment of a circumference less then a semicircle: major Arch is above 45.
degrees, a minor Arch, less then 45. vide Circle. Arithmeticall complement, is
the difference between the Logarithm to be subtracted, and that of the
double, or single Radius. Artificial numbers, are the Logarithms, and
artificial Sine the Logarithm of the Sine. Axiom, is a maxim, tenet, or
necessary principle, whereupon the Science of a thing is grounded: it comes
from (...), dignus; because such things are worthy our knowledge.
B.
BAsall, adjectively is that, which belongs to the Base, or the subjacent
side, but substantively the great Base. Basangulary, is said of the Angles at
the Base. Basidion, or baset, is the little Base, all which come from the Greek
word (...). Basiradius, is the total Sine of that Arch, a Segment whereof is
the Base of the proposed sphericall Triangle. Bisected, and Bisegment, are said
of lines cut into two equal parts: it comes from biseco, bisecare, bisectum,
bisegmen. Bluntness, or flatnesse, is the obtuse affection of Angles.
Bucarnon, by this name is entitled the seven and fortieth proposition of the
first of the elements of Euclid; because of the ox, or, (as some say) the
hecatomb which Pythagoras, for gladness of the invention, sacrificed unto the
gods: of (...), bos, and (...), vicissim aliquid capio; they being (as it is
supposed) well pleased with that acknowledgement of his thankfulness for so
great a favor, as that was, which he received from them: you may see the
proposition in the seventeenth of my Apodicticks.
C.
CAnon, is taken here for the Table of Sines and Tangents, or of their
Logarithms: it properly signifies the needle or tongue of a balance, and
metaphorically a rule, whereby things are examined. Cases, are the parts
wherein a Mood is divided from cado. Cathetos, is a Perpendicular line, from
(...), demitto, of (...), and (...). Catheteuretick, is concerning the finding
out of the Perpendicular of (...), and (...), invenio. Cathetobasall, is said
of the Concordances of Loxogonosphericall Moods, in the Datas of the
Perpendicular, and the Base, for finding out of the maine quaesitum.
Cathetopposite, is the Angle opposite to the Perpendicular; it is a hybrid or
mungrell word, composed of the Greek (...), and Latin oppositus. Cathetorabdos,
or Cathetoradius, is the total Sine of that Arch, a Segment whereof is the
Cathetos, or Perpendicular of the proposed Orthogonosphericall. Cathetothesis,
and cathetothetick are said of the determinat position of the Perpendicular,
which is sometimes expressed by cathetology, instructing us how it should be
demitted: of (...), and (...), from (...), pono, colloco. Cathetoverticall, is
said of the Concordances of Loxogonosphericall Moods in the Datas of the
perpendicular, and the vertical Angle in the last operation. Catoptrick, the
Science of perspective, from (...), perspicio, cerno. Characteristick, is said
of the letters, which are the notes and marks of distinction, called sometimes
figuratives, or determinaters, from (...), sculpo, imprimo. Circles, great
circles are those which bisect the Sphere, lesser Circles those which not.
Circular parts, are in opposition to the real and natural parts of a
Triangle. Circumjacent, things which lie about, of circum and jaceo.
Coalescencie, a growing together, a compacting of two things in one; it is said
of the last two operations of the Loxogonosphericals conflated into one, from
coalesco or coalco, of con and alo. Cobase, a fellow Base, or that which with
another Base has a common Perpendicular, of con and basis. Cocathetopposite,
is said of two, Angles at the Base, opposite to one and the same Cathetos.
Coincidence, a falling together upon the same thing, from coincido, of con, and
incido, ex in, and cado. Comment, is an interpretation, or exposition of a
thing, and comes from comminiscor, comminisci, mentionem facere. Compacted,
joined, and knit together, put in one; from compingo, compegi, compactum, vide
Coalescencie. Complement, signifies the perfecting that which a thing wants,
and usually is that, which an Angle or a Side wants of a Quadrant, or 90.
degrees: and of a Semicircle, or 180. from compleo, complere, to fill up.
Concurse, is the meeting of lines, or of the sides of a Triangle, from
concurro, concursum. Conflated, compacted, joined together, from conflo,
conflatum, conflare, to blow together, vide Inchased. Consectary, is taken here
for a Corollary, or rather a secondary Axiom, which depends on a prime one,
and being deduced from it, does necessarily follow. From consector,
consectaris, the frequentative of consequor. Consound, to sound with another
thing; it is said of consonants, which have no vocality without the help of the
vowell. Constitutive, is said of those things, which help to frame, make, and
build up: From constituo, of con and statuo. Constitutive sides, the ingredient
sides of a Triangle. Constructive parts, are those, whereof a thing is built,
and framed: From construo, constructum, to heap together, and build up, of con
and strues. Conterminall, is that which bordereth with, and joyneth to a thing,
of con and terminus, vide Adjacent, or Insident. Cords, and cordall, are said
of subtenses metaphorically; because the Arches and subtenses are as the bow
and string: chorda, comes of the Greek word (...), intestinum, ilia, quia ex
illis chordae conficiuntur. Correctangle, that is one which, with another
rectangle, has a common Perpendicular. Correspondent, that which answers
with, and has a reference to another thing, of con and respondeo.
Cosinocosinall, is said of the Concordances of Loxogonosphericall Moods,
agreeing, in that the terms of their final Resolvers run upon Cosines.
Cosmography, is taken here for the Science whereby is described the celestial
Globe, of (...), and (...). Cosubtendent, is the subtendent of a correctangle,
or that which with another is substerned to two right Angles, made by the
demission of one and the same Perpendicular. Coverticall, is the fellow top
Angle, from whence the Perpendicular falls.
D.
DAta, is said of the parts of a Triangle, which are given us, whether they be
sides or Angles, or both, of do, datum, dare. Datimista, are those Datas, which
are neither Angles only, nor sides only, but Angles, and sides intermixedly:
of data, and mista, from misceo. Datangulary, is said of the Concordances of
those Moods, for the obtaining of whose Praenoscendas, we have no other Datas,
but Angles, unto the foresaid Moods common. Datapurall, comes from datapura,
which be those Datas, that are either merely Angles, or merely sides.
Datolaterall, is said of the Concordances of those Moods, for the obtaining of
whose Praenoscendas, the same sides serve for Datas. Datoquaere, is the very
Problem it self, wherein two or three things are given, and a third or fourth
required, as by the composition of the word appears. Datisterurgetick, is said
of those Moods which agree in the Datas of the last work: of data, (...),
postremum, and (...), opus. Demission, is a letting fall of the Perpendicular:
from demitto; demissum. Determinater, is the characteristick or figurative
letter of a directory: from determinare, to prescribe and limit. Diagonall,
taken substantively, or diagonie, is a line drawn from one Angle to another, of
(...). and (...) what the diagonie is in surfaces, the axle is in solids.
Diagrammatise, to make a Scheme or Diagram, from (...), delineo. Diatyposis, is
a brief summary description, and delineation of a thing: or the couching of a
great deal of matter, for the instruction of the Reader, in very little
bounds, and in a most neat and convenient order: from (...), instituo, item
melius dispono, vide (...). Diodot, is Pythagorases Bucarnon, or the gift
bestowed on him by the gods: of (...), the genitive of (...), and (...), datus,
from (...), do, vide Bucarnon. Dioptrick, the art of taking heights and
distances, from (...) pervidendo, altitudinem dimensionemque turrium and
murorum exploro. Directly, is said of two rows of proportionals, where the
first term of the first row, is to the first of the second, as the last of the
first, is to the last of the second. Directory, is that which points out the
Moods dependent on an Axiom. Discrepant, different, dissonant, id est, diverso
modo crepare. Disergeticks, of two operations, of (...), and (...). Document,
instruction, from doceo.
E.
ELucidation, a clearing, explaining, resolving of a doubt, and commenting on
some obscure passage, from elucido, elucidare. Energie, efficacy, power,
force; from (...), qui in opere est, of (...) and (...), opus. Enodandum, that
which is to be resolved and explicated, declared, and made manifest, from
enodo, enodare, to unknit, or cut away the knot. Equation, or rather aequation,
a making equal, from aequo, aequare. Equiangularity, is that affection of
Triangles, whereby their Angles are equal. Equicrurall, is said of Triangles,
whose legs or shanks are equal; of aequale, and crus, cruris; leg being taken
here for the thigh and leg. Equilaterall, is said of Triangles, which have all
their sides, shanks, or legs equal, of aequale and latus, lateris.
Equipollencie, is a samenesse, or at least an equality of efficacy, power,
virtue, and energie; of aequus and polleo. Equisolea, and Equisolearie, are
said of the grand Orthogono sphericall Scheme; because of the resemblance it
has with a horse-shooe, and may in that sense be to this purpose applied with
the same metaphorical congruencie, whereby it is said, that the royal army at
Edgehill was imbatteld in a half moon. Equivalent, of as much worth and
virtue, of aequus and valeo. Erected, is said of Perpendiculars, which are set
or raised upright upon a Base, from erigere, to raise up, or set aloft.
External, extrinsecall, exterior, outward, or outer, are said oftest of
Angles, which being without the Area of a Triangle, are comprehended by two of
its shanks meeting or cutting one another, accordingly as one or both of them
are protracted beyond the extent of the figure.
F.
FAciendas, are the things which are to be done: faciendum is the gerund of
facio. Figurative, is the same thing as Characteristick, and is applied to
those letters which do figure and point us out a resemblance and distinction
in the Moods. Figures, are taken here for those partitions of Trigonometry,
which are divided into Moods. Flat, is said of obtuse, or blunt Angles.
Forwardly, is said of Analogies, progressive from the first term to the last.
Fundamental, is said of reasons, taken from the first grounds and principles
of a Science.
G.
GEodesie, the Art of Surveying, of (...), or (...), terra, and (...), divido,
partior. Geography, the Science of the Terrestrial Globe, of (...) terra, and
(...), describo. Gloss, signifies a Commentary, or explication, it comes
from (...). Gnomon, is a Figure less then the total square, by the square of
a Segment: or, according to Ramus, a Figure composed of the two supplements,
and one of the Diagonall squares of a Quadrat. Gnomonick, the Art of Dyalling,
from (...), the cock of a Dyall. Great Circles, vide Circles.
H.
HOmogeneall, and Homogeneity, are said of Angles of the same kind, nature,
quality, or affection: from (...), communio generis. Homologall, is said of
sides congruall, correspondent, and agreeable, viz. such as have the same
reason or proportion from (...), similis ratio. Hypobasall, is said of the
Concordances of those Loxogonosphericall Moods, which, when the Perpendicular
is demitted, have for the Datas of their second operation the same Subtendent
and Base. Hypocathetall, is said of those which for the Datas of their third
operation have the same Subtendent and Perpendicular. Hypotenusall, is said of
Subtendent sides, from (...) and (...). Hypotyposis, a laying down of several
things before our eyes at one time, from (...), oculis subjicio, delineo, and
repraesento, vide (...). Hypoverticall, is said of Moods, agreeing in the same
Catheteuretick Datas of subtendent and vertical, as the Analysis of the word
does show.
I
IDentity, a samenesse, from idem, the same. Illatitious, or illative, is said
of the term which brings in the quaesitum, from infero, illatum. Inchased,
coagulated, fixed in, compacted, or conflated, is said of the last two
Loxogonosphericall operations put into one, vide Compacted, Conflated, and
Coalescencie. Including sides, are the containing sides of an Angle of what
affection soever it be, vide, Ambients, Legs, etc. Individuated, brought to the
lowest division, vide, Specialised, and Specification. Endowed, is said of the
terms of an Analogy, whether sides, or Angles, as they stand affected with
Sines, Tangents, Secants, or their complements, vide Invested. Ingredient, is
that which enters into the composition of a Triangle, or the progress of an
operation, from ingredior, of in and gradior. Initiall, that which belongs to
the beginning, from initium, ab ineo, significante incipio. Insident, is said
of Angles, from insideo, vide Adjacent, or Conterminall. Interjacent, lying
betwixt, of inter and jaceo; it is said of the Side or Angle between.
Intermediat, is said of the middle terms of a proportion. Inversionall, is
said of the Concordances of those Moods which agree in the manner of their
inversion; that is in placing the second and fourth terms of the Analogy,
together with their indowments, in the rooms of the first and third, and
contrariwise. Invested, is the same as endowed, from investio, investire.
Irrational, are those which are commonly called surd numbers, and are
inexplicable by any number whatsoever, whether whole, or broken. Isosceles, is
the Greek word of equicrurall, of (...), and (...), crus.
L.
LAterall, belonging to the sides of a Triangle from latus, lateris. Leg, is
one of the including sides of an Angle, two sides of every Triangle being
called the Legs, and the third, the Base; the Legs therefore or shankes of an
Angle are the bounds insisting or standing upon the Base of the Angle. Line of
interception, is the difference betwixt the Secant, and the Radius, and is
commonly called the residuum. Logarithms, are those artificial numbers, by
which, with addition and subtraction only, we work the same effects, as by
other numbers, with multiplication and division: of (...), ratio, proportio,
and (...), numerus. Logarithmication, is the working of an Analogy by
Logarithms, without having regard to the old laborious way of the natural
Sines, and Tangents; we say likewise Logarithmicall and Logarithmically, for
Logarithmeticall, and Logarithmetically; for by the syncopising of et, the
pronunciation of those words is made to the ear more pleasant: a privilege
warranted by all the dialects of the Greek, and other the most refined
Languages in the world. Loxogonosphericall, is said of oblique sphericals, of
(...), obliquus, and (...), ad sphaeram pertinens, from (...), globus.
M.
MAjor and Minor Arches, vide Arch. Maxim, an axiom, or principle, called so
(from maximus) because it is of greatest account in an Art or Science, and the
principal thing we ought to know. Mean, or middle proportion, is that, the
square whereof is equal to the plane of the extremes: and called so because of
its situation in the Analogy. Mensurator, is that, whereby the illatitious
term is compared, or measured with the maine quaesitum. Monotropall, is said
of figures, which have one only Mood, of (...), and (...)* from (...).
Monurgeticks, are said of those Moods, the maine Quaesitas whereof are obtained
by one operation, of (...), and (...). Moods, aetermine unto us the several
manners of Triangles, from modus, a way, or manner.
N.
Natural, the natural parts of a Triangle, are those of which it is
compounded, and the circular, those whereby the maine quaesitum is found out.
Nearest* or next, is said of that Cathetopposite Angle, which is immediately
opposite to the perpendicular. Notandum, is set down for an admonition to the
Reader, of some remarkable thing to follow, and is the Gerund of Noto, notare.
O.
OBlique, and obliquangulary, are said of all Angles that are not right.
Oblong, is a parallelogram, or square more long them large: from oblongus, very
long. Obtuse, and obtuse angled, are said of flat, and blunt Angles. Occurse,
is a meeting together, from occurro, occursum, Oppobasall, is said of those
Moods, which have a Catheteuretick Concordance in their Datas of the same
Cathetopposite Angles, and the same Bases. Oppocathetall, is said of those
Loxogonosphericals which have a Datisterurgetick Concordance in their Datas of
the same Angles at the Base, and the Perpendicular. Oppoverticall, is said of
those Moods which have a Catheteuretick Concordance in their Datas of the same
Cathetopposites, and vertical Angles. Orthogonosphericall, is said of right
angled Sphericals, of (...), rectus, (...), angulus, and (...), gobus.
Oxygonosphericall, is said of acute-angled sphericals, of (...), and (...).
P.
PArallelisme, is a Parallel, equality of right lines, cut with a right line,
or of Sphericals with a Sphericall, from (...), equidistans of (...) and (...).
Parallelogram, is an oblong, long square, rectangle, or figure made of parallel
lines: of (...), and (...), linea. Partial, is said of enodandas depending on
several Axioms. Particularise, specialise, by some especial difference to
contract the generality of a thing. Partition, is said of the several
operations of every Loxogonosphericall Mood, and is divided in praenoscendall,
catheteuretick and hysterurgetick. Permutat proportion, or proportion by
permutation, or alternat proportion, is when the Antecedent is compared to the
Antecedent, and the Consequent to the Consequent, vide, Perturbat.
Perpendicularity, is the affection of the Perpendicular, or plumb-line; which
comes from perpendendo, id est, explorando altitudinem. Perturbat, is the same
as permutat, and called so because the order of the Analogy is perturbed.
Planobliquangular, is said of plain Triangles, wherein there is no right Angle
at all. Planorectangular, is said of plain right-angled Triangles.
Planotriangular, is said of plain Triangles, that is, such as are not
Sphericall. Pleuseotechnie, the Art of Navigation, of (...), navigatio, and
(...), ars. Plusminused, is said of Moods which admit of Mensurators or whose
illatitious terms are never the same, but either more or less then the maine
quaehtas. Poliechyrologie, the Art of fortifying Towns and Cities, of (...),
urbs, civit as (...), munio firmo, and (...), ratio. Possubservient, is that
which after another serves for the resolving of a question; of post, and
subserviens: of sub and servio. Potentia, is that wherein the force and whole
result of another thing lies. Power, is the square, quadrat, or product of a
line extended upon it self, or of a number in it self multiplied. Powered,
squared quadrified. Precept, document, from praecipio, praeceptum.
Praeroscenda, are the terms, which must be known before we can attain to the
knowledge of the maine quaesitas of prae and nosco. Praenoscendall, is said of
the Concordances of those Moods, which agree in the same praenoscendas.
Praesection, praesectionall, is concerning the digit toward the left, whose
cutting off saves the labor of subtracting the double or single Radius.
Praescinded problems, are those speculative Datoquaeres, which are not applied
to any matter by way of practice. Praesubservient, is said of those Moods which
in the first place we must make use of for the explanation of others; of prae,
and ^ub^ervio. Prime, is said of the furthest Cathetopposite, or Angle at the
Base, contained within the Triangle to be resolved. Primifie the Radius, is to
put the Radius in the first place, primumque inter terminos collocare
proportionales. Problem, problemet, a question or datoquaere, from (...), unde
(...) propositum, objectaculum. Product, is the result, factus, or operatum of
a multiplication, from produco, productum. Proportion, proportionality, are the
same as Analogy, and Analogisme; the first being a likeness of terms, the
other of proportions. Proposition, a proposed sentence, whether theorem or
problem. Prosiliencie, is a demission, or falling of the Perpendicular, from
prosilio, ex pro and salio. Proturgetick, is said of the first operation of
every Disergetick Mood, of (...) and (...), the (...) being Attically
contracted into (...).
Q.
QUadrant, the fourth part of a Circle. Quadranting, the protracting of a
Sphericall side unto a Quadrant. Quadrat, a Square, a forma quadrae, the power
or possibility of a line, vide, Power. Quadrobiquadraequation, concerns the
Square of the subtendent side, which is equal to the Biquadrat, or two Squares
of the Ambients. Quadrosubduction, is concerning the subtracting of the Square
of one of the Ambients from the Square of the Subtendent. Quaesitas, the things
demanded from quaero* quaesitum. Quotient, is the result of a division, from
quoties, how many times.
R.
RAdically meeting, is said of those Oblongs, or Squares, whose sides do meet
together. Radius, ray, or beam is the Semidiameter, called so metaphorically,
from the spoake of a wheel which is to the limb thereof, as the Semidiameter,
to the circumference of a circle. Reciprocal, is said of proportionalities, or
two rows of proportionals, wherein the first of the first is to the first of
the second, as the last of the second is to the last of the first, and
contrarily. Rectangular, is said of those figures, which have right Angles.
Refinedly, is said when we go the shortest way to work by primifying the
Radius. Renvoy, a remitting from one place to another, it comes from the French
word Renvoyer. Representative, is said of the letters, which stand for whole
words; as E. for side, L. for secant, U. for subtendent. Residuat, is to leave
a remainder, nempe id quod residet and superest. Resolver, is that which
loses and untieth the knot of a difficulty, of re and solvo. Resolutory, is
said of the last partition of the Loxogonosphericall operations. Result, is the
last effect of a work. Root, is the side of a Square, Cube, or any cossick
figure.
S.
SCheme, signifies here the delineation of a Geometrical figure, with all
parts necessary for the illustrating of a demonstration, from (...), habeo.
Sciography, the Art of shadowing, of (...), umbra, and (...), scribo. Segment,
the portion of a thing cut off, quasi secamentum, quod a re aliqua secatur.
Sexagesimat, subsexagesimat, resubsexagesimat, and biresubsexagesimat, are said
of the division, subdivision, resubdivision, and reer-resubdivision of degrees
into minutes, seconds, thirds, and fourths, in 60. of each other: the devisor of
the fore goer being successively the following dividend, and the quotient
always sixty. Sharp, is said of acute Angles. Sindiforall, is said of those
Moods, the fourth term of whose Analogy is only illatitious to the maine
quaesitum. Sindiforation, is the affection of those foresaid Moods, whereby the
value of the mensurator is known. Sindiforatall, is concerning those Moods,
whose illatitious term is an Angle. Sindiforiutall, is of those Moods, whose
illatitious term is a side; all these four words are composed of
representatives, and (if I remember well) mentioned in my explanation.
Sinocosinall, is said of the Concordances of those Moods, which agree in this,
that their Analogies run upon sines, and sine-complements. Sinocotangentall, is
said of those Moods, which agree in that the terms of their Analogy run upon
Sines and Tangent-complements. Sinus, is so called (I believe) because it is
always in the very bosom of the Circle. Sinused, is said of terms endowed or
invested with Sines. Specialized, contracted to more particular terms, vide,
Individuated. Specifying, determinating, particularising. Specification, a
making more especial, by contracting the generality of a thing, vide,
Specialized. Sphericodisergeticks, are the Sphericall Triangles of two
operations. Structure of an operation, is the whole frame thereof, from struo,
structum. Subdatoquaere, is a particular datoquaere, and is applied to the
problems of the cases of every Sphericodisergetick Mood, vide, Sub-problems.
Sabajcent, is the substerned side or the Base, of sub and jaceo, vide,
Sustentative, Sustaining side and Substerned. Subordinate problems, is the same
with subdatoquaere. Subproblems, is the same with subordinate problems, or
problemets. Subservient, is said of Moods which serve in the operation of other
Moods. Substerned, is the subjacent side or Base: or, more generally, any side
opposite to an Angle; of sub and sterno, sternere, vide, Subjacent. Subtendent,
is the side opposite to the right Angle, of sub and tendo; as if you would say,
Under-stretched. Subtendentine, is the subtendent of a little rectangled
Triangle, comprehended within the Area of a great one, and is sometimes called
the little subtendent, and reere subtendent. Subtendent all, is the subtendent
of a great rectangled Triangle, within whose capacity is included a little one:
it is likewise called the great subtendent, and maine subtendent.
Supernumerary, is said of the digit, by the which the proposed number exceeds
in places the number of the places of the Radius. Supplements, are the Oblongs
made of the Segments of the root of a Square; and so called, because they
supply all that the Diagonals or Squares of the Segments joined together, want
of the whole lines square. Suppone severally, is to signify several things.
Sustaining side is the substerned, or subjacent side. Sustentative, is the same
with sustaining, substerned, subjacent and Base. Sympathy of Angles, is a
similitude in their affection, of (...), and (...), passio, vide homogeneall.
T.
TAble, is an Index sometimes, and sometimes it is taken for a Brief and
summary way of expressing many things. Tangentine, is that which concerns
Tangents or touch-lines. Tangentosinall, is said of the Concordance of those
Loxogonosphericals, the terms of whose Analogy run upon Tangents and Sines.
Tenet, is a secondary maxim, and is only said here of Cathetothetick
principles. Theorematick, speculative, from (...), a speculation, which comes
from (...), or (...), speculare, or contemplare. Topanglet, and verticalin are
the same. Trigonometry, is the Art of calculating, and measuring of Triangles,
of (...), triangulus, and (...), metior. Trissotetras, is that which runs
all along upon threes and foures of (...), and in plurali, (...), tertius,
trinus, triplex, tres, and (...), numerus quaternarius, from (...), quatuor.
U.
VAriator, is from vario, variare, to diver sifie, and is said of cases, which
upon the same Datas are only diverse in the manner of resolving the Quaesitum.
Verticaline, vertical, verticalet, are the top-angles, and top-anglets, from
vertex, verticis. Underproblem, problemet, subordinate problem, sub-problem,
under-datoquaere, and sub* datoquaere are, all the same thing. Unradiated, or
unradiused, is said of a sum of Logarithms from which the Radius is
abstracted.
Z.
ZEterick, is said of Loxogonosphericall Moods which agree in the same
quaesitas, from (...), quaero, inquiro.
The final Conclusion.
IF the novelty of this my Invention be acceptable (as I doubt not but it will)
to the most Learned, and judicious Mathematicians, I have already reaped all
the benefit I expected by it, and shall hereafter, (God willing) without hope
of any further recompense, cheerfully under-goe more laborious employments, of
the like nature, to do them service: But as for such, who, either
understanding it not, or vain-gloriously being accustomed to Criticize on the
Works of others, will presume to carp therein at what they cannot amend, I pray
God to illuminate their Judgments, and rectify their Wills, that they may know
more, and censure less; for so by forbearing detraction, the venom whereof
must needs reflect upon themselves, they will come to approve better of the
endeavors of those, that wish them no harm.

Sit Deo Gloria.
The Diorthosis.
THe mistakes of the Press, can breed but little obstruction to the progress
of the ingenious Reader, if with his Pen, before he enter upon the perusal of
this Treatise, he be pleased thus to correct (as I hope he will) these ensuing

Erratas.
Page lin. Errata. Emendata. Page lin. Errata. Emendata. 8 25 Talfagro Talzo.
Talfagros Talzos. 16 25 This Cheme. the Schemes and dining room total sum.
10 17 Niubprodesver. Niubprodnesver. 16 31 or dining room total Sine. 11 29
Natfr. Autir. Natfr. Eutir. 23 23 11 35 Not. And Nath. Naet. Naed. Naeth. 26 6
as the Sine of the cosubtendent. as the cosubtendent. 11 36 Eheromabme.
Eherolabme. 11 37 Being Allotted. Being abinarie allotted. second basidion. 16
8 80 9 second Base.

What errors else (if any) have slipped animadversion (besides their not being
very material) are so intelligible, that being by the easiest judgment with
as much facility eschewable, as I can observe them, not to mention the
commission of such faults is no great omission; and therefore will I heartily
(without further ceremony) conduct the Student (who making this the beginning
of the Book, as it is most fit he do, seeing a Ruler should be made straight
before any thing be ruled by it) is willing to go along with me from hence
circularly through the title, to the end of the Treatise in the proposed way,
as follows.

And so God bless us both.

