Regulated ZEAL.

OR, An earnest request to all Zealously affected Christians, to seek the
desired Reformation in a peaceable way.

Showing further, in several particulars, wherein they are offensive who
disturb the PEACE of the CHVRCH.

If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men.

ROMANS 12.18. BY W. T. homason

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Rand. 1641.

Regulated Zeal.
ZEAL for Gods glory, and love of the Truth, are two such transcendent
excellencies, that whosoever will not for the advancement thereof, (being
lawfully called thereto) most willingly engage both his life and fortunes,
deserves not the name of Man: but yet it necessarily concerns (as the times
now stand) every good Christian to know, that good actions may be ill done; as
ch^yse meats may be slovenly handled, and so mard in the dressing: in a word,
things are never well done, that are not orderly done, Order being their
beauty. The business I drive at is this: The general cry (at this day) of
the Kingdom is Reformation: and in truth this is now a very seasonable and
blessed desire; and what heart is not full of it? But I wish from my soul, we
were as right in the way to that longed-for redress, as we are desirous of
that end But I fear there are too many, who whilst in their over-vchement, and
unwarrantable proceedings, they seek to quicken this Reformation, they lay
stumbling blocks in the way, and involve it with more difficulties.

Zeal, where its well ordered, is a precious Diamond: there is no service
pleasing to God without it; but yet, where it is not qualified with knowledge
on the one side, and a calling on the other, too much zeal may prove
dangerous, I wish we could not experimentally say, scandalous, both to Church
and Commonwealth. It is an undeniable truth, that every man in his place
should endeavor a Reformation, every man should pray for it, every man should
persuade to it: but no private man may break the peace of God and the King for
it, no man may swagger for it, or cause tumultuous and seditious meetings for
it; much less overthrow the frame of all Government and Order in the Church
for it: For private men to labor the redress of public grievances in a
peaceable way, as by their humble Petitions to the seat of Justice, I say,
happy are those men that do it: but for such to forget their stations, to
involve themselves into the mysteries of Government, and to make themselves
Reformers, where their place is to inform; I think the Laws neither of God
nor man will warrant it. It would make a man's heart to bleed to see what
divisions we have in our Church, what differences, even to separations, what
distractions, what disgraceful handling one of another, to the shame and
reproach of our Church, and derision of our adversaries, and all this for
points not fundamental; yea, for Circumstances and Ceremonies, which are not
parts, but appurtenances to Gods worship. What comfort can such men reap of
their zeal, who living in a Church, which does heartily desire a Reformation
of her blemishes, and at this very present is seriously employed in the pursuit
thereof, yet will not tarry the leisure of their Governors, but will snatch
the sword out of the hand of Justice, and have a Reformation of their own
devising; certainly such men pull down more by their impatience, than they
build by their zeal.

Is it now a time to be divided amongst our selves, when all our forces united
are little enough to withstand the common adversary? Alas those seditious
oppugners of the public weal little know, and less consider, how grievously
they wound the cause of Religion, and how many they wrong at once: They are
offensive to God in the contempt of his ordinance, who commands every soul to
be subject to the higher powers: they are injurious to the State they live in,
whose power they despise, and Government they trample under foot: they bring a
blot upon the Ministry, who suffer through their sides, and are perhaps by
some malevolent spirits (though unjustly) censured as the seditious projectors
of their unwarrantable insolences.

And lastly, that which is seriously to be considered on, and I would to God
they would take it more to heart, they render us a gazing stock to all
Christian Churches, and make us the derision of all that are round about us. I
would counsel these unquiet spirits, but to walk by the same light which
themselves set up for others: let them regulate themselves by the rule of the
Scriptures: What one thing is there that the holy Scripture does more
abundantly insist upon than this, That we should keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace? with what vehemence of Spirit does St. Paul urge it? If
there be any consolation in Christ, (says he) if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any compassion and mercy, fulfill my joy, that
you be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one
judgment, that nothing be done through contention or vain glory. Phil. 2.1.
And again, let us follow those things which concern peace, and wherewith one
may edify another. Romans 14.19. And the Apostle does urge the same so far,
that he exhorts all good Christians, to press on uncessantly toward this
mark, even until they find an utter impossibility of obtaining the same: If it
be possible (says he) and as much as in you lies, live peaceable with all men:
Nay our Savior himself, when he departed the world, left as a Legacy to his
Disciples this blessing of peace; My peace I leave with you, My peace J give
unto you: And excellent to this purpose is that of St. Cyprian, Qui pacem
Christi rumpit, adversus Christum facit: That man which breaks the ligaments of
Christian peace, fights against Christ himself. Cypr. de unit. Eccles.

Run over the whole volume of the Word of God, and and you shall not find
any grace or virtue whereunto God has vouchsafed greater honor, than to this
of peace: God Himself is styled, the God of peace; Christ, the Prince of
peace; the Word, the Gospel of peace; his Angels, the messengers of peace; his
Ministers, the reconcilers to peace. So exceedingly God delights in it, so
strongly he pleads for it; yea, and blesses them that make it: Blessed, says
our Savior, are the peacemakers; and he promises them a sweet blessing
indeed, for they shall be called the Sons of God. Alas then, by what name shall
I term those, who for things of smaller moment, for Ceremonies, will rend the
Church, shake off the yoke of obedience, and as far as their endeavors will
extend, reduce all Government into a confused Chaos? Oh that such minded
Christians would sit down a while and commune with their own hearts; Am I now
in Gods way? where is my warrant? what ground have I? where is my Commission?
is the cause I now undertake, of that weight and consequence that it will bear
me out, being a private man, in these boisterous proceedings? We all agree that
the Scriptures are the perfect rule of our faith, we all accord in the
fundamental grounds of Religion; may I then for things that are merely
appurtenances, and no parts of Gods Worship, make a tumult in the Church of
God, and trouble the peace thereof? God is the God of Order, and shall I be the
Author of Confusion? God would not come to Eliah in a Whirlwind, but in a
quiet and still voice; and shall I break out in thunder? But some perchance
may object, the cause we stand for is Gods, we strive to vindicate Gods service
from the defilements of Popery, the Ceremonies of our Church are the rags of
Antichrist. I answer, who has given you a calling to this employment? I am
sure the Apostle gives private men a better direction; namely, to study to be
quiet, and meddle with their own bunesse, and to see that all things be done
in love.

It is true that liberty is given to every Church to use what Ceremonies they
please, that agree to the general rule, and tend to edificati n and decency:
but liberty is not left to every one in the Church, that he may set up, and
pull stowne, what he will. This must be left to the wisdom of the Governors
only, who (if they find the Ceremonies of the Church not conduceable to that
end for which they did intend them) may, and ought also to be as ready to give
them a dismission, as they were willing to receive them. If every one in the
Church of Creet might set up what his list, to what purpose did St. Paul leave
Titus there, to set in order the things that were wanting. Tit. 1.5. Order is
the usher of peace, and if every one should rule, it would be no virtue to
obey. It is a happy conjunction between Prince and people, where Unity and
Order knits their several hearts into one. The Apostle St. Paul puts us in
mind of one body, one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God, one
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all. Ephesians. 4.3,-6.
Declaring to us, by this multiplication of Unities (as a most reverend Father
of our Church observes upon this place) that the knots whereby we are tied
together, are both in number more, and of far greater moment, then that matters
of smaller consequence should dissever us. And therefore leaving Church
government to those it does concern, our duty is (I speak of private
persons) to stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel. Philip. 1.27. and if we pass these limits we disturb
the state, and in it our selves, since in the quiet and prosperity of our
Church, consists both our weal and safety. But what need we many persuasions
to peace and love one with another, when we have Gods own example for our
rule? For did we with a serious eye look upon the face of these times, and
well consider our strange irregularities, and sinful provocations both in
Church and State on the one side, and Gods merciful dealing toward us, even
to admiration and astonishment on the other, we could not but acknowledge,
that we have infinite cause to spend the whole stock of our time (yea though it
could be doubled) in breathing out praises and thanksgiving to God, rather than
to squander it away in matters of strife. How strange a deliverance did God,
not long since, vouchsafe us, when the Sword, accompanied with blood and death,
was entered into our Coasts, which had not Gods overruling hand seasonably
prevented, had undoubtedly devoured us? What matchless Conspiracies has he
revealed unto us, which it was thought were laid so deep, that they could never
have seen the light, but that it appeared, he that was higher than highest
regarded it, and there be higher than they? Now what shall we say to these
things? what shall we repay God for these blessings? we see with our eyes, and
our hearts may rejoice in it, the Lord has had thoughts of peace toward us,
and shall we now have thoughts of contention one against another? God has
wrought wonderfully for our safety; and shall we in the want of a common
enemy divide our selves into parties? God forbid. The Prophet David says,
(and our experience has found it true) that God has pleasure in his people:
why then should not his people delight in him again; and in him, and for his
sake delight in one another. Its strange to read in some places of Scripture
what emphaticall expressions God has given us of his love: how he does
beseech us to be reconciled. 1 Cor. 5. how he even waits to have mercy on us
Esaias. 30.18. yea, and wonders at our back wardnes. Esaias 59 16. And how sweetly
does the Lord reveal himself to his people the Jews. I will rejoice over them
(says he) to do them good and will plant them in this land assuredly with my
whole heart, and with all my soul. Jer. 32.41. O how convincing and prevalent
should this compassion of God be with us, even to enforce us to love and
compassionate one another? Happy were it, if they would advisedly consider of
this Gods gracious indulgence to his people, who for Circumstantiall matters,
which God has neither commanded nor forbid, are ready to contend, even to
blood. But let me not be mistaken, it is not my intent here to patronize and
defend the Ceremonial Ordinances of our Church, but wish rather, since they
are of that nature, that they may be safely abrogated without any offense to
God, but cannot (as the times now manifest) be so safely retained, without
breach of peace) that for the quiet, and peace sake of our Church, they were
returned into the bosom of that Church from whence we had them: that so we
might all as one man, serve the Lord in the purity of his Ordinances, with a
cheerful and peaceable mind. But yet so long as they stand established by
the hand of Authority, its every private man's portion to obey: Only thus far
extends the duty of us all; if private men, to pray zealously; if Ministers, to
preach zealously; if Magistrates, to endeavor zealously, that we may with one
heart and soul keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And when
all this is done, if those whom the care and charge of Reformation shall
concern neglect their duties, the sin will be their own, and private men are
free.

FINIS.

