The Popes Brief: OR ROMES Inquiry after the death of their Catholics here in
ENGLAND, during these Times of WAR: Discovered by two Commissions; The one
sent from the Pope that now is: The other from the Bishop and Duke of Cambrey,
to several Commissioners in England: Whereby the Death of such Catholics may
be returned to the Sea of Rome, to be determined of (As may be fit for the
glory of God.)

Together with A CATALOGUE Of the Vicars General, and Archdeacons under the
Bishop of Calcedon, for the settling of the Popish Hierarchy in England.

With diverse LETTERS concerning the same.

Also several LETTERS and PAPERS Of the Lord Inchiquines in Jreland,
Intercepted by the Earl of Warwick, and sent to the House of Commons; wherein
is discovered the ungrateful and perfidious dealing of the said Lord with the
Parliament of England.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That the said Commissions, together with
the Hierarchy, and several Letters and Papers Intercepted, be forthwith
Printed and published: H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw: Husbands. December. 7. 1643.

[Note:] That this Commission, together with a Letter herewith Printed
concerning the same, was taken at Great-Yarmouth in the county of Norfolk,
amongst diverse other Letters and Papers directed to diverse Papists in England;
from one Walter Winsor a Papist, who brought the same from Flanders, as he
confesses in his Examination, on the 26. of September, 1643. which said Winsor
still remains in custody.

The Commission.
FRancis Vander Burch, Dei and Apostolicae sedis gratia Archiepiscopus and Dux
Cameracen, Sac. Romans Imp. Princeps, Comes Cameracesii, etc. Executor and
Comissarius ad infra tam una cum quibusdam aliis nostris in hac part Collegis
per litteras Apostolicas in vim clausulae and quemlibet ipsorum specialiter
deputatus omnibus and singulis ad quos praesentes nostrae litterae pervenerint,
quousque in fratrum tangit negotium seu tangere poterit quomedo libet in
futurum, communiter vel divisim quibuscunque nominibus conseantur, aut
quacunque praefulgeant dignitate, salutem in Domino sempiternam, and
praesentibus fidem indubiam adhibere nostrisque, imo verius Apostolicis obedire
mandatis. Litteras Sancti in Christo Patris Domini nostri, Domini Urbani divina
providentia Papae Octavi, nos eum ea qua decuit reverentia recepisse noveritis,
hujusmodi sub tenore. Urbanus P. P. Octavus ad futuram rei memoriam Pii^.
Dilecti filii Procuratoris Generalis Congregationis Angliae Ordinis Sancti
Benedicti votis annuere, id^^que specialis gratiae favore prosequi volentes and
a quibusvis excommunicationts suspensionis and interdicti aliisque
Ecclesiasticis sententiis, censuris and panis a Iure, vel ab homine quavis
occasion vel causa latis, si quibus quomodolibet imo datus exisiit ad effectum
praesentium duntaxat consequendum harum serie absolventes and absolutum fore
consentes: Supplicationibus ejusdem Procuratoris Generalis nomine nobis super
hoc humiliter porrectis in^^^^i de venerabilium fratrum nostrorum S. R. E.
Cardinalium in total Repulbica a Christiana contra haereticam pravitatem
Inquisitorum generalium ab hac Sancta sede Apostolicas spectaliter deputatorum
consilio Venerabiles fratres Archiepiscopum Cameracen', ac Andomar' and Ipren'
Episcopos, and quemlibet ipsorum Apostolica auctoritate tenore presentium
subrogamus in le^um Ordinariorum in Angli^ ad effectum tantum modo auctoritate
Ordinaria legitime instituendi Processus super causa, and genere mortis little
qui pro fide Catholica in Anglia patiuntur, ita ut hujusmodi processus aliaque
acta ab illis, seu quilibet ipsorum legitime confecta ad Doctrinas passiones,
and mortes verificand^^ fiant auctoritate Ordinaria. nec aliter, nec alio modo,
irritum and i^^ne decernentes quidquid secus super his a quiquam scienter, vel
ignoranter contigerit attentari, Non obstantibus quatenus opus sit foelicis
recordationis Bonifacii Papae Octavi pradecessoris nostri de una, and Concilii
Generalis de duabus dictis, alii^que constitutionibus and Ordinationibus
Apostolicis caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque. Datum Remae apud Sanctum
Petrum sub Annulo Piscatoris die vigesima tertia Februarii, Anni millesimi
sexcentesimi quadragesimi tertii, Pontificatus nostri anno vig simo, signat. M:
A: Maraldus.

Post quarum quidem litterarum Apostolicarum prae insertarum praesentationem
and receptionem nobis and per nos, ut praemittitur, factas, suimus per
Reverendos Dominos, Dominum Ceorgium Musket Collegii Anglicani Duaceni
Praesidem, fratrem Joannem Meutisse Conventus Sancti Gregorii Magni
Benedictinorum Anglorum Prierem, and fratrem Angelum de Sancto Francisco
Provinciae fratrum Minorum in Anglia Commissarium, pro part totius Cleri
secularis Anglicani Congregationisque Anglicanae Ordinis Sancti Benedicti, and
dictae Provinciae fratrum Minorum debita cum instantia requisiti, quatenus ad
earundem praeinsertarum litterarum Apostolicarum and contentorum in eisdem
executionem, juxta traditas seu directas a sede Apostolica praesentia per
easdem litteras nobis facultatem, formam and auctoritatem procedere Litterasque
nostras desuper opportunas concedere vellemus and dignaremur. Nos igitur
Franciscus Vander Burch, Archiepiscopus and Dux Cameracen', S. R. Imp.
Princeps, Comes Cameraces^i, etc. Executor and Commissarius subrogatus
auctoritate Apostolica Praesentia in locum Ordinariorum in Anglia, attendentes
requisitionem hujusmodi esse justam and nationi consonam, Volentesque Mandatum
Apostolicum supradictum nobis in hac part directum and commissum re^erenter
exequi, prout tenemur: idcirco auctoritate Apostolica nobis commissa, and qua
fungimur in hac part, tenore praesentium committimus and deputamus pro iis qui
Londini, vel juxta Trentam fluvium versus Londinum in Anglia degunt, Reverendos
Dominos D. Georgium Gage Prothonotarium Apostolicum, P: Thomas Dade Ordinis
Sancti Dominici in Doctrina Angliae Provincialem, Patrem Benedictum Coxium
Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis Sancti Benedicti Presbyterum, P: Franciscum
Bell Provinciae fratrum Minorum in eadem Anglia Definitorem; Pro iis qui
Eboraci, vel ultra Trentam fluvium respectu civitatis Londinensis in
supradicta. Anglia degunt Reverendissimum Dominum Philippum serenissimae
Reginae Angliae Confessarium, ac Reverendos Dominos D. Georgium Catherick, P:
Robertum Hadokium, alias Bensonium, Provinciae Eboracen', Ordinis Sancti
Benedicti Exprovincialem, ac P. Gulielmum Andertonum Ordinis Sancti Francisci,
Religiosum, lomnes simul: and conjunctim ac quemlibet little divisim ac
separatim in solidum ad effectum legitime instituendi Processus super causa,
and genere mortis eorum, qui in suts respective districtibus, hac ultima
saeviente contra Catholicos ibidem persecutione pro fide Catholica occubuerunt,
dicta auctgritate Apostolica mandantes iis ut personaliter accedant loca, quae
prepter hoc fuerint, and erunt accedenda, and evocatis coram se personis probis
ac fide dignis, quae passionis ac mortis hujusmodi Catholicorum notitiam
habuerint, de veritate passionis ac mortis corundem formaque causis scicentiae,
and circumstantiis ad rem facientibus, aliisque ad rei certitudinem requisitis
seu alias opportunis praeviis solemni juramento diligenter interrogent,
audiant, and examinent, earumque personarum nomina, cognomina, dicta and
depositiones pertinenter in scriptis redigant, and sic redacta and fideliter
clausa ad nos dirigant, ut ea postmodum ad sedem Apostolicam transmittamus,
quatenus de iis quod justum fuerit ad Dei gloriam statuat and decernat.
Caeterum intendimus and declaramus quod si aliquis, vel aliqui dictorum, per
nos Deputatorum, per seipsum vel seipsos, hoc munus personaliter praestare non
potuerit, vel non potuerint, ille vel illi quem vel quos aliquis vel aliqui
dictorum Deputatorum ad dictum effectum subrogare voluerit, vel voluerint,
simili omnino potestate and Jurisdiction quam principales and primo Deputati
gaudeat vel gaudeant quartus aliquis dictorum Deputatorum vel ab iis
subrogatorum, alix legitime impeditis in dicto Processu instituendo cum effectu
pergat and procedat, and auctoritate nostra ordinaria per sedem Apostolicam
nobis attributa ex nunc prout tunc ipsis hujusmodi tribuimus facultatem. In
quorum omnium fidem ac robur praesentes per Secretarium nostrum expeditas
nostris signatura sigilloque communimus.

Datum Cameraci in Palatio nostro Archiepiscopali, Anno Domini millesimo
sexcentesimo quadragesimo tertio mensis Junii die decima. Franciscus Vander
Burch, Archiepiscopus Cameracen.
De Mandato Illustrissimi and Reverendissiimi Domini D. Archiepiscopi and Ducis
Cameracen. Patr. Foulon, Secret.

5. October. 1643.
FRancis Vander Burch, By the Grace of God, and of the Apostolical Sea,
Archbishop and Duke of Cambrey, Prince of the Sacred Roman Empire, Earl of
Cambresis, etc. Agent and Commissary for the things hereafter mentioned.
Jointly, and severally, with some others in that behalf, by Apostolical
Letters especially deputed. To all and singular persons, to whom our present
Letters shall come, and whom the matter herein after mentioned, does or may
concern, jointly and severally, by what names soever they shall be called, or
of what dignity and honor they shall be of, health everlasting in the Lord, to
give undoubted credit to these Presents, and to obey our, or more truly the
Apostolical commands. Know ye, we did receive with that reverence which was
meet, the Letters of the most Holy Father in Christ, our Lord, the Lord Vrbane,
by the Divine Providence, the Eight Pope of that name, under this Tenure, Pope
Vrbane the VIII. for future remembrance of the matter: Being willing to
Condescend unto the pious desires of our beloved Son, the General Procuratour
of the Congregation of England, of the order of Saint Bennet, and to favor him
with a special Grace (and by the Order of these Presents absolving him, and
holding him to be absolved, from whatsoever censure of Excommunication,
Suspension and Interdict, and all other Ecclesiastical Censures, and Pains
inflicted by Law, or by man: For whatsoever occasion or cause, if in any way,
he do lie under any of them, only for he effecting of these Presents)
Inclining unto the Petition humbly presented unto us in that behalf, in the
name of the same General Procurator, with the Council of our venerable
Brethren, the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, Inquisitours Generals,
especially deputed by this holy Apostolical Sea in all the Christan
Commonwealth against Heretical wickedness, by the tenor of these presents,
and Apostolical authority we substitute our venerable Brethren the Archbishop
of Cambreys the Bishops of Saint Omer and Iper, and every one of them into the
place of ordinary in England only to that effect, that they may by ordinary
authority according to Law make out Process, To enquire after the cause and
kind of death of them that suffer in England for the Catholic Faith: So that
such Process and other Acts lawfully done by them, or any of them, for the
clearing of the Truth of such sufferings and deaths, be done by ordinary
authority, nor otherwise, nor in any other manner; Commanding that whatsoever
in that behalf shall happen herein to be attempted otherwise by any man,
either wittingly or ignorantly, it shall be void and of none effect;
Notwithstanding any use that may be made of the Constitution of Pope Boniface
the eight, our Predecessor, of most happy memory, commonly called de una, or
that of the General Conncell, commonly called de Duabus, or any other
constitutions or Apostolical Ordinances made to the contrary whatsoever. Given
at Rome at Saint Peter's under the King of the Fisher, the three and twentieth
day of February 1643. in the twentieth year of Our Popedom, signed M. A.
Maraldus.

After the presentation and reception of the which Apostolical Letters above
written, to Us and by Us (as is abovesaid made) we have been earnestly and duly
required by the Reverend Master, Master George Musher, President of the English
College of Dowey, Friar John Mentisse, Prior of the Covent of Saint Gregory
the great, of the English Benedictins, and Friar Angel of Saint Francis,
Commissary of the Province of the Friars Minorites in England, on the behalf
of all the Secular Clergy of England, of the English congregation of the Order
of Saint Bennet, and of the said Province of the Friars Minorites, that we
would be willing and vouchsafe to go on in the execution of the same above
mentioned Apostolical Letters, and of the contents of the same, according to
the power, manner, and authority, given or sent to us from the said Apostolical
Sea by the same Letters, and to grant to that end as necessary Letters. We
therefore Francis Vanderburgh Archbishop and Duke of Cambrey, Prince of the
sacred Roman Empire, Earl of Cambresis, etc. Agent and commissary substituted
by the abovesaid Apostolical Authority into the place of the Ordinaries in
England, taking into consideration that such a request is just and reasonable,
and willing (with reverence as we ought to do) to put in execution the
abovesaid Apostolical command directed and committed to us in that behalf.
Therefore by the Apostolical authority committed to us, and by the authority
which we exercise in that behalf; by the Tenure of these presents, we ordain
and depute for them that live at London or on this side Trent in England, the
Reverend Mrs. M. George Gage, Apostolical Prothonotary, Father Thomas Dade,
Provincial of the order of Saint Dominick, in England aforesaid; Father Bennet
Cox, Priest of the English Congregation of the Order of S. Bennet, Father
Francis Bell, Limitor Collector of the Province of the Friars Minorites in
England aforesaid; and for those that live at York, or beyond the River of
Trent in England aforesaid, the Reverend Mr. Phillips Confessor to the most
gracious Queen of England, and the Reverend Masters, Master George Cathericke,
Father Robert Hadock, alias, Benson, late Provincial of the Province of York,
of the order of S. Bennet, and Father William Anderton of the order of S.
Francis; all and every one of them jointly, severally, and wholly to this
purpose; that they according to law make press to inquire of the cause and
kind of death of them, who in their respective Limits, during this last fierce
persecution there against the Catholics, have dyed for the Catholic Faith:
Commanding them by the said Apostolical Authority, that they do personally
repair to such places, as for this purpose are or shall be to be repaired
unto: and that they call before them, such persons of honesty and credit, as
have knowledge of the sufferings and deaths of such Catholics; and that they
diligently inquire, hear and examine, upon solemn oath, the truth and manner
of their sufferings and deaths, and the cause of such their knowledge and such
circumstances pertaining to the same and other things requisite for the
discovery of the truth of the matter: and that they conveniently put in
writing, the names sirnames, sayings, and depositions of the said persons, and
direct them to us, being so disposed, and faithfully closed up; That we may
afterward transmit them to the Apostolical See; to the end that the said See
may ordain and determine of them, that which shall be fit to the glory of
God. Moreover, we intend and declare, That if any one, or some of them deputed
by us by himself, or by themselves, cannot personally perform that office, he
or they, whom, one or some of the said deputed persons shall or will substitute
to that effect; he or they so substituted, shall enjoy the very like power and
jurisdiction, as they which were principally and first deputed do enjoy: To
that end, that any one of the said deputies or their substitutes, the rest
having lawful excuse of absence, may proceed and go on with effect in the
execution of these presents, and by our ordinary authority given unto us by the
Apostolical See from this time forth we grant unto them such power; for
testimony and credit whereof we have authorized with our hand and seal these
presents: Dispatched by our Secretary.

Given at Cambrey in our Archiepiscopall Palace in the year of our Lord 1643.
Tenth of June FRANCIS VANDER BURGH, Archbishop of Cambrey,
By the command of the most Illustrious and Reverend Lord, the Lord Archbishop
and Duke of Cambrey aforesaid. Foulin Secretary.

This Figure of a Cross was on the top of the Letter.

Very much respected Sir,
SEEing that I was to write unto you obout the business contained in the
enclosed Commission; I was also commanded by my Master (who is altogether
unknown unto you) to let you understand, that the Bearer (who is the Foreman of
his shop) is sent to the party with Letters from Mr. Iozelin (the which he is
to impart unto you) and with Letters from himself, to the Parents of some
young men, who are Prentises here; expecting to hear their resolutions before
they can become Free men. I hope that you will find him to be a fit man for
both employments (if you would be pleased to assist him with the best advice
whiles he is a stranger amongst you) peradventure you will startle at the sight
of the enclosed Commission, considering how the times go now in those parts,
and to how little purpose it is to meddle in affairs of that nature. But if you
please to know the true reasons and motives why I sent it now, I doubt not but
that you will rest satisfied. The first is because I had now an extraordinary
good opportunity to send it safely by a known friend, who would have a special
care to see it conveyed unto you, with those small directions it has; which
none could make any use of, (in case it should fall into their hands) but only
the Bearer: and if I should not have sent it now by him, the directions must
have been such as might have brought you into some question, if my Letters had
been intercepted.

The second and principal reason is, because the Pope is old and sickly, and
so is the Archbishop of Cambrey, and if either of them dye before the mattet be
begun by one or other, the grace would be of no force: and if any of the three
named in it do but call any one Catholic man and take such information as he
can give of the martyrdom of Father Ambrose, and record them before witness,
the grace will be of such force that we may make use of it, any time these
thirty or forty years following, when the said parties are dead. Therefore I
beseech you excuse me for having sent it unto you: and for Gods sake commend it
presently to some of the parties named in it, or to be named by them, to see
the matter begun, as I have said, and then to be kept in great secrecy till we
see better times.

Thus in haste I bid you farewell. August 17. 1643. Your true Friend, B. B.

This Letter was intercepted with the former Commission, with diverse other
Letters to Papists in England.

A CATALOGVE OF The Vicars General and Archdeacons in ENGLAND, under the
Bishop of CALCEDON.
Vicars General constituted, by the most Reverend RICHARD Lord Bishop of
CALCEDON, By the Letters dated the first of JUNE, 1625.
MAster John Colleton Episcopal Vicar in the eleven Provinces underwritten,
Two months after nis Majesty came to the Crown.
Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and the Isle of Elv, Bedford, Buckingham,
Middlesex, and Hartford, The City of London, and the Suburbs, and the City of
Westminster.

To Master John Colleton, being disabled through old age, is added, as a
Coadjutor, Master Gregory Fisher, alias Muscot, Archdeacon of Surrey and
Middlesex, by the letters bearing date the tenth of February, 1626. by the most
Reverend Richard Lord Bishop of Calcedon.

2. Edward Bennet Episcopal Vicar in the sixteen Provinces under written, viz.
Walesboth South and North parts, the Isle of Anglesey, Hereford, Shropshire,
and Chester.

3. Master John Bostile. Doctor of Divinity, Episcopal Vicar in the five
Provinces underwritten, Oxford, Warwick, Northampton, Stafford, and Worcester.

4. Master Broughton, Episcopal Vicar in the seven Provinces underwritten,
Huntington, Rutland, Lincoln, Leicester, Nottingham, Darby, and York.

5. Master John Iackson, Episcopal Vicar in the six Provinces underwritten.
Dorcester, Wiltshire, Gloucester Somersetshire, Devonshire and Cornwall.

6. Mr. Cuthbert Trollop, Epicopall Vicar in the five Provinces underwritten.
Lancaster, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and the Bishopric of
Durham.

7. Master Be^iamin Norton Episcopal Vcar in the five Provinces underwritten.
Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Hampshire and Barkshire.

Archdeacons and their Provinces.
1. Master John Colleton Arch Deacon in the County of Kent.

2. Master Arthur Pits Archdeacon of the Cities of London, Westminster, and
the Suburbs.

3. Master John Bostile, Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon in the Counties of
Warwick and Leicester.

4. Mr. Edward Bennet Archdeacon in the Counties of Buckingham and Bedford.

5. Mr. Thomas wright Doctor of Divinity, Archdeacon in the Counties of
Norfolk, Cambridge, and the Isle of Ely.

To Doctor Thomas Wright, now resident in the parts beyond Sea, is constituted
as a coadjutor, Master Elisha Brabant, by the Letter of the most Reverend Lord,
Richard Bishop of Calcedon, dared the 11. of Febr. 1626.

6. Master Richard Broughton Archdeacon in the counties of Huntington,
Rutland, Lincoln.

7. Master John Iackson Archdeacon in the counties of Wiltshire and Hampshire.

8. Master Cuthbert Trollop Archdeacon in the counties of Northumberland and
Bishopric of Durham.

9. Master Roger Strickland Archdeacon in the county of York.

10. Master John Mitchell Archdeacon in the county of Lancaster.

To Master John Mitchel, weak through old age, is constituted as a coadjutor,
Master John Redman, by the Letters of the most Reverend Richard Lord Bishop of
Calcedon, dated the tenth of February, 16.26.

11. Joseph Heynes Archdeacon in the county of Essex, and Suffolk. To which
Heynes. Master John Southcot Doctor of Divinity is coadjutor.

12. Richard Button Archdeacon in the counties of Stafford and Chester.

13. Humphrey Hanmer Archdeacon in the counties of South Wales and Hereford.
To whom succeeded Mr. Guin.

14. Matthew Britton Doctor of Divinity Archdeacon in the Counties of
Westmerland and Cumberland.

15. Master George Fisher Archdeacon in the Counties of Midlesex and Surrey.

16. Master Humphrey Hughes Archdeacon in the County of North Wales.

17. Master Thomas Moore Archdeacon in the Counties of Hartford and Northampton.

18. Master Thomas Morton Archdeacon in the Counties of Devonshire, Cornwall,
and Gloucester.

19. Master William Shilley Archdeacon in the County of Sussex.

To him succeeded M. Lane.

20. Master Anthony Teuchnor Archdeacon in the Counties of ( Oxford and
Barkeshire).

21. Master John Merricke Archdeacon in the Counties of (Shropshire and
Worcester).

To him succeeded M. Hyde.

22. Master Thomas Manger Archdeacon in the Counties of ( Sommerset and
Dorset-shire).

23. Master Thomas Worthington Archdeacon in the Counties of ( Notingham and
Darbie).

The new division of the Provinces, of the Vicaries and of the Archdeacons,
with the number of the Archdeaconries, contained in every one of the Vicarships.
1. The first Vicarship contains seven Counties or Provinces, viz. Cornwall,
Devonshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Gloucestershire, Hampshire, and it has
under it, three Archdeaconries.

1. Cornwall Devonshire 2. Somersetshire Dorsetshire 3. Wiltshire
Gloucestershire Hampshire
2. The second Vicariate contains seven Counties, Viz. Midlesex with the City
of London and City of Westminster, Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Barkeshire, Essex,
and Hartfordshire, and it has four Archdeaconries, 1. London Middlesex 2.
Surrey Barkeshire 3. Kent Sussex 4. Essex and Hartford


3. The third Vicariate contains five Counties, viz. Bedfordshire,
Huntingtonshire, Cambridgeshire with the Isle of Ely and with the part of the
Province of Lincolnshire which is called Holland and Norfolk and out of that
part which is called Marshland and Suffolk; And it has three Archdeaconries.

1. Bedford Huntington 2. Suffolk Norfolk 3. Ca^bridge with the Isle of Ely,
Holland, and Marshland.
4. The fourth Vicariate contains eight Counties, viz. Oxford, Buckingham,
Northampton, Leicester, Stafford, Warwick, worcester and Chester, and has
four Arch-deaconries.

1. Oxford Buckingham 2. Northampton Leicester. 3. Worcester. Warwick. 4.
Stafford Chester.
5. The fifth Vicariate contains fiveteen Counties, viz. North- Wales, South-
Wales with the Isle of Anglesey, Hartford, and Shropshire, and it has three
Archdeaconries.

1. North- Wales with the Isle of Anglesey, Mountgomerie, Merioneth, Denbigh,
Flint, Carnarvan.

2. Monmouth, Clamorgan, Radnar, Cardigan, Carmar. then, and Pembrooke.

3. Hereford and Shropshire.

6. The sixth Vicariate contains five Counties, viz.

1. Yorkshire. 2. Darbishire Nottingham 3. Lincoln Rutland
7. The seventh Vicariate contains five Counties Lancashire, Westmerland,
Cumberland, Northumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham, and it has three
Arch. deaconries.

1. Lancashire. 2. Westmerland Cumberland 3. Northumberland and the Bishopric
of Durham
According to the present division there are seven Vicarships and three and
twenty Archdeaconries, viz. Two more then there were heretofore ordained. That
if it does not seem good to multiply the number of the Archdeacons, the
present division may be so ordained that Cheshire and Staffordshire shall be
taken from the fourth Vicarship, and the Archdeanerie of Worcester, and
Warwickeshire, shall be added thereunto, and Cheshire shall be joined to the
Archdeanerie of North- Wales or Lancashire, and so shall belong to the fifth or
seventh Vicarship.

A Committee of Parliament sitting at Rochester, intercepted the foresaid
Catalogue and diverse other letters and papers herewith printed, as they were
carrying to the Bishop of Chalcedon, for the nominating such persons to fill up
vacant places in England as his Lordship shall think fit.

SIR,
I Send you all the enclosed open, that ere you deliver them to my Lord, you
may if you please take Copies of them, or at least be able to suggest unto his
Lordship the ordering of his Secretary to copy out, and keep safe such Records
as we are in danger here to lose, and cannot miss without great prejudice to
our Clergy.

You have herein what light and assistance we can give you toward filling up
the Chapter, in case you persist in that resolution in these confused times,
which perhaps considering my Lords age were not amiss to dispatch, if not
before, at least as soon after the election of a Coadjutor as may be, lest his
Lordship die before it be done, for we were better have it done less
completely before his Lordships death then not at all, and this cogitation has
accurred since I writ the former Papers, wherein was some doubt made about the
point, especially in the long Letter I had written to you before this setting
down the present state of your Chapter, and certifying who are living thereof,
who Dead, wherein are some things necessary perhaps to show my Lord what ere
the whole Letter it self be, which I refer unto your discretion, because I
had no notice from his Lordship of filling up all the vacant Places in the
Chapter, only of adding some more Canons thereunto.

As I had written thus far, I received yours of this week, and by good
fortune Master Herbert was actually with Master Webster at the same time; so
after he had read your Letter to him, and heard how earnestly Mr. Webster moved
not to resist his Brethrens Election, in case your self may not comply with
the place, he at last consented to submit to what his Brethren should finally
conclude upon, desiring first, that they advise again about your self, if
there be any probability with you to comply with the Place, if not, you see by
his consent our business is at an end, for he has (in case you fail) all the
Votes there, and here of those that are to Vote herein; as also he has Master
Bensons of Doway, and doubtless will have most, if not all, of our Brethren in
the Countries, who are not yet consulted about this affair, but shall be
speedily.

The said News of Mr. Montague being taken at Rochester, Mr. Montague
and preparation for him in the Tower does much afflict his friend^ and will be
as unwelcome to you, as to any man living. This night the Count de Harecourt is
expected in Town; I beseech you excuse me at this time to Master Clifton, you
see I have been overcharged with the enclosed, and pray tell my Lord I had not
time to write fair those Lights I send him for (...) the Chapter besides they
are not so perfect as were requisite if we had more time, but if his Lordship
will give longer time, he shall have it more exact. The ninth Canon now I
perceive was Master Herbert; excuse, if what I writ before in that be obscure
or less exact, for I have no time to rectify it, you may easily mend all
Errors therein by what is written otherwise about this business of the
Chapter.

SIR,
ACcording to your desire, and my promise, I now send you the state of our
present Chapter, together with such Patents as will be necessary for the
filling up thereof, with a particular of how many thereof are dead, and with
such a note (as up on so short a warning could be gotten) of names to fill it
up again, as have been by those of the Chapter in London reflected on, for
such was your desire.

The Copies of the Patents are such as Master Lovell left me, and I snall
desire that you will cause them to be kept there in safety, lest those I have
here should in these troublesome times miscarry. I could wish you had also
there other Copies of things most necessary, which I find here handsomely
recorded in Books by Master Lovell, God rest his soul; but truly I am so ill,
I cannot my self transcribe them, and to trust them out of my hands in the^^
times to Scribes, I dare not, and spare the Book I cannot, so I must hope God
will protect them and us his servants, whom they concern.

You will perceive by the Copy of the Catalogues of Vicars and Archdeacons
which Master Lovell left, as I now send them to you transcribed, that there
have bin two divisions of the Counties, in the first there appear 55. in the
last but 53, Counties of (...) distributed unto the care of 7. Vicars General,
and of 23. Archdeacons out of which number of Archdeacons you must deduct but
7. forasmuch as the 7. Vicars General not being (as Vicars) of the Chapter
were made each of them Archdeacons purposely to render them Chapter men also,
so that how are the number of Archdeacons be 23. yet deducting 7. out of that
number, as appropriate to the 7. Vicars you will find remaining only 16.
Archdeacons, I mean such as are purely Archdeacons, and not Vicars to boot;
And yet by the Note of Master Lovells at the end of the new Division, me
thinks there was an intention to have only 22. Archdeacons in all, or to
speak perhaps more properly to the Bishops intention, but 22. Chapter-men. Yet
I find that either you must increase the former districts of some Archdeacons,
of else you will not exhaust the Counties in the distribution thereof, for you
shall not find the Counties of Nottingham nor Darby appropriated to any
Archdeacon, unless you resolve the number of 23. shall stand good. An perhaps
that number was reduced to 22. only in the last Division upon reflection that
the seventh Vicar viz. Master Norton was not made Archdeacon, that I can find
upon any Record, and I send you all I have of this nature, so that my Lord and
you of the Chapter there, must please to resolve whether there shall be any
Vicar General without the Title of Archdeacon, and so let the first number of
23. Archdeacons stand good, or whether all the seven Vicars shall be
Archdeacons, and then the last Division of Archdeacons into 22. to remain. It
seems here most consonant to reason, to make each Vicar General an
Archdeacon, but what you there resolve will be here allowed of, but you shall
do well to appropriate such Counties to each Vicar and Archdeacon, as may be
most convenient for them to repair unto, which will be ahard matter to
determine in these unsettled times.

And hence you will perceive that by the Addition of Canons to the Chapter,
which you know were added but lately, that without filling up the places of the
old Chapter-men deceased, you will have as great a number almost of Chapter men
now living to choose a Coadjutor to the Deane (which is the present affair in
agitation) as would have been if all the dead persons vacant places were filled
up before the Election of this Coadjutor, so that if the desire of filling the
Chapter proceed out of a fear that there will want a competent number of
Chapter-men to make this Election, considering the late Addition of Canons to
the Chapter with power of voting in all affairs of the Clergy, there will be
no want of almost as full a number as ever were of the Chapter since it was
first erected.

For you see there never were above two or three and twenty at most of the
Chapter, and albeit most of them that were Vicars and Archdeacons be dead;
nevertheless those that are living together with the Canons lately added
thereunto, amount to the number of twenty, as I wrote you word last week;
only I forgot then to tell you, that one of the six whom I reckoned upon to be
in Paris, viz. Master Laborne, is neither of the Chapter in virtue of Vicar,
Archdeacon, or Canon, that I can find upon any Record, but this I impute to an
Accident of his being out of the way at Tame when the Canons were made, and so
I reckon upon him as if he were a Chapter-man, the rather because he was, and
is still one of his Lordships Consult, which may perhaps ipso facto, give him
that quality, The whole Chapter in the nature of a Counsel to Doctor Rich.
Smith titular Bishop of Chalcedon and Ordinary of England and Scotland by
Commission from the Pope.
in regard the whole Chapter has the nature of his Lordships Counsel.

But now to come unto the particulars, who are dead of the Chapter, and who now
living thereof, that so you may see clearly in the particulars what I tell you
of our Chapter in general, you may please to understand, that of the Vicars
General who were at most in number but seven, there are five dead, viz. Master
Colleton, Mr. Bennet, Mr. Boswill, Mr. Broughton, Mr. Norton, so that you must
think of Constituting five Vicars, for however Master Muscot was made
coadjutor to Master Colleton, yet he is now in a charge by the Popes command
incompatible with that office of Vicar General in Master Broughtons place,
whose residence he possesses, yet I do not conceive that he was ever made
Vicar General by Patent.

Now for the Vicars actually living, you will easily see they are but two, viz.
Master Iackson, and Master Trollop, who had need of a Coadjutor, being himself
grown unable to travel as you all know,

As for the Archdeacons, there are dead five in the five Vicars, and of such as
were purely Archdeacons and no more, there are dead besides Master Muscot
(whose place is vacant though he be living) ten, viz. Master Pits, Doctor
Wright and his successor Brabant, Master Strickland, Master Heines and his
successor Doctor Lovell, Master Hanmer and his successor Mr. Guin, as also the
intended successor to him, Master Robert Hughes lately, Doctor Britton, Master
More, Master Martine, Mr. Tushenor and his successor Mr. Aston, and Mr.
Worthington.

I do not account Mr. Shellyes, nor Mr. Merricks places vacant, by reason Mr.
Lane and Mr. Hide (surviving both) do supply them, but whether by Patents
created Archdeacons or not I cannot say, or whether by Deputation only they
execute the same, which in effect I account is all one.

So that here are undoubtedly to be de novo, created ten Archdeacons to fill up
the places vacant by death, and more to supply Mr. Muscots place yet living as
abovesaid.

Now for the living Archdeacons they are in number two, in the two Vicars
above, and four that are purely Archdeacons by Patents undoubted, viz. Master
Redman, Master Button, Mr. Hughes, and Master Manger, whereunto if you add the
suppliants (at least) living, Master Hide and Master Lane, then are there six
Archdeacons living.

As for Canons there were Created (as I remember) nine at the first, and they
are all living still, viz. Master Blaclo, Master Harrington, Master Holden, Mr.
Fitton, Master Clifford, Master Morgan, Master Curtes, Master Gage, and Mr.
Herbert; for I have now no convenience to come at such Records as do show
this, perhaps your memory will tell you this better then mine, or else then
Master Hide was made Canon, and not Master of which you shall know the
certainty ere long; but however thus you see what with two Vicars living, six
Archdeacons, and nine Canons, and the Deane, there are eighteen persons of the
Chapter now living; or take the Deane and at least five Archdeacons, and nine
pure Canons, supposing Master Hide to be no Archdeacon, they will in all amount
to the number of seventeen persons, whereunto adding the three Suppliants for
Archdeacons, who have as vet never had Patents viz, Master Barlo in
Warwickshire, and Master Stevens in Hertford, and Master Thomas Green in
Suffolk, by the old Division Norff. by new; you see we may account upon just
nineteen or twenty Chapter-men now actually living, whereas at first Erection
of the Chapter there were never more (as you see) then twenty two or twenty
three at most: And thus you have the exact account of the Chapter as now it
stands, wherewith if you rest not satisfied, but desire either to make more
Canons (as my Lord seems to do) or to fill up the number of those that ale
dead, We can suggest unto you for the present only these that follow for that
purpose, because we cannot have an exact account from all the Shires what men
are now residing therein, much less can we make any probable conjecture how to
six any one man in any one County of England, as times now stand, to officiate
therein, and so we should not at this time have thought of filling up the
vacant places yet because you there have that cogitation, and desire to know
whom we here in town think fitting for that purpose, we have reflected on
these underwritten.

For Vicars General.

Master Blaclo Mr. Holden, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Fitton, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Hide,
Mr. Drury Mr. Clifford, Mr. Laborne, Mr. Barquer.

For Archdeacons.

Master John Berrington, Mr. Stevens, Mr. Barlo, Mr. Edward Hughes. Mr Green,
Mr. Coffin, Mr. Sands, Mr. Laurence, Mr. Bruarton, Doctor Bloudston, Mr.
Faulconer, Mr. Ireland, Mr. Iennings, Mr. Curtes, Mr. Cattericke, Mr. Clampit,
Mr. Woodward, Master Cheake.

For Canons.

Master Carleton, Mr. Everard, Mr. More, Mr. Knightley, Master Warham Mr.
Polewheele, Mr. Carre, Mr. Todhill, Mr. Bradshawe, Lassels, Mr. Warnford, Mr.
Hall, Mr. Worthington, Mr. Marten, Mr. Lutlo, Mr. Turbervile, Mr. Ellice, Mr.
Weeks, Mr. Harrison, Mr. Page, Mr. Skinner, Mr. Sale, Mr. Totty, Mr. Tustall.

Above all things you must recommend secrecy if you resolve upon Master
Herbert, that his Lady come not to the notice of his being chosen into any
Office that will require resort to him, or his going abroad.

Master Carre however not in England, is a man so considerable, that above all
others not already of the Chapter, it were fit he were made one thereof, and
however I put him amongst Canons only, yet if his continual absence admit of
higher place, surely his merrits will claim it.

CONSIDERATIONS.
COnsiderations about filling up the Chapter.

The maine to appoint such Officers in such Divisions, as probably shall reside
therein, or at least conveniently may once a year repair thereto to comply
with their Officers.

Then persisting in the last Division, which you will find taken out of Master
Records.

The first Vicar is Master Hammon in Cornwall.

Note that he is also Archdeacon of the Shires, Hunt. and Wiltshire; now to
keep the form of this last Division, you must either add Gloucester shire to
his Archdeaconate, or else incur a greater confusion in altering the whole
frame of this Division.

And here I may not omit to let you know, that master Ham. has often desired
to resign up his Archdeaconate in the two Shires above said, for what cause I
know not; but admit he may be entreated to keep them, and to accept of
Gloucester shire thereunto;

Yet you must cast for two Archdeacons more, viz. of Somerset, Dorset. Cornwall
and Devon.

For however master Manger is living Archdeacon of Somerset and Dorset shire
yet now a bedrid man in Wales, he had need of a Coadjutor at least. The men
living in, or at least acquainted, and frequenting those parts are,

Master Victor, Mr. Martine, Mr. Woodward, the two Brothers Warhams, Mr. White
Mr. Hames, Mr. Brown, Mr. Newman.

The said Vicar according to this last Division, of London, Etcae't; will be
the man of most consideration in this affair, as being (being near to the
Dean) he through whose hands the greatest part of the Clergies affairs will
run, both for receiving the Priests new comers, and dealing With Persons of
greatost rank about the Town. This was Mr. Lahetans charge, and since Mr.
Muscots, and is now (by his absence, and being in a charge incompatible
therewith) vacant.

If you think of fixing in this place any of the Chapter-men now about the
Town, you will find few to afford you choice, for Mr. Herbert is already
suppliant to the sixth Vicariate, and happily may be changed into the fifth,
as being the only Britton that we can think of except Master Humphrey Hughes,
to be Vicar General of Wales Etcae't, Mr. Hamman you see is already fixed, Mr.
Webster is Deane, here only remain of Chapter-men Mr. Curtes, and Mr. Hoard
now about the Town. so that you must in this point go I believe by guess who
is likely of all those learned and grave Chaptermen now at Paris or Doway to
fix in Town when times come favorable, and those men you know are Master
Blacklo, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Barquer Mr. Holden, Mr. Filton, Mr. Hide, Mr.
Clifford, Mr. Laborne, Master Drury.

Now admit you fix upon one of these abroad, for the Vicar General about
London;

You are then to find him three Archdeacons more, for by this last division
there are four Archdeacons belonging to this Vicurate, so that making the
Vicar one of these four Archdeacons, as is supposed you will, there remain
three Archdeacons to be chosen under him.

With whom they shall be most serviceable for the common good, as being most
upon the eye of the world, and stay of our common affairs, you must resolve.

The Priests about the town are now so few, that they scarce make a number,
especially those that are Chapter-men, and not already deputed otherways, viz.
Master Curles Mr. Howard.

The Priests abroad you know. The Priests (not Chaptermen) in town to be
thought on for this charge are sew or none, only Mr. Worthington, though he
was one moved to be made of the Chapter, and it was refused, because he was
as servant to Doway being Procurator, and so not to govern.

Note, that of the three Archdeacons, Master Lane must be one, for he has a
long time supplied Mr. Theli^s place as Archdeacon of Sussex, and so to keep
Order of this second Division, must have added unto his district Kent also; so
his Patent must run Archdeacon of Sussex and Kent.

The third Vicar of Bedford, Huntington Elect, is in virtue already, and in
repute, M. Herbert, and consequently Archdeacon of two Counties thereunto
belonging.

So then you must provide for him two Archdeacons more out of these Priests
following (you will take such as live in those parts) they are Master Thomas
Green, Mr. Weeks, Mr. Everard, Mr. Carleton, Mr. Henry Blacklo.

In Norfolk and Suffolk.

In Cambridge elect, Elie, Hoh, Marchland, or thereabouts, none at all.

The fourth Vicar of Oxford Buckingham. Elect, which was Doctor Bosvile, and
now must be supplied by whom you think good, either of those named in an other
paper for Vicars, or of some of these following Priests living in that Division
and has under him four Archdeacons, but himself being to be one of the
four, you must cast for three more, and if you take the Priests living in
those Counties they are these that follow.

Master, Button Archdeacon already of Stafford and Cheshire, but so old, that
he had need of a Coadjutor, with power to succeed him.

Master Barlo, Mr. Bruerton, Mr. Venables, Mr. Lawrence, Master Suttlo, Mr.
Turbervill, Master Iennings, designed one for a Reader, a very able man, but
young; Master Humphrey Hattlo, Mr. William Ellis.

These are in Worcester Warwick Stafford, Cheshire: in Northton and Leicester
shire are Mr. Faulconer, Mr. Cheek, Mr. Edward Hughes.

Oxford and Bucks are the Counties perhaps most fit for these Vicars district
as he is Archdeacon.

The fist Vicar, who is he of Wells Elect, has under him three only
Archdeacons, whereof himself standing for one, you are to think only of two
Archdeacons more for that Division.

For the Vicar himself there occurres none fitter then either Mr. Herbert, (if
he be not deputed Vicar in Huntington Elect) or Mr. Humphrey Hughes now
Archdeacon of North- Wales.

For two Archdeacons under him, besides, if you choose them out of Priests in
those parts, they are these following.

Master Stevens living in Hertford, Mr. Vaughan, Mr. Stephen Pue, Mr. Permane,
Mr. Williams, Mr. John Barrington, Master John Powell, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Thomas
Street, Mr. John Holland Remble, Master Barnes Lay, Mr. William Pue, Mr.
Francis Green, chief man, Master Elliets, Mr. Morris, Mr. Prises, two of them.

Master Stevens and Mr. Barrington held the two fittest.

The sixth Vicar, who is of York, Darby, Nottingham, Lincoln, and Rutland,
and whose place is vacant, has under him only two Archdeacons, whereof
himself being one, you are to think of one more only for that Division.

The men fit to be thought on for this Vicariate, if you take the Priests
living in those parts are, Master Falconer, Mr. Coffine.

The Archdeacon may be one of those names in the four Vicars district, Mr.
French, Mr. Arnold, Mr. Fathering, Mr. Edward Hughes, Mr. Iackson, Mr.
Wor^hington.

The seventh Vicar who is hee^ of Lancashire, Northumberland, etc. Master
Trollop still living, but so old, as he had need of a Coadjutor with power to
succeed him, which whether it may not be Mr. Holden considering who is of those
parts, or master Lab. who is likewise of the same you may there advise.

This Vicar has under him three Archdeacons, himself being one; you are to
appoint one more only, Mr. Redman being Archdeacon in Lancashire already.

The Priests in the Country most considerable, for Vicars or Archdeacons, are
these that follow.

In Northumberland and the Yorkshire district.

Mr. Catricke, Mr. Walker, Doctor Blunderston, Master Wivell, Mr. Nearby, Mr.
John Lassells, Master H. Green, Mr. William Constable, Mr. Hodgeson, Master
Strickland; one his name Prebend of York Minster.

In Lancashire, there is already Archdeacons, Master Redman; too besides him
are, Master Sands principally, Mr. Totty, Mr. Sale, Mr. Thomas Worthington,
Master Tunstall.

Right Reverend my very good Lord,
Isend you now according to my promise last week such Copies of Patents as you
desired of Canons; and such other of Vicars and Archdeacons, and Rural Deanes
as you may have need of for completing the Chapter with such light into that
affair as in these dark and confused times I could procure.

I must not omit to certify your Lordship, that I have inserted Mr. Peter
Warnefords name amongst those who are suggested here to be made Canons, and I
should humbly desire he may be made such for one maine reason above others,
that I have a probable hope hereby to secure the Chapter of the holy Thorn
after his decease: and that is a Jewel which I am sure your Lordship values at
a high rate, A precious Relic.
as also do all others that know thereof.

If the light I have given in the choice of such men as may complete the
Chapter be sufficient to satisfy your Lordship of the merits of the men
suggested: Perhaps it may not be a miss to think of even in these uncertain
times, if for no other reason then to prevent mortality, and that the Chapter
might have the fuller power in its compleatnesse in case your Lordship should
die; as we that are many years younger cannot say but we may dye very
suddenly, and truly but for this only reason perhaps it were better defer the
filling up the Chapter till we better times expected; yet since I writ those
enclosed Papers I have reflected that perhaps it may not be amiss to complete
the Chapter with all speed that may be, for however we cannot suggest unto your
Lordship all our men in every County, yet I am confident we have named those
that are fittest for such places in each County, and such as are persoually
best known I believe to your Lordship for the most part of them.

As I wrote last week that Mr. Fittons repair to England would not be
necessary though he be chosen Coadjutor to Mr. Webster, cum jure missionis, so
I write again now upon better grounds, for God be thanked Mr. Webster mends in
his health: but admit he should fall back and die, yet even in that case perhaps
Mr. Fitton would most probably get our Chapter confirmed in his person of
Deane, and this not only through his being known and liked well of in Rome,
but farther through his particular relation with Lord (...) who perhaps would
conduce much toward confirming our Chapter, and Mr. Fittons person and the
Confirmation of our Chap: being the main thing we aim at, moves many to
think, that we were better choose Mr. Fitton Coadjutor then a stronger man;
because if in his person we get the Chapter confirmed, we can easily choose a
Coadjutor to him in case he should not grow strong; And so by this means we
effect our greatest affair and desire. The rest is that I am, my Lord,

Your most humble servant, F: H:

Mr. Herbert upon sight of these last Letters from being moved by Mr. Webster
to accept of the place makes answer, that if Mr. Fitton cannot supply the
place, rather then give offense unto his Brethren, he is content to conform to
the Votes of his Brethren.

A Letter from the Earl of Warwick, and some Members of the house of COMMONS:
To the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the said House.
SIR,
WE have thought fit to acquaint you with some Informations that we have
lately received, concerning the affairs of Ireland, such as we suppose you will
think fit to be imparted to the House. The Inhabitants of the Lath of Saint
Augustine in the county of Kent, out of their charitable commiseration of the
miseries of the Protestants in Ireland, (being enabled thereunto by an
Ordinance of Parliament). did in a very large manner contribute and gather Five
hundred quartets of Wheat, and other Grain; and accordingly sent it over to
Cork, imbarqued in a Vessel called the Prosperous of Sandwich, whereof one
Thomas Basset was Master; who accordingly carried the same unto Cork, and
delivered it unto the hands of the Lord Inchequine, according to an Order of
the Committee for Irish affairs: Now the said Vessel being returned, the
Master thereof makes this report, which we with all care and diligence have
sent up.

1. First, That the Lord Inchequine was so far from distributing the said
Grain, according to the intention of the Parliament, and the Doners, (who did
intend it as a free Gift, for the relief of the poor Protestants in Ireland)
that he did seize it, and sell it at a very dear rate, to any that would buy
it, detaining it from those to whom it was given.

2. That he did not only deprive them of the intended Charity, but also
oppressed them, with Billetting of two Regiments of Soldiers, that are since
sent over, (whereof the said Mr. Basset was an eyewitness) under the command
of Sir Charles Vavasour, and Sir John Pawlet, to the Port of Bristoll, to serve
here against the Parliament.

3. That the Lord Inchequine did press the said Master, Thomas Basset, to
carry over more Soldiers to the Port of Bristoll, which Basset did colourably
undertake, and attended several days to receive the Soldiers aboard of him,
till such time as he met with a convenient opportunity to make his escape,
which he desired, and now at last obtained.

4. The said Thomas Basset does report upon very good grounds, That there are
further intentions of raising great Forces of the Irish Rebels, to come over
to serve against the Parliament; and that for present there are ready two
Regiments, under the command of Sir Hardes Waller, and four Regiments of the
Lord Inchequines, and six Troops of Horse under the command of the Earl of
Cork; all which are to be listed under the Duke of York, to maintain this
unnatural War against the Parliament and Kingdom.

Now that it may appear that this Information of Thomas Basset is not
conjecturall, he is ready to testific all this upon Oath; And for present we
have here sent up diverse Instruments tending to this effect, subscribed by the
Lord Inchiquine, and delivered to the said Thomas Basset.

By all this you may perceive what a Design there is to bring over both Horse
and Foot of the Irish, to war here against the Parliament; which might in some
sort have been prevented, if the winter guard had been timely set forth, which
we desire you with all possible speed to hasten the winter guard, as hoping it
may be a means to prevent, and intercept a great many of the Irish Rebels,
which daily are in readiness to come over. And so, with our best respects
remembered unto you, praying God to give a blessing to all your proceedings; We
bid you heartily farewell, and rest

Downs, the 7th. November. 1643. Your assured loving Friend, Warwick.
William Strickland, Henry Mildmay, Edw. Boys.

By the Lord of Inchiquine, Commander of His Majesty's Forces in chief for the
Province of Mounster.
Whereas Thomas Basset, Master of the Providence of Sandwich, Bur. 100 Tuns;
arrived here in this Port of Cork, with his said Vessel from Sandwich, laden
with Corn and other provisions for the use of His Majesty's army; for which he
has here accordingly duly performed in that particular. And further, I do
hereby certify to whom it may or shall concern, That I have pressed the said
Vessel, Master, Company, and all other provisions to her belonging, for His
Majesty's service, the Ninth day of this present October: And is by me
commanded, from the said day to give his attendance until further order: For
which, he the said Master may not fail at his peril.

Given under my hand at Cork, the Ninth day of October, ut supra, Anno Dom.
1643. Jnchiquine.

By the Right Honorable, the Lord of Inchiquine, Commander in chief of his
Majesty's Forces within the Province of Mounster.
Whereas Thomas Basset, Master of the good Ship called The Prosperous of
Sandwich, Burden 100 Tuns or thereabouts, Company and said Ship, Is employed
by me from this Port of Cork, To carry and transport Soldiers for the Port of
Bristoll: And in respect I find him obedient, and ready to perform the said
service, I do hereby very earnestly desire the Admirals of His Majesty's Fleet,
and all others employed in His service, or any other person or persons
whatsoever whom it may any way concern, Not any ways to hinder or molest him
the said Master, Ship, or Company, or any of them in their departure from the
said Port of Bristoll, or in their intended Voyage into Wales, there to lade
the said Ship with Coals, to be transported from thence to this Harbor, for
the relief of this distressed Garrison of Cork; To which purpose I have engaged
my self to the said Master; and therefore am confident, That my desire herein
shall be complied withal.

Dated under my Hand at the said city of Cork, this Eighteenth day of October,
Anno Dom. 1643. Jnchiquine.

To the Right Honorable, my very good Lord, the Lord Hopton, Governor of the
City of Bristoll.
MY LORD,
I Have employed this Bearer, Mr. Basses, Master of a ship, called The
Prosperous of Sandwich, for the transporting, and carrying over hence in his
ship, to the Port of Bristoll soldiers for His Majesty's service and have,
According to His Majesty's Letters, enabling and authorizing me, agreed with
the said Master, that he shall be paid forty pounds ster. for the freight of
his ship upon her arrival there; which I conceive to be reasonable: And
therefore do desire, not only for the present service, but also for the future
encouragement of others of his quality: That the said money, according to my
said agreement with him, be forthwith upon his arrival in that Port punctually
paid: Thus, not doubting of the speedy performance hereof, I take leave and
remain

Cork 18. October: 1643. Your Lordships affectionated friend, and servant,
Inchiquine.
If it be nor proper for your Lordship to order this payment, I beseech you
recommend the Master, to whom your Lordship thinks fit for his satisfaction.



A Letter from the Governor of Plymouth, To Mr. Speaker of the Honorable House
of SIR, COMMONS, These present in London.
I Have sent you true Intelligence from Falmouth, one John German coming from
Perrin does report, that two ships are come to the Pott of Falmouth, From the
Rebels in Jreland, with-men, and ammunition, showing the Kings Broad-seale for
their safety; And the Castle gave two Pieces of Ordiance, with great joy at
their arrival, with menacing speeches against the Parliament, and swore the
Round heads should pay for all: Whereupon some Captains of the ships, being men
of war there, and diverse of the Inhabitants petitioned John Arundel Esquire,
Governor of Pendennis Castle, asking of him, if he would admit entrance to the
Rebels; and told him, if he did, many of them would forsake that cause, for
good could not possibly come of it; he answered them, that he would send to
know His Majesty's pleasure in that particular; the Rebels that came from
Ireland and Falmouth, report, that they look every day for eleven ships from
Ireland, with men and ammunition, and call themselves the Queens Army; two
ships were also going to relieve the poor Protestants in Ireland, and both
stopped at Falmouth, the one laden with wheat, the other with malt: Likewise
there is one John Burlasse Esquire, a known Papist, has command of a foot
Regiment, and governs the West of the County of Cornwall. Moreover, the said
German reports, that to the foresaid Port of Falmouth, is come four French
ships, landed some Officers and men, being laden with ammunition, and it is
thought, that the Officers are gone to the Kings Army; for they presently took
post from Falmouth, and the said French Officers report, that they expect ten
thousand men to be speedily sent over out of France to them.

Your most humble servant to command, James Wardlaw.
Plymouth, Novem. 1. 1643.
FINIS.

