THE REDUCTION OF EPISCOPACIE Unto the Form of Synodical Government Received in
the ANCIENT CHURCH:

Proposed in the year 1641. as an Expedient for the prevention of those
Troubles, which afterward did arise about the matter of Church Government.

By the most Reverend and learned Father of our Church. Dr. JAMES USHER late
Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of all Ireland.

A true Copy set forth by NICOLAS BERNARD, D. D. Preacher to the Honorable
Society of Grayes Inn occasioned by an imperfect Copy lately Printed.

December: 17 LONDON, Printed by E.C. for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane,
1656.

To the Reader.
THE late publishing of this Treatise from some different Copy, has compelled
me thus to hasten out a more Perfect one, according to the Original given me of
late years by this Most Reverend Person under his own hand, which I had a long
time in my custody; These defects or mistakes following were in the former
impression, and are amended in this.

1. The not mentioning the time of the Proposal, and intimating as if it had
been lately composed by him for the compremising of the now differences, and
the preventing of those troubles that may arise, etc. Whereas it was first
proposed in the year 1641. by way of accommodation then, and as an Expedient
for the prevention of what fell out afterward about the matter of
Church Government.

2. The printing of the Marginal notes in the I, II, III, IV, Propositions,
Parallelling them with the then customs of Scotland; these by his orders to me
were to be wholly left out, if ever they should be thought fit to be published.

3. The omission of the Marginal note out of St. Jerome in the third
Proposition, which is here supplied.

4. Some different words, (as company for community, Primate for Archbishop,
form of ordaining Ministers for the Book of Ordination, etc.) as the neglect
of that distinction of Characters for the quotations in English, and other
passages which were designed by his own hand.

5. The Postscript is set forth so defective, that the Reader might interpret
it to be his own attestation, whereas it was the draught of an approbation of
it by some others of eminency both for learning and piety, then living, who
were ready to have subscribed it. The Original given to me, having this
Introduction (which was notin the former impression) viz. We are of the
Judgment that the Form of Government here proposed, etc. I suppose Doctor
Holdsworth was one, by what I found under his hand annexed.

Thus much I have thought fit to advertise, as the causes necessitating me to
the reprinting of it, and to desire the Reader upon this occasion, not to give
credit hereafter to things of this nature, which shall be published in this
most Reverend Primates name, without the Approbation of such as are appointed
for that end.

And now if this (which is a Copy according to his own last correction) may
answer the expectation of many pious and prudent persons, to be a seasonable
preparative to some moderation in the midst of those extremes which this Age
abounds with, it will attain the end intended by the Author: And it is likely
to be the more operative, by the great reputation he had and has in the hearts
of all good men, being far from the least suspicion to be biased by any
private ends, but only aiming at the reducing of Order, Peace, and Unity, which
God is the Author of, and not of confusion. For the recovery of which, it were
to be wished, that such as do consent in Substantials for matter of Doctrine,
would consider of some conjunction in point of Discipline, that private
interests and circumstantials, might not keep them thus far asunder.

Grayes Inn, Dec. 2.1656. N. Bernard.

The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government received in
the ancient Church; proposed in the year 1641. as an Expedient for the
prevention of those troubles which afterward did arise about the matter of
Church Government.
Episcopal and Presbyterial Government conjoined.
BY Order of the Church of England, all Presbyters are charged The book of
Ordination.
to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ as the
Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the same; And that they
might the better understand what the Lord had commanded therein, Ibid. ex Act.
20.27, 28.
the exhortation of St. Paul to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus is
appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination; Take heed unto
your selves and to all the flock among whom the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers to (...) so taken in Mat. 2.6. and Rev. 12.5. and 19.15.
Rule the Congregation of God which he has purchased with his Blood.

Of the many Elders who in common thus ruled the Church of Ephesus, there was
one President whom our Savior in his Epistle unto this Church in a peculiar
manner styles Rev. 2.1.
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: and Ignatius in another Epistle written
about twelve years after unto the same Church, calls the Bishop thereof.
Betwixt the Bishop and the Presbytery of that Church, what an harmonious
consent there was in the ordering of the Church Government, the same Ignatius
does fully there declare, by the Presbytery, with 1 Timothy 4.14.
St. Paul, understanding the community of the rest of the Presbyters or Elders,
who then had a hand not only in the delivery of the Doctrine, and Sacraments,
but also in the Administration of the Discipline of Christ: for further proof
of which, we have the known testimony of Tertullian in his general Apology for
Christians. Ibidem etiam exhortationes, castigationes and censura divina; nam
and judicatur magno cum pondere ut apud certos de Dei censpectu, summumque
futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a communicatione
orationis, and cenventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur: praesident
probati quique seniores, honorem istum non pretio, sed Testimonio adepti.
Tertul. Apologet. cap. 39.
In the Church are used exhortations, chastisements, and divine censure; for
Judgment is given with great advice as among those who are certain they are in
the sight of God, and it is the chiefest foreshewing of the Judgment which is
to come, if any man have so offended, that he be banished from the Communion of
Prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all holy fellowship. The Presidents that
bear rule therein are certain approved Elders, who have obtained this honor
not by reward, but by good report, who were no other (as he himself intimates)
elsewhere, but Nec de aliorum manibus quam praesidentium sumimus, Id. de corona
militis, cap. 3.
those from whose hands they used to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

For with the Bishop who was the chief President (and therefore styled by the
same Tertullian in another place Dandi quidem Baptismi habet jus sumus sacerdes
qui est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, Id. de Baps. capt. 17.
Summus Sacerdos for distinction sake) the rest of the dispensers of the Word
and Sacraments joined in the common government of the Church; and therefore
where, in matters of Ecclesiastical Judicature, Cornelius Bishop of Rome used
the received form of Omni actu ad me perlato placuit contrahi Presbyterium,
Cornel. apud Cyp. epist. 46.
gathering together the Presbytery; of what persons that did consist, Cyprian
sufficiently declares, when he wishes him to read his Letters Florentissimo
illic clero tecum praesidenti. Cyprian epist. 55. ad Cornel.
to the flourishing Clergy which there did preside or rule with him: The
Presence of the Clergy being thought to be so requisite in matters of Episcopal
audience, that in the fourth Council of Carthage it was concluded, Ut Episcopus
nullius causam audiat absque praesentia Clericorum suorum, alioquin irrita erit
sententia Episcopi nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur, Council. Carthag.
IIII. cap. 23.
That the Bishop might hear no man's cause without the presence of the Clergy:
and that otherwise the Bishops sentence should be void, unless it were
confirmed by the presence of the Clergy: which we find also to be inserted
into the Canons of Excerption. Egberti cap. 43.
Egbert, who was Archbishop of York in the Saxon times, and afterward into
the body of the 15. q. 7. cap. Nullus.
Canon Law it self.

True it is, that in our Church this kind of Presbyterial Government-hath been
long dis-used, yet seeing it still professes that every Pastor has a right to
rule the church (from whence the name of Rector also was given at first unto
him) and to administer the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the
Doctrine and Sacraments, and the restraint of the exercise of that right
proceeds only from the custom now received in this Realm; no man can doubt
but by another Law of the Land, this hinderance may be well removed. And how
easily this ancient form of government by the united suffrages of the Clergy
might be revived again, and with what little show of alteration the Synodical
conventions of the Pastors of every Parish might be accorded with the
Presidency of the Bishops of each Diocese and Province, the indifferent Reader
may quickly perceive by the perusal of the ensuing Propositions.

I.
In every Parish the Rector or Incumbent Pastor, together with the
Churchwardens and Sidesmen, may every week take notice of such as live
scandalously in that Congregation, who are to receive such several admonitions
and reproofs, as the quality of their offense shall deserve; And if by this
means they cannot be reclaimed, they may be presented to the next monthly
Synod; and in the mean time debarred by the Pastor from access unto the Lords
Table.

II.
Whereas by a Statute in the 26 year of King Henry the eighth (revived in the
first year of Queen Elizabeth) Suffragans are appointed to be erected in 26
several places of this Kingdom; the number of them might very well be conformed
unto the number of the several Rural Deanries into which every Diocese is
subdivided; which being done, the Suffragan supplying the place of those who in
the ancient Church were called Chorepiscopi, might every month assemble a
Synod of all the Rectors, or Incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and
according to the major part of their voices, conclude all matters that shall be
brought into debate before them.

To this Synod the Rector and Churchwardens might present such impenitent
persons as by admonitions and suspension from the Sacrament would not be
reformed; who if they should still remain contumacious and incorrigible, the
sentence of Excommunication might be decreed against them by the Synod, and
accordingly be executed in the Parish where they lived. Hitherto also all
things that concerned the Parochial Ministers might be referred, whether they
did touch their doctrine or their conversation; as also the censure of all new
Opinions, Heresies, and Schisms, which did arise within that Circuit; with
liberty of Appeal, if need so require, unto the Diocesan Synod.

III.
The Diocesan Synod might be held once or twice in the year, as it should be
thought most convenient: Therein all the Suffragans, and the rest of the
Rectors or Incumbent Pastors (or a certain select number, of every Deanery)
within the Diocese might meet, with whose consent, or the major part of them
all things might be concluded by the Bishop or (...) id est, superintendentes;
unde and nomen Episcopi tractum est. Hieron. epist. 85. ad Evagrium.
Superintendent (call him whether you will) or in his absence, by one of the
Suffragans; whom he shall depute in his stead to be Moderator of that Assembly.

Here all matters of greater moment might be taken into consideration, and the
Orders of the monthly Synods revised, and (if need be) reformed: and if here
also any matter of difficulty could not receive a full determination: it might
be referred to the next Provincial or National Synod.

IV.
The Provincial Synod might consist of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such
other of the Clergy as should be elected out of every Diocese within the
Province, the Archbishop of either Province might be the Moderator of this
meeting (or in his room some one of the Bishops appointed by him) and all
matters be ordered therein by common consent as in the former Assemblies.

This Synod might be held every third year, and if the Parliament do then sit
(according to the Act of a Triennial Parliament) both the Archbishops and
Provincial Synods of the Land might join together, and make up a National
Council: Wherein all Appeals from inferior Synods might be received, all their
Acts examined and all Ecclesiastical constitutions which concern the state of
the Church of the whole Nation established.

FINIS.
WE are of the Judgment that the Form of Government here proposed is not in
any point repugnant to the Scripture; and that the Suffragans mentioned in the
second Proposition, may lawfully use the power both of Jurisdiction and
Ordination, according to the Word of God and the practice of the ancient Church.


