Utrum Horum, Mavis, Accipe.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN T -- D -- And C. G -- P -- As they met in the Privy-Garden.
O. WELL met Brother Evidence, I am glad at last that we are both in the same
Predicament.


P. Zounds, who made me a Brother to such a profligate Wretch as thou art?


O. Sir, I hope it is not so great an Affront for a Dr. of the Noble University
of Salamanca, to call a disbanded Captain, Brother; and especially when we are
so upon more Titles than one.


P. Pox on thy Brazen-Face. I can show a real Commission I had from my Quondam
Master for my Captainship; whereas you cannot show the least scrap of your
Diploma for your Dr's. Degree, having never been within two hundred miles of
that famed University.


O. How do you know but I had it by the Post?


P. Oh, oh! Good Doctor, the first Dr. of the Post, but not the first Knight of
it, I am sure.


O. Sir, Do you call me Dr. of the Post? Remember that I was styled Savior of
the Nation, and believed by Parliaments.


P. A Savior of the Nation you may be still; but you must be Crucified first,
you perjured Dog; though three Parliaments believed you; the all-healing
Parliaments that have been since this happy Revolution, refused to take off
your Attainder of Perjury, which, be sure they would have done, had they judged
you Innocent, so that now you are like a Serpent whose Poison lies in his
Teeth, which after they are pulled out, every body may play with Security.


O. Sir, If my Breath stinks, I am sure you have foul a Mouth, and when you
tell me of Crucifying, think of hanging your self, good Brother Evidence,


P. O how my Valor rouses if it were not to destroy the breed of Evidences,
you should quickly feel the Effects of my Resentments.


O. Your Resentments? You never durst draw your Sword in Anger, if your Enemies
Sword were drawn first. I have heard you have suffered your self rather than
fight, to be twang'd by the Nose.


P. That Is one of Charnock's and my Man Key's Stories; but I think I have been
even with them since.


O. That you have with a witness, and I believe was the first Master that ever
drew in his Man to commit Treason, and after hanged him for his Pains.


P. No more reflections, good Dr. of the Post, my Traitors confessed their
Crimes at the Gallows, and with their dying Breaths, confirmed my Evidence; but
yours denied it to the last Breath.


O. Good Captain B. B. Do you know the reason of it? When my Traitors suffered,
the Pope was not in a Confederacy against France, and so gave them
Dispensations to die with a lie in their Mouths; but being now in the
Confederacy, he utterly denied all Dispensations, and so they were forced to
confess; whereas mine having it in their Pockets, died hard as they Phrase it.


P. Pox take your silly Reasons. I am sure you could assign better; have you
forgot what you said in your Book called the Popes Warehouse, that one might
have a Dispensation for most Crimes, especially Treason against a Protestant
Prince for half a Crown, and a Cheap penny worth too; and you know the old
Gentleman still loves Money, and would not shut up his Warehouse upon any
account whatsoever; and do you think that neither they nor any of their party
could procure half a ^^own?


O. what I said in my Warehouse was only a Cast of my Office, and served a
turn then; for who does not reflect, that if Dispensations were so easy to be
got, that to make Laws against the Papists, or so reputed, were but to hedge in
the Cuckoo, and that no Man would pay double Taxes, or want an Employment for
want of an Oath, when he may be dispensed with any Perjury for half a Crown?


P. What you are coming over to my Church.


O. Where the Devil's that?


P. Where a Pox is yours, Zounds, Sword draw your self, and revenge my Quarrel.


O. Sir, have a care of Swearing; you know the severity of the late Act.


P. Good wooden Dr. of the Post, keep your advice to your self, I have not
sworn above twice, and it I loose time by it, I do not much value it, I have
four Pounds per Week. I am sure you need not, for you have got well by
Swearing. Some say three or four hundred a Year.


O. What Is that to 40000 Pounds, that was promised me by a good many true
Protestants, as I might then have kept my Coach and Six, and have had a great
deal of Masculine divertisements. But now while I think on it, meet me at the --
Tavern at Charing Cross, there is a delicate Drawer, as beautiful as Ganimedes,
and will end all Quarrels, you know what I mean, it is no small pleasure to have
good Wine filled by a beautiful Hand.


P. I understand trap. I do not mean trap ad Crucem: This innuendo is enough;
I Will be sure, and I heartily forgive you for what is past, and I could almost
measure Chins with you even now for your good News.


O. We are not unlike in our Chins; which denotes more Cowardice than Valor
and Bravery in either of us.


P. I am impatient to hear your Nonsense, in Repeating such infamous Actions,
that are enough to make a Neager Blush: Do you hear how your old friend groans
for you?

Oh! name it once again; will Titus come?
My dearest, hopeful, that long wished for One,
For whom my Triple Arms extended were,
(To hug with close Embraces) many a year.
Haste! haste! my choicest Darling, whom I love,
And thy long-promis'd kindness let me prove.
That Right thou plead'st for, which indeed's thy due,
Though others I Have denied, I Will grant it You.
The World shall find I willingly will bear,
And dance thy Carcass 'twixt the Earth and Air.
In Hemp'n string I Will lull thee fast a sleep,
And prevent all the Dangers of the Deep.
Oh, how I love thee! 'cause I Have heard thou'st been
So well acquainted with all kinds of Sin,
And, with a false and strange Religious Guise,
Destroyed the Innocent, abused the Wise.
What crafty Lessons did thou teach to men!
How to Rebel, and told the time best when;
Urged to Exclude a Right and Lawful Heir,
Unthrone a King, and swore away a Peer.
Thy Zeal through two-inch-Boards was plainly seen,
When Satan prompt thee to swear against the Queen:
Besides those many guiltless Souls that died
A Sacrifice to thy Luciferian Pride.
Yet, yet, beloved Titus, my dear Son,
(Reputed Savior, for thy Mercies shown,)
And well may claim my Palace as thine own.
Thou Wilt find me kinder far than Courtiers; I
Will never turn thee out until thou die:
And, since White Hall has left thee, I Will provide
That Lodging for Thee, where old Noll was tied.
Adieu, dear Brother.


FINIS.
LONDON: Printed in the Year 1699.


