THE METHOD OF A SYNOD, OR, A RATIONAL AND sure Way to compose and settle the
Differences and Controversies in Religion to the Contentment of honest and wise
men, and all the Lovers of Christian Peace.

By G. T. Stud. in C. C. C.

Nemo nostrum dicat jam se invenisse veritatem: Sictam quaeramus quasi ab
utrisque nesciatur. Aug. cont. Manich.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by William Larnar. MDCXLII.

A METHOD OR, WAY OF PROCEEDING in SYNOD.
NO Age from the first entrance of Sin into the World has enjoyed so pure
and certain a happiness but that it has still been mingled and disturbed
with some infelicity: and on the other side, on Time has been so miscrable
and unfortunate, but the good will of God toward Mankind, whose flesh his
blessed Son wore, has tempered it with some sweetness. The experience of
all Ages witnesses this, the Histories of all people abundantly prove it. This
present Age of ours is a most clear Testimony to assert the same: Oh all you
that pass by, was ever grief and distraction like ours? Which to prove, I
mean not to run the Story of all our Evils, nor of that Good wherewith we
are somewhat recreated and relieved; but only to recount one most eminent
Good, and one Evil diametrally opposed to that Good; our great and eminent
Good is this: That divine Mercy has illuminated these Kingdoms with the
beams of Sacred Truth, and the knowledge of the true (that is) of the
Christian Religion, for all others besides it are most certainly false: Our
Exceeding great Evil to that Good opposed, is, That either humane ignorance,
or perverseness has not only mask't, but dangerously clouded the beauty of
that Truth with Errors, and torn us into various parts, nay parcels of parts,
quite contrary to the nature, spirit and Genius of Christian Religion, which is
most entirely one, the Author of which is one; and the Prince of peace, the
Doctrine, the Gospel of peace, the Professors called the Sons of peace; and
to say all in a word, The foundation of which is that great Pacification
betwixt GOD and man; and the end of it eternal peace and tranquillity. Is it
not then strange, that of this Religion such and so many Dissentions should be
borne? Christ himself tells us no. Mat. 10.
I came not to send peace into the Earth; but a sword, etc. And the enemies of
a man shall be those of his own house; which words do not show the end of
Christ's coming, but an event like to arise from thence by the averseness of
some or the most of men from his Discipline.

From Religion sprung that hate of the Jews toward the Samaritans whose
service he would not use even in business that concerned his life, nor the
Samaritan his: hence the Samaritan woman admires that Jesus should ask water
of her to drink, Joh. 4. From such hate and dissent of minds, Schisms,
Factions, Secessions into several parties arise. For as Love is an Affection
of Union, so hate of disseparation. Hence Synagogues, are opposed to
Synagogues, Temples to Temples, Altars raised against Altars, consecrated and
frequented, which neither part wiladmit of Commerce with the other. This is the
cause, that voices not unlike those of the Jsraelites scattering themselves
into Factions, are heard amongst us now; To thy Tents (O Israel!) they have no
share in God, nor in his Son Jesus Christ. For both Factions equally
appropriate to themselves that glorious name of the true Israel, and take it
from the other; as if this were possessed with plenary absolute power of
judging above the other; or as if the GOD of Heaven had prejudged that great
name to this party alone, which he graciously bestows upon, and publishes to
his whole Church: neither yet does this im bitterdnesse of dissenting minds
rest and fix it self in Schism; but if peradventure one party find it self
too strong for the other, it does not fear to begin a persecution against the
adverse, and to contrive, and labor the utter destruction of it, passing by no
Engine fit for that purpose which either wit can invent, or Religious choler
can dictat, or the very Shop of Hell can furnish them withal. They are mad,
and commit outrages upon the same; the goods and bodies of men alive, upon
their dust, Sepulchers, and memory when they are dead, nay upon the souls of
living and dead men, and that with all kinds of arms; with mocking, Calumnies,
and Execrations, Excommunications, Anathematismes, Libels, Prisons, Banishments
into remote and barbarous Islands, from their dear Wives and Children, till the
adverse part be either quite extinct, or submit it self to the will of the
prevailing side, by abjuring their own opinion, and receiving that opinion
which they lately blamed, and protested against.

Thus the Gentiles persecuted the first and best Christians; thus the Arians
the Orthodox Divines. If we look upon our present state here at home, I need
not cast about for more Arguments to prove this; all this Town, all this
Kingdom confesses, That from Christian Religion our greatest good, dissentions
and importunate vexations of one another have flowed, not immediately from
Religion it self, but our vice, or weakness, or both. And now I come to the
Remedy of these miseries and evils, and most hopeful appearing way to
repossesse us in that good which we our selves have forfeited. Physicians say
the nature of Remedies is such that they are never applied in vain; that they
either do good, and truly are what they are said to be, or a great deal of
harm: which very thing persuades me, first to remove certain perverse
remedies in this case of controverted Religion, devised by men, and sometimes
used. 2. Ill. Remed.


First of all the sufficiency of implicit faith, by which we believe without
knowledge of the thing it self, what the Church and Prelates believe, is
obtruded upon us as a special Remedy, when Religion is distempered and sick.
With this kind of faith, (says the jesuit) the Catholic Collier perplexed
and confuted the Devil. And indeed this is a way without doubt not only to
remove dissentions in Religion, but take away even Religion it self which
cannot be without knowledge and faith, Romans 10.10. Hab. 2.4. 2 Cor. 4.13.

2. another Device not unlike this, to settle Religion, is a strange Position,
yet received in the world; namely, That every man may be saved in his own
Religion: But this Assertion is a Remedy worse then the Disease of Religion,
and leads those which are possessed with that Error to certain destruction;
because that opinion makes Error incurable, since no man upon this ground, That
his own Religion will save him, needs to lay down or correct his error.
Mahomet devised this to establish his Alcoran and exempt it from Disceptation.
This prevaild in Paganism, as appears by that inscription of an Altar at
Athens; To the Gods of Asia, to the Gods of Europe, and Africa, to unknown
and foreign Gods. By this way the Devil sought to establish himself,
providing that his Kingdom should not be divided against it self to perish.

3. A third perverse Remedy is prohibition of dispute about Religion, which
lays a foundation for most stupid ignorance. and this is dangerous, whether
that Religion which prevails amongst a people be true or false: if true, by
reason of the inconstancy of man's mind ready to be Apostate from true
Religion, there needs dispute to confirm it: if false, lest received Error
should be turned over, and consecrated to perpetuity.

4. The Romanists prescribe us three Remedies more. They send us to the
Catholiqne Church, that is, the representative body of the Roman Church, the
Bishop of Rome, the Cardinals, inferior Bishops, and other Praelaticall men
subject to the Pope: and because they believe that all the subordinate Bishops,
Cardinals and Prelates gathered together may err, they exempt the Pope from a
possibility of erring, and turn us over to his Holiness for definitive
Sentence, and peremtory Decree, in the Doubts, Controversies, and Differences
in Religion. But this Remedy for two Reasons is vain. First, because the
Christian world cannot be convinced of the Truth of that Article of
Infallibility in the Pope. Secondly, when they go about to prove his Holiness
infallible by the Scriptures, they teach us unawares to run to the Scripture as
the great President, and most certain Determiner in Religion.

5. If this way of cure do not please us, they give us a receipt of all the
Greek and Latin Fathers; they bid us swallow and digest them, and then pick
out our Religion from their consent and agreement: But this Remedy is
hopeless for many Reasons, but especially for that which the Romanists with us
agree upon; namely, That every Father might Err, and be quite out as well as
we.

6. For further Remedy, They send us to consult with the Decrees of antecedent
Councels, and if the Controversy be there once decided, they advise us not to
call it again into question. But what if a good Cause be ill pleaded and cast;
not for any fault in it self, but in the assertors silence for fear or
unskilfulnesse in the Patronage of his cause? must we then take the Result of
his weakness for truth upon the word of a Council?

7. Some have thought it a hopeful Remedy in case of divided Religion, To
supplicate God Almighty that he would be pleased to send some man from the
dead, that of him we might know how God judges of the opinions of dissenting
men. But our Savior takes us off from this, Luk 16. They have Moses and the
Prophets, whom if they will not hear, neither will they believe though one
should rise from the dead.

8. There remains another horrible kind of Remedy, and yet sometimes used;
namely, the adjuration of damned Spirits in the bodies of the possessed men by
Exorcismes and Conjurations to make them answer concerning the truth of
controverted opinions. And this is so execrable that I need say nothing against
it. We know that Christ Jesus would not take the Testimony of such spirits
concerning him, but commanded them to hold their peace. But I dismiss these
wild Remedies, and come to those which are voted sober, holy and true, by the
most learned Writers of the best reformed Churches: which Remedies may be
distributed into Rernedies preparatorie, and Remedies Aphaereticall, or
powerful to take away Dissentions of minds in Religion. To the Remedies
preparatorie chiefly belong Prayers and supplications to God for the knowledge
of truth, and the impetration of Christian peace; which prayers joined with
fasting and humiliation in dust and ashes cannot but be efficacious, because
(according to Gods own command) we pray for the peace of Israel. To our
prayers let a serious Correction of our lives be added, or else our Prayers are
nothing but a fruitless noise. He that does the will of my father shall know
of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, etc. John 7. Let those causes which
beget and nurse dissension be taken away: let humility out our pride; let
benevolence take place of envy, longanimitie of anger; let a sober kind of
wisdom in nice questions set a bound and measure to our desire of knowing
something more then others; let hate and bitterness be laid down, and in stead
of them let the bowels of compassion be put on toward those which dissent
from us in Religion and seem to be in the error; which we may easily do if we
consider these four things. 1. How difficult a thing it is to discover truth,
and decline error. 2. That those who cross our opinion, do it rather out of
ignorance then a studied malice to procure eternal destruction for their own
selves and others. 3. That those whom we apprehend to be in such an error may
possibly be of the number of Gods elect, and permitted to fall into that
error, that God may raise them with more glory: and can we then determine any
thing rigorously against our brethren the members of Christ, and not only the
servants, but the sons of God, and the elect heirs of heaven? Thus much of
preparatory Remedies disposing us to the discovery of truth, and the
reconciliation of divided parts in Religion. The piety and wisdom of our
Sovereign Lord, and of this great and honorable Council has already showed
us the most hopeful Remedy of our distempers, namely a Synod. The definition
of which (though it might be here not unartificially as also that authority
by which a Synod ought to be called, I willingly omit. A young Divine may
easily trip in a political discourse: but I have resolved with my self not to
touch on any thing which is not safe for me, nor to say any thing which a wise
man perhaps will not venture to say after me. But will you now hear the
judgment of grave, honest, and learned Divines concerning the qualifications
and accomplishments of such as are fit to be Synoders? Such men (say they)
ought to be convein'd as are instructed with wisdom, sanctity of life, and
experience of things, such as burn with the zeal of God, and the salvation of
men, with the love of truth, and Christian peace; such as are acknowledged by
probable reasons to have the Spirit of Truth, by which they are enabled to
discern betwixt true and false, good and bad; and since Laics as well as
Ecclesiastic men may be endowed with such abilities; Laics (say the same
Authors) whether they be inplace of office and Dignity, nor more private may
be admitted to the sacred Convent: the door of the house where such'a Convent
is held, they would have thus inscribed with golden letters. Let no man enter
here, but he that is studious of Truth and peace: may God himself place his
Angel with a flaming sword at the entrance of this Paradise where divine Truth
and the lovely Concord of the Church is consulted about, to keep back all
those who are otherwise minded. Amen.

In such a Synod Divines agree, That the Prerogatives of Princes, making of
war, with other Political chings, are not to be handled; but things pertaining
purely to Religion, such as are (say they) the Doctrine of Faith and manners,
and Ordo Ecclesiasticus, the interpretation of which words I permit to every
man, because I mean to be offensive to none, except it be for not rendering
them. In dogmatis, or in opinions two things are to be considered; 1. the truth
of them; 2. how great the necessity is of knowing, believing and doing
according to them. The end of such a sacred Convent should be the illustration
of Truth, the conservation and propagation of it, extirpation of errors the
peace of the Church, whence exists the glory of God, and the eternal salvation
of man. Now whether a presidence in such a Synod be compatible to any one
particular man, or whether to avoid confusion, several Presidents to succeed
one another may not be needful, I leave to the resolution of honest and wise
men. But I think some kind of President might be very useful to propose thines
to be done, to ask opinions, to collect them by the service of Notaries, and
govern the whole action.

Actions which pass in such a Synod by Divines are reduced to three; 1.
acurate disceptation about controversies; 2. mature consultation; 3. A free
speaking of every ones sentence concerning what is inquired, the rule of all
which is the Word of God contained in the old and new Testament. All men which
write upon this subject agree, that Disputations in Synods ought not to be made
in Rhetorical flourishes, but in Logical concise argumentations, in which all
extemporality and praecipitant have must be taken heed of. They advise the
Disputants on both sides to take time enough for just meditation, and for the
avoiding of many absurdities, to comprise in writing the sum of what they
intend to speak, and thence to recite it. The Disputation being ended, grave
and mature deliberation is to be used both about the Controversies themselves
and Arguments urged by both sides, that by contracting the whole Dispute to a
narrow compass, the truth at one intuition may appear and be received with the
content and astipulation of the whole body. And because nothing has more
hindered the discovery of Truth, and agreement of men in Religion, then that
some men who have tied themselves to opinions at home, bring them to the Synod,
and resolve to pronounce them there: therefore it is necessary (says my Author)
that sanctum juramentum a holy Oath should be given to every man convented to
speak all in the fear of God from a good conscience, to maintain nothing which
he thinks false, to conceal nothing which he thinks true though it make against
himself, not to urge any thing which is doubtful for a thing certain, but
that he will be ready to do all which lies in him that may conduce to the
discovery of Truth, and promotion of Christian peace. From minds of men
disposed as aforesaid to reconciliation and agreement, from a Synod thus
administered and regulated, we may expect by Gods mercy and blessing, a glorious
rising and breaking forth of Truth and peace upon us, and have cause to receive
them with Benedictions Jubiles, and such like acclamations.

Truth and righteousness look down from heaven upon us, and we see Jerusalem as
a City at unity within it self. Pray for them that love her: peace be upon
them, and upon the Israel of God.

FINIS.

