UNTO THE Youth of our Friends (called Quakers) IN THE City of Bristol, and
elsewhere, And others who may be concerned herein.
To be Read and Practiced in the Fear of God, in which it was given forth.
IN a tender care and desire of the welfare of you, the Youth of Friends of
this City (and others concerned) of what Capacity so^ver, whether Children or
Servants; in an earnest Travel that the Work of God, which he has begun, might
go forward (...) you, with full Power and Victory over all your Enemies, and
that as living Plan^s of Righteousness, you may be preser^ed, and grow together
with his people, in a pure and spotless Testimony for the Truth, as it has
been received, and preac^ed from the beginning; for the gathering all out of
the Pollutions, vain Customs and Traditions of the World, into the pure Spirit
and Life of Christ Jesus, which has been the Guide of the Righteous through
all Ages.

These Lines are to you, in the pure fear of God, from us whose Hearts have
been long saddened with the Observations, and feeling of the prevalency of the
Enemy's Snares and Temptations of diverse sorts, over Youth; And that
notwithstanding the (...)ent Warnings, and Counsels, which have been given in
your ears, which have not had that through effect, upon some, (...) our Souls
have desired; And to the grieving of our Spirits, we have observed that the
Enemy has taken great advan^^ge over Youth, in their disorderly proceeding
toward Marriage, wherein many have gone from the pure leadings of the Truth,
by unequally yoaking themselves, and going to Priests to be married; and other
miscarriages, which have been to the dishonor of the Truth, the opening the
mouths of the Enemies thereof, grieving the hearts of Friends, and wounding
their (...) Souls.

And farther, We being (in our waiting upon the Lord) made sencible, that a
great Cause from whence the evils, hurts, ^^d offenses of this kind have come;
has been through youth, in their unbridled nature, Engaging and Intangling one
ano^^ers affections before they have acquainted their Parents or Gardians
therewith, which if they had so done, they might (...)e received right and true
Counsel how they might have acted, to the honor of Truth in that Affair.

And we being made sensible how unrighteous and uncomely a thing it is, and how
far remote from that duty and respect ^^at is due to Parents, and Gardians, who
are rightly concerned in their dispose, for any thus to act; we cannot but, for
(...)ring of our selves, and for the preventing of future Miscarriages of this
kind, on Gods behalf, warn and caution all Friends (...)t are (or may be)
concerned herein, to be tender, and careful in this matter, of so weighty
concernment; and that such, (...) have any intentions toward Marriage, do in
the fear of the Lord, seriously weigh and consider what they are going about
(...) do, and mind his leadings and guidings therein, and not to be too
forward, but wait in singleness of heart for Counsel from (...), and not to eye
any outward thing more then the Lord; and when they shall come to see their way
clear, in the Fear of (...) Lord, in the first place, in plainness to offer
such their Intentions unto their Parents or Gardians, and to the Parents or
Gardians of the party that is in their eye; and so to act in the Light, as
Children thereof, as may answer the Witness of Truth them all, and not
otherwise; And in this they may expect the blessing of the Lord to be with them
in their so pro(...)eding.

And we do believe, that this our Serious, and tender Advice and Counsel will
have an answer in the hearts of all such as love the Truth and the prosperity
of it, and that such will readily follow our advice and Council herein which is
for their good, and preservation, and for the preventing those miscar^iages,
which many (not minding the true guide) have unadvisedly ^^n upon, to their
great hurt, which may be warning^ to them that come after.

And whoever they are, that shall slight this our love, and t^nder regard to
their good, and preservation, and shall wilfully act in a way contrary
thereunto, we shall be thus far clear of them, and of all hurts and evils that
may ensue; and the Truth of God will be clear. And his righteous Judgments such
(who have, or shall act contrary to the Truth in this kind) must feel, before
they can recover their place again, which we wait for, and should be glad of
the Restoration of any that have fallen. And thi^ our Tender Counsel and
Warnings for perventing the Enemies Snares in this kind, for which this Paper
was perticularly dra^n up, and sent to you; And that it may have the more sure
effect, we make it our Request, That all Parents, Masters, an^ Gardians would
carefully propagate the same, and that any who do, or may know of any ones
acting contrary to the advic^ ^iven in this Paper, that in Love to the Truth,
and he Souls of such Persons, they do give timely notice to such Friends a^ ^ay
be concerned therein, to advise them; That al evil Consequences may be
prevented and stopped, and the care and t^^uble of Friends may be lessened in
this matter.

Giv^^ forth at our Ma^^-Meeting, i^ ^^e City of Bristol, the sixth d^^ ^f the
third Month, 1678. A(...) their appointment signed By Laurence Steel, Charles
Jones, Charles Harford, Thomas Callowhill, Thomas Gouldney, William Forde.




