THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from Pope Urban the 8. unto the King of France,
Jan. 28. 1641.

Brought unto the said King, by the Bishop of Salerno the Popes Nuntio.

Wherein he informs the King, that he understands by his Nuntio lately
returned out of England. what and how great persecutions and pressures the
Catholics suffer, since, the sitting of the Parliament there.

Whence he takes occasion to exhort and incite the King to the same measure
toward his Hugonets in France.

Also strongly persuading him to an Inclination unto peace with the Crown of
Spain. And for the assisting of the Catholics in Ireland.

Translated out of the Latin Copy, by J. S.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

Urban the eight, by the Divine Providence Pope of Rome, Bishop of Bishops, and
servant of the servants of God. To the most Christian King LEWIS the 13.th, By
the grace of God King of France, and Navarre, our thrice beloved Son in Jesus
Christ, and the Faith Catholic; Greeting and Benediction Apostolic.
WHereas we are given to understand Ian. 13. by the relation of Count Russete
Nuntio of our Sea Appostolique, unto MARIA HENNERETTA, dearest Sister unto your
Majesty and Queen unto Charles, King of great Britain, what, and how great
miseries our Catholics, living in England have endured since the Scottish
Jnvasion, and convening of the Parliament there holden, how cruelly and
barbarously persons in Order and sacred Ecclesiastics, how opprobiously and
unworthily the Layicks have been handled, their undergoing Racks, tortures,
Gallows, Gibbers, quartering of their members (yea notwithstanding that some
of thom were eighttie years old, ruffering Jmprisonment, reproaches, loss of
Honors, confiscation of Goods, bereaving of their Children, sequestration of
Revenues, alienation of Lands, counted mere dung and the off-scowring of their
Country, and that for no other reason but that they have testified to the World
in the two late Northern expeditions, Fidelity not to be paralel'd. Obedience
not to be blamed toward their King, to the great impairing (at least) if not
to the utter decay of their estates.

And seeing that by things there already enacted as farther to be enacted, it
may evidently appear how not only ominous, that contagious quag of Heritieks
is unto the undoubted Catholic Roman Faith, but also to the established State
and settled Government, of Haereditary Kings and Monarchs, not only contrary but
pestifferous, where once they have got the upper hand and gained the masterie,
we would that your Christian Majesty should be most seriously admonished, that
ye may with mature care and seasonable prevention foresee those distempers
which are afoote with your neighboring Prince, that King Charles and great
Brittan's disasters, may prove unto your Majesty's instructions, and when it is
likely that the nefarious deeds of the Heriticks which now carry all before,
them in England, are known unto your Majesty then to us, as who are nigher,
and that ye have the deformed notoriousnesse of them as it were drawn in a
Table before you; hereupon we council your Majesty to consider what so
nearely concerns you, that millions of Heritickes lurk and harbor in your
Dominions, we wish we knew not, who have the same mind, the same opinion of you
and your belief, and had they but strength, what they approve in the English
they would exploit themselves, let your Majesty take heed ye foster not a
Viper in your bosom, whose feebleness is yet the cause it does no mischief,
not its disposition, when they shall find themselves able they do not domineere
but rage, neither contemn they the Crown but trample it, we adjure your
Majesty by all that is sacred, by the sweet cognomination of the most Christian
King first granted to the Kings of France, for their famous defense of
Catholic, and chastising Heriticks (and derived unto your Majesty, as in the
same sense, so to be no other ways enjoyed) by all your rather to be admired,
then credulous Heroyick Acts, and glorious enterprises, with the which he that
led Captivity Captive has crowned you with Lillies, by the obedience you owe
unto St Peter, filial recognizance to us, diligence in advancing the
Catholic faith, which your Majesty swore at your sacred Coronation and
anointing, by all the foresaid, we beseech your Majesty, that not only ye
would endeavor the suppression and abatement of the Heritiques that nestle in
your Realm, but their total ruin and extirpation, which thing we more
earnestly request of your Majesty, by how much we desire the flourishing of
your Monarchy, your Scepter and Magnificence, the faith Apostoliques
prehemenence; when did more luster atend your Crown, then after the surprizall
of the Rotchell Heritiques Den, when your Authority greater or more
enlarged, then upon the disabling those Rebels of Montauban, what stops the
free current of Catholic faith, wholesome and fresh streams through France,
but this cho^king fenne of Heresy: Let it be taken away therefore not only
bow and twig: but both stock with strings be rooted up, least by their
Commission the sincere flock of Catholics may be drawn into consent of the
putred and ulcered Cattle, and seeing that it may shame us, that those
malevolent should labor more the devastation and laying wast of Christ's
blessed body, then we its propagation, that your Majesty may the sooner not
suppress or diminish, but wholly blot out and extinguish that Contagion, let
your Majesty under most heavy pains strictly forbid not only the public
convent in Churches of that heriticall Conspiracy, but all private exercise and
use of this seditious Leaven, even within private walls, let fit Officers be
set over that charge, and let them taste of their own sauce, as they use your
Catholics, so you must handle them, your Majesty being a Member of that body
they thus persecute, let them perceive that in the ancient Catholic Roman
faith, distance of place, diversity of Nations lesseneth not our simpathy in
the cause, nor affection to the afflicted, put the Ministers of your Hugonets
to death when your Catholic Priests are hanged on Gibbers, what reason is
there that their beardlesse impudent Bablers should range so unbridled
throughout France, unpunished? when your poor Religious more ancient then able
(a thing odious to Barbarians) have undergone the raking out of their bowels,
let others undergo Fines of Crowns, confiscation of goods, loss of Office,
banishment out of the Realm, depriving of their children, loss of Vote in
Courts bands, imprisonment, that it may appear to all the world that your
Majesty has as much power over your Hugonets, what others have over their
Catholics, and that your Majesty's esteem is nevertheless of them for
other, notorious debasing of them, neither let your Majesty desist before you
have either vanquished your own Hugonets, or purchased some ease for the
English Catholics; Being certified by the Agent of the Irish, that they
burdened with heavy pressures, threatened by the now sitting Parliament with
heavier, as who are utterly debarred the free use of the Roman Catholic
Religion, put out of their houses, Lands, Honors, and when they would have
submitted, denied Pardon; we entreat your Majesty that you would by your
Ambassador solicit the cause of the distressed Nation, with the King of
great Britain, and that you would put that King in mind of the Rouchellers,
whose notorious raising of Arms, and Rebellion, yea, pardoned at the
intercession of that King, granting them also all their former Privileges and
Liberties as your Majesty writ unto us by your Ambassador Mounsieur du Fresne.
Anno Dom. 1628.

But if your Majesty shall perceive, that you can prevail nothing by that
Mediation: We exhort your Majesty, as is our duty to undertake the defense and
Protection of that Nation in all Ages, so constantly obedient unto the Roman
Catholic Religion, which defense will well become the Arms of the most
Christian King; We farther desire so your Christian Majesty to send Grave and
temperate Ambassadors unto us to Bononia, for the conclusion of that so much
wished for, and heartily longed after peace betwixt the Christian, and the
Catholic Crowns, let both your Majesty's think on peace, do ye both
desire it, let each in something depart from his right, give ye way on both
parties, and the Spirit of peace shall accord you, and the happy agreement of
these two Glorious Crowns, shall crown my old Age, and rejoice all Catholic
Regions, When we shall see two great Princes having bin so long at such Mortal
dissension, at length to the unspeakable Joy of all, to fall at unity, and
two the very Eldest Sons of the Catholic faith professing betwixt
themselves a Catholic consent to employ their Arms only against Heretics,
and Ethnickes.

Which we cease not day and night to beg on our knees in the blessed
Sacrifice of the Mass of God Almighty of our Blessed Mother of God, and of him
that being God became man, of the Blessed Apostle of our faith St. Peter, and
of all Saints.

Given under the Seal of the Fisherman.

Ian. 28. Anno Salutis, 1641. And of our Popedom the nineteenth Subscribed,
Rancone, S, R, E, P, S.

FINIS.

