THINGS JUST and NECESSARY, WHICH THE PARLIAMENT Must do if ever they would
Prosper.
FIRST, They must be humbled for, and repent of that woeful Violation, and
Contempt of that Solemn Covenant which they made and swore, with hands lifted
up to the most High God, and caused the People to enter into it; and yet have
since commanded them to enter into Engagements, in some Points clean contrary
to this Covenant: And let them well consider, whether it be not for this very
sin that God has shaken them out from their House, and from their labor
twice, according to that direful, but just imprecation: Nehemiah 5. 13. Also I
shook my Lap, and said, so God shake out every man from his House, and from his
labor, that performs not this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and
emptied: And all the Congregation said Amen, and praised the Lord, and the
people did according to this promise. Let them beware the third time, and let
them never look to prosper as a Parliament, till this be acknowledged,
bewailed, turned from, till the Covenant be resumed, and more religiously
observed: Let them never think to prosper, unless they can cancel that Text,
Ezekiel. 17. 15. Shall he prosper that does these things? or shall he break his
Covenant, and be delivered? Till this be bewailed and reformed, they cannot do
God right.

Secondly, They must call in all those Members that have by the Armies force
violently been secluded, since the first seclusion of the eleven Impeached
Members; else they do not the Nation right, but apparently wrong and injure
many Counties and Buroughs; and let them consider, whether their being now
twice turned out by the Army, be not a just retaliation from God upon them for
their consenting to, or conniving at the like violence offered to their
Fellow Members; according to that, Matthew. 7. 2. For with what Judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again. And with what face or shadow of Justice can they condemn this
violence against themselves, and yet abet it against their Fellow Members. Romans
2. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judge;
for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou that
judge, do the same things. Romans 14. 22. Happy is he that condemns not
himself in that thing which he allows.

Thirdly, They must own Christ as King and sole Lawgiver in his Church, or
else they cannot do Christ right; and consider whether one reason, why God has
suffered their servants, the General and his Officers to Rule over them, be
not, because they were unwilling to acknowledge and submit to the Rule and
Government of Christ; and whether the Parliament ever prospered since they
refused to establish Doctrine, Discipline, and Government according to the Word.

Fourthly, They must pass an Act of Indemnity, or else they cannot do the Army
right, who have, as to the generality of them, followed their Officers, as the
people followed Absalom, in the simplicity of their hearts: And yet they must
exempt some of the Principal of the Faction, both in the Army, and out of the
Army from pardon, or else they will never do themselves right, nor restore the
Parliaments of England to their Pristine and Native Terror, Majesty, Glory; no,
nor to their Due and Just Liberty.

Fifthly, They must so provide for liberty of tender consciences, as withal to
tender the safety of Religion, or else they cannot do Religion right; That Vote
they had past in their Committee for Religion, when they last sat, was such,
as all that love the true Protestant Religion, cannot but abhor; and before
they could pass it in the House, they were broken up, betrayed, deserted, even
by those very men whom they sought to please in it. Let them consider the
remarkable justice of God against them therein; yet mercy to the Nation, in
preventing so great a ruin to Religion, as that Vote did portend; and mercy to
themselves too, if they repent, and turn from their wicked design.

Sixthly, They must have their eye upon them that are faithful in the Land, by
this time they have learned to discern of men: There are some in the Land that
profess very high to Religion, and style themselves the Godly Party, that have
very expansive consciences; that can take as many Covenants, Engagements, as
any change of powers shall put upon them, and break them all as fast as they
take them: Are such men fit for public Council or Trust? how can they be
faithful to men, that are not faithful to God? There are besides others in the
Nation, fearing God, and fearing the Oath of God, who have layen by for many
years, and been cast aside as Vessels of no pleasure, only because they dare
not swim with the Stream, or shift Sails with every wind, as the manner of too
many is: These, if they may be gained in, to serve the Public, as sometimes
they did, and would do again upon terms of Honor and Conscience; might be a
blessing to Parliament and Nation, and things might yet go well with England.

Consider of it, Take Advice, and Speak your Minds, Judges 19. 30.
