Thirty and two Extremes of these times discovered and reduced to sixteen
Golden Means, tending to the reducing of Strayers the establishing of
Waverers, and the uniting of Judgments and Hearts together in the Truth.
Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are the peacemakers.
Romans 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.
Job. 32. 9. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand
judgment. Old Exstreame


Job 27. 11. I will teach you by the hand of God, that which is with the
Almighty will I not conceal.

Goulden Mean


Job 38. 2. Who is this that darkneth counsel by wordt without knowledge.

New Exstreame


1 Old Extreme. I Cannot abide to bear of your whimsicall ways, and your new
lights, which are so much talked of and set up now adays; for mine own part I
am resolved to go on, and live and die in the old and true Protestant Religion,
and do you take all your whimsicall ways to your self.

2 New Extreme. And I do so esteem of our new ways, and new lights, that I
have no regard at all to any thing that is old, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
considering that the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Old things are past away, behold all things are become new. And that God who
commands light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to give
the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

1 Golden Mean. It is not good so to adhear to any Old truth, as to cast away
any clearer discovery thereof, neither is it good so to catch at any new notion
as to cast away all Old truths because of a clearer discovery, Jer. 6. 16.
but it is good to stand in the ways and see and ask for the Old paths which
is the good way and walk therein, And yet when any clearer discoveries of that
light which shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19
comes by means of the day star arising in our hearts, we are not to obscure
it; but yet say I to the Law, Isa. 8. 20.
and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them.

3 Old Extreme. Well my desire is that Archbishops, and Bishops, might be
restored again to their places and dignities, and that all things in the
Church might be ruled and governed by them and their Officers as they have
formerly been in this Kingdom.

4 New Extreme. You speak like an old simple and ignorant man, and do well
deserve to be questioned for your speeches, for that were to bring the Saints
of God into bondage again.

2 Golden Mean. Doubtless the constitution of a Diocesian Bishop has no
footsteps in the word of God, Luke 22, 25, 26.
and that Lording or Magistraticall power which they have exercised in the
Church, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
especially of late years, has rather been Antichristian then Christian, and
therefore we are not to desire their restoration again; notwithstanding if any
one through ignorance do wish for such a thing, let us bear with his
weakness, and endeavor to instruct him better.

5 Old Extreme. I wish in mine heart, that the ^ervice-booke might be read
again in our Churches as it has formerly been, for therein as I conceive the
true Protestant Religion is contained.

6 New Extreme. But rather then I would come into a congregation where any of
the Service-booke is read, I would never come into congregation whilst I lived.

3 Gold. Mean. Undoubtedly the true Protestant Religion is contained in the
old and new Testament, and not in the Service Book, and therefore a man may
live and die in the true Protestant Religion though he never hear leaf of the
Service Book read in all his life, nor one line of it be read at his death, yet
rather then I would omit the hearing of the Word, I would hear much of it read.

7 Old Extreme. I wish in mine heart that every man and womau might be freely
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper as formerly they have been.

8 New Extreme. But rather then I would receive the sacrament in the company of
any man or woman, whom I do conceive are carnal, unregenerate, and
unconverted, I would never receive the Sacrament whilst I lived.

4 Goulden Mean. Surely none but such as are in the state of grace, are to be
admitted unto the Sacrament of the Lords supper, Romans 4. 11
it being a seal of the Covenant of grace, notwithstanding though I should be
jealous that such a man or woman were in the state of nature, yet they being
admitted by the Eldership, I should rather choose to think that they upon
Examination had found more evidences of their being in the state of grace then
ever I imagined, and therefore would not omit the receiving of the Sacrament
because of their presence there.

9 Old Extreme. I would have all infants that are borne alive, to be Baptized
presently, because I am persuaded that none can be saved which die without
Baptizme.

10 New Extreme. But I say, that Believers are the only subjects of Baptism;
but infants cannot believe, and therefore no infant is to be baptized.

5 Golden Mean. All elect infants shall undoubtedly be saved though they be
not Baptized, for they are saved by virtue of Christ's blood, and not by virtue
of Baptism, nevertheless I would have all the infants of believing parents to
be Baptized; Act. 2. 39. Col. 2. 11, 12.
first, because the promise is made both to them and their children. Secondly,
because Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision. Act. 16. 33 34
And thirdly, because we read in the new Testament, that when the Master of the
house was turned to the faith, all his whole household were Baptized, and that
the household is taken for man woman and child, is evident, Gen 18, 19. Genes.
49. 8.

11 Old Extreme. I would not have any man to take upon him to preach or
expound, or any way to do the Oface of a Minister, except he be endewed with
human learning, and have taken some Degrees in the University, and be
ordained and set apart thereunto.

12 New Extreme. But for my part I am so out of conceit with humane Iearning
and degrees in Schools, that I could wish every Minister of the Gospel were
without them; for I verily think a man cannot be a right Gospel Minister that
makes any use of them, and I would have every man to whom the Lord has given
any gifts, to take all opportunities to exercise the same either publicly or
privately, whether he be ordained or no.

6 Golden Mean. The truth is, that humane learning and degrees in Schools,
neither make a man a Saint, nor an able Minister of the New Testament; and yet
considering that the original of Scripture cannot be attained unto without the
gift of Tongues, and that in these last days the Lord does deny men that
immediate gift: humane Learning and degrees in Schools may stand a man in
stead; and surely it is lawful for any gifted man to exercise bis gifts
privately, either in his own Family or elsewhere for the good of others,
provided it be not in the time of public exercise; yea, and publicly also
before he be ordained, if he intend to be ordained.

13. Old Ext. Our Minister preaches now and then for the lawfulness of
peoples paying Tithes to their Ministers for their maintenance, and urges it
very much, and I think he does very well in so doing, for surely it is meet
that Ministers should be thereby maintained.

14. New Extreme. But though your Minister, and all the Ministers in the
Kingdom should press it never so much, rather then I would give a Minister a
penny under the notion of Tithes, I would see him starve for lack of
maintenance, for that were in effect to deny the coming of Christ in the flesh.

7. Golden Mean. I would not advise any Minister of the Gospel to require any
maintenance under the notion of Tithes, because some men do take offense
thereat; neither is it material^ whether any man give him maintenance under
that notion, so he give it him, because the Apostle, Gal. 6. 6, 15
or rather because the Lord by the Apostle says, Let him that is taught in the
Word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things.

15. Old Extreme. Our Minister does well deserve maintenance, for he is a very
honest painful man, continually pressing us to repent of our sins, and to do
good works according to Gods Commandments.

16. New Extreme. But I should like him much better if he were continually
declaring unto you what is the Kingly Office of Christ in his Church, and what
Discipline and Government he would have set up there.

8. Golden Mean. But that Minister is best of all to be liked, who does chiefly
endeavor to inform his people in the Mysteries of Jesus Christ; for though to
handle the points you speak of, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
be sometimes expedient, yet the Doctrine concerning Christ and him crucified,
is that one point necessary.

17. Old Extreme. I am persuaded that the Civil Magistrate is to have a hand
in reforming the Church, and in ordering and doing all things in the Church,
for it is said, Isa. 49. 23.
That Kings shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church.

18. New Extreme. I know no other Reformation that Christ requires in his
Church, but only the Reformation of the heart, and I am sure the Civil
Magistrate has no power to do that; and therefore it is clear to me, that he
has nothing at all to do, neither in nor about the Church of Christ, but only
about the Commonwealth.

9. Golden Mean. In the Church of Christ, besides the Reformation of the
heart, which indeed is the chief Reformation, and Christ's Work only, and not
man's, there is required a Reformation of Religion in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, and this the Civil Magistrate is to have a hand
in, by compelling to the means, and to the external acts of Worship and
Government, as you may see, Nehem. 13. 31, 32. 2 Chronicles. 34. 32, 33. and indeed
the Civil Magistrate is to do much about the pale of the Church, as to punish
the wicked, and encourage the godly, and the like; but how they are to be
nursing fathers and nursing mothers to the Church, is, as I conceive, a hard
matter rightly to determine.

19. Old Extreme. Some men do talk very much of worshipping God in the
Spirit, and not with ontward forms; but for mine own part I am resolved to
stick to my ontward forms of hearing, reading, praying, fasting, and other
such like Religious exercises, for I know no other way of worshipping God.

20. New Extreme. But I am all for the Spiritual Worship of God, and to tell
you truly, I use no outward forms at all, for I know very well that God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth, Joh. 4.
20.

10. Golden Mean. As we are not to content our selves with outward forms
without the inward power, and spiritual Worship of God, so are we not to
conceive, that the inward power, and true spiritual Worship of God can be
where outward forms are wilfully neglected, when God calls us unto them,
therefore surely he does best that does both.

21. Old Extreme. I am persuaded that Christians are bound to observe the
Sabbath day very strictly, for we are forbidden so much as to kindle a fire on
that day, as you may see Exo. 35 3. or to gather a few sticks to lay thereon,
as you may see, Number. 15. 35.

22. New Extreme. I find not in all the whole new Testament any command to
keep any Sabbath at all; and therefore I do believe, that now in the days of
the Gospel, every day is to be kept as a Sabbath, and a Christian is not to
restrain it to one day more then to another, nor make any difference of days
at all, but all days are to be alike to him.

11 Golden Mean. Indeed the precise and strict rest of the Jews on the
Sabbath Day was Ceremonial, and therefore now by Christ so taken away, that a
Christian is not so bound to rest but that he may do works of urgent
necessity, as you may see in the Disciples plucking the ears of Corn, and
rubbing them an the Sabbath Day; and our Saviors defending them for so doing,
Luke 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. yea, and a Christian may also do works of mercy on
that day, as you may see, Mat. 12. 11, 12. nevertheless the first day of the
week, or Lords Day, is to be kept as a Sabbath to the Lord, for surely Christ
had no other reason to bid them pray, Mat. 24. 20.
that their flight should not be on the Sabbath Day, but for that it would
disturb and hinder them from attending upon the Worship of God.

23 Old Extreme. I cannot abide your assembling together, and your preaching in
private houses, for I am persuaded Gods Word ought not to be preached any where
else but in the Church of God.

24 New Extreme. But I had rather hear a Sermon in a private house then in any
of your Steeple Houses.

12 Gold. Mean. Certainly the place appointed for Public Worship cannot
properly be called the Church of God, Mat. 18. 20
for the Church of God is, where two or three, or more of the Saints of God are
gathered together to worship God, nevertheless for as much as the Apostle
wills, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
that all things be done decently and in order; I think is meet we should
assemble together to hear the Word, rather in public then in private, because
it is so appointed by authority.

25 Old Extrem. There is much talk now adays about liberty of Conscience, and
many men seem much to desire it, but for mine own part I know not what they
mean by it, and therefore I regard it not.

26 New Extreme. Liberty of Conscience is so dear and precious a thing to me,
and I do prize it so highly, that I would spend my blood rather then I would
want it, for to live without it were to live in slavery.

13 Golden Mean. The Apostle, Gal. 5. 1. wills Believers to stand fast in
that liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, that is, from the yoke of
the Cerimoniall Law, and the condemning power of the Moral Law, and this may
truly be called, Liberty of Conscience, and this we are to desire and plead
for, and yet we must beware that we use not this liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, as the same Apostle advises, verse 13. and this we shall do if we
truly say with David, Psalm. 119. 45. I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy
precepts.

27 Old Extreme. I have heard some men speak, as though there were a great
defference to be made betwixt the Old Testament and the New, and much to
under-value the Old in comparison of the New; but for mine own part I do
believe that they are both of them the Word of God, and therefore I see no
difference that there is to be made betwixt them.

28 New Extreme. But for my part, I do make such a difference betwixt them
that I do believe the Old Testament is utterly to be abolished, and that a
Believer is to have nothing at all to do with it; for does not the Apostle say
in plain terms, that the Old Testament is done away, 2 Cor. 3. 11. Heb. 8. 13.

14 Golden Mean. Indeed it is true, the Ceremonies, and the circumstantiall
Administrations of the Old Testament are done away, but yet the substance
remains; so that we are not to imagine that the Book it self is done away,
for therein is contained the Law of God, and Word of God, even the perfect Will
of God, which shall remain for ever.

29 Old Extreme. Surely the Presbyterian way of Church Government must needs be
now the only way to Salvation, seeing that Authority is pleased to set it up
in this Kingdom.

30 New Extreme. And I am confident that the way which they call the
Independent way is the very way to Heaven, for I have been more confidently
assured of my Salvation, since I entered into that way then ever I was before.

15 Gold. Mean. Assure your selves that no man shall be saved simply, because
he is under such a way of Church Government, whether it be Episcopacy,
Presbitery, or Independent, nor damned simply because he is under any of them;
but a man shall be saved if he believe truly on the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Joh. 3. 38.
and damned if he do not, which way of Church Government soever he is.

31 Old Extr. I would have every man constrained by Authority to conform
himself to the Presbyteriall Government, because it is established by
Authority.

32 New Extreme. I would have all men to have liberty of Conscience, of what
Opinion or Religion soever they be.

16 Gold. Mean. I would have all men to have liberty of Conscience who are
sound and Orthodox as touching Fundamentalls, and godly in their lives and
conversations, though they do not conform themselves to the Presbiteriall
way, but none else.

Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1647.


