THE Sovereigns Power, AND THE Subjects Duty: DELIVERED In a SERMON, at
CHRIST-CHURCH in Oxford, March 3. 1643.

By J. ARMAGH.

ROMANS 13.2. Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God.
OXFORD, Printed for W.W. 1644.

Roman. 13. verse. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers: for
there is no power but of God.
IN vain do Christian Princes bear the Sword, if their subjects conscience
may question their power. They which begin it in the cause of Religion, may
as well go on, and doubt of all. And therefore as Princes are justly zealous
in restraining the outward man, the Priests should be as forward in informing
the conscience. You know the occasion of such a meditation, and this has put
me again so soon upon you and a new Text, standing engaged for many, which I
must desire you to hearken to, as Gods message, pleading for the right of Kings
by his Apostle, Rom 13. v 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers,
etc.

Wherein are th^se two parts: 1. a Proposition delivered by way of command,
expressing a duty enjoined, Let every soul b^ subject etc. Wherein are three
things, 1. Quis, Who it is that is to perform it Every soul. 2. Quid, What it
is, Be subject. 3. Cui, To whom, The higher powers.
2. a Reason for confirmation of it, as if this cause were grounded, not only
on bare authority, but enforced by infallible reason, For there is no power but
of God.

I shall begin with the persons; and first with those to whom this duty is due;
the higher powers, (...)

We have just cause to examine this style, and confine it strictly to us
subject; lest usurpers taking advantage of the looseness secretly undermine
the bulwark, which we hope for, and may here build up. For some are ready to
thrust in, and shroud under this Title, Bishops and all Spiritual Governors:
others, who mainely oppose that, labor to make all temporal Governors equal
sharers; both which are repugnant to the Apostles meaning, and both equally
dangerous. Let spiritual power be here supposed, and (if they be not subject)
yet shall temporal Princes have no command over the Clergy. Let all temporal
partake in it, and every inferior Magistrate shall contest with his King. For,
for their safeguard (according to them) as well as the Princes, is this precept
of the Apostle. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. And here is
no subjection, but command allotted them. For powers, say they, extends its
self to the spiritual power, and higher, in the others sense, looks only on
the people; and therefore agreeable to inferior Magistrates, who in respect of
the people are (...), superexcellentes, exceeding all others in civil power.
For that, which we render Higher, they translate, superexcellentes, hoping
thereby to escape the obscurity and danger of the vulgar translation, which
answers our English. That is Bezaes censure on the vulgar Latin, (which says,
Potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit) and redounds to our English; wherein he
has his followers. The difference at first seems only verbal, but when we
hear them from hence suspect a dangerous sense; we are to stand upon ourguard,
and presume of a real dissension. Give them leave to change the word
[sublimioribus] into superexcellentibus, and they think they have sufficient
warrant, in stead of absolute Lords and Princes, to put in Bailiffes and
Constables. It must be meant of all Magistrates, that have power over other
men, or else it is Periculosa interpretatio. And wherein stands the danger?
Because they shall be denied to derive their power from God? That would not
follow; because others are heresayd to be of God, they being not named. Put
the case they were denied it, and had their power allotted them only from
Kings, and not immediately from God, as Kings derive theirs. Indeed this is
that, which is much feared by them, who secretly labor to curb Kings; as
shall appear anon. But is this less then the Apostle gives them? S. Peter
makes a different fountain of power. Submit your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake: whether it be to the king as Supreme; or unto
Governors, as unto them, that are sent by him: 1. Pet 2.13, 14. Governors,
who have a King, may not think they stand at the wellhead with him; but have
their power derived from him. By him are they sent, and from him have they
their authority, and yet it is from God too, being a branch of the Kings
power, which is immediately from God. It is not then a dangerous opinion, but
the safest truth which they would avoid.

But we must not frame fancies, and then fit the Scripture to them by
translation. Indeed should I lay this to their charge, I should wrong them: for
whilst they were quarrelling with the word, that was the occasion of danger,
rather then they would err from the original, they placed in another alike
dangerous. For what advantage have they by Superexcellentibus? it is not in the
comparatiue degree, as was the other. But has it not a comparatiue sense? Yes
as great, or greater: Such as our English, more excellent, or more eminent does
not reach; which Pareus at length confesses, saying, Praecipuetamen (...), the
Apostle especially aims at the Supreme power; so the true meaning of the word
importes: for it is that, which amongst many is still higher then them all, and
therefore Supreme, which our latter English Translation observes in the place
before cited out of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to the King, (...) as Supreme. They are then (...),
Supreme powers only, to whom this obedience is due; and to all such, whether
in Monarchy, Aristocratie, Democratie, or other form of government.

This we have further warrant for from our Apostles discourse: for that we may
have yet another Plea against inferior Magistrates; and show also at last
against the Papists claim, that no Spiritual Power has place here, these
higher powers are such, Romans 13.4.
as to whom the sword of justice is immediately committed, at the fourth verse.
He that is one of these powers, bears not the sword in vain: for he is the
Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, and unto
whom Tribute belongs at the sixth verse: for this cause also you pay Tribute.
Both which are the infallible marks of Supreme civil power, being parts of
the Rights of Majesty. Ye have then the persons, to whom subjection is due.
Let us now see, Quis, who it is that is to perform it, whom we find expressed
by Omnis anima, Every soul.

PART. II. Quis? Every soul.
THat here the soul is used Synechdochice, the part for the whole man (as
oftentimes in Scripture) I presume needs no confirmation: But yet there may be
some special cause, why he names the soul, not the body: which Gorran will
have, Quia debet esse voluntaria subiectio, as if he were not properly subject,
whose body was fitted to the Superiors command, and the will, which is from
the soul, ioynes not with it. And Caietane, vt non solum corpus, to the end
that Subjects should by the way understand, that not only their body and goods,
but ipsa anima, their very soul also should be subject to their Princes
command; and as Omnis homo, every man, so Totum bominis, or Totus homo, should
concur to make a perfect obedience; for so our Apostle afterward more
plainly: Verse 5.
Wherefore, ye must be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience
sake.

The maine thing we are to enquire for here, is to know who these are, to whom
this command extends it self, and whether as in the note, so in the Apostles
meaning, there is an absolute universality; so that no kind of men, and no
man is exempted; and it is worth our enquiry, since there are not wanting who
would wrest themselves out of this number.

The Anabaptists at first would have pleaded exemption from Princes, but
finding by their woeful experience, that they could never prove it whilst
Powers remained, have changed their Proposition, and in stead of putting
themselves out of Omnis anima, labor to ruin Potestates, not deeming them fit
for Christians. These have confessed their error, and save us a labor.

But the Clergy of Rome, aiming at the same privilege, and managing their
purposes more craftily; have wrested it from some Princes, which they have now
so successefully improued, that against Kings, by violent practice of it, and
against all disputers, Suarez def. Cath. fid. lib. 4. cap. 7.
by argument they challenge it as their proper inheritance; and maintain that
the Pope cannot, if he would, submit himself to any civil Power: But were the
sword as able to plead Kings causes in the field, as Divines pens in the
Schools, their Crowns would not so often totter on their heads, nor their
lives be exposed to such rebellious out-lawes.

That our Apostle intended this Precept to the Clergy as well as to the
Laity, if the words themselves cannot persuade, hear the Ancients exposition
of them. S. Chrysostom says, Let every soul be subject, yea, (...) though
he be an Apostle, yea, though he be an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or whosoever.
Theodoret, Whether he be Priest Bishop, or Monk; So Theoph. So Oecumenius.
And Bernard ad Archiepiscopum Senonensem, urging this verse of S. Paul expounds
it, Siomnis, and vestra, If every soul be subject, Bern. Epist. 42.
then yours. Quis vos excepit ab vniuersitate? Who has exempted you from this
universality? yea, and leaves a brande on all his successors, that shall
attempt to persuade any Clerk to such a freedom, Si quis tentat excipere,
conatur decipere.

Were these silent, the circumstances attending this Epistle would discover it.
The occasion, it seems, of this strict command was the heathens jealousy of
Christian subjection, and the infection, which the Apostle feared, might have
seized on these new Christians, from that common opinion of the Jews, who were
about this time altogether impatient of any government, but what they then
expected from their Messiah. For suppressing of the like conceit, and clearing
of the Christians, he adds this precept to the Epistle directed to all the
Saints at Rome, and therefore the Clergic; yea, Saint Peter too, (if he were
then in Rome,) else had he not satisfied, but increased the Heathens supicion.

Again, this may be confirmed by the doctrine and practice of those times. Our
Savior takes order, Mat. 17.27
that Tribute be paid for himself; and Peter gives direction to the Priests
spies to give unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's. Luke 20.25
Saint Paul appeals to Caesar for judgment. And if we look backward into
the old Testament, we may find the same subjection in Priests and Levites,
and the like power in temporal Superiors. 1. Mac. 4.42.
Judas Maccabaeus appoints the Priest to Sanctify the Temple, after
Antiochus his profaning of it. The like did Josiah. 2. Chron. 34. Ib. Ca. 24.6.
1. King. 2.26. 1. Chro. 15 11.
Ioash reprehendeth Iehoiada the high Priest for neglecting it. Solomon
deposes Abiathar the high Priest for offending against him. David gives order
to the Priests and Levites for the service of God. Aaron is subject to Moses.
But we may spare our labor for these arguments, since some of them are content
to acknowledge the force of them, and grant what we have proved. Est. in
romans 1.1.
For so Estius to the practice of the Apostles, Non est consequens, it follows
not, if Peter and Paul were then subject to temporal powers, that therefore
Bishops and Priests should be now. Why so? Placuit Principibus Christianis:
Because Exemption has since been granted by Christian Princes. What? By the
Supreme Power of every dominion? If not, then are they not exempt from all. If
so, it is but only on favor, and not of due; so that they are still subject,
when any Prince shall claim it: Nay, they are necessarily subject in the maine
point of subjection, (if not in other circumstances) because an absolute
freedom is a detraction from supremacy, which no person can dispose.

Wherefore we may conclude, that people, and Priest, and every person amongst
them is included in omnis anima, and therefore must attend the charge that is
given, Subdita sit, Let it be subject.

PART III. The Duty: Let it be Subject.
O (...), as S. Chrysostom. He says not simply, let it honor the powers, or
be obedient, but let it be subject; which includes all parts of duty, which a
subject owes unto his King; for the accomplishing of which, no outward act of
reverence, or service must be wanting: and though this may satisfy the Kings
command; yet does not this discharge thee of thy duty, which can never be
true, till the heart answer the gesture of the body. Divine precepts seize not
on the body only, but the soul. If thou will not then withdraw thy self
from this subjection, thou must add these four conditions to thy external
obedience. Promptitudo voluntatis interior, a free, voluntary, and cheerful
assent of mind. Sincerus amor, perfect love and affection toward his person.
Filialis timor, an awful respect of his power over thee, and a filial fear
of offending him. Fidelitas, a faithful heart toward him, whereby thou art
constant in all bonds of duty to him, and jealous of all injuries by others
intended against him. This is the qualification of the subjection here
mentioned, and when thus qualified, it is not arbitrary, left to thee, to
perform when, and where thou please. For Saint Paul proposes it not by way
of advice, or direction; but imperative, 1. Pet. 2.13
by way of command, having, besides his apostolical authority, the same
precept, given by other his fellow-Apostles; by Christ himself, Matt. 22.21
and the foundation of all commands, the Law, which was given by God himself;
first in general terms, Honor thy father and thy mother; Exodus 20.
and afterward enlarged, Deuteronomy. 17.12
That man that will do presumptuously, nor hearken unto the Priest, or unto
the Judge that man shall die. But does this command urge at all times, and on
all occasions? What if the Prince be wicked, idolatrous? The vices of the man
abridge not his power, and therefore not the Apostles command. If this might
have been a sufficient plea against obedience, S. Paul might have spared this
precept, since Nero was the power, to whom these Romans were subject. Or (to
omit all other cases that may be made) what if his command be contrary to
religion? yea an army be raised for the extirpation of true religion? This is
the true touchstone of subjection; and here (if ever) may a subject renounce
all obedience to his King. For now is there power against power, man against
God, and the subject of both left to follow either man, or God. This is a
wonderful strait, from which whilst some labor to escape by the shipwreck
of their faith, they turn traitors to God: others by taking the sword in hand,
though but to defend, become rebels to their King: That is their style.

Whether God be to be obeyed rather then man, should need no proof amongst any
that confess a God: and therefore when a Christian hears the command of a
Prince pressing him to what God has expressly forbidden, Nature prompts him his
answer, I must obey God; and this has the Apostles practice ratified, who
counted this their safe warrant for not yielding to the High Priests
injunctions, Obedire oportet Deo magis quam hominibus, we ought to obey God
rather then man, August. de ve bis Domini, ser. 6.
rather indeed in respect of the danger that attends in the disobeying of
either; for, Hi carcerem (as S. Augustine) Ille gehennam minatur, these
threaten imprisonment only, God hell fire, I hey a temporal, He an eternal
death. There is no shifting then of Gods command, without the penalty of
eternal death, and therefore he must be obeyed even against the King. That Is
my resolution in the first case.

But what if the King press by violence to draw thee from that obedience, will thou maintain it by violence?

We have indeed the Jesuits instructions for it, yea, Comoz letter to Parry.
and the Popes encouragement to it: I spare the quotations because there comes
not a Book of theirs, wherein (if occasion be given) they forbear to express
it, Hospin. Hist. Jesuit. l. 4. c. 1. Anticotton.
or compendiously to refer you to some: see Hospin. and Anticotton.

A doctrine of which, when the Society is challenged for, they are ashamed, and
labor to clear themselves against their written testimonies, as appears in
Anticotton.

And yet (I can not, but with grief speak it) we find even in some Reformed
Books the Jesuits pen. Their names deserve to be branded that broach such
positions: weigh those of Pareus. Par. in Romans 13. dub. 4.


Bishops and Pastors may and ought to resist their unjust Magistrates, Pareus
his false doctrines and wicked positions concerning Higher powers.
not with the sword but the word of God, reproouing their notorious impiety,
and injustice, and reducing them to their office, according to the word of God,
and the Law, and delivering them, if stubborn, to Satan.

That Priests should tell Princes their faults,

Subditi non priuati, Subjects, such as are inferior Magistrates, may by arms
defend themselves lawfully, the Commonweal, and true Religion against the
superior Magistrates.

These superior Magistrates are such,

It is not lawful for subjects, out a lawful calling, neither to invade a
tyrant before danger, nor to defend themselves against them in danger, nor to
revenge themselves after danger, if they may be defended by the ordinary power.

If then they fail of this condition,

If a tyrant press on his subjects, latro and stuprator, and they can not
escape by flight, or any other ordinary means, it is lawful for to defend
themselves and theirs, as against a private extortioner.

How far short these conclusions come of the Jesuits positions, I refer to
your trial by comparing them. And yet is not he the only man that maintains
the^? Buchanan and the feigned Iunius Brutus are infamous for this doctrine. I
could name others But this may suffice that there is scarce any of them, who
are eager for the Presbytery, and are fit instructours in this point for
subjects of a free Monarch; and therefore no marvel if our ears be tainted
with such doctrine.

That which I conceive in this case for truth is, that no subjects may upon any
occasion take arms or use any violence against the supreme power, no not in
defense of religion.

Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13.2
says S. Paul, in the 2. verse. Which place may well serve to confirm Princes
power over their subjects in this case; for this rule was given to them, who
suffered under a Tyrant, and that for religion. It is a vain and idle
exception, which Pareus takes at this. Some arguments drawn from the power of
Majesty, saying, such places are bent against private men, who usurp such
power over superiors; for every Commonwealth consists but of two sorts in the
general, Prince and People, superiors and subjects: those who partake not of
the Supremacy (as in an Oligarchie) are private men: if (where the power is
divided) one take the sword against the other, this is as he is a part of the
supreme power.

Other arguments that may be drawn a part potestatum, I forbear, because
they have all their strength from the Apostles reason, and till that be
weighed, we cannot avoid their shifts.

If we reflect upon subjects, we shall find that their hands are tied by
precepts, which lay hold on them, as they take on the^ to be zealous
Christians. Christ's, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.17.
Pray for them that persecute you: and the Apostles, Recompense to no man evil
for evil; are not such private virtues, but that they pertain to every man;
yea, it is the onley badge of their true subjection unto Christ, if for his
Names sake they practice them. And therefore Tertullian instead of abetting such
zealous revenge, fights with a prohibition, Tertul. Apol. c. 37. Ad Scap.
Absit vt igne humano vindicetur secta diuina; at doleat pati, inquo probatur:
and in the combat gains the victory, by the persecutors cruelty, and
proclaims it, Crudelitas vestra, est gloria nostra.

But since precepts are made so liable to distinctions; and, when capable of
several expositions, each may be maintained; let us read the exposition of
them in the practice of them, that gave and received them. Did our Savior or
his Apostles ever withstand the rage of the persecuting Jews? Do we read of
any one vproare, or resistance made by the Primitive Christians in those
barbarous outrages, practiced on them by Heathen, Idolatrous Tyrants? No, but
in stead of alarums for defense, they rejoiced, when apprehended, and triumphed
in their torments; having yet their hearts always as ready to wish and pray
for the happy state of their Emperors, as their bodies ready to suffer their
violence. I might prove it from age to age, for many hundreds of years after
Christ: but that I can but touch, not discuss this question, and leave it to
your own reading, and further scanning. The force of this argument is
confessed by our opposites, who think to relieve themselves by imputing their
not resisting to their weakness, not unwillingness to resist. Rash uncharitable
Judges of such holy Saints. Did they proclaim one thing to the world, and
belie the thoughts of their hearts? Hear their unanimous consent in
Tertullian; Apud nostram disciplinam occidi magis licet, quam occidere; It is
our profession, rather to die then kill. Such precepts, and the rules of
obedience kept out al thoughts of rebellion against their Prince; and hence in
their name Tertullian contends with his heathen Persecutors for a greater share
in Caesar, in whose name they were executed; Noster est magis Caesar; Apol. c.
33.
He is rather ours, then your Emperor, being appointed by our God. And where
as they pretend want of force in Christians, Soc. hist. lib. 3.9.
they observe not, that at Iulians death, his whole army cried out to
Iouianus, We are all Christians. In Dioclesians time, Omnes fere mortales, The
whole world almost, leaving their Idolatrous Sacrifices, joined themselves with
the Christian Congregations. Tertullian pleads against the same objection;
would we deal with you as enemies, Apol. 37.
Deesset nobis vis numerorum, and copiarum? could we want forces? We Christians
have filled all places of your Empire, your Cities, Islands, Castles, all but
your Temples. Yea go higher yet, and behold the Church in her cradle, armed
with force able to oppose the world, the Apostles power of miracles, Christ's
legions of Angels, ready to b^e employed at his command. Or had they failed of
these means, they thought of as easy a trick as the Jesuits, to punish
their enemies, when Tertullian professes, that one night, by the help of a
few torches, might have afforded them a large revenge. Behold now the power of
these Primitive Christians, and yet weltring in their own blood for their
Christianity: With them, to right themselves upon their persecutors, or to
oppose them, is rebellion, and malice. Then was it the strongest parts Plea;
Laesos vltio diuina defendit (as Cyprian) Divine refuge protects us. Tract.
con. Demet. pa. 224.
But now, Our own arm shall strengthen us. It is a glorious plea with flesh
and blood, to fight the Lords battle, and to provide that the true Religion be
not rooted out: and (for ought I find) their best argument, for all the rest
hang on the disposing of Supreme Power, (which by the Apostles reason are all
undermined) or on the example of some, whose commission is confessed to be
extraordinary, and from God. But let them hear whether we may not take up
Saint Hilaries complaint; Hill. con. Auxent.
Misereri licet nostrae aetatis laborem, and praesentium temporum stultas
opiniones, quibus patrocinari Deo humana creduntur, and ad tuendam Christi
Ecclesiam ambitione saeculari laboratur; We may justly pity the vain labor
and foolish conceits of these times, wherein man's endeauours are accounted Gods
aid, and Christ's Church thought to be maintained by the worlds policy,
ambition or greatness.

For the Apostles receive a sharp check that would have fire come down from
heaven, to consume the rude Samaritans; Luke 9.54.55.
and the sword that was drawn in Christ's defense is commanded to be put up
into his place, not without the heavy sentence: All that take the sword, shall
perish by the sword. Mat. 26.52.
Whence Tertullian, Tertul. de Cor. Mil.
Gladium nec Dominicae defensioni necessarium reddidit. The sword was not
lawful in a private man's hands; no, not for Christ's sake. The weapons which
the true Church uses in her battles, 2. Cor. 10.4
are spiritual: and the walls of Jericho are not to be battered, but with the
Priests trumpets.

Protestants should remember how they withstand the Papists notes of the Church
when they require it to be visible, of large extent, and glorious in the eye of
the world. And Papists should acknowledge what Bellarmine professes, Bellarm.
de Ecc. lib. 4. c. 6.
Durauit hucusque etc. The Church has lasted to this day in despite of her
enemies, Jews, Pagans, Heretics; and not so only but still has gained by
persecution. That is the greatest advantage, that true Christianity has when
it is persecuted; and then does she conquer, when her soldiers are slain.
Was the Protestants cause weakened, either in France, by their many outrageous
massacres; or in England, by their frequent fires; or in the Low Countries, by
their great afflictions? If ever they prove loosers, it is when they unjustly
fight for preserving it. Should the Papist Princes all muster their forces,
Scioppins class. sacr.
and wage the holy war, whose Trumpet has already sounded the alarm, they
might perchance for a time eclipse the light of truth, put it out they never
can. They may abate the visible number, but will make more true Professors.
Tertullians, Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, is a maxim, The blood of
true Martyrs is the Churches seeds-plot, if it be cast into the fire, or spilt
by an unresisted sword.

I could dwell in the contemplation of this strange husbandry; but that I may
be suspected for digressing, and am yet to show the medium between disobeying
God, and resisting the King.

It is confessed there must be no disobeying of God: That we may not resist
the King is proved (as the occasion gives leave) what then remains? Preces
and lachrymae, solicit, beseech, earnestly pray for the reuersing of the
Decree, Haec sunt munimenta spiritualia, and tela diuina, quae protegunt, This
is the only shelter and fortress, whither a Christian may betake himself in
this tempest. Hester 3.16
Here was Hesters and the Jews refuge, when the Decree was gone out from
Ahasuerosh for the destroying of the Jews. Act. 4.2.
Hither fled the Apostles, when they were prohibited to preach Christ: Sozim^l.
l. 2. c. 28
Alexander of Constantinople, when command was given for the reestablishing of
Arius; Russin. l. 2. c. 36.
and Ambrose, when he was eagerly prosecuted by Iustina in the cause of
Arianisme. And these are tela too, and diuina, weapons that fight from above
against the fury of persecutours; not, as if by thee directed to revenge (that
is not warrantable) but approved with God by the testimonies of his vengeance.
By these was Hamans gallows (appointed for Mordecai) fitted for himself; by
these on the day, when Arius should have been restored, did he suddenly
perish by these was Iustina put to flight and executed. If these prevail not,
know that now is the time wherein God will make trial of thy faith to him, and
loyalty to thy king. Both which must appear in thy readiness to undergo the
intended affliction.

There is no defensive resistance allowed, unless thy defense be such, Lib. 3.
(as Liuie only allots to subjects) Scutum, non gladius, the buckler of
patience, not the sword, which is as ready to give, as ward the blow. He that
in this defense wounds his persecutor, is a rebellious murderer, not a lawful
executioner. Remember that he is still thy Prince, and since thy conscience may
not yield to his command, show thy self his subject in yielding to his
punishment. For now thou maye^t either die by living, or live by dying: Thou
have Christ's warrant for it; He that (in such a case) finds his life shall
loose it, Mat. 10.39
and he that loses his life shall find it; loose a temporal, find an
eternal, where he shall for ever reign in the glory of triumphant Martyrs.

FINIS.

