CHURCH Reformation, A DISCOURSE Pointing at some VANITIES in DIVINE SERVICE.
Delivered in Two SERMONS at Bridgnorth: Sept. 30. 1660. Being the Lords Day;
and the time of the Assizes held there for the County of Salop. By MICH:
THOMAS, Rector of Stockton in the same County.

Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and Reverence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord,

Levit. 19. 30. Si quis dicat Domum Dei contemptibilem esse; and Conventus qui
in ea celebrantur, Anathema sit: Concilium Gangrense, Canone quinto.

LONDON, Printed for Jo: Martin, Ja: Allestry, and Tho: Dicas, and are to be
sold at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

(...)
ECCLES. 5. 1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God, and be more
ready to hear, then to give the Sacrifice of Fools; For they consider not that
they do evil.


SOme of those Learned men, who have employed The Preface.
their Talent of sacred knowledge in the Exposition of this Book, have made a
critical Observation upon the Inscription of it. They tell us, that according
to the Original, we should read the first Verse of it thus.

The words of the Preacheress, the Son of David, King in Jerusalem: But what?
Was Solomon the Son of David a Preacheress? How so? they endeavor to assoyl
the doubt thus; Either by supplying the word Sapientia or Anima.

That in this Book, The Wisdom of Solomon is the Preacheress, instructing the
Sons of men in that difficult Question, de summo bono; and directing them
toward the attainment of the Chiefest Good.

Or, the Soul of Solomon is The Preacheress; that is, Solomon is delivering the
various Observations which he had made upon the world heartily and
experimentally. The Text which he chose was, Vanity of Vanities, which he proves
and prosecutes by convincing Arguments, and in such a Method and Manner, as St.
Paul afterward instructed his Son Timothy in the Art of Preaching.

I made use of this Criticisme for a Preface to my Discourse, Captare
Benevolentiam; to bespeak and prepare your favorable attention: for here are
those Three things which (according to the Orator) are most available to gain
an Audience. Here is, First, Eloquence in the Author: The Wisdom of God
speaking in, and by Solomon. Here is, Secondly, Importance in the matter. St.
Ambrose, and St. Gregory of Nyssen say, This Book is a Treasury of Divine
Knowledge; the Doctrine of it may serve to wean us from the love of these
earthly things, and further us in securing our interest in the things of
Heaven. Here is, Thirdly, Perspicuity and Brevity in the Method. This great
Argument concerning the Vanity of the Creature, is handled Succinctly and
Demonstratively, so as to convince the judgments, and to stop the mouths of
such as have the greatest love and affection for the world.

Supposing then this whole Book to be but one Sermon, I must entreat you to
look upon the words which I have selected for the Text, as upon one particular
Note of it.

In the former Chapters Solomon declares the several Vanities which he had
observed in other things. In this Chapter he points at those Vanities which are
incident to Divine Service. It pleased the Lord to appoint and enable Solomon
to be the Builder of his Temple; It pleased him also to inspire and direct
Solomon to be the Reformer of the abuses of his Temple: So that from him we may
expect a perfect Pattern or Platform of Church Reformation.

We have had of late much talk and high pretentions by some for A Thorough
Reformation of this Church of England; but the Lord knows, and the Lord give
them grace to know, and to consider, that (beside nothing was done) the face of
Divine Worship was rendered more deformed to the wo^ld, and left more
ill-featur'd then when they first undertook the cure; and the ways they
proceeded by we^e crooked, and improbable to produce such a blessed effect.

It was not likely to Reform a Church by ejecting learned and faithful
Ministers; by decrying a pious Liturgy, and Form of Divine Worship; by leaving
Churches utterly void, and no Ministers to attend their desolate Congregations
in their holy things. But I shall choose rather to mourn in secret, then to
enlarge a public complaint against those unhappy miscarriages.

That there are corruptions crept into the House of God; and that there are
still some very considerable, and very deplorable Vanities in our Divine
Service, is too visible and apparent; and by the good providence of God, I am
here this day as Solomon's Amanuensis; as one that has taken some short Note
out of his great Sermon, and in an humble way to give you some notice of them.

Since we are so happily met together on the Lords Day, and in the Lords House,
I could not conceive any Argument would be more proper, then to discourse of
that Divine Service which we ought to perform to God as on these days, and in
these places. I am so charitable as to hope, that there is not one soul in this
Congregation so vain, but desires to serve the Lo^d reverently and acceptably,
and to observe the prescriptions of his most holy Will, both for the matter and
form of it; and the doctrine of this text will direct us in both the parts of
it. I must tell you, that I have not managed my meditations on this argument so
as to please all, but as near as I could, to edify all. I durst not neglect my
duty, nor be deficient to that providential Call which summoned me to this
public employment; and I hope no one will be displeased at such a plain and
faithful discourse; by which I endeavor to deliver my own soul, and to further
the salvation of his. And so I proceed to the Explication and Division of the
text.

I do not observe any considerable variety in the several Translations. Arias
Montanus renders the Hebrew, by Quando ibis, When thou shall go. The Lxx. by
(...), Quum vadis, When thou do go. The Vulga^ Latin by Ingrediens Domum
Dei, When thou art entering into the house of God.

But some may say, Must all our care be taken as we are going to, or, as we are
entering into the house of God, as these Translations import? And indeed the
Syriack and the Arabic import no more.

I answer, It is an usual Trope in Scripture, Ex anteceder te intelligere
consequens; by the antecedent to collect the consequent; and the Trope must
have place here. This counsel of Solomon is not to be understood of things to
be done when we are going to the house of God; but what we are to do when we
are come thither. There may be some preparatory actions and meditations, which
may dispose and qualify us for Divine Worship; But that which Solomon here
speaks of, is of the essence and substance of it. But what is that?

Keep thy foot.] Spiritualem pedem animae omnes interpretantur, says Lorinus;
All those Expositors whose opinions he had collected, do with one voice
interpret it of the feet of the Soul; of the tempe^, and disposition, and
resolution which the soul ought to be in, both when we are coming to, and when
we are come into the house of God.

But some may say, where is that? and urge against Solomon's counsel in the
text, Solomon's confession in another text; That God dwells not on earth, the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, much less that House which he had built;
1 King. 8. 27.

I shall answer briefly for the present, That by the house of God here, is
meant such a place as is peculiarly designed, and consecrated to, and for
divine Service.

Here is yet a farther enquiry; Suppose the soul of a man to be rightly
prepared to come; and being come, to be so well affected, as really and
reverentially to conceive himself to be in the house and presence of God; What
must he do then? Most Translations of the Text tell us, Be ready to hear: But
sure there is more in it. Learned men observe, that the original word signifies
also to obey; and so the vulgar has it, Melior est Obedientia quam Victimae
stultorum, It is not auricular, but practical hearing which is intended in this
place; Obedience to God's Commandments, conformity in our lives to such sound
doctrine as is delivered to us in the house of God.

There lies not any difficulty upon any other term in the text; and therefore
for a full explication, be pleased to receive the Chaldee Paraphrase upon it,
which I have faithfully translated. As if Solomon had said thus;

Thou son of man, Keep thy feet at what time thou The Paraphrase on the Text.
shall go into the house of the Sanctuary of the Lord to pray: Do not come
thither full of sins, before thou be converted; and while thou art there,
incline thine ear to receive the doctrine of the Law from the Priests and Wise
men; Be not as the fools, who offer a gift for their sins, yet are not
converted from their evil works which they have wrought with their hands; and
so God is not well pleased with them, neither do they know what to do between
good and evil.

And now that we do in some measure understand The Division:
the sense and meaning of the words, be pleased to receive the division of them
into these two general parts.

Here is an Instruction, and a Caution.

The Instruction consists of two branches, and both full of fruit:

The first branch is, Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God.

The second branch is, Be more ready to hear (or obey) then to offer the
sacrifice of fools.

The Caution is contained in the latter clause, which is presented in the term
of a reason; For they consider not that they do evil.

So now the parts of the Text are laid open, and the work lies before us; and I
hope we have all been so careful of our feet in coming to this house of the
Lord this day, as that our pretended Divine Service may not prove a sacrifice
of fools; I must declare again, that my design lies against the irreverend and
wilful sin, though he be a frequenter of the House of God; and my procedure
shall be with all meekness and gentleness, as becomes a Minister of Christ; and
with all reverence and respect, as becomes so great a presence as this is.

The first general part, the Instruction; I am to invite your religious
attention to gather the fruits of the first branch of it; In which we shall
stop and stay upon these three things.

First, That God has an House here on earth.

Secondly, That there is a reverence due to that House.

Thirdly, We shall enquire wherein that reverence does consist.

From whence, we may pass to the view of the second branch; wherein we shall
find what is the main constituent part of divine reverence; namely, Obedience
to Divine Commands.

For the first of these; That God has an House here on earth, I am to make
good the proof, thus.

First, That God has owned such places as were peculiarly designed and
consecrated to his Worship, for his houses, for his dwelling places here on
earth.

Secondly, That the people of God in all ages have owned and acknowledged such
places as the houses of God.

I cannot conceive more cogent arguments in this point, then the Word of God,
and the practice of the people of God: Such as will not be convinced by these,
must be reckoned in the number of those (...), St Paul speaks of, unreasonable
men, whom no Topic nor rational argument can win over to the decency and
uniformity of Divine Worship.

First, I say, God does own such places for his Houses.

Is there no weight in that command of God? Ye shall sanctify my Sabbaths, and
reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord. Lev. 19. 30. Where observe; Does not the
Lord own the Sanctuary as well as the Sabbath? Does he not say, Ye shall
reverence my Sanctuary, as well as ye shall keep my Sabbath?

Such as would evade this evidence, by saying, that the Tabernacle, and the
Sanctuary, and the Temple were Jewish things, they were types and shadows, and
are vanished and abolished: We Christians are free to serve God in any place,
and at any time. True, we are so; but by such an argument as this, we may wipe
out the Commandments of both Tables; for they were Jewish things, as being
first given to them: and truly it is easy to observe, that such as have been
the revilers, and despisers, and destroyers of the houses of God amongst us,
have been rejecters and contemners of all the other Commandments of God; a very
slight care of godly or neighbourly duties has appeared among them.

But I confess it is improper to answer an argument by an invective; and
therefore I say, in the second place.

Where the fundamental reason of something in the first constitution of it
abides still the same; there the thing it self must abide in the like esteem.

I have heard it is a Rule in the Law, Eadem, vel simili ratione manente, idem
statuendum est; Like reasons produce like determinations in all cases.

There was a fundamental reason in the Institution of the Sabbath, the day
allotted for divine Worship: and therefore the holy Apostles did not abrogate,
but change it. Now the fundamental reason of the Jewish Tabernacle and Temple
was, that God should have a set place, as well as a set time for his Worship;
it being improbable that Divine Service should ever be solemnly performed,
except there be both time and place appointed for it.

And this was the reason why holy David was so careful in providing materials;
and Solomon was so industrious in building the Temple of Jerusalem, that there
might be a fixed place where the Name of the Lord might be placed and called
on, and where the Lord might meet his people and bless them.

Hence was that command of God, That while the Jews were in their ambulatory
condition, removing their Tents from place to place, they should build him an
Altar of earth, wherein their Sacrifices were to be offered: The reason whereof
is there assigned. In all places where I record my Name; that is, In every
place where the remembrance or Memorial of my Name shall be, I will come unto
thee and bless thee, Exodus 20. 24.

The like command, upon the like reason, we find Exodus, 25. 8. Let them make me
a Sanctuary, that I may dwell in the midst of them; which makes to the Point in
issue: That the Lord owns his Sanctuaries, the places designed for his Worship,
as his Houses, and his dwelling places. But there are in this case more clear
and plain evidences; yet I shall enforce but one more.

When the Lord says by the Prophet, Isa. 56. That he would make the Gentiles
joyful in his House of Prayer; and again, My House shall be called the House of
prayer for all people: verse the 7. it is worth the noting, that the Prophet
speaks in the Future Tense, My House shall be called; and this universally, in
regard of all people, not of the Jews alone, but of the Gentiles also.

And this precious promise is recorded by three of the four Evangelists; by St.
Matthew in the 21. By St. Mark in the 11. By St. Luke in the 19. Chapters of
their Gospel: I infer, if that Temple, that House of Prayer, had not been the
Lords House by a peculiar right and propriety, he had had no ^eason to take the
profanation of it so unkindly: If a Stable, as some have said, be as holy a
place as a Temple, what need had the Lord Christ to be angry, that Sheep, and
Oxen were brought into it? and sold to the people for their Sacrifices. Surely
it is no offense to Christ, nor dishonor to Religion, to put Cattle in a
Stable, but the Lord Christ did not conceive so of it. He esteemed and called
it his House: and as Divines observe on that passage; He gave the most signal
testimony of his displeasure that appeared in the whole course of his life. St.
John tells us, that he made a Scourge of small Cords, and drove the buyers and
sellers out of his Temple; he would not endure that that House, which was
designed to the duty of prayer, and other parts of divine Worship, should be
made an house of Merchandise, and Den of Thieves.

Again, is it not plain out of that promise, that the Lord intended there
should be a succession of his Houses? that in all ages, as the light of the
Gosp^l should appear to any Nation, they should have an House, a fixed place to
resort unto for Divine Worship; It was impossible that the Temple at Jerusalem
should be an House of Prayer to all Nations.
and the Lord performed this promise, in stiring up the hearts of holy men, to
erect and prepare convenient places for holy Worship; and if the records of
antiquity do not deceive us, there were some Churches built even by the
Apostles themselves; by St. Andrew and St. Luke. That evidence of Isidore
Pelusiota, is fraudulently detorted by some, when they cite him, saying, (...)
That in the Apostles time there were no Churches; but they leave out what he
adds, (...), that is, not so magnificently built, nor so richly adom'd as in
the succeeding age they had, whereof there is mention made by Saint Ignatius in
his Epistle to the Magnetians; by Justine the Martyr, in his second Apology;
and by St. Martialis in his Epistle to those of Toulouse.

By this that has been spoken, I hope the Evidence is clear, That the Lord
does own some places as his Houses. And I was the larger in this, because I
conceived the proof would mainly stick here: If the Lord vouchsafe to call them
his Houses, and his dwelling places, and the Memorials of his Name; It might be
necessary, that some amongst us would consider, whether those reproachful Names
which they put upon our Churches, in calling them Steeple Houses, and
Meeting-places; And whether their continual wilful absence from them, be not
defaults against that command of God, Of Reverencing his Sanctuaries? The Lord
in his due time give them grace to consider of it, and bring those wandering and
well-neer lost Sheep into the Fold of his Church again.

It follows now that I declare unto you, that the people of God in all ages
have owned and acknowledged those places which were designed for the public
Worship of God, as the Houses of God.

When Cain complained that he was driven from the presence of God, Peter Martyr
understands it, that he bemoand himself, as being cast out of the Church of
God, which was then in the Family of Seth.

When the Lord vouchsafed to holy Jacob that vision of the Ladder; and when he
saw the Angels ascending and descending upon it, he breaks out into that
Expression; How fearful is this place? This is none other but the House of God!
and it was a part of his Vow: This Stone shall be the House of God, and of all
that thou have given me, I will surely give the Tenth unto thee.

How often does holy David make mention of the Sanctuary of the Lord, and the
presence of God, and the House of God? In all which expressions he intended the
place of public Worship; and that, before the Temple was built.

It were endless to cite the Testimonies of all the Prophets; do but consider
that sharp reproof of the Prophet Haggai, when the people of Israel were
returned out of Babylon, and were more intent on the building and beautifying
of their own houses then the House of God; He puts that confounding question to
them: Is it time for you to dwell in sieled Houses, and the House of God lie
w^ste?

Does not St. Paul check the Corinthians for despising the Church of God, and
for the divisions that were among them when they met in the Church of God, 1
Cor. 11?

That by the Church of God he meant the place which was then set apart for
divine Service, is the concurrent opinion of those 18 Greek Fathers, whose
judgments Gecumenius sum'd up; and of those modern Divines whom Marlorate has
epitomized; they all understand it, non de coetu, sed de loco; not of the
Congregation, but of the place they were met in, which was not to be profaned
by their uncharitable divisisions, nor their luxurious Feasts, which had been
less sinful in their own houses.

I shall not conceal from you, in what a passionate way St. Hierom expressed
himself against Sabinian for an indecent action in a Church. Infaelicissime
mortalium; Oh thou most unhappy of all the sons of men! Proh nefas! non possum
ultra progredi: When he was about to declare his sin, he breaks off, and cries
out, Oh horrid Impiety! I am not able to express my self, my tears flow faster
then my words; my spirit is straightened through grief and indignation. Even
Cicero and Demosthenes would be dumb in such a cause as this, and could not say
any thing to defend it; So great an aggravation did Sabinians sin contract from
the holiness of the place it was committed in.

And we may wonder the less at the passionate zeal of St. Hierom, when we hear
old Eli reproving his Sons for their misdemenor with the women of Israel at the
door of the Tabernacle: If (says he) one man sin against another, the Judge
shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?
He calls their sin, a sin against the Lord, in respect of the place; and
intimates, that it was of such an heinous nature, as was not to be expiated by
sacrifice or intercession.

To declare the reverend esteem which holy men have had of the Houses of God,
is too copious an Argument to be touched upon in a Sermon; it is fitter rather
for a Volumne then an hours discourse; and I had not said so much, but to
invalidate those pretensions of piety, by which the Sectaries would disguise
their contempt of the Houses of God, and their separation from us.

It was one of the brainsick humors of the Donatists of old; they esteemed a
beggarly Cottage fitter for Gods service, then a magnificent Temple.

The Manicheans objected it as a criminal matter against the Christians, that
they have Temples and Altars after the manner of the Jews, and the Gentiles.

The Messalians imitated them, execrating and abandoning all Churches, and
would pray only in their own houses.

Socrates reckons it among the errors of Eustatheus, that he detested all
Churches, and persuaded his followers to keep their Conventicles in their
private Houses.

In this Glass our modern Sectaries may see from what Progenitors they are
descended; that in despising the Churches of God, they walk in the paths of
condemned Heretics: And whereas they pretend P^ety and Purity in their
separation from us, they pollute themselves with the greatest impiety; for they
rob God of his right and propriety in the Houses of Prayer, which himself has
claimed, and his people in all ages have cheerfully and humbly acknowledged.

Well then, If God has an House here on earth: It will follow in the next
place, that there is a Reverence due to it.

It is due, first, in respect of the divine Command. Ye shall Reverence my
Sanctuary; the Command is twice repeated in the Book Leviticus: and that we may
not conceive it a service peculiar to the Jews only, St. Paul makes it his
Exhortation, to serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, for our
God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.

Secondly, Reverence is due to the House of God, because it is the memorial of
his divine presence.

There is something in that Promise, which the Lord made to Solomon, when he
had consecrated his Temple by prayer: Mine eyes and my heart shall be there
perpetually, 1 Kings 9. 3. And does not our blessed Savior promise, That when
two or three shall be gathered together in his Name, He would be in the midst
of them: These places import a divine presence in the Houses of Prayer,
especially in the time of Prayer.

Some of the Ancients raised an Argument for Reverence to the House of God, in
regard of the immediate presence of the Angels of God there. (...), says St.
Chrysostom; He is reproving his Antiochians for their irreverent behavior in
the Church, in walking, and talking, and saluting one another, and the like.
The Church (says he) is not like a Barbers shop to tattle in, and tell news,
but the place of Angels, and Archangels, the Place of God, even Heaven it self.

And in another place he advises thus: Consider (says he) with whom thou
stand, with whom thou call upon the Name of the Lord: With Cherubims and
Seraphims, and all the powers of Heaven: It may be sufficient to persuade thee
to reverence, when thou remembrest, that thou who art but flesh and blood, but
dust and ashes, art admitted with the incorporeal powers to celebrate the Lord
of Glory. So that Father.

To the same purpose, St. Ambrose. Ne dubites assistere Angelos, ubi Christ us
assistle; There is no question to be made, but where Christ is present, the
Holy Angels are present also.

Tertullian observing the irreverent gesture of some, sitting in the time of
Prayer in the Church, manages his Argument thus. Siquidem irreverens est
assidere, etc. If it be an irreverent thing to sit in the sight and presence of
him whom thou honor in an especial manner; how much more irreligious is it
to do it in the presence of the living God? Angelo orationis adstante, and the
Angel of Prayer standing by: Unless thou will upbraid God that thou have
wearied thy self with praying, and can stand nor kneel no longer.

And these judicious Fathers did not urge this Argument for reverence, without
good grounds for it. The learned Junius in his Not^s upon that place of
Tertullian, conceives, that in that expression he had respect to that place, 1
Cor. 11. 10. where S. Paul instructing them for the most decent manner in the
duty of Prayer, says, For this cause ought a woman to have power (or a
covering) on her head; because of the Angels; namely, which are present there;
for otherwise there were no strength in the Argument: Why should the woman be
covered in the place of prayer, more then any where else, unless the Angels be
more there then any where else? They are (...) said Philo Judaeus, Overseers,
to look that all things be done as they ought in the houses of God; and hence
no doubt was that expression which we have in our Liturgy, Wherefore with
Angels and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, we laud and magnisie thy
glorious Name.

We have now well near gathered the fruit of the first branch of Solomon's
Instruction. Two things have appeared to us.

First, That God has his Houses here on Earth.

Secondly, that there is a Reverence due to them.

We are now in the third place to enquire, wherein that Reverence does consist?

And we have the answer in the Text, Custodi pedem tuum, Keep thy foot when
thou enterest into the House of God.

And here it were easy to refresh your attention, with the grateful variety of
conjectures, what Solomon might mean in these words.

Hugo de Sancto Victore conceives, that our Reverence to the house of God may
be expressed, First; in the decent decking and adorning of them; which he
collects from that passage Psalm. 144. 12. That our daughters may be as the
polished corners of the Temple: the Lxx. renders it, (...) concinnae and
ornatae, beautiful and adorned.

In this Prayer of David it must necessarily be supposed, that the corner
stones of the Temple were carved and polished; had they been rough and unhewen,
it had been a frivolous prayer, if David had desired of the Lord that the
daughters of his people should be like to them.

But in this last and worst age of the world, the Reverend Sons of God may
invert that prayer, That the stones of our Churches were but polished and
beautified as our daughters are. There are many wealthy persons who have laid
out more money for a new Dressing, or a new Gown for a Daughter, then ever they
gave toward the repair of a Church, in their whole lives.

Paulinus the Bishop of Nola, expressed his reverence to the House of God in
that desire of his;

Prae foribus servire tuis: tua lumina mane
Munditie curare sinas. -- Translated thus.
Let me attend thy doors, and every morn
Sweep clean thy Threshold, and thy Porch adorn.
So we find S. Hierome commending Nepotian for dressing up the Church with
boughs and flowers, and for keeping the walls and the pavements clean.

Certainly there is a golden mean between that pompous Ornament which the
Papists bestow upon their Churches, and that sluttish neglect which we may
observe in some Churches of the Protestants. Look upon their outsides, and by
the thatch, and broken roof, you would take them rather to be Stables for
Horses, then places designed for the Worship of the God of Heaven.

Look into their insides, and were it not for a wormeaten Table, and some
broken seats and forms, you would think them rather places littered for Swine
to lie in, then for Christians to pray in.

The Lord be merciful to this Land for our irreverence to his Sanctuaries in
this particular, and raise our hearts to that pitch of devotion, to make and
keep Gods House, at least, as decent as our own.

But in the second place, let us inquire what this keeping of the Foot is.

This is certain, that both the Jews and the Gentiles also did understand it
literally.

Aben Ezra (as I find him cited) glosses it thus. Come not into the House of
God, Illotis Pedibus, with unwashen feet.

Maimonides tells us, it was not lawful for a man to come into the House of God
with his shoes on his feet, or with his staff, or in his working garment, or
with dust on his feet.

Which is further confirmed by what Burtorsius relates to be the modern
practice of the Jews in their Synagogues, even in these Western and colder
parts of the World. Before the door of their Synagogues they have an iron
fastened in the wall, whereat every one is bound to make clean his dirty shoes,
and that by the authority of Solomon, who says, Look to thy Foot. And
whosoever had slippers on, if they were foul, he was bound to put them off,
according as it is written, Put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place
whereon thou stand is holy ground.

In this literal sense did the Jews understand this Instruction of Solomon: And
we find that the Gentiles, by the impulsion of the Law of Nature did reverence
the Temples of their gods in this manner.

It was one of the Precepts of Pythagoras: (...). Offer thy Sacrifice, and
worship with thy shoes off.

Drusius tells us, that some of the Eastern Nations held it a crime not to be
pardoned, to tread upon the pavement of their Temples with their shoes on.

And so a late Writer, who was a long time Prisoner among the Turks, tells us
what their behavior is, when they come into their Mosguees.

Their first duty is, to wash their hands and their feet; then they sprinkle
water thrice on their heads, repeating these words: Glory be to my God.

Then putting off their shoes, they enter into their Temples.

And so Arnobius tells us, it was the custom of some Heathens to fall down
flat in the Temples of their Idols.

And that all these expressions of Divine Reverence may not be blown away as
superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, savouring of Judaisme and Gentilisme; be
pleased to hear in what sense some Christians have understood this Instruction
of Solomon.

Zaga Zabo, a Bishop of Ethiopia being sent Ambassador to the King of
Portugal, and being requested to make a Relation of the Rites and Ceremonies
which the Abysines used in their Divine Service; He gives this.

It is forbidden amongst us, that either Heathens, or Dogs, or any other beasts
should come into our Churches.

It is not permitted to us to go into our Churches, but barefooted.

It is not lawful for us to walk up and down in our Churches, nor to laugh, nor
to spit, nor to speak of secular matters, because our Churches are like Mount
Sinai, where God spoke unto Moses, saying, Put off thy Shoes from thy feet, for
the place whereon thou stand is Holy Ground.

St. Hierome reports it to the honor of that devout Matron, Paula, that she
died with these words in her mouth: How dreadful is this place? this is none
other but the House of God.

And Greg. Nazianzen commends his pious Mother Nonna, that in the Church she
would never open her lips but concerning divine matters; that she never turned
her back upon the Altar; that she would never spit upon the pavement, as
considering her self to be in the House, and presence of the Lord.

By these several Instances we may perceive how all Nations, both Jews,
Gentiles, and Christians, agree in this reverent behavior in the House of
their gods: And shall the English Christians be the only rude, uncivil, and
irreverent worshippers of their God above all the world beside? God forbid.

I press you not to a strict imitation of these several Nations, in putting off
your shoes, or washing your feet, or your heads: Only this, that whenever ye
are coming to, and when ye are entered into the Houses of God, ye would consider
that ye have a glorious, and a jealous God to meet with: That the holy Angels,
though they know not your hearts, yet are overseers of your outward gestures
and behavior; and it is their joy to see and hear the real expressions of
unfeigned repentance. So Junius interprets those words of St. Luke 10. 15. I
say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner
that repents: that is, The Angels of God can see our tears and our humble
postures; they can hear our sighs and our groans, aad the confession we make of
our sins; and this is matter of joy to them, that the number of the Servants of
God, and such as shall be saved, is increased.

It may beget an abasing blush in us to hear what Seneca said in this case.
Intramus Templa composud, in omne argumentum modestiae fingimur: We enter into
our Temples with composed spirits, and frame our selves to all possible
expressions of modesty and humility. And no doubt the Lord expects the like
from us, and more; forasmuch as we have a better God to serve then the Heathens
had; and the knowledge of him is delivered over to us by clearer and more
abundant revelations.

But I must not stay too long upon the literal sense of these words. Keep thy
foot when thou enterest into the House of God: There is something more in them.

Hippomanus, and some other Expositor, have objected, The Second Sermon.
That that Ceremony of Discalceation, among the Jews, was used to signify a
man's departure from his Right; in passing his Inheritance to another, as we
read, Ruth 4. 7.

And it is not improbable, that Solomon in this Instruction, might have respect
unto that Ceremony.

When St. Paul called upon the Corinthians to glorify God, both with their
bodies and their spirits, he presses them to it by this Argument: Ye are not
your own, ye are bought with a price; as if he had spoken to them in the phrase
of the Text: Put off your Shoes from your feet. Yield up that right which ye
have to the members of your bodies, and the faculties of your souls unto
Christ, who has redeemed them: And from this Notion of the phrase (which is
genuine enough, and analogous to the rule of divine Worship) I may raise some
other Notions, which may serve to advance and promote the Duty which we have in
hand.

I shall easily admit that account which Lorinus gives us, that by foot here,
is meant, the feet, that is, the affections of the soul; but may I not put the
question, Of the soul only? Had Solomon's instruction no design upon the members
of the body? Does Divine Reverence consist only in the pious frame and
composure of the soul? Certainly it requires the whole man; the inward man, and
the outward man too; and the ensuing Discourse will be managed accordingly in
some short Directions for the decent behavior of the outward man.

First, I advise according to the letter of the Text. Keep thy foot when thou
go to the House of God: When thou art going thither keep on thy way; suffer
no temptation either to stay thee at home, or to turn thee aside from it. It is
one of the choicest arts of Satan, in hindering men from going to the House of
God; he knows that there is not any thing that debauches the spirit of a man,
nor hardens his heart more, then his frequent absence from divine worship;
that is the sin which keeps men in ignorance of themselves, and of the ways of
God, and discomposes them for that great account which they must render to the
Lord at the last day.

1 Chronicles. 21. 30. We read That David could not go up to Gibeon to inquire of
the Lord, because of the sword of the Angel of the Lord: that is, because he
was to pass through infected places thither; but when the way to the House of
God is clear and safe, thy absence from it will not be defended by either of
those too common excuses; some worldly business, or the entertainment of a
friend that came to visit th^e.

Again, Keep thy foot when thou art come into the House of God.

Tertullian tells us, that the primitive Christians had their Dies stationum,
days of standing, wherein they thought it Nefas, (as he expresses it) an
unlawful thing to kneel, though at Prayer; and those days continued from the
Passover to the Pentecost, in memory (as it is thought) of our Saviors
Resurrection. St. Cyprian tells us, that the Confessors and Martyrs, who
persevered in the faith were called Stantes, The Standers. The ancient Church
took up another custom at the reading of some portions of the Gospel, and at
the repetition of the Articles of our Faith, that the Congregation should stand
up; not only to acknowledge their unity and consent in faith, but to testify
their resolution to persevere in that faith, and to maintain the truth of that
Gospel against all opposers.

And since that custom of standing at those times, at the repetition of the
Creed, and the reading of the Gospel, has been derived down to us by the piety
of our Forefathers; I advise you to look to your feet then; do not kneel at
the Creed, as the manner of ignorant persons is, as if it were a prayer. Do not
sit, as if ye doubted of the truth, or were not concerned in that public
profession of your Faith; and as if your constancy to it would be conditional;
that is, so long as it stands in favor, and is in fashion with the world: But
in the Name of God stand up at it, and stand up for it; that the Lord may stand
with you, as He did by St. Paul, and strengthen you in the day of your
tribulation.

I pursue my design of putting our outward Man into a reverend posture for
divine worship; and therefore the discourse rises from the Foot to the Knee.
Look to that, that it be not too stiff in the House of God.

God stands in the Congregation, says David; does God stand? and do his holy
Angels stand and look upon thee, and will thou sit? Will thou sit, and never
kneel? St. Jerome's rule is, not only frequenter orandum, to be often in the
duty of prayer; but flexo corpore orandum, to declare an inward humiliation by
an outward.

Our coming to Church is a Testification, a profession of our Religion; and to
testify our fall in Adam; the Church appoints us at certain times to fall upon
our knees; and to testify our faith in the Resurrection, both of Christ's and
our own; the Church has appointed certain times to stand, but no man is so
left to his liberty as never to kneel.

Genu-flexio est Peccatorum: Kneeling is the sinners posture: If thou come
hither in the quality of a sinner (and if thou do not, what do thou here?)
put thy self into the sinners posture. Kneel sometimes. Habe reverentiam Deo,
ut quod pluris est ei tribuas, is devout Bernard's counsel. And let me improve
it thus.

Do but remember with what reverence thou have come into thy Masters presence,
when thou wast a Servant.

Do but remember with what reverence thou have come into thy Landlords
presence, when thou were a Tenant.

Do but remember with what reverence thou have come into a Court of Justice,
when thou were either a Client, or a Pleader, or a Witness, or but a stander by.

Do but remember with what reverence ye have come into the Kings presence, or
the Council Table, or, which was much lower, to a Committee-Table.

Collect (I say) but the reverence which thou have showed to these Persons, and
in these places, and though I could wish the Lord had but as much; such bowing
of the knee, such bending of the body, such uncovering of the head, even in the
coldest weather, such mannerliness in all points; yet, Quod pluris est, says
Bernard, God must have thus much reverence, and more; for all these expressions
of reverence may be counterfeit, these honorable Persons may have the body,
but not the heart: but the Lord must have all: Remember that call of David in
the 95. Psalm. O come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord
our Maker.

From the reverence of the knee, we may pass to the reverence of the hands.

I will (says St. Paul) that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands.

This Rite in Prayer was observed by the Heathens, even by the instinct of
Nature; So Virgil speaking of Aeneas,

Ingemit, and duplices tendens ad sidera palmas; He sighed, and lift up his
hands to Heaven. Many other authorities might be cited of this nature.

Cosma Magalianus glosses upon these words of St. Paul. The lifting up of the
hands is, Orantis forma, ex alto auxilium petentis, it is such a posture of
Prayer, whereby we declare that we seek for help from Heaven.

This was that posture to which the Prophet Jeremy exhorted the distressed
Jews. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the Heavens, Lamenta.
3. 41. Not the heart alone, but hands and heart too.

I had not mentioned this particular, but to remember you, what an express and
punctual charge the Lord gives for all parts of bodily Worship, among which,
this of lifting up the hands is so eminent, that the whole duty of Prayer is
comprehended under it. When ye stretch out your hands, I will turn mine eyes
from you, says the Lord by his Prophet Isaiah.

And this may serve to shame us for our dullness and sluggishness; and for that
no motion which our bodies express in the time of Divine Wo^ship. Outward
gestures are not only the Ornaments of Religion, but the Incentives of
Devotion: The lifting up of thy hands may be the raising up of thy Pew-fellows
heart; he may take a spark from thy holy zeal, and kindle himself into a flame
of piety; but however it fare with him, if thou bow down thy knee before God,
he will bow down his ear to hear thee; and if thou lift up thy holy hands, thy
help shall come from on high, and the Lord will fill them with good things.

I should in the next place give you notice that there is a reverence due to
the House of God from the tongue.

And I hope there is not such a critical Auditor in this Congregation, as to
charge me with a digression from the Text; because Solomon speaks to this
subject in the verse immediately following; he advises there, Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God.

Cajetan gave this sense of the words, Oration ad Deum careat festinatione, tam
in ore, quam in cord. Our prayers to God must be so ordered, that our hearts
be neither hasty in conceiving, nor our tongues in uttering. The Original word
(says Lorinus) signifies festinare praecipitanter, an headlong haste; that is,
when a man gives himself the liberty of speaking quicquid in buccam venerit,
whatsoever comes next into his thoughts, without premeditation, whether the
words, whereby those thoughts must be presented, be proper and acceptable; or
no.

And therefore in provision against this vanity of the tongue, it seemed good
to the Church in all ages to p^epare Liturgies, and set forms of Prayer, by
which the devotion of the people of God should be regulated, that their mouths
should not be rash, nor their hearts hasty, to utter any thing before God.

That great searcher into Antiquity, Mr Gregory, has delivered it unto us from
very reverend Authority, that Noah himself, while he was in the Ark, used a set
form of Prayer, whereof he gives us the Copy out of an Arabic Manuscript; and
although there be no need to distrust the faith of such a venerable Record; yet
we have other evidence for the use of forms of Prayer, from unquestionable
authority.

We have the manner of the Temple-service as it was in use in our Saviors
time, and we find not any where that he took offense at it: Yea, we find that
when his Disciples came to him, and besought of him that he would teach them to
pray, as John had taught his Disciples; He prescribes them a set form: When ye
pray, say, Our Father, etc. Verba et recitationem certam praescribit, says
Melancton. Christ commands to repeat the very words: Aliter orare quam Deus
docuit non ignorantia sola est, sed culpa, says St Cyprian: To pray otherwise
then the Lord Christ has taught us, is not only our ignorance, but our sin:
Wherefore (says he) My beloved brethren, let us pray as God has taught us. And
accordingly we find in Tertullian; It was the manner of the Primitive
Christians to begin their Divine Service with the Lords Prayer; praemissa
legitima and ordinaria Oratione Dominica. When they had used that lawful and
ordinary prayer which the Lord Christ had taught them; then there was, jus
superstruendi: A right of building upon that foundation: and continuing their
divine service according to those Liturgies which were comp^led by Saint Mark
and Saint James, as the Eastern Church steadfastly believes: Which Liturgies (as
it is supposed) were afterward altered by St. Basil and St. Chrysostom, and
fitted for more public use; and out of which, and the ancient forms in the
Western Church, that Liturgy which is established in this Church of England,
was collected and composed.

Prayer is a duty, and every duty is a debt; and debts, you know, must be paid
in current money; such as has the present Caesar's stamp or image upon it: So
that for the discharge of the duty, and the payment of that debt of prayer, I
humbly conceive, the safest, and the most current, that is, the most acceptable
Coin to pay it with, will be in those Prayers which have the stamp and
impressions of the Church of God upon them; I mean in the Confessions and
Absolutions, and Collects, and Letanies which are compiled to that purpose, and
which were present, and end in the Name of Christ: And when we pay our debt of
prayer in the words, and in the Name of Christ, I see no reason we have to
doubt of a discharge, and acquittance of our sins in the blood of Christ Jesus.

There are yet two pieces of the outward man to be prepared and fitted for
divine worship, which must be taken into a short consideration, lest I be too
much straightened with time for the Points that remain.

The two parts or pieces of our outward man are the Eye and the Head; and we
must have an especial regard of these.

It was the resolution of a very holy man; 'twas Job, That he would make a
Covenant with his eyes; he would not allow them that liberty which nature had
given them, of wandering upon every pleasant object.

And it was the confession of a very holy man: 'twas St. August; that in his
younger days, Intra sacros parietes egi negotium procurandi fructus mortis;
Even while he was within the Walls of Gods House, his eyes were wandering and
lusting, and he was making a bargain for the fruits of death. Now forasmuch as
the chastity of the soul is in so much danger to be violated and betrayed
through the treason of the eye; it will concern us to join with another holy
man, with David in his Prayer: Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and
quicken thou me in thy waey.

Be pleased to receive the reverend Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase upon those words;
as if David had said, Lord grant me a strict guard over mine eyes, those inlets
of so many sins: Withdraw me from all delight and complacency in the wealth and
grandeur of the world, on which the lust of the eye is wont to be placed; turn
away my eyes from false, frail, and deceitful beauty, which is too apt to
kindle impure flames in my breast: And on the contraray, inspire into me, and
enliven in me all pious and virtuous designs. Such a Prayer as this may well
become us, as we are going to the House of God, and when we are entered into it.
It were a sad miscarriage, if we should turn these Oratoria into Lupanaria; the
house of Prayer into an house of sin; to come hither with a greater desire to
meet a vicious friend, then the holy God; and when we return, to be able to
give a better account of the faces and the fashions of the Congregation, then
the parts or points of the Sermon: But I forbea^, because I hope better things
of you.

And for the full preparation of the outward Man, there remains only a few
words concerning his Head. But here I dare prescribe nothing; age or sickness
may make a strong plea against a bare-headed presence in a Church; especially
when the God of mercy is to hear it: But supposing health and strength, I make
some question whether a covered head will not be too pregnant an evidence of an
irreverent heart. Mr Cartwright (who was no good friend to the discipline of
this Church of England, yet) in his Homily on our Text, presses for reverence
in the House of God, by that argumentum ad hominem, which his followers have so
much decryed since. The Houses of God may challenge as much reverence as the
Courts of Princes: Who presumes to enter into the Kings presence with his head
covered? and if not there, why here?

Busbequius tells us, that the Great Turk, when he enters into his Mosques,
lays aside his Robes, and continues in an humble posture till their manner of
Service be finished. I am afraid the reverence which the Jews, and the
Heathens, the Eastern Christians, and the Turks also, declare in their Temples
and holy places, will rise up in judgment against some amongst us, who can hear
that Sacred Name of Jesus pronounced, and yet neither move Hat nor Knee: Who
can sit at the Lords Table as familiarly as at their own; Who can uncover their
heads when a Psalm is singing, but cover them whiles the Psalms and Chapters
are reading; Who can allow their servants to sit covered before them in a
Church, but not in a Shop. It is the wonder, and the grief of all sober
persons, that the Christian Religion should produce such cross legged Monsters,
such anomalous and unequal practices; which are so far from being evidences of
the true fear of God, that they are not consistent with the rules of common
civility.

And now I have delivered my sense concerning the reverential deportment of our
outward Man in the House of God; which I humbly submit to better judgments,
and shall cheerfully and willingly retract, if any thing has passed from me in
any respect diss^nant from prudence or piety.

These are the Vanities which I have observed in our Divine Service; and I
shall heartily both wish and pray for a Reformation of them. That in our
public Meetings we appear to God, and the Angels, and to all such who are not
yet effectually called, as a Congregation of Christians; and they may say of
us, Surely the Lord is among you.

Hitherto I have entertained your Christian Attention with the fruits of the
first Branch of the Text; and if any one doubt I have been too lavish of my
time in regard of the Parts that remain: I hope I shall deceive him. Rouse up
your selves I beseech you but a few minutes more, and I shall dismiss you.

The Second Branch.
I suppose you remember that I told you, that on this Second Branch we should
find the main constituent part of Divine Reverence; and that is, Obedience to
divine Commands.

This Obedience has a double Object.

The Commands of God; and the Commands of the King; for that is another Note in
this excellent Sermon of Solomon: We have it Chap. 8. 2. I counsel thee to keep
the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. Now these are to
be considered apart: And first, our obedience to Gods Commands.

Hearing is a Preparatory duty to obeying; we must hear that we may learn how
to obey: It is impossible we should conform our lives to the will of God,
unless we know it.

And that was the reason, I suppose, that St. Jerome translated his clause thus:
Appropinqua ut audias, Draw nigh that thou may hear; Sanctify the Lords holy
day in that holy manner, in waiting in holy Ordinances, hanging (as it were)
upon the lips of such Messengers of God, as preserve Knowledge: But this is not
all.

Hearing without a proportionable Obedience will but inflame our reckoning
against the last day: And therefore St. Hierom notes upon the Text thus: Non
ingredi in domum Dei, sed sine offensione ingredi, laudis est; The bare duty of
entering into the House of God is not praiseworthy or acceptable to him; but
when we enter so, as that our consciences are void of all purpose of offense
toward God, and also toward man.

It is conceived by Expositors, that Solomon in this Branch of his Instruction,
had observed a corrupt humor that was in his subjects, the people of Israel,
that they rested and contented themselves with the outward formalities of
divine Worship: If they came to the Temple of the Lord, and brought their
Sacrifices as they were commanded in the Law, they thought themselves religious
enough, though they took no care of their lives. When they had sinned, and
brought their Sacrifice, they conceived this was as much as God did, or could
expect from them; and this was the Sacrifice of Fools which is spoken of in the
Text: and the Prophet Samuel had so determined it in that famous case. The Lord
lays a strict command upon Saul, to make an utter destruction of the
Amalekites; but he prevaricates, and spares some of the fattest of the Cattle
for Sacrifice: But what says Samuel to him? Obedience is better then Sacrifice,
and to hearken then the fat of Rams; and that covetous project undid him;
within a short time he lost both his life and Kingdom.

Now let us learn to be wise by his Example. Let us take heed we do not delude
our poor Souls as the Jews did, by the outward Formalities of Religion. Come to
the House of God as often as ye can, but keep your Feet when ye come thither:
That is, according to Lorinus, Keep the Feet of your Soul in a due temper. When
ye come hither, be disposed and resolved to yield to the evidence of the Word
of God, to acknowledge that to be sin, which the Word of God condemns for sin,
and to yield that to be a Duty, which by the light of Scripture appears to be
so. When we come to the House of God, we should be ready to say, as the Prophet
Samuel did, Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears: That is, as Mendoza glosses
that place, Speak Lord what thou please, and I am ready, not only to hear,
but to obey it. Such a readiness appeared in St. Augustine, Da Domine quod
jubes, and jube quod vis. O Lord give me grace to obey, and command what thou will.

And now, shall I be so bold as to inquire whether the Feet of your Souls be in
that obediential posture as the Lord expects you should be? Solomon speaks in
general terms in the Text; but it may be expedient, for your better
edification, that I instance in some few particulars.

Lay the two Tables of the Law of God before you, and examine your selves
whether ye are henceforth resolved to conform your lives according to those
sacred Rules?

First, art thou resolved to have no other God but the God of Heaven? Will thou
no longer serve the God of this World, Mammon, for the wages of unrighteousness?

Secondly, art thou resolved never more to dishonor God by worshipping him in,
or before some graven Image? Will thou never hereafter disguise, and palliate
thy Idolatry by a nice distinction?

Thirdly, Art thou resolved that henceforth thou will not take the Name of the
Lord thy God in vain? Will thou not swear rashly and customarily? Will thou not
make a false Oath in the Courts of Justice, to take the righteousness of the
Righteous from him?

Fourthly, Will thou hereafter remember to Keep holy the Sabbath day? never
mo^e to profane it by idleness, or drunkness, or feasting, or luxury, or
worldliness?

Fifthly, Art thou resolved henceforth to Honor thy Parents? To Honor the
King, as the common Parent of the Country? To Honor the Ministers of God, who
have begotten thee in Christ? To Honor thy natural Parents, who have brought
thee into this world, and bred thee up in it in care and sorrow?

Sixthly, Art thou resolved that henceforth thou will do no Murder? That thou will not take up Arms against thy King, and destroy thy fellow subjects, upon
the mistaken quarrel of Religion and Liberty?

Seventhly, Art thou resolved henceforth never to commit Adultery? never more
to pollute thy body, which is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, by unclean thoughts
or actions?

Eighthly, A^t thou resolved henceforth never to wrong thy neighbor in his
goods, neither violently nor fraudulently? Will thou not hereafter use false
Dice, nor false Weights, nor false Measures, nor false words, nor overreach
thy neighbor in any matter?

Ninethly, Art thou resolved henceforth never to bear false witness against thy
neighbor? Will thou not for fear or favor, nor for a bribe, give a false
testimony to blind the eyes of the Judge, and to pervert the course of
Judgment?

Lastly, Art thou resolved never hereafter to covet any thing that is thy
neighbors? Will thou hereafter restrain thy self from all covetous practices,
and labor to be content with such things, as the Lord in a gracious providence
shall please to allow and assign to thee?

In this Glass, in this perfect Mirror, you may see whether the feet of your
souls stand right; whether they be washed and cleansed from all purposes and
resolutions to sin: For let me tell you,

Unless ye can say with David, and say truly; Oh Lord my heart is ready, my
heart is ready; I will have respect unto all thy Commandments; I am purposed
that I will not offend: Unless (I say) ye are in this ready posture for holy
Obedience, all your prayers, and all your Fasts, and all your days of
humiliation, are but the sacrifice of Fools; they will avail nothing either to
remove the guilt of sin, or to appease the wrath of God.

Let me give you but one Note more in this Point: This resolution (which I have
been speaking of) will be best discovered by your constancy and fervency in
prayer, both in private and in public; for Mercy, in regard ye have
transgressed the Laws of God; and for Grace, that the Lord would incline your
hearts to keep them: And therefore it was a pious provision in our Church
Liturgy; that after the Minister has repeated the several Commandments, as
from the mouth of God; the whole Congregation are enjoined to say, Lord have
mercy upon us; in that we have broken those Commandments: And incline our
hearts to keep them; that is, give us grace to do so no more.

Bucolcerus tells us of Henricus Auceps, one of the Emperors of Germany, that
when his City of Mersburg was assaulted by a vast Army of the Hungarians, he
slew and put them to flight, his Soldiers crying out with a loud voice, Lord
have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us. And truly, I do not know a better
defense against temptation to sin, then to pray with David, Oh Lord incline my
heart to thy Testimonies; nor a better remedy against the guilt of sin, then to
pray with the poor Publican in the Gospel, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

The Feet of our Souls are well kept, when we have taken up a firm resolution
of obeying the Commandments of God; but yet we must take one step further.

We must keep the Kings Commandment also; this is certainly a Duty, however
some men endeavor to distingu^sh themselves out of it. I counsel thee, says
Solomon; and surely the counsel of so wise a man is worthy to be heard and
regarded; as if he had said, I Solomon, who require obedience from mine own
Subjects, do counsel all Subjects to yield obedience to their Kings: And St.
Paul delivers the same Doctrine: Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake.

But wherein are the Commands of Kings to be obeyed? Must we yield up our
selves in a blind obedience, to observe, and do whatsoever the Higher Powers
shall impose upon us? This is a busy question, and there is a short answer to
it: We must either Obey, or Suffer.

If the Commands of Kings are consistent with the Laws of God, our Obedience is
indisputable; yea, I may say, that in that case, we do not so much obey the
King as God: So that the Trial of our obedience to Kings lies for the most part
in such matters, which we call indifferent, which are neither positively
commanded nor forbidden by the Law of God. Such as are matters of Decency and
Order in Divine Worship, and such as are of absolute necessity, namely, the
payment of Tribute and Custom, for the preservation of his Person, and his
Honor, and his People, and his Kingdom, to boggle at such Commands as these,
is, (as I am informed from very learned and pious men) a rejection of this
counsel of Solomon, and that exhortation of St. Paul beforementioned; we may
make our selves liable to the wrath of the King, which (as Solomon says) is, as
the roaring of a Lion; yea, we may make our selves liable to that which St.
Paul terms [Damnation] an heavy word, and the Lord incline all our hearts to
such a prudent and conscionable obedience both to his own Commands, and the
Kings, that we may never feel the weight of it.

The second general Part.
The Caution. For they consider not that they do evil.

Have ye yet one minutes patience more? I hope ye have; and indeed there needs
not much more for the discussion of this part.

Solomon here points at a palpable, and very dangerous piece of Folly: As
indeed, what can be more foolish, then for a man, when he does evil, to think
he does well? And what can be more dangerous, then to dishonor God while we
think we serve him? It is an heavy word that of Solomon; Who so turns away
his ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be an abomination, Prove.
28. 9. and that is a fea^ful state: Let but a sinner, against Gods and the
Kings Commandments, retire into some private place, and there sit down and
bethink himself, and say, What shall I do to be saved? Righteousness I have
none, my whole life has been (as it were) one continued transgression. I have
in an Hypocritical way come often to the House of God, and heard many Sermons,
and observed many Fasts; but my heart was not right toward God; it went after
covetousness; my pretended zeal was cruel and bloody; and I served my self,
while I bore the world in hand that I was a servant of Christ's. All my Religion
lay in hearing, but I had no obedience: My practice was not conformable to my
pretenses; and now what will become of me? Should I betake my self to prayer,
and pour out my guilty soul in supplications; Solomon tells me, That they would
be but the Sacrifice of Fools; that my prayer would be an abomination; that the
Lord would cast it out as a filthy thing: So that I am in great danger to lie
under the guilt of sin, and the wrath of God for ever.

Let (I say) a sinner, I mean one that has been more ready to hear then to
obey, but argue his own case with his own soul, and he will quickly see his
folly, and with tears acknowledge that he has done evil; that there has been
iniquity even in his holy things; and there remains nothing for him but a
fearful expectation of vengeance to come.

But I would not close my discourse with such a sad note as this; neither dare
I tell you, that the yoke of the Christian Religion is easier then it is. You
have had the Nature of Divine Worship represented to you, both for the Form and
the Matter of it: The Form I place in those Reverential postures and gestures
of the outward Man: The Matter, in an obedience to divine Commands, and to the
Kings, so far forth as they are not repugnant to the Laws of God; nor injoin
any thing which is unlawful for, or unworthy of a Christian: And I beseech you
to think of it, and by a speedy resolution for new and better obedience, secure
and lay in a stock of comfort for your poor souls against the coming of the
great Day of the Lord. If hereafter ye shall come rightly disposed and prepared
to this House of Prayer, the Lord (according to his promise) will meet you, and
bless you, and make you joyful in it. He will give you the comforts and the
graces of his blessed Spirit to strengthen and guide you in the way wherein you
should go, and at your end, receive you into that other House of his, not made
with hands, which is eternal in the Heavens. For which the Lord of his Mercy
prepare us.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
To the Honou^able Sir Christopher Turner, Knight, One of the BARONS OF HIS
Majesty's Exchequer.
My Lord,
AMong those many mercies which our good God in the happy Restoration of his
sacred Majesty, has poured upon this unworthy Nation; it is looked upon by
some pious and judicious persons as none of the least, yea rather, as one of
the greatest, that his Majesty has placed such Judges over us, who understand
both Law and Gospel, and are able not only to administer Justice and Judgment
to the people in their Civil Causes, but to be guides and examples to them in
their devotions and addresses to God.

It was no small comfort to me, being by the Providence of God called to this
service, and directed to this argument, that I found your Lordship such a
practical Auditor, recommending my mean discourse to the better consideration
of the people, by your exemplar reverence in the House of God: And I have the
sooner digested the Obloquy which was cast upon these weak pieces, when I saw
the duty which they pointed at (Reverence in Divine Worship) was so well known,
and so evidently performed (beside your self) by so many learned, and pious,
and honorable persons.

Many and sore were the evils which lay upon this Church of England in our late
troubles; and although our chief cordolium arose, that we see some of the
fundamentals of our Religion undermined and shaken, it could not but beget some
sighs and sad thoughts in us, to hear the circumstantials so decryed and
despised, as if Divine Worship consisted only in our hearts and spirits, and it
had been superstition in any respect to have glorified God with our bodies.

It was an ingenuous concession of Mr Calvin in the case of Ceremonies, that if
they were few in number, easy to be observed, and clear in their
signification, they might juvare rudiorum imperitiam, assist the weakness of
the ruder sort of people, and that they would conduce, Christum illustrare, to
make Christ better known to them.

And certainly the devout and reverend servants of God, in the various and
humble postures and gestures of their bodies in Divine Worship, have no other
design, but to testify that awful sense which they have of an extraordinary
presence of God in Holy Assemblies, by them to instruct and edify the
ignorant, and to prepare them for their more solemn approaches to the Throne of
grace.

It was judiciously said by a late learned man, that reverence was the pale of
Religion; if that pale be broken down, the Roes and the Hinds of the field, as
Solomon calls them, weak and unstable souls will break out, and wander into
profaneness and Atheism, and in a short time forget that God whom they see
worshipped in such a slight and homely manner.

Wherefore we have cause to bless the Lord, that notwithstanding the Sectaries
(like wild Boars) were so long foraging in his Vineyard which he had planted
here amongst us, and had well near laid it waste, by destroying the Dressers,
and rooting out those goodly plants of Order and Decency, and Uniformity, he
has yet preserved an holy seed who know him, and fear him, and come with
hearts and bodies to sanctify him, at what time, or in what places soever they
draw near to him.

It is the joy of our hearts, notwithstanding we live so far remote from the
Imperial City, to hear of the signal reverence of his Sacred Majesty in holy
Worship, and it is our wish, that his pious example may have such an influence
upon the Nation, that this Church of England which was so lately blackned by
her own intestine troubles, may recover her former comeliness, and become once
more a praise on the Earth.

Our expectations of this happiness are somewhat raised, since we see the
Episcopal Chairs, and the Seats of Judicature filled with such eminent persons,
who have given so ample testimony of their Loyalty to their King, and their
constancy to their Religion.

My Lord, I am a poor stranger to you, I had not the happiness (to my best
remembrance) ever to see your face, till I met you in the House of God, and
afterward received from your Lordship that more then sufficient reward, a very
candid signification of your acceptance of my well-meant labors. And I humbly
and heartily congratulate to you your Honor, that by the favor of your
Prince, you shine in the Orb of Justice, and are such an illustrious (and yet
benevolent) star in that (Now) glittering Constellation.

Good luck have you with your Honor, and may you ride on prosperously (as you
have begun) judging the Tribes of England in Truth, and Meekness, and
Righteousness; and may he, whose name is, The Counselor, be continually
assistant to you; may you grow old and honorable in the service of your
Country and your King, and your God; and then, when your Change shall come,
your comfort and assurance will be so much the greater, that you shall be
translated and adscited into the number of those, who shall sit upon Thrones,
judging the Tribes of Israel. These hopes and wishes shall be constantly and
fervently seconded by the prayers of,

My Lord, your most humbly devoted servant, Mich. Thomas.


