THE Kingdoms Key, TO LOCK OVT, OR LET IN AN ENEMY: OR, Certain Parliamentary
Proceedings, concerning the Peninsula of Lovingland, in the County of SVFFOLK.

Nec propter vitam vivendi perdere causam. Juven. By JOHN VFFLET.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1646.

TO The worthily Honored SPEAKER, of the Honorable House of COMMONS William
Lenthall Esquire.
HONORED SIR,
WHat you once vouchsafed to entertain, and promote, I beseech you now maintain
and vindicate: God his glory, and the Public safety is concerned in it, and
calls for it. My Innocence seeks protection under your integrity: if
oppression, or tempta^ion, could have driven, or drawn me to the Enemy, I might
with others have enjoyed a slippery felicity: But I praise GOD, He has given
me a courage to maintain my honest resolutions, for my dear, but distressed
Countries Welfare, against high, and powerful Adversaries. The ordinary ways
of my address, for redress of mischiefs, and inconveniences, being blockt
up; I am enforced to take this extraordinary course. If what you find here,
proceed from a faithful heart; the Covenant warrants me you will protect me:
if from a foolish, it being an error of love, you will admonish me: but, if
from a false one, severely punish it in

Your humblest servant, JOHN UFFLET.

To all True-Lovers of Englands Prosperity.
GENTLEMEN,
I Never was ambitious of being a man in Print, thereby to publish my
imperfections: But this subject is of that concernment for the common
preservation of England, that I shall most willingly expose my life, and fame,
to all hazard, and contempt, for the welfare of my Country. I have observed all
the windings and turnings of the Jesuited Serpent, in his obstructing of this
places security, ever since the beginning of these sad divided times: and if I
may have an impartial hearing, shall discover them. Dunkirk is now in
possession of the French, by reason of the Netherlands corresponding with them,
in the archieving of it. Sovereign favors tend principally to the enlargement
of their own Interests; what this place may prove in a foreign possession,
which is not only an Inlet to a future Conquest, but shall at present
contribute most (of any particular place in the Kingdom) to the subversion of
the whole Nation, and also engrosse all Northern Traffic. It will not be vast
sums, and multitude of lives, that will regain it, if once lost: It may be
supposed by some, that these cautions to our friends, may be an instruction to
our enemies. Let such know, that the only obstruction of this business, has
proceeded frdm our enemies too much knowledge, and our friends to little, which
yet they may improve, and prevent their mischievous designs, and provide for
our safety. If the Parliament will yet be pleased, to send down an upright and
judicious Commander, one of quick eyes, patient ears, and clean hands, to view
the place and report to them; they may secure themselves, awe their enemies,
and help their friends, and confederates. And if what is here suggested, be not
fully proved and performed, but that I have caused the State to send their
Commissioner upon impertinencies, the Briars of Oppression have not so bared
me, but let the charge be defrayed out of the remainder of my poor estate,
rather then the Commonwealth should suffer one penny, by my folly. This is all
I can do; if more I could, I would: but it comforts me, that I have in this
fulfilled the Covenant; That what I am notable of my self to suppress, or
overcome, I shall reveal, and make known, that it may be timely prevented, or
removed, which shall be the earnest prayer, and utmost endeavors, of

Your Countryman, JOHN UFFLET.

Sol does no sooner rise from's Eastern bed,
But by Aurora, is first welcomed,
In Lovinglands fair Isle, The only place
That Art and Nature by their soft embrace
Blessed have, with profit and delight; A Soil
Proud Forraigners, with bloodied soul would toil;
To master Englishmen, most thankful be
To him, that lets you peace, and peril see.
John Ash.

The Description of Lovingland.
THE Peninsula of Lovingland in the County of Suffolk, in Longitude extends it
self 7 mi^es, in Latitude 4. It contains 16. Parishes, abounding with all
things requirable, either by necessity, or delight, by way of sustentation, or
recrea^ion: Its blessed with a heal^^ full A^re: sci^uated for a general
accommodation of Trade, having the Sea bordering upon a fourth part of it; the
other parts being begirt with the great Rivers of Yare, and Waurney, by which,
the Country commodities are brought unto it, and from thence transported to all
transmarine parts.

Strength.
To survey it in its natural strength; the whole Peninsula is (as it were)
raised into one entire Hi^^: defended toward the Sea with Cliffs and Sands,
and on all parts by Land, surrounded with a spacious level of low grounds,
ami^'st which level runs the forenamed Rivers, discharging themselves (with a
third) into the Sea through the said Isla^d, by which they are all commanded:
So that it is in accessib^^ by Land, four passages excepted, and one by Sea,
called New^on Gap: which plac^, not improperly, for its heal^^, fertility,
strength, and pleasure, has anciently been termed, little, or Low-England,
God having in a smaller character contracted his blessings to the whole Island
in this Peninsula.

Inhabitants.
For the disposition of its Inhabitants, their affections may be easily read in
this; That since the b^ginning of these sad times, there has not been one
voluntary horse or foot soldier sent out of the whole Island into the
Parliaments service; and at this present, the posture of Defense marches but
lamely on there.

Endeavors.
This place and people in these distracted times, have been taken into
consideration by both parties: The Parliament at the instance of Yarmouth,
August. 1643. passed an Ordinance in the House of Commons for the fortifying of
it, Major Knights (by command) came to view it, the Bayliffes of great Yarmouth
were sollicitors, and importunate, to have it put in such a posture, as might
render it defensible, both to it self, and them. Sir John Hobart (at Norwich,
moved the Earl of Manchester, that he would stir up a person of estate (in
the said Peninsula) whom he conceived to be too remiss in a matter of such
concernment as he (at that time) apprehended it to be. After which, Mr. Miles
Corbet (a Member of the House) sent a Captain into it with a Company of
Soldiers: The Earl of Manchester most providently sent up to the Parliament,
and Committee of both Kingdoms about it: And being sensible of the danger or
welfare, the whole Kingdom would be in, either by the loss, or preservation
of it, was contented to part with a large proportion, of what was allowed him,
for maintenance of the Associated Army.

It is most worthy of a serious deliberation, for what ends all these
endeavors have been all these times obstructed, and to recollect by what
by-ways, and under-hand-dealings it has hitherto been retarded. First, for
the Commanders (entrusted with it by the Earl of Manchester) neither envy, nor
malice could throw any aspersion upon them (that would leave a blemish behind
it) but their Officers were traduced: yet they were such as ventured both their
lives and estates first, in the service of the Parliament, in the Association.
Then were the soldiers sent by the aforesaid Mr. Corbet branded with strange
opinions (purposely to render them odious.) Yet I believe they will hardly be
paralleled for their patience, and integrity: for, from March till August, they
received little or no pay; and yet I could never hear, that the Country could
charge any one among them, for violently taking any thing, to the value of a
chicken.

Attempts.
For the Attempts that have been in it, I shall offer such as come to mind.
First, Allen landed many warlike provisions in it, after the Commission of
Array should have been set up in it, by diverse Knights and Gentlemen assembled
in it for that end; but prevented by Lieut-Gen. Cromwell, by whom the aforesaid
Allen was then amongst others taker, and committed to custody, and those
entrusted with authority promised a care should be taken both of the place, and
Alien, which how observed, would be examined. All Papists and Malignants have,
and still do resort to it, either for flight, or refuge: many of the most
expert Pylots, and Seamen, have withdrawn themselves into Dunkirke, and
continually rob upon the Coasts.

Examples.
How ancient times have esteemed of this place, the ruins of Burrow-Castle,
will inform us: For hither the Romans transplanted their Colonies, and
bridled the whole East of England by it. And of late days, the Remainders of
the Fortifications raised in Anno 1588. will read a sufficient lecture to us of
our noble Predecessors circumspection: So that by our enemies, it has been
esteemed the only place of these parts, worthy of their surprise to defend
themselves, and to subdue us: and our own State has considered of it, as the
principal place of these parts, to be secured against all foreign attempts,
least to our irreparable loss it should happen to be violenced from us.

Conjctures.
Let it be considered whether lying so conveniently, to subsist of it self,
and to defend it self, and to offend the whole Kingdom (it commanding the
whole Trade from the North to London) especially of Fish, and Fuel, if it be
not of more importance to France, or Spain, then the Isles of Rhee and Cales
could formerly have been to the English in case they could have surprised
either of them; Is it not more worthy of France and Spaines endeavors? being
so short a cut as 20. hours Sail from Dunkirke, where many of our chief
Seamen, and Pylot of these Coasts, are now resident: so as if it should be
surprised by them, it is more impregnable then Dunkirke, and wou^^ prove more
obnoxious to the English.

History has recorded it as the grand oversight of the Duke De Alua his
neglect of the porces adjacent to the Searby which error he irrecoverably lost
his Mister the dominion of the Netherlands.

Now it is as worthy consideration, whether it be not likely, as well, as
possible, that in these times; our English fugitives, may not surprise the said
Pene-Insula with two thousand men, who in three hours may cut through the
Isthmus; to let in the Sea, and drown the Level, till such time as they shall
most sufficiently fortify themselves, and receive all homebred Malignants
unto them, and by sea take in continual supplies of foreign Aids, and being
accommodated with Dunkirke Frigots, and other pyraiticall Vessels of which the
fugi^ives have a ready a considerable number under their command, whether they
having joined these places of Lovingland and Dunkirke (in a recipre call
correspondency of each others mu^uall assistance) shall not only infest (but
as it were) block up this part of the Ocean, and then what sad consequents it
will be accompanied with, as the destruction of the Eastern Association and the
straightning of the City of London; will soon appear.

Remedi^s.
Much more may be declated, to illustrate and demonstrate the danger and
necessity, to prevent all these imminent dangers: four hundred foot Soldiers
maytained will be a sufficent remedy against ensuing dangers, which Garrison
would be continued in the most Halcyon days (if duly perpended) for the
conservation of Peace and Trade.

For the defraying of which charge, I ascertaine my self I can open away, that
the burden shall be so light, that I am confident none (but lovers of
themselves and the world) will repine at. (the meaner sort these hard times
being altogether freed.)

Lastly, I submit to all understanding, and upright Judgments and Consciences,
whether these motives and inducements were not sufficient (the time and
advantages considered) to incite, and stir up our adversaries to attempt it, or
to move France or Spain to retaliate our enterprises of Rhee, and Ca^es.

From these poor sparks; better judgments may raise a greater light, both to
direct our friends out of that obscurity, they have been so long in: and to
detect our adversaries in their darkest corners.

These proceedings, and reasons I presented to the Honorable Speaker upon the
seventeenth of February, Anno. 1644. by which; his zealous affections for his
Countries good were moved to obtain this ensuing Order to pass the House of
Commons the 19. of the same month.

Die Mercurii. 19. Feb. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that it be
referred to the Committee of both Kingd^ms, to consider of the Pene-Insula of
Lovingland, and whether it may be for the advantage of the Public, to secure
it by fortifications: and in what manner it may best be done, and what will he
the necessary charge thereof.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl. Do. Com.


Upon the passing of this Order, the day after being the twentieth of
February; I drew up this following Petition, and the same day preferred it to
the Committee of both Kingdoms.

To the Right Honorable Committee of safety of both Kingdoms.
The humble Petition of John Vfflet Gentleman.
HVMBLY SHOWS,
THat whereas the Honorable House of Commons upon information received,
concerning the danger (and necessity of secureing) of the Pene-Insula of
Lovingland, which has been too long neglected, have by their order bearing
d^te the ninteenth of this instant February referred it to this Honorable
Committee, to consider o^^^, to the advantage of the Public, and to secure it
by fortification, and in what manner it may best be done, and what will be the
necessary charge thereof.

May it therefore please this most Honorable Committee to take into your
serious consideration accordingly, the present condition of the said
Pene-^nsula, and after ye are truly, and fully informed by this annexed
declaration, which I hope will give such ample sa^isfaction, that your Honors
will be pleased to dispose of it, to the Kingdoms good, and to the frustrating
of our adversaries plots, which have had too long and great an i^fluence to
obstruct so noble and necessary a work; and I shall in all humble duty be
bound to pray, etc.

Upon this Petition, I attended from the delivery of it, till the eight of
March, was then dismissed upon the engagement of some of that Country that it
should be provided for, which, how performed, if examined; would be found very
foul.

I returned home, where for my good intentions, I have been laden with
reproach, contempt, and oppression, yet could not be discouraged, having been
formerly employed in it, and having an eye to all the indirect proceedings that
were and are still used to delude the State, and to satisfy the most unworthy
desires of such whose ends are chiefly Ambition, and avarice, who have since
the beginning of these times been the prime hinderers of it, I being acquainted
with the subtle and false practices of the chief opponents in the affair, was
solicitous how I might make it appear to the State the uncertain condition we
were in, upon which I drew up a Petition, and certain propositions which I
intended to deliver to the Speaker, but by the way I was impris^ned by some
Committee men of Bury, and all my papers which were sealed up and superscribed
to the Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons broken open by them, and
delivered into the hands of Sir I. W. the State^ close enemy and my professed,
oppressing adversary, so that they have left me the subject of his malice and
hatred; What those Papers were, I sent a List of to Mr. William Ryley, with a
Petition to the House of Commons, in a Letter; but never received any account
in his proceedings therein. I shall here publish the Letter, Petition, and
List, that I may be judged by my Country, for the evil that is in them;
because some Caterpillars of the Commonwealth, would render me odious to my
country, for my poor endeavors used herein.

To Mr. William Riley.
Noble friend,
J According to your desire, and in discharge of my own engagement to you,
shall give you an account of our Islands estate, and in it of my own sad
condition: After I left you, I the day following, being the 2 of July, appeared
before the Bury Committee, where I had not so much as a word of rep^o^f^ spoke
unto me, though formerly reputed for a vilde and unworthy person, but am now by
them cleared, and enlarged: yet to be abused, reproached, my life endangered,
my body imprisoned, my estate by unnecessary charges consumed; and after
traveling so many miles at my own charge, and having so powerful an
Adversary, as Sir J.W. who boasts of his Party he has in the house, which he
deludes, and the Committee he has p^^ssess^d with mis-informations, these are
great discouragements: and row this last exceeds all the rest; for he is become
master of all those poor endeavors that I had used for my Countries welfare. I
would fain have avoided his g^ining of them, and thereupon I presumed to
enclose them in a sheet of paper, sealed them up, and directed them to the
Speaker. The Committee Men might have trusted ^im wi^h them, when they had
imprisoned my person, which was liable to any punishment, which the State
should have censured me to have ^e^^rved. I have here enclosed, sent you a List
of all the Writing, that were in the Packet, directed to the Speaker. Let them,
I beseech you, be demanded; and if there be any thing contained in them,
unbeseeming a true lover of his Country, let severe punishment be inflicted
upon m^. After all these troubles and vexations, I could be well content to sit
still, and bewail my Countries calamities; but that my conscience dictates to
me, that GOD (who in his providence, has reserved me to these times) enjoynes
me, not to bind my Talent in a Napkin. You have known me above 20. years; yet
I hope could never perceive me to be of a factious inclination. Good friend, I
cannot at present, but look upon these vast expenses of blood, and treasure,
but as the only means to give a foreign Foe, that which his own virtue would
never ob^ain: our own divisions will be the inlet of our miseries; in
consideration whereof, I have always had a vigilant eye upon this Peninsula,
it being one of the Ardua Arcana Regni, and am confiden, can make it out to the
Speaker, that this place is the principal in the Kingdom, either for the
French, Spanish, or Netherlands, to begin an invasion. Let the whole
Association bel^st; this k^p^, may regain it: this, in an enemies p^ss^ssion,
draws the whole Association with it: besides, straightens the City of London.
My grief would be the less^, did I not know so mue^^ When onese^s his friend
contracting his limbs, his eyes staring, and his mouth soming; he may conclude
with pity, that he has the Falling Sickness: It is not discretion, to
prescribe a aure, but to repair ^^sie sk^full Physitiah, I perceive sad
SymP^omes in the Body political, God in mercy enable our State Physi^ians, to
discharge their duties: Where Justice is not by man executed, God will come
with Judgment. Sweer Sir, you in some part were a means for my access^ to the
Speaker, and gave mecoragement to go on in this cause: Suffer nor (...) me to
fall, it will, I doub^ not, be for God his glory, and this Kindomes good
Present this enclosed Petition to the Speaker, and stand on longer b^ me, then
I stand for Truth, and my C^untries welfree.

On the 6, of this instant month, diverse Pirates of Dunkirke aken by u^, and
freed, did take a Boat, and are gone: We are in that secu^i^y, that to the Sea
we have not a common Watch kept. Be but a means, that the Speaker may tak^
notice, who moved to have the Ordinance pass in the H^use of Commons, August
1643 and why it has be so opposed. There is not way to discover the Juggling
of our Adversaries, but by the eye of judgment. Let but a Commissioner that is
upright be sent down, and he will discover ad the falsehoods and
mis-informations that have hindered it, to let in our ruin. I know, worthy
friend, I am much censured, and maliced for my perseverance in this action, but
my encouragements arise from what I have laid my foundation on, which are
Truth, Reason, and Experience. I pray prese ^n respects to Mr. Cole, who will
give you all the furtherance that may be in this business, to the Speaker.
Kind friend, my love to my ensnared country, has made me to enlarge my self
unto you, not doubting in the least, to find your reciprocal affections to
move for the common-good, and to be helpful to

Your true friend to serve you, J. V.


A Note of such Papers, which were sealed up, and directed to the Speaker, but
intercepted by some Committee Men of Bury.
A Plot of the Peninsula of Lovingland. Two Declarations concerning the said
Peninsula. A Letter of Mr. Will. Ryleyes. A Letter of Sir John Hobarts unto me.
A Letter of Nich. Pacies. A Petition to have been presented to the House. A
Warrant of the E. of Manchesters to me, which speaks my first employment in
this affair. Two Warrants more under the E. of Manchesters hand and seal,
that enabled me to demand four Pieces of Artillery from Yarmouth, and two
from Dunwich, to be employed for defense of the Island. An accusation under my
own hand, against Sir I. W. A Captains accusation against Sir I. W. Mr. H.B.
senior, his examination against Sir I. W. attested by his Son H.B. junior,
G.I.W.K.G.A. A Commission from Col. C.F. unto me.
To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled in the
Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of JOHN UFFLET, Gemleman.
Humbly shows;
THat your Petitioner, who has been formerly employed in the business of the
Peninsula of Lovingland, by the Earl of Manchester, being confident of his own
good intentions toward his country, and being an Inhabitant in the said
Peninsula, has been a constant observer of the place and of all passages that
have been used both for, and against securing of it, in these times of danger
and necessity; and finding, that his unworthiness, and disability, for a
matter of such weight, did concur with the misprision of others to render it
(the 8. of March last) to the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms as a place
not fit to be secured.

May it therefore please this most Honorable House to be moved with the ancient
practices of the Romans, by the Judgment of the State in Anno. 1588. and the
wisdom of this Honorable House, who both by your Ordinance, and Order, have
with the rest looked upon it as the chief place in all the Fast parts, that may
be a means to preserve, or enda^g^r the whole Kingdom, to send down an
upright, and judicious Commander, to take an exact survey of the place, danger,
and necessity, and to certify this Honorable House thereof, whereby you may
come to the implicit truth, and discover the self ends, which have all this
time been the only cause of obstructing this work, and

Your Petitioner shall be ever bound to pray, etc.

The Charge of the Garrison will be defrayed with what the Earl of Manchester
did formerly allot toward it, if the State shall be pleased to allow of it,
which was the monthly payment^s of East, and West Fleg, great Yarmouth, and
the half hundred of L^vingland, with the benefit of so much of
thesequestration, issuing out of the forenamed places, as was assigned to the
Earl of M^nchester.

And for present secureing of it, and putting it into a posture of defense, if
the State will be pleased to allow four hundred pounds (beside Ammunition)
with the voluntary contributions of the Inhabitants, and that the benefit of 6.
days works elapsed, and to come appointed by Statute for repairing high
ways, be converted to the work of the fortifications, the Island st^nding in
no great need of repairing high ways: and what shall want, may be supplied out
of the fines of Malignants, and disaffected to the Parliament, as, if Justice
may have her due course, there may be many discovered, and some, no means ones.

Here I have faithfully imparted, what I have at any time made known
concerning this place: somewhat more remains collected by observation; That
as yet my heart never made my tongue acquainted with. Oh let not the great
Trustees of Engand be displeased if I do heartily pray, that they would be
pleased speedily, for a short time to spare the Right Honorable the Earl of
Northumberland, and Lieutenant General Cromw^ll to review this place, that
they both have formerly had a sight of, and been in. These are persons of
dignity, honor, integri^ie, and ability, without exceptions, and they must be
great and good that give you a right understanding of this place. If I had any
thing in the world to prize above my despised life, I would willingly engage
i^, that neither ye, not themselves will look upon it as a frui^l^ss^ peace,
but esteem of it as one of the prime Jewels of the Kingdom. Whether does my
affection transportane? Pardon, o pardon (ye great ones) the presumption; of
your meanest,

VFFLET.

FINIS

