A Loving and Loyal SPEECH Spoken unto the Excellency of our Noble Prince
CHARLES: By Sir Hugh Yaughan the 2. of October at Ragland-Castle in
Munmoth-shire in WALES, at His happy Access and coming thither.

Also the manner of his brave entertainment, and a Relation of diverse rich
Presents brought unto him by the Gentry and Communalty of the Country, Humbly
tendering their true service to their PRINCE: With the PRINCES Speech, giving
them hearty Thanks for their kind Expressions of their Love.

Sent from a Gentleman of that Country, to one M. Francis Meredith, unto M.
Henry Roberts, belonging to the Custom House. LONDON.

Printed for John Johnson. 1642.

A loving and loyal Speech spoken unto the Excellency of our noble Prince
Charles, by Sir Hugh Yaughan the 2. of October, at Ragland-Castle in
Munmoth-shire in Wales.
THis Country of Wales is so filled with joy, by the gracious presence of you
their hopeful Prince Charles, so that they know not how to show it outwardly,
or to speak unto you in such language as may declare their unfeigned and hearty
gladness by your approach and residence here in Ragland-Castle: The Genius of
that ancient building does seem to rejoice, and the Walls are now become a
Cabinet to keep and preserve the eldest jewel of the Royal Progeny, and our
dearly beloved Prince Charles. It is the glory of the Britains, that we are
the two remaining and only one people of this Land, and we have always been
true in our affections to our King and Country, the eldest Son of our
gracious Sovereign having so near Relation unto us as to be our Prince, and
the Prince we now behold with tears of joy, with hearts overflowing with an
inundation of love, with wishes, with desires, and fervent prayers, That Heaven
would be a^wayes auspicious to our King and Prince Charles. We know no Sun that
can with the influence of Royal beams, cherish and warm our true British
hearts; But the Sun of our gracious Sovereign, who now does shine in the
Horison of Wales: We have no happiness nor hope but what we derive from your
gracious Aspect, and we reckon it amongst the greatest favors that divine
Providence could do us, to send you our hopeful Prince amongst us. In what
the true and ancient Britains may serve you, you may command us to our
uttermost strength, our lives and Fortuues to be ready to assist you, the King
and the Parliament, in all just actions, that none may suffer by the malignity
of some ill-affected persons. Our loves, dear Sir, are so true and firm to
your Princely Person, so that all we can promise cannot declare how ready we
will be to actuate and express our love in real performances. The common
people with hands and hearts are ready to help you in all honorable attempts,
and our Gentry will show their ancient virtue and valor in your service, and
because we will not trouble you with further Protestations of our real
intentions, we will conconclude this brief Narration with prayers to God to
bless and preserve you: And the General voice of this Country does by this
Speech bid you thrice welcome to WALES.

The manner of Prince CHARLES his entertainment in Rogland-Castle in Wales.
AS the Welsh-men did in many verbal Congratulations manifest the true love
and affections of the British hearts unto Prince Charles, now keeping Court at
Ragland-Castle. So to make their words true expressions of their love and
ambition to serve the Prince, they did with cheerful forwardness make diverse
substantial demonstrations of their professed affection; Love is always
active, and desires to be be known and understood by signs, by evidences, and
many officious actions, it will appear and be visible: And this was manifest
by Prince Charles his late entertainment at Ragland-Castle in Wales; Which was
performed with much solemnity; the Castle was prepared and made ready for his
coming before his approach thither, some of the chief rooms were richly hung
with cloth of Arras, full of lively Figures and ancient British Stories; all
the other furniture was rich and costly: At the first entering into the Castle,
the aforesaid Speech was by a person of good rank and quality spoke before the
Prince, who in thankfulness gave them a brief answer in testimony of his
accepting their love and tendered service; And besides, honored the Knight that
delivered the aforesaid Speech by reaching forth his hand to kiss, whereon the
Knight imprinted a kiss as the zeal of his affection: Then there was a great
Feast of diverse varieties, especially of Foul, whereof their abundance in
those Countries, and all this preparation did conclude in a curious Banquet,
while Metheglin and other British drinks were plentifully affourded unto all
the Courtiers: For the Welsh-men are of a true generous disposition, and when
they are to give entertainment to common strangers, they will perform it with
much civil courtesy; but especially now having the happiness to see their
young hopeful Prince in the heart of their County, they could not endeavor
enough (as they thought) to make it appear that with all cordial and hearty
affection, the Prince was most nobly welcome into Wales, they showed a glimpse
of their true British love to the King and Prince in the aforesaid Speech,
congratulating his coming into the County, promising him to be his true and
faithful servants, and after they had feasted him and all his Court in a
liberal, free and magnificent manner, they remembered that it was an ancient
custom to offer Presents unto Princes to gratulate their access and coming
into a County. Whereupon, to declare that their love was not barren like the
Sea-sands, which yields nothing, but that as their Country was plentiful,
abounding with all sorts of provision, so their hearts were large and liberal,
as became them who are acknowledged to be the ancient true Britains, and to
make their native liberallity apparent, they as soon as the Prince was come to
Radnor-Castle, brought unto him diverse rich Presents, and with many expressions
of love presented them to the Prince, some brought him pieces of plate of great
antiquity, as might appear by the fashion thereof; The common people brought
in provision for the maintenance of his Court, as young Kids, Sheep, Calves,
Fish and Foul of all sorts, and some sent in fat Oxen, every one striving for
the credit and glory of their Country, to exceed in several expressions of
generous liberallity. One Master Lewis-ap-Morgan a private Gentleman sent the
Prince a piece of plate, with his Arms engraven thereon, being very massy and
of great value, other Gentlemen and Squires of the County of Radnor-shire being
descended of ancient Families, came bravely mounted to the Princes Court at
Radnor-Castle, and there presented him with diverse testimonies of their true
good will and affection, every one in the delivery of his present desiring, are
wishing all accumulations of happiness unto their noble and gracious Prince
Charles, offering together with their Presents their service unto him, and
promising to assist him and his Royal Father King Charles upon any lawful
design, to the maintenance, justice, piety and Religion, and defend their
persons from all malignants and enemies. The Prince being thus entertained and
nobly used by the Welsh men, he showed himself very gracious and loving unto
them, and because he could not give particular thanks unto every person that
presented gifts unto him; therefore in a great Assembly of Lords, Knights,
Squires, Gentlemen, and many common people, the Prince made a very loving
Speech unto them, and to gratify their liberallity, and remunerate their
bounty, he in this brief Speech following, rendered them hearty thanks for their
Presents offered to him, and for the tender of their service upon all good
occasions.

The Princes speech at Rigland-Castle in WALES.
Gentlemen,
I Have heard formerly of the great minds, the true affections and meanings of
the ancient Britains: But my kind entertainment has made me confide in your
love, which I shall always remember. I give you commendations, praise and
thanks for your love, your bounty and liberal enterainment, I know you desire
nothing but thanks, you shall be sure of that my favor as long as I am Prince
of WALES.

FINIS.

