THE GOSPEL-CALL.

In METER.

Compiled by W. V.

Whereunto is added Twenty Five Considerations OF THE PAINS prepared for SIN
After this Life.

WITH A SERMON Preached on Acts VII. 60.

Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound,

Psalm. 89.15. To day if you will ^ear his voice, harden not your hearts,

Ps. 95.7, 8. Hear and your soul shall live,

Isa. 55.3. Rise, he calls thee,

Mark 10.49. LONDON: Printed for Richard Butler, in White-Lion-Court, in
Barbican. 1688.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Honest Reader,
THE sad Degeneracy of the Age we live in, makes it appear but too great a
Truth, That such Books as these were never more necessary or more seasonable:
And therefore I hope there needs no Apology for publishing this. The following
Papers came recommended to me from Persons of known Honesty and Integrity. Our
Author has thought fit in Modesty to conceal his Name, and I will not trouble
my self or thee with impertinent Guesses: Nor will I pretend positively to
determine why he has clothed part of his Conceptions in a Poetic Dress, since
Examples are not wanting in all times in this kind. The Royal Prophets, David
and Solomon have excelled in Divine Poesy; And we are not wanting in our own
Age of great Men, famous in our Generation, who have obliged the World with
their Excellent Labors of this Nature; witness the Famous Quarles, Inimitable
Cowley, Facetious Done, and the Divine Herbert (to name no more), who gives
this Excellent Reason:

A Verse may find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.
As for the following Discourse, it is plain and honest, fitted to the meanest
Capacities, which, I hope, will render it universally acceptable. It treats of
things of the greatest Moment, and highest Consequence, no less than the
Concerns of Eternity. I will no longer detain thee from the Perusal, which, I
wish, may redound to thy great benefit. I heartily recommend it to thee, and
thee to the Grace of God. I am

Thine, R. B,

To the Author of the Gospel-Call.
THY Gospel-Call
(Dear Friend) has outdone all
Those gaudy florid Strains,
Which puzzle Vulgar Brains.
Thy Book has Worth,
Which needs no setting forth
By my weak Pen;
The Praise is thine,
For which thy Name shall shine
Bright, like the Morning Star,
Which ushers in the Day from far,
Until the Restitution of all things again.
T. D.

To the Author of the Gospel-Call.
AWake my Muse, how can I silent be,
When I these pious Works of David see?
They that peruse this little Book, may find
The wise Suggestions of the Author's Mind,
How wittily this Worthy does impart
His Sentiments with Judgment, and with Art,
In Style most Elegant, in Sense profound,
In Morals practical, and Doctrine sound.
Who, like a Geographer, does here display
To Heaven the surest, and the safest way:
In Gospel-Colours does delineate
The lively Landschape of our future State.
Dull Soul, cheer up, here, here is thy chiefest Good,
It Is not Terrestrial, but Celestial Food.
A. T.

THE GOSPEL-CALL.
In METER.
READER, awake, awake, my Soul and all
That is within me, hearken to the Call
Of God, most gracious; who calls thee
His Name to hallow and to glorify;
And from vile lusts, vain glory, cheating pelf,
Invites thee to Communion with himself.
This is thy chief end, thy Felicity,
Thy greatest good, thy highest dignity.
Here is Light, Life, Love, all that is meet,
Needful and useful, holy, right, and sweet;
And all which truly fills the heart and eyes;
Elsewhere is naught but emptiness and lies.
Jehovah calls, the Father, and the Son;
The Holy Ghost, Blessed Three, in Essence One.
Nothing but God, the Father, Son, and Spirit,
Can fit and fill thy Soul's vast appetite.
The Soul's a Spirit, and while not unite
To God, who is a Spirit Infinite,
It wandreth, seeking rest, but finds none,
Nor ought that gives it contentation.
Immortal Souls, in things which fade with time,
Cannot find rest: Come restless soul to him
Who in Eternity has his abode,
And is from and to everlasting God;
Who changes not, with whom is no mutation,
Nor any shadow of an alteration:
Who is, and was, and shall be still the same,
Whose Name alone is, I am that I am.
When thy heart fails, thy hearts strength he will be,
And thy sure Portion to Eternity.
God Infinite in wisdom, only wise,
Calls, Will thou, fool, Wisdom's advice despise?
It Is God Almighty who does thee command,
Will thou, frail wretch, Omnipotence withstand,
Since the most Holy calls upon thee?
To disobey were gross profanity,
Since the most Just, most justly does thee press,
To disobey were mere unrighteousness.
He who thee calls is good and gracious,
To anger slow, in mercy plenteous.
He Is lovely, loving, Love, who calls on thee:
Will thou from love, grace, goodness, mercy flee?
He who does call, most faithful is and true.
Trust Truth it self, and thou shall never rue.
The Great Creator calls, whose Word did call
What was not, and of nothing formed all;
Who all thy Members wrought most curiously,
And formed thy Spirit in the midst of thee:
He gave, and still he life to thee does give.
Thou liv'st in him, will thou without him live?
Thou mov'st in him, from him move not away:
From him in whom thou go, go not astray:
In him thou do exist; and can thou be
Without him, who gives being unto thee?
Where art thou Adam, when the Lord does cry,
Where Is God, my Maker, Man should then reply.
When he in whom thou liv'st, and does consist,
Commands, how dares thou for thy life resist?
When he in whom thou mov'st does thee command,
To come to him, how dares thou lingering stand?
Lord, what is Man, that thou so much should make
Of such a nothing, and such knowledge take
Of Man, who is but dust, and fading grass,
And, which is worse, a loathsome filthy Mass
Of darkness, horror, lust, profanity,
Unrighteousness, of sin and misery;
Conceived in sin, formed in iniquity,
A slave to diverse lusts, lusts of the eye,
Lusts of the flesh, and to the pride of life,
To anger, hatred, malice, wrath and strife.
All in him is corrupt and vitiate;
His heart's deceitful, wicked, desperate;
Estranged from God, straying as soon as born;
Inclined to lies, apostate, and forlorn.
This Man, whom thou, O Lord, did once create
In thine own Image, in a happy state,
Has quite dis-made himself: He who was light,
Is darkness now; he who was made upright,
Is now perverse, ungodly and unjust,
Conform to Satan, to his will and lust;
Without the Lord, under Gods curse and wrath,
Liable to the first and second death:
To plagues in this life, which were long to tell,
And to the easeless, endless pains of Hell.
Lord, what but Grace and Mercy could thee move
Upon thy hateful Foes to set such love?
To speak to them who hearken not to thee,
To follow them who from thy presence flee:
To show thy self to them who shut their eyes
On thee, and turn them unto vanities:
To stretch thy arms to those which turn their back,
And not their face to thee; and thus forsake
The Spring of living waters, and in vain,
Dig Cisterns, which no waters can contain.
To love the loathsome lying in their blood,
To overcome their evil with thy good.
Of these who sought thee not, lo, thou art found:
Where sin abounds, Grace does more abound.
O wonderful, that thy delights should be
With Sons of Men from all Eternity!
Since thou art Love, thy love must wondrous be,
For all is wonderful that is in thee.
Thy love, most High, does far surpass in height
The highest reach of Men or Angels sight:
Its endless length no finite eye can see;
For it is from and to Eternity.
But O the depth past diving! Who can sound
How low Love stoops? O lowliness profound!
That the most High, who clothed is with light,
To which none can approach, should from the height
Of Glory, which does Heaven of Heavens transcend,
Unto the lower parts of Earth descend,
To take up fallen Man; yea, to take on
Frail Humane Nature: So that now the Son
Of God is Man, the Word is Flesh; and thus
Behold, God is become like one of us.
In likeness of Man's sinful flesh God sent
His own, His only Son, with this intent,
That he for us an Offering should be,
And bear our sins in's body on the Tree.
All we like wandering sheep had gone astray,
The Lord on him did our transgressions lay
The blameless Lamb dies for the Sheep who stray,
And did restore that he took not away.
He who is blessed, did bear the curse that we
Who cursed are, in him might blessed be.
He who knew no sin, was made sin for us,
That we in him might be made righteous.
The Prince of life did die, that so the dead
In sins, might by his death be quickened.
He taken was, and bound to set us free,
He was condemned, that we absolved might be.
He quietly did stripes and wounds endure,
That by his stripes he all our wounds might cure.
The trouble of his Soul, his Agony,
Procured our Peace, and Soul's Tranquillity.
His Soul was exceeding sorrowful,
That we might joy, that our joy might be full.
He was forsaken of his God, that we
Unto God's prefence might have access free.
His blood was shed, Justice to satisfy,
To purge away all our iniquity.
His flesh is meat, his blood is drink indeed,
On which poor hungry, thirsty souls may feed.
He Is God and Man, a Mediator meet,
To make the Peace, and God, and Man unite.
The fullness of the Godhead, bodily,
Dwells in him, what then can wanting be?
He Is full of Grace and Truth, that empty we,
May from his fullness have complete supply.
To us a Child is born, a Son is given,
To us he came, di'd, rose, and went to Heaven.
He Is all for us, all who obey his call,
Shall find all in him, who fills all in all.
In him is all that needy souls require,
All their salvation, all their desire.
Why stayest thou, O my soul? Can thou refuse?
What say thou? What pretend'st thou for excuse?
Thy call is clear; thou may, yea, thou must come,
Thy Sovereign calls, God faithful is, by whom
Thou called art unto Communion,
And Fellowship with Jesus Christ his Son.
The Son invites thee, spreading out his Hands,
He shows himself, cries, knocks, and waiting stands:
Ho, every one who thirsts, come, he cries;
Come, come; he double, triple multiplies:
Come unto me, hear, and your soul shall live;
Come, weary souls, I rest to you will give.
The Spirit says, Come, whosoever will;
Take living water freely, drink thy fill.
Thus thou must love, or hate; come, or rebel:
And all who hate Christ, love Death, Wrath, and Hell.
All who despise his Love, revenging Wrath
Shall them pursue unto Eternal Death.
Thus thou have heard his voice, now lift thine eyes,
Behold him, who, Behold, behold me, cries.
Behold the true God, who is over all,
God blessed for ever, consubstantial.
With God the Father, God's own only Son,
The Father's daily delectation.
The brightness of the Father's Glory bright,
His Person's express Image, light of light,
Immanuel, that is plainly, God with us,
God-Man, One Person Great and Gracious:
The Lord of Lords, the Prince and King of Kings,
The Sun of Righteousness, who in his wings
Has Healing; yea, has Life; for he is the Light
Of Life, who gives unto the blind their sight.
The great High Priest, who by the Eternal Spirit,
Offered himself a Sacrifice complete.
All in him lovely is, in him is all
That lovely is, All Good we should him call.
He Is God, yet Man, and near of kin to us;
Most High, yet lowly, Great, yet gracious.
We sent not for him, yet behold he is come:
Think who he is, who comes, and to whom
He had no need of nothings, who are less
Than nothing: Fullness comes to emptiness.
We made the breach, we sinned, yet his Grace
Prevents us, seeks our love, entreats for peace.
This Plot of Love the Gospel does reveal;
God was in Christ the world to reconcile
Unto himself, and then a Ministry
Of Reconciliation we do see
Entrusted to his Messengers of Peace,
To publish, and make Offers of his Grace.
If we his Messengers slight and abuse,
We God himself despise, slight and refuse.
He who despises them, does God contemn,
Since God himself beseeches us by them.
Again, my Soul, consider thy estate,
While thou from Christ continues separate:
Lo, thou art blind, naked, miserable;
Thou can not help thy self, but Christ is able
To help, and save, even to the uttermost,
Those who are self-destroyed, dead and lost:
His Name is Jesus: He did get that Name
Which speaks salvation, because he came
To save his people from their sins, and from
The dreadful everlasting wrath to come.
His Name is Christ, that is to say, anointed;
For he to save is fitted and appointed.
As it is his Office, so it is his Joy
To save the lost, and Satan's works destroy.
If thou art poor, would thou do him a pleasure?
Come with thy emptiness unto his Treasure,
Where thou will find Riches unsearchable,
Fine tried Gold, and Substance durable.
Thy eyes are blind, come unto him; for he
Has Eye Salve, which does make the blind to see.
Art thou ashamed of thy vile nakedness?
Here Is fine white Raiment, perfect Righteousness.
Thou art a Fool, of wisdom destitute,
Like a wild Asses Colt, a stupid Bruit.
Lo he is wisdom, and is wisdom made
Unto the foolish, who no wisdom had.
Thou art by Nature darkness of the Night;
He is that light which makes darkness light.
Thou errest and wandrest, going still astray,
He is the truth, the leader, and the way;
The way of life, the true new living way,
By which unto the Holiest come we may;
And by the blood of Jesus, which makes peace,
With confidence may access have to Grace.
The true, the faithful witness, the Amen,
Is given for a leader unto men.
A just Commander, and a gracious Guide,
From strangers on the Earth he will not hide,
But open up the Scripture, clear the Eye
Of the Understanding, Scripture Light to see.
The light of truth he unto them does show,
That truth from error they may clearly know.
He shows what is right, what is wrong, what is good, what is ill,
For to inform the Mind, reform the Will.
He takes them by the arms, learns them to go,
And holds them, that they reel not to and fro.
If thou art weak, thy help on him is laid,
Who mighty is, in straits a present aid.
Thou filthy art without, unclean within,
He is a Fountain opened for sin.
Thou art diseased, this Physician can
Heal all Diseases incident to Man.
This Man's the Peace in midst of Enemies,
The heart's support under Infirmities:
He is the Ark in midst of a Deluge,
When wrath pursues a City of Refuge.
If thou art dead, he is life; if lost, salvation;
If comfortless, he is Israel's consolation.
Jesus is All, by Jesus Name alone,
To Men is given God's salvation.
All they which are in him are justified,
Regenerate, adopted, glorified.
Come, come to him, and then thou shall be free
From condemnation, and accepted be,
As Just, through his Obedience to the Death,
Imputed to thee, and received by Faith.
Thy sins and guilt shall never thee confound,
Though they be sought for, they shall not be found.
They are renewed who are in him that is true,
Old things are past, and all things are made new.
Christ lives in them, and Christ in them is found,
And to his Image they are all conformed.
They die to sin, they live to him who died,
And rose, that they might be all sanctified.
As many as receive him, who does come
To them, they all the Sons of God become:
They have his Spirit, they have access free
To Grace, and Abba, Father, they may cry:
They by his Name are called, by him protected,
Provided for, they are chast'ned and corrected;
Yet not cast off; their Father's power and love
Keeps-them to their inheritance above:
They all are Heirs of life perpetual,
Heirs and joynt-heirs with Christ, the Heir of all.
They persevere, and never fall away
From Grace, in which they firmly stand for ay.
For God's Foundation stands ever sure;
He knows his own, his love does still endure.
There Is none, there is nothing whatsoever that
Them from the love of Christ can separate.
He will not leave them, he does promise make,
That he will not them leave, nor them forsake.
They shall not leave the Lord, for in their heart
He puts his fear, that they may not depart.
None can them pluck away, they firmly stand,
As holden in the Son's and Father's Hand.
Christ's Intercession, which does still prevail,
Procures, that their Faith shall never fail.
They persevere in Grace, in Grace they grow;
From Christ in them more benefits do flow:
Assurance of God's favor and his grace,
In midst of trouble, inward rest and peace
Of Conscience, the joy of God's salvation,
Which makes them glory, even in tribulation.
Their Souls at death are perfectly made free
From sin to glory, pass immediately:
Their bodies sleep in Christ, in whom they have
Rest till the Resurrection in the grave.
Then their vile body, so by Death deformed,
Shall to Christ's glorious body be conformed,
The Soul and Body being unite shall be
For ever with the Lord, and clearly see
His Glory in his Light; they shall see Light:
There is no darkness there, there is no Night:
Shadows are fled, the Lattess here below
Did well, through which the Lord himself did show.
But when the perfect day is come, and grace
Is crowned with glory, they see face to face,
Not in a glass, nothing does interveen,
To mar their sight, they see as they are seen,
And known; there needs no Candle there,
Nor Moon, nor Sun, these lights are darkness where
God's Glory shines, and where the Lamb's the light:
He fills the eye, and perfect makes the sight.
In his own glory, they his glory see,
And like him are, because they perfectly
Behold him as he is: The Light Divine
Inlightens them, that like the Sun they shine.
They see his love, it is in their heart and eye,
That he is God, their Soul does taste and see;
And in his love, the Spring of Life Divine,
They Water drink that is better far than Wine
Rivers of pleasures in upon them flow,
And fill their Soul throughout, and overflow,
Yet do not drown: These living waters give
Eternal life to all who in them live.
Their love is perfect, God's love makes abode
In them, they dwell in love, and dwell in God.
And then a whole Burnt-offering they prove,
Wholly inflamed, but not consumed by love.
They Are free from sin, free from all that defiles,
From all temptations, from all Satan's wiles;
No spot remains, Holiness is perfect.
Here they loved cleanness, there they wake in white.
No trouble's there, dishonor, nor disgrace,
But perfect Glory, Honor, Rest and Peace:
There is no grief, nor ought that can annoy,
Christ's Joy's in them, they enter into Joy.
No doubts perplex them, nor suspicious fear,
For God's Name is in all their Foreheads clear.
Come now to Christ, and then he unto whom
Thou come, will kindly thee invite to come
Into his Kingdom; yea, he will thee own,
As a Joynt-Heir, and thee with Glory Crown.
And (which does pass all admiration)
Thou shall be fet with him upon his Throne.
They who will not come now, must then be gone
From Christ to Hell, and to destruction.
For when the Lord, whom now they will not hear,
Shall as great Judge at the great day appear.
His words shall thunder terror through their heart,
When they shall hear the dreadful Doom, Depart,
Depart, ye cursed, to fire unquenchable,
With Satan and his Angels execrable,
Where there is endless weeping, fruitless tears,
Gnashing of teeth through anguish, and where fears,
Consuming terrors, horrors do abound,
Shame and contempt eternally confound:
There they who would not look to Christ the Light,
Shall be for ever shut out from his sight.
In utter darkness, in an endless night,
Blackness of darkness shall them still affright.
They who despise his love, shall drink his wrath,
And streams of Brimstone kindled by his breath.
The wine is wrath, the wrath of God without
All Mixture, is unto them poured out
Of Divine Indignation's dreadful Cup.
They swallow wrath, and wrath them swallows up,
With wrath and fury they are filled and drunk,
And in a lake of fire and brimestone sunk:
Their torments smoke ascends up for ever,
They have no rest, their torment cease never.
Now life and death are set before thee, choose
What thou will take, and what thou will refuse.
Will thou, fool, turn eternal life to death?
Will thou refuse God's favor, choose his wrath?
And turn from Jesus Christ to go to Devils?
Refuse all good, and choose all sorts of evils?
Darkness prefer to light, will thou refuse
Rivers of pleasures, streams of brimstone choose?
If thou the God of Truth, Love, Mercy, Grace,
Forsake, and lying vanities embrace,
Thy conscience, the worm that does not die,
Shall torture thee to all eternity.
Now tell me, Soul, what thy Objections are:
Is it Christ's Yoke, Rod, Cross, that does thee scare?
His Yoke is easy, and his Burden light,
His Laws not grievous, but the Soul's delight;
All his Commandments are holy, just and good,
And better far than thy appointed food.
They sweeter than the Honeycomb shall prove;
For all his Laws are summed up in love.
The love of God, who is the chiefest good,
And of our Neighbor, our own flesh and blood.
To the in hatred is on Earth a Hell,
But it is a Heaven on Earth in love to dwell.
Should thou not love the Lord with all thy heart,
Who goodness is, and does good impart?
With all thy soul, since he is the God alone
Which to the soul gives satisfaction?
With all the mind? for he does fill the mind,
And cannot be by finite thoughts confined.
With all thy strength? Thy Powers are not able
Him to desire as he is desirable,
Tho all thy soul to the utmost thou extend,
It cannot boundless goodness comprehend.
Love sweetly joins the heart to God alone,
And other gods before him will have none.
It will have none on Earth or Heaven above,
But God for its desire, delight and love.
The Spouse disdains (this is love's holy pride)
By Christ's companions to turn aside.
To please the Lord love does the soul dispose,
And with his will in every thing to close.
Love worship's God according to his mind,
And loves to be within his will confined.
Love fears his Jealousy, and stands in awe,
To take ought from, or add ought to his Law.
It casts all worship forged by man's will,
And does the sale of Idol-mongers spill.
Love God; and then his glorious Name to thee
As precious Ointment poured out will be.
Strongly, yet sweetly Love will thee restrain
From taking his most holy Name in vain.
Love God, so Sabbath Days from morn till night,
Shall be by thee accounted a delight.
These Sabbaths of the Lord are holy blessed,
Love's tristing times, Feast-days, and days of Rest.
Then the beloved blesses Saints with grace
And glory, then they see his lovely face.
He entertaineth them in holy rest;
Days in his Courts of all days are the best.
From love to God neighbourly love does flow,
From this sweet root this pleasant plant does grow.
Since man was made in Gods similitude,
Since all men are of the same flesh and blood,
It Is for God's honor, and our own behoof,
That we our Neighbor as our selves should love.
The light of Nature cries it is righteous,
To do as we would men to do to us.
If thou thy neighbor love, thou will delight
To keep him blameless, and to do him right.
Love turns Superiors to Fathers kind,
And makes them of a condescending mind.
Love bounds their wrath, moves to commiseration,
Love tempers rigor, pleads for moderation.
When Justice, matched with Mercy, sweetly reign,
Then all of Justice, and of Mercy sing.
Blessed is the land in which the law of love
Does rule in those below and those above.
Love makes Equals deal with one another,
As every one were one another's brother.
Where Love prevails in inferiors,
It makes them kindly honor higher powers.
Love envies not superiors higher place,
But does in God's Order still acquiesce.
Love makes Subjects patient and mild,
Like to a kindly tender hearted child,
Who tho injured with grief and shamefacedness,
Conceals his Father's faults and nakedness.
Love makes man abhor man's blood to shed,
^ince God has man in his own Image made.
To sinful Anger, Hatred, Envy, Spite,
Malice, Revenge, Love is most opposite.
Pure love destroys vile filthy lusts, and flies
From Fornications and Adulteries.
^t purifies the heart, and guards the eye,
And will not wrong a Neighbor's chastity.
He who is loving, seeks his Neighbor's wealth,
And wrongeth none by Rapine or by stealth.
Love is most tender of a Neighbor's Name,
It thinks no evil, and will not defame;
It loves truth, and does abhor all lies,
False-witnessing, reproaches, calumnies.
Love is contented well with its own lot,
And what belongs to others covets not.
It Is opposite to the first inclinations,
Which tend to ill, to sinful delectations.
Since Love's the end, and sum of all the Law,
It Is pleasant in Love's easy yoke to draw,
The Law of Love is holy, good and just;
But Oh! the lawless Law of sin and lust,
Like to a stinking humor spoils the taste
Of Lust-sick men, that the sweet food distaste,
To man's stiff Neck, which galling lust does spoil,
The Yoke seems hard, which softer is than Oil.
Yea, no mere man is able since the Fall
To keep these perfect Laws, but breaks them all:
And every sin deserves God's curse and wrath
Both in this present life and after death.
Yet, O poor sinner, turn not desperate,
Since with the Father there is an Advocate,
Even Jesus Christ the Righteouss who has
Fulfilled the Law, appeased revenging wrath.
He has the Law established, answered
All that it did demand, or threatened.
Justice has found a Ransom in the Son,
Full satisfaction for transgression.
He under lay the curse, that he might free
All from the curse who unto him do flee.
Come unto him who is the Lord's salvation,
And thou shall not come into condemnation.
For all sins of omission and commission
Thou shall receive a full and free remission.
He will take off thy rags of filthiness,
And cloth thee with white robes of righteousness.
Was ever Traitor so perverfly mad,
To slight a pardon when it might be had?
To seek for cautioneis poor debtors run:
Will thou an able off'red Surety shun?
Art thou with sins too heavy burden pressed?
Come, weary soul, and Christ shall give thee rest.
Art thou for foughten, and quite out of breath
With the old man, that man of sin and death?
Groan unto him, that he may pity thee:
Say, I Am oppressed, Lord, undertake for me.
He who cried out, O wretched man am I,
Within a little sung of Victory.
Cry, Help, Lord, sins prevail against me, do;
Purge me, subdue them, and them quite undo.
Since without him thou can do nothing right,
Be strong in him, in the power of his might.
When thou come up out of the wilderness,
Lean upon him, lean on him all thy stress.
Would thou have peace and comfort, come to Jesus:
He is the peace, and he alone can ease us.
By Faith receive him to dwell in thy heart:
He will thy conscience purge, and ease its smart.
Take him as off'red in the Gospel-Call:
With this great gift the Father gives all.
Stay wholly on him, rest on him alone
For to accomplish thy salvation;
To save thee from all sin and misery,
And with all goodness thee to satisfy.
Is not this work of Faith the hearts delight?
Is not this labor ease? this burden light?
A hungry thirsty man will never think,
That it is a grievous work to eat and drink.
It Is easing to a man with loads oppressed,
To be disburden'd, and to find a rest.
The wind tossed traveller is glad to find
A hiding place, to hide him from the wind.
And they whom a tempestuous storm does beat,
With pleasure to a covert make retreat.
Tho thirsty, when in a dry place they see
Rivers of waters, thither they will flee.
If travelers see a great high Rock stand
In a Sun burnt, and scorched weary land,
Tho they be weary, yet they mend their pace,
To find in its cool shadow some solace.
The drowning man longs at the Rock to be,
The chased man into a strength does flee,
Yet all these things, when they together twist,
Are but mere shadows when compared with Christ.
He is the Truth, true Light, true Life, true Food,
A refuge from all ill: He Is all that is good.
To buy this Pearl all things are wisely sold;
For it is a treasure that cannot be told.
Riches unsearchable in Christ do meet:
In this one Pearl all treasures are unite.
Earth's Riches, upon which poor worldlings dote,
Tho they appear to be, yet they are not:
They are uncertain, yea, uncertainty,
And certainly they will make wings and fly:
They are but shadows when they seem to stay,
And are found nothing when they flee away.
These many things to nothing do amount,
When in Death's shadow men cast the account.
Oft-times in life these Riches take their wing;
When death is come, they signify nothing,
Except to vex the rich, they cannot free
From death, nor him in death accompany.
But here true wealth, riches unsearchable,
Eternal riches, substance durable.
With many things vex not thy heart or head,
Since in one Pearl all good is treasured.
Rest not in hearsay, come, himself behold,
And thou shall see much more than has been told.
Buy without price, or money, O! cheap rate,
And calculate for our poor mean estate.
Sure it is free grace which has this match made,
Where all things good may be for nothing had.
Put to thy hand, fear not, thou may be bold,
Since he himself commands thee to take hold.
Since sweetness, better, by the taste than eye,
Or ear is known, O come! and taste and see,
How good the Lord is: eat that which is good,
Fatness and Marrow, soul-delighting food.
Drink wine that is well refined on the Lees,
Drink poverty away and miseries.
Be filled with the Spirit, do not fear,
Lest thou exceed, there is no excess here:
Drink, thirsty soul, and drink abundantly:
He who drinks most, lives most soberly.
This drink does not the sense and head confound,
It clears the eyes, makes mind and judgment sound:
It does not pervert, but right the heart,
And from all evil to all good convert.
They reel not; for the Spirit does them lead,
They safely go, their paths are stablished.
Their Mirth's not madness, it is solid, pure;
Ends not in sadness, but does still endure.
They who are filled with the Spirit, rejoice,
Make melody to God with heart and voice.
They Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs do sing,
Give thanks to God, through Christ, in every thing.
These Joys begin the perfect melody,
Which is above; come, taste, and sing, and see.
Ah carnal wretch, who knows no other Feasts,
But such as common are to men with beasts:
Who seeks no better meat, nor better drink,
Than what corrupts, and turns to filth and stink.
Thy belly is thy God, thy glory shame,
Thy pleasure is the shadow of a dream,
Which goes in coming, when it comes it goes,
And leaves a filthy stain upon the soul;
It leaves a sting for thy vexation
And guilt, which binds to condemnation.
Thy momentary mirth, thy pleasures vain,
Brings on most real and eternal pain.
Thy fill is emptiness, thy mirth is madness,
The laughter of a fool that ends in sadness.
Thy fleshly lusts, tho they seem to delight,
Against thy soul most fiercely they do fight.
Their fond embraces are death's cruel grasps:
Their seeming sweetness is the gall of Asps.
The money's spent for that which is no bread,
But is the bane whereby you are poisoned.
Thy labor's spent for vexing vanity,
Which does torment, but cannot satisfy.
When will thou come unto thy self, and say,
Ah! I am famished, I pine away
With hunger; I am cheated, poisoned:
I feed vile lusts, by them I Am murdered.
I hear of bread indeed, and bread to spare,
And of a Feast, where all things ready are.
Since I am called, shall I not make haste,
And run before I die? But Oh! the Feast,
And the Feast-maker, are just at my hand,
Before the door, tho closed he does stand.
He knocks, and does me lovingly invite:
Since he is so near, alas! shall we not meet?
If any man what ere he was before,
My voice hear, and to me open the door,
I will come in, and sup with; if he,
Poor thing have nothing, he shall sup with me.
These are his words, if I had ears to hear,
Lord, open them, give me the hearing ear.
Since, Lord, thou art so near, do not depart:
Stand not without, ah! shall a door us part:
Make the King's Keys, or since you are not for breaking,
Right the split lock, it is of thine own making.
I have it split, it will not budge nor gee
For any thing that can be done by me.
Lord, thou can mend it, put thy hand within,
Open my closed heart, thou know the gin:
When David's Key in thy Almighty Hand,
Does open, none can shut, or thee withstand.
Come in, O mighty one, and dispossess
Satan and Lust, which do my soul oppress.
Of thy own goodness, Lord, the Feast provide,
Enlarge my heart, and my mouth open wide,
And fill it; for both hunger and the fill
Proceed from the good pleasure of thy will.
Without thee I am nothing, nothing have,
And nothing good can think, will, do, or crave,
Unless thy Spirit help my infirmity,
And grace perfect all that concerns me.
I cannot come, except that I drawn be:
Draw me, O Lord, and I will come to thee
O wretched sinner, cry for mercy, cry,
When Christ, the Son of David, is so nigh.
Blind Bartimeus heard that Christ past by:
He takes the tide, and does for Mercy cry.
Many did think his crying a disgrace,
And charged him, that he should hold his peace.
But he the more did lift his voice and cry,
O Son of David, mercy have on me.
Jesus stood still, he thought it not a shame
To be thus called, but answered to his Name.
The Beggar being called, made no stay,
But in his haste, did cast his Cloak away.
He seeks for sight, obtains his request:
He came in faith, in love he follows Christ.
Let nothing which Devils or Men can say,
Scare thee; cast all impediments away.
Since the great Master calls, make no delay,
Turn a deaf ear to all, who him gainsay.
Do as the woman of Canaan did,
From whom Christ, tho retired, could not be hid:
She cries out, Have mercy on me, Lord:
Christ hears her cry, but answers not a word.
And when he speaks, his words discourage more
Than did the silence which he kept before:
I am not sent but to Israel 's lost sheep,
Says Christ: The woman will not dive so deep,
To dispute his Commissions extent,
To whom he was, to whom he was not sent;
But kindly came, and humbly him adored,
Pressed her suit, and cries out, Help me, O Lord.
It is not meet to cast to dogs the bread,
Says Christ, with which the children should be fed.
She storms not at a Dog's disgraceful Name,
But wifely makes advantage of the same:
Since I Am a dog, says she, for crumbs I plead:
Give me some crumbs, Lord, of children's bread.
Christ praised her great faith, and did fulfill
All her desire, and gave her all her will.
Tho Christ withdraw, seek him, he will appear:
He hears thy cry when he seems not to hear.
Tho he seem strange, unto him kindly come:
Tho thou be called a dog, yet seek a crumb.
If Satan say, thou art a reprobate,
That by a dispute dark and intricate,
Concerning secret things, and depths profound,
He may affright thee, and thy mind confound.
Listen not to a lying murdering cheat;
Enter not with him on that great debate.
Come on, Christ's call, effectual vocation,
Will free thee from the fears of reprobation.
All whom he draws, are called in effect,
And were from all Eternity elect.
But if thou say, I fear the bitter smart
Of a repenting pricked, rent, broken heart,
I must confess my sins with grief and tears,
And watch against my lusts with careful fears.
And thus my mirth is marred, and my gladness
Is turned to grief and melancholy sadness.
I answer that it is of God's free grace,
That for repentance there is any place.
Justice might say, go weep in Hell, and burn:
It Is grace that says, Sinner, repent and turn.
The pricking of the heart lets out the sin,
Which festers and destroys when kept within.
It Is for thy health, that thy hard heart be rent,
That so thy vile impostume may be vent.
It Is not a Foe's, but a Physician's wound:
God breaks the heart to make it whole and sound.
The Lord does heal the broken in their heart,
Their pain is gain, there is pleasure in the smart.
There Is peace and safety in their watchful fears;
The Oil of Joy is mixed with Gospel-tears.
The Lord is broken by our whorish heart:
Should not our heart then break with grief and smart?
When Christ was bound, our sins did make the bands,
They were the Nails that pierced his feet and hands;
They were the Thorns that tore and rent his head;
They were the Spear that made his heart to bleed.
The lashing Whips, the Fists that did him beat,
They made his body weep a bloody sweat.
His outward pains, the Agony within,
His troubled soul, procured were by sin.
Look on him whom thou pierced, Oh! look on still,
That grief thy heart, and tears thine eyes may fill;
That kindly thou may weep and mourn, like one
Who mourns for a first and only Son.
Sin is against the Lord, breaks his laws;
It mars his Image, and from God withdraws.
Thy sin does vex and grieve the holy Sp'rit:
Should thou with grief for sin contrite.
They shall find mercy, who confess and turn;
Comfort is promised to these who mourn.
The Oil of Joy the Lord for mourning gives,
And he the humble contrite heart revives.
If godly sorrow will not thee destroy,
It tends to life, its tears are seeds of joy.
Gospel-grief, which melts the heart aright,
Is sweeter far than all the world's delight.
And even godly grief, the sweeter then
All the delights of all the sons of men,
Who can the peace of God, who does transcend,
And pass all understanding, comprehend.
Their Joy that is full of glory, who is able
To express? for it is unexpressable.
Christ calls on thee, Sinner, to repent,
And he exalted is for this intent,
To give repentance and remission.
Employ him to remove thy heart of stone.
They who are turned from sin to God by grace,
Find Wisdom's paths both pleasantness and peace.
The Word, the Sacraments, Prayers, and Praise,
Are lightsome, pleasant, and delightsome ways.
Blessed is he who knows the joyful sound,
And who can say, O Lord, thy words were found:
I did them eat, and thy word was to me
My heart's delight, and joyful melody,
Admire the Lord's low condescendency,
That he would speak and write to such as we,
And write so plainly, that each hungry one,
Tho simple, finds food to live upon;
And so sublimely, that the Learned might
Not nauseate, but search, desire, delight;
And in such useful, sweet variety,
For to prevent loathing satiety.
Here Histories of grace, and ancient things,
Of persons good and great, of Saints and Kings,
Examples rare of Faith and Self-denial,
Of patience under the fiery Trial:
Of hope when Sense spoke nothing but despair,
Of Love, overcoming ill with good, O rare,
Of Fortitude joined with a broken Sp'rit,
Of warlike courage in a heart contrite,
And wit to rule an Army and a Nation,
With wisdom that made wise unto salvation.
But O! the History of Histories,
So full of Miracles and Mysteries;
The Son of God his Incarnation,
His coming with life and salvation.
These good news are, and will be ever fresh,
That God was manifested in the flesh,
And dwelt with us; then on the Cross did die,
Rose from the Grave, ascended up on high.
Much may be seen of God in the Creation,
But he is more clearly seen in man's salvation:
For here appears God's wisdom manifold,
His spotless Justice does it self unfold,
Suing the guiltless Surety till he died,
Not quitting him till he had satisfied.
Here Love shines bright, as in its proper place,
Upon the Mercy-seat, the Throne of Grace.
Lo, this is love, God who is Love, did give
His Son to death, that Enemies might live:
His own beloved, loving, lovely Son,
Only begotten, with his Father one
In Essence, one in Mind, and one in Will,
who all his Father's Precepts did fulfill,
Who holy, harmless, spotless was, yet he
Got a command for the lost sheep to die:
To die both in their stead, and for their good
To wash away their sins with his own blood.
Christ loved the Father, and he loved the sheep,
And so took pleasure this command to keep.
O matchless love! it passes all degree;
The Judge does for the Malefactors die.
It was his meat to do his Father's will,
His work to finish, Righteousness fulfill:
He went from place to place, still doing good,
Healing the sick, giving the hungry food;
Delivering from all maladies and evils,
Relieving them who were oppressed with Devils.
He was most meek, lowly in heart and mind,
Most merciful, most affable and kind.
Easy he was to be entreated, all
Who called him, found him ready on a call.
When called to a Marriage, he went,
And made their water wine, when wine was spent:
When called, he went with Publicans and Sinners,
And even with Pharisees unto their Dinners.
All who did come for good, got all they sought,
And often better than they asked or thought.
The man sick of the Palsy, laid before
Christ on a bed, seeks health, Christ gives more:
He first forgiveth his Iniquity,
Then cures his body of its malady.
To teach the sick to seek more earnestly
To be from sin, than from their sickness free.
Christ sees a Widow following the Bier
Of her dead only Son; he draws near,
And on the Widow has compassion,
Restores to her alive her only Son.
Thus he prevents her expectation
With unexpected consolation.
His piercing eye is sharp to see, to see
His Israel's affliction; his eye
Affects his tender heart with feeling stounds,
And all his bowels mercies, mercies sounds.
He quickly comes with all convenient speed,
And helps and succors in the time of need,
In Christ all persons of each rank and station,
May see a pattern for their imitation.
Church Members, learn of him to countenance
God's Servants, and each holy Ordinance.
Jesus when eight days old was circumcised:
He heard John preach, would be by him baptized.
He loved Church Communion; for he
When others were baptized, baptized would be
He kept the Passover, and after that
His own Supper he himself did eat.
He sought and took each fit occasion
For spiritual communication,
And did from earthly things occasion take
Of divine heavenly purposes to speak.
Vile men things holy wrest to vile abuse,
He sinful things drew to an holy use:
He prayed with others, taught them what to say,
And in what order they to God should pray.
To pray that God's Name may be hallowed,
His kingdom come, his will accomplished
In Earth, as it is in Heaven; then he allows
To seek for bread, not things superfluous;
And to seek more for liberation
From sin and snares, than from affliction.
Our hearts, when we begin our prayers to raise
To God in Heaven, and end them in praise.
Pastors, from the great Pastor learn to preach,
Who truth with all authority did teach.
His words were right words, plain, and words of grace,
Sweet, sharp, and suited to his hearers case.
He smote proud Hypocrites with Thunderdarts:
He poured the Oil of Joy in broken hearts,
And as a Hen her brood under her wings
Gathers, so would he gather wandering things:
He called, and pressed his hearers to repent,
And to believe on him whom God had sent.
On fools, who to believe, of heart were slow,
He with much patience did great pains bestow:
In prayer he praised their knowledge, tho but weak,
And of their little Faith right much did make.
He wept over those who from him turned away,
And would not know, nor ponder in their day
The things which did belong unto their peace,
While they were visited with Gospel Grace.
And by their slighting of Christ's Visitation,
Brought on themselves ruin and desolation.
To Christ let Children, Servants, Subjects look,
How pleasantly he bare Subjections Yoke.
To Joseph and his Mother due respect
He gave, and did himself to them subject.
He paid Tribute; he would not offend:
And in his Doctrine he did recommend,
To give to Caesar what to him belonged.
He was most patient when by Rulers wronged.
He served Rulers, yea, he thought it meet
To serve his servants, and to wash their feet.
Let all whom the most High has set above,
Their Fellow Creatures learn of Christ to love,
And condescend to those of low degree.
This lowly love adorns Authority.
Meekness and Mercy, Lowliness in Christ,
With Majesty and Justice well consist,
Because of Truth, Meekness and Justice, he
Rides prosperously in stately Majesty.
He glories in goodness, mercy, grace,
His kingdom stands in righteousness and peace,
And Joy spiritual. O! happy they
Who learn of Christ to rule, and to obey.
Learn of Christ to suffer, and to die;
He had his sufferings often in his eye,
And to Jerusalem did set his face,
Went foremost in a more than usual pace:
Went to the Garden which his Foes did know,
And when they came, himself to them did show.
He did meet Death before his strength was lost,
He cried loud when he gave up the Ghost.
He from his Father's Hand the bitter Cup
Received most pleasantly, and drank it up.
Pure Nature has a sinless aversation
From wrath and death, and loves self-preservation:
So that it cannot choose but fear and shrink,
When sin-revenging wrath does mix the drink.
This Humane harmless will Christ gives up
Unto his Father's will, and drinks the Cup,
Freely submits his inclination,
And says, Lord, not my will, but thine be done.
With fervent cries, and tender tears he pray'th,
And multiplies the acts of Love and Faith.
For my God, my God, Abba Father, prove
The strength of Faith, and fervency of Love.
When that the Sword through his pure Soul was thrust,
He did his Spirit to his Father truft,
And to the hand which did him bruise and smite,
In Faith and Love he did his Sp'rit commit.
And as his love was wonderful to men
At all times, so it was most wondrous then,
When sorrows filled, and did his soul surround,
His kindness and compassion did abound.
Tho he foresaw his torment and reproach,
And saw the Prince of this World make approach,
And found his soul with trouble so much pressed,
That its grief could not be by words expressed,
Yet none of these his loving heart diverts
From comforting his sad Disciples hearts.
Before the Passover, when Jesus saw
His hour was come, and that he should withdraw
From this world to the Father, having loved
His own, t'ward the world he constant proved,
Loved them unto the end. Since now he went
To God, from whom he came, his love must vent.
Like a kind Friend, who from his Friends must part,
In his farewell pours out his loving heart.
In words and deeds, and sufferings, O! how
His love bursts out, and does all bands o're-flow.
He girds himself to be for service meet,
He stands, stoops, washes, wipes his servants feet,
To teach them not to lord it, as above
Their fellow servants, but to serve in love.
The Passover he did most heartily
Desire to eat with them e're he did die.
The Paschal-Lamb slain, roasted which they eat,
Meant Christ slain, scorch't in Wrath's just burning heat.
But Christ, Death, Pains, Agony, Sweat of blood,
Loved as they were our life, ease, peace and food.
He straightened was till all was finished,
And his blood-baptism accomplished.
Behold! again his love will represent
His death our life, in a new Sacrament.
Two feasts, one end; O rare! in such a night
^n which he was betrayed, to take delight
To act his own sad death once and again,
A death in which blood, shame, and lingering pain:
And which was worst of all, a Curse did meet,
To make his terror every way complete.
He ante-dates his death for their behoof,
Turns his sad death in a sweet feast of love.
He gives his broken body for their food,
And for their drink he gives his precious blood.
The Sword of Justice against him awoke,
It stroke him, broke him, he did bear the stroke.
The Shepherd bore it, who God's equal is,
That the poor little ones the stroke might miss.
His body broken for them in their stead,
Is life-procuring, and life-giving bread.
The Sword of Justice, the blood-thirsty blade
Pursues; for blood rests not till blood be shed.
The blood of beasts cannot God's wrath appease,
Nor purge the Conscience, nor give it ease.
Vile finite man could never satisfy
For sin against God infinite, tho he
Should bleed for ever in this helpless case.
Christ comes in for his poor sheep's release.
He says, I come, I come; behold and see,
As in the book it written is of me;
A Body, Lord, thou have for me prepared:
Draw blood of me, and let the sheep be spared.
I do delight even my hearts blood to shed
For them, that their sin may be pardoned.
Come all ye whom the fiery law does charge
With guilt and wrath, and who your hearts enlarge
For righteousness, and who for pardon pant,
Come, drink the blood of the new covenant.
This drink will quench thy thirst, and scorching heat,
Which guilt and wrath do in thy soul beget.
Christ gives himself for food, to intimate,
That he himself is ours, in us, and that
He is one with us by a lively union,
And that our life consists in communion
With him, who gives us life, and growth, and strength,
And perfects what concerns us at length.
This puts his loving kindness out of doubt,
That he comes in, and will not stand without;
And comes in, that he with his Friends may feast,
And gives himself for food to every guest:
He gives his flesh for bread, and to make up
The feast, he pours his blood into the Cup.
White others have but Bread and Wine for food,
Believers eat Christ's Body, drink his Blood.
He will not live without them, he does give
Life unto them, and Christ in them does live.
Yea, the life which they in the flesh do live,
They live it as they on the Son believe.
Behold again his Love, behold him die,
Behold him leave his little ones a legacy,
In a most sure, well ordered Testament,
And gives it sealed by a Sacrament,
This Testament contains all that is good,
All that is purchased by Jesus blood:
It cannot changed be, it must endure;
The great Testator's death does make it sure
He dies to ratify his latter Will,
He lives Executor, it to fulfill:
He gave himself for them, to them he gives
Himself; for them he dies, for them he lives.
Yet still here is more of love, the loving art.
Is learned best from Christ's most loving heart:
He leaves a token of his love most kind,
To keep him: and his death still in their mind.
A token which he will have to remain
With them, until he come from Heaven again.
He says, This is my body for you broken,
Take this, as of my love a sign and token:
Take, eat, and when this braken bread you see,
And take and eat it, then remember me.
And drink this Cup, and drink ye of it all:
As often as this Bread and Cup ye shall
Eat and drink, ye show forth, and do record
The bloody breaking death of Christ the Lord.
Since these Love tokens are most excellent,
Which do to us most clearly represent
An absent friend, to show what he has done
For us, what hardships for us undergone:
And those most charming and endearing prove,
Which represent his loveliness and love.
This Sacrament is an illustrious
Symbol of love, presenting Christ to us,
As broken, bleeding, dying in our stead,
Broken, that he might unto us be bread;
Bleeding, that he might us with drink relieve,
And dying, that we by his death might live.
His Farewell Sermon, registered by John,
Is full of love and consolation,
Where you will find most kindly compellations,
Comforting Truths, strengthening Exhortations,
And promises most great and precious,
Most fit for them, most sweet and gracious.
His Sermon sweet, in a sweet Prayer ends,
Where he them to his Father recommends;
And prays for all that should believe upon
His Name, through the Word, that ye might be one,
As thou (says he) O Father, art in me,
And I in thee, they one in us may be.
I will that they whom thou have given me,
Be with me, that they may my Glory see.
I have declared unto them thy Name,
And will continue to declare the same,
That the love wherewith thou have loved me,
May be in them, and I in them might be.
Himself, his Glory, and his Father's love
To him, he gives to them; and this does prove,
He will no good deny, but all impart
Unto his Spouse, who ravisheth his heart.
For her his hands, feet, side, and heart did bleed:
These streams did from the Spring of Love proceed.
His bleeding hands, feet, side, and heart, do prove,
That our Lord Jesus Christ did die for love.
In suffering, he acted, finished
His work, his Father's will accomplished;
Paid the price, Justice to satisfy,
His Prisoners to ransom and set free.
And when he ignominiously did die,
His Foes he vanquished most gloriously.
Heroic Facts, which Histories record,
Are nothing to the acts of Christ the Lord,
Who the Red Dragons, the old Serpent's head
Bruised, and all Hell's Powers vanquished;
Destroyed Death, and took away its sting,
And rend'red it, tho grim, a harmless thing;
O'recame the world, and made an end of sin,
And everlasting righteousness brought in.
To God he Glory gave, to Earth brought Peace,
And toward worthless men good will and grace.
The feigned Loves which are in forged Romances,
Tho they be strained, are dull and cloudy Fancies,
And nothing to his matchless wondrous love,
Which is all finite minds and thoughts above,
The Spirit did the Gospel often indite,
And moved four Evangelists to write,
That we might often read, and hear, and see
Of godliness the true great mystery;
That in beholding we might be transformed
Into Christ's Image, and to him conformed.
If thou take pleasure to read Prophesies,
Again into the Scripture turn thine eyes,
Where thou will find, that in the days of old
Things future were long e're they came foretold,
The Promises of Christ are there most clear,
And were fulfilled when he did appear.
They who had eyes to see, could not mistake
Him, of whom Moses and the Prophets spoke.
All circumstances here did meet and twift,
What they foretold fulfilled was in Christ.
The Promises so great and precious
Assures us, that the Lord is gracious.
His Word and Oath, which ever do endure,
Do make his mercies to his people sure.
May worthless I these Promises embrace?
Thou may, for they are Promises of Grace.
If thou be miserable and impure,
They promise cleansing, they are mercies sure.
As cleansing purges from impurity,
So mercy pities, saves from misery.
If thou do thirst and hunger after all
The Promises, thine own thou may them call.
The needy soul that longs for righteousness,
May claim the Promise, fullness blessedness.
Since Christ has blessed the hungry thirsty foul,
Such sure are blessed, none can his Word control.
Once close with Christ, all Promises are then
Thine; for in him they are, Yea and Amen.
If thou embrace all his Commands aright,
Thou may in all his Promises delight.
Would you read laws, in Scripture you may see
The laws of God most holy and most high,
Whose Will's the rule of all holiness,
Of love and mercy, and of righteousness.
These pure commands light to the eyes impart:
They Are right and good, and do rejoice the heart.
Receive them in thy mind, since they are light:
And since they are good, make them thy hearts delight.
Great peace have they, O Lord, thy law that love
Nothing to them a stumbling block shall prove.
Would you read Proverbs, much sense in few words,
The Scripture Proverbs plenteously affords.
In Scripture rare Epistles you will find,
Where to his Friends Christ writes his heart and mind:
And as their case requires, so he in love
Sometimes commends, and sometimes does reprove.
Would you read news, here is news both great and true,
Good tidings of great Joy, and ever new,
That God was manifest in humane flesh,
Will be for ever wondrous news and fresh.
He is the same to day, and yesterday,
And is the same for ever and for aye.
His love's the same, it never waxes old,
His blood's still fresh, his virtue grows not cold,
He Is white and ruddy still, his beauty rare
Does never fade, no age can it impair;
His locks are black, no gray hairs there are seen,
His Marriage bed continues ever green.
All earthly things do languish and decay;
The fashion of the world does pass away.
These things are nothing else but shadows fleeing,
Which seem to be, and have no solid being:
But Christ is truth, and new creatures true,
Old things are past, lo all things here are new.
These things fade not with time, they grow not frail,
They are eternal and shall never fail.
New creatures wax not old, they never die;
Newness of life lasts to eternity.
New are their hearts, their spirits, minds and sense,
Their acts are acts of new obedience;
Their way is new, as light it shines always,
Still more and more unto the perfect day.
These creatures new have a new secret name,
And a new City, New Jerusalem;
A new Heaven and new Earth, which far excel
This World; for there all righteousness does dwell.
New various fruits they gather from the tree
Of Life, and drink new wine perpetually;
Eternal draughts of Light, Love and Joy,
While God himself they fully do enjoy.
Ah Fools! who seek for needless Novelties,
To feed fantastic Curiosities,
Of precious time so prodigally lost,
Your brave new nothings will not quit the cost.
Search for the new things that are great and true,
And of this labor thou shall never rue.
These news thy soul to wondering will raise,
And yield sweet matter of new Songs of praise.
Art thou disposed to sing? apply thine ear,
In scripture thou a joyful sound shall hear
Of Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs Spiritual,
Which make a melody celestial.
No Poet now can such Composures write;
For the great Maker did these Songs indite:
They came from Heaven, and by a heavenly strain,
They lift the soul from Earth to Heaven again.
There are high Songs made touching the great King,
Who has pre-eminence in every thing:
There are most stately Songs of acts divine,
Sweet Songs of Love, which better are than wine.
Here mournful Songs, and Songs of joy and gladness,
And here are Songs composed of mirth and sadness.
The Psalm begins sometimes with sighs and tears,
And sad complaints of dangers and of fears;
But while the Psalmist sings, the grief and fray
Evanish, and are sweetly sung away.
These fingers travel much aloft, to raise
Their hearts and tongues to highest Notes of praise:
They call for help, invite the creatures all
In Earth, Seas, Air, the Hosts celestial.
But all the praise that creatures can afford,
Is far below the praise due to the Lord.
This rent will never fully paid be,
Through all the Ages of Eternity:
But they who ever praise, are ever blessed,
In restless praise there is eternal rest.
Unto the word the Lord subjoined has
The Sacraments, for to confirm our Faith,
That as we hear, so we may clearly see
Christ and his Grace presented to our eye.
In Baptism, behold, Christ does apply
His Blood and Spirit us to purify,
To purge away our guilt and filthiness,
To give us holiness and righteousness.
Be pure and clean, and of a holy frame,
Since thou wast washed in God's holy Name.
Unto the holy One, the holy Three,
Thou offered wast, should thou not holy be?
Think never shame holiness to avow,
Glory to stand to thy Baptismal Vow.
Abhor the filthy lusts of Swinish Hogs,
Disdain to cast what is holy unto Dogs:
Watch, fight against all worldly lusts and evils,
Resist unclean, lying and murdering Devils:
Be strong in God, and in his power of might,
The War is holy, and the Cause is right:
Put on Gods armor, stand, stand, do not flee,
Upon the Captain always fix thine eye.
He is the Captain of Salvation,
Cleave unto him, and thou shall surely win;
For he has given to all thy Foes the foil,
Come after him, and gather up the spoil:
He will thee feast in midst of all thy fight,
Cover thy Table in thine Enemies sight.
A Banquet in the fight expect thou may,
Since Christ Love's Banner does over thee display.
O! let it not be ever said of thee,
That from Christ's Colors thou away did flee.
Christ and his fullness in the union-feast,
We may both hear, and see, smell, touch, and taste.
By these same ports were Satan, Death, and Sin,
Entered, Christ, Life and Righteousness, come in.
Adam did hear, take, smell, touch, taste t^^ fruit,
And was transformed to a vile mortal Brute.
He is the Living, the Life-giving Bread,
Here is the meat indeed the drink indeed,
Under the shadow of this true Apple tree,
Sit down, it is Fruit to thy taste sweet shall be.
This tree of life, this true and noble Vine
Yields Grapes, which bleed true life, a life divine.
Christ would be broken, that he might be bread,
And that the dead might live, he would be dead.
He would bleed out his life, that we might drink
Life in his blood, remember him, and think
Still of his Death, and in his Temple still
Think of his Love, and of his latter Will.
Thou who art willing Christ himself to take,
And all his fullness, no more scruples make;
For as the bread thou eat'st, and as the wine
Thou drink'st, belongs to thee, so Christ is thine.
As food the empty body satiates,
And life and strength recruits and recreates;
So Christ to souls does full contentment give:
He is their strength and life, by which they live.
If he dwell in thee, thou shall filled be
With all Gods fullness most abundantly,
And thou shall live, not thou, but rather he,
Who is a quickening Spirit, shall live in thee.
Faint not when to great works thou have a call;
In Christ, who strengthens thee, thou may do all.
Thou will him find life giving, strenthening food,
The living Spring of all that is truly good.
Prepare thy self for this great holy Feast,
The King himself observes every guest:
He who had not his Wedding Garment on,
Incurred the Sentence of Damnation.
If thou come thither as to common food,
Thou will draw on the guilt of Jesu's blood.
Come with repentance, mourn when thou do see
The Lord, whom thou by sin did crucify.
Come hungring, thirsting for this holy Feast,
The hungring soul shall be with goodness blessed:
Come meek and lowly to Christ crucified,
The meek shall eat, and shall be satisfied:
Christ dwells with those who are of humble Spirit,
And does revive the heart of the contrite.
Thou must have Faith, that Christ himself thou may
Eat Spiritually, not in a carnal way.
Purge out the leaven of hypocrisy,
And eat this feast with heart-sincerity:
Purge malice out, Division detaste,
This is a Love, and a Communion-feast.
Forgive the sins of others heartily,
As God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven thee.
If wants discourage, guilt stare in thy face,
Then judge thy self, beg mercy, seek for grace.
If thou seek Jesus, fear not, do not stay,
He has all that thou want, haste, come away:
Come to the blood of sprinkling with thy sin,
The Fountain's open, wash thy self therein.
As it is of grace that the most glorious Lord
Speaks unto us, and seals his faithful Word
By Sacraments; so it is of his grace,
That we may speak to him in every place:
Yea, he most graciously of us requires,
That we in every thing make our desires
Known to him by prayer and supplication,
That we may freed be of all vexation,
And that we may to our comfort find,
The peace of God guarding our heart and mind.
Offer thy hearts desires unto the Lord,
For things agreeable unto his Word:
Pray in the Spirit, who helps up every groan,
And sigh and suit, we cannot pray alone:
Pray in Christ's Name, if access thou would have
To grace, and answers of thy suit receive.
This is the new and living way, the gate
Of life, that leads to the Mercy-seat.
All those for whom Christ does interceed,
Mercy and grace, find in the time of need.
Be humble, fervent, pray in love and faith:
Life up pure hands without doubting and wrath:
Confess thy sins with sorrow and with shame:
For mercies praise the Lord's most holy Name:
And pray that God's Name may be hallowed,
Before thou come to seek for daily bread.
If answers come not soon, wait, knock again,
He has not said, Seek ye my face in vain.
Seek, ask, knock, wait with expectation,
Thou shall rejoice in God's salvation.
The very pouring out of a sad heart
Before the Lord, will somewhat ease its smart.
He hears prayer, and he loves to hear
His Doves, his Turtles voice; he bows his ear.
All their desires, groans, breathings, chatterings,
Are pleasant music to the King of Kings:
These broken Notes he joins in pleasant sets
Of Music, and their moaning words repeats:
He hears Ephraim, while he does bemoan
Himself; he tells every word and groan:
His bowels move, he has compassion
Upon his pleasant child, and his dear Son.
Is it not meet that since the Lord takes pleasure
To hear, and to repeat thy suits takes leisure,
That thou with pleasure should persist to cry,
And wait his leisure till he do reply?
Sometimes he answers Prayers e're they are done;
Sometimes he answers e're they be begun:
For he regards our necessity,
And answers our need before we cry:
And sometimes humble, patient expectation
Is a most needful part of supplication.
That man is indiscreet who is offended,
That he is not answered ere his suit be ended.
The needy he will not forget always:
The poor man's hope shall not be lost for ay.
Think it not then a weariness to pray,
To come by this new, true and living way,
With boldness by the Blood of Jesus Christ,
The Son of God, the merciful High Priest,
Who does for ever live to interceed
For sinners sensible of sin and need;
And takes those who come to him by the hand,
And brings them into grace, wherein they stand,
Into the holiest, the Mercy-seat,
That from the God of Grace they Grace may get;
Pardons of sins, cures of all maladies,
And for all wants full suitable supplies;
Light, Life, Strength, Grace to do and persevere,
When they are tempt with pleasure or with fear:
Yea, more than they can ask, or think upon,
Grace, Grace, sure mercies, God's salvation.
Are not then all God's Ordinances sweet,
Since in them he does with his people meet?
Himself, his Mind, his Grace he does impart
To them, and they pour out to him their heart.
Blessed are they the joyful sound who hear,
And to God's Word apply their heart and ear.
It Is Spirit and Life; it light in darkness gives,
And when they faint and fear, it them relieves.
O! blessed are they who are washed in
The Fountain opened for faults and sin:
These Waters cleanse, heal, quicken, and make grow
All things, where they do come and overflow.
And happy are they who by Christ, the King,
Are brought into the house of banqueting:
And happy they who by his Sp'rit are led
Unto his house of Prayer, and there made glad.
If this begun-communion be so sweet,
What will it be when it is in Heaven complete?
As for Christ's Rod and Cross, tho they appear
So sharp and sad, yet follow, do not fear:
That he himself does humble to reprove,
And chasten thee, it is condescending love:
For if thou were without correction,
Thou would a Bastard be, and not a Son.
It Is better to endure Paternal Ire,
Than bear the vengeance of eternal fire.
If thou receive the rod with spirit mild,
Thou may be sure God treats thee as a child.
Why should thou his chastising hand suspect,
Since for thy profit he does thee correct,
That we may partake of his holiness,
And may bring forth the fruits of righteousness?
His fire will not consume thee, but thy sin:
It purges out thy filthy dross and tin.
These Thorns are kindly sharp, which hedge the way,
That thou may not thy lovers find, but say,
I will to my first husband go; I know
That it was better then with me than now.
He is to anger slow, he stirs not all
His wrath, he quickly lets the quarrel fall:
He spares even when he strikes, debates in measure,
Waits to be gracious, gives space and leisure
To those whom he chastises to repent,
Speaks to their heart, to move it to relent:
Despise not the Almighty's chastisement,
And when he thee rebukes, do not faint:
Humble thy self under his mighty hand,
Obey his will, it is madness to withstand.
Turn to his hand that smites, and kiss the rod:
And it is meet that thus thou say to God,
I have chastisement born, I Will not offend:
Have mercy, give me Grace my faults to mend:
What I see not, Lord, teach me, that I may
Know secret sins, and no more go astray.
Blessed is the man who is of God chastised,
And from his Law thus taught and exercised.
Sin brings down rods, rods bring forth fruits of peace,
Christ turns the fruits of sin to means of grace:
God's sovereign Grace makes changes strange of things:
It life from death, sweet from bitter brings;
Peace out of trouble, out of darkness light;
Out of the Eater meet, from grief delight.
What of it self did to destruction tend,
Grace makes it in salvation to end.
As for Christ's Cross, be not at it offended;
For it can never be enough commended:
O! it is a holy, pleasant, stately thing,
To be conformed to him in suffering.
Remember often his often repeated word,
The Servant is not greater than his Lord:
It is enough, and very fair that he
Who Is a Disciple, as his Master be.
Is thy condition mean? can thou not find
Accommodation unto thy mind?
Have thou no harboury, no house, nor hold,
To shelter thee from storms? look and behold,
The First-begotten to the world brought in,
In an Out-house, and not into the Inn.
He, unto whom the Angels worship paid,
Is in a Manger, not a Cradle laid.
Foxes have holes, and each fowl has its nest,
Christ had not whereupon his head to rest.
Want thou wherewith to buy thy daily bread?
Some of their substance to him ministered.
Or art thou from thy Native Soil exiled?
Christ driven was to Egypt when a child.
Art thou reproached? Vile iniquities
Were cast on him, calumnies and lies;
Vile drunkenness, sensual gluttony,
Collusion with Devils, blasphemy,
Madness, deceit, and friendliness to vice,
And all that crafty malice could devise,
Was charged on him, whom they proclaimed abroad,
An Enemy to Coesar and to God.
Do Friends turn Foes, or do they faint and flee
From thee in straits? to Jesus turn thine eye:
His own Disciples did leave him alone:
They to their own were scattered and gone:
He was by Judas traitorously betrayed,
By Peter thrice most shamefully denied.
Art thou a Prisoner, and hardly used,
Pursued to death, and scornfully abused?
Christ as a Thief, was apprehended, bound,
As a mock-King in purple clothed, and crowned
With pricking Thorns, a Reed put in his hand,
As a mock-Scepter; then they do command,
That he hood-wink't, should tell who did him smite.
To show at him as Prophet, their despite,
They spit on him, and scourge him cruelly,
And lead him out upon a Cross to die
A lingering, shameful, painful, cursed death,
On which he bore our sins and divine wrath.
These were the weights that did his soul distress:
His sweat was blood, when bruised in this press.
The Cross, as Christ has left it, we may say
Is light, Christ took its greatest weight away:
He wrath, the bitterness of death drunk up,
And left no vengeance in his peoples cup:
For wrath and death, he love and life puts in,
Which Marab's waters make more sweet than wine.
Take up his burden, it is light and meet,
And drink his cup, it healthful is and sweet.
To bear about the dying of sweet-Jesus
Will not us kill, but quicken, strengthen, ease us.
They Are highly honored who suffer shame
For Jesus sake, and for his glorious Name:
Reproach for Christ, is Riches much more great
Than Egypt's Pleasures, Treasures, Honors, State:
Shame for him honor is, and loss is gain:
In death for him is life, and ease in pain.
When all day long they are killed for his sake,
Like sheep for slaughter, burned at a stake
They Conquerors, and more than Conquerors prove,
Through him who them eternally does love.
Turn thine eyes from the dark side of the Cross,
On which appears dishonor, pain and loss,
And turn upon the lightsome side thine eye,
Where pleasure, gain and glory thou may see.
Christ's own Example will us best direct,
How of the Cross to take a right prospect.
The Son of man is glorified, he said,
And God in him is also glorified.
If God in him thus glorified be,
God shall in him himself straight glorify.
He Glory saw in being crucified,
He saw God by his suffering glorified:
He saw the heavenly glory to ensue:
Keep still this Triple Glory in thy view.
Sigh not then at the Cross, as sad and sorry,
But shout in triumph, Glory, glory, glory.
Live to God's Glory, for his Glory die,
It is thy Glory God to glorify.
If by thy death God glorified be,
Thou shall in Glory live eternally.
They who with Christ do suffer, with him reign,
And bearing palms, eternal triumph sing.
If for the Name of Christ reproached thou be,
The Spirit of God and Glory rests on thee.
These momentary crosses which are light,
Work endless Glory of exceeding weight.
Yet go not from thy way to seek a cross,
Follow thy calling, to God's way keep close:
That Cross which thy wise Lord for thee thinks meet,
Is in thy way, in the great King's High Street:
That thou must take it up, or else go wrong,
Meddling in what does not to thee belong.
If in thy sufferings thou would have delight,
See that thy call be clear, the cause be right:
Take up thy Cross in Christ's Name, and his strength,
That of thy race thou may run all the length.
Pray to be strengthened by his glorious might,
To suffer with all patience and delight.
Tho thou were burned, yet if thou have not
Love, burning will not profit thee a Jot.
Unto thy hungry Enemy give food:
Love those who hate thee, vanquish ill with good:
And pray that those who do impoverish thee,
With the true riches may enriched be:
That they who cause thee wander far abroad,
May from their wandering be reclaimed to God.
Those who from Earth pursue thee till thou die,
Endeavor to draw them to Heaven with thee.
Our blessed Lord, when hanging on the tree,
Prayed for those who did him crucify:
He to his Father for their pardon prayed,
And did say for them all that could be said.
How far was Stephen from leaving of his death
On those who stoned him, witness his last breath:
He kneeled, and cried, this sin, Lord, do not lay
To their charge: Thus in love he slept away.
O lovely blessed sleep! O sure 'twill be
A heavenly thing in love to live and die.
Love is the way to Heaven, love is the flame
In which the soul surmounts the starry frame.
This is the work and life of Saints above,
To love, and loved be; for God is love:
He Is light and love, he freely does impart
Light to the mind, and goodness to the heart.
With his resplendent Glory fill thine eye,
And in his goodness place thou all thy Joy.
Come see and taste, Come, come, and taste and see,
With goodness fill thy heart, with light thine eye.
The Father, Son and Spirit, Persons three,
Who are in Essence one, do call on thee
To come from dolesome darkness unto light,
From ill to good, from sorrow to delight;
From death to life, from guilt to righteousness;
From the vile filth of sin to holiness;
From want to fullness; from weights which thee load,
To rest and ease; from Satan unto God;
From Hell to Heaven, from lusts base drudgery,
To that high service, God to glorify.
Not that we can unto his Glory add;
For it is boundless. He has ever had,
And has, and shall have to Eternity
Perfection infinite, but that poor we,
With mind, heart, mouth, acknowledge and confess
His glory, as he does it express
In all his Works, and in his holy Word,
And in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord:
And that in eating, drinking, in each thing
We do, God's Glory we may still design.
But surely it is wonderfully sweet
To see Gods Glory and man's good unite.
In these same acts by which they glorify
The Lord, they do enjoy his company:
And these same acts which do unite the soul
Unto the Lord, his Glory do extol:
By acting Faith, and hoping in his Word,
They praise the Grace, Truth, Power of the Lord:
By acting Faith, they in their heart receive
The Lord to dwell in them, great peace they have:
Whose mind and heart upon the Lord is staid,
Of evil tidings they are not afraid:
When they themselves most quietly do hide
Under the shade of his wings, and abide
In the most secret place of the most high,
What harm of evil can to them come nigh?
Munition of Rocks does them secure;
Their bread and water are to them made sure:
God with broad Rivers them surrounds, that so
No Ship nor Galley can against them go.
Since in them God is Glory, and a wall
Of sire about them, surely they have all,
Glory within their mind and heart to fill,
A fire without, to guard them from all ill.
How can they but be safe, who have salvation,
For VValls and Bulwarks, for their preservation.
The more they trust, the more they glorify
God, and his wondrous loving kindness see,
Which he to them has greatly magnified
Within a city that is fortified.
No outward force disturbeth their solace,
When they thus guarded, see and taste his grace.
Love does at once the Lord himself embrace,
And glorifies his goodness, love and grace,
While we above all things the Lord do love,
We in our heart set him all things above,
While we desire him, and do in him joy,
We move to him, and God himself enjoy:
Yea, every act whereby we glorify
The Lord, in it we do the Lord draw nigh,
And God to us. Thus are his servants blessed:
For all their service is their interest.
Christ from himself servants sent not away,
His word is come, follow me, with me stay:
If any serve me, let him follow me,
And where I am, there shall my servant be.
Since Christ is foremost, sure the way is right:
Since he is the way, the Leader, and the Light,
The way is safe, take courage, talk no more
Of fear and danger, since God is before:
The way is pleasant, it is a sight most sweet,
To see the steps of Jesus lovely feet;
And to walk in them, in them to walk on,
Since our forerunner in these paths has gone:
Tho he be gone before, yet he is near,
He Is on the front, and also on the rear;
And still on thy right hand thee to uphold:
Yea, in thy heart, to make thee humbly bold.
As he walks in them, this of them is craved,
That they walk in him, as they him received.
It is his promise to be with them still:
That they be still with him, is his good will.
Thus all the service he to them commends,
To Glory, Union, and Communion tends:
Their Master's Service is their interest,
In glorifying God they are truly blessed:
This is thy chief end God to glorify,
And to enjoy him to eternity.
Come to the Mediator Jesus Christ,
In him alone the Lord with man's wellpleas'd.
Come unto God by him, though thou be'st lost,
He will thee save unto the uttermost.
Come, take himself, and take his fullness all;
Deny thy self, follow upon his call.
Follow him fully, follow him with delight;
His yoke is easy, and his burden light:
His holy Ordinances are most sweet,
His Rod is needful, and his Cross is meet:
All service he requires, is reasonable,
All Rods and Crosses needful, seasonaable:
It Is only for a time, if need there be,
That trials come in great variety:
And though they sadning be, yet they are blessed,
And tend to Holiness, Praise, Glory, Rest.
Come, come, thy service all, all thy distress,
Is for God's Glory, and thy Happiness.
Now since by God, the Father, and the Spirit,
Thou art from sin and torments infinite,
Called to come, through Christ, the living way,
To Fellowship with God, which lasts for aye;
Behold, by whom, from what, through whom, to whom
Thou called art, all calls on thee to come:
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; let all who hear,
Say, Come; and let them come, who thirsty are:
Here is Life's Fountain, whosoever will,
Of living water freely take thy fill.
That all who hear, may come, Lord, draw, that we
May come, and run, and follow after thee.
Come with thy Grace and Glory speedily:
Lord Jesus, come. Amen. So let it be.
FINIS.
Twenty Five CONSIDERATIONS OF THE PAINS prepared for SIN After this Life.

WITH A SERMON Preached on Acts VII. 60.

I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, From henceforth, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit; for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them,

Rev. 14.13. LONDON: Printed for Richard Butler, in White-Lion-Court, in
Barbican. 1688.

Twenty Five CONSIDERATIONS OF THE PAINS prepared for SIN After this Life.
I. AMongst all the means which God uses toward the Children of Men, to move
them to this Resolution, whereof I treat, the strongest and most forcible (to
the common sort of men) is the consideration of Punishments prepared by him for
rebellious sinners, and transgressors of his Commandments. Wherefore he uses
this Consideration often, as may appear by all the Prophets, who do nothing
else almost but threaten plagues and destruction to Offenders: And this means
has often times prevailed more than any others, that could be used, by reason
of the Natural Love which we bear toward our selves; and consequently the
Natural Fears we have of our own danger. So we read, that nothing could move
the Ninevites so much as the foretelling them of their imminent destruction.
And St. John the Baptist, John the 5th. Matthew. the 3d.
although he came in a simple and contemptible way, yet preaching unto the people
the terror of Vengeance to come, and that the Axe was now put to the Trees, to
cut for the fire all those which repented not; he moved the very Publicans and
Soldiers to fear, which otherwise are people of very hard metal; who came unto
him upon his terrible Embassage, and asked, what they should do to avoid these
punishments?

II. After then that we have considered of Death, and of God's severe Judgment,
which ensues after Death; and wherein every man has to receive according to
his works in this life, as the Scripture says; it follows, that we consider
also of the punishments which are appointed for them that shall be found faulty
in that account. Hereby at leastwise no other consideration will serve to
induce Christians to this Resolution of serving God: For as I have noted
before, If every man have naturally a Love of himself, and desire to conserve
his own ease, then should he also have fear of peril, whereby he is to fall
into extreme calamity. This St. Bernard expresses excellently, according to
his custom: O man (says he)! if thou have left all shame, which appertains
to so noble a creature as thou art; if thou feel no sorrow, as carnal men do
not, yet lose not fear also, which is found in very beasts. We use to load an
Ass, and weary him out with Labor, and he cares not, because he is an Ass:
But if thou would thrust him into fire, or fling him into the ditch, he
would avoid it as much as he could; for that he loves life and fears death.
Fear thou then, and be not more insensible than a beast: Fear Death, fear
Judgment, fear Hell. This Fear is called the beginning of Wisdom; and not shame
and sorrow; for that the Spirit of fear is more mighty to resist sin, than the
Spirit of shame or sorrow. Wherefore it is said; Remember the end, and thou
shall never sin: That is, Remember the final punishments appointed for sin
after this life.

III. First therefore to speak in General of the punishments reserved for the
Life to come: If the Scriptures did not declare in particular their greatness
unto us, That they are most severe, dolorous, and intolerable: For first, as
God is a God in all his Works; That is to say, great, wonderful, and terrible;
so especially he shows the same in his punishments, being called for that
cause in Scripture, a God of Justice, as also a God of Revenge. Wherefore
seeing all his other Works are full of Majesty, and exceeding our capacities,
we may likewise gather, that his hand in punishment must be wonderful: Also God
himself teaches us to reason in this manner, when he says, And will ye not
then fear me, and tremble before my face, which have put the sand as a stop
unto the sea, and have given the water a commandment never to pass, no, not
when it is most troubled, and the floods most outrageous: As if he should say,
If I am wonderful, and do pass your imaginations in these works of the Sea, and
others, which you see daily, you have cause to fear me, considering that my
punishments are like to be correspondent to the same.

IV. Another conjecture of the great and severe Justice of God, may be the
consideration of his infinite and unspeakable Mercy, the which, as it is the
very Nature of God, and without end or measure, as his Godhead is, so is also
his Justice; and these two are the two arms, as it were, of God, embracing and
kissing the one the other, as the Scripture says: Therefore, as in a man of
this world, if we had the measure of one arm, we might easily conjecture of the
other: so seeing the wonderful examples daily of God's infinite mercy toward
them that repent, we may imagine by the same his severe justice toward them
whom he reserveth to punishment in the next life, and whom for that cause he
calls in the Scriptures, Vessels of his Fury, or Vessels to show his Fury
upon.

V. A Third Reason to persuade us of the greatness of these punishments, may be
the mavelous patience, and long-sufferings of God in this life: As for
example, in that he suffers diverse men, from one sin to another, from one day
to another, from one year to another, from one age to another, to spend (all I
say) in dishonor and despite of his Majesty; adding offense to offense, and
refusing all persuasions, allurements, good inspirations, or other means of
friendship that his mercy can devise, to offer for their amendment: And what
man in the world could suffer this? Or what mortal heart can show such
patience? But now if all this should not be requited with severity of
punishment in the world to come upon the obstinate, it might seem against the
Law of Justice and Equity, and one arm of God might seem longer than the other.
Saint Paul teaches this Reason in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 2.
where he says, Do thou not know, that the benignity of God is used to bring
to repentance? And thou by thy hard and impenitent heart, do hoard up
vengeance unto thy self in the day of wrath, and appearance of God's just
judgment, which shall restore to every man according to his works. He uses
here the words of hoarding up of vengeance, to signify, as a covetous man does
hoard up money to money daily, to make his heap great, so the unrepentant
finner does hoard up fin to fin; and God, on the contrary side, hoardeth up
vengeance to vengeance, until his measure be full, to restore in the measure
against measure, as the Prophet says; and to pay us home, according to the
multitude of our abominations. This God meant, when he said to Abraham, that
the iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full up: Also in the Revelation unto
St. John the Evangelist, when he uses this conclusion of that book: He that
does evil, let him do more evil; and he that lives in filth, let him yet
become more filthy: For behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to
render to every one according to his deeds. By which words God signifies, that
his bearing and tolerating with sinners in this life, is an Argument of his
greater severity in the life to come; which the Prophet David also declares,
when talking of a careless sinner, he says, The Lord shall scoff at him,
foreseeing that his day shall come. This day, no doubt, is to be understood the
day of account, and punishment after this life: For so does God more at large
declare himself in these words: Ezekiel. 7th.
And thou Son of man, this says thy Lord God, The end is come; now (I say) the
end is come upon thee: And I will show in thee my fury, and will judge thee
according to thy ways: I will lay against thee all thine abominations; and mine
eye shall not spare thee, neither will I take any mercy upon thee; but I will
put thy own ways upon thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. Behold,
afflictions comes on; the end is come, the end, I say, is come; it has
watched against thee, and behold it is come: the day of slaughter is at hand:
crushing is now come upon thee: Shortly will I pour out my wrath upon thee, and
I will fill my fury in thee, and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and I
will lay all thy wickedness upon thee: mine eye shall not pity thee, but I will
lay thy way upon thee, and thine abominations in the midst of thee, and thou
shall know that I am the Lord that strikes. Hitherto is the speech of God
himself.

VI. Seeing then now we understand in general, that the punishments of God in
the Life to come, are most certain to be great and severe to all such as fall
into them; for which cause the Apostle says, It is a fearful and horrible
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Let us consider somewhat in
particular, what manner of pains and punishments they shall be.

VII. And first of all touching the place of punishment appointed for the
Damned, commonly called Hell. The Scripture in diverse Languages, uses diverse
Names, but all tending to express the grievousness of punishment there
suffered, as in Latin it is called Infernum, a place beneath, or under ground
(as most of the Old Fathers do interpret): But whether it be under ground, or
no, most certain it is, that it is a place most opposite to Heaven, which is
said to be above. And this Name is used, to signify the miserable suppressing,
and hurling down of the damned, to be trodden under the feet, not only of God,
but of good men also, for ever: For so says the Scripture: Behold the day of
the Lord comes, Mal. 4.
burning like a furnace, and proud and wicked men shall be as straw to that
furnace, and you that fear my name shall tread them down, and they shall be as
burnt ashes under the soles of your feet in that day. And this shall be one of
the greatest miseries that can happen to the proud and stout Potentates of the
World, to be thrown with such contempt down, and to be trodden under feet of
them whom they so much despised in this world.

VIII. The Hebrew word which the Scripture uses for Hell is (Seol), which
signifies a great Ditch or Dungeon: In which sense it is called in the
Apocalypse, The lake of the wrath of God: And again, A poole burning with fire
and brimstone. In Greek the Scripture uses Three words for the same place: the
first is (Clades), used in the Gospel, which (as Plutarch notes) signifies a
place where no light is; the second is (Zophoz), in St. Peter, which signifies
darkness it self: in which sense it is also called of Job, a dark land
overwhelmed with deadly obscurity: Also in the Gospel, utter darkness. The
third Greek word is (Tartaros), used also by St. Peter: which word being
derived of the Verb, Tarasso, which signifies to terrify, trouble and vex,
imports an horrible confusion of Tormentors in that place, even as Job says
of it, There dwells no order, but everlasting horror.

IX. The Chaldee word, which is also used in Hebrew, and translated to the
Greek, is (Gehenna), first of all used by Christ for the place of them which
are damned, as St. Jerome notes upon the Tenth Chapter of St. Matthew's
Gospel. And this word being compounded of Gee and Hinnom, signifies a Valley
nigh to Jerusalem, called, the Valley. Hinnom; in which the old idolatrous Jews
were wont to bury alive their own children, in the honor of the Devil, and to
sound with Trumpets, Timbrels, and other loud Instruments, whilst they were
doing thereof, that their childrens Voices might not be heard; which place was
afterward used for the receipt of all filthiness, as Dung, dead Carrions, and
the like: And it is most probable, that our Savior used this word, above all
other, for Hell, thereby to signify the miserable burning of Souls in that
place, the pitiful clamours and cries of the tormented, the confused and
barbarous noise of the tormentors, together with the most loathsome filthiness
of the place, which is otherwise described in the Scripture, by the Names of
Addars, Snakes, Cockatrices, Scorpions, and other venomous creatures, as shall
be afterward declared.

X. Having declared the Names of this place and thereby also in some part, the
Nature; i^ remains now, that we confider, what manner of pains men suffer
there. For consideration whereof, we must note, That as Heaven and Hell are
contrary, assigned to contrary persons, for contrary causes; so have they in
all respects, contrary properties, conditions, and effects, in such sort, as
whatsoever is spoken of the Felicity of the one, may serve to infer the
contrary of the other, as when St. Paul says, No eye has seen, nor ear heard,
nor heart conceived the Joys that God has prepared for them that shall be
saved, we may infer, that the pains of the damned must be as great again, when
the Scripture says, the felicity of them in Heaven, is a perfect felicity,
containing omne bonum, all goodness; so that no one kind of pleasure can be
imagined, which they have not.

We must think on the contrary part, that the misery of the damned must be also
a perfect misery, containing all afflictions that may be, without wanting any:
So that as the happiness of the good is infinite and universal, so also the
calamity of the wicked is infinite and universal. Now in this life all the
miseries and pains which fall upon men, are but particular, and not universal:
As for Example, We see one man pained in his Eyes, another in his Back, which
particular pains, notwithstanding, sometimes are so extreme, as life is not
able to resist them, and a man would suffer them long for the gaining of many
Worlds together: But suppose a man were now tormented in all the parts of his
body at once, as in his Head, his Eyes, his Tongue, his Teeth, his Throat, his
Stomach, his Belly, his Back, his Heart, his Sides, his Thighs, and in all the
Joints of his Body: Besides, suppose (I say) he were most cruelly tormented
with extreme pains in all these parts together, without ease or intermission,
what thing could be more miserable than this? What sight more lamentable? If
thou should see a Dog lie so in the street, so afflicted, I know thou
could not but take compassion upon him. Well then, consider what difference
there is between abiding these pains for a Week, or for all Eternity; in
suffering them upon a soft Bed, or upon a burning Gridiron, and boiling
Furnace; among a man's Friends, comforting him, or among the Furies of Hell
whipping him. Consider this (I say), gentle Reader, and if thou would take a
great deal of labor, rather than abide the one in this life, be content to
sustain a little pain, rather than to incur the other in the life to come.

XI. But to consider these things yet further, not only all these parts of the
body, which have been instruments to sin, shall be tormented together, but also
every-sense, both external and internal, for the same cause, shall be afflicted
with his particular torment, contrary to the Object, wherein it took most
pleasure and delight in this World: As for Example; The Eyes were afflicted
with the ugly and fearful fight of Devils, the delicate Ears with the horrible
noise of the damned Spirits, the nice smell with poisoned stench of brimstone,
the dainty taste with most ravenous hunger and thirst; and all the sensible
parts of the body with burning fire. Again, the Imagination shall be tormented
with the apprehension of pains present and to come, the Memory with the
remembrance of pleasures past, the Understanding with consideration of the
felicity lost, and the misery now to come on. O poor Christian! what will thou
do amidst the multitude of so grievous calamities.

XII. It is a wonderful matter, and able, as one Father says, to make a
reasonable man go out of his wits, to consider what God has revealed unto us
in the Scriptures, of the dreadful circumstances of this punishment; and yet to
see how little wretchless men of this world do fear it. For first, touching the
universality, verity and greatness of the pain, not only the Reasons before
alleged, but also diverse Considerations in the Scriptures do declare: As where
it is said of the damned, They shall be tormented day and night. Rev. 20.14.
And again, Rev. 20.
Give her torment, speaking of Babylon in Hell, by which is signified, that the
pains in Hell are not exercised for chastisement, but for torment of the
parties: And torments commonly, we see in this world to be as great and extreme
as the Wit of a man can reach to devise. Imagine then, Luke 16.
when God shall lay his head to devise torments, as he has done in Hell, what
manner of torments will they be.

XIII. If creating an Element here for our comfort, I mean the fire, he could
create the same so terrible, as it is in such sort, as a man would not hold his
only hand in it, to gain a Kingdom; what a fire think you has he provided for
Hell, which is not created for comfort, but for torment of the parties? Our
fire has many differences from that, and therefore is truly said of the holy
Fathers, to be but a painted and feigned fire, in respect of that: for our fire
was made to comfort us, as I have said, and that to torment: Our fire has need
to be fed continually with wood, or else it goes out; that burns
continually, without feeding: Ours gives light, that gives none: Ours is out
of his natural place, and therefore shifteth to ascend, and to get from us, as
we see; but this is in the natural place where it was created; and therefore it
abides there perpetually: Ours consumes the matter laid in it, and so quickly
dispatcheth the pain; that tormenteth, but consumes not, to the end, the pain
may be everlasting: Our fire is extinguished with water, and abated greatly by
the coolness of the Air about it: that has no such abatement or qualification.
Finally, what a strange and incredible kind of fire that is, as appears by
these words of our Savior so often repeated? There shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Weeping is to be referred to the effect of extreme burning
in the fire; for that the torment of scalding and burning enforces Tears
sooner than any other torment, as appears in them which upon a sudden do put
an hot thing into their mouth, or scald any other part of their body; and
gnashing of their teeth, or chattering, at least, as every man knows,
proceeds of great and extreme cold. Imagine then what fire this is, which
has such extreme effects both of heat and cold. O mighty Lord, what a strange
God art thou! how wonderful and terrible in all thy works and inventions! how
bountiful art thou to those that love and fear thee! how severe to them that
contemn thy Commandments! Have thou devised a way how they that lie burning in
the lake of fire and brimstone, shall be tormented with extreme cold? What
understanding of man can conceive how this may be? But thy Judgments, O Lord,
are a depth without bottom; and therefore I leave this to thine own providence,
praising thee eternally for the same.

XIV. Besides these general pains, common to all that be in that place, the
Scripture signifies also, that there shall be particular torments, peculiar
both in quality and quantity to the sins and offenses of each offender: for to
that end says the Prophet, Isa. 17. and Isa. 28. to God: Thou will judge in
measure against measure. And God says of himself, I will exercise judgment in
weight and justice in measure. And this is the meaning of all those threats of
God to sinners, where he says, he will pay them home according to their
particular works, and according to the inventions of their own hearts. In this
sense it is said in Revel. 18. of Babylon now thrown down into the Lake; Look
how much she has glorified her self, and has lived in delights, so much
torment and affliction give her. Whereof the holy Fathers have gathered the
variety of torments that shall be in that place, says old Ephraim: As if the
Adulterer should have one kind of torment, the Murderer another, the Thief
another, the Drunkard another, the Liar another: As if the proud man should be
trodden under feet, to recompense his pride, the Glutton suffer inestimable
hunger, the Drunkard extreme thirst, the delicious mouth filled up with gall,
and the delicate body feared with hot burning Irons.

XV. The Holy Ghost signifies such a thing, when he says in the Scriptures of
the wicked worldling, His bread in his belly shall be turned into Gall of
Serpents; Job 20.
he shall be constrained to spue out again the riches which he has devoured:
nay, God shall pull them out of his belly again: He shall be constrained to
suck the Gall of Cockatrices, and the Tongue of an Adder shall kill him; he
shall pay sweetly for all that ever he has done, and yet shall not be
consumed; but shall suffer according to the multitude of all his devices: utter
darkness lies in wait for him, and fire which needs no kindling shall eat
him up. This is the wicked man's portion from God. By which words, and such
like, is plainly showed, that worldlings shall receive, as it were, particular
and proper torments, for their gluttony, for their delicate fare, for their
extortion, and the like; which torments shall be greater than any worldly
Tongue can express, as may appear by the vehement and horrible words which the
Holy Ghost here uses, to insinuate the same.

XVI. Besides this, the Scripture shows unto us, not only the universality,
particularity, and severity of these pains, but also the straitness thereof,
without aid or help, ease or comfort, when he says, we shall be cast in bound
hand and feet: For it is some kind of comfort in this world, to be able to
resist or strive against our afflictions: but here we must lie still, and
suffer all. Again, when he says, Clausa est Janua, the Gate is shut: that is,
the Gate of all Mercy, all Pardon, of all Ease, of all Intermission, of all
Comfort, is shut up from Heaven, from Earth, from the Creator, and from
Creatures, insomuch as no consolation is ever to be hoped for any more, as in
all the miseries of this life there is always some. This straitness is most
lively expressed in that dreadful Parable of the Rich Glutton in Hell, who was
driven to that necessity, as he desired that Lazarus might dip the top of his
finger in water, to cool his Tongue, in the midst of that fire wherein he says
he was; and yet could he not obtain it. A small refreshing it seems it would
have been unto him, if he had obtained, the same: but, to show the straitness
of the place, it was denied him. O you that live in the sinful wealth of the
world, consider but this one Example of God's severity, and be afraid. This man
was in great Royalty a little before, and nothing regarded the extreme misery
that Lazarus was in: But would he give a thousand worlds, if he had them, for
one drop of water to cool his Tongue. What demand could be less than this? He
durst not ask to be delivered thence, or to have his torments diminished, or to
ask a great Vessel of water to refresh his whole body therein, but only so much
as would stick on the top of a man's finger, to cool his Tongue. To what need
was this man driven, that was so rich before! What a great imagination had he
of the force of one drop of water! To what a pitiful change was his Tongue now
come unto, that was wont to be so diligently applied with all kinds of pleasant
Liquors! O that one man could take example by another. Either this is true, or
else the Son of God is a Liar. And then, what men are we, that seeing our
selves in danger of this misery, do not seek with more diligence to avoid the
same?

XVII. In respect of these extremities, and strait dealings of God, in denying
all comfort and consolation at this day, the Scripture says, that men shall
fall into rage, fury, and utter impatience, blaspheming God, and cursing the
day of their Nativity; with eating their own Tongues for grief, and desiring
the Rocks and Mountains to come and fall on them, to end them of their pains.

XVIII. Now if we add to this the eternity and everlasting continuance of these
torments, we shall see that it increases the matter greatly: for in this world
there is no torment so great, but that time either takes away, or diminishes
the same: for either the tormentor, or the tormented dies, or some occasion or
other happens to alter or mitigate the matter; but here is no such hope or
comfort: but, says the Scriptures, they shall be tormented for ever in a pool
burning with fire and brimstone: As long as God is God, so long shall they
burn; there shall neither the tormentor or the tormented die, but both live
eternally, for the eternal misery of the parties to be punished.

XIX. Oh! says one of the Fathers, in a godly Meditation, if a sinner damned
in Hell, did know that he had to suffer those torments there no more thousands
of years than there be Sands in the Sea, and Grasspiles on the ground, or no
more thousands of millions of Ages, than there be Creatures in Heaven and
Earth, he would greatly rejoice thereof; for then he would comfort himself, at
the least, with this Cogitation, that once the matter would have an end: But
now, says this good man, this word never breaks his heart when he thinks
on it: And after an hundred thousand millions of Worlds there suffered, he has
as far to his end as he had at the first day of his entrance to these torments.
Consider (good Christians) what a length an hour would seem to thee, if thou
had but to hold thy hand in fire and brimstone only during the space
thereof. We see if a man be grievously sick, tho he be laid on a very soft bed,
yet one Night seems a long time unto him; he turns and tosseth himself from
side to side, telling the Clock, and counting the hours as they pass, which
seems to him a whole day: And if a man should say unto him, that he were to
abide that pain but seven years together, he would go well nigh to despair for
grief. Now if one Night seem so long and tedious to him that lies on a good
soft bed, and afflicted only with a little Ague, what will the lying in fire
and brimstone do, when he shall know evidently, that he shall never have end
thereof. O (dear Brother)! the satiety of continuance is loathsome, even in
things that are not evil of themselves; if thou should always be bound to
eat one meat, it would be displeasant to thee in the end; if thou should be
bound to sit still all thy life in one place, without moving, it would be
grievous unto thee, albeit no man did torment thee in that place: What then
will it be to lie eternally; that is, world without end, in most exquisite
torments? Is it any way tolerable? What Judgment then, what Wit, what
Discretion is there left in man, which makes no more account of this matter
than they do.

XX. I might here add another circumstance which the Scripture adds, to wit,
that all these torments shall be in darkness, a thing dreadful of it self to
man's Nature: For there is not the stoutest man in the world, if he be found
himself alone, and naked, in extreme darkness, and should hear a noise of
Spirits coming toward him, but he would fear, albeit he felt never a lash from
them on his body. I might also add another circumstance that the Prophet
adds, which is, that God and good men shall laugh at them that day, which
will be no small affliction: For as to be moaned by a man's friends in time of
adversity, is some comfort, so to be laughed at, especially by him who only may
help him, is a great and intolerable increase of his mifery.

XXI. And now all this that I have spoken of hitherto, is but one part of a
damned man's punishment only, called by Divines, Poena Sensus, the pain of
sense or feeling; that is, the pain or punishment sensibly inflicted on the
soul and body. But yet besides this, there is another part of punishment,
called Poena damni, the pain of loss or damage, which, by all Learned men's
Opinions, is either greater, or no less than the former. And this is the
infinite loss which a damned man has, in being excluded for ever and ever from
the sight of his Creator, and his Glory, which sight only being sufficient to
make happy and blessed all them that are admitted unto it, must needs be an
infinite misery to the damned man, to lack that eternally: And therefore this
is put as one of the chiefest and first plagues to be laid upon him: Isa. 26.
Let the wicked man be taken away to Hell, to the end he may not see the Glory
of God. And this loss contains all other losses and damages in it, as the
loss of Eternal Bliss and Joy (as I have said), of Eternal Glory, of Eternal
Society with the Angels, and the like; which losses, when a damned man
considers (as he cannot but consider them still), he takes more grief
thereof (as Divines do hold) than by all the sensible torments that he abides
beside.

XXII. Whereunto belongs the Worm of Conscience, in Scripture so called: For as
a Worm lies eating and gnawing wood, wherein she lies, so shall the remorse
of our Conscience lie within us, griping and tormenting us for ever. And this
worm of remorse shall principally consist in bringing to our minds all the
means and causes of our present extreme calamities, as our negligences, whereby
we lost the felicity which other men have gotten. And at every one of these
Considerations this worm shall give us a deadly bite, even unto the heart; as
when it shall lay before us all the occasions that we had suffered to avoid
this misery wherein we are now fallen, and to have gotten the glory which we
have lost. How easy it had been to have done it! how nigh were we oftentimes
to resolve our selves to do it, and yet how ungraciously we left off that
Cogitation again! How many times we were foretold of this danger, and yet how
little care and fear we took in the same? How vain the worldly trifles were
wherein we spent our time, and for which we lost Heaven, and fell into this
intolerable misery? How are they exalted whom we thought Fools in this world,
and how are we now proved Fools, and laughed at, which thought our selves wise.
These things (I say), and a thousand more, being laid before us by our own
Conscience, shall yield us infinite grief, for that it is now too late to amend
them. This grief is called the Worm or remorse of our Conscience, which worm
shall enforce men more to weep and howl, than any torment else, considering how
negligently, foolishly, and vainly, they are come into those insupportable
torments, and that now there is no more time to redrefs their Errors. These are
the Cogitations of the damned in Hell.

XXIII. Now only is the time of weeping, for these men, and their lamenting but
all in vain. Now shall they begin to fret and fume, and marvel at themselves,
saying, Where were our Wits, where was our Understanding, where was our
Judgment, when we followed vanities, and contemned these things? This is the
talk of sinners in Hell. Says the Scripture, What has our pride, or what has
the glory of Riches profited us? they are all now vanished, now like a shadow:
We have wearied our selves in the way of iniquity and perdition, but the way of
the Lord we have not known. This, I say, must be that Everlasting Song of the
damned worm eaten Conscience in Hell. Mark, good Reader, Eternal Repentance
without profit, whereby we shall be brought to such desperation as the
Scripture notes; as he shall turn into fury against himself, tear his own
flesh, rent his own soul, if it were possible, and invite the Fiends of Hell to
torment him, seeing he has so beastly behaved himself in this world, as not to
provide in time for this principal matter. O! if he could have another life to
live in this world again, how would he pass it over! with what diligence, with
what severity! But it is not lawful: We only which are yet alive have that
singular benefit, if we know it, or would resolve our selves to make the most
of it: one of these days we shall be past it also, and shall not recover it
again; no, not one hour, if we would give a thousand worlds for the same, as
indeed the damned would do, if they might. Let us now therefore so use the
benefit of our present time, as when we are past hence, we have not need to
wish our selves here again.

XXIV. Now is the time we may avoid all; now is the time we may put our selves
out of danger of these matters (I say), now, if we resolve our selves out of
hand; for we know not what shall become of us to morrow: It may be to morrow
our hearts will be as hard and careless of these things as they have been
heretofore, and as Parcab's heart after Moses's departure from him. O that he
had resolved himself thoroughly whilst Moses was with him, how happy had he
been! If the Rich Glutton had taken the time while he was in prosperity, how
blessed a man had he been! He was foretold of his misery, Luke 16.
as we are now by Moses and the Prophets, as Christ signifies; but he would
not hear. Afterward he was in such admiration of his own Folly, that he would
have had Lazarus sent from Abraham's bosom unto his brethren, to warn them of
his success: But Abraham told him it was bootless; for they would not have
believed Lazarus, but rather have persecuted him as a Liar, and defamer of
their honorable Brother's death, if he should have come and told them of his
torments: Indeed, so would the wicked of this world do now, if one should come
and tell them, that their Parents and Friends were damned in Hell, for such and
such things, and do beseech them to look better to their Lives, to the end,
that their coming, they do not increase the others pains, for being some cause
of their damnation. (for this is only the cause of care which the damned have
toward the living, and not for any love they now bear them) If (I say) such a
message should come from Hell to the flourishing sinners in this World, would
not they laugh at it? Would not they persecute eagerly the parties that should
bring such news? What then can God devise to do for the saving of these men?
What way, what means may he take, when neither Warning nor Example of others,
nor Threats, nor Exhortations will do any good? We know, or may know, that
leading the life that we do, we cannot be saved; We know, or ought to know,
that many before us have been damned for less matters; We know, and cannot
choose but know, that we must shortly die, and receive our selves as they have
received, living as they did, or worse. We see, by this laid down before us,
that the pains are intolerable, and yet Eternal which do expect us: for the
same, we confess them most miserable, that for any pleasure or commodity of
this world, are now fallen into those pains. What then should let us then to
resolve to dispatch our selves quickly of all impediments; to break violently
from all bonds and chains of this wicked world, that do let us from this true
and zealous work and service of God? Why should we sleep one Night in sin,
seeing that might be our last Night, and so the everlasting cutting off all
hope for the life to come.

XXV. Resolve thy self therefore, my dear Brother, if thou be wise, and clear
thy sell from this imminent danger, while God is willing to receive thee, and
moves thee there unto by these means, as he did the rich man by Moses and the
Prophets, while he was yet in his prosperity. Let his Example be often before
thine eyes, and consider it thoroughly, and it shall do thee good. God is a
wonderful God, and to show his patience and infinite goodness, he wooeth us in
this life, seeks unto us, and lays himself (as it were) at our feet, to
move us unto our own good, to win us, to draw us, and save us from perdition.
But after this life he alters his course of dealing, he turns over the
leaf, and changes his style, of a Lamb he becomes a Lion to the wicked, and
of a Savior a just and severe punisher. What can be said or done more to move
us, that is forewarned, and sees his own danger before his face, and yet is
not stirred, and made more wary, or fearful thereby, but notwithstanding, will
come, or slide into the same, may well be pitied, but surely by no means can be
helped, making himself incapable of remedies that may be used.

FINIS.
A SERMON.
Acts VII. 60. And when he had said this he fell asleep.


THese words contain in them the happy closure and upshot of Stephen's life,
wherein we have Three Particulars:

First, The Person that fell asleep.

Secondly, The Speech he made when he fell asleep.

Thirdly, What he did when he had finished his Speech.

First, We have the Person that fell asleep, and that was Stephen. He was a man
full of Faith, and full of the Holy Ghost, as you may see, Acts 6.5. He was the
first Martyr that ever suffered for the Cause of Christ. Hence I might gather
this Doctrine, viz.

That the best of men are subject to sudden and violent Deaths.

Stephen, that was full of the Holy Ghost, was stoned to death, and John the
Baptist, that was full of the Holy Ghost from the very Womb, was beheaded;
Peter was crucified, and so was Andrew; Isaiah was sawed asunder, Jeremiah was
stoned, and Zacharias was slain between the Temple and the Altar. But I shall
pass this.

The Second part of the Text is the Speech that Stephen made when he fell
asleep; Hcc dicte obdormivit: That is, when he had finished his Prayer, he fell
asleep. Hence observe this, That it is an excellent way to close up our Life
with prayer. To die praying is a most Christian way of dying; the stoned
Stephen calling upon God. After this manner Christ died: he prayed, Father,
into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and having thus said, he gave up the Ghost.
This he did, that it might be a pattern to all Christians. Prayer is a
necessary duty at all times, but especially when we are a dying: And that for
these Reasons:

First, Because when we are to die, we have most need of God's help: for then
the Devil is most busy, and we most weak.

Secondly, Because when we are to die, we are to beg the greatest boon of God
that is, That he would receive us into his Heavenly Kingdom. Now Prayer is the
chief means to obtain this mercy: for it is Porta Caeli, Clavis Paradici, the
Gate of Heaven, a Key to let us into Paradise. Therefore we have great reason
to die praying.

Thirdly, Because when a Saint of God is dying, he is then to take his last
farewell of Prayer. In Heaven there is no praying, but all thanksgiving: There
is no need in Heaven, therefore no praying in Heaven now, a Saint of God being
to take his leave of prayer, when he is to die, therefore it is fit to die
praying.

I beseech you remember this pattern in the Text, St. Stephen died calling upon
God. Let us die praying, as that Emperor said, Oportes Imperatorem stantem
mori. So may I say, Oportet Christianum mori precantem; It behooves a Christian
to die praying.

Quest. But what was the Substance of Stephen's prayer.

Ans. He prayed for himself, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit, ver. 59. Secondly,
He prayed for his persecutors; Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, ver. 60.

I will not enter upon this part of the Text, for it would swallow up all my
time: Therefore I shall wave it, and come to the Third part, which is that,
that by God's assistance I purpose to speak unto, to wit, what Stephen did when
he had finished his Prayer: When he had said this, he fell asleep; that is, he
died. Behold here the Magnanimity, the Piety, and the Christian Courage of
Stephen: The people were stoning of him, and gnashing their Teeth upon him: and
the good man dies with as much quietness of mind as if he had died on his bed:
He fell asleep while they were stoning him; while he died he prayed, and while
he prayed he died.

But what made Stephen die thus quietly? Read the 55th Verse, and you shall see
the Reason of it: Being full of the Holy Ghost, he looked up steadfastly into
Heaven, and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
This made him die with such a sweet, quiet, and calm Temper; he saw Jesus
Christ standing at the Right Hand of God, ready to receive his Soul, and that
made him to die with such an extraordinary quietness of mind.

Death in Scripture, especially the death of God's Children, is often compared
to a sleep: It is said of David, 1 Kings 2.10. that he slept with his Fathers.
And it is said, 1 These. 4.3. I would not have you ignorant concerning them that
are asleep; that is, concerning them that are dead. And 1 Cor 11.50. For this
cause many are weakly and sick among you, and many sleep; that is, many die.
This Expression is a Metaphorical Expression, and will afford us many rare and
precious Instructions: And therefore, the Grace of God assisting me, I desire
to spend the rest of the time in opening this Metaphor.

The Doctrine is this, viz. That when a child of God dies, though his death be
never so unnatural and violent, yet it is nothing but a falling asleep. Or, A
Child of God, though stoned to death, though burnt to ashes, though it be never
so violent, or unnatural, is nothing but a falling asleep: When he had said
this, he fell asleep.

Somnus est mortis Imago; Sleep is the Image of Death. There are many notable
resemblances betwixt sleep and death, some of which I shall speak of at this
time.

First, Sleep is common to all men: no man can live without sleep: A man may
live long without meat, but no man can live long without sleep. So it is true
with death; Death is common too: It is appointed for all men once to dis: and
therefore David says, he was to go the way of all flesh. Statutum est omnibus
semel mori: omnibus est calcanda semel Lethivia: All men must sleep the sleep
of Death, or else be changed, which is a metaphorical death.

Secondly, As sleep arises from the Vapors that ascend from the Stomach to
the Head, and tie the Senses, and hinder their Operations; so Death came into
the World by Adam's eating the Forbidden Fruit, and by the poysonful Vapor of
sin, that brought death upon him, and all his Posterity: By one man, sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned, Romans 5.12. Had Adam never sinned, Adam should never have died:
But, in illo die, said God; But in that day thou eatest the forbidden fruit,
thou shall die the death. Sin brings omni modam mortem, all kinds of death; it
brings death temporal, death spiritual, and death eternal. Now because all men
are poisoned with the poison of sin, therefore all men must sleep of the sleep
of death: It is sin that has poisoned all mankind.

Thirdly, As a man when he goes to sleep, puts off his Clothes, and goes
naked into bed; so it is with us when we come to die: We came naked into the
World, and naked we must return; As we brought nothing with us into the World,
so we must carry nothing with us out of the World: And therefore Death in
Scripture is called nothing else but an uncloathing of our selves, as 2 Cor.
5.4. Death to a Child of God, is nothing but the putting off of his Clothes:
The Body of man is Animae and vestimentum; it is the Soul's clothing: and
Death is nothing else but the uncloathing of the Soul: It is just like a man
going to bed, and putting of his clothes. St. Peter calls it, the putting off
of our earthly Tabernacle, 2 Peter 1.14. Our Bodies are the Souls Tabernacles,
and death is the putting off of this Tabernacle.

Beloved, when we come to die, we shall be stripped naked of Three things:

First, We shall be stripped naked of all our Worldly Honor, Riches and
Greatness.

Secondly, We shall be stripped naked of our Bodies.

And, Thirdly, Which is above all, we shall be stripped naked of our sins, and
that is the happiness of a child of God; he shall put off not only his mortal
body, but the body of sin.

Fourthly, In the Fourth place, observe, As no man knows the time when he
falls asleep, a man falls asleep before he is aware; so no man can tell the
certain time when he must die. There is nothing so certain as that we must die,
nothing so uncertain as the time when we shall die: Death comes suddenly, even
as sleep comes on a man before he is aware.

Fifthly, Observe, as Children and Infants, because they do not know the
benefit of sleep, are very loath to go to bed; yea, many times the Mother is
fain to whip the Child to bed: even so it is with most of God's People, because
they do not study the benefit of death: That death puts an end to all our
miseries and sins, and opens a door to let us into everlasting happiness, and
that we shall never see God or Christ until we die. I say, because God's People
do not study the benefit of death, therefore they are like to little children,
loath to die, Job 18.14.
loath to go to bed; and therefore Death is called, the King of Terrors. Death
is terrible to many of God's Children, because they are but Infants in Grace,
and because they do not know the benefits of death.

Sixthly, Observe, as when a man is fast asleep, he is free from cares and
troubles. Let it thunder, as it thundered not long since, as you know, yet a
man that is fast asleep, he hears it not. Let the House be on fire while the
man is asleep, he sees it not, neither is he troubled at it: So it is with the
death of God's Children; When God's Children sleep the sleep of death, they are
free from the thunders of this World, and from all cares and troubles: they go
to their Graves as to their Beds, and rest in quietness, and are not sensible
of any troubles that are in this World; for Abraham knows us not, Isa. 63.16.
so 2 Kings 22.20. Thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, and thy eyes
shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place. When a Child of
God sleeps the sleep of death, he does not feel, nor is he sensible of any of
the calamities or sad providence of God upon the Earth.

Seventhly, When a man goes to sleep, he goes to sleep but for a certain
time; in the morning he awakes out of his sleep: So it is with the sleep of
death; and therefore death is called a sleep, because we must all awake in the
morning of Resurrection. We are in the Grave as in our Beds, and when the
Trumpet of God, and the voice of the Archangel shall sound, we shall all arise
out of our Graves as out of our Beds: Death is but a sleep for a certain time.

Eighthly, Sleep is a great refreshing to those that are weary, and sick; and
when the sick man awakes, he is more lively and cheerful than he was before he
fell asleep; and therefore sleep is called, Medicus laborum redintegratio
virium, recreator corporum, the great Physician of the sick Body, the renewing
of man's Spirits, the reviver of the weary Body. And so it is with death: When
God's People awake out of the sleep of death, they shall be more active for God
than ever they were before. When you lie down in the Grave, you shall lie down
with mortal Bodies, as 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. It is sown a mortal body, but it shall
rise up an immortal body; it is sown in dishonor, but it shall rise up in
honor; it is sown a natural body, but it shall rise up a spiritual body.

Nithly, As in the morning when we rise out of our Beds, we then put on our
clothes, so in the morning of the glorious Resurrection, we shall put on a
glorious Body, like to the glorious Body of Jesus Christ: We shall put on
Stolam Immortalitatis, the Garment of Immortality.

Tenthly, As no man when he lies down to sleep, knows the direct time when
he shall awake, so no man can tell when the Resurrection shall be. They do but
cozen you, who say, That the general Resurrection shall be such or such a year:
For as no man can know the minute when he shall awake out of his natural sleep,
no more can any man know when we shall arife from the sleep of death.

Eleventhly, As it is a very easy thing to awake a man out of sleep, it is but
stirring of him, and you will awake him quickly; so it is with the sleep of
death: It is as easy for Jesus Christ to awake us out of the sleep of death,
as it is for you or me to awake a man out of his sleep in Bed: Nemo nostrum tam
facile excitat dormientem de lecto, quam Christus jacentem in Sepulchro.

Twelfthly, As when a man rises in the morning, tho he has slept many hours;
nay, suppose he could sleep twenty years together, yet notwithstanding when he
awakes, these twenty years will seem to be but as one hour unto him: So it will
be in the day of Judgment, all those that are in their Graves, when they awake,
it will be tanquam somnus unius horae, as the sleep of one hour unto them.

Lastly, And most especially, as sleep seizes only upon the Body, and the
outward Senses, but does not seize upon the Soul. The Soul of man is oftentimes
most busy when the man is asleep.

And God has heretofore revealed most glorious things to his children in
dreams, when they have been asleep: God appeared unto Abraham, and many others,
in dreams. The Body sleeps, but the Soul awakes. So it is with the sleep of
death; it is the Body that dies, but the Soul does not die. There are some men
that are not afraid to teach you, that the Soul sleeps as well as the Body; and
that when the Body dies, and falls asleep, the Soul likewise continues in a
dull Lethargy: Veternoso somno correptus: neither capable of joy nor sorrow
till the Resurrection.

Beloved, this is very uncomfortable, and a very false Doctrine. They endeavor
to prove it from my Text: They say, That when Stephen died, he fell asleep. It
is true, in regard of his Body, he fell asleep, but his Soul did not fall
asleep: That which was stoned fell asleep, which was his Body only; for when he
was stoning, he saw Jesus Christ standing ready to receive his Soul into
Heaven: Lord Jesus, says he, receive my spirit. Stephen's Soul could not be
stoned, tho his Body was stoned. So when Jesus Christ was crucified, his Soul
was not crucified, I mean, when his Body was killed. Indeed he did endure
torments in his Soul, which made him cry out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? But yet his Soul did not die. So when Stephen died, his Soul went
to Christ. It is true, when a child of God dies, the Soul goes to sleep. How is
that? The Soul goes to sleep in a Scripture sense; that is, it goes to rest in
Ahraham's Bosom. O blessed Sleep! it goes to rest in the Embraces of God; it
goes into the Arms of its Redeemer; it goes to the Heavenly Paradise; it goes
to be always present with the Lord. But take heed you do not say, that the Soul
sleeps in this sense; viz. That it lies in a strange kind of a Lethargy,
neither dead nor alive, neither capable of joy nor sorrow until the
Resurrection. Tho Stephen's Body fell asleep, yet his Soul did not fall asleep,
but immediately went unto Jesus Christ in Heaven. Thus I have given the
Explication of the Words.

Now give me leave to make some Application of all unto our selves.

Use 1. If the death of God's children be nothing but a falling asleep, then
let this comfort us against the death of our godly Friends, tho they die
unnatural and violent deaths, tho they be stoned to death, tho they be burnt to
ashes, tho they be sawn asunder. Here is a message of rich consolation, which
as a Minister of Christ, I hold unto you this day; viz. That the death of a
child of God, let it be after what manner soever it will, it is nothing but a
falling asleep; He goes to his Grave as to his Bed: And therefore our
Burying-places are called our Dormitoria, Sleeping-houses. A child of God when
he dies, he lies down in peace, and enters into his rest: And as a man, when he
is asleep, is free from all the cares and troubles that he has in the
daytime, so the People of God, when they are fallen asleep, they are free from
all the miseries and calamities, crosses, losses and afflictions that we are
troubled withal: Therefore give me leave to say to you, as Christ did to the
Women that followed him to the Cross, bewailing and lamenting of him: O
daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your
children: So I say, weep not for those that are dead in the Lord, that are
fallen asleep in Jesus Christ: They are at their rests; they do not know the
troubles that we are troubled withal: Abraham remembers us not: they are not
sensible of our miseries and afflictions. Let us weep for our selves, and for
the miseries that are coming upon us; and let us know, that when God's children
die, they do but lie in their Beds until the morning of the Resurrection, and
then they shall put on Stolam Immortalitatis, the Garment of Immortality, and
their Bodies shall be made like unto the glorious Body of Jesus Christ. And
know one thing more, which is all in all, viz. That when the Body of a child of
God falls asleep, his Soul immediately goes into the Arms of Christ, and there
lives for ever in the Embraces of Jesus Christ: Tho the Body falls asleep, yet
the Soul is received into Abraham's Bosom. I beseech you comfort one another
with these words.

Use 2. Let me beseech the people of God, that they would look upon death, not
as it is presented unto us in Natures Looking-glass, but as it is set down in a
Scripture-dress. Nature presents death in a very terrible manner: and it is
true, death is very terrible to a man out of Christ; but to you that are in
Christ, the sting of death is taken away: Death is nothing else but a quiet and
placid Sleep, putting off our clothes and going to Bed, till we awake in the
morning of Resurrection. Death to a child of God is nothing but a putting off
his Earthly Tabernacle, a going from an Earthly Prison into an Heavenly Palace,
a hoising up Sail for Heaven, the letting of the Soul out of Prison, as a Bird
out of a Cage, that it may fly to Heaven; a change from a Temporary Hell to an
Eternal Heaven, a going out of Egypt into Canaan: and therefore called, 2 Pet.
1.15. not mors hominis, but mors peccati, not the death of the man, but the
death of his sins; it is Sepultura vitiorum; it is the Pilgrim's Journeys end,
the Seaman's Haven, an absence from the Body, and a presence with the Lord. Let
all God's People look upon death through Scripture-Spectacles, and consider it
as it is sweetly represented in this Text. Remember blessed Stephen stoned to
death, and yet falling asleep; and remember also that Excellent Saying of St.
Austin, That a child of God should be as willing to die as to put off his
clothes, because death is nothing else to him but a Sleep, and a departure from
misery to everlasting happiness.

Use 3. Is to beseech you all every night when you go to Bed, to remember this
Text, and especially these Four things: First, When you are putting off your
clothes, remember you must shortly put off your Bodies. And Secondly, When you
go into your Beds, remember that it will not be long before you go into your
Graves. And Thirdly, When you close your Eyes to sleep, remember that it will
not be long before death must close your Eyes. And Fourthly, When you awake in
the morning, remember that at the Resurrection we must all arise out of the
Grave; and that the just shall arise to everlasting happiness, but the wicked
to everlasting misery.

It is the saying on a Heathen man, That the whole Life of a man should be
nothing else but Meditatio Mortis, a Meditation of Death: And it is the saying
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that men were wise, that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter end. Beloved, it is the greatest part of
Wisdom every day to remember our latter end: That man is the only wise man, and
happy man in life and death, that is ever mindful of his end.

But before I make an end, I must propound one Question, viz. whether the death
of the wicked be not in Scripture compared to a Sleep as well as the death of
the godly? I answer, That wicked men in Scripture are said to fall asleep when
they die: It is said of Idolatrous Jeroboam, that he slept with his fathers: of
Baasha and Omri, those wicked Kings, that they slept with their fathers. But
then the Question will be, In what respect is the death of the wicked compared
to a Sleep? Ans. Even as a man which is asleep, sometimes has no benefit,
rest, or ease thereby; when the sick man awakes, he is many times more sick
than he was before he went to sleep. Some men are much disquieted in their
sleeps by hideous and fearful dreams: Nebuchadnezzar, when he was asleep, had a
most scaring dream, and was amazed therewith. So it is with a wicked man; death
to a wicked man is a Sleep, but it is a terrifying Sleep: The Soul, that goes
immediately to Hell, where it is burned with fire that never shall be quenched,
and where the Worm that never dies, is always gnawing upon it; The Body, that
indeed lies asleep in the Grave: But how? Even as a Malefactor that sleeps in a
Prison the night before he is to be executed, but when he awakes, is hurried
and dragged to Execution: So the wicked man falls asleep in death, but when he
awakes, he awakes to everlasting damnation; but a child of God when he sleeps
the Sleep of death, he sleeps in his Father's House, and when he awakes, he
awakes to everlasting happiness.

Use 4. And this makes way for the Fourth and last Use, which Use is of very
great consequence, and that is, to beseech all, that you labor so to live,
that when you fall asleep you may sleep an happy Sleep. There is the Sleep that
the wicked man sleeps when he dies, and there is the Sleep that the godly man
sleeps when he dies: Now I beseech you labor so to live, that when you fall
asleep, your Sleep may be an happy Sleep unto you, that when you awake in the
morning of the Resurrection, it may be a good awaking for you.

But then the great Question will be, How shall I do this?

Ans. I shall give you Four or Five helps for this:

First, If you would sleep an happy Sleep at death, then you must labor to
sleep in Jesus Christ. It is said, 1 Cor. 15.18. Then they also which are
fallen asleep in Christ. And 1 These. 4.14. If we believe that Jesus died, and
rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
What is it to sleep in Jesus? To sleep in Jesus is to die in the Faith of Jesus
Christ.

2. To sleep in Jesus Christ, is to die with an Interest in Jesus Christ, to
die as a Member united to Christ, as our Head: For you must know, that the dust
of a Saint is part of that man who is a Member of Jesus Christ; and every
believer, when he sleeps in the dust, he sleeps in Jesus Christ; that is, he
lies in the Grave, and his dust is part of Christ Mystical; and Christ as an
Head, will raise it up, and cannot be complete without it. Now then if ever you
would sleep an happy Sleep, labor to get a real Interest in Christ: labor to
live in Christ while you live, and then when you fall asleep, you shall be sure
to sleep in Jesus. There are many that would have Christ to receive their Souls
at death, and that say with dying Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: But if
ever you would have Christ to receive your Souls when you die, you must be sure
to receive him into your Souls whilst you live: If ever you would have him to
receive you into Heaven, you must receive him into your hearts. No man makes a
Will, but he says, Imprimis, I bequeath my Soul to Jesus Christ, my Redeemer.
But how do thou know that Jesus Christ will accept of this Legacy? If thy
Soul has not Christ's Image upon it, if it be not regenerated and renewed,
Jesus Christ will never own it: Thou may bequeath it unto Christ, but the
Devil will claim it. Beloved, if ever you would reign with Christ when you die,
he must reign in you whilst you live; and if ever you would sleep an happy
Sleep, you must live in Jesus, that you may sleep in Jesus.

3. In the Third place, if ever you would sleep an happy Sleep at death, then
you must take heed of overcharging your self with worldly cares. A man that is
full of cares cannot sleep: They lay (as the Proverb is) all their cares under
their Pillow: they labor to shut all cares out of their mind. O take heed that
you do not murder your selves by the cares of the World. Beloved, a man that
eats out his heart with Worldly Cares, will never sleep an happy Sleep, the
Cares of the World will choke all the good Seed of the Word of God: And
therefore as men, when they go to sleep, lay aside all Worldly Thoughts, so if
ever you will sleep an happy Sleep, take heed of overmuch carking and caring
for the things of this World: And remember what you have heard this day, and
that will regulate and moderate all your cares. Naked you came into the World,
and naked you must go out of the World. Why should we take care for that we
know not who shall enjoy after us.

4. If ever you would sleep an happy Sleep when you die, you must take heed of
sucking too much of the pleasures of this World. A man that eats a full supper,
will sleep very disquietly: Therefore they that would sleep quietly, use to eat
light suppers: For when a man's stomach is overcharged, it takes away his
quiet Sleep from him. So if you would sleep an happy Sleep when you come to
die, O take heed of sucking too much the Pleasures of this Life: take heed of
eating too large a Meal of Worldly Delights, and of Creature Comforts. These
Worldly Pleasures will make the Sleep of Death unquiet unto you. O! let not
Dalilah's lap deprive you of Abraham's bosom: Remember, that David, by
Bathsheba's Embraces, lost the Embraces of God: I mean the sense of the
Embraces of God, the joy and comfort of them.

Fourthly, If ever you would sleep an happy Sleep in death, then labor to work
hard for Heaven while you live. O how delightful is Sleep to a weary man: When
a man has taken pains all the day, as the Traveller that has traveled all
the day, or the Plowman that has been at work all the day, how quietly, how
soundly does he sleep in the night! O beloved, if ever you would sleep an happy
Sleep at death, then work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and give
all diligence to make your calling and election sure. The more you labor for
Heaven, the better, the sweeter will your sleep be when you come to die. And
remember this, as much sleeping in the daytime will hinder a man's Sleep at
night, so you that idle away way the time of your providing for Heaven in this
your day, you that sleep away the minute on which Eternity does depend, O! you
will have a sad Sleep when death seizes upon you. Take heed therefore of
sleeping whilst you live, that so your sleep in the night of death may be
comfortable unto you.

5. And lastly, If ever you would sleep an happy sleep when you die, then take
heed of the sleep of sin. Sin in the Scripture is compared to a sleep: Awake
thou that sleep: that is, thou that sinnest. Sin is such a sleep as brings
the sleep of death: Sin brings the first death, and sin brings the second
death: All miseries whatsoever are the daughters of sin. If you would sleep an
happy sleep, and have an happy awakening at the Resurrection, then take heed of
the sleep of sin: Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead, and Jesus
Christ will give thee life, Ephesians. 5.14. so Romans 13.11, 12, 13. with which I will
conclude; and I pray you, mark it well: for it was a Text that converted St.
Augustine: Knowing the time, beloved, that it is now high time to awake out of
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. The night is far
spent, the day is at hand: Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and
let us put on the armor of light: let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying; but put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Butler, in White-Lyon-Court in Barbican.
A Practical and short Exposition of the Catechism of the Church of England, by
way of Question and Answer: Wherein the Divine Authority and Reasonableness of
every Question and Answer, every Doctrine and Practice in it recommended, are
Evidenced and Improved against most Contemners of it, and Dissenters from it;
with that Moderation and Plainness, that it may engage all to adhere to, and
especially may instruct Children in the true Protestant Religion of the Church
of England. Humbly offered for the good of Schools and Youth. By Nathanael
Tailor, M. A.

(...): Or the Baptism of Infants Vindicated by Scriptures and Reasons. Humbly
offered in Order to a Composure of Differences at this Juncture of Time. By
Nath. Tailor, M. A.

(...): Or an Alphebetical Martyrology, containing the Trials and Dying
Expressions of many Martyrs of Note since Christ. Extracted out of Foxe's Acts
and Monuments numents of the Church. With an Alphabetical List of God's
Judgments remarkably shown on many Noted and Cruel Persecutors. Together with
an Appendix of things pertinent to the understanding this Martyrology. By N. T.
M. A. T. C. C.

Two Sermons of Hypocrisy, and the vain hope of self-deceiving sinners:
Together with an Inspection into the Manners and Conversation of the People
called Quakers, whose fruits betel them to be Men of a Worldly Spirit, hating
true holiness, and strangers to the simplicity that is in Christ: All which is
showed in the following Treatise, composed and published for the common good,
the startling and awakening of all Worldly and Opinionative Hypocrites, of what
Name or Sect soever, and particularly the Quakers, and the establishment and
consolation of the upright and sound in heart, in perilous and shaking times,
and intended for a further confutation of Quakerism. By John Cheyney.


