A true and certain RELATION Of His Majesty's sad CONDITION IN HURST-CASTLE,
in Hamp-shire.

With the Manner how He was taken out of His Bed on Saturday night l^st, to
the amazement of the Inhabitants there: With the imprisoning of Captain Cook,
who was appointed Governor by the Inhabitants, in stead of Colonel Hammond.
Also, the sad-condition of the Mayor and Aldermen of Newport for their
Allegiance to His Majesty. This being done without the knowledge of the
Parliament, with other remarkable Passage.

Printed in the Year 1648.

A LETTER FROM THE ISLE OF VVIGHT.
Noble Dick:
NOva rerum facies here no Planet reigns in the Isle of Wight but the Moon,
my heart is at least a stone ligher since my last of the 28 of November, our
cafe is altered (God be th^n^ed) with Ploydons. Wednesday the 29 of the last
whether of his own moving (which all inclines unto) or by the advice of others
it is not known: the King sent for the Major and Brethren of Newport, with
other chief of the To^n declared unto them before the Parliaments
Commissioners what he had granted for the content of his people, and how he
had quite for some time decested himself of the very essence of authority, and
received naught but the shadow to give satisfaction unto his two Houses in all
their proposalls put up to him, (and therein referred them unto the
Commissioners there present who confirmed the same) that not withstanding all
this he was like to be used as they saw, (and for ought he knew as bad, nay
far worse then before, (seeing the General had of his own Head as far as
he could learn, sent those three (I writ of) to order and dispose of His
Person, according to their private instruction of the said men, or perhaps of
one that His Majesty had reason to dislike worse then he, (Cromwell) and
therefore as His liege people he requested their help and assistance to
preserve Him from undeserued bondage, to which his Majesty thought they were
bound to do, not only by the law of God, but by the virtue of the oath of
Allegiance, Supremacy, Protestation, and Covenant, at the hearing of this, the
Mayor and his assistants after reverence on their knees; protested unto the
King, that seeing His Majesty and his Parliament were agreed, that they would
defend him both in honor and safty with lives, bodies, and fortunes, and that
during his Majesty's pleasure and his Parliaments for his above there, and that
they trusted that he should shortly find the maine Inhabitants of the Isle of
the same opinion, which accordingly fell out, for on Thursday toward noone I
think almost all the people came to the Town, and with open acclamations made
good the same. Nay, one Wilckes a Brewer at the Greybound told Mayor Bolfe,
That if he or any else attempted to restrain, guard or keep the King there,
(or other wise then He pleased) that it were better for them to be a keeping of
Sheep [in the Garden before the Kings face] his Majesty was much taken with the
sober bluntness of this Fellow, so that GOD be blessed His Majesty has the
solace the Island can afford him now with promise of protection, till such time
as His Parliament shall think fit to send for him to London in honor. His
Majesty likewise has past his Kingly word to them not to put himself out of
their trust and protection, save with their knowledge.

Colonel Ewer and his two collaterals have leisure to return, or if they like
otherwise to fish in the Island for ought they need trouble themselves about
attending the King after their gaped for wish, the special charge of waiting
upon His Majesty is by the general vote and agreement of all the Island
conferred on one Captain Cook, Marshall of Colonel Hammonds regiment, an
honest-heartie true Trojan, and an old Blade that of my conscience loves the
King wonderful well, and is right joyful of the credit, and opertunitie in
any way to serve or obey His Majesty, the Island have so good an opinion of him
that they have made him as it were Commander in chief over them till it shall
please the Parliament to take further order for a Governor.

In faith I do verily believe the Inhabitants of the Island to be between
seven or eight thousand fighting men, an Every completely armed.

The Parliament, Garrisons here do let them take their own way, some being
better content with it than others, but all willing to strike to necessity, for
I do judge the mere Souldierie of the Army at this present remaining in the
Island to be about five or six hundred or near thereupon, if the Inhabitants
of the Island stand upon it, the places of landing are of that advantage to
them, and so disadvantagoeus to the approachers, that they are able to keep out
a very considerable force for a good time.

Here came hither Thursday night last of Pinaces and Frigates to the number of
9. from my Lord of Warwick, who declares for the King and Parliament, and is
appointed as we hear to carry His Majesty to London by Sea, as also we are
given to understand by some of his Officers that come a shore, that the
agreement betwixt the Prince and his Lordship is in a fair advance and that His
Highness will be content to surrender him the Ships upon assureance, and
engagement to keep them for the King and Parliament, according to the tenure
of the Treaty.

And that the Masters and Captains of them with other Officers may have
benefit of the Pardon, Acts of Oblivion and Indemnity, and continve their
places upon security of their faithfulness, and obedience for hereafter,
according to the Articles of the Treaty.

But his Lordship must pardon His Majesty if he choose rather to stay in the
Island, as we are plainly here informed; for hither came one of His Majesty's
Scalding-House that dwells at Windsor on Thursday last who having Officers of
the Lord Generals, of great quality qua^^^^red in hi^ house, and did avouch
to us that the general resolu^ion of the Army was within very few days to
march for London, and to order and alter matters not only in the City but
even at Westminster likewise, and spoke large words, not only concerning His
Majesty's Person but His Life.

GOD in mercy defend Him, for surely the hand of wickedness is very high, the
billows of contemptious pride swells beyond measure. Yet God cannot a hook
into this and a sway, that when he pleases, man's necessity being often time
Gods opertunitie.

But as touching Mrs Parliament it is universally thought that the Army will
purge there, and therefore gave them a taste of its Remonstrance. First, to
open her passages, that she may go to it the better.

Some think that the Army will phlebotomise her, which if it does and stops not
bleeding before good blood, I am afraid they will not leave her so much good
blood in the body as will go into an egg shell: questionless her long vitase
adventaria, has contracted not only cr^dity, but many ill and p^ccant
humors. One said that at the reading of the Remonstrance in the House they
throng together as sheep that had been run at by the wolf. She has long lain
in, long kept her chamber, been a long time troublesome, so that her very
friends (even toiled out) do wish her speedy mending or ending. She is prayed
for on sea and land, in the Island and Continent, town and Country, yea over
all the four roades of England, (that God would take her to his mercy, she
hoped for some restorative by the Treaty, but it is said, that the General
says it is too easy a potion for her, and that he must give her some stronger
physic, for certain he intends by Glyster to draw away her costivenesse of
Presbytery, and to put her it to a temperament of soluble Independency.

Oh me, how these two factions of Presbytery and Independency have squared it
a long time, the one up, the other down, like two well buckets hanging and
drawing one another, but now it seems Independency is minded to dally no
longer, but still to be aloft, and let Presbytery for ever keep in the well;
chacun chose son tour c'est le ieu du monde: cras mihi, hodie tibi, a dog will
have a day.

Yours to command, George Vaughan.

Gentle Reader:
Thou must not wonder in this changeable world, that what was most true one day
is false the next for since the date of this Letter written by a Personage of
honor out of the Island; and which hates falsehood as much as baseness, the
condition of all things is strangely altered there: some additionall forces on
a sudden arriving to the furtherance and aid of Collonell Ewer in his design.
His Majesty Satturday at night wonderful late, or Sunday morning extreme
early, was seized in his chamber, yea in bed, compelled to make ready straight,
put into a catch, and forthwith p^ssed over to Hurst-Castle, in Hampshire,
standi^g upon the Sands, his condition there is most sad and dismal, being
kept close pr^soner, and having not any either of his own Servants or
acquaintance about him, and by the appointment and order of the Army, only the
Parliament no way visibly intermedling or apppoving it; and that after he had
condescended unto and offered further to ratify whatsoever had been requested
of him.

Capta^n Cook who by the appointment of the inhabitants of the Isle* Thursday
last had the guard of His Majesty is kept prisoner* and the Major and Aldermen
for their forwardness showed toward the mainteining of him in the island in
danger to be further questioned about it.

FINIS.

