Magnalia Dei Anglicana. OR, Englands Parliamentary-Chronicle.

Containing a full and faithful Series, and Exact Narration of all the most
memorable Parliamentary-Mercies, and mighty (if not miraculous) Deliverances,
great and glorious Victories, and admirable Successes, of the Counsels and
Armies of this present Parliament, both by Sea and by Land, over the whole
Kingdom of England, in the most just defense and Vindication of her Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, from the year, 1640. to this present year, 1646. Compiled
in 4 Parts; The two first, entitled, God in the Mount. The third, Gods Ark
overtopping the Worlds Waves; The fourth, The Burning-Bush not Consumed: This
last Part, coming up to These Present Times, and to our most renowned
General, Sir Thomas Fairfaxes late famous Actions, in the West, and the happy
(because unbloody) rendition of Oxford, in this present year, 1646.

Collected chiefly for the high Honor of our Wonder-working God; And for the
unexpressible Comfort of all Cordial English PARLIAMENTARIANS. By the most
unworthy Admirer of Them, JOHN VICARS.

Genesis 49. 22, 23, 24. Joseph is a fruitful Bough, even a fruitful Bough, by a
Well; whose Branches run over the Wall. The Archers shot at him and hated him;
But his Bow abode in strength, and the Arms of his hands were made strong, by
the Hand of the mighty God of Jacob; from thence is the Shepherd; the stone of
Israel. Imprinted at London, for J. Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain, in Paul's
Churchyard, and Tho. Underhill, at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1646.

THE Burning-Bush not Consumed. OR, The FOVRTH and Last PART OF THE
PARLIAMENTARIE-CHRONICLE.

Containing a full and Faithful Continuation and Exact Narration of all the
most material and most Memorable Proceedings of this renowned Parliament. The
Armies and Forces, which are or have been in the several parts of the
Kingdom; The Description of all the brave Battles, Victories, and famous
Defeates given to the Enemies, both by Sea and by Land; Especially, the winning
of Newcastle, the glorious Victory at Nazeby, and that famous Victory at
Langport, won through fire and water; Together with all the other admirable
Successes of our most Renowned and Victorious General, Sir Thomas Fairfax,
with his despised New-Modelled Army in the West, even to admiration: and the
happy Rendition of Oxford, and the rest of the strong Garrisons about it.
Beginning from August, 1644. and coming up to this present Month of July,
1646.

Collected for Gods high Honor, and all pious Parliamentarians COMFORT: By the
most unworthie Admirer of Them, JOHN VICARS.

Isaiah 63. 7. I will mention the Loving kindness of the Lord, and the high
praises of our God, according to all the rich Mercies which the Lord has
bestowed upon us; And his great goodness toward us (his English-Israel) which
he has conferred on us, according to his great Mercies, and according to the
Multitudes of his loving kindnesses. The Third, and this Fourth Part, being
Printed at the sole and entire cost and charge of the Author Himself.

Imprinted at London by R. C. and M. B. for M. Spark, at the Bible in Green
Arbor, J. Rothwel, at the Sun in P. Church yard, and T. Underhill, at the Bible
in Woodstr. 1646

TO The Right Honorable Peers, and Pious Patriots of this Kingdom, Algernon,
Earl of Northumberland; Philip, Earl of Pembrook; Robert, Earl of Essex;
Robert, Earl of Warwick; Oliver, Earl of Bullingbrook; Edward, Earl of
Manchester; Fardinando, Lord Fairfax;
His Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of all the Parliaments
Forces over the Kingdom; Sir William Waller; Sir Harbotle Grimstone; Harbotle
Grimstone, Esquire; Walter Young, Esquire; Sir John Young; Francis Rouse,
Esquire; Edmund Prideaux, Esquire; and Major General Massy;
And to the Rest of the most Noble and Right Worthily Renowned, and Honorable
Lords and Commons, and Famous Soldiers and Senators, Assembled in Parliament,
that are loyally affected, and Constantly Addicted to the Great-work of a
Glorious and Through Reformation of the Kingdoms Evils, in Church and State:
John Vicars most humbly Dedicateth and Consecrateth Himself and These most
Grateful Memorialls of Gods Eternal Glory; and Their high Honor; And ever
prays (as he is most justly bound) for a most plentiful Repay of enlarged
Gracious Honor, here, and Glorious Immortality, hereafter, (For all their
pious Pains and indefatigable Labors, Loyalty and Love, for the Best-Good of
Church and State) to be showred down into the Bosoms of Them, and their
Posterity, after them, for ever.

TO The Right Honorable. Thomas Adams, Esquire Lord Major of the most famous and
renowned City of London; And to the Right Worshipful, Sir John Wollastone,
Knight and Alderman of the said most Renowned City.
TO The Right Worshipful, his most highly Honored singular good Friend, Sir
Matthew Brand, Knight, High Sheriff of the County of Surrey; And the Right
Worshipful Sir Richard Sprignall, Knight.
TO The Right Worshipful and truly Pious and Virtuous, the Lady Francesse
Brand; The Lady Anne Sprignall; The Lady Rebeccah W^llastone; And Mistress Mary
Grimstone; All of them, my Pious and most precious Friends; And Honorable, and
Worshipful Patrons and Patronesses and principal Encouragers and
Countenancers of all my poor and unworthy Labors and Endeavors to advance
Gods Glory and Unspotted precious TRUTHS:
John Vicars their meanest and most unworthy Votary, most humbly Dedicates and
Consecrates Himself and all his poor, but most bounden Services; And ever
prays for their perpetual and pious increase of all Honor and Happiness,
here; and an immarcescible Crown of Glory, hereafter.

A Colossus of Eternal bounden Gratitude: OR, A Panegyricall Pyramides of
perpetual Praise. First erected by our Britains ingenious and ingenuous
MERCURY: And, now, Re-erected by the unworthy Author of this
Parliamentary-Chronicle, with some plain and homely Inlaid-Work of his own,
insome convenient places.
1 To God,
TO the Eternall-Ternall-Trin-Vn Glorious and ineffably illustricus, Great and
Gracious, most Holy, and most Wise Wonder-working JEHOVAH, Great Britains only
Rock of Defense, and most prudent Pilot, steering and upholding her
Weather-beaten Bark, through the midst of the Ocean of all her turbulent and
overflowing Floods and swelling Waves of bloody Woes and Wretchedness. The
most Potent and Provident Shepherd of his English-Israel, discovering and
defeating all the malignant Machinations, and Hell-hatcht deep Designs of
Wrath and Ruin, most maliciously intended, and most desperately attempted by
Papisticall, Prelaticall and Atheistical Wolves, a degenerous Generation of
her Vnnaturall-Native^ Paricides. To this Great God, this Righteous Lord and
King of Heaven and Earth, who is thus glorious in Holiness, fearful in
Praises, and has (in mere Mercy and free Grace) done all these most memorable
Wonders for us, in Crowning us with so many most glorious Victories and
treading our Enemies under our feet, Let England and Scotland, and with them,
all the Powers and Potentates of the World (with the 24 Elders, Revel. 4. 10,
11.) fall before this great God, and the Lamb that sits upon the Thr^ne, and
worship Him that lives for ever and ever; and cast their Crowns down at his
feet, before the Throne, saying, Thou, O Lord, alone, art most worthy to
receive all Glory, and Honor, and Power; For, Thou have created this great
Salvation and Deliverance for us; Ye^, and All-Things were created, and are for
thy pleasure and Praise. Even so, Amen.

2 To the Parliament.
TO the High and Honourable-Court of Parliament, the renowned Lords and
Commons, as His Sublunary, prime and principal Agents and Instruments, in
these our mighty and even miraculous Deliverances; I must and do most justly
and ingenuously acknowledge your Loyalty and Zeal, to and for God and your
Country; your constant out-darings of all Plots and Conspiracies. (witness,
that grand and unparallelled Affront and Abuse, January, the 4. 1641.) Yea, all
Violence from abroad, and at home. The many thousand Mischeivous Machinations
against us. Your continual, and indefatigable tuggings through so many
Counterplots and Oxford fine-Designes, the like, never heard of, nor recorded,
in any age or history. Have ye not most unanimously kept, even to this day,
(and, long may ye) that famous Act of Continuation, even miraculously sealed
unto you by the Royal Hand? Who could have said, 7 years ago, That a
Parliament should have sat, at all again, in England? Much less, a Parliament
to sit incessantly, till now, at Westminster, especially considering that
forementioned intended Acheldama, or Field of Blood, in the House of Commons,
by those armed ruffianly Royalists; Yea, and an Army whom ye paid, when they
were plotting and preparing to come against you; and, as it were, rewarded them
for intending your destruction, (a Bounty hardly heard of, in other ages) and
yet, for all these, a Parliament! They that saw whole Committees of Nobility
and Gentry posting to York, and doing what they could to carry the very
Parliament House (had it been possible) along with them.

And, since that, a pestilent and pernicious jugling-juncto, or
Mock-Parliament, at Oxford, and yet, a Parliament at Westminster! They that
knew the intestine- Temptings, secret- Sidings, and perverting- Partyings, made
within your own Walls, and yet, a Parliament at Westminster! A Parliament,
indeed, of Prayer, summoned from Heaven; and by Prayer continued, in spite of
Hell! And what shall I say of you, most Excellent Worthies, far transcending
ancient Romes so famoused grave and renowned Senators? Ye have pulled down our
tyrannical Greivances, and set up our hereditary Liberties; Which, the People
will (best) see, when the glistering of Swords is over (the eye of popular
judgment being now a while, dazzled with war) every Greivance, now, seeming
to reside in that which, so, for the present pinches. Ye have taken down, by
your Excellent Ordinances, most of Idolatry, from among us, not suffering that
Babylonish Harlot to have her name, so much as in a piece of Glass, nor the
shadow of a strange God in the Walls of our Church-Buildings. Ye have
Ordinanced away oppressing Prelacy, and Popish-apish Innovations, and Mimicall
Ceremonies, those Dark-Lanthornes of the Bishops, by which, they (insensibly)
thought to have brought in the triple-Crown, and none should have seen it, till
it had been among us. Ye have Ordinanced standing-Remedies for
standing-Troubles, even a Monethly-Fast, or Spirituall-Militia; and are not we
a hard-hearted People, that must be comp^lled to Repentance by a Law? Ye have
Ordinanced a precious and pious Solemn League, or Covenant, to tie 3 Kingdoms
together to their God, and One to another, if it might be; A most heavenly
Engine, indeed, considering there are so many Tuggers to pull them asunder,
both Papists, Prelates, atheistical- Malignants, and unhappily, if not
unholily, dissenting Separatists. Yea, you have Ordinanced a reverend,
religious, and learned Assembly of Divines (a divine auxiliarie, indeed) to
promove and properate the blessed work of building and beauti^ying Gods- House
with powerful and pure Ordinances, and the Kingdom with a through-
Reformation. These and many mo such like admirable Advancements of the Lords
Glory have ye most happily and honorably established and effected, for which,
Posterity shall have just cause everlastingly to praise and bless the Lord for
you. Finally, I may say of you, both renowned Houses of Lords and Commons, as
Solomon of his praiseworthy Woman, Prove. 31. 29. Many Parliaments have done
excellently, but, This present Parliament has excelled them all.

3 To the Assembly of Divines.
TO the truly venerable Assembly of Divines, whom I must, most deservedly,
congratulate for your unwearied pains, incessant disputes, and learned,
toylings to build up (as much as in you is) the House of God, to a glorious
Evangelicall structure; yea, and for your holy and grave remindings of the
Parliament, continually, to keep time with God in Victories and Losses, by
Praises and Humiliations. And, if any ask me, What ye are, now, a doing? I
answer, Ye are doing; yea, doing the Work of the Lord, in sending the Word
abroad by your divine Agents and faithful Factors for Reformation. Ye are
praying and disputing us out of our distempers and distractions; And, shall not
We be patient, until Ye (by Gods gracious guidance and assistance) have
argued-out the Truth from Error, and illustrious Light, from
Glow-worm-Glistrings, and too evident Darkness? God forbid. However, Reverend
Gentlemen, here is your Comfort, your Work (maugre all unbrotherly and
uncharitable prejudice) is with your God, who will not leave it unrewarded.

4. To the City of London.
TO thee, most famous and faithful Metropolis of the Kingdom, the City of
London, who deservest not the least Congratulation in this our Panegyric
Pyramides of just Praises? Of which, I may most justly say (with the sweet
Singer of Israel; Psalm. 87* 3.) Many and most glorious things are spoken of
thee, O City of God! Have not Thou been (under God) a grand- Bulwark, and a
constant Garrison to the Cause of God? Have not ye (most venerable Senators
and renowned Commons thereof) been a glorious and impregnable Reserve to 3
tottering Kingdoms? Do not Gloucester, Newberry, Redding, Arundell, etc. look
red with the glorious guerdion of your crimson-Conquests? Have ye not
exchanged your Shops for Tents? Your soft and smooth advantages, at home, for
rugged-difficulties, and rough-dangers abroad? Have you not been an admirable
rich Armory, and a munificent Magazine to the Lords just and most righteous
Cause? Has it not been your Artillery (for the most part) and Ammunition,
which have given such and so many successful Alar^^s to the enemies of God?
Have not your happy Habitations been a Hyding-place, and a safeguarding
Sanctuary, to Gods afflicted Outcasts, and distressed Saints, their Wives and
Children, from all parts (almost) of the whole Kingdom, whom, ye have with
your Christian Charity and most helpful Hospitality nourisht and cherisht with
the Brest-milk of your Love and Bounty? Have ye not been, as it were, an
unexhaustible Exchequer to this great Cause? Witness the wonderful free and
frequent disbursments of your money out of your Chests and purses, and liberal
Emptyings of your former rich and costly Cup^oards of Plate, all to enrich the
Gospel, and advance the glorious Work of Reformation of Evils in Church and
State. And has not this your zeal for God and his Truth, most illustriously
flamed forth of late also, in that most famous and faithful, that pious and
prudent Remonstrance or Petition of yours, exhibited to Both Houses of
Parliament, May 26. 1646. for the beating down of Heresies, Errors, and
Schisms, and the most religious advancement of the blessed work of pure
Reformation, and a holy and happy settled Government of the Church of God? Such
a pattern and monument of your Piety and godly zeal, I say, as shall remain to
your Praise, and indelible renown to Posterity, throughout all Generations. And
has not Heaven sweetly resented (In Christ) these your precious Expenses, and
fervent zeal for Religion, as so many holy Hol^causts, and has, as it were
(even already) sent down thanks and recompense of your Love and bounty, in much
measure, into your Houses and Habitations? Witness (even to the just and
joyful admiration of your Friends, and the envious astonishment of your Foes)
the constant and copious incomes of Peace and Plenty, Health and Liberty, but
most especially (and, which, indeed, Crowns all the rest) of the radiant and
resplendent Gospel-Beams of pure and powerful Word and Ordinances; No leading
into Captivity, in your streets, no slaughter or schrecvings out of your Wives,
Virgins, and little Children, nor Pestilentiall Mortality in your Houses. And,
ye are (and that, most worthily) for all these so rich and rare, so many and
marveilous Mercies, the present Wonder of the whole World, and, ever, O, for
ever, so may ye be the Praise of all succeding Posterity.

5 TO our Warlike Worthies.
To all the famous and renowned Worthies of Great-Britaine; and, first, To our
meritoriously dear, and entirely beloved, loyal and faithful
Brother-Kingdome of Scotland, to which we are everlastingly bound in all
mutual, and reciprocal bonds of Love and Unity; Whose hearts, the Lord did so
affect and envlame with Sympathizing Love and Zeal to his glorious Cause, and
to our (then) most low and calamitous Condition, that with most brotherly
^ervour and fellow-feeling affection, they entered into a holy League and Solemn
Covenant with us, of mutual defense one of another; Cheerfully left their own
Country and Kingdom, their dearest Friends, Wives and Children, and (through
many difficulties and distresses, in a bitter and sore pinching Winter-march,
even to deep admiration) carrying their lives in their hands, came in unto us,
to help the Lord and us against his mighty and our most malicious Enemies. And
whom, as the Lord made the main and principal instruments of the beginning of
our happiness, both in saving our throats from the death-threatning knives of
destruction, and procuring us a most unhoped and unexpectible Parliament (as
the case was with us, then) which (under God) has been the fountain of our
felicity to this day: So, now at last also, the Lord has made choice of them
to be the Consummators, and, as it were, the main fin^shers of our felicity,
in putting the Person of the King into their hands, as counting them faithful
to improve such a Prize to the best advantage of his Glory and our Good, if we
had but honest hearts so to consider it. And, heerin, more especially and
peculiarly, to his Excellency, Magnanimous and Victorious General Lesley, Earl
of Leven, most worthily famous among us, for ever, both for this famous Prize,
the Kings Person put into his hands; And for his most renowned Courage and
Valor at Newcastle and Marston-Moore. Next, To his Excellency, the most noble
and renowned Lord General, Robert Earl of Essex, most famous, faithful and
courageous at Keynton and Newberry. To the most valiant and magnanimous present
CaptainGenerall, his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, as famous and faithful
at Naseby, Bristol. etc. of which two most noble and loyal Generals, I may
say (as Plutarch, in his Lives, did of those two renowned ancient
Romane-Commanders, Fabius, and Marcellus,) They have been (under God) The Sword
and Buckler of the Kingdom. To the right noble loyal and religious Robert
Earl of Warwick, the famous and faithful Lord High-Admirall, whose Chivalry at
Sea, and whose Seasonable Charity to Lime, ought never to be forgotten by us.
To the renowned Peers and Patriots of their Country, the noble Earl of
Manchester, and famous and faithful noble Lord, Fairfax, the Parliaments two
most valiant and successful Generals, both in the North and Associated
Counties. To undaunted, and never Enough honored Sir William Waller, who has
been a strong Wall, and brave Bulwark, indeed, to this Kingdom, as Portsmouth,
Aulton, Alsford, and his many other famous Victories can Witness. To magn
animous Sir William Fairfax, and Sir John Meldrum, those two most Courageous
Commanders, who most nobly spent their best blood, for the best Cause that ever
this Kingdom undertook. To as valiant as virtuous Sir William Brereton, famous
for his valor and activity in Cheshire, Namptwich, and now lately, at West
chester. To religious and magnanimous Major General Skippon, that most pious
Cornelius, and Expert brave Soldier, and Commander, as was admirably evident,
in Cornwall, and at Naseby; of whom it was said, He lived like an Angel,
prayed like a Saint, and fought like a Lion. To never sufficiently praised and
prized, Major General Massy, far more worth than his weight in Massie-Gold,
as the famous Siege of the City of Gloucester, and all that County, and the
adjacent parts thereof can most copiously witness. To Renowned and right
valiant and Victorious Lei^tenant General Cromwell. Those valiant victorious
and active Patriots, Sir John Gell, and Sir Thomas Middleton. Renowned Major
General Brown; Major General Laughorne; and Major General Poyntz. Valiant
and victorious Colonel Mitton, Colonel Sydenham, Colonel Morgan, and brave
Captain Swanley. Together with very many other most active, loyal, and most
Courageous Commanders, and brave Brittish-Spirited Soldiers, Who all, most
like unto David's Worthies (honorably Commemorized, 2 Samuel 23.) have made
themselves most meritoriously famous in this Present Age, and to Future
Posterity, for their so faithfully and valiantly serving their GenRration;
Together also with the renowned Corporations, and invincible Garrisons of Hull,
Gloucester, Manchester, Coventry, Warwick, Northampton, Stafford, Namptiwich,
famous and faithful Plymouth, Lyme, and all the famous and faithful
Governors, Holders, and Vpholders of them; With the most worthy and
well-deserving Counties of Lancashire and Kent; And the other most famous and
faithful Parliamentary-Patriots, Cities and Counties, most loyally and
lovingly appearing in this great and good Cause, and most freely and forwardly
jeoparding Themselves and their All, in the High Places of the Kingdom; yea,
and whose gallantry of Spirits, indelible Merits, undaunted Resolutions,
Memorable adventures, and great Engagements, even to Life, Estates, and all
that was most near and dear unto them, have most justly called for, yea,
Commanded a resounding Acknowledgement of their so honorable and heroic
Actions, as an incessant Echo of perpetuated Applause, to all succeeding
Generations, Who have not only made us to be their deep-debtours; but even
the Gospel too together with all the Protestant-Churches of the World: And the
Generations that are yet to come, shall pay tributary-Honours to their Ashes.
And, O, that this present Generation would plant a Field of ever-flourishing
Laurel, and fragrant Bays unto them, and tell their Children; These are for
Garlands to deck the brows of all these our renowned Worthies, who have not
been afraid to look Death in the face, for the preservation and maintenance of
their more than Life, precious Gospel and Liberties.

6 To God.
ANd, now again (in the last place, as in the first) since the Lord JEHOVAH,
our Great and Glorious Wonder-working God, is and ought to be the Alpha and
Omega, of all things in Heaven and in Earth; And is, indeed, the Author and
Finisher both of our Faith and of all our Felicity; And has so freely and so
fully wrought and done All our Works, in us, and for us; And so admirably
raised up all these Saviors, the Means and Instruments to be thus happily and
successefully assistant to us: For all these so rich and rare; for all these so
many and marveilous Blessings, Benedictions, and Preservations, thus
gra^ciously and gushingly flowing out and powered down upon Us: Therefore, I
say, to This only Wise God of Peace and Power, this unexhaustible overflowing
Fountan of Free Grace and Goodness, whose Ways are unsearchable, whose Power
is unre^istible, and whose unlimited Love and boundless Bounty is
unexpressible, Who has, thus, done abundantly above All that we were able to
ask, think, or desire, much less (in the least measure) to deserve, according
to the Power of his Spirit, whereby he is able, indeed, to do All Things, To
Him Alone, and Altogether, be all Honor, and Glory, Dominion, and Praise,
with all holy Reverence, and Universal Obedience* in the Church of God* by
Jesus Christ, throughout all Generations even worldwithout end. Amen and Amen.

THE SONG of MOSES: PARAPHRASTICALLY And Metrically applied to our
Present-Purpose.
AS A Preparative whereunto, let me beseech every Religious Reader of this
Parliamentary Chronicle, to rouse up his Soul and raise up his Spirit, with
this fervent and affectionate ejaculation of holy David, that Sacred and Sugared
Singer of Israel.

Psalm. 57. 7, 8, 9, 10. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will
sing and give Praise. Awake up, my Glory, awake, Psaltery and Harp! Yea, I my
self will awake, right early. I will praise thee, O Lord, among the People, I
will sing unto thee among the Nations. For, thy Mercy is great unto the
Heavens; And thy Truth reaches unto the Clouds.
THE Song of Moses, paraphrastically applied in Meeter, to our present purpose.
IF ever Moses had just cause to sing
The high-tun'd praises of heavens glorious King,
When God his Israel out of Egypt brought
And with strong Arm and mighty Wonders wrought,
Them, from tyrannical Tax-masters freed,
And their Deliverance, (long before decreed)
Had, now, completely brought to pass, with Fame,
And all his People gladly saw the same;
Themselves secure on Land, their Foes all drowned,
And they had ( thus) Gods Promise faithful found:
Then, sure, as justly, it to us belongs
With as enlarged-hearts to sing such Songs;
Even us, I say, Gods English-Israel,
It ev'ry-way befits, becomes, as well,
To magnify and Omnifie Heavens name,
And with incessant sounds of Trumps of Fame,
With Voice and Verse, with tongues and hands and hearts
Triumphantly to put forth our best-Parts;
And with God-pleasing Moses, thus, to sing
The endless praise of heavens eternal King.
The Song.
SIng praise, sing praise unto Jehovah high,
For, he has triumphed, most gloriously,
Over all our foes; The horse and Rider, He
Has tumbled down to deepest misery.
Yea, all the rotten-Rout^ of Romanists,
Papists and Prelates, Atheists, Royalists,
And mad-Malignants, void of Grace or Sense,
To whom, God, now, has made just recompense.
The Lord is our sure-strength and pleasant-Song.
And unto him, yea, him alone belong
The precious praise of our Salvation sweet,
He is our God, let us (as is most meet)
Prepare, for him, a holy Habitation
Who is our God, yea, God of all our Nation.
Let us make holy-haste to edify,
His glorious Church, in worships purity.
For, sure, the Lord's a Man of War most stout
The Lord God is his Name, the world throughout;
The proudest Princes that against him rose,
The strongest, stoutest hosts of furious foes,
With all their boldest, bravest Captains, He
Has drowned and drencht in Seas of misery;
And, like a Stone, made them sink deep and fall,
Death and destruction has them swallowed all.
The Right hand of the Lord is most Victorious,
The Right hand of the Lord is strong and glorious:
And full of Power, and Might, and Majesty,
To dash in pieces each proud Enemy.
And in the Greatness of thy glorious Might
Thou have over thrown all that against Thee fight,
And made their swelling Pride, but as a Bubble,
And by thy Wrath consumedst them like stubble;
And with thy Nostrills easy Breath and Blast,
The swelling Waves were, like great Banks, up cast,
And made, on heaps, to stand up, like a Wall,
And, so congealed that they could not fall:
And when thine Enemies, which saw this sight,
(Stuffed and stirred up with rancour, rage, and spite)
Said, in themselves; So, so; I Will, now, pursue,
I Will overtake, and make them All to rue,
I will divide the spoil, and satisfy
My utmost Lust upon them, till they dye,
I Will draw my Sword, and quickly them destroy,
My hand shall bring them all to dire annoy:
And thus, O thus, did ou^ proud Enemies
Resolve, over us, to trea^ and tyrannize,
All England, Scotland, Ireland quite to foil,
And amongst themselves, soon, to divide the Spoil;
But, in the midst of their insulting Pride,
The Lord Jehovah blew, brought back the tide,
Turned all those Watery Walls to liquid Waves,
And made the Ocean the eternall-graves,
Of all his Isreal's foes, who sank, like Lead,
Into the Seas vaste depth, till they were dead.
O, therefore, who (Great God) in like to Thee?
Who, amongst all gods, to Thee compared may be?
In Holiness most glorious, and in Praise,
Most fearful, Working Wonders in our days!
When Thou thy powerful Right hand stretchest out,
Thou make the Earth devour thy Foes most stout;
But, Thou, in thy rich Grace do lead along
Thy Chosen Flock, and them redeem'st from wrong;
And, in thy strength, do them most safely guide,
And, in thy holy Habitation hide.
The Heathens shall this hear and be afraid,
With woe shall Palestina be dismayed;
The Dukes of Edom shall astonished be,
And, when as Moabs mighty Men shall see
Gods mighty Wonders, they shall tremble All,
The Canaanites shall moulder, melt and fall.
Even France and Spain, and Rome and Denmark bold,
Shall be amazed when they the things behold,
Which God has d^ne for England, Scotland, and
Malignants all shall thus astonished stand;
And, fear and dread shall them soon overtake,
And Gods strong Arm, as still as Stones them make;
Till all thy People (Lord) pass over free,
Till they pass over, purchased by Thee;
Till Thou have brought them in, and planted, sure,
Upon thy holy Mountain to endure;
In thine Inheritance, thy precious Place,
Which, Thou, O Lord, have made, full fraught with Grace,
And heavenly Glory, where Thy Self does dwell,
Thy Sanctuary, where all joys excel;
By thine own export Hand most rarely made
To all Eternity established, staide,
Where, Thou, O Lord, most gloriously do Reign,
And shall for ever, evermore remain.
For why? proud Pharaoh's Horse and Chariots All,
His daring Horsemen, Riders strong and tall,
Into the Sea, audaciously, did enter,
And, durst into the Deep, most proudly venture,
But, suddenly, the Lords great Blast did blow,
And all the Waves and Floods did backward flow;
And drench and drown them All, in Isreal's eye,
Whil^^, This his People passed over dry.
Thus (as said Jethro) in the very Thing
Wherein they proudly dealt, heavens glorious King,
Was admirably far above them All,
And into utter Ruin made them fall.
And, thus (may I say) Englands glorious King,
To whom (so justly) we these praises sing,
Has wondrously declared unto us All,
That, in the Things intended for our thrall,
By our Papistick, Atheistick Foes,
The Lord Jehovah, far above them rose,
And tumbled them into the Pit which they
Had dug, as deep as Hell, for our decay.
For this, O Lord, this great deliverance,
Our Souls, our Songs Thy Praise do thus advance;
For this so great, so gracious Love, O Lord,
Our Hearts and Tongues thy Praises do record:
For this so mighty Mercy, glorious King,
For evermore we will thy Praises sing,
And tell our Childrens Children of the same,
That they, when we are dead, may blaze thy Fame,
To their Posterity, for evermore;
O sing aloud all Laud and Praise, therefore,
Advance, O England, then, thy cordiall-voyce,
To Heavens great King, who makes us thus rejoice.
Omnis Gloria solius est Domini.
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.
April 4. 1646.
THE BVRNING-BVSH not Consumed OR, The Fourth Part of the
Parliamentarie-Chronicle.
ABOUT the later and of the Month of July, 1644. the Reader may be pleased to
remember that we lest the Affairs of the Kingdom in a prosperous posture,
and Victorious condition for the Parliament, both in the Northern parts of the
Land, after the most memorable and renowned Victory at M^^stone-Moore, A
Summary relation of the state of the Kingdom at the Conclusion of the third
pa^^ of this Parliamentary-Chronicle.
near York, together with the surrendering up of that great City it self, into
the power and possession of the Parliament; and the Earl of Manchesters most
successful advance Southward, after his departure from York, with his
conquering Army: As also in the Western-parts of the Kingdom, where the Lord
had marveilously blessed the proceedings four most noble Lord General, his
Excellency ^he Earl of Essex, both in releeving and securing of Li^^,
Plymouth, and other straightened Towns in the West, and in the reducing of
Saltash, Causam, S^ellum Greenvills house, Mount-Stamford, Plimpton,
Barnstable, Dartmouth, and War^ham, with many other strong Holds and Towns in
those parts.

Now, therefore, having (by the good providence of God) opportuni^y (...) so
happily (...)famous History of the Parliaments most (...) and inevitably
necessitated proceedings, and managing of affairs over the whole Kingdom, for
the public safety and subsistence thereof, against the destructive designs of
the pornicious and viperous Adversaries thereof, Atheists, Papists, Prelates,
and besotted, yea bewitched Malignants: I shall now, I say, by Gods gracious
assistance and the Readers constant candor and Christian patience, proceed to a
Fourth part of this our Parliamentarie-Chronicle, which, Varietas, in omnibus
delecta^.
for Varieties sake (which in all things and actions adds delight and content)
I have termed or Entitled, The Burning Bush not Consumed. To which
admirable-wonder, shown by God himself to Moses, The Title of this fourth Part
of our Parliamentary Chronicle, justified.
Exodus 3. 2, 3. etc. I doubt not but we shall make a most full and fit
resemblance and allusion, in the admirable providentiall passages of this
ensuing History. For* as the Angel of the Lord, or, as some, the Lord Christ
himself, appearing unto Moses in a flame of fire in the midst of a Bush which
Burned and was not consumed, called unto Moses, (who voluntarily turning toward
it, expressed his desire to see this strange sight, how it came to pass, that
the Bush, so, burning was not consumed) to draw near unto it, and to put off
his shoes from his feet, in regard of the place of Gods presence. So, I shall
now earnestly desire the godly Reader (in the sight and (...) of this most
admirable and renowned History of the Burning estate of our ^ottering State and
Kingdom, England the Burning-Bush not consumed.
all on fire with intestine furious flames of threatened ruin and confusion,
yet, to this day, even miraculously preserved, by the All-saving presence of
the Lords mighty protection and preservation, dwelling in the midst of it,
whereby it is not (nor has been, long ere this, as otherwise it had been)
utterly consumed and turned into ashes of desolation and d^struction. I shall
now therefore, I say, desire the godly Reader, to put off the shoes of
prejudicacy and sinister construction, and so to draw near, and seriously to
peruse and take special notice of these miracles of mercy and divine
providence, with the (...) (but (...)) (...) of Christian candor and
singleness of heart and affection, and seeing them, greatly and graciously to
admire and adore the infinite riches of the free grace and goodness of Him,
that thus dwelt in the Bush, for its so rare and unspeakable preservation.

August. 1644.
And thus, now, let us accordingly come near to behold this Wonder; And for the
first part and apparition thereof which presents it self to our eyes and
understanding, and wherewith I shall begin this Month of mighty and even
miraculous preservations, in this Burning Bush of our present Parliaments great
affairs, and necessitated Arms and negotiations, shall be of that most
famous, faithful, active, and successful Commander, Colonel Massy: Who
about the beginning of this Month of August 1644. by his own Letter to the
Speaker of the House of Commons in Parliament, certified us of a very brave
defeat which he had given to the Kings fiery Furies, and Cosmorant-like
devourers, the Cavaliers under the command of Colonel Mynne, which for the
Readers better satisfaction, I shall here insert, verbatim, as it was Printed
and published by authority of Parliament, August 6. 1644.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
KNowing the affairs of the Parliament so many and so weighty that their time
is precious, Colonel Massies Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons in
Parliament.
and therefore a tedious relation not so suitable to them, having by this Post
more fully related in my Letter unto the Lords and Gentlemen of the Committee
of both Kingdoms; it being their command I at all times should so do. I shall
entreat you to excuse me unto them at this time, who shall suddenly, God
willing, enform and render unto them, a more perfect account of both the late
following passages both of Gods displeasure, yet afterward Mercy unto us. That
upon Friday last, Colonel General Mynne being entered into our parts with a
considerable strength both of Horse and Foot, I had appointed a Party both of
Horse and Foot, to March with me to have met with the enemy, who was within
three or four miles of our Garrison, plundring and spoiling the Country.
Having therefore, given order to Major Hammond, my Major of Horse, to draw out
the Horse, and Major Gray, my Lord Stamfords Major, to draw out the Foot, both
having been with me for orders therein; and they meeting in my lodging near the
door, A branch of the Bush, here, on fire; but not burned.
it so fell out, that through some exceptions of Major Gray, taken at Major
Hammond, at a Council of War, they entering into the street, upon departure
from me, upon a blow given by Major Gray to Major Hamm^id, they drew their
swords upon each other, where and at which time Major Gray received his deaths
wound, whereupon our Foot Soldiers fell into a high discontent and quarrel;
which, notwithstanding it pleased the Lord so to appease that I presumed to go
forward with my Design and to march on. And the next day in the morning we
met with the enemy at Kidmarl^y, entered fight with them, when by Gods great
hand of mercy to us, we slew their General Mynne, General Mynne slain, and a
brave Victory obtained.
with some other Officers, and about an hundred Soldiers, and took prisoners
of them, one Lieutenant Colonel Passey, Major John Buller, seven Captains,
three Lieutenants, five Ensigns, and twelve Sergeants with other Officers and
men of note, and of common Soldiers about three hundred; the rest of the enemy
fled and escaped, some to Lidbury, whither our Horse pursued them: But by
reason of another body of strength come from Worcester, of about two hundred
Horse, and five hundred Foot, coming and advancing in our sight, purposing to
have joined with Colonel Mynne, we thought it more safe to gather up our
straggling pursuers, and make our march back to Ridmarly with safety, and to
make good our obtained Victory, and there to expect the advancing enemy; rather
than presumptuously to hazard our selves and the rest, in seeking the enemy
with our tired Horse, and wearyed Foot, and so they retreated to Lidbury, and
we to Gloucester, where we have much cause to magnify the Almighties goodness
to us, and to sing incessant praises to him for the same. Our loss was, only,
that Colonel Harley was shot in his left arm, but no danger to his life or
health, praised be God; and who like a most gallant and valiant Gentleman
indeed, behaved himself in this fight; and the rest also did like very brave
men; Two or three of our Soldiers were slain, but, praised be the Lord, not
one Officer, and not passing four or fire more wounded. Thus much at present,
I thought it my duty to signify from my self, whose faithfulness shall ever
be manifest in the Parliaments Service and Cause, being unto Your self, Sir, a
most thankful acknowledger of your many favors, and

Your most humble Servant, Edward Massy.


ABout the eighth of this instant August also came credible information by
Letters to London from We^, that that most valiant, loyal and active
Commander, Colonel Mition, Governor of Oswestre, and valiant and faithful
Sir Thomas Middleton, (to lessen our danger of Prince Roberts going Westward
against the Lord General) joining together with about three hundred Horse and
four hundred Foot, A brave defeat given to the enemy at Welchpool, in
Mountgomery shire.
marched from thence, to Welsh pool in Montgomery, in Wales, two long miles
distant, at which place, that bold and bloody Prince of Plunderers, his own
Regiment of Horse were quartered, and where they suddenly falling on his sleepy
and secure Cavaliers, early in the morning, they killed Ruperts own Cornet, who
refused quarter which was proffered him, took so many Horse that they mounted
most of their Foot home again, The prize and prisoners taken.
even above three hundred; they also took about an hundred Prisoners, besides
three Captains, three Cornets, three Quartermasters, and diverse other
Officers, with much Arms and Baggage: But Sir Thomas Dallison, (brother to
Popish Dallison the Lawyer) who commanded those Horse, had the unfortunate
happiness to escape away, The shrewd strait that Sir Thomas Dallison was put
unto.
and for haste was feign to run away only in his shirt, and left his breeches
behind him (such a strait he was put unto) wherein was found a Letter to
Prince Robber, which he intended that morning to have sent to his impious
Highness.

Much also about the same time came certain information by Letters out of the
West to London, that Colonel Sydenham that valiant and loyal Commander in
Arms, assisted with that much honored and worthy Gentleman, The Town of
Wareham yielded to Colonel Sydenham.
Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Knight and Baronet, having some time lain before
Wareham, a strong Garrison Town of the Enemies, about four miles from Pool;
Now at length gave a fierce assault upon the Town, had gained the outworks, and
that the Enemy sent a Drum for a Parley, which being granted, a respit for an
answer was desired by the Town, till next morning, but this would not be
yielded to, nor for any longer time than one hour: whereupon the Town of
Wareham (upon Articles of fair agreement) was surrendered unto them, and the
one thousand two hundred Horse and Foot which lay before it, was immediately
designed to march further Westward to Colonel Middleton. A Letter from the
Lord of Inchiquin out of Ireland occasioned the speedy yielding of this Town.
Now here also I must farther inform the Reader, that this strong Town was
especially so soon surrendered by reason of a Letter sent from the Lord of
Inchiquin out of Ireland to his brother, Lieutenant Colonel O Brian, then
Governor of Wareham, in his said brothers absence, in which Letter the said
Lord of Inchiquin had declared. That his resolution wa^ to stand firm to the
Parliament, and to live and die in the defense of their Cause, which ^ee now
most clearly saw was in the right, and that the Kings party bad merely abused
them all, and sought the certain subversion of (the true) Br^testant Religion,
both in England and in Ireland, and therefore desired him that he would
seriously consider of the same, and speedily surrender the Town of Wareham to
the use of the Parliament. Which Letter being read to the Soldiers in the
Town, they were all, for the most part, willing to have the Town surrendered,
only some few Irish Rebels were averse, upon whose obstinate denial, they
were presently dispatched out of the way, and cut off by the other Soldiers, in
part of requital of the Protestant blood, which they and their barbarous and
bloody brethren had shed in Ireland; And the said Lieutenant Colonel and the
rest of his Soldiers presently declared themselves for the Parliament; and he
also prevailed so far with his Soldiers that five hundred of them took the
Covenant, and were willing to be shipped away for Munster in Ireland, to assist
his brother, the foresaid Lord of Inchiquin, and the other Parliament Forces in
the said Province, against the Irish Rebels.

And about the tenth of this instant, Letters out of Staffordshire advertised,
that Bagot, the Governor of Litchfield, had caused twelve of his bravest
Horses to be breathed and rid abroad some few miles, Twelve brave Horses
surprised by the Garrison of Stafford.
to take the fresh air, forsooth; which being so abroad, they were all suddenly
surprised and snapt up, by a party of about twenty Horse of the Garrison of
Stafford, who had been scou^ing abroad, upon some discovery, and were informed
thereof, and got between them and home, and took them all, and safely carried
them away with them; which said twelve Horses were of that value and estimation
with the Governor, that be offered a thousand pound to have had them again,
but could not.

About the sixteenth of this instant August, we also received a perfect and
faithfully satisfying relation of the certainty of the thrice noble and
renowned Earl of Manchesters victorious proceedings, The Noble Earl of
Manchesters advance from York.
and farther advance in those Norther^ parts from Dorcaster (after that most
famous Victory at Marston-Moor, (...) York, which the Lord of Hosts gave us)
testified under the hand, and by the Letter of that Reverend and truly pious
Gentleman, Mr. Goods, Chaplain to the said Noble Earl, which (...) sent to his
reverend and religious brother-Minister and fellow (...) in to the said Earl,
Mr. Sim^on Ash, then in London. (...) whereof I have been ^^tracted, which was,
briefly, this: That the most Noble and Victorious Earl of Manchester being upon
his advance (according to order and agreement between the three renowned
Generals at (...)) from Doncaster and Blyth, they come to Wors^p about eight
miles from Blyth. At which time of his Lordships being there, Welbeck (the Earl
of Newcastles own dwelling house, wherein was a strong Garrison, Welbeck House
taken by the Earl of Manchester.
and where most of the Gentry of those parts of that County had laid up their
Plate and (...) goods) having been summoned and besieged some days before, by
his Lordships forces, was now surrendered to them upon composition and Articles
of Agreement; And whereas all the Soldiers in it ^ad liberty to march away
with their Arms and one price of Ordnance, whither they pleased, there were
not above thirty men of two hundred, who took away any Arms, but rather
desired that they might depart peaceably to their own homes; only there was a
broken Troop of Horse which went from thence with the foresaid thirty foot unto
Bever-castle. This place was taken without any great noise, nothing appearing
there but friendship and civility when the House was surrendered. Here we took
eight or nine great pieces of Ordnance, some bigget, some lesser, with good
store of M^^ch, Bullet, and two hundred Muskets. The keeping of this House was
committed to the care of Colonel Tiber^ay, a Commander of Nottingham Garrison,
because the House is in Nottinghamshire. There were left therein the Marquess
of Newcastles three Daughters, the Lord Widdringtons children, with others into
very peaceable manner, without any great disturbance to themselves or their
families there. After this, this noble and victorious General, the virtuous
and valourous Earl of Manchester advanced farther, and sent out a party of his
Army (consisting of (...) thousand two hundred Foot and a Regiment of Horse,
commanded by Major-Generall Grawford, and Colonel Pickering, with three of
their biggest pieces of Ordnance) to take (...), a strong hold in Yorkshire,
wherein were a Troop of Horse and two hundred foot* strongly fortifyed with
abroad and deep Tre^^ of eighteen foot deep, Sheffeild-castle taken.
and water in it, a strong (...) work (...) will round of two yards thick,
eight (...) of Iron Ordnance and two Morter-peices. Our forces being come nee^^
^his Castle, s^nt them three (...) which did (...) after which they sent (...)
to the Castle, who shot (...) at the (...), two of which shots came very near
and hardly mist him, The manner of assaulting the Castle.
and they flourishing their Swords cried out they would have no other parley:
Where upon ours advanced into the Town, and there quartered that night, in
which night and next day they raised two batteries within threescore yards of
the Enemies outworks, whereon our Ordnance fell to play upon them, and did as
much execution on the walls as pieces of their bigness could do, the greatest
being but a Demiculverin, and after about four and twenty hours playing and
plying thus with their Ordnance, and finding it would protract too much time to
lie thus battering with their pieces, they resolved to send to my Lord Fairfax
for the Queens pocket-pistall and a whole Culverin, which accordingly were soon
brought thither and presently mounted, and the next morning betimes, after
their coming, those three began to play, which did very great execution upon
one side of the Castle, and brought the strong walls thereof down into the
trenches and made a perfect breach; And the noble Major-Generall having
prepared all things in a readiness for storming the Castle, both Faggots,
Ladders, and other accommodations thereunto digested the form of storming by a
Council of War it was resolved to send another Summons to the Castle which
produced a present Treaty between three Gentlemen sent out of the Castle, and
three like men of our party, who speedily concluded the surrender of the Castle
upon fair Articles. We took in this Castle four hundred Arms, The prize
taken in the Castle.
besides the great Gunnes aforementioned, twelve barrels of Powder, much
Match, twenty tuns of great Iron-shot, about four hundred pounds worth of
Corn, Beef, Bacon, Cheese, and other provisions, all which and many other
things (except an hundred Muske^s and a Morter-peice, The Country gave my Lords
Soldiers 500. pound to drink for their good Service.
which were brought away) were left in the Castle for supply thereof, the
Country thereabout giving my Lords Soldiers five hundred pound among them for
(...) good service against this place.

Shortly after this the noble Major-Generall, having left Colonel Bright, a
Commander of my Lord Fairfaxes, and a party of Foot in the Castle, by order
from the most noble Earl of Manchestor, advanced toward B^wzar, alias, (...),
about eight miles from Sheffeild, Boulsover-castle also yielded to the Earl of
Manchester.
it being another strong House of Marquess Newcastles in Darby shire, which
was well man^^d with Soldiers, and strengthened with great Guns, one whereof
carried eighteen pound bullet, others nine pound, and it had strong works about
it, yet this Castle also upon summons, was soon surrendered up to my Lords
Forces, upon fair and moderate Articles granted to them. The prize taken in
this Castle.
It pleased God to give us in this Castle of Boulsover, an hundred and twenty
Muskets, besides Pikes, Halberts, etc. Also one Iron Drake, some leaden
bullets, two Morter-peices, some other Drakes, nine barrels of powder, with a
proportion of Match, some Victuals for our Soldiers, and some plunder.
Immediately also after this, Staley-House also taken.
they all marched to Staley-House, which was strongly fortified, but upon our
Armies advance to it, it was soon surrendered also, upon Articles of agreement,
and in it we had twelve pieces of Ordnance, two hundred and thirty Muskets, an
hundred and fifty Pikes; And Mr. John Fretchwell (who had long held the House
fortified with strong Works, for the service of the King) being then convinced
of the goodness of our cause, did very freely and voluntarily render to the
Major-Generall all the Arms aforesaid, Wingfleld-Mannour besteged by Darby
forces
with much other Ammunition. From hence, shortly after, they also advanced to
Wingfeild-Mannour, about eight miles distant, which House had been long
besieged by Darby Forces, but was not, at this time, taken, nor likely to be,
without more assistance, which also upon the advance of our Forces, God
delivered into our hands, as in its due and proper place, we shall make more
particular mention thereof; and thereby most of the Northern parts were
cleared, as far as Newark, save only Pomfret-castle, and some few other strong
Houses or Holds beyond York. In all which the Lord our God made this most Noble
and renowned Earl of Manchester, a most victorious and glorious instrument.

About the eighteenth of this instant, came certain intelligence out of the
West, that in the time of the Lord Generals unhappy enclosure in heathenish (I
had almost said hellish) Cornwall, by the Kings Forces, who also at that time
were in no little straits for want of provision for his Army also, and was
therefore forced to send into Sommersetshire for supplies therein; whereof
Leivtenant General Middleton watchfully having gotten intelligence, A brave
defeat given to the Enemy by Colonel Middleten.
and that there were diverse Carriages and Wagons laden with necessaries for
the King gotten together: He very seasonably marched thither and met with
them, valiantly encountered their convoy, slew and took about an hundred and
forty Horse, and many or most of the Carriages. After which he marched farther
toward Sherbor^, and sending our parties for intelligence, was certainly
informed that Sir Francis Dorrington, Sir William Courtney, and others; in all
about a thousand Horse and Dragoones were at Lamport: Whereupon he advanced
with a party of five hundred Horse and Dragoones to Pederton, where the enemy
was in readiness to receive him, at his coming. And being now in sight of
each other, Major Ennis and Major Car charged them most gallantly, Another
gallant Victory obtained by Colonel Middleton.
being seconded by Colonel Middleton, who at the very first encounter Routed
the Enemies Horse and Dragoones (though their Dragoones had lined the Hedges)
and pursued them within half a mile of Bridgewater. In which conflict he took
prisoners, one Major, three Captains, one Leivtenant, two Cornets, two
Quarter Masters, forty common Soldiers, and fourscore Horses, and killed
fifty upon the place; on our side Major Car was taken prisoner, and only scure
common Soldiers more; and here also ours took the Enemies Carriages.

And about the twentieth of this instant August, we received farther
intelligence out of the West, of some more good service done by this foresaid
Leivtenant General Middleton since his so routing of Sir Francis Dorrington,
as aforesaid, namely, that he fell upon the Enemies with a party of three
hundred Horse and a hundred Dragoones at Farringdon, near Bristol, where he
also most bravely dispersed the Enemy and took these prisoners following, A
third brave de^eat given to the Enemy, by Col. Middleton.
viz. Colonel Edward Bisse, four Captains, five Leivtenants, one Cornet, one
Quartermaster, a Chaplain of their Army, and a Surgeon, eight and thirty
Troopers, two Gentlemen Troopers, twelve Foot Soldiers, three barrels of
powder, with a good quantity of Match and Ball, together with an hundred Horse.

Much also about the same time we were for certain advertised out of
Lancashire, that a party of Prince Robbers forces, being about three hundred of
them, whom he left in that County, and were going to fortify Wiggen, Sir John
Meldrum defeats the Enemy in Lancashire.
whereof Sir John Meldrum (Commander in chief in that County) having certain
intelligence, he sent a considerable party to them, who surprised them all,
with all their Arms and Ammunition, and so also utterly frustrated their
intended design.

August the two and twentieth, (...) credible information by Letters out of
Lancas. to London, that the Lord Ogleby, a Scotch incendiary fell upon Colonel
Doddington, near Preston in Loncashire, as he was marching out of Yorkshire
to Sir John Meldrum then in Lancashire: Colonel Doddington, at the first, had
the worst, but young Colonel Shuttleworth, who indeed deserved to be an elder
brother for his activity and very gallant performances in this Service,
Colonel Doddington takes the Lord Ogleby prisoner.
came in timely to the releif of that valiant Gentleman Colonel Doddington,
and put the Enemy, consisting of four hundred Horse, to a total Route, slew
many on the place, and took many prisoners, among whom were the Lord Ogleby
himself: Colonel Mynne, and Leivtenant Colonel Huddlestone, a man of power
and much repute in Cumberland; and diverse other persons of quality, Scottish
Commanders and Gentlemen, were taken prisoners; they also took threescore Horse
with their Riders: and a party of these also endeavoring to get to
Latham-House, as a place of retreat, was surprised by our Forces which lay
before Latham-House, and every man of them taken prisoners.

Much also about the same time came certain and unquestionable intelligence
that the Cavaliers were soundly cudgelled in Cheshire; for, Colonel Marrow, a
second Nimrod of those parts, and indeed a stout Soldier and brave Commander,
issuing out of the City of Chester, A brave defeat given to the Enemy by Sir
William Brereton.
with about fourescors or an hundred Horse, was received by a party of that
most renowned and Religious Commander, and loyal Patriot, Sir William
Breretons, (near Crowton-House, where we kept a Garrison) who most bravely
routed the Colonel, Colonel Marrow slain.
and in the conflict wounded him mortally, of which wounds he dyed the very
next day in Chester; at which time Sir William took many prisoners. And Prince
Robber, to revenge the death of Colonel Marrow, advanced next day with two of
his best Regiments of Horse to beat back Sir William Breretons Forces, but,
Prince Robber with two Regiments of horse defeated.
the Robber was routed and about four hundred of his men slain on the place,
and taken prisoners; In which conflict, valiant and undaunted Captain Zanchie,
who commanded Sir Williams own Troop, most gallantly pursued the enemy, within
pistoll-shot of the walls of Chester, and valiant Lieutenant Colonel Jones
performed his part in this conflict with no less valor and gallantry; and a
Corporal of Sir William Breretons Troop, by name John Cooper, seeing a most
brave Horse, which the Enemy could not get into the Church in Tarvin Town
(where the fight was very hot and furious) but was fain to be held by the
bridle, The valiant performances of Sir William Breretons forces in the fight
at Tarvin.
by one of the Enemies under the Church wall, this brave spirited Corporal
adventured to fetch the Horse away, but they fired so fast out of the Church
upon him, that he was forced twice to retreat, but he adventured the third
time, pistolled the enemy and so brought away the Horse, which was valued to
be worth, at least, fourscore pound.

And about the same time, Another most brave defeat given to the Enemy by Sir
John Meld^um, at Ormskirk.
the renowned Major General of Lancas. Sir John Meldrum having notice of the
Enemies marching toward Ormskirk, made haste after them, overtook them on
Tuesday the twentieth of August, in the Evening, upon a Moore near unto
Ormskirk, where they stood in Battalia, and upon the first charge of our
Musketteers, which were under the command of Colonel Booth, they all fled,
whereupon our Horse bravely fell upon them and totally routed them, in the
pursuit of whom, they took about eight hundred Horse (some Letters report a
thousand) and three hundred prisoners; 800 Horse, and 300 prisoners taken.
but by reason of the night coming so fast upon them they could not improve
the Victory, as otherwise they might have done; but the Lord Byron, and the
Lord Mollenaux were forced to leave their Horses in the flight, and to hide
themselves in a Corn-field, some of the special prisoners then taken, were
Colonel Sir James Prestwich, Leivtenant Colonel Cottingham, Captain James
Anderton, with five or six Captains more, six or seven Leivtenants, four
Cornets, one Quartermaster, eight or ten Gentlemen of worth and quality, two
Priests or malignant Ministers, and as I said before, above two hundred and
fifty common Soldiers.

And here now, give me leave, good Reader, to give thee this necessary note or
observation upon some of the forepast premises, especially touching Gods very
gracious dealing with his much menaced and molested Servants in Lanoashire and
Cheshire, A brief note, how the Lord prospe^ed our proceedings against bloody
Prince Robber, in and about Lancashire.
and those parts, and his most just and revenging hand of displeasure upon that
bold and bloody Prince Robber, and his great strength of Horse, wherein he
much boasted and ^oulstred up his proud hopes of subduing or ruinating those
Counties: For, in a very short space it was sorely and suddenly abated and
decreased by the great hand of God toward us. As first, a^ Welsh-pool (as I
have forementioned) there were taken by Sir Thomas Middleton, and Colonel
Mitton, with the assistance of the Forces of Cheshire, three hundred forty six
Horses of Ruperts own Regiment; and within a sevennight after that, there were
taken by Colonel Ashton at Holland in Lancashire two hundred Horse; At Preston
also in Lancashire, presently after, at least threescore Horse, and at this
last mentioned brave skirmish by the Lancashire Forces, at Ormskirk in
Lancashire, about nine hundred Horse, and by Sir William Brereton, at Tarvin,
Almost 2000. of Ruperts Horse taken by ours besides prisoners.
(as was fore-specified) at least three hundred Horse; which, in all, make up,
about one thousand eight hundred Horse, besides the prisoners, then, taken with
them.

And about the four and twentieth of this instant August, I received a summary
Relation of the valiant actions of that loyal and active brave Commander
Colonel Fox, A brief relation of some active and victorious performances of
Colonel Fox.
(so much inveighed against by that base Pamphleter Aulicus, the Kings Liar in
chief, as witty Britanicus rightly titles him) which I thought not sit to let
slip, or to sleep in oblivion, which were as follows. Upon this vigilant
Commanders discovering of the quartering of Worcester forces in Vpon-Warren,
some twelve miles from his Garrison, he went forth with a party of Horse and
took, in their quarters, Leivtenant Colonel Dudley, (as appeared by a
Commission found in his pocket) Captain Milward, A prize taken at Vpton-Warren.
Leivtenant Newberry, Quartermaster Dod, two Corporals, ten other Soldiers,
and twenty Horse; and with these he also brought away a drove of Cattle from
the Earl of Shrewsbury, and a little after he took Captain Knight in his
Quarter, at Stoke, near Bromsgrave. And not long after upon intelligence that
the Commission of Array sat in execution thereof at Ombersley, four miles
from Worcester, and seventeen miles from Egherson Garrison, he desired my Lord
of Denbighs forces to join with him for their apprehension, which was
accordingly attempted, where they took forty prisoners, diverse of them being
men of note, Another brave prize taken by Colonel Fox.
an hundred and thirty brave Horses, an hundred and fifty Beasts, but most of
the Commissioners very hardly escaped, by reason of some delays of the Earls
forces, who stayed a little too long upon some other design near Worcester,
contrary to the Colonells direction and desire; yet notwithstanding by reason
of the Colonells and his cubs pursuit after them over the River Severn, where
they were enforced to swim, he recovered diverse excellent Horse and Arms, and
so returned with this prize, in safety.

And upon the twentyeth of this instant, A third prize also taken by Colonel
Foxes Forces. What a terror Colonel Fox was to all his enemies about him.
the said valiant and vigilant Colonel having intelligence of some Cavaliers
to lie in Bromsgrove, he sent forth a party of Horse under the command of
Captain Tadman, and Captain Johnson, who surprised, in the place, Captain
Barnsley and all his Soldiers, he being a Gentleman of note and quality and a
W^^^ster Captain. And thus, this noble Colonel did so hunt and fright the
Cavaliers in all those parts, that scarcely one of them were heard of in the
Country thereabout, but he presently pulled them into his den, nor durst any
enemy come out of Worcester to oppose his proceedings, insomuch as that the
greatest Malignants and Papists about him were forced to fly or make their
peace with him.

About the four and twentieth also of this instant August, we were certainly
informed by Letters out of Darbyshire, that whereas that most active and
valiant Commander and loyal Patriot of his Country, Winck field Manor taken
by Sir Joh. Gell
Sir John Gell, had long time lain before Winck field-mannour, the Sanctuary of
all the Papists and Delinquents of that County, he was now (by the brave
assistance of the most noble Earl of Manchesters forces) become Master of it,
it being now at last surrendered up into his possession, on fair terms and
Articles of agreement, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein, except only
what the Cavaleirian Commanders carried away with them for their own particular
uses, which were only, each Commander his Sword and Pistol. There were in the
House above there hundred Soldiers, and fourteen pieces of Ordnance, and it
was a House very strongly fortified and of no small concernment to us in the
taking of it. And now Sir John Gell was, by Gods mercy, as good as his word,
who had vowed he would never leave the said siege till (if God so pleased) he
had the place; and brave Colonel Crawford, with part of the Earl of
Manchesters forces, came (as I touched before) seasonably to his assistance, and
was a great help unto him in the said business.

And about the six and twentieth of August, our most pious, prudent and
vigilant Parliament, published an Ordinance of Parliament, wherein it was
Ordered that the Counties of Wilts, An Ordinance of Parliament for the
Association of the Western Counties.
Sommerset, Devon, Dorset, and Cornwall, with the Cities of Bristoll and
Excester, as also the Town and County of Pool, be Associated for their mutual
Defense against the Cavalierian Adversary, and that the Committees nominated in
the Ordinance of Parliament, of the first of July, shall put in execution the
said Ordinance, in the Counties aforementioned, and that all the Colonells,
Leivtenant Colonells, Captains and other Officers, are also to Associate
themselves, and with the well-affected of the said Counties to aid and succor
one another; and giving thereby full power and Authority to the said Committees
to put in execution the Ordinance for Voluntary Loanes and Contributions to the
Parliament, for raising of Moneys and Forces, for the suppression of all
Malignant forces against the Parliament. It was thereby also Ordered that the
Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Pembrook, and the Earl of Salisbury, the
Lord Roberts, and the Lord Bruce, with the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of
the said Counties, in the House of Parliament, have power to nominate and
appoint all Colonells, Leivtenant Colonells, Sergeant Majors both of Horse and
Foot, to Command the Forces so raised in the Association, and the Lord
General, or such as shall from time to time command in Chief, shall grant
Commissions to them accordingly.

Much also about this time, viz. the six and twentieth of this instant August
we received Letters from the Western parts of the kingdom, that his
Majesty's, and his Excellencies headquarters were very near to one another,
and that four hundred of his Majesty's Horse had cast themselves into three
divisions, and advancing near my Lord Generals Quarters, and with disdainful
words reproaching them and challenging them to fight; the brave young Gentleman
Major Archibald Stranghan quickly apprehending the same and not able to endure,
A brave and most Heroic exploit of Sergeant Major Stranghan against the Enemy
in the West.
desired that he might receive so much honor from his Excellency as but to
have Commission to charge them with an hundred Horse, with which force (though
far less in number, than the Enemies) he doubted not (he said) but, by
Gods assistance, to return victorious. This gallant motion of the young
Gentleman being much applauded and well entertained, he received the first
impression of the Enemy without moving from the place at all, until the Enemy
being come nearer and almost breast to breast, he fired upon them, at once, with
so much fury and so good success that about twenty of them were observed to
fall together, on which the rest began to fly; whereupon finding his
opportunity and pursuing it, he was charged on by the second division, and
received them with such undaunted Spirits and magnanimity with his pistols,
that they also, following the example of the former, presently began to fly
away confusedly, not being able to endure the heat of this hot charge and
fierce tempest. After this also his pistols being discharged, he most
unweariedly fell in pell-mell upon the Enemies last Division with the Sword,
and soon also enforced them to an ignominious flight unto the body of their
Army, which seeing the disorder of the Horse, began to disband and fly
themselves. His Majesty was then not far off in the Field, and was a sad
spectator of the Tragedy of his men: And it was verily believed, that had this
valiant Scot been suddenly seconded to pursue home his Victory, he had taken
his Majesty in the Field and totally routed his Army, so great and general was
the distraction, that at that present they were in. For this brave service his
Excellency rewarded the victorious Major with many thanks and appellations of
honor, and with a Horse esteemed to be worth an hundred pound.

And about the seven and twentieth of this instant August, it was for certain
informed by Letters from Sir William Brereton to the Parliament, that there
being a great strength of the Enemy at Malpasse, with intention to march into
Wales after that bold and bloody Prince Robber; A most brave defeat given to
the Enemy at Malpasse, by Sir William Breretons Forces.
Sir William Brereton sent out a party of Horse and Foot, consisting of about
eight hundred, under the command of Leivtenant Colonel Jones. The Enemy having
notice of the said Party drew out all their Horse and Dragoones in Battalia,
consisting of about two thousand, and placed their Musketteers in hedges and
places of advantage: The Enemy was about 2000 strong, we but 800.
Notwithstanding Leivtenant Colonel Jones with his Troop did most gallantly
charge through two Divisions of the Enemy, did great execution on them, and
returned without the loss of a man, himself only shot into the thigh, the
rest of the Troops (there being but four Troops in all) came up, and some of
the Foot after them, and played their parts most bravely, The Enemy is routed.
The prize and prisoners taken
and with Leivtenant Colonel Jones gave another fie^ce charge upon the Enemy,
quite routed them, some of them flying into Wales, others into Chester, and
ours took about an hundred and forty Horse and many prisoners, the chief whereof
were these; Major Maxie, (or, Murrey) Major to Sir Charles Lucas; Major
Cromwell, Major to the Duke of Yorkes Regiment; Majo^ Crathorn a Papist;
Captain Clavering or other to the late Colonel Clavering: And the Commanders
slain in this brave conflict, Commanders slain.
were, Colonel Baines, Colonel Conyers, Major Heskith; another Major buried
at Chester, and another Major buried at Malpasse; One Leivtenant Colonel
slain, but not (then) known who he was; Captain Harris, and Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, the Commander in chief desperately wounded and carried to Chester for
cure. Common soldiers slain.
There were also slain upon the place, and in the flight about an hundred; and
those that fled to Chester were, with much affront, kept out of the gates, and
not suffered of a long time, to get in; as some that came out of Chester,
shortly after, informed us.

About the eight and twentieth of this instant August we were credibly
informed by Letters out of the West, and in specially by the most noble Lord
General his Excellencies own Letter to the Parliament, from Lestithiell, A
most per^idious plot, and dangerous Design to have blown up our Magazine, and
destroyed our Army at Lestithiell in Cornwall.
that the perfidions Enemy (who dare not compass their base aims and
designs, in an open, fair, and honorable way, by battle, though double in
number) had about this time so managed their base and treacherous plot, that
into two close Wagons, wherein was a Magazine of at least 60 barrells of
Gunpowder, they had privily conveyed two notable Engines of War, which should
have blown up all the powder; and at the time, when the enemy thought to have
effected the design, they had drawn up their whole body of their Army toward
that part of his Excellencies Army, Two wilde-fire Engines conveyed into our
close wagons, where were 60 barrels of powder.
expecting the blow, upon which they intended to fall most fiercely on the Lord
Generals Forces; but it most graciously pleased the Lord, that one of the said
Engines, to the end whereof a lighted match was fastened, was burnt to the very
neck of the Engine (whereat it was to give fire to the wildfire in the Engine)
but, The manner of the preservation described.
then, the coal went out of it self; the other match also in the other Engine,
was burnt within an inch of the wilde-fire of that Engine, just at the time
when by a Cooper it was seasonably and happily discovered before the dangerous
blow was given, whereupon the Engines being taken out by the said Cooper and
brought to my Lord General, The two Engines sent up to the Parliamen^, where
they were publicly shown and seen.
which his Excellency, together with his Letter presently sent up to the
Parliament, and was publicly showed to the Houses of Parliament, and as some
that were there present said, it was just after that fashioned Engine, which
his Majesty delivered with his own hands (being covered with red leather, as
that was) to the party that made his Majesty believe that he would blow up the
Magazine at Ailesbury, but as that, so this most base and treacherous Design
of theirs was, by Gods great mercy and good providence, happily prevented, and
their wicked hopes thereby frustrated, and all they got thereby was shame and
infamy.

And thus, now, I hope (good Reader) thou have fully and clearly seen (in the
whole progress of this Months contemplation of Gods wonderful protection and
preservation of his Church and Children) the great and amazing wonder of the
World, in these our Mosean days, The Burning-Bush no^ consumed.
even, The Burning-Bush (the Church or Cause of God) not consumed, though
enclosed with flames of wrath and rage, of the wicked and outrageous intestine
enemies thereof, on every side, both by Sea and by Land, blowing the coals,
and adding combustible fuel to the fire of their fury, and endeavoring to heat
the furnace of their frantic rage and madness, yet seven times hotter and
hotter; Dan. 3.
And yet Gods Three (yea 30 times three) most faithful and zealous Shadrachs,
Meshachs, and Abednego's, still preserved and kept safe in the midst of the
fiercest and most furious conflagrations; and all this made most clear and
manifest both in all the forementioned famous Victories obtained, and
perfidious plots, and dangerous designs detected and prevented: And have we
not then great cause, with holy Moses, both to put off the shoes of sin and
transgression, and also to approach unto, and fix the feet of our affections on
the ^oly ground of most grateful contemplation of this great wonder, and in
sacred admiration thereof to break out into holy adoration of our great and
good God, and with holy Moses to sing and say: Exodus 15. 11.
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like unto thee, glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, and doing wonders?

BUT, September 1644.
now to go on in our next Months sacred and serious observation, of this
foresaid wonder, still continuing all this next ensuing September. And herein I
shall desire, in the first place br^ifly to show, or rather, to remember the
Reader, how that about the beginning of this month of September, it pleased
the Lord, again, to set his blessed Bush in the midst of a most dangerous
devouring flame (to see to) and yet the Bush not Consumed; Even to suffer our
prime Parliamentary-Army of the whole Kingdom, then under the Command of that
most noble, Our formidable Parliamentary Army coopt up in Cornwall in the West,
and in great danger, but most mightily preserved and delivered.
renowned, loyal, and most courageous Lord General, the Earl of Essex, to
be brought into a strange strait, and most unhappy noose in a corner of
Cornwall, in the West, one of the remotest parts of the Kingdom, (but by what
mischeivous means or improvidence, I know not) rendering that (at first) most
formidable Army, most obnoxious to much danger and distress, of the numerously
augmented forces of the most malicious and outrageous enemies thereof, who by
the daily additionall and increasing powers of the perfidious and atheistical
Cornish and Devonshire men, had strangely and strongly coopt and hedged in that
our most famous Army for diverse weeks together in a nook or angle of that
County of Cornwall, and no Reserve or considerable Releif, in so long time,
coming to their aid and assistance; insomuch that the extraordinarily
increasing wants in the Army, and the extraordinary and inevitably necessitated
duty of his Excellencies Soldiers being so incessantly continued, and (as I
touched before) the powers of the Enemy so daily increasing and growing big
with rage and pride against them; they could not possibly any longer subsist
without releif: Whereupon a Council of War being called, it was resolved (an
absolute necessity lying on it) that the Horse of the Army should break through
the enemy, and the Foot (alas, alas) should stand upon their own guard and
Defense, Here was, indeed, the B^^ning Bush not Consumed.
till more aid (if by any means it could be procured) should be sent unto
them; and thereupon 3000 Horse, under the command of that renowned Soldier and
brave Commander Sir William Belfore, (the rest of the Horse remaining still
with the foot) violently brake through the Enemy and most fiercely made good
their retreat, notwithstanding all the power of the Enemy, and brought off
with them several of the Enemies Colors and slew many: And, ( Probdolor,
under correction of better judgment) why might not our whole Army together,
both Horse and Foot, as safely and certainly, have come off fully, had that
Council of War played Fair play above board?) So got to Sal^ash and
Plymouth, with very little or no considerable loss in so desperate a Service.

Now, thus, our Foot forces being left behind under the Command in ch^if of
that most noble and ever to be renowned, virtuous and valourous Soldier and
brave Commander Major General Skippon, (his Excellency the Lord General, and
the Lord Roberts being also gone to Plymouth by Sea) and the Enemy choosing
rather to bend their greatest power against the Foot, than in pursuit of the
Horse, and having also resolved at a bloody Council of War (thinking the day
their own, The Kings cruel Council of War resolved to give no quarter, but
to put all to the Sword.
and the birds to be all caugh^ in the net) in a most cruel and merciless
manner, to put them all to the Sword, and not to give Quarter to any, and
likewise in pursuance hereof, they having taken about 30 of our Foot Soldiers,
and put them all to the Sword, save only two that by Gods good providence
^scaping, ran from them and acquainted the rest of the Foot forces with the
s^quell thereof: Hereupon brave Majo^ General Ski^pon, Major General Skippons
(...), but brave speech and ^esolution to live ^^ die with his Soldiers.
like a true Soldiers, indeed, made a gallant and courageous speech to his
said Foot forces to this effect. That it would be more honor for th^^ to die
valiantly in the field, than to (...) themselves b^fely or, ^owardly to the
tyranny of so bloody and (...) an (...), professing himself, most cheerfully,
there ready to live or di^ with them; (...), first; to sell their lives (by
Gods help) at (...) a rate (...) ever Soldiers did. Whereupon they all, most
unanimously and cheerfully resolving the same, fell upon the Enemy with such
undaunted courage and resolution, being led up in person by so brave and
Lyon-like a Commander, who (to use his Excellencies own expression, in his
Letter to the Parliament of him) fought like a Lion; and disdained that their
brave Ordnance and Artillery should be gained from them, The fight begun.
at a lesser value than the hearts blood of many hundreds of their Enemies;
which was so indeed, ere they parted, for they discharged their great pieces,
diverse times upon the Enemy, which did great execution and slew very many of
them, whom they might see fall fast before them (and the King himself, being in
fight thereof in the field) and still received the rest so gallantly, that the
Enemy (instead of being absolute Victors) was at last enforced (though much
against their former intentions) not only to give them Quarter, Not only
quarter, but also fair conditions granted to our Soldiers.
but, farther also, to condescend to very honorable conditions and Articles on
our Soldiers part; though, in the issue, the Enemy proved most perfidious (as
their constant practice was) in violating of them all, and bespoiling and
stripping them (ere they left them) of all they had (save only their lives)
even taking from them their very clothes off their backs, The most perfidious
disloyalty of the Enemy in violating all the conditions agreed on.
boots, stockings, and shoes from their legs and feet, and enforcing some of
them to march stark naked, and bare footed, with only a base convoy of their
perfidious Enemies Horse, Here again the Burning-Bush not Consumed.
whom (being quite disarmed) they durst not resist. And though renowned Major
General Skippon rode back, and boldly and bravely complained to the King
himself thereof, yet he could find no redress therein. But, howsoever let
the judicious Reader here judge and say whether here was not a wonder, indeed,
even no less than Gods Burning-bush not consumed, considering what a furious
and devouring flame was round about it, and whereinto it had been so strangely
(yea and treacherously too as many feared) entrapped and cooped up, but, thus,
as you have heard most admirably delivered and preserved from utter ruin and
destruction, as was threatened and resolved, which therefore, is with
extraordinary thankfulness to God to be beheld and looked upon, This
deliverance of our Soldiers was a singular merry of the Lord.
and most justly to be enrolled in the number of our singular great mercies,
and deliverances of the Lord wrought for us; as whereby (notwithstanding the
unhappy loss of so brave an Artillery and Arms of our Soldiers) yet, a wide
door was, thus, left open unto us, in good measure to r^crute our Army again,
considering that there is no competition or comparison to be made between the
raising of men and getting of Arms, the former being known by experience to
be very difficult, the other very easy to perform; And (which is also herein
very considerable) the mercy was so much the greater, and the loss the less,
in regard that his Excellency had taken far more Ordnances and Arms from the
Enemy, but a little before in this his Western Expedition, than were now lost
in this last disaster.

Now as touching the matter and cause of this great miscarriage, though I do
not, I dare not take upon me to discuss it, it having been, That this
miscarriage of our Army, was a plain plot of treachery.
I hope, thoroughly examined by others, to whom it more properly appertained;
yet give me leave, good Reader, to suspect still, that it was a plain piece of
treachery to the State and Parliament, and honest and honorable Major Gen:
Skippon, perceived it at last, (as it was reported) though too late, most
evidently, and therefore (as it was credibly informed) smiting himself upon his
breast, he said: Renowned Major General Skippon perceived this plot, but too
late.
We are betrayed! we are betrayed! But, who the persons were, was not then so
clear, yet some were known, and one of them ran to the King to secure himself;
and Colonel Butler was sent up to London by his Excellency, and committed to
the Tower of London, till he was examined about it. And it is the more easily
to be believed to have been a mere piece of treachery against the noble Lord
General, as being a thing plotted and contrived before he went into the West,
A notable and most pregnant proof or ground of the knowledge of this disaster
in the West to be a plot.
and that upon this ground, namely; That diverse of the most knowing and active
Royalists then among us at London, were heard, with much confidence, to say
(before his Excellency went forth in this Expedition) that the Lord General
would receive a blow in the West. In particular, a Gentleman, then, a prisoner
in Warwick-castle, by name, Mr. E. Andrews, the Son of Sir Eusebie Andrews,
who being among diverse Gentlemen, at a Tavern in Warwick, said before them all,
with imperious speeches, that he would be hanged if the Earl of Essex came
safe back again out of the West; And told them withal, that they should see
the Kings Army flourish; with other words to this effect, as I had it by
credible information. And this was presently after the Lord General was gone
into the West, when he had a most gallant and stout Army, indeed, and such an
one, as the Kings Army durst not look in the face, nor was it probable, durst
come so near it, as to behold their back-parts. For, his Excellencies Army was
then known to be a terror to the Enemy; for some of the chief of the Kings
Army, at the end of Newberry-battail (when they were carrying the body of the
Earl of Ca^narvan into the Town) said, Damn me, Essex will never be beaten,
and with fearful oaths were heard to swear, All the devils in hell could not
beat him. But now to proceed.

About the 4 of this instant September, Sir Thomas Middletons ammunition safely
conveyed unto Oswest^y from Wem, for the Welsh Affairs.
came certain information by Letters from Os^estry to London, that Sir Thomas
Middletons Ammunition was safely arrived from Wem to Oswestry, to the great
sorrow of the Enemy, who some few days before (as was certified by Letters
from Wem) issued out of Salop to Whittington, with at least 1200 foot and 400
horse to have intercepted it; But renowned Sir Thomas Middleton having
intelligence thereof sent out a party from Oswest^^y to guard the Ammunition,
which party discovering the Enemy, wheeled into the Rear, all the Horse being
with the Ammunition, in the Van, and so fell upon them, killed five upon the
place, took five prisoners, wounded many, and made the Enemy fly, but being to
guard the Ammunition, they durst not leave their charge to follow them, so the
Enemy wheeled back again from Franck ford-Hope near Elsmore, and so to Salop,
and out Ammunition, of exceeding great concernment for the succeeding Welsh
affairs, was (as I said) safely, thus, conveyed into Oswestry, ready there for
the following work in Wales, where of more in its due place.

About the 8 of this instant also came certain intelligence by Letters out of
Staffordshire, of a brave exploit performed by that most valiant and brave
Commander Colonel Rudgely in a most notable defeat which he gave unto the
Enemy; the substance whereof we received from Letters thence to this effect. A
brave defeat given to the Enemy by valiant Colonel Rudgeley.
We marched out of Stafford to Lynsell, and thence took from under the Walls,
at least an 104 Oxen and Cowes, and about 300 Horse; Then we marched to
Litchfield, whence we brought away above an 160 Oxen and Cowes and 60 Horse,
and presently after news being brought us that the Enemy was plundering at
Chartley, his Excellencies the Lord Generals own Lands, with an intent to drive
away his Cattle; whereupon our valiant Colonel, Col^ Rudgel^y drew forth all
those horses he had, and about an 180 foot, and marched thither, but they
having broke open the stable door, and taken a choice Colt of my Lord Generals
(which Colt was shot and killed by one of his Servants out of the house, as
they led him away) they were gone thence before we could get thither, and got
into Pen^h-Park to drive that; whereupon we marched to Vssiter and at Lacksley
we heard that the Enemy was marched toward Bromble, so with those few horse
which we had, we marched in haste after them, if possible to engage them,
till our foot came up unto us, and near unto Bagots-Brom^ey, after 10 miles
hard march, we fell upon their Rear, and upon the first charge took about 40
horse, and as many men and Arms, and pursued them to their main-body, which
consisted of at least 500 good horse, but our horse not being above an 100. we
were forced to retreat a little way, but presently rallyed again, which whilst
we were doing, the Enemy planted an ambuscado, which upon our second charge,
fired upon us, but we bravely beat the ambuscado up, and killed and took every
man of those so planted, and all their arms and Horses, and kept the rest in
play till our foot came up, and then they fell off from us, and we kept the
field. On our part we had only one man slain, and they took six prisoners; but
from them we took, a Sergeant Major, one Captain, one Leivtenant, two Quarter
master^, three Corporals, and the rest Common Soldiers, in all 18. and killed
about 30. took many Arms, and 50 Horse, and so returned safe with our said
prize.

Much also about the same time we had certain intelligence of some singular
good service done immediately after the forementioned furnishment of Oswestry
with Ammunition, by that most valiant and brave Commander, A brave defeat given
to the Enemy, by Sir Tho. Middleton.
Sir Tho. Middleton, at or near about Mountgome^y-castle, the substance of
which intelligence by a Letter, was this: That by Gods gracious assistance,
that noble Commander was advanced and came into Mountgomery, where he found the
people all very willing and ready to receive him, and that Sir Thomas had
summoned the Castle, and that his own Regiment fell, in that interim, upon
New-Town, and had there taken Sir Thomas Gardener, and his whole Troop of
Horse, 28 prisoners, 36 barrels of powder, some store of match, two Horse
Colors, one Quarter master; and since that, even immediately after came
certain information unto us, that the said most noble and renowned Commander
Sir Thomas Middleton, Mountgomery Castle taken by Sir Thomas Middleton.
having (as was forementioned) summoned the Castle of (...), where the black
Lord Horbert was, he, upon fair and honorable terms surrendered it without
much contestation about it, although it be a Castle as strong as any Castle in
the Kingdom whatsoever, or in the Principality of W^l^s, and of very great
concernment for the happy reduction of all North Wales, to the Parliament, of
which more in its proper place.

About the 10 of this instant September, we had certain information by Letters
from Wem, that the vigilant and active Committee there resident, having
intelligence of the drawing out of the forces in Shrewsbury, toward Ludlow, (as
was then conceived) but afterward they understood those forces marched toward
Sir Thomas Middleton, they sent out under the Command of Leivtenant Colonel
Rinking (a very good Soldier) a party of foot and horse to surprise
Morton-Corbet-Castle, The manner of taking Morton-Corbet-Castle. by Wem
Garrison.
and sent unto the Lord Calven to meet them with a party from Stoke, and upon a
Saturday night about one or two of the clock they came before the Castle, every
man being assig^ed the place where he should fall on. Now they being come
thither, it being but about four miles from Wem, and they finding the People in
great security, ordered the business thus: First, the Commander gave the Word,
which was Will and Tom, with order that if any asked who they were, to answer,
Will, and if the other answered not, Tom, they should give fire; this being
done, he sent Drums at a fields distance from the house, with order to beat a
march as soon as ever the assault began, which they did accordingly, and thereby
made the Enemy think that there had been a great strength, when as, indeed, it
was no such matter; Then presently the Leivtenant Colonel calling aloud to
bring up such a Regiment to such a place, and such a Regiment to another place,
(this much daunted the hearts of the Enemy at the hearing thereof) and then he
sent some to discover the Centery, with an order to tell the Centery that they
were friends, and to hold him in discourse until they had notice; which
service was so well performed on all parts* that before the Centinell knew who
we were, our Ladders were mounted and we in possession of one of their works,
and then the Enemy took the alarm, and our men plied the work most stoutly:
The Leivtenant Colonel endeavored with but ten men to have forced a little
door, wherein not prevailing, he marched along over the tops of the works with
but four men, and with these, fell upon them that were in another work, and
forced them with one volley to betake them to the House, where, out of the
windows and holes they within shot fiercely at us, till we by throwing in
among them some hand Grenades, they quitted those places, which gave way to
our men to break a stone pillar of a window, where the Leivtenant Colonel
entered, and his four men entered, and after them (immediately after) many more;
but before these were come in, the Enemy being at least 80 foot and 30 horse,
and fearfully supposing (by reason of the noise of the Drums, aforementioned,
and the Leivtenant Colonels calling together of so many Regiments) supposing
therefore, Morton-Corbet-Castle taken by five men only who first entered the
Castle.
I say, that a greater force of ours followed those five then entered into the
Castle, they all instantly cried out for quarter, which these five granted
them, and by that time the rest of our Forces were come up and had entered the
Castle and so possessed themselves firmly of it, and in it Major Bridgeman,
Captain Maurice, one Leivtenant, one Sergeant, one Quartermaster, one Ensign,
two Horse Colors, at least 80 Soldiers and 30 good Horses, 6 barrells of
powder, with much other provisions. The House was so strongly fortified, that
my Lord Calven, and the Leivtenant Colonel, who behaved themselves most
bravely in this action, said it might have been maintained against a great
strength; for, had it been day-work, they should not have attempted it. In all
this so resolute and even desperate service, we lost but one man, and had only
some few wounded.

Now much about this time there having come constant and most true intelligence
of the sweet tranquillity, and peaceable, and free Trading of the people in all
the Eastern and Southern Associated Counties of this Kingdom, where the the
Kings devouring Cormorants, the bold and bloody Cavaliers had no power to
pester them and pilfer from them, (which I may therefore, here, most justly
add to the Catalogue of all the rest of our most rare and singular
Parliamentary-mercies,) Some Collyr^n^ or eye salve to heal (if it were
possible) Malignants sore eyes.
as namely, in Cambridgeshire, what a goodly and full Fair there was kept at
Sturbridge, near the University, with free Trade and comfortable commerce, as
was formerly accustomed in our former most peaceable times; the like also at
Berry in Suffolk, Faires and freetrading in all the Associated Counties.
at Lyn in Northfolk, at Braintree in Essex, at Maidstone in Kent, at London
both at Peter's Fair in Westminster, Jameses and Bartholomew Fair, in
Smi^^field; and diverse other parts and places under the power of the
Parliament, and where, I say, the Cankerworms and Caterpillars of the kingdom,
the most accursed Cavaliers came not. The admirable mercy of God to London and
Westminster, in the pure and powerful preaching of the Word.
And again, if we look no farther than the most renowned and famous Cities of
London and Westminster, (the intolerable terrors and tormentors, under God, of
all the rotten Royalists) where the Word of God is most powerfully and purely,
most freely and frequently Preached; where peace and plenty are, (even to the
highest admiration of Gods infinite and unexpressible praise and glory)
enjoyed, and where they know not, But by hear say (ever magnified and omnified
be the free grace and great mercy of our good God) the most woeful
massacrings, plundrings, and pillagings, spoylings, and filthy deflouring of
all sorts and sexes, which in very many, yea, too too many parts and places of
the kingdom, are most sadly seen and suffered, where the Atheistical
Royalists, Romish and Malignant Atheists, rule and tyrannize, as in
Worcestershire, where the English Papists; and Cavalierian Atheists have (all
the time of these most unhappy wars) kept correspondency with those most
barbarous and bloody Canibals, The sad and bad condition of the Counties and
places under the Royalists power and tyranny.
the Rebels of Ireland. O the sad tragedies perpetrated and acted there in
those parts, by the Russels, Brunts, Canning^, and other inhumain Cavaliers of
that County! by the Giffords in Stoffordshire; the Tay^ors and Barnses in
War^^ickshire the filthy French, Walloones, and all other sorts of
blood-thirs^y Villains in all parts! I say, where the ravenous and all-ruining
Royalists get and keep pernicious power and pre-eminence: witness their horrid
and hideous cruelti^s, and more than Turkish barbarities acted in
Oxfordpris^ms, in Marlborough, Newbury, Redding, (when it was in their helli^h
hold) Mar^ field, Contraria juxta se posita magis illucescunt.
Gloc^s^e^ shire, Bathe, the Vizes, Sommersetshir^, Devon, and Cornwall, in
none of all which places, is permitted any free Trading, no powerful
Preaching, no comfortable or quiet living, but (as I said) the clean contrary.
And, now, s^riously and sadly put both these two conditions together, as white
to black, and light to darkness, yea even as representative heaven to hell,
and then tell me, O thou most obdurate-hearted, and Mole-eyed Malignant, if
thou be but Com^os mentis, if, I say, thou art not stark man, whether this
one, and only consideration (were there no more) be not enough in mere common
sense and reason; to open thy blind eyes, and cause thee to see thy gross
error, most pesti^ent prejudice and unreasonable rage and rancour against the
ways of God and work of Reformation, the great Cause and business of this
present most pious Parliament, so injuriously and so unjustly maligned and
abused by thee; God in mercy, at length, open thine eyes to see thy folly and
madness, and to be truly humbled for it. But to proceed.

Now much about the 14 of this instant, came certain intelligence from that
valiant and vigilant Commander Colonel Fox, how that a party of his being
drawn out by Captain Tudman, mar^hed toward Hartlebury-Castle, and there
salling upon a party of the enemies, took prisoners Sergeant Whitlework, and 4
others. That another Captain of his, Colonel Foxes constant activity and good
Services.
namely, Captain Johnson marched with a party of Horse to join with the
Coventry forces for the securing of Asherton Fair (here is another particular
confirmation of the truth of what was forementioned) from the Lord
Loughboroughs, or rather Rob-carryer, Hastings, and Litchfield Forces: Which
Fair (though with much ado) was secured; wherein Colonel Foxes Soldiers,
commanded by Captain Johnson aforesaid, unhorsed Colonel Lane, a Litchfield
Commander, brought away his Horse, Pistols, Cloak, and Bever, the Colonel
himself being sorely wounded, if not slain, was, with no small struggling, at
length rescued by a strong party, and so carried off to Litchfield, but his
chin was cut off in the fight, his arm shot and his head sorely wounded, and
he therefore deemed unlikely to live.

Much also about the 16 of this instant, that ever to be honored and approved
Patriot of his Country Alderman Pennington, then, Leivtenant of the Tower of
London, (having been brought into no small perplexity and trouble by the sudden
and silent escape out of the said Tower of those two bloody Rebels, The worthy
Leivtenant of the Tower of London, Alderman Pennington apprehended the two
Irish-Rebels, Macquire and Macmahoon, who had made an escape.
the Lord Macquire and Machmahoon) by the assistance of that most worthy Knight
Sir John Cl^tworthy, a Gentleman also of a most public Spirit and known
integrity, and a member of the House of Commons in Parliament, who having
private intelligence of the said Lord Macquire and Macmahoons place of
residence, where they had been securely h^^boured ever since they got out of
the Tower; both these worthy Gentlemen, and eminent Patriots, suddenly and
secretly got together, the Trained Bands of Ludgate-Ward in London; and with
them expeditiously beset one Mr. Clouds house (a Painter or Picture drawer in
Drurie-Lane) on all sides, Cloud himself being out of Town, reported to be
beyond Sea, but believed to be with the King, he being a known Papist, and
one of a great estate. Now the house being round beset, The manner of taking
the Rebels.
as aforesaid, Alderman Pennington, and Sir John Clotworthy, with some others
went into the said house, and instantly found the two bloody Rebels eating
Oysters, on whose persons they instantly and joyfully seized, especially the
Leivtenant of the Tower, whom their apprehension most nearly concerned, and
with the foresaid Trained Band guarding them along the streets to the Tower
again, where, again, they safely lodged and locked them up, till their farther
trial for their lives, which shortly after followed. There were also found, at
the same time, in the said Clouds house, (that Popish cloud that had hidden
those two grand bloody Rebels in his house so long) the pictures of filthy
Father Corbet, forsooth, and devilish Ducket, his copesmate, two
Irish-priests, that had been hanged, drawn and quartered at Tiburn, but the
Sessions before this apprehension of the said Irish-Rebels, both those
Villains pictures being very fairly set forth in Oyle-colours; so madly do
the Romish sots and slaves of the Pope, dignifie, if not Deifie such
abominable, base and bloody Trentine-Traitors, Romes cursedly Canonized
lying-martyrs; which Pictures I my self saw, in my ever most honored friends
house, Sir John Wollastone, then, the most honorable Lord Major of London.

About the 18 of this instant September, diverse of the reverend and truly
religious Ministers of the City of London, The City Ministers petition to the
Parliam. against novel and upstart Schisms and for a settlement of Church
Government.
to a very considerable number, presented a petition to the House of Commons in
Parliament, for a full and speedy reformation and uniformity in Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship, and Government of the Church of England, wherein, among
many other things, they religiously remonstrated, that by reason of many most
dangerously erroneous opinions, ruinating Schisms, and damnable heresies (as
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Antinonianisme, Socinianisme, Libertinisme, and
Independency) most unhappily revived and crept in among us, and much fomented
both in City and Country, the Orthodox Ministry and truly pious and painful
Pastors were much neglected and contemned, the people seduced, congregations
torn asunder, families distracted, rights and duties of Relations both
national, civil and spiritual, very scandalously violated, the practical
power of godliness greatly decayed, Parliamentary authority was much
undermined, fearful confusion introduced, imminent destruction threatened, and
in part inflicted on us (lately) in the West, as a sign of Heavens high
displeasure at us, for our most unthankful and wanton quarrelling among our
selves, and thereby retarding of so great and glorious a work, so much
conducing to Gods high honor, and the Kingdoms best security. And therefore
they desired (as a sovereign remedy for the removal of these present
distempers and growing evils, and the prevention of their farther progress)
the serious expediting of a Directory for publick-worship, and to accelerate
the establishment of a pure and Apostolical Discipline and Government
(according to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches) and to endeavor
to take away all obstructions that might impede and retard the same. Which
petition was read in the House, and the Petitioners called in, and had thanks
returned them, with assurance how earnest the Parliament has been to establish
Church Government, Clear demonstrations of the Parliaments pious integrity to
expedite and complete the work of Reformation.
as was desired, which was most notably evident, both in their calling of an
Assembly of Divines to that purpose, by their endeavors, since, to remove all
obstructions and misunderstandings among them that might hinder the work, by
their farther late proceedings for the settling of a godly and painful
Ministry, in London, and many other parts of the Kingdom within their power;
together with diverse other ways (as might be instanced) which may be as so
many sufficient testimonies of their fervent and faithful zeal therein: And,
lastly, to testify their most earnest desire to remove all impediments that
might hinder a speedy settlement in Religion, the Commons taking into
consideration the many stops and hindrances in the Assembly, by reason of some
differences among themselves, they ordered, that the Committee, Tender
consciences taken into consideration by the Parliament.
of Lords and Commons should treat with the Commissioners of Scotland, and the
Assembly about settling a union in point of Church Government among those
Divines which were of a contrary opinion; and in case it could not be, then to
find out away how tender consciences might be born withal, so far forth as
might stand with the peace and safety of the Kingdom, and as was warranted by
the Word of God, that so the Service of the Assembly might not be retarded.
And the Assembly of Divines having agreed on the names of such Ministers as
they thought fit to be entrusted with the matter of Ordination, Ordination of
Ministers taken also into consideration and established.
pro tempore, within the City of London, there being 23 of them whereof 13 of
the City Ministers, and the other 10 of the Assembly, who presented the same to
the Commons, which they passed also with full approbation of them and the said
Ordinance was by a message from the Commons sent up to the Lords, desiring
their concurrence therein; to which also the Lords immediately assented, and
the Ordinance came forth in Print with the full and joint authority of both
Houses of Parliament, and the thing it self diverse times put into execution in
diverse Churches in London, in such a holy, reverend, and religious manner, as
did exceedingly joy the hearts of all Gods people to see, in the most pious and
apostolical performance of it.

About the 20 of this instant, we were most credibly informed by Letters out
of Leicestershire, of an excellent exploit performed by a party of Leicester
Horse against that old and bold Rob-Carryer Hostrings forces, which was thus
certified. viz. That a party of Horse, about 80 in number, going from
Leicester, as a convoy to certain Carriers of Nottingham, the passage, by
reason of the Enemies Garrisons there about being full of danger, A brave
exploit performed by Leicestershire forces against Rob-Carryer Hastings.
so that no Carriers durst adventure to pass without a convoy: Whereof Hastings
having had intelligence, and that there was a prize to be preyed on, he
presently sent out a party of about an 120 Horse at least against them, but
they coming too short of the Carriers (who were, before his coming safely
lodged in Nottingham, and the Convoy returning to Leicester; Hastings Forces
placed their ambuscadoes and lined the hedges on both sides of a Lane where
Leicester Forces were to pass through, near unto a Town called Cast^ck within
5 miles on this side Nottingham, and accordingly gave the said Convoy an
unexpected salute in their said return; but they very gallantly forced their
passage through the Lane, which done they wheeled about again upon the Enemy,
beat them from the hedges, miserably routed and dispersed their whole party,
killed and took above 60 of them prisoners, the rest that escaped, leaving all
their arms behind them for haste, and they took 90 good horses from them
besides. In which action Leicester forces lost not one man; only Leivtenant
Steevens, who deserved much honor for his gallant undertaking in this Service
was shot in the back, but not mortally wounded. After which exploit thus
bravely performed by a party of but 86 against at least an 120. the Convoy
returned sa^e unto Leicester with all their prisoners and prizes, and were
entertained with much joy and triumph.

About September 23. we received certain information, by Letters both from the
right noble and renowned Patriots and magnanimous Commanders, A most famous and
renowned Victory obtained by Sir William Breret^n, Sir Tho. Middleton, and Sir
John Meldrum, at the raising of the s^ege before Mountgomery-Castle.
Mountgomery-Castle besieged by the Enemy, as soon as we had taken it.
Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas Middleton, and as virtuous as valourous Sir
John Meldrum, to the Parliament, bearing date the 18 and 19 of Septem. 1644. of
a most famous and renowned victory, obtained (by Gods great mercy and
goodness) by their forces against the Enemy at the raising of the s^ege,
before Mountgomery-Castle; the substance of all which three noble Commanders
Letters to the Parliament, I have, here, for the Readers better content and
satisfaction, faithfully extracted and Composed together, in this relation
following Immediately after renowned Sir Thomas Middleton, had been possessed
of the strong and advantageous Castle of Mountgomery, it was suddenly and
closely besieged again by a very strong power of the Enemies Forces, before
ours could bring in any competent provision for that Garrison, and both the
Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Colonel Price, and most of Sir Thomas Middletons
brave Officers, and near 500 Soldiers, were all, thereby, much distressed, and
in great danger; which, brave Sir Thomas Middleton perceiving, and laying near
to heart, himself also being necessitated to a retreat, and he having, in his
retreat, safely recovered Oswestry, he presently hasted into Cheshire unto
renowned Sir William Brereton, his ever fast friend, who, indeed; like a
faithful Achates* Sir Tho. Middleton speedily invi^es Sir Will. Brereton, and
Sir John Meldrum, to his assistance A brave prize lately before taken from the
Enemy.
never failed him; and instantly also expedited messengers into L^ncashire to
valiant Sir John M^ldrum, and brave Sir William Fairfax, in all whom, he found
a great deal of forwardness and cheerful readiness, both to help the said
distressed Castle, and to preserve what they had but lately before gotten from
the Enemy; viz. 37 barrels of powder, 12 barrels of brimstone, store of Match
and other Ammunition, which the Enemy exceedingly wanted, all which, ours, I
say, had a little before taken, as it was coming from Bristol, and was
intended for the releif of Shrewsbury, Chester and Leverpool. Now, all these
foresaid noble and renowned Commanders speedily assembled and marched together
toward Mountgomery-castle with 30^0 Horse and Foot, Our Army consisting of 3000
horse and foot, come near the Enemy to the Castle.
and came thither on Septem. 17. resolving to contribute their best endeavors
in this expedition in regard of the great importance of the Service. They lay,
that night, in a field most advantageous for them, which the Enemy had possessed
themselves of before, but deserted at our Forces coming thither, placing
themselves on the mountain above the Castle, a place of great advantage for
them, our forces resolved not to go to them, but to endeavor to victual the
Castle, and sent out parties for the bringing in of provisions to the Castle,
even a third part of our Horse being thus employed abroad for victuals, and
forage for the Castle; which the Enemy perceiving, The Enemies Army consisting
of 5000 horse and foot commanded by the Lord Byron. Sir John Meldrum had the
ordering and managing of this whole action.
they took the opportunity, and thereupon marched down in a body toward us both
Horse and Foot, being in number, full 5000 Horse and Foot, whom that bloody
Lord Byron commanded in Chief, and came up to our Forces to give them battle,
with great courage and resolution, thinking at the first to have broke through
our Forces, and to have made themselves Masters of the Bridge, which ours had
gained the night before, which indeed, would have cut off the passage of our
retreat. But valiant Sir John Meldrum, who had the command and ordering of our
Forces, performed the charge with admirable judgment dexterity and resolution,
and therefore (as noble Sir William Brereton testified of him) deserved a large
share in the honor of that days success; but indeed, the whole honor and
glory of it all was to be given and ascribed to God only, the giver of all
Victories. Ours, by the foresaid fierce assault of Byrons Forces so desperately
on us, were so hardly tasked by their multitude, that the Commanders and
Soldiers were constrained deeply, and most undauntedly to engage their utmost
valor and courage, The fight was very desperate and dubious on both sides.
and behaved themselves (as indeed by Gods providence it was manifested) most
extraordinary gallantly (for it was a while very dubious and uncertain, which
way the Lord would incline the Victory) yea, and at last it came to push of
Pike, wherein they were much too hard for ours; they having many more Pikes
than we, insomuch that our Horse was worsted, at the beginning of the battle,
and forced a while to retreat; but it so pleased the Lord, at last, to put such
an unanimous Spirit and undaunted courage and resolution both in our Horse and
Foot (animated on by the admirable examples of their so renowned Leaders and
Commanders, Sir John Meldrum, Sir William Brereton, The admirable courage of
our brave Commanders and Leaders. Sir Will. Fairfax mortally wounded in this
fight
Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir William Fairfax, who had the Command of the Horse,
who did most valiantly set upon the Enemies Horse, and engaged himself so far
that he was taken prisoner, but was presently fetched off by the valor of his
own men, but yet mortally wounded) but, as I said before, God had put such a
spirit of undaunted resolution and courage into the hearts both of Sir William
Fairfax his men, and, indeed, of all the rest, that they resolved to fight it
out to the last man; insomuch that when the battle was now in a most anxious
and uncertain condition, Our extremity was Gods opportunity. The Enemies whole
Army routed and put to flight.
our extremity was Gods opportunity to magnify his power, and on a sudden
with one fresh and valiant charge our Soldiers routed the Enemy, and put their
whole Army to a most shameful retreat, or rather, indeed, a plain flight,
pursuing them diverse miles together even in the Mountains, and performed great
execution on them; And, as I should have told you, our men, when the battle
was in the hottest, issued out of the Castle and fell upon the enemies that
were in their trenches and took diverse of their Officers and Soldiers, whom
they had left to keep their works. In which foresaid fight and flight of the
Enemies, The slain and prisoners taken in this notable fight.
we slew at least 500 of their common Soldiers, besides many Officers and men
of quality, wounded many more, and took near upon 1500 prisoners, among whom
were these Officers and Commanders, viz. Colonel Sir Thomas Tilsley, their
Major General; Colonel Broughton; Leivtenant Colonel Bladwell; Major
Williams; 9 Captains; 17 Leivtenants; 1 Quartermaster, 3 Cornets; 22 Ensigns;
52 Sergeants; 57 Corporalls; and 11 Drums. Our Soldiers also took at this
time, near 2000 arms, most for foot; all their Carriages, and near 20 barrels
of powder, wherewith they had been furnished the night before. Sir William
Brereton, with his brave Cheshire foot, Sir Will. Brereton and his Cheshire
forces did most remarkably in this fight
and among them, Major Lowtham, especially, who Commanded as Major General,
did most admirably in this fight, and fought more like Lions than men, (as
noble Sir John Meldrum himself testified of them) and did beat the best Foot in
England, as the very Enemies themselves confessed, being all Prince Robbers foot,
and indeed the choycest foot out of all their Garrisons. But noble and renowned
Sir William Fairfax (as I touched before) was mortally wounded, by at least 15
wounds upon his body; as also Major Fitz-Simons a brave Soldier, Our loss and
slain.
who both behaved themselves most admirably, and with invincible courage, in
this terrible battle, and (with great and most just lamentation for their
loss) dyed of their wounds, immediately after the fight, together with some
few others of our Captains and Officers of horse; but it was verily believed
we lost not 40 men, slain in this fight, nor had above 60 of our Soldiers
wounded. Thus by Gods blessing the Castle was every way most valiantly
releived, Our benefits by this famous Victory.
brave Sir Thomas Middletons Soldiers, who before were as prisoners, were now
set free from danger, together with the Lord Herbert of Cherbury, and all of
them put into a comfortable posture; and by this so terrible a blow, the best
of the Enemies foot ruinated and taken from them, as also Shrewsbury, Chester,
and Leverpool unfurnished of their hoped Ammunition, and our selves plentifully
furnished, and, heerby, Northwales (which formerly had been the nursery for the
Kings Armies) most probable, in good time, to shake off that yoke of Servitude,
which formerly lay so heavily upon their necks, by the example of
Mountgomery-castles safety, which is, indeed, one of the goodliest and
strongest places that is in the Kingdom. And, now, say (good Reader) did not
here the Lord our God let us conspicuously see that great wonder of the Bush,
The Burning-Bush not consumed, again.
his Church or Children, in the midst of a furious flame, indeed, and yet not
consumed therewith, but rather contrariwise flourishing in the flames and
destroying the destroyers, and quenching the crackling thorns of the ungodly,
under the boiling pot of their implacable wrath and fiercest fury, Not unto us,
therefore, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name alone, We give all the honor
and glory. But, here, give me leave (good Reader) to acquaint thee (I holding
it very pertinent to this present business) with one more most noble and
renowned action, which much honored that brave Commander Sir John Meldrum; who
immediately after this famous Victory, was yet so sensible of the loss of that
noble Gentleman, and most brave Commander Sir William Fairfax, A most memorable
and worthy act of renowned Sir Joh. Meldrum toward slain Sir Will. Fairfax his
surviving sorrowful Lady.
that apprehending (and that most rightly and religiously) the affliction would
be great to his deer surviving virtuous Lady (as indeed it was sad to her and
to the whole kingdom) he procured from among the Soldiers, or Surgeons
(not without some difficulty) the Diamond-Ring that was on Sir Williams finger,
and the bracelet of gold that was about his arm, when he was slain in the
fight, and sent them up to his Lady, together with a Letter so full of noble
and most pious expressions, as it has justly added much to his other actions
of honor. And when these things were denied him by some Surgeons, and by
some others also claiming them to be their due, he drew up some of his horse,
and said he would deal with them, as with enemies, if they did not deliver the
same to be sent to his Lady. Sir Thomas Middleton likewise, wrote a Letter of
much respect and consolation to the Lady Fairfax; The most pious and precious
speech of the virtuous Lady Fairfax.
Who like a most heroic and pious Lady, told her friends about her, That she
greived not that he d^ed in this Cause, but that he dyed so soon to do no
more for it. A most noble speech, indeed, and most worthy a virtuous and
Christian Lady. But now to proceed.

About the 26 of this instant September, came certain intelligence by Letters
to London, out of Gloucestershire, of a very rare exploit performed by that
most renowned and ever to be honored successful Commander Colonel Massy,
A brave exploit of renowned Colonel Massies, in the taking of the Town and
Castle of Monmouth.
at Monmouth in South Wales, which was this: Colonel Kerl, who had the Command
of the said Town and Castle for the King, went out in the night with a party of
Horse, and was met with by Colonel Massy, who having laid an ambuscado,
surprised the Colonel, and took all his men prisoners; After which (to requite
some ill service which he had formerly done to the Parliament, in deserting it
(or whither that were done by compulsion or otherwise, I will not determine,
but) the said Colonel Kerl (upon an agreement and resolution betwixt brave
Colonel Massy and him) marched in the head of Colonel Massies men to the
Town of Monmouth, and demanded entrance, whereupon the drawbridge being let
down, Colonel Massy soon became Master thereof, The Town and Castle of
Monmouth, taken by Col. Massy, by a stratagem.
and quickly got possession both of the Town and Castle together, with the
loss not of above 6 men on both sides. This Colonel Kerles Father was then at
Gloucester, and for the Parliament, and having an estate in the County of
Monmouth, the King gave it to his Son on his revolt to his side; but by this
means the Father happily regained both his Son and his inheritance together.
This Town being a place of great concernment, was on this obtaining of it, made
a Garrison for the Parliament; it being not only the inlet into South Wales,
from Bristol, but was also a Magazine to furnish that City and those parts with
Butter, Cheese, and all sorts of Victuals.

And about the latter end of this instant September, we had farther certain
information by Letters from Glouc^ster, that Prince Robber having had a design
to secure a passage between Bristol and Wales, A brave (...) given to the Enemy
by Col. (...) Massy at Betsley Sconce in the Forest of Dean
for which purpose ^ee had sent 200 of his Forces to Betsley in the Forest of
Dean, joining upon the Severn, near unto that grand Papists Sir John Winters,
in the Parish of Tidenton, where they were a fortifying and making a mote, and
had raised a Sconce to secure that Garrison; But valiant Colonel Massy having
timely intelligence thereof, drew out a considerable Party of his own and some
of the Earl of Denbighs Horse, and bravely fell upon them; slew diverse of them,
took their Governor and 10 Commanders more, about an 162 prisoners, 200 Arms,
2 pieces of Ordnance, and all their Artillery, bag and baggage; and thereby
utterly frustrated that design; and thus the noble and renowned Colonel
victoriously returned to Gloucester, with all his prisoners and prize aforesaid.

And now, good Reader, let me here desire thee to make a little pause and
ponder a while with holy admiration and Christian contemplation on this months
great wonder also; even to see this blessed Burning-Bush, The Burning-Bush
(...).
the Cause of God, his innocent Church or Children, in the midst of so many
combersome and combustuous, and furiously flaming Conflagrations; and yet this
Bush so far from being consumed, as that contrariwise it grows more and more
strong, vigorous and victorious, sprouting and spreading forth with more and
more extraordinary boughs and branches, and as it were in a fair and most
flourishing condition; Witness all this foresaid months particular passages
of Gods providence and protection over his forely smitten, assaulted, and
menaced Members of his Church, both in their deep danger in Cornwall by an
undoubted plot of treachery contrived by false friends, as well as open enemies;
together I say, with all the rest of the most memorable providentiall passages
of this month, in all which it was most evidently seen, that the blessing and
good will of him that dwelt in the Bush was plentifully poured out on his
Churches Cause; Deuteronomy. 33. 16.
and may therefore most justly cause and encourage us still more and more to
magnify the mercy of our good God, and with immovable constancy and
confidence relying on his experienced love and faithfulness to confess with
holy David (to the incomparable praise of our wonder-working God) O Lord God of
Hosts, Psalm. 89. 6. 8.
who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy faithfulness round about thee?
for who in the heavens can be compared to the Lord, and who among the sons of
the mighty can be like unto our God? But now to go on.

AND now, October. 1644.
I say, to go on in a farther and more serious search (for contemplation and
admiration) of these continued wonders, of our great and glorious
wonder-working God, which were most obviously and conspicuously presented to
our eyes and ears in the whole progress of this next ensuing Month of
October, 1644. And here we will begin with the then present state and
condition of the Parliaments main and standing-Army, under the special Command
of his Excellency the Lord General, Robert Earl of Essex; which Army, what a
most dangerous combustion and deep gulf of destruction it had lately escaped in
the West (by the unfaithfulness (as was strongly conceived, and groundedly
believed also, as I have already expressed in the last foregoing months
passages) of some of the prime Officers and Commanders of that Army? In serious
consideration whereof our most renowned and vigilant Parliamentary Statists did
(the very beginning of this Month) Vote a Committee to go down to the Army, A
Committee of both Houses of Parliament appointed to be joined with the Army,
for joint consultation in the actions and motions thereof.
viz. the Lord Wareston, and Mr. Crew, whose advice was to be taken by the
Commander and Commanders in Chief for the prevention of future disloyal
attempts and treacherous designs, and for the more serious and solid acts and
motions of the Army, for the good of the Kingdom, by Gods blessing thereon;
the like course being said to be taken in Holland, namely, that there are some
of the States of those United Provinces that accompany the Prince of Orange,
whose concurrent advice he takes upon the enterprising of any design; and yet
the said Prince takes not this as any diminution of his Command: And how
needful this course has been in our main Army, the Kingdom has been or might
have been most feelingly sensible; especially considering the ill-instruments
which about this time, and formerly were and have been in the Army in the West
(which, although I have already, in some measure touched before, A more clear
demonstration of the plot against our Army in the West.
yet because more clear demonstrations thereof are since come to light, and to
my hands, I shall desire, with the Readers patience and to his farther and
fuller satisfaction therein, a little here to insist on) Witness therefore
those instructions dispersed by Colonel Butler (as was most credibly informed)
which the King sent to tempt our said Army, then in Cornwall, which were the
most desperate and dangerous things that ever were yet penned, Dangerous
Instructions to tempt our Army to revolt from the Parl. to the King. One of the
Instructions.
and may in time come to public view; One of which was this; You shall also
inform that we have assurance of a Party in both the Houses of Parliament at
Westminster, that do only wait the conjunction of these two Armies (meaning
the Kings Army, and the Lord Generals, then, in Cornwall) and then they will
put things to the question, being backed with such a strength which now they
dare not propound; Also you shall enforce the conjunction of these two Armies,
the sooner, with this argument, that, otherwise, the Scots will prevail and
conquer the Kingdom, and so the English must become subject to that Nation.
There were 20 or 30 more particulars (as was credibly informed) and those very
remarkable ones. These instructions were sent by Mr. Harding Son to the
Marquess of Hartford, to be communicated to his Excellency, if upon the
receipt of a Letter sent from the King to our Lord General, The Lord Generals
noble ^delity to the State.
he would entertain a Treaty; Which, his Excellency, most loyally and
prudently had formerly refused, highly scorning to be fastened on (though by a
Royal temptation) to betray his trust; yet, how ever, those private
Instructions were afterward dispersed* amongst some of the Commanders, as we
then found by unhappy experience. And yet, in all the plot and design (praised
and for ever blessed be the Lord our God) the issue proved more to be a
crackling-Squib, than a considerable loss, (as has been before more
particularly and clearly manifested) especially considering the danger, and yet
the Bush un-burnt, The false, ^al^^cious and malicious p^ottings of the
Royalists to cousen the Kingdom.
in the midst of that great flame round about it. In which premised Regal
instructions, we may primarily take notice how falsely and fallaciously the
Royalists fancy to themselves (and that with no small malice too) both a party
in the Parliament for them, and would also fain blind the kingdom with such a
belief: But, that which sticks most to their sides (as there you may see and
observe) is our honest and loyal Brethren of Scotland, against whom they would
fain possess the people with an opinion, that their intention is to conquer
the kingdom; whereas never did a Nation so faithfully, The chief reason why our
Brethren of Scotland, are so s^andered and maligned by Cavaliers and Malignants.
and (in a manner) so unanimously appear, with more loyalty and cordial
integrity, in the Cause of Religion, than they have done; and the crafty
Cavaliers knew they will not depart from their principles, nor leave assisting
the Parliamentary proceedings, till Religion and Liberty be secured, in both
kingdoms; and therefore I cannot much blame them (considering their case and
condition) that they so scandalize the Nation of Scotland, that in the
conclusion is like (by Gods gracious assistance and appointment) to be a main
means of their ruin and destruction from among us. And to all these premises,
add that most memorable mercy of the Lord in those our straits in Cornwall,
forementioned, namely, what admirable courage and undaunted resolution the Lord
put at that time, into the hearts of those most valiant Commanders and
Soldiers that were of the Plymouth Horse, The admirable courage of the
Commanders and Soldiers of the Plymouth horse.
who in Cornwall, by their impregnable courage and valiant actions, deserved as
much honor as could be possibly conferred upon men of merit and valor. For,
all those of the Kings Army that were of the three Regiments of the Kings
Horse, were utterly routed by Major Straghen a Scottish Commander with only 100
Plymouth Horse, whom he Commanded, who all manifested so much unparallelled
valor and magnanimity of spirit, as occasioned such extreme terror to the
Enemy, that the King himself was put into as great a fright at that time, The
Plymouth horse, put the King himself into a terrible and frigh^ing fear.
as when he rode hard from Northall^rton to York, when he heard the Scots had
beaten his Army at Newborn, at their first coming in among us; So stoutly they
resolved and so faithfully performed and acted their resolution, to live and
die with our Foot forces (at that time left in such a strait) and to stand or
fall with them, though most barbarously and basely they were p^^^ged and
plundered contrary to Conditions, yea, the King himself being in the field, and
to his shame and eternal infamy it will certainly remain to posterity, A most
ignoble and disloyal act of King Charles in Cornwall.
that he most unjustly permitted such a most ignoble, disloyal, and
unsouldierly shameful action to be committed, notwithstanding that noble and
ever to be honored Major General Skippon went to his Majesty, and complained
of that per^idious breach of Articles, but could find no redress therein. And
now, good Reader, put all these together, viz. the Enemies abominable treachery
to have utterly ruinated our so brave an Army (forementioned in some passages
of the Month before) together with the devilish design to have wrought our
Army perfidiously to have conjoined and combined into one body against the
Parliament; And the admirable courage and magnanimity of spirit which God put
into the hearts of our Foot forces, and some few Horse, especially those of
renowned Plymouth, to stand to it so invincibly, and to come off so totally
with their lives, out of so deep and dangerous a snare and pitfall, into which
they were very near entrapped. And then say whether the Lord Jehovah appeared
not mightily and most manifestly for their preservation, The blessing of him
that dwelt in the Bush was on our Army in the West.
and whither the blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush, was not on them to
save them from the devouring flames of that prepared and intended combustion
and confusion.

Much also about the 4 of this instant October, came Letters out of Scotland,
which certified for an undoubted truth, that the Popish party and faction of
the Royalists in Scotland, had laid down their arms, Most successful
proceedings of affairs in Scotland, and in the Northern parts of our kingdom*
and were come in and had submitted themselves. That the most noble Marquess
of Argile, most renowned in Scotland for his known constant piety, loyalty to
his King and Country, and his magnanimity of spirit, in the then present
distracted condition of Scotland; that he, I say, was in present pursuit of
the Irish Rebels that had got in among them there, and kept them closely in
among the mountains, where he often lit upon many of them, and straightened them
extremely; Insomuch that the troubles of that honest neighbor kingdom being
thus far so happily appeased, the noble Earl of Callender returned again to
the Leaguer at Newcastle. It was also then for certain informed by Letters out
of the North, that the Array-men and other disaffected persons of quality in
the Counties of Cumberland, Many Array-men in the Northern parts surprised by
the Country people.
and Westmerland, were met together to feast together, and therein also to
consult about raising more Forces in those parts against the Parliaments
proceedings there; which the Country People having knowledge of, and being very
sensible of the miseries which those men had already been means to bring upon
those Counties and places adjacent, they all rose as one man, and apprehended
many of them, to the number of about 40. whom they brought to General Lesley,
to the Leaguer, but Musgrave and Fletcher narrowly escaped to Carlisle.

About the 6 of this instant, Letters from Welchpool, were brought to London,
which certified that renowned Sir Thomas Middleton had taken Red^astle a place
of very great consequence and one of the strongest of the Enemies holds in
Northwales. The manner of the taking of it was said to be thus. The Enemy, in
this Castle (whereof the Lord Powis, a grand Papist, and most desperate and
devilish blasphemer of Gods name, The taking of Rad-castle in North Wales by
Sir Thomas Middleton.
was Governor and the Owner also) did often oppose and interrupt the bringing
in of provisions unto our forces at Mountgomery castle; whereupon Sir Thomas
Middleton summoned the whole County thereabout to come in unto him, and
presently upon it advanced from Mountgomery to Pool with 300 foot and a 100
Horse, where they quartered on the Monday and Tuesday night following, and on
the Wednesday morning next, at 2 of the clock, even by Moonlight, Mr. John
A^undell, the Master-Gunner to Sir Thomas Middleton, placed a Petarre against
the outer-gate, which burst the gate quite in pieces, and (notwithstanding the
many shewers of stones thrown from the Castle, by the enemies) Sir Thomas
Middletons foot commanded by Captain Hugh Massey, and Major Henry Kett, rushed
with undaunted resolution, into the Enemies works, got into the porch of the
Castle, and, so stormed the Castle-gate, entered it, and possessed themselves both
of the old and new castle, and of all the plate, provisions and goods therein,
which was great store, which had been brought from all parts thereabout; The
prisoners and prizes taken in the Castle.
they also took prisoners therein, the Lord Powis and his brother, with his two
Sons, together with a Seminary-Priest, 3 Captains, one Leivtenant, and 80
Officers and Common Soldiers, 40 horse, and 200 arms. The place is of great
concernment, for, before the taking of it, it did much mischief to the Country,
and almost had blockt up the passages from Oswestry to Mountgomery-castle, so
that, now, the strongest forts in all Northwal^s, are in the possession of the
Parliament, this Castle being conceived to be of strength sufficient to hold
out a years siege, and to be able to keep out at least 10000 men for a whole
12 month, it having at that present, sufficient provision in it of all sorts
for such a continuance of time. Besides, by this means noble Sir Thomas
Middleton has now the command of all North Wales, and can raise men, there, at
his own pleasure.

About the 10 of this instant October, the Ordinance for Ordination of pious
and painful Ministers, pro tempore, (whereof I briefly made former mention
that it was in preparation in the Parliament) now, fully had passed both the
Houses, and was Printed and published. By which it was Ordained by the Lords
and Commons in Parliaments (upon advice had with the Learned and Reverend
Assembly of Divines, The Ordinance for Ordination of Ministers, in and about
London
convened at Westminster) that during the present exigencies of the Armies, and
of the Navy, as also of many Congregations destitute of able and faithful
Ministers, and until a farther and fuller Church Government were completed,
and the whole and constant course of Ordination of Ministers, in an ordinary
way were set up and settled for the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; That these persons in the City of London, being Presbyters, viz. Dr.
Cornelius Burge^, one of the Assessors of the Assembly, Dr. William Gouge, Mr.
John Ley, Mr. George Walker, The names of the Presbyters appointed for
Ordination of Ministers.
Mr. Edmund Calamy, Mr. Daniel Coudrey, Mr. Stanley Gower, Mr. John Conant, and
Mr. Humphrey Chambers, all members of the Assembly; Mr. Henry Roxborough, Mr.
John Downham, Mr. Charles Offspring, Mr. Richard Lee, Mr. Timothy Dod, Mr.
James Cranford, Mr. Thomas Horton, Mr. Thomas Glendon, Mr. Arthur Jackson, Mr.
Samuel Clark, Mr. Emanuel Brown, Mr. Fulk Bellers, Mr. Francis Roberts, Mr.
Leonard Cook; or any 7 of them, the major part being present, shall examine all
those which are to be admitted into the Ministry, upon these particulars
following, viz. Touching his skill in the Original tongues, and that trial
be made by reading the Hebrew and Greek Testaments; The manner of examining
those that are to be Ordained Ministers.
and rendering some portion of them into Latin; Whether he has skill in
Logic and Philosophy; What Authors he has read, and what knowledge he has
to defend the Orthodox Religion, contained in them; That he shall frame a
discourse in Latin, upon some Common place or controversy in Divinity, as
shall be assigned him, and maintain a dispute thereon, and shall preach before
the people or Ministers appointed to Ordain, or some of them. Being thus
approved, he is also to Preach three several days in the Church where he is
to serve, that they also may have trial of his gifts, and may know and be
satisfied concerning his life and conversation. Which being thus completed and
concluded, the next thing in reference to that, and the very first thing,
indeed, Care taken for an augmentation of Ministers small Livings, and for
future competent maintenance for them,
the pious and prudent House of Commons took into consideration, was, how such
godly and able Ministers might be supported and comfortably subsist, who
formerly had very small and inconsiderable livings; and yet that the
Parishioners might not be overcharged therein: Whereupon a remedy was
propounded to be out of the revenues of Deanes and Chapters of Cathedralls,
which also was generally approved of, and referred to the Committee of
plundered Ministers to bring in an Ordinance to that purpose. And a president
thereof was made for a farther allowance to be given to the Minister of
To^^ham-High-^ros^^, out of the revenues of the Dean and Chapter of Paul's in
Lond^n, he having at that time, not above 30 pound a year in that Parish. But
of this, more in its due place.

About the 14 of this instant, we had certain information by Letters out of
Glo^estershire, and from Colonel Massy himself, who thereby confirmed the
truth thereof to the Parliament, of a very rare and famous exploit performed by
this most renowned, successful, and unconquerable Commander, Colonel Massy,
the substance of which Letters was to this effect. That God had in his rich
mercy and goodness given him singular good success against the Kings Forces
commanded by Sir John Winter, A most brave and famous exploit performed by that
most renowned Co^mander Col^n. Massy upon the Kings Forces at Beechley.
that active arch Papist, at the passage at Beechley, where he had formerly
well cudgelled him, as I have before specified; And now again Sir John Winter,
perceiving himself, and those of his Popish and malignant humor that inhabited
in those parts to be in a desperate condition, unless that passage at
Beechley or Bestley, could be fortified by them against Colonel Massies
constant excursions upon him; whereupon he, I say, adventured again to
fortify the same, and which he did with much admirable dexterity and
expedition, as was almost incredible to be believed, that in so few days,
such strong works could be made, but having pallisadoes ready made at Bristol,
and speedily conveyed to him, of three several sorts, each higher than other,
and all of them well strengthened with ironwork, they were therefore suddenly
fastened into the ground, and good deep ditches made; But notwithstanding,
undaunted Colonel Massy hearing heerof, presently marched out of Monmouth,
with a 100 Foot, all commanded men, and 8 troops of Horse, and therewith
marched against the Enemy; who having intelligence of his approach, presently
drew out a party of Musketteirs, and lined the hedges in his way; but about 4
of the clock in the morning, the noble Colonel fell upon them, beat them from
the hedges, and drove them to their holds, and following them close, fell
valiantly upon their works, and forced the Enemy into the pallisadoes, and got
over the first and second pallisadoes, notwithstanding the great and small
shot, both from the works and the ships and pinnace in both the rivers of Wye
and Severn, and being himself thrown down to the ground by a leap which his
horse made over the ditch (he himself first entering) a Musketteir of the
enemies gave fire at him, The extraordinary danger of death that noble Col.
Massy was in at this (...).
but, by Gods good providence missed his mark, and being somewhat near him, as
soon as he had discharched, he turned the Butt^end of his musket and struck
at the Colonel, and with the force of the blow struck off his head-peice, all
which was so suddenly done, that the brave Colonel had no time to consider
the danger he was in; but being of an undaunted spirit, he now had recovered
himself, and instantly charged the Musketteir and killed him on the place; and by
this time was valiant Colonel Harley also entered into the second pallisado
with his horse, and so fully releived and remounted Colonel Massy, and
presently after him came also Colonel Kerle, and so they all together made a
most furious onset upon the Enemy, and fell to it pell-mell with their Swords,
Muskets, and Pistols; now the Enemy seeing himself so hard beset, and that
there were little or no hope to do any good, they began to run away apace, and
Sir John Winter himself (that grand Papist, who had always showed himself
exceeding active in the Papist cause) being now amongst them, and who (to give
him his due, stood stoutly upon his guard, with a fire-pike, a while, till
Colonel Kerle discovering who he was, cried out, Sir John Winter that grand
Papist being in a great danger of death, tumbled himself down a hill to save
his life.
that's Winter, that's Winter, pistol him, pistol him, whereupon he flung down
his pike, and tumbled himself down the steep banck or hill where the pallisado
stood, where his neck, contrary to all likelihood, incurred not the act of
breaking, and so he escaped, but his horse was taken, but yet 230 men that
might have escaped the same way, durst not follow his example therein, and so
were all taken prisoners, among whom was Leivtenant Colonel Powell, The
prisoners and prizes taken.
Sir Ralph Hoptons own Major, together with diverse other Commanders and
Officers, and near 10 slain upon the place: we took there also, 8 barrels of
powder, 4 Drakes, and 4 Iron-peices, 200 Arms, with many horse and furniture;
And that which was further observable was this, that Prince Robber was to have
been there the next night after it was thus taken by us, and his bed was set up
and fairly furnished for him, and he was to have joined with Colonel Gerard,
but now was by Gods great mercy and good providence prevented therein. All
which service was thus most bravely performed by this victorious Colonel, The
loss which we sustained in this exploit.
through Gods gracious assistance, with the loss of only 10 of his own men,
and some few wounded. This exploit was of great concernment to us, in regard
that it hinders all manner of provisions from the Enemy at Bristoll, and stops
the passage from Wales, so that they can have no supply of men from thence;
which consideration, indeed, made the enemy so eager to have possessed
themselves of that advantageous passage. A brief Encomium to renowned Col.
Massy.
Many Colonells, I justly and ingenuously acknowledge have done bravely; but
brave and ever to be renowned Massy has excelled them all, and that which
challenges eternal fame and datelesse splendor to his illustrious name, and
indelible honor, is his constant persevering in all his most noble actions,
free from self-aymes and ends, not ambitious, nor proud of his many
incomparable Victories, not covetous, but truly gallant and noble. Hold on,
then, renowned Massy, and certainly the illustrious name and fame of Massy,
more precious than Massie-gold, shall never dye, but ever fairly flourish,
whiles England stands. But to go on.

About the 16 of this instant, we had also indubitable information out of the
North, that the base and bloody Irish-Rebels, having sent a ship with 8 great
pieces of Ordnance, An Irish ship taken, at White-Haven in Cumberland.
20 double-barrels of powder, and good store of other Ammunition into
White-Haven in Cumberland, intended for the releif of Carlisle, being then
distressed for want of powder and such other Ammunition; Sir Wilfrid Lawson,
who had raised a Regiment in Cumberland for the service of the Parliament,
happily surprised her in the said Haven, by manning out some men in boats, and
so seized upon the said Ship, Ordnance, and Ammunition.

Much also about the same time came certain news from Pool, of the taking of an
100 brave horse of the Queens own Regiment, 2 Colors, a Masse-book, and other
Popish trumpery, 40 prisoners, then, A brave prize taken by the Governor of
Pool. And
taken, and 16 killed on the place, by the brave Governor of Pool, who
victoriously returned thither again, with all the said Horse and prisoners,
with the loss of but one man of his; This brave exploit was performed between
Pool and Blanford.

And about the same time we had certain intelligence out of the North, Another
by Colonel Lambert.
that valiant Colonel Lambert (since his and Colonel Sandys taking a Troop of
Horse in Craven) has taken a 120 horse more from the Enemy at Plumpton in
Yorkshire, together with an Irish-Rebell their Commander, whom they took
prisoner, with the rest.

And much about this time also a petition was presented to the Parliament, by
that virtuous and religious Gentlewoman, Mistress Bastwick (wife to that
heroick-hearted Gentleman, and famously suffering servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Dr. John Bastwick) for some allowance for herself and children, and
toward the present maintenance of her said Husband, then a prisoner in the
Castle of Knarsborough in Yorkshire, for the Parliaments Cause, as he had
formerly lain prisoner a long time in the Island of Silly in Cornw. Much to be
honored Dr. John Bastwick re^^ived in prison, and released out of prison, by
the Parliament.
for pieties and religions Cause; which her petition was very freely and
favorably entertained by the House of Lords, and by them sent to the House of
Commons, to desire their concurrence therein, who accordingly most willingly
agreed thereunto, and the sum of an 100 pound was presently ordered to be paid
unto her out of Haberdashers-Hall in London, and which she immediately
received thence as was ordered. And shortly after this, it pleased the good
hand of Gods providence so to order it, that by the indefatigable pains and
care of Mistress Bastwick, and of Colonel Hudlestones wife (he being then a
prisoner in the Tower of London) the said noble Dr. Dr. Bastwick exchanged for
Col. Hudlestone, returned from Knaresbor^ugh Castle to London.
was upon exchange for the said Hudlestone, released out of prison from
Knaresborough Castle, as aforesaid; where, and also in the Castle in York, he
had endured much wrong and great affliction, but now was, I say, returned home
to London, with abundance of honor and most welcome entertainment to the City
of London, and to all the honest-hearted-Christians therein; yea, most welcome,
I say, to his dear Wife and Children. And, O thrice happy Gentleman indeed (say
I) heerin, especially, namely, that having most magnanimously, and with
invincible Christian courage and wisdom, passed (as the Poet sang) Per varios
casus, per tot discrimina rerum, and now at last arrived safely in his desired
Haven, he found most happy, Dr. Bastwick, like an impregnable Rock, ^^turned
true to his pious principles.
and heart-cheering welcome in his own conscience, having (like an impregnable
Rock) held fast his pious principles, and withstood and out-stood all the
assaults and snares of Papists, disloyal Royalists, Separatists, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, and novell Independents, who all strugled and strove to have
seduced and ensnared him into their unhappy and unholy L^byrinths of heresy,
error, and schism, to his Souls ruin; but, whom, I say, God did most
graciously support and preserve from the danger of them all, and returned unto
us a most loyal and faithful friend to Gods glorious Cause, and a most
constant and courageous professor and propugnatour of untainted Truth, which
two, indeed, deck and adorn the flourishing garland of his afflictions, and
make the Crown of his sufferings most illustrious and glorious; But to proceed.

About the 18 of this instant, came certain intelligence, by ^eters out of
North Wales, that since the taking of Radcastle, by ^nowned Sir Thomas
Middleton, (whereof we made mention a little before) he has also performed
much gallant service in those parts; and in particular that ^ee sent forth a
party of horse and foot into Leigh, More excellent performances by noble and
renowned Sir Too. Middleton, in North Wale^.
about a mile from Bishops-castle, where the Enemy had left a Garrison, which
fled away thence before his forces came near them; after this a party of about
20 horse was sent from Mountag^m^ry into R^dnorshire, where they took prisoner
the Lord Leigh, Baron of Du^smore, who was then carried prisoner to Radcastle.
Sin^e that also, the Enemy forsook another Garrison, called Leigh^^ll, the
house of Sir Pelham Corbet, in Shropshire. And Sir John Price (a Gentleman
always well-affected to the Parliament, though, over-powred by his Enemies
round about him, was forced to conceal it) was made Governor of
Mountgomery-castle. The Country came in very cheerfully to Sir Thomas
Middleton, upon his summons, but were very unwilling to fight, so little valou^
is there in those who pretend to descend from the ancient Britains.

Upon the 23 of this instant October, came the full and certain relation, and
most joyful news to London, especially, of the taking of Newcastle by ou^
honest, active, loving and loyal brethren of Scotland, who, as they have all
along, ever ^ince their first appearing in this great Cause, in a warlike
man^er and posture showed themselves most zealous to God and true Religion, and
therein also most brotherly to us, and free from base self-seekings and ignoble
by-ends (though our most degenerous and rotten-hearted Malignants, The relation
of the taking of Newcastle by storming it, by our brethren of Scotland.
in City, Court, and Country, have most ignominiously slandered them, and most
basely and abusively strugled (but in vain, blessed be the Lord for it) to
blemish their untainted honor and honesty heerin:) so, now also, in a most
eminent manner, they have again made it appear to the whole world (if men would
not be wilfully or maliciously blind) that they sought not their own ends, or
to enrich themselves, but mainly and only Gods glory, and therein, ours with
their own best good; as i^ this relation of this glorious and victorious
conquest of the Town of Newcastle, now (by Gods mighty and merciful
assistance* and their impregnable valor and fidelity) happily subdued to the
just obedience of the King and Parliament, as now I shall make manifest in this
brief and faithful Narration of the taking of this strong Town by storm, which
is with all convenient b^evity extracted out of our brethren the Scots own
Relation thereof sent to the Parliament, and the Scotch Commissioners then
resident at or about Westminster, which was as follows. Our valiant and most
unwearied brethren the Scots, having in the time of their lying before this
Town of Newcastle, The Scots pious and prudent carriage before the storming of
Newcastle.
out of their Christian and tender pious pity toward the inhabitants thereof in
general, and great and gracious unwillingnesse to shed blood, if possibly it
might, by any fit and fair means, be avoided; sent diverse Letters and
merciful messages to the Town in general, and to and from some special
cordial persons, in particular, before their summons, which afterward was
also sent unto them, but found all their Christian love and pity; partly, with
stubbornness rejected, and partly with scoffs and jeeres derided, but
especially by the Atheistical and most desperately Malignant Major of
Newcastle, Sir John Marley; all which their interchangeable Letters and
Messages, containing Marleys and the Newcastelians answers, and our Scotch
brethrens patient and pious replies, having been fully set forth in that
particular and exact relation of all those proceedings, by our loyal brethren
of Scotland, I here therefore purposely (for brevities sake) pretermit, and
shall only acquaint the Reader here, with thus much in particular: That after
many interchangeable messages and motions on both sides, Marley the Major of
Newcastle his proud and dissembling carriage toward the Sc^ts.
and some seeming agr^ements (seeming, only, I say, on Marleys side) and
hostages mutually given, Articles of accord were demanded to be sent to the
Town by noble General Lesley, which was accordingly done; and which said
Articles together with the rest of the succeeding passages, or Letters sent to
each other (for the further clearing of our Brethrens integrity and fairness
therein,) after the tendering of the Articles of agreement, I have thought fit
here to insert, which were as follows.

Conditions whereupon the Surrender of the Town of Newcastle, and Fo^^es
thereof, with all the Ordnance, Ammunition, and other Warlike furniture thereto
belonging, were demanded by his Excellency, the Earl of Leven, Lord General of
the Scottish Army; to be kept by him for the use of his Majesty, and the
Parliament of England.
1. THat the Officers and Soldiers who desire to go out of Town, shall have
liberty to pass with their Arms, Horses, bag and baggage, to what place they
please, the same not being already beleaguered, and shall have a safe convoy
thither, it being within forty miles distance, and shall be accommodate with
draughts in their march.

2. That all Strangers, Residents, Sojourners, or Inhabitants, who desire to
go out of the Town, with the aforesaid Officers or Soldiers, shall have the
like liberty, convoy and accommodation.

3. That sick and hurt Soldiers shall have all necessary accommodation until
their recovery, and shall have a safe conduct as aforesaid.

4. That the Citizens, Burgesses and Inhabitants shall have their persons,
houses, families and goods, kept from violence, and shall have the same free
liberty of trade and commerce, as any other Town reduced to the obedience of
King and Parliament.

5. That their privileges, liberties, and jurisdiction, shall be preserved
inviolate, conform to their ancient charters, in manner above written.

6. If any of the said Citizens, Inhabitants, or others, presently within the
Town, shall desire to go and live in their Country Houses; they shall have
protection, and safeguard for their persons and estates.

7. That no Billet shall be granted upon any of the Inhabitants without their
consent.

8. The whole Army shall not enter the Town, but only a competent Garrison.

Signed, LEVEN.
Provided always, that in case these Conditions above written be not accepted,
and Hostages sent before eight a clock in the morning, the nineteenth of this
instant, for surrender of the Town, at or before Monday next, they shall then
be altogether void, and have no effect.

But in place of accepting the above Conditions, (which the Governor himself
did afterward, acknowledge most honorable) they not only returned this
following Answer (whereby their judicial induration, and obstinacy may appear)
but the Governor likewise, the same morning, while the Army was in action,
sent out a Letter to my Lord Sinclair, full of mockeries and incivilities; but
before that day ended, he changed his strain, and was resolved of his scruple,
whether there was such a man that had the name of Leven.



Answer of their three Commissioners to the Lord General his last Letter, with
the Articles, October. 19.
My Lord,
WE received your Letter, wherein you say, we cannot make good that your
Commissioners demands are against either his Majesty's honor, or the welfare
of Newcastle; We will give you but one reason amongst many; whether it be for
his Majesty's honor that the Town of Newcastle should be rendered to any of
another Nation; nay more, if it be for the honor of the English Parliament:
and that it is not for our welfare is so clear, needs no answer. And whereas you
say, you wonder we are not ashamed to be so delatory, having demanded a
Treaty; We say, we wonder you can be so forgetful, knowing we have your Letter
to show, that the Treaty was your own motion: but for Answer to the rest, and
to your Articles; We say, the delivery of Newcastle is not of so small moment,
but if you intend as you say, time may well be given till monday for giving
answer, for in case we should give consent to let you have this Town, there
are diverse more Articles then you have set down, both fit for us to demand and
you to grant. Therefore if you would shun effusion of bloodshed, as you
profess, forbear your acts of Hostility, until we give you Answer upon
Monday, wherein we will not fail; otherwise we doubt not but God will
require an account at your hands, and besides, will keep and preserve us from
your fury. So expecting your Answer, We rest

Your Friends, Jo. Marlay, Nich. Cole, G. Baker.
Newcastle, 19. October. 1644.
The Letter sent by the Governor to my Lord Sinclair, October. 19
My Lord,
I Have received diverse Letters and Warrants subscribed by the name of Leven,
but of late can hear of none that have seen such a man; besides, there is
strong report he is dead: therefore to remove all scruples, I desire our
Drummer may deliver one Letter to himself: thus wishing you could think on some
other course to compose the differences of these sad distracted Kingdoms, than
by battering Newcastle, and annoying us who never wronged any of you; for if
you seriously consider, you will find that these courses will aggravate, and
not moderate distempers: but I will refer all to your own consciences, and
rest

Your Friend John Marlay.
Newcastle 19. October.
By these former Letters, Answers, and Replies, it is more than manifest, how
perversely obstinate the Enemy was, and how carefully and patiently they were
sought after; but seeing their obstinacy desperate and incurable, it was full
time to proceed to action; for the condition of the Army, which had endured
much hardship, and of the Mines which were always in hazard of discovery, as
they had formerly destroyed some seven or eight, and the approaching Winter,
could not well admit of further delays; and thereupon, October 19. early in
the morning, the Cannon began to play upon the walls from their several
Batteries, while 8 a clock, at which time the Hostages should have come out, or
otherwise they were to expect the extremities of War; but since none came,
the service continued from all the Batteries, and the Regiments were drawn up;
standing to their arms, while the breaches were in readiness, and the Mines
sprung. About three a clock in the afternoon, the Enemy by their countermines
had very near approached some chambers where the powder was lodged for blowing
up the walls, which being signified to his Excellency, he forthwith ordered,
that fire should be given to these two mines endangered* and thereafter to
maintain the breaches carefully, while the general assault should be made
from all quarters: a little after, the day failing, and the breaches being
made, though not so large and passable as was needful for so desperate
service; the word was given, and the sign made, to give fire to the rest of the
Mines, and for the Regiments to advance all at once toward the breaches, and
those places of the wall which were opened by the mine; but they met with no
small opposition, and nothing was left undone by the Enemy to repel the fury
of the assault: They played very hotly and desperately from the Castle upon the
breaches, and from the ^^anking-towers of the walls with scattered shot; yet
the Regiments advanced without any shrinking, though the Cannon played from
many places upon their full open bodies, so that the difficile access to the
breaches, and the mighty advantages of their walls and works within the Town,
made a considerable loss of Soldiers and Officers of good quality; yet
notwithstanding all difficulties and resistances, they acquit themselves as
become a people that considered the importance of so high a cause, and minded
nothing but the happiness of both Kingdoms; and after two hours very hot
dispute upon the breaches, they found their first entry at the mine sprung on
the West side of the Town, near to Close-gate; and after their entry, were
furiously charged three several times by the horse which were in Town, but the
charge was gallantly sustained and the place maintained, while the reserve of
that post came to assist: thereafter they marched for the releif of the rest of
the breaches, and so the Soldiers gave over and forsook the walls, and the
whole body almost of the Army entering, they became Masters of the Town, which
tasted of no less mercy and favor after the Victory, than they found valor
in obtaining the same; for after their entry* the Soldiers did quite vanish,
sheltring themselves in houses, the Inhabitants kept close their doors, the
Regiments marched through the streets without any insolency or disorder, never
offering once to rifle a house, or cut off either Citizen or Soldier; they
were presently after their entry in peaceable possession of all the corners and
streets, and on a sudden, all tumult, fear and noise, did cease. Upon the
first entry, the Governor Lodovick Lyndesay, sometime Earl Crawfoord, the Lord
Maxwell, Doctor Wishart, a man of a dangerous temper, who had seasoned the
people both before, and the time of the siege with bitter Malignancy, Mr. Gray
and Alvay, and others of the perverse crew, authors of all the evils which
might justly have fallen upon the Town, so exceedingly obstinate, according to
the rule of War, did all betake themselves to the Castle, whence they cast
over a white flag, and beat a Parlee, but before notice could be taken
thereof, all the service was near done. The principal houses of the Town were
preserved from plundering by the Officers; the Common Soldiers that night,
after they had long kept their arms without doing any wrong or violence, entered
some houses of the meaner sort, not safeguarded, and did a little pillage, and
take away the goods out of them, but less than ever any people or Army did in
the like case, which was the testimony of the most Malignants and Papists
themselves, expressing in these very words, that no History can parallel where
less cruelty and insolency, and more mercy were shown in any Town gained by
storm, which ought to be no small matter of gloriation, when the Enemies are
constrained to acknowledge, that the ways and practices of those who have
often declared the purity of their intentions, are now found out to be nothing
different from their profession; and indeed it were to be wished that the
well-affected in the Kingdom had as great feeling of the advantage given to the
cause, and the good they received since the coming in of that Army to England,
as the enemies to the peace and happiness of both Nations are sensible of the
hurt done to them and their designs. But to return.

The Town being that same night secured, and the Guards carefully appointed at
the breaches, and by the waterside, to watch the escape of those who were
within, and with so much loss and pains now caught in the snare. Next day
thereafter, being the Lords Day, his Excellency did likewise enter the Town,
and with the General, Officers, and others of the Army, did go to the Church
straightway, and gave thanks to God, that he was pleased, even according to
the words, and wishes of their Enemies, to prosper and bless his People,
according to the justness of their Cause; The Governor, who was lately so
pertinacious, and high minded, that he would neither hearken himself to any
thing which might tend to the preservation of the Town, but likewise published
Proclamations, that none should presume to speak of any compliance to a
surrender, did now become a humble suitor to the Lord General (whom he
thought not to be in the world that morning) that his Excellence would be
pleased to suffer him, and those that were with him in the Castle, to depart to
the Kings next Garrison, as may appear by the following Letter, wherein you see
him a humble supplicant, though in some of his former, a scornful Prophet.

A Letter sent by Sir John Marlay, sometimes Governor of Newcastle, to his
Excellence, from the Castle, the day after the Town was taken. October. 20.
My Lord,
ALthough you have the fortune of War against me (and that I might I confess
have had honorable terms from your Excellency:) Yet I hope your Nobleness
will not think worse of me, for doing my endeavors to keep the Town, and to
discharge the trust reposed in me, having had strong reasons so to do, as is
known to many; And now whereas I am compelled to betake my self to this Castle,
I shall desire, that I and those with me, may have our Liberty, and your
License, to stay, or go out of the Town with your safe Pass, to his Majesty's
next Garrison, which is not beleaguered, with our Horses, Pistolls, and Swords;
And to have 14 days time to dispatch our Journey, so many as please to go.
And truly, my Lord, I am yet confident to receive so much favor from you, as
that you will take such care of me, as that I shall receive no wrong from the
ignoble spirits of the vulgar sort; for I doubt no other, I must confess, I
cannot keep it long from you, yet I am resolved, rather than to be a spectacle
of misery and disgrace to any, I will bequeath my soul to him that gave it,
and then refer my body to be a spectacle to your severity; But upon these
terms abovesaid, I will deliver it to you, and so entreating your Answer, I
rest,

Your friend and servant, John Marley.
From the Castle in Newcastle, the 21 of October. 1644.
For his Excellency, the Earl of Leven, General of the Scottish Army.

Compare this Letter with that which he sent out the day before, then look
what a day may produce; And now could there be any thing more just, than to
deny favor to a man so eminent in all the ways of Malignancy, so wicked an
instrument; One who had so exceedingly provoked the Army, and had slighted all
gracious offers of Peace? He is now overtaken in his season, and as God in his
Justice had decreed, and his Servants foretold, those enemies to the peace of
the Kingdom in these parts, are overthrown, and were forced to surrender the
Castle, and come out upon mercy; Sir John Marley was committed to his house by
a strong guard, to defend him from the fury of the incensed people, for he is
hated, and abhorred of all, and he brought many Families to ruin. The rest
that were in the Castle, have likewise in constrained humility, submitted
themselves, and are rendered Prisoners, though not many days before, these
peaceable Divines taught the people, that it was more lawful, one of them to
eat another, than to hearken to the Scottish Traitors, or comply with them in
any sort.

The Town is now in as good condition, as ever any Town reduced by the
extremity of War, and thereupon exposed to the rapine of Soldiers, which often
times is unavoidable. All care was had to preserve the houses and goods of the
Inhabitants, so far as possibly could be done; and to that effect, many
Proclamations made, That no Officer nor Soldier should presume to trouble nor
plunder the house of any, under the pain of death. And that better obedience
might be given thereto, and all occasions of tumults, wrongs and oppressions
might the better be avoided, It was Ordered that no Officer, nor Soldier
should stay in the Town, without special Order, but to return to the Leaguer,
and his former Quarters; And likewise for the further weal and ease of the
Town, the Quarters of the whole Army, are enlarged, and none ordained to stay
in Town, but the proper Garrison.

This is the true Relation of the success of the Scottish Army against
Newcastle, whereby it would appear, that God delights to cooperate with his
Armies. The best use that can be made thereof, and of all other Victories, is,
to make them steps of advancement for the Reformation begun, and great
encouragement to expede the Work in hand, and beat down all difficulties.

A Letter from the Committee at the Scottish Army, to the Committee of both
Kingdoms.
Right Honorable,
WE know not any better use you or we can make of the great success
wherewith it has pleased God to bless our attempts against this Town, than to
make it evident to the world, that Truth and Peace are the utmost of our
desires, and designs. For this purpose, we must uncessantly renew our former
desires to you, That all other Affairs whatsoever set aside, you will so far
take to heart the settling of matters of Religion in the Worship of God, and
Government of his House in this Kingdom, as you may in your own, and our Names,
become earnest sollicitours with the Assembly of Divines, to put that business
to a period, and with the Parliament, that where the foundation is laid by the
Assembly, their Authority be not wanting for the completing of the Work; no
greater incouragem^nt than this can come to the hearts of all those that are
engaged in this Cause with you, nor can any means be so powerful, to remove
these great prejudices raised against our Cause, by the abundance and variety
of Sectaries, Separatists, and Schismatics living amongst us, to the great
scandal of the Gospel, and professors thereof. This being done, we may with
the greater confidence expect a blessing upon our endeavors for Peace, for
which, as no success can alter our desires, so we are confident, you are
using all expedition possible, for expediting your Propositions thereof, that
they may be dispatched to his Majesty, whose favorable acceptance is prayed
for thereunto, by

Your affectionate Friends, and Servant, Sinclare J. P. D.
Newcastle 23 October. 1644.

See here, now then (pious and impartial Reader) whether England has not most
just cause, everlastingly to bless the Lord our God, in working thus
gloriously for us, by these our loyal Brethren, What great and most just cause
England has, for ever, to love most entirely their faithful brethren of
Scotland.
and eternally and most entirely to love and embrace them, in our best
affections, who have not only thus extraordinarily laid out themselves, and
carried their lives in their hands for us, and exposed themselves to such and
so many marveilous dangers of death and destruction: but also so sweetly,
preciously and piously declared (as in this their last Letter is so clear and
conspicuous) their only aim in all this, and the rest of their toils and
labor of love, to be Gods glory, the true Religions and pure Reformations
splendor, and the just Laws and Liberties of Subjects firm and faithful
establishment; and whether our most wicked and wretched Malignants slanderous
mouths are not most abundantly stopped, Malignants most slanderous mouths
justly stopped.
to Gods eternal glory, and all good men's just rejoicing, let all that hear of
these truths, righteously judge. But now to proceed.

About the 25 of this instant came certain intelligence, by Letters out of the
West to London, that Sir Richard Cholmley (Brother to Apostate Sir Hugh
Cholmley) with about 2 or 300 Horse about Colliton, Axmister, Bemester and
other places, on the confines of Dorsetshire, A brave exploit performed by
renowned Col. Seel^y, Governor in Lyme.
had driven away many Cattle from those Country people; whereupon brave
Colonel Seeley, the most renowned Governor of Lyme, having intelligence
thereof, drew out a party, who soon discovering the plunderers, fell upon them,
took 56 of them, horse and arms, rescued all the plunder they had got, and so
routed the rest, that they all fled and dispersed themselves several ways.
Among the prisoners taken, as aforesaid, were 2 Captains, and 10 other
Commanders and Officers, who were all carried to Lyme, and all the plundered
Cattle were mercifully restored to their owners; Cholmley himself fled, but
was shot in his shoulder, as was confessed by the Prisoners taken, and many
others of the Enemy sore wounded.

Much about the same time, information being given to the Parliament of
intolerable cruelties, and outrageous insolences committed by barbarous Irish
Rebels ( Oxfords good subjects) and some of the very Natives of heathenish
Wales, The most just reasons of an Ordinance of Parliament against Irish Rebels
taken prisoners by Sea or Land, who are to have no quarter granted them.
by burning and destroying the Corn on the ground, stripping all sorts of both
sexes stark naked, stigmatizing some, half hanging others, and then suffering
them to live, or rather, to languish in that condition, all which was informed,
I say, by Letters to the Parliament, by diverse honest inhabitants of those
parts, and by some of the Committees of the Parliament, at Haverford West, in
South Wales. And further information being given to the Parliament, of one
Colonel Mac Mayler, an Irish-Rebell, (another of King Charles his good
Catholic Subjects) taken prisoner in Yorkshire, by the Lord Fairfaxes forces,
under the Command of that valiant and faithful Commander, Colonel Lambert; as
also the sad confirmation of such like cruelties of the Irish-Rebels at
Boulton, and Leverpool, in Lancashire, all which being as fresh bleeding
wounds, still in the sad memory of all people, and now at this time most
seriously considered of, and well weighed by our most prudent Parliament; Both
Houses heerupon passed an Ordinance of Parliament, requiring all Commanders in
Chief in any part of the Kingdom, to give no Quarter to any Irish-Rebell taken
by Sea or by Land, in any part of the Kingdom; And because all Soldiers in all
parts of the kingdom might take notice hereof, Letters were Ordered to be sent
down by the Committee of both kingdoms, to all principal Commanders with that
Ordinance enclosed in them, for the more certain and exact execution thereof
accordingly.

And about the 26 of this instant October, the Parliament understanding by good
intelligence, Certain intelligence brought to London that ours and the Kings
forces were within 2 or 3 miles of Newberry, and like to be engaged.
that the King and his forces were about Newberry, and Dennington Castle, and
that some part of the Parliaments Army was upon one side of Newberry, near
about the place where the fierce battle was fought between them the last
year, and that the rest of our Army was within 2 or 3 miles at farthest from
Newberry, between the Kings Army and Oxford, and that both the Armies being so
near each other, there was like to be a speedy engagement between them; The
Parliament, therefore, desired the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, on
Monday October 28, to turn their other intended businesses and affairs of that
day into prayers for a blessing on our Armies, which accordingly they did. And
the same Monday night, Gods providence so ordered it, that the Lord Generals
Scout-Master, Mr. Bedford, came to Town, and brought certain information to the
Committee of both Kingdoms, of a brave defeat given by his Excellencies Forces
to the Kings Army, near Dennington-Castle, which also was confirmed by a Letter
directed to the honorable Speaker of the House of Commons, sent from 3 or 4
Eminent Commanders and Officers in Arms, whose names were subscribed thereto;
A Copy of which Letter, being a full and complete relation of the fight, I have
here, for the Readers better content and fuller satisfaction, inserted, which
was as follows.

Honorable Sir,
THough our other employments in and about the Army, may excuse us in point of
news, The Copy of a Letter sent to the honorable Speaker of the House of
Commons, relating the whole fight at Newberry, 28 October. 1644.
yet being eyewitnesses of this late fight, and knowing your kind acceptance
of some presents, though without the circle, and especially to express our joy
for this success which the Lord of Hosts, upon his own day has vouch^afed us;
We presume to press in with the crowd, and to make it more clear, shall give
you the preceding circumstances. After a weeks tedious, but speedy march of my
Lord Generals Infantry, and one nights refreshment at Redding, in two days
farther progress, we drew up before Newberry, as near the Town as the Enemies
Cannon would suffer; This was upon Friday the 25 of October. The King in Newberry.
The King kept within the Town, guarded by his Artillery, but his body of Horse
and Foot drew out into Speenfield, the midway betwixt the Town and Castle, both
to make his Army more numerous, and also to embattle them in a place of
extraordinary advantage. That day afforded nothing save an interview, (the
interposing river hindering our desired fight) on their side appeared rather a
declining to be engaged, either that their numbers were not equal, or from an
expectation of Ruperts advance with 3000 Horse or Dragoones, and the return of
the Earl of Northampton, The Enemies strength at Newberry, was 8000 foot and
5000 horse.
from Banbury with a 1000. The Enemies strength is reported to have been 8000
Foot, and 5000 Horse; which albeit a gallant Army, yet upon our drawing into
battalia, they durst not take the field, but to counterpoise our numbers with
his Stratagems, he fell mainly to fortify the Town, especially the avenues,
and having raised his batteries and lined the hedges, he stood upon his guard,
and with some great p^ices, where he saw the biggest bodies and most
advantage, he sent liberally some of his bullets among us, God, here, took
more care for his servants, than the King did of his best Subjects.
which killed 2 or 3 Horse, but hurt not their Riders. For many hours some
parties of Horse skirmisht betwixt both the Armies; in which play we had the
best on our part, but one of our men fell; of theirs 4 or 5. of which, one had
been knighted. It being impossible to engage them without much hazard, that
night, the greater part of our Army marched unto Cheveley. The horse commanded
by Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belfore; the foot by Sergeant Major
General Skippon, whilst the other encamped before the East End of the Town,
and was ordered by the Earl of Manchester, Our Army was necessitated to quarter
al night in the open field.
at one same time they had all agreed to storm the Garrison on both sides. That
night and the next we quartered in the open field, but neither the coldness
of the weather, nor want of usual provision, any whit disanimated the
Soldier, the earnest expectation of fight swallowed up all other extremities;
Howbeit, most of them had 3 days provision prepared by Command in his
snapsack. By daybreak, upon Sunday, the horse and Foot commanded by Sir
William Waller, and Major General Skippon, Ours took 2 or 3 cart loads of the
Kings provision, and 100 horse and foot of the enemies.
were upon their March, and in 4 hours had surrounded Dennington-Castle, and
made their approach toward the West of Newberry. By the way we intercepted 2
or 3 Carts of the Enemies provision, intended, they said, for his Majesty, but
in respect an unworthy race about him, were to have shared therein, and that
our men more needed it, we disposed of it to our selves; To recompense which,
they fell upon our Rear from the Castle and took 10 or 12 of ours prisoners.
Upon this March we received the report that Newcastle was taken by storm* and
the Vlster Rebels in Ireland, totally defeated; happy news unto us, and of a
double use to our engagement. It was one of the clock ere the Train and Rear
came up, and near 3 ere we could be put into Battalia. The fight begun.
With extraordinary shouts, and other testimonies of courage and joy, the
Western-body advanced, and the forlorn Hopes of horse quickly began the fight,
which with as much eagerness was seconded by the foot, The fight maintained
for at least 3 hours space, with admitable courage and fiercenes on both sides.
so as, for 3 hours at least, the fight was maintained with as much resolution
and bravery on our side, and desperateness on the other, as has been seen
since the commencement of these Wars; the Cannon and small shot on both sides
firing with as quick a motion as was possible to be done by Souldier^, and
amongst the foot, to speak impartially, his Excellencies Regiment did most
eminently well, of whom especially and of the rest, we can speak very justly,
we neither saw man nor party, horse or foot, either to desert his duty or
dishearten his fellow. About the midst of the fight the Earl of Cleveland, and
some other of the Enemies prime Commanders rode among our Soldiers, The Earl
of Cleveland and others taken prisoners.
asking them, Wherefore they would fight against their own men? but being
demanded the word and not knowing it, diverse of them were knocked down from off
their horses, and the Earl of Cleveland himself, and some other Officers were
taken prisoners. And after a long and hot dispute, we beat the Enemy first
from their works, and then from their Ordnance, 9 in number; 9 of our brave
pieces of Ordnance, which had been lost in Cornwall, here, now recovered. our
men fought like devils, as the Cornish Soldiers cried our, running away.
Our forces were no sooner possessed of the Ordnance, (which were a part of those
which we lost in Cornwall) but our Western sparks, with exceeding great joy,
hugged and kissed them, and cried out; Now will we show them a Cornish hop; and
on the other side, many of the Cavaliers most fearfully threw down their Arms
and ran away, crying out, Devils, Devils, they fight like devils; for, ours
gave no Quarter to any whom they knew to be of the Cornish. In which fierce
fight and brave deportment of ours, we lost a few men, and with or among them,
Captain Cawler, a brave Gentleman of Glam^rganshire, who by an honorable and
triumphant hazard, bequeathed the thing adventured to us with his life also,
an expression sufficient fully to entitle himself, True to his Charge,
notwithstanding his captivity in Cornwall. The day was of so much discontent to
the King, that wrapping up his losses with the night, The King ^^ed out of
Newberry with only one Troop of horse.
an hour after midnight, he marched (or rather fled) out of the Town, with
an attendant Troop only, toward Winchester, and sent up his Cannon, Carriages,
and Baggage, to the Castle, where (at daybreak) we saw them placed. Upon the
first intelligence of their departure, Colonel Cromwell followed the body of
the Enemy, a hours before day, the issue of which, as yet, we hear not of.
Our men are full of Spirit, and extraordinarily heightened with this Victory.
The Enemy has little to support them but their Rodomants. In the mean time, as
an addition and signal of good success, we have (as I touched before) the
Earl of Cleveland prisoner, taken by a Leivtenant of Colonel Barkleys, General
Gorings brother shot dead in the fight.
who wonders how General Goring escaped our hands, but his Brother paid his
account, being shot dead as he charged, and most of his Troop were cut off,
and Major Trevillian, and diverse other, whose bodies are seen, but names, as
yet, undiscovered. Above 200 were slain on the ground, and 300 taken prisoners,
Prisoners taken at Newberry fight.
whereof these, in special, by name; The Earl of Cleveland, Captain Philpot,
Leivtenant Harper, Leivtenant Roan, Cornet Whealand, Quartermaster Ironmonger,
Quartermaster Campion, Quarter master Nicholas, Mr. John Percie; all these of
the Earl of Clevelands Brigade, and 38 Troopers of the same Brigade. Taken
prisoners of Sir Ralph Hoptons Regiment, Captain Elmes, a Captain of Horse,
Mr. Simon Court, Quartermaster to Hoptons own Troop; Edward Philips, Henry
Dimmo^k, Hugh Pope, Gent. of Arme^, and diverse other Troopers. Colonel
Philpot, Captain Mildem^y, Captain N^vet, Mr. Richard Niston, Mr. John Curtis,
Mr. Edward Archer, and diverse other Gentl. of Arms, and Reformadoes, besides
(as I said before) 300 Common Soldiers.


The King flying out of Newberry reviles the Major.
And it was credibly reported by good testimony, that at the instant of his
Majesty's flight from Newberry, he complained of the Major, Townsmen, and
Inhabitants of Newberry, saying, that they were most pestilent Roundheads, and
that they were not so loyal as his subjects of Cornwall, who used to give him
intelligence upon all occasions. There were also taken, at least 2000 Arms at
this fight, and the Kings, and General Forths Coaches, Prizes-taken at and
about Newb.
and diverse sumpture-horses laden with rich prize; and upon the consideration
of this great and good success of this our Army at Newberry, and the other of
our brethren of Scotland, at Newcastle; An Order was agreed on by both the
Houses of Parliament, An Order of Parliament for a day of publik Thank^giving
to God (...) brave def^at, and happy Victory.
that public Thanks should be given to God in all Churches in London and
Westminster, on Tuesday then ensuing, which was the 5 of November, being the
day of solemn annual thanksgiving for Englands deliverance from the most
horrid and exorbitant Popish Gun-powder-Treason, which sacrifice of
Thanksgiving for these 2 foresaid Victories, was, on the said day accordingly
performed.

But, Oh our unhappiness, that ever it should be justly said of us, A just
check to our improvidence in not improving this braveadvantage as we might have
done.
as it was of Hanniball that great Carthaginian Conqueror and scourge of the
Romans! Vincerescis Hannibal, Vtivictoria nescis. O that we should not only
not prosper in this Victory, according to the admirable advantage, which God
had put into our hands, but that we should suffer the Enemy to rally and
recrute their Force^, and as it most unhappily fell out ( Quo fato, aut q^a
fraud, nescio,) at Dunnington-castle, shortly after, where they greatly and
most grossly recovered much of their losses, and our, then* famous and
formidable Army was (to our shame and sorrow be it spoken) most strangely
baffled and abused, even to their faces, we standing still and looking on; But
enough and too much of this, and now to proceed.

About the 28 of this instant also came certain intelligence, by Letters from
Newcastle, to the Committee of both Kingdoms, that the Castle, within the Town
of Newcastle, was for certain taken by our noble brethren of Scotland, and that
all within the Castle, who had fl^d in thither, The Castle in the Town of
Newcastle taken by our brethren of Scotland.
at the taking of the Town, surrendered both the Castle and themselves to the
mercy of those our very merciful brethren of Scotland, wherein were taken
several prisoners of quality, and who they intended should all have legal
trial both English and Scottish; but their own Native Scots they speedily sent
away into Scotland, and the English (to be adjudged by the known Laws of
England) they sent to London. The names of the most eminent men taken, The
names of the prisoners taken in the Castle.
then, in the Castle, were these, Sir John Marley, the atheistical Major and
Governor of the Town, a most pestilent and desperate malignant and enemy to
all goodness; the Lord ^raford, the Lord Maxwell, the Lord Ree, 3 Lords of
Scotland, and all 3 most desperate incendiaries, together with diverse others,
prime Commanders and Officers in arms.

Much also about the same time, we were most certainly informed by several
Letters out of Lincolnshire, that his Majesty had sent directions to all the
Commanders of his Garrisons at Newark, Belvi^-castle, and others thereabout,
with special command speedily to join into a considerable body, and to march
for the releif of Crowland, and then to fall into the Associated Counties,
which accordingly, and instantly they put in practice, and for which purpose,
they met together in a great body, A most famous defeat given to the Enemies at
Bever Vale, by Sir Jo. Gells, and Sir Tho. Fairfax his forces.
and came into the Vale of Bever, from whence they intended to march speedily
toward Crowland; But, loyal, active, and valiant Sir John Gells, and Sir
Thomas Fairfaxes forces, being timely informed thereof, appointed also speedily
to meet together, and to fall upon the Enemy in the said V^le of Bever, which,
accordingly they performed, with singular good speed and good success, and
bravely surprised the greatest part of them, took Major Pudsey, and 2
Colonells, about 800 horse, 800 horse and 400 prisoners taken at Bever-Vale.
and 400 prisoners, and by this means most happily frustrated both the certain
releiving of Crowland, and especially prevented that most desperate and
dangerous design (as it might unquestionably have proved) of breaking in, like
a furious overflowing flood, into the Associated Counties, a mercy most worthy
our extraordinary thankfulness to the Lord our God, the most gracious and
vigilant Watchman of the English Israel.

And about the 30 of this instant October, we were credibly assured by Letters
from Wareham in the West, that that most valiant and faithful Commander
Colonel Sydenham, had fallen upon Sir Jews Dives Forces at Crew, in
Dorsetshire, and had a brave bickering with them, where he wounded his
Leivtenant Colonel, took an 100 horse, 40 prisoners, above a 100 Arms, and
routed and put to flight 400 horse and foot. Colonel Syden^ams good service in
the West
And the same Letters also farther certified, that Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper,
with 1500 horse and foot from several Garrisons thereabout in Dorsetshire, had
then taken the field to encounter with Sir Lewis Dives, who was endeavoring to
fortify some places in those parts; whereof more in its due and proper place.

The good news from our Armies rested not here; for, about the 30 also of this
instant, came certain intelligence to the Parliament, signifying, Leverpool in
Lancashire surrendered up to Sir Jo. Meldrum
under the hand of that pious, prudent, and victorious Commander Sir William
Brereton, that Leverpool in Lancashire, was delivered up to brave, and ever to
be honored Sir John Meldrum. The English Soldiers therein, some 2 or 3 days
before having combined together, came away out of the Town, and drove away with
them the Cattle that was thereabout, and the Irish seeing themselves left, only
with some few English Commanders, they also being in great straits, and knowing
no quarter would be given them, if they stood it out, they therefore also
voluntarily came forth of the Town, The manner how Leverpool was taken.
and cast themselves at Sir John M^^drums feet, and had their lives granted
them thereupon, before the Ordinance of Parliament against the Irish, came to
his hands or knowledge. And heerupon the Commanders also were enforced
instantly to surrender the Town, wherein were taken prisoners, Sir Robert
Byron, Governor; Colonel Cuthert Clifton, Robert Bambridge, Major; Prisoners
taken and the goods of the Town recovered by Sea.
Hugh Anderson Leivtenant Colonel, 14 Captains, and many other Officers in
Arms. Most of the choice Goods which were in the Town, they had shipped in
small Barks and Boats, thinking to have stolen away in the night time, by our
Ships, to Beu-Morrice; but some of the well-affected in the Town, having given
timely notice thereof, our ships manned out long boats, and took all their said
Goods from them, to a very considerable value.

Nay, yet, Gods goodness to the Parliament, and his extraordinary blessing on
their forces rested not here; for, much about the foresaid time we were
certainly informed, by Letters from Newcastle, to the Committee of both
Kingdoms, that noble and renowned General Leven, carried on businesses so
prudently, in the capitulation between his Excellency and the Governor of
Tinmouth-castle, Tinmouth-castle surrendered unto General Leven, with 38 pieces
of Ordnance in it, and great store of other Arms and Ammunition.
that the said Castle was ( October. 27. 1644.) surrendered to his Excellency, and
that therein he found 38 pieces of Ordnance, 50 barrels of powder, 500
Muskets, a great number of Pikes, and great store of shot and other sorts of
provision. And heerin, now (in brief) we may see the great goodness of God
thus admirably completing our comforts to us, by several most wise
providentiall degrees; for, though the Town of Newcastle was taken, and in our
full possession, yet it was of little use unto us till the Castle therein was
surrendered; and though both this Town and Castle were taken, yet they were not
of any considerable and desired use for public Trade by shipping, till
Tinmouth castle was surrendered, The most wise and providentiall degrees of Gods
completing his mercies to us.
which commands the ent^ance into that River, so as, no Ships can pass it but
with great hazard; but now (Gods name be ever glorified) all let^ and
obstructions to a free Trade into that Town are quite taken away, and any ships
may pass and repasse most freely and fearlesly; and the Ordinance of
Parliament (formerly inhibiting all commerce and Trading with Newcastle, whiles
it was in the power of the Royalists) was shortly after by Both Houses of
Parliament repealed, and full power and license now granted of free Trading
thither again by authority of Parliament.

And now upon the 31 of this instant October, being the last wednesday of this
Month, we had the Parliamentary monthly Fast solemnized, before and close
upon which, the Lord did most graciously give us, both, admirable preventions
of our prayers, and singular returns of them, This Months day of humiliation
was also (most justly) turned as much into a day of exultation. Reverend Mr.
Cases baptizing of the surrender of Newcastle, with the name of G^d, a
Multitude.
after prayers, even all along (save only in that unhappy self-failing of our
forces at Dunnington-castles and Bazing-houses, releif, by our own undoubted
remissness, if not worse,) whereby, I say, our said day of Monthly
humiliation, was, (and that most deservedly) turned as much into a day of
gratulation, rejoicing, and praising the Lord our God, as of Fasting and
Praying to God, both for that famous Victory and ^urrender of the Town of
Newcastle, to our loyal and lowing brethren of Scotland, which, (as learned,
reverend and truly religious Mr. Case justly said) we may most worthily
baptize and Christen, with the name of G^d, a Multitude, for, after it, we
received a multitude of Mercies from the bountiful hands of our good God; for,
presently upon that surrender fell out all the succeeding memorable mercies,
which have been in this months passages forementioned; as namely, the last
famous Victory or defeat given to our Enemies, the Kings Forces, at Newberry;
the taking of the Castle, in Newcastle-Town, and of Tinmouth-castle, shortly
after; the happy and remarkable unbloody surrender of the Town of Leverpool, in
Lancashire; and the famous defeat given to the Newark forces, by our most
valiant and vigilant Forces of Leicester and Lincolnshire, all fore-specified.
Here, therefore, good Reader, I shall desire thee together with me, to make a
short stand and stay, to see and admire this Months most admirable wonder,
also, of the Burning-Bush, not only, not Consumed, but even in the midst of
most furious flames and conflagrations, The Burning-Bush not consumed.
as it were growing green, still, and waxing more and more fair and flourishing:

Witness, 1.
I say, most conspicuously and undeniably, that further discovery of that
desperate and dangerous plot and design, A brief and most grateful
^ecap^tulation of all the memorable mercies of this month of October.
closly and craftily carried on for our inevitable ruin and destruction, had
it taken on our Army in Cornwall, in the West, but marveilously prevented by
Gods good providence, infusing such courage and faithfulness into the hearts
of our Commanders and Soldiers.

Witness also, 2.
the most successful proceedings of the affairs of our best beloved brethren
in the kingdom of Scotland; together with the many mischeivous Array-men,
surprised in the Northern parts of our kingdom by the well-affected-people of
those parts, and putting them into the power and custody of renowned General
Lesley.

Also the taking of Radcastle, 3.
in Northwales, by Sir Thomas Middleton; together with the Parliaments most
pious and prudent completing and publishing of that blessed Ordinance for
Ordination of Ministers, in and about London, in a most pious and Apostolical
way and order.

Witness also that brave and most famous defeat given to the Enemies, 4.
by that most renowned and ever to be honored and loved Commander, Colonel
Massy, at Beechley, where the said brave Colonel was admirably preserved both
from death and danger; Together with the surprisall of the Irish ship at
White-haven in Cumberland; the brave prize taken by renowned Colonel Syden^am,
Governor of Pool in the West; and another also by most valiant and loyal
Colonel Lambert in the North.

And witness Gods special providence and particular love and regard of the
good, 5.
not only of this Church and State in general, but also of his peculiar
treasure, and holy hidden ones in special, viz. in the redemption and
deliverance from a long and tedious captivity in the North, of one of his most
faithful servants and sufferers, for his Truth and Gospel, namely, Dr. John
Bastwick, lately, then, a prisoner in Knaresborough castle in Yorkshire;
Together with the farther brave performances of noble and renowned Sir Thomas
Middleton in North Wales; 6.
And all the rest of the most remarkable and memorable Victories, I say, of our
most worthily ever to be honored and beloved brethren the Scots, at Newcastle,
and the other most memorable successes of our Armies, as is forementioned; all
which being put together, and seriously considered do abundantly make good the
truth of this our Nations wonder, The Burning-Bush not consumed.
in reference unto Moses his great wonder of his Burning-Bush not consumed, and
therefore gives us just occasion in admiration and contemplation thereof, to
break forth into a just and ingenuous confession of the faithfulness of Gods
promise to his Church and children by the Prophet Isaiah, by whom the Lord
tells his people. Isa. 54. 16, 17.
Behold, I have created the Smith that blows the coale^ in the fire, and that
brings forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to
destroy. But, no weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper, and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall condemn. And as the
Lord says in the 15 verse of this foresaid Chapter: Ibid. ver. 15.
Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: Whosoever,
therefore, shall gather together against thee, shall fall, for thy sake. And
thus, has the Lord most faithfully done for us, in these our days, even for
us, as sinful and undeserving a people as were his Israelites of old; And
therefore, let us in holy exultation, with the pious Prophet David, sing and
say to the Lords everlasting praise and glory. Psalm. 18. 31. 46
O who is God, save only the Lord, or who is a rock, save our God? The Lord
lives, and blessed be our rock, and let the God of our Salvation be exalted
and praised for ever. But now to proceed, and go forward to the farther
progress and prosecution of our just admiration of this our National wonder,
in the next succeeding Month of November, 1644.

ANd first I shall begin with a brave exploit performed by the forces of that
valiant Patriot, November. 1644.
and brave Commander Colonel Ridgeley, a principal and prudent Commander in
the Earl of Denbighs Army about Staffordshire, who about the beginning of this
Month of November, understanding that the Enemy in those parts began to stir
apace, A brave exploit performed by Captain Stones, one of valiant Col. Ridgele
yes Officers in arms, against the Enemy about Eccleshall
and to molest the peace and people of the Country thereabout; and especially
that the Enemy from Tongue-castle, and Linshall Garrison, were got about
Eccleshall, and had there gotten and taken away all the Cattle and horse that
they could light upon in those parts, to the number of about 200 at least; He
therefore, I say, sent out Captain Stones a brave Officer in Arms of his
Regiment, who with a considerable party, being upon their March, by his Scouts
discovering which way the said Enemy moved, hasted after them, and having
overtaken them, he most valiantly advanced up unto them, and with his men fell
most courageously upon them, and presently put them to the rout, took 27 of
them prisoners, slew 2 or 3 of them on the place, and wounded many, among which
prisoners, he took Sergeant Major Fleetwood, Sir Richard Fleetwoods Son, and
one Almand, a most desperate and active Cavalier, who had done much mischief in
those parts, who also was sorely wounded, and rescued all the 200 horse and
Cattle from them, and restored them to their right Owners, at their return
home. And about the same time Captain Wagstaffe and Captain Wakefield, with
part of Colonel Chadwicks, and Colonel Leighs Troops, went forth together in
their assignations about Hampton, and in their March, hearing that some of the
Enemies were quartered thereabout, they marched up unto them, fell upon them in
their quarters, took about 13 or 14 of them prisoners, and brought away above
20 good horse to Stafford with them.

And although I briefly mentioned a mixture of Thanksgiving together with our
last day of the monthly Humiliation, in the conclusion of the month of
October last, for the late, many, and great Victories given by our good God to
the Parliaments forces; yet now give me leave, good Reader, here to acquaint
thee, that our ever to be honored and most pious Worthies in Parliament,
Ordered by special appointment that the 5 of this instant November, which was
the former anniversary-day of public Thanksgiving, This 5 of November a day of
publik thanksgiving for diverse great and famous victories.
for our most happy deliverance from the Popish Gunpowderplot, should also be
a particular day of solemn Thanksgiving to the Lord (and was accordingly
performed) for our most memorable Victory at Newberry; for the taking in of the
Town of Newcastle, and the Castle therein also, together with the taking of
Tinmouth castle, the yielding up of Leverpool to Sir John Meldrum, and the
brave defeat given to our Cavalierian adversaries in Lincolnshire: Which said
day of Thanksgiving for all these rare and famous Victories, was very solemnly
kept thorow-out the Cities of London and Westminster, with Sermons in all
Churches both forenoon and afternoon, The great triumph in the City of London,
on this solemn day of thanksgiving.
with ringing of Bells, shooting off Ordnance at all the Forts round about the
City, and making many and mighty bonfires at night. And to add to all this
days triumph, as the Lord Major, accompanied with the Aldermen and Sheriffs
his Brethren, together with the several Companies of the said City of London,
then attending him, came back from the Sermon at Paul's Church, through
Cheapside, there was (just in the place where once that abominable monument of
Idolatry, the Cross stood) a frame of firre-wood set up, and upon it diverse
Popish pictures, and Romish Relics, Books, Beads, and Crucifixes were set on
fire and bravely burnt to ashes, making a most beautiful bonfire, as they all
past along Cheapside by it. Praised be the Lord, who caused us thus justly to
rejoice.

About the 8 of this instant November, we received credible information out of
the West, by a Letter from a Commander of note and quality, of the storming and
taking of a strong Garrison of the Enemies, which was Sir John Strangewaies
House in Dorsetshire, and had been a very ill neighbor to our renowned
Garrison of Lime, which service was most bravely performed by that valiant and
loyal Patriot, Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper, Commander in chief for the
Parliament, in that County, a Copy of which Letter, relating the gallant
service performed therein, The Enemies Garrison at Sir Jo. Strangeways House in
Dorsetstire, stormed and taken by Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper.
for the Readers better content and satisfaction, I have here inserted.

Sir, etc.
We marched from Dorchester to Abot^bury, where Colonel James Strangewayes
and all his Regiment were in Garrison, they held both the House and the Church
which joined to the House; It was night before we summoned it, and they in a
scorn refused the summons of Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper, a very active and noble
Gentleman, our Commander in chief, whereupon he sent his Major General with a
considerable party against the Church, who presently assaulting it took it, and
all the men in it prisoners, without the loss of one man of ours. After this
we summoned them in writing, the second time, to yield on fair quarter, or
else to expect no mercy, if they forced us to storm them. To this also they
disdained to return an Answer; upon which denya^^ we* fell on, The storming of
this Garrison continued 6 hours together
and after as hot a storm as ever I heard of, for six hours together, it
pleased God, at length to give us the place, when by no other means we could
get it, we found a way by desperately flinging in fired turf-fagots into the
windows; and the fight, thus, grew so hot, that our said Commander in chief
(who to his perpetual renown behaved himself most gallanly in this service)
was forced to bring up his men within Pistol shot of the House, and could
hardly, then, get them to stay and stand the brunt, yet in all this time (God
be praised) we lost but 3 men, and some few wounded. Now, when as by the
foresaid hot assault, half of the house was on a light fi^e, and not to be
quenched, then at length, Colonel James Strangewayes called out for quarter,
which our Commander in chief was resolved no man in the House should have, in
regard they had so desperately and disdainfully scorned his summons, and also
in regard that the Cavaliers custom was observed to be to keep such paltry
houses and pilfring Garrisons against any of our Armies, that they might thereby
be sure to do us mischief, and (by reason of our observed clemency) to have
their lives at last granted to them; But some of our Commanders upon one side
of the House, contrary to the mind of our said Commander in chief, and against
the opinion of all the Officers, in his absence, had given them quarter, which
being granted them, we instantly rushed into the House, which being of a light
fire, and their Magazine in it (I believe rather accidentally, than as some
reported, Between 30 and 40 of our men blown up with powder in the taking of
this house.
purposely and trecherously) it set on fire 4 or 5 barrels of Gunpowder, and
blew up between 30 and 40 of our men, yet the Lord be blessed, my self and the
rest were even miraculously preserved. We took prisoners, Colonel James
Strangewayes, Sir John Strangewayes his Son, Governor of this Garrison, his
Major, and 3 Captains; and not 3 of his whole Regiment, but were either killed
or taken, and the House was wholly burnt down to the ground, and we thereby
freed of a pestilent and pernicious neighbor. Colonel Bruen and Mr. Crompton,
behaved themselves very worthily in this action, and Captain Star
incomparably bravely.

Yours, C. A.


November the 12, we were for certain informed by Letters out of the North,
that a party of the Enemies horse advanced from Skipton and Knaresborough in
Yorkshire, and fell upon the Parliaments guard before Helmesley Castle,
intending to have raised that siege. Whereupon 240 of the most noble and
renowned Lord Fairfaxes Horse under the Command of Major Sanderson, were sent
to relieve them, A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Helmsley castle.
but our valiant Forces before Helmesley had quite routed the Enemy before
their said help came unto them, and pursued the Enemy over Black-Hambleton, and
took prisoners, 1 Captain, 5 or 6 Leivtenants, one Cornet, one Ensign, a
Quartermaster, and 44 Troopers; there were about; or 6 slain on the place, and
very many sore wounded; ours also took 80 Horse, together with a great quantity
of Meal, Salt, and other provisions designed for the releif of Helmesley. All
which was performed without the loss of any, save only Captain Leivtenant
Frampton, Leivtenant Shepperson, and 3 common Soldiers.

About the 16 of this instant, both the Houses of Parliament passed an
Ordinance for the re-establishing of free Trade again at Newcastle, Free
Trading with Newcastle re-established by the Parlia.
which now lately had beer most happily reduced (by Gods blessing on the valor
and magnanimity of our loyal Brethren of Scotland) to the obedience of the
Parliament, which said Ordinance, for the Readers fuller satisfaction and
content, I have here thought fit to insert, verbatim, as it was Printed and
published by Authority of Parliament.

Die Jovis, November. 14. 1644.
Where as the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, by an Ordinance of
the 14 of January, 1642. did for several reasons in the said Ordinance
mentioned, prohibit all ships and other vessels to carry provision of victuals,
arms or money unto Newcastle, Sunderland, and Blyth, or make return of any
Coals or Salt from either the said places, under pain of seizure of the said
ships, vessels, and their l^ding: And whereas by the good providence and
blessing of Almighty God, and the endeavors of our brethren of Scotland, the
Town and Port of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Castle of Tinmouth, are lately
rescued out of the hands of the Enemy, and reduced to the obedience of the King
and Parliament: The Inhabitants of which places, by reason of the rapine and
spoil of the Enemy, have been brought to extremity of want. It is this day
Ordered by the said Lords and Commons that the said Ordinance be repealed and
annulled, And the said Lords and Commons do hereby repeal and annull the same.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

About the 20 of this instant came certain intelligence by Letters out of
Yorkshire to London, that the Castle of Helmesley in that County, which had
been then besieged (as was forementioned) by the right honorable and thrice
noble Lord Fairfaxes forces, was now at length surrendered to his Lordship, upon
Articles of agreement. Helmsley castle in Yorkshire taken by the thrice noble
Lord Fairfax.
Whereupon, the said Castle with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition
therein, except what arms the Commanders and Officers marched out withal,
according to the agreement. In this Castle were about 200 men, 9 pieces of
Ordnance, 300 Muskets and Pikes, 6 barrells of powder, and much money, Plate,
and other good plunder; and many of the common Soldiers turned to the Lord
Fairfax, whereof at least 40 went presently to assist at the siege of
Scarborough.

And about the 24 of this instant November, we were informed by Letters out of
Lincolnshire, of the good success against the Enemy there, of that brave and
most valiant active Commander, Colonel Rossiters Regiment of horse, and
Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment of horse, Commanded by valiant and virtuous Major
Harrison, who resolved to face the Town of Newark, to try what strength of
horse they had left, A brave defeat given to the Enemy in Lincolnshire, by
Major Harrison
since the last loss of near about 800 horse upon a rout: But in their way,
they also resolved to attempt the beating up of one of their quarters, within a
mile of Newark, which accordingly they did, and took there, an 160 horse, and
80 prisoners, Major Heren, Captain Cressey, 3 Cornets, 3 Leivtenants, and
diverse Gentlemen, and afterward faced the Town of Newark, the enemy not daring
to adventure out; whereupon they victoriously returned and brought their
prisoners and prize safely with them to Lincoln.

And about the 28 instant, we received certain intelligence by Letters out of
the West, that the valiant Soldiers of Lime marched out of that Garrison to
meet the Enemy at Axminster, who came thither to fortify that Town, thereby to
have straightened the quarters of Lime; But they being as vigilant as valiant, and
discovering the Enemies drift, A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Axminster,
by Lime forces.
and unwilling to be nosed by so bad a neighbor, fell upon the said Enemy, as
they stood upon a posture of defense, fitted and resolved (as it seemed) to
entertain the charge of our forces, but in the end, were bravely routed by the
Lime Soldiers, who in the encounter killed Major Walker, a desperate and
wicked Cavalier, 2 Captains, and 2 Leivtenants, and mortally wounded Sir
Richard Cholmley (Son in Law to the Lord Pawle^, and brother to Sir Hugh
Cholmley of Scarborough, that disloyal apostate Run negado) who commanded in
Chief this party, and some Letters, since, have certified that the said Sir
Richard is dead of his wounds; In which encounter also the brave Lime forces
took 4 pieces of Ordnance, great store of Arms, many prisoners, and drove the
rest into a Church, which was not then taken, when this Letter came to our
hands. This most valiant Governor of Lyme deserves to be had in high honor
and remembrance for his former famous services also, especially for his so
manfully defending that poor Town against Prince Maurice, and the Lord Pawlet,
A rich ship driven into Lime Haven by a storm.
and other mighty menacing powers, as has at large been forementioned. And
shortly after this brave defeat, it pleased the Lord that a sudden storm
arising at Sea, a ship of Apsome was driven into the Haven at Lime, and there
seized on, which was estimated to be worth many thousand pounds, a part
whereof was ordered by the Parliament to be employed for the use and service
of Lyme, and the rest for the other Western parts, the goods in the said ship
being found to belong to diverse rich Malignants of Exeter and Apsome, and most
of them consisting of special good Linen cloth. And besides that foresaid
Victory at Axminster, and rich prize so put into their hands in their haven;
we had certain information that this most valiant and active garrison of Lime,
within 2 or 3 days after fell upon another party of the Enemies, Another brave
defeat given to the Enemy by Lime Garrison.
and did good execution on them, and took prisoners 3 Leivtenants more, with 50
other Officers and Soldiers, took an 160 Muskets, 10 Halberts, 3 barrels of
powder, one Cornet Colors, 2 foot Colors, and 5 Drums, and that Colonel
Bret; Knight and Baronet, was here also dangerously wounded, and, as was
reported since, dyed of the wounds he then received, and that Major Hinkley
was for certain dead of his wounds in this skirmish received.

About the 30 of this instant November, we were certified by Letters from Sir
Thomas Middletons quarters, that Colonel Beal (who went with Foot forces out
of London, by Sea, intended for Anglesey, and so for Sir Thomas Middleton, in
North Wales,) landed his forces in Milford-Haven, in Pembrookeshire, in
South Wales, where joining with the Pembrook-men, he marched into
Carmarthenshire, where the Enemies had a strong Garrison, Laughorn castle in
South Wales taken by Colonel Beal.
called Laughorn castle, which this brave Colonel won from them, the exact
particulars of which Service being brought to London, in a Letter dated at
Pembrook, I have here thought fit to extract and set down the substance
thereof, to the honor of that gallant Colonel, and the other Commanders
assistant to him therein, which was as follows. We made our approach to
Laughorn castle, and having soon gained the Town, in the Town gate we planted
our Ordnance, and first gave the Enemies a fair summons to surrender the said
Garrison for the King and Parliament, which they utterly refusing, we
presently made our batteries against the Castle gate house, and that not
without the happy advantage of a great breach, and so with an unanimous consent
of our forces fell to hot storm, and undermining of the walls, both which were
performed with such fervor, courage and expedition (and that only with the
loss of not above 5 of our men, but at the least 33 of theirs within, as was
afterward confessed, by some of their own Commanders) as that the Enemy seeing
us in such good earnest and wisely foreseeing the eminent danger they werein,
if they now delayed any longer, they presently sounded a parley, which
notwithstanding our advantages being granted them, though at first they began
with us on high terms, yet were forced speedily to surrender only upon quarter
for their lives, and the Castle thus surrendered into the Generals possession,
wherein were 4 pieces of Ordnance, 160 arms, 4 barrels of powder, and great
store of other provision, they having lost in this assault ere it was ended, 33
of their men, and many wounded, whereof 4 were Captains.

Much also about the foresaid time came certain intelligence by Letters from
Pool in the West, that Sir Lewis Dives being at Dorchester, with 200 horse and
Dragoones, sent a party to face Pool, who made a daring show and bravado, upon
sight of whom brave Colonel Sydenham prepared valiantly to oppose them, but
after only a daring show and bravado, A brave exploit performed by Col.
Sydenham against the Enemy at Dorchester.
they vanished like a vapourous cloud, and marched away instantly to Dorchester:
But renowned Colonel Sydenham impatient of the empty flourishes of a vapouring
Enemy, that night drew out a party of between 50 and 60 horse double pistolled,
and with them marched (like a gallant Gentleman indeed) himself in person,
desirous to show Sir Lewis Dives some action, and in the night he came to
Dorchester, and fell upon the Enemy in their quarters, first charged the
out-guards, calling to his men to fall on courageously, which they did most
gallantly, The admirable courage and valor of Colon. Sydenham and his
Soldiers.
beat his whole Regiment quite through the Town, and then gave them a second
charge, and beat them back again, most stoutly charging upon the Dragoones, and
crying out to his Soldiers, Give the Dragoones no quarter. With which his so
violent a charge some fell and the rest fled, and at a third charge this noble
Colonel facing about in the Town, found and knew Major Williams in the head of
the Enemies Troops, coming to charge him; This Williams had formerly basely
and cruelly killed Colonel Sydenhams Mother; whom so soon as Colonel Sydenham
saw, he spoke to his men that were next to him, to stick close to him, for,
said he, I will now avenge my Mothers innocent blood, or die in this place;
and so he most valiantly made his way to Major Williams, and flew him in the
place, who fell down dead under his horses feet, the rest of the horse and
Dragoones fled out of the Town and so escaped; Sir Lewis Dives himself and some
others of note being sorely wounded, and valiant Colonel Sydenham, returned
back victoriously into Pool, with the prisoners he had taken.

And thus now having by Gods good guide and assistance finished with a short
and succinct Survey, A grateful summary review of the various ways of the
Burning Bush not consumed.
the comfortable contemplation of this Months wonder of the Burning-Bush,
thus, still, Unconsumed in the midst of all these premised fierce and furious
conflagrations, as namely, Captain Stones his brave exploit at Eccleshall; the
various happy occasions of a Solemn day of Thanksgiving November, by Order of
Parliament; Brave Anthony Ashley-Coopers storming and taking of Sir John
Strangewayes a strong Garrison in Dorsetshire; The brave defeat given Helmsley
castle, and the taking thereof; Free Newcastle by authority of Parliament; A
Newark in Lincolnshire; Two other also given unto them, the one at Axminster in
the West, Lime; the other within 2 or 3 days after the former, against a party
of the Enemies, in those parts; The taking of Laughorn-castle in SouthWales;
Dorchester, by renowned Sydenham. All these, I say, performed to the eternal
praise and high honor of our Isreal's ever most gracious and glorious
Wonder-working God, whereby we have great cause to sing and say with holy
David, with exulting joy and thankfulness of heart, Psalm. 46. 11.
The Lord of Hoasts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. And thus we
will now briefly pass on without any farther digression or interruption, to
the farther view and observation of Gods most powerful and propitious
preservation of this still Burning-Bush, the Parliamentary Cause.

FIrst therefore, December. 1644.
I shall begin the serious Survey of this most rare and admirable Wonder of the
Burning-Bush not consumed, in this next succeeding Month of December, 1644.
with that brave defeat given to the Enemy, about the time when Taunton was much
straightened by a siege, then, about it, that valiant and faithful Colonel
Norton, with others, being then designed for the releif thereof, wherein also,
Sergeant Major Dewet (who, since, has proved a most perfidious apostate) and
Major Wansey (with the rest of Colonel Ludlows Regiment of horse designed also
as a reserve to our Forces then sent to relieve Taunton, as aforesaid) who all,
I say, A brave defeat given to the Enemies at Salisbury by Sergeant Major Dewet.
marched to Salisbury, where the Enemy was quartered, who upon the sudden
approach of these our friends, were forced to fly into a place called the
Closse, a chief and eminent place of that City, where the Bishops and
Cathedral Choristers, and Singingmen, used to live, like so many lazy
Abbey-Lubbers, commonly called the Prebends-Closse, and thither our Forces
marched after them, even up to the gates, and first brake open the Sand-gate
(the Enemy having made fast and baricadoed all the gates) and then our horse
also forced open the Closse-gate, whereupon the Enemy dispersed themselves,
many of them betook themselves to the Angel at the Closse-gate, others to
another house at the Sand-gate, but our men seeing them thus housed, fired both
of them, and in the mean season most bravely skirmished with the Enemy,
without, but the fire taking on the foresaid houses, they within them were
forced to surrender themselves prisoners to us. Colonel Cook and
Leivtenant-Col. Hook, with others taken prisoners.
Whereupon our men helped to quench the fire, and so obtained a very
considerable Victory; for, they there took prisoners Colonel Francis Cook,
Leivtenant Colonel Francis Hook, 2 Captains, Leivtenant Relsoll, 2 Cornets, 3
Quartermasters, one Mr. Alexander a Gentleman of quality, and 40 common
Soldiers; besides an 163 good horses, 200 arms, some Match and powder and
other good purchase; one Captain and diverse others were slain on the ground,
one Sergeant Major sorely wounded, and diverse other Officers and Soldiers, who
by the opportunity of the night escaped our hands. This service was most
gallantly performed on our part, for we had but 2 of ours slain on the place,
some few wounded and Captain Feiler hurt, and this was all the loss on our
part, blessed be the Lord for it.

About the 6 of this instant December, there was a great dispute in the House
of Commons about the calling home of all the Members of Both Houses of
Parliaments, from their Offices and employments both in the war and otherwise,
that so the Houses being completed with their Members, The self-denying
Ordinance for calling home all the Members of both Houses of Parliament.
here might be a more sudden and surer dispatch and transaction of businesses,
and for clearing the public prejudice concerning personal respects to
themselves; And heerin also they seriously took into consideration, the slow
proceedings of our Armies abroad, and the not prosecuting of advantages (when
God in mercy gave them into our hands) tending much to the prolongation of this
most unhappy War, and withal resenting that those differences which were
then among our Commanders, were (commonly) most where the command was greatest:
For these and such like weighty considerations, I say, the House of Commons put
this great and most weighty business to the Vote in their House; and the very
same motion was also made by an honorable personage in the House of Peers,
and many Votes and suffrages passed about it pro and con; But at last it was
agreed on, and a Vote passed clearly, with a most unanimous consent, and, as I
take it, Nemine contradicente, by the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled,
The substance of the Ordinance, or Vote it self.
to this effect; That no Member of either House of Parliament shall (during
this war) enjoy or execute any Office or Command Military or Civil, which
has been granted to or conferred on any Member of either House, or by any
authority derived from either House; and that an Ordinance be brought in
accordingly. This Ordinance or Vote was afterward, accordingly Printed and
published by authority, and was very fitly called, The Self-denying Ordinance,
whereof more hereafter in a more proper place. And for the more serious and
religious managing and establishing of this great Vote, and the other weighty
affairs of the Kingdom, depending hereon, A day of Humiliation ordered to be
set apart for both Houses in private, to seek the Lord, touching this great
Vote.
and hence issuing, our most renowned Worthies of the House of Commons, Ordered
that Wednesday the 10 of December, then next ensuing, should be set apart for
the keeping of a private Fast by both Houses of Parliament, so to seek the
Lord, and implore a blessing from Almighty God upon their farther proceedings
in the grand affairs of State to be agitated and negotiated on this vote; And
reverend and religious Mr. Marshall, Mr. Sedgewick, and Mr. Hill were entreated
to Preach and carry on the work of that day with them. And was not here a work
hopeful indeed to end well, which was so well begun? A Jove own principium.
Certainly, if God has made it known unto us, That he is found of those that
seek him not; Isaiah 65. 1.
much more unquestionably, will he be found of those that seek and seriously
enquire after him; And so truly we have blessedly found it, as I shall make
most clear to the godly Reader, by many most remarkable and memorable
testimonies and demonstrations thereof in their succeeding proper places. But,
to go on.

About the 10 of this instant, we were credibly assured by Letters out of
Lincolnshire, that a brave Party of the Parliaments forces in those parts, led
by valiant and virtuous Colonel Rainsborough, under the Command of the Earl of
Manchester, having much battered Crowland with the Ordnance which they brought
by Water in long Boats against it, Crowland taken by Col. Rainesborough.
the Enemy, at last, was forced to a parley, which was assented to, upon the
conclusion whereof, it was agreed by both parties, that the Enemies forces
should march out of the Town, the Commanders and Officers with their Swords and
Pistols, but the common Soldiers to leave all their Arms behind them, as
also all the Ordnance and Ammunition therein to be left for the Parliaments
use, which accordingly was performed; And thus this place of so great
concernment, that at this time many hundred, by Land and by Water, were fain to
be employed against only a few men within it, and yet receiving many checks
and affronts many times by sallies out of the Town; was now thus at last
surrendered again into the Parliaments possession. This Town had been twice lost
and recovered by us, which had it not, now, might have proved a kind of
scurvey Dunkirk to the Parliament, both by land and water too, had the Enemy
continued in it, and thereby better manned and fortified it, as they might and
would have done, had they not so soon been thus beaten out of it.

December the 12, we were certainly informed out of the West, of a singular
good piece of service performed by that most valiant, A brave defeat given to
the Enemy at ^ed^ury by renowned Col. Massy.
active, and faithful Commander Colonel Massy, who hea^ing that a party of
the Enemies Horse from Bristol, had some design about Chippingham in Wilts,
he sent out his Scouts, who discovered them to be, that night, quartered at
Sedbury in Gloucestershire, some 9 miles from Bristol, and the just middle way
from Bristol to Chippingham: Whereupon, he presently advanced with a
considerable party, from Malmesbury, some 10 miles from Sedbury, and with
accustomed undaunted courage falling on the Enemies quarters, he there
surprised and took an 160 of their horse, 100 arms, 50 prisoners, together
with 12 Captains, Leivtenants, and other Officers, the rest of the Enemies
leaving their design for lost, fled back again with haste into Bristol.

And about the 14 instant came certain intelligence by Letters from Oswestre
from Sir Thomas Middleton, of some considerable action and good service
performed by our forces thereabout, the substance whereof was to this effect.
That now at length the long looked for Colonel Beal, was (blessed be God)
come safely to Sir Thomas Middleton, into Mountgomery-shire, and that Colonel
Carter with our Horse and Dragoones to the number of 450 were sent under the
Command of Captain Farrar into Cardiganshire to meet them, Good service done by
Sir Tho. Middletons forces about Mountgomery-shire.
who, in their return had, upon the borders of Mountgomery shire, a skirmish
with about a 1000 of the Enemies, where the Country was summoned in by Sir
Richard Price, and Mr. Pughe of Mathavern, they met in the night in a very
narrow passage, where the Musketteirs played for an hour together upon them,
but no good could be done; Whereupon Captain Farrar led up the Horse in a full
Carreir upon them, which put them all to a present and confused flight, our
forces pursued them 3 miles together, and slew at least 20 of them in the
pursuit, whereupon the Enemy cried quarter, quarter, and had quarter given
them; we there took 60 prisoners, among whom were 12 Officers, and an 100
arms, wounded diverse of them and put all the rest to flight.

The next morning Captain Farrar sent a Troop of Horse, and a company of
Dragoones under the Command of Captain Luke Floyd, to summon Mathavern-house,
where the Enemy kept a Garrison, where Mr. Pughe having had notice of our
coming toward this house, presently upon our appearing he flew away and left
the House, whereupon we instantly entered the Garrison, took what was in it,
and then burnt it down to the ground to keep them from returning again to it,
to do us any farther mischief.

About the 16 instant we had credible information by Letters out of the West,
that Colonel Holborn, Major General of the forces sent to relieve Taunton (at
this time much straightened by the Enemies) being upon his March in Dorsetshire, A
brave defeat given to the Enemy in the West by Col. Holborn.
and upon the design, the Enemy had intelligence thereof, and drew themselves
into a body to meet him in battalia, and Major General Holborn having also
intelligence that they were come as far as Chard, he marched thither, with
an intent to give them battle: But the Enemy discovering our forces drawing
nigh them, and seriously bent to encounter them, fled out of the Town in great
haste, and left above an 100 arms behind them, dispersing themselves in a
disorderly retreat, but our forces pursued them, and took a whole Troop of
their Horse, the Captain, Leivtenant, Cornet, and all both Officers and
Soldiers, Horse and Arms, besides 20 other prisoners, whereof 5 were
Officers, together with all their Hay, Oats, and other provisions, which they
brought with them for their releif there.

And about the 18 of this instant we received certain knowledge of diverse
plots and treacherous designs of the Enemies for the betraying of several
Towns and strong Holds (their old trade of treachery) into the Enemies hands;
but, how our good God (the most vigilant Watchman over his English-Israel) most
graciously discovered and disappointed them in their devilish designs and
perfidious practices therein; Plots and conspiracies of the Enemies discovered
and prevented. Stafford Town and Castle in danger. Dover^castle. Abbington.
as namely, the great danger of losing the Town and Castle of Stafford, by the
either unfaithfulness, or negligence, or both, of Colonel Chadwick, Governor
of the said Town and Castle, but by Gods goodness, and by valiant, virtuous
and faithful Sir William Breretons vigilance timely prevented.

Another plot and most dangerous and desperate design for the betraying of
Dover-castle. That of Abbington also, wherein renowned, valiant, and faithful
Major General Brown, most bravely befooled that spurious spark, and glistring
Glowworm of Oxonian wit, and base treachery, apostate Dig^i^.

Another plot against Reading, Ail^bury. Reading. Plymouth.
and Ailesbury; And another plot against Plymouth also, to have betrayed the
Island there, into the Enemies hands; All these much about one and the same
time, but all of them as seasonably discovered and prevented, as they were
secretly and deceitfully plotted. But especially that most notable and craftily
contrived St^^tagem (which I may not here by any means omit) acted by Mr. Roger
le Strange (a strangely audacious and desperate Cavalier) for the betraying of
Lyn-Regis, Lyn-Regis in great danger to have been betrayed.
in Norfolk, into the Enemies hands, which being a place of great concernment
and in regard of most neat and cleanly carriage, of the business, in the
discovery and prevention of the plot, a very remarkable piece and worthy of
serious notice, I have, therefore, here for the Readers better content and
fuller satisfaction, thought good exactly to impart it, as it was truly
related and attested under the hand of that worthy and most loyal Gentleman
Captain Lemon, the faithful discover (under God) and preventer of the plot,
which was, as follows.

Mr. Roger le Strange, third Son to Sir Hamond le Strange, sent to Captain
Thomas Lemon of Lin, An exact relation of the crafty contrivement and d^scovery
of the plot to betray Lyn-Regis.
to Appleton-Hall, to the house of one Mr. Paston a Papist; and at his coming
to him with a design intended by him against Lyn, for which he said he had a
Commission from his Majesty to surprise the Town of Lyn, which Commission he
presently showed him, and told him that if he would undertake to be assistant
to him and raise a party within the Town to effect the design, that he should
have a 1000. li. for his pains, and whatsoever preferment he would desire,
either in the Town or in his Majesty's Navy: And farther he told him that the
King did value the surprising of this Town as half his Crown, The Kings esteem
of Lyn-Regis.
and that within 10 days, after certain notice that the Town was reduced, his
Majesty would send a sufficient power to their releif, and that those forces
should be under the command of the Lord Goring. To which plot the said Captain
Lemon for his own security (having taken the Covenant) and well weighing, on a
sudden, the peace and good of the Commonwealth, for the present, he
seemingly gave consent, Captain Lemon seems to consent to the plot
the night then coming on he departed from him, with promise to come to him
again the next day, to advise farther of the design, but presently hasting to
Lyn, he went to the Governor Colonel Valentine Walton, The Governor of Lyn
made acquainted with the business.
and acquainted him with it, who after long debate, resolved the next day, that
at the time appointed he should go to the said Appleton-Hall, and take with
him a Corporal of his, clad in a Sea-mans habit, who seemingly, should be a
partaker with him to effect their design; and coming thither, the said Mr.
Strange demanded of Captain Lemon, what he was that came with him, who
answered that he was a man for their turn, and immediately upon it, the said
Corporal himself answered very discreetly, that he was a pooreman living in
Fishers-end in Lyn, and kept an Alehouse, The brave carriage of the business.
and that he was 40 pound the worse for the Roundheads; whereunto Mr. Strange
replied, It is no matter, for when the design is accomplished, thou shall have
a 100 li. for it, and a Cannoneers place, which the Corporal, seemingly, was
exceeding well pleased with; But, the better to know where the Commission was,
Captain Lemon said, Mr. Strange, this my friend, by the way as we came,
demanded of me what security you had, if in case the plot should be
discovered, to save them from the gallows, if it might be; Captain Lemon,
therefore said, he told him you had the Kings Commission, which he desired to
see. Whereupon Mr. Strange went immediately to a hole in the canapy of his bed
and produced the Commission and read it to him, and having read it he put it
into his pocket. In the interim came Leivtenant John Stubbin, Leivtenant to
Major Moll, with 5 Soldiers more, Leivtenant S^ubbin and 5 or 6 more with him
sent from Lyn by the Governor, came in a disguise to perfect the work.
all in the habit of poor Seamen, apparelled like shipbroken men (with a
Warrant to attatch suspicious persons) who came begging to the door, and
somewhat boldly getting within the Courtyard of the said house, being so
ordered by the Governor, who as soon as they were up to the door of the
House, the Gentlewoman of the house came running up to Mr. Strange, and told
him there were 6 or 7 poor Soldiers come from Lyn a begging, Mr. Strange
presently sent them down a shilling, and wished them to be gone, and Mistress
Paston went down, to bar the door, which, Captain Lemon seeing, winckt upon
the foresaid Corporal, there present, to lay hold on Mr. Strange, which
instantly done, he gave a stamp with his foot, by which the Leivtenant knew
what he had to do, whereupon Mr. Strange seeing he was betrayed, conveyed
his Commission to Captain Lemon (out of the drying pan into the fire) then the
Leivtenant not taking notice of the person of the Captain as known to him, Mr.
Strange finds himself betrayed.
or as set purposely to ensnare Strange, did first attach Mr. Strange as an
Enemy to the Commonwealth, and demanded his name, which he refused to tell,
then he required his Commission, but he denied to have any; Heerupon the
Leivtenant seeing Captain Lemon, demanded what he was, and what he did there
consulting against the State, telling him he was a stinking knave, and
searched him for the commission, and finding it in his pocket, took it from
him, and set a guard over him, and another over Mr. Strange, and would not
suffer them to speak each to other, by the way from Appleton-Hall to Lyn,
whither they were brought prisoners to the Governor with the Commission; all
which was done by order and consent of the Governor and Captain Lemon, before
Mr. Mr. Strange and his Commission taken and sent up to the Parliament.
Strange his apprehension, which said Mr. Strange was immediately brought up to
London, and committed to safe custody, and the Commission sent up to the
Parliament, the Copy whereof I have here also inserted, which was as follows.

His Majesty's Commission granted to Mr. Roger le Strange for the betraying of
the Town of Lyn-Regis into the hands of the Enemy.
Charles Rex,

The Copy of the Commission.
WE having received from our trusty and well-beloved, Roger le Strange,
declarations of the good affection of diverse of our well-affected Subjects of
our County of Norfolk and Suffolk, and particularly of our Town of Lyn, as also
some overtures concerning the reducing of our said Town of Lyn, We have
thought fit forthwith to return our Royal thanks unto our said well-affected
Subjects; and particularly to give our said trusty and well-beloved Roger le
Strange, these encouragements to proceed in our service, principally in the
work of reducing the said Town of Lyn.

1. That in case that attempt shall be gone through withal, he the said
Roger le Strange shall have the Government of the place.

2. That what engagement shall be made unto the inhabitants of the said place
in any other person capable of contributing effectually to that service, by way
of reward, either in employment in his Majesty's Navy or Forts, or Money, not
exceeding the sum of 5000 pounds, the service being performed, shall be
punctually made good unto them.

3. That they shall in this work receive what assistance may be given them
from any of our merest Garrisons.

And lastly, that when ever our said Town shall be reduced unto our obedience,
We shall forthwith send thither (...) a considerable power, as shall be
sufficient to relieve and preserve them, We being, at present, even without
this, fully resolved to send a considerable power to encourage our faithful
Subjects in those parts, and to regain our rights and interests therein.

By his Majesty's Command George Digby.
Given at our Court at Oxford, this 28 of November, 1644.
And much about the foresaid time we had certain intelligence of the releiving
of that brave, courageous and pious people in the good and strong Garrison of
the Town of Iounton-Dean, Iounton-Dean in the West releived.
whereof, that ever to be honored faithful Gentleman and most courageous
Commander, Colonel Blake was Governor, and where Prince Maurice and his
thousands were after a long siege most shamefully beaten away, and many
precious souls in the said Town preserved from the bloody rage and intended
cruelty of those blood-thirsty and lustful Enemies, those scelerous sons of
violence; a most renowned piece of Gods providence and mighty mercy to those
Western parts, never to be obliterated out of theirs and our most grateful
remembrance. Since which we also were most certainly informed by Letters out
of those parts, Colon Holborns activity and brave service in the West.
that Major General Holborn, marched with a party to the Lord Pawlets House,
where he took 30 horses, many prisoners and diverse arms, and made himself
Master of that Garrison. From whence he marched to the House of one Mr.
Arundell a notorious Papist, at a place called Chadwick, where he beat the
Enemy out of that pernicious nest, and took some of them prisoners. After this
also hearing that diverse of the Enemies forces were got into Sir John Pooles
House, he marched toward them, but the Enemy hearing of his approach that way,
fled to Exeter; And the like did another party of the Enemies at Mr. Crewes
House, setting it on fire, they fled away; Thus this most active and valiant
Commander ferretted the Enemies out of their sculking holes in those parts, and
procured much security to the inhabitants thereabout.

December the 20. the Parliament taking into their serious consideration that
the time was near approaching for the annual choosing of Officers in the most
famous City of London, according to their anniversary custom, Care taken by
the Parliament for the choosing of good Officers in the City of London.
and well knowing that the good government thereof does chiefly depend upon the
faithfulness and integrity of public Officers, especially in these times of
so much trouble and danger; It was therefore Ordered in Parliament, that no
person should be elected to be of the Common Council, or into other Offices
in the City of London, who have not voluntarily contributed upon the
Propositions, according to an Ordinance in Parliament, of the 29 of November,
1642. or who have otherwise testified their dis-affection to the Parliament, or
who have not taken the solemn League and Covenant; And that no such person
shall have any voice in such elections, or any else who have been imprisoned or
whose estates have been sequestered for Malignancy against the Parliament; And
the right honorable Thomas Atkin Lord Major of the City of London, and the
Aldermen in their several Wards were required to see the due execution thereof.

About the 23 instant, we had certain intelligence from Northhampton of
singular good service done in those parts by Captain Redman, who with a party
of Northampton horse marched out; and fell upon a party of the Enemies horse,
Captain Redmans brave service near Northampton.
but then newly come from Oxford, to do some mischief in those parts, of whom
diverse were taken prisoners by the said valiant Captain Redman, and the rest
soundly beaten; among those that were taken prisoners were Sir John Feunick,
Sir Thomas Strickland, the Lord St. Paul, a Frenchman, and 15 more, some were
slain and many wounded, the rest ran (like brave Oxonians) to save themselves,
but they left behind them at least 30 horse, and a rich Sumpter, together with
good quantity of Arms, and Ammunition. And at the same time we were certainly
informed that Knaresborough castle in Yorkshire, Knaresborough-castle in
Yorkshire taken.
was surrendered to the thrice noble and renowned Lord Fairfax, and in it good
store of Arms, powder, and Ammunition, with some Ordnance and other good
booty, viz. especially some hundred pounds in ready money, and about 1500
pounds worth of Plate, silver and guilt.

And about the 26 of this instant December, we were certainly informed by
Letters from Radcastle, that those 2 most loyal and renowned Commanders Sir
Thomas Middleton and Colonel Mitton, had taken a strong Garrison of the
Enemies, near Mountgomery called, Abby-cumhire; Cumhire Abbey a strong Garrison
of the enemies in Mountgomery shire taken by Sir Tho. Middleton.
This House had formerly been a Romish-Abby, and was strongly built of stone,
upon their first coming before it, they summoned it, but upon the Enemies
denial to surrender, Sir Thomas Middletons, and Colonel Mittons old
Soldiers, assisted by Colonel Beal, and Leivtenant Colonel Carters
soldiers, who were then, lately, come to them out of South Wales, and with
brave resolution fell upon the Enemy, and stormed and took the House in a short
time; where they took prisoners, Colonel Barnard, Governor of the Castle,
Hugh Floyd, Esquire, a Commissioner of Array in those parts, and High-Sheriffe
of that County, and one of those that were excepted by the Proposition for
Peace at Vxbridge, to have no pardon, 2 Captains of Foot, one Captain of
Horse; a Captain Leivtenant, 3 Leivtenants, a Foot Colors, one Cornet of
Horse, 4 Sergeants, 8 Corporalls, 2 Trumpetters, 4 Drums, 60 common Soldiers,
3 barrels of powder, 60 firelocks, 40 Horse, 40 horse arms, besides 200
Muskets, and some other arms and ammunition. By the taking of which said
strong Garrison, the Counties thereabouts are freed from much danger of their
cruel Enemies, who had before used many of the inhabitants with much severity.

About the 28 of this instant we received credible information by Letters out
of Staffordshire, that Captain Stone the valiant Governor of Eccleshall
castle, having intelligence that some parties of the Enemies were abroad out of
Tongue castle, Captain Stones brave defeat given to the Enemy at Tongue-castle.
he thereupon marched out of Eccleshall, with a party of horse, found them,
and fell upon them, and in the fight slew diverse of them, took prisoners the
Governor of Tongue castle, diverse Officers, 200 common Soldiers, and 50
horse, with some other good booty. And by Letters out of the West we were
farther informed, about the same time, that Major Dewet performed a brave
exploit upon the Enemy at West Dean, Another by Major Dewet.
which was thus related. Sir, our brave-spirited Major (but shortly after this
a base apostate from us) marched with his men from about Malmsbury, toward our
Garrison by West-Dean, and by the way, he fell upon a quarter of the Enemies
at Rushall, near Vphaven, where there were quartered about 36 of Captain
Paddons Troop, who entitled themselves, The Wiltshire Troop; where after some
hot and testy dispute, he took prisoners, Leivtenant Borrow, Leivtenant of
Horse, commanding the Troop, George Warner, a Reformado Captain, a Leivtenant
of Foot, 2 more Reformado Officers, 6 Troopers, 20 good horse and arms, and
other good prize for his Soldiers, without the loss of any one man or horse
on his side. And about the same time, we had farther certain intelligence of
another brave exploit performed against the Newarkers, And another by Col.
Thorney.
by valiant Colonel Thorney, and the Nottingham Forces, who took a
considerable Garrison from the Enemies, near Newark, viz. Sir Roger Coopers
House, and in it Sir Roger himself, and his brother, and 50 prisoners with
their arms and ammunition.

And about the 30 of this instant December, an Agent of the most illustrious
Queen of Sweden, The most noble Queen of Sweden desires Association, with the
Parliament of England.
was admitted with honorable reception into the Parliament, the representative
Body of the Kingdom of England, with his Letters to the Parliament, from the
said most Royal Princess, which were, then, opened, and after the translating
of them out of the Latine-tongue, in which they were written, they were read in
Parliament; The effect and substance of which, was, That the said thrice noble
Queen of Swethland, with her Nobles and whole State desired to associate
themselves, and to keep fair and loving correspondence with the Parliament and
State of England, and to enter into the Solemn League and Covenant with them,
for the mutual defense of the true Reformed Protestant Religion. A rare mercy,
indeed, thus to see another Protestant Kingdom desire to join with us in this
blessed work of setting the Lord Christ upon his Throne; as our most loyal and
loving brethren of Scotland have done, to the high honor and glory of God and
good of his Church. And with this so sweet a mercy I shall here most fitly
close up this months most famous blessings on this Burning-Bush, the
Parliaments honest and upright Cause.

And here now therefore, good Reader, let me entreat thee to make a little
stay, and therein to stand amazed at this even senseastonishing
Parliamentary-wonder, The Burning-Bush not consumed.
to see and consider in this one Months contemplation thereof, this
Burning-Bush, thus still Unconsumed, I mean, the Parliaments just Cause and
quarrel, in the midst of so many devouring flames of bloody bickerings, and
perfidious plots and trecheries as have been forementioned, to stand upright
still undestroyed; yea, contrariwise more and more flourishingly and fairly
corroborated and fixed at the root, the blessing of him that dwells in the
Bush, thus, admirably (still) preserving and protecting it from constantly
contrived and intended ruin and destruction. Upon the serious sight and pious
pondering whereof, O what great cause, have we, with holy David, to break
forth into a holy and hearty ecstasy of joy and admiration, as wanting words to
express sufficiently, the many and mighty mercies of our God, Psalm. 367, 8.
and 32. 7.
and to sing and say: How excellent, O Lord, is thy loving kindness, how
powerful is thy protection therefore the children of men put their trust under
the shadow of thy wings. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy
house; and thou do make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasure. And thou, O
Lord, art he alone that do encompasse us, still, with songs of deliverance.
But now to proceed, and set forward to the farther sight and contemplation of
the succeeding wonders, in and upon this our thus Burning Bush, in this ensuing
Month of January, 1644.

ANd first, January. 1644.
I shall begin, here to remember my Reader, that, as God had lately before
begun to cut off (in a Judiciary way) one most pestilent plotter and dangerous
Malignant Incend^ary, who (had not Gods gracious providence prevented) intended
to have sorely and mischeivously increast the f^ames, and utterly to have burnt
down this onely-God-protected Parliament Bush, I mean, Sir Alexander Carew
beheaded, for treason.
Sir Alexander Carew, who was executed on Tower Hill, in the preceding month
of December, for his intended treasonable plot against Plymouth: So, now, also
on the second of this instant January, being Thursday, Sir John Hotham, (though
much means was used to save his life; yet such was the admirable and
commendable integrity and inflexible impartiality of the House of Commons in
Parliament to do justice, where sentence was once past, that even he) was
that foresaid day brought by the, then, Leivtenant of the Tower, Sir John
Hotham beheaded for treason.
Alderman Pennington, to the place of execution, where he justly suffered
deserved death for his most treacherous intentions and endeavors against the
Parliament, to have betrayed Hull into the hands of the Enemy. Where also, his
Son Captain Hotham, Captain Hotham also, Son of Sir John Hotham, beheaded on
Towre-Hill.
another complotter with his foresaid Father, in the same design, was also
beheaded, as a just reward to such pernicious Parracides and conspiring
Catilines, who, thus, would have rejoiced in the ruthlesse ripping up of the
bowels of their dearest Mother, their native Country. And here also I may most
fitly hint and suggest to the Reader, another remarkable passage of like divine
providence, to the effect aforesaid; namely, that on the 4 of this instant, it
pleased our most wise God to put it into the hearts of our most noble Peers in
Parliament, A remarkable passage of Divine providence. The Directory for pure
worship Voted in Parliament, and the Common Prayer Book abolished.
that they should not only most sweetly concur with the Honorable House of
Commons, in the amendments of the Directory for Gods pure Worship, and pass
the same; and therewith to subjoyn an Ordinance of Parliament for utterly
taking away, and quite abolishing of the Book of Common Prayers: But that also
the said most noble and pious Peers (unwilling to part the Refiner from his
Mettle, I mean, the Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, from his purged
Common Prayer Book) that therefore, I say, the Lords in Parliament should
presently send 2 of the reverend Judges to the House of Commons, with the
message of their concurrence and resolution to proceed, The Arch Prelate of
Canterb. to be now effectually brought to his Condemnation.
now, effectually to the sentencing and condemnation of the Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury, one of the prime and Metropolitan heads and complotters against
Church and State; which, indeed, after this, was followed to the full, until
they had brought that base and bloody Bishop, yea, that most abominable and
unparallelled hypocrite to his just execution, in the cutting off of his most
traitorous head also, at the Towre-Hill, whereof more anon in its more proper
place. But, here, by the way, I shall desire the Reader religiously to take
notice of one remarkable note, A remarkable note.
and observation heerin, namely, of the day on which it pleased the most wise
providence of our God to order and appoint this seasonable concurrence of Both
the Houses of Parliament together for confirmation of those 2 great works of
Piety and Justice, viz. That it was just on the 4 of January; That very day 3
years, on which unhappy King Charles came in person into the Parliament with a
multitude of armed Ruffians to effect such a bloody and desperate design as
(had it taken effect) had made as bloody a piece of work, as ever this Kingdom
beheld, and as had thereby established that pestilent Prelate, with his
Common Prayer Book, and therewith, especially, the Popish faction (only masked
under those poor Vizards) to a long and lustful tyrannizing over the bodies
and souls too of Gods dear Servants, the Lord knows how long and lewdly. And
now, say, ^ood Reader, do thou not already see in this remarkable passage
(...) providence, a most beautiful and bountiful blessing of him that dwelt
in the Bush, upon this his Unconsumed Burning Bush, the Parliament? But to
proceed.

About the 6 of this instant January, we were certainly informed that the
Garrison of Winchester, being much straightened of provisions by the Parliaments
forces quartered near them, the Enemy (there) went out to drain the Country of
Cattle, and to plunder the people, and had got much plunder and Cattle from
them, but before they could get into Winchester with their prey, Diverse brave
exploits performed by the Parliaments forces against the Enemies.
Colonel Morleyes Troop met with them, gave them a martial salute, routed
them, and rescued all the Cattle and plunder which they had got, and took
diverse of the Enemies prisoners. We had also intelligence from Ailsbury about
the same time, that they in that brave Garrison having notice of a party of the
Kings Horse that were in the Country, taking up plunder, they made out to find
them, and at last discovering them, fell valiantly upon the Enemy, surprised 30
or 40 of them, stripped them of their plunder, and brought the prisoners to
Ailsbury. And, that, shortly after this, Colonel Martin, the valiant and
vigilant Governor of Ailsbury, went forth and happily lit upon a whole Troop
of Horse, which was said to be the Princes, and singular good Horse they were,
indeed, and well armed; All which, I say, he totally surprised, and brought
safely into Ailsbury. Also, that courageous Colonel Holborn had had some brave
skirmishes in the Western parts, with Gorings Horse, and notwithstanding that
the addition of strength came not unto him, as was promised, and which he
expected; yet he most valiantly attempted to fall upon the Enemy in their
quarters, bravely beat them, and took diverse of the Enemies prisoners, and
about 200 Horse, and had not a cross accident fallen out and prevented him, he
had certainly taken the Town of Bridgewater.

And about the 8 of this instant January, we had unquestionable information
and assurance of a brave prize of Bristol ships taken at Sea, by Captain
Coachman, a valiant and faithful Sea-Captain, Cardigan Town and Castle taken
by Col. Laughorn in Wales; and a brave prize at Sea.
testified in renowned Captain Swanleys Letter to the Earl of Warwick, as a
postscript of the said Letter, wherein, especially, Captain Swanley, certifies
the foresaid renowned Earl of Warwick of a brave Victory obtained by Major
General Laughorn, viz. his taking of the Town and Castle of Cardigan in Wales,
with above an 100 Commanders and common Soldiers in it, and all the arms and
ammunition therein, and of the surprising of ^ivers eminent persons, the Kings
Irish-Commissioners, together with the Kings broad-Seal to treat with the
barbarous and bloody Rebels of Ireland, (King Charles his best Popish
Subjects) about concluding a peace with them, of all which, for the Readers
better satisfaction, I have here inserted the foresaid Letter it self, under
Captain Swanleyes own hand.

The Copy of a Letter sent to the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, from
Captain Richard Swanley.
Right Honorable,
SInce my last of the 20 of November, by Captain Green, in the Dogger Beat,
Major General Laughorn, keeping the field with such Forces as the indigency of
the County gave a possibility of subsistence, pretending for Carmarthen, and
lying still, working by double policy to draw the hearts of the Inhabitants of
Cardiganshire to the State, and the force of Carmarthen with their adherents,
into the said Town for their d^fence and the indemnity of their adjacent
Garrisons, opportunely rose and advanced from his quarters to the Town of
Cardigan, whither the Country formerly invited him, and made a party to assist
the General to complete the design inagitation, and the Town (being faced at
a distance) willingly surrendered and complied. The Castle (being a considerable
place, ably manned, having the Ordnance of the convert Frigot, there
shipwrackt) most obstinately stood out, till a Demiculverin of brass,
belonging to the Leopard, was rounted, and played 3 days upon them, forcing a
breach, which was gallantly entered and made good by our party, and the Castle
stormed; wherein were an 100 Commanders and Soldiers, with their arms and
good plunder, not forgetting the Converts Ordnance, thus returned by divine
providence, and works of mercy in a Commander, adding honor to ^cts of
Chivalry; invited the General to give the Steward life, who contemned quarter.
The Town and Castle reduced, and the Country in the major part (as conceived)
well affected; our Army advanced toward Newcastle, the Enemies next Garrison;
which (as conceived) will be slighted or quitted by the Enemy, and that County
brought to a right understanding of their duty and Parliamentary just honor
and proceedings. To God be rendered the due praises of his mercies. Vessels of
late have been designed to the well-affected Garrisons in Ireland, but none (in
regard of contrary winds) returned; and shipping to ply up the Channel, as
high as Miniard, have also been Commissionated to give intelligence and
assistance to our Forces in those parts. Sir Thomas Middletons Ma^azine of
Amm^nition since disposed of to Leverpool. Nothing, that by integrity and
action may add life to the public good, shall, by Gods assistance, be
wanting, and my faithful indevours shall comply with your Honors great trust,
whose happiness shall ever consist, my very good Lord, to be

Your most humble and faithful Servant, Rich. Swanley.
Jan. 1. 1644. Postscript. My Lord, In the night of this date, arrived Captain
Coachman, in the True-Love, from Leverpool; I have herewith presented Colonel
Moors Letter from thence, who brought in the Content-prize with the
passengers, as per list. I have included a paper that from Dublin, came to band
to whom I can yield no compliance for want of Ammunition. Pray take present
order to supply me with Ammunition, and all stores, otherwise I shall burden
the State and be disabled to do Service.

A List of Passengers Names taken in the Content-prize bound for Dublin, by
Captain Coachman, in the True-Love.
The Lord Brabison. Sir Henry Titchburn. Sir James Ware. Mr. Robert Price. Mr.
Tho. Williams. Mr. John Smith. Mr. Alex. Nugent. Mr. Rich. Holland. Mr. Patr.
Pue. With their Servants.



All which are to be sent to the State, being of considerable force, with the
first convenience in the Honor, by Captain Seaman.

An Extract out of a Letter written by Captain William Smith, to the Lord high
Admiral, from aboard the Ship called the Swallow in Milford Haven, touching
the taking of Cardigan Town and Castle.
AFter many great raines which have fallen in these parts (which was no
invitation for a Soldier to lie in the fields) yet such was the gallantry of
Major General Laughorne, to promote the Cause in hand, that the Almighty no
sooner crowned his desires with a happy season, but in a grateful
acknowledgement, he placed a Garrison in Laughorn castle, and from thence
marched toward Cardigan, with about 500 Horse, and 300 Foot; and on the 21 of
December 1644. he sat down before Cardigan castle, demanding a surrender
thereof for the service of the King and Parliament: But Major Slaughter who
commanded in che^f, replied, he held that Castle for the service of the King,
and so long as he had life he would keep it for his Majesty, (though therein
he was not a man of his word.) After three days siege, the Major General
perceiving all further attempts-would be in vain, unless a breach could be
forced, and having no Artillery with him, he forthwith gave order the
Demy-Culverin should be brought from Laughorn, which with much difficulty and
industry came safe to Cardigan, and being placed to the best advantage he fell
to battery.

The Enemy within the Castle-yard cast up a half moon some distance from the
place on which the Demi-Culverin played, in which they placed their great
Gunnes laden with Ca^e-shot, that in case a breach should ^ee made those Gunnes
might disanimate our men in entering, or perform sudden execution on them: Our
men plying the Demi-Culverin, forced a breach, and being full of resolution
entered, running in the mouth of their Guns, recovered the half moon, where the
Enemy, as men bereft of all sense, having not the power to give fire to their
Guns, although the Linstocks were in their hands ready lighted, cast down all
their arms, and cried for quarter, the which was granted ^ from thence we
entered the Castle and took Prisoner Major Slaughter and his wife, one Captain
Vaughan, with their Leivtenant and Ensign, one Doctor* Tailor a Divine with
about an 100 common Soldiers, six great Guns, a 150 Arms, a quantity of
powder, ball, and other provisions, and this was done the 29 of December last.

On the 4 of January, General Gerrard sat down before the Castle with about
1200 horse, and 1300 foot; Major General Laughorn recruted his forces to about
600 horse, and 300 foot, and advanced toward Cardigan to redeem his friends,
who were in the Castle, out of the power of the Enemy; Leivtenant Colonel
Powell in the night sent a Soldier who swum through the river, and informed
Major General ^^ughorn, that unless he could relieve the Castle, within
eight days* he should be enforced to surrender it for want of Victuals, and
Ammunition, which he believed might be supplied, if some Seamen versed in
managing a water sight, and climing up rocks were employed; So 120 Seamen were
sent, who after a veiw had of the place, undertook it, which was performed on
this wise: A boat laden with provisions was placed in the middle between four
boats on each side, two of which were manned with Seamen, who in flanks faced
both ways, plying their Mu^kets on the Enemy, who from the shore played on them
with about 300 Musketters, yet our Seamen gallantly proceeded, put all the
provisions into the Castle, and returned without the loss of one man, only
two slightly wounded. After this Colonel Laughorn having drawn his foot into a
body, being with our Seamen in all about 350. he encouraged them to give an
assault on the Town; which after some debate was attempted, and on the 22 of
January last, our foot forced their passage over the Bridge, in which we lost
but one man, and having beaten the Euemy from their first guard, they pressed
on to the second, which they also took, and pursuing the victory beat them out
of their main guard, which was at the Market place, and then out of the Church,
where our forces took two brass Demi-Culverins, which Gerrard brought from
Bristoll, with some Powder, ball, and all their provisions, and following the
Enemy, beat them all out of the Town, and so we are now Masters both of the
Town and Castle. Of the enemy were slain in the place 85 besides those that
were slain before the Castle, 100 prisoners were taken, and their whole Forces
routed, and I believe in their flight they never looked behind them, until
they came to Castle Emlyne, which is six miles from Cardigan. In the* Town we
also took 250 Arms. I have not heard since these unhappy differences began in
this Kingdom, that the hand of the Almighty has more visibly appeared in
giving so great victories to so small a handful, than has been manifested in
these parts, and therefore to his own power we attribute all the praise and
glory.

But to proceed.

About the 10 of this instant January, the proud and most pestilently
pernicious Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, William Laud, that Arch Traitor to the
Church and State, to God and all good men, yea, that Arch Incendiary (together
with his brother Strafford) of 3 Kingdoms, The Arch Prelate of Canterbury
executed for treason on Towre-Hill.
after a long, and most full and fair trial (as ever to be honored Mr.
William Prynn, has in his famous History of this Arch Prelates Life and
^^eath, and Trial, most abundantly cleared to all the world) being most justly
and worthily condemned by the most honorable House of Peers, to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, as a Traitor, indeed, yet upon his Petition, that kind of
death was altered, and he beheaded (as the rest of his Traiterous companions)
upon the Towre-Hill. Of whom, all I will say, at this time (having said so much
already of him and the rest of his wretched rabble of Traitors, in my Second
Part of The Looking-glass for Malignants) shall be only this; That his
constant pride and impudence, considered wherewith he swelled in his whole
life, and wherewith he jetted even to the Scaffold, to his deaths Block,
manifested in his pert, yea, and malepert gesture, spruce and neat apparel,
unparallelled bold countenance, and confidence in his whole carriage, even to
his very minute of Death; his most audacious and hypocritical Preaching, (or
most properly, prating) for almost an hour together before his death, in most
egregiously juggling and justifying his whole life, and all his most accursed
and abominable works of darkness, and that, to the very death; ( O nefanda,
and inaudita audacia, and execrabilis durities!) all which, I say, most
seriously and sadly considered, O how justly and most properly applyable to
this wretohed Arch Prelate is that most terrible and frightfull judgment of
the Lord, mentioned by the Prophet. Make the heart of this man fat, Isaiah 6.
10.
and make his ears heavy, and shut his eyes; lest he see with his eyes, and
bear with his ears, and understand with his heart, and should convert and be
healed. This unquestionably, was this most miserable man's condition; for a most
proud and hypocritical crafty Tyrant and persecutor of Gods Saints he lived,
and a most obdurate and marble-hearted Atheist he also impudently and
impenitently dyed. Giving us all over the whole Kingdom, yea, all over the 3
whole Kingdoms, great and just cause heartily to bless the Lord for his
righteousness and justice heerin, and happily fulfilling that of wise King
Solomon, or rather of the Lord by him. When the wicked perish there is shouting
and joy among the people. Prove. 11. 10.
And truly so it justly was with us at this wicked man's death: For, truly, as
Queen Elizabeth once said, when she was freed from distress, by Queen Mary's
death, and the persecuting Popish Bishops clapped up in prison. O, said she, it
is merry with Lambs when Wolves are shut up: so say I, it was happy for us,
poor Lambs, when this Wolf was thus taken from us. For truly, ever since this
his just execution (what ever the Court-Cabinet Prognosticators falsely
affirmed) God has admirably blessed our Armies, and the whole work of intended
Reformation. But now to go on.

About the 14 of this instant, we were credibly assured by Letters to the
Committee of both Kingdoms, A brave defeat given to the Kings forces at
Abbington, by renowned Major General Brown.
as also Major General Browns own Letter to his Excellency, Robert Earl of
Essex, then Lord General, of a most brave victory, and famous defeat obtained
over, and given to our Enemies, the Kings forces, at Abbington, by the said
renowned and most active and loyal Major General; the particulars whereof, I
have thought fit to give the Reader, for his fuller satisfaction and content,
in a Letter written by religious Colonel Harsnet, to his worthy Friend Captain
Jones, in London, which was as follows:

Sir,
A Copy of Col. Harsnets Letter to Capt. Jones, touching the brave defeat at
Abbington.
I have had a longing desire to requite your love, in giving me a relation of
that famous fight at Alford, but never, till now, could meet with an
opportunity. But something the Lord has, now, I say, vouchsafed worthy the
relation to our worthy Friends at London. I came on Friday night from Henly,
with our Company that came with us from London. Some others of our Garrison,
whom we found at Reading, after midnight, past with us very quietly by Walling
ford, and so about 3 of the clock, came safe to Abbington, seeing none in our
way to trouble us; but having been not above 3 hours there, we had an allarm
from the same way we came, The Enemies gave Abbington an alarm and possessed
themselves of Cullum Bridge. Rupert, and Maurice, were present.
which was about half a mile from us in Oxfordshire, called Cullumbridge, which
the Enemy possessed themselves of, before we had time to draw forth any party to
charge them; There were parties from Oxon and from Wallingford, Prince Rupert
Commanding in chief, with whom was his brother Prince Maurice, Sir* Henry Gage,
Governor of Oxford, and many other great Commanders; Their forces were
supposed to be in all, about 3000 Horse and foot with 2 pieces of Ordnance.
Their strength 3000 horse and foot.
Behind the foresaid. Bridge was a great hill with many hedges, which they had
lined with Musketteers, to the great annoyance of our men. But our noble Major
General upon hearing of the allarm, Commanded our men to Arms, which was
cheerfully obeyed; and by parties were drawn along the Cawsie, that led from
the Town to the Bridge (Medows overflowed with water being on both sides) and
coming to charge them at the Bridge, The charge on the Enemy begun.
the Enemy stoutly opposed us, but to their loss; whereupon we had 2 Drakes
commanded thither, and our men cheerfully wading into the water, on both sides,
did so pelt them, while the Drakes played upon the Bridge, that after 4 hours
fight we drove them from the Bridge and the Hedges, Cullum Bridge recovered by
ours.
and forced them to a retreat, and we having got the Bridge (which being of
Stone, the Enemy had partly broken down) yet our men got over, Commanded by
Major Bradberry, Ma^or Bradberry slain. The Enemy put to a shameful retreat.
Major to Colonel Sparrows Regiment of Essex, at the entering over which Bridge
he was slain, but in this hot bickering, we lost not above 8 or 10 men, at
the most, and so the Enemy was forced to a shameful retreat. The fight began
betimes in the morning, at which instant there was a party of 70 or 80 horse
from Farrington to set upon our horse, quartered at a Village called Brayton in
Barkeshire, on the other side of the Town, about 2 miles off. The Enemy was,
there, commanded by Major Hatton Farmer, Major of the Princes Regiment; our
Horse carried themselves very courageously* beat the Enemy out of their
quarter, and pursued them within a mile of Farrington, and killed the Major
with diverse others, Major Hatton Farmer slain. 5 Irish men hanged.
and mortally wounded the Captain Leivtenant of the Princes Regiment, took many
of the men and horse, among whom were 5 Irish men, whom we hanged, the same
day in the Marketplace, and not above 12 of these horse got into Farringdon, A
rare and clear victory.
the rest were all slain or taken without the loss of any one of our men or
horse. Their intent was, as we were informed by prisoners, and a Trumpeter
(who that evening came from Oxford, to desire the Majors body) that the horse
should give us an allarm on the one side, Sir Henry Gage Governor of Oxford
slain in this fight.
whiles the foot stormed us on the other; And another that then came from
Oxford gave our Major General information, and both of them affirmed that we
slew in this fight Sir Henry Gage, Governor of Oxford, and many other
Gentlemen of great quality, and in particular that Leivtenant Colonel Lower,
Deputy Governor of Wallingford was also slain. I am confident the Enemy had a
great advantage of us, by the bridge and hills, yet the Lord fought for us, and
has graciously delivered us out of their hands, for which we desire Thanks
may be generally given to the Lord of Hoasts, and God of Battles, and in
particular for preserving us also in our safe passage to Abbington, the Enemy
being upon their march so near us, and had they taken us, it would have
occasioned great triumph in the Enemy, A great mercy and preservation to us.
there being of us 4 Colonells, besides other Captains and Commanders. Our
Major General, Dr. Wilson and Quarter Master General Burrowes remember their
loves to you, and would have given you a touch heerof, but that I undertook to
save them that labor. I pray you acquaint our Friends heerwith, as having
expressed nothing but what I know to be truth.

One of the Messengers from Oxford informed us that Prince Rupert engaged
himself to the King and Lords, with many vows and protestations, Prince
Ruperts proud brag to be Master of Abbington. 1 King. 20. 1. 1.
yea, and execrations too, That he would dine the next Sunday in. Abbington,
and that he would be Master of it by 12 a clock that morning, forgetting that
of A^ab to Benhadad; Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself, as
he that puts it off. But missing his hopes, and the Governor of Oxford
being also slain, he was ashamed to march triumphantly into Oxford, with the
forces that returned, but came sneaking in privately another way; where the
Lords mocking him asked him where was Abbington, Rupert notably jeered for his
brave Victory.
which he boasted he would so suddenly have. But we, I say, gave them such
a breakfast, as that it was believed he would have little stomach, thereafter
to come and visit our noble Major General. We could not, for want of horse,
pursue the victory; Colonel Fynes having left us, and I think God would not
vouchsafe to do him so much honor as to be present at so noble an exploit.
For the number of ours slain, I have already given you an account. The number
of the slain of the Enemy was not certainly known when I wrote this; the
Country reported 3 or 4 Cartloads of dead and wounded corpse to be taken with
them, besides many that were drowned, and others that were thrown in after they
were slain, and some found dead upon the place.

Sam. Harsnet.
Abbington this 12. of Jan. 1644.

And here also I shall desire the Reader to take notice, that this brave
Victory was thus happily obtained, the very next day after that judgment was
given upon that egregious and abominable hypocrite and atheist, and most
pestilent Incendiary the Arch Prelate of Canterbury: Another passage of divine
providence.
And that on the very same day also we had the certain information of those
brave Victories and rich prizes, forementioned by renowned Captain Swanley,
specified in his Letter to the noble Earl of Warwick, as aforesaid.

About the 16 instant, we were certainly informed by Letters out of the West,
especially by an Express from the Lord Roberts, Governor of Plymouth, to the
Speaker of the House of Commons, that that most impious and impudent
rotten-hearted Apostate Skellum Greenvill, having gathered all the forces he
could raise in Cornwall, and other parts of the West, did about the 10 of
January, 1644. about eleven of the clock at night, alarm the works of the Town
of Plymouth, in 4 several places, at once, with near 6000 men, The enemy most
bravely beaten at Plymouth.
whereby, after a very hot dispute the Enemy became Masters of the 4 great
works of the Town; out of two of which they were quickly beaten, but held the
third, called Little Pennyquick, and began to scale or rather dig down,
another fort called Great Penny-quick: But, at last, by the admirable courage
of the Commanders and Garrison-Souldiers they were quite beaten out of that
too, with great loss unto the Enemy, leaving 75 of their men dead on the
place, The Enemy had gotten the 4 outworks of Plymouth, yet were beaten out of
them all again.
and (at last) 4 times as many more slain in this Service, besides many
hundreds wounded: For, as soon as they were beaten off from the 3 works, the
Plymouth men who behaved themselves with extraordinary gallantry, environed the
fourth work (whereinto our men had got, partly by digging and undermining, and
partly by scaling) and the Enemy within it, who seeing themselves so suddenly
beset and ensnared (as it were) in their so late and so sure seeming gotten
prize, instantly surrendered it upon quarter for their lives. In this brave
bickering there were also many prisoners taken and much arms; the victory was
very great, and the Enemy by it, much discouraged, Let our God alone therefore
have the greater praise and glory for it.

About the 18 instant, we received certain information again, by Letters out
of the West, of valiant Colonel Holborns taking in of Sydenbam-House, Colon.
Holborn his good service in the West.
in which he had near an 100 prisoners, among whom, was one Captain, one
Leivtenant, and other Officers in arms together with some other persons of
quality; And he surprised also the High-Sheriffe of Somersetshire, and ten
Commissioners of Array with him; And also that he shortly after, took 300
prisoners, with many Horse and Arms, as they were forraging abroad in those
parts, for plunder and spoil.

And about the 21 instant, the House of Commons in Parliament had a debate
concerning the New Model for the settling of the Armies; And proceeded to the
nomination of diverse Officers for the new Army; by which means (tho for the
time, the Self-denying Ordinance seemed, at this time, to be laid aside) they
might recall any of the Members of either House to the public Service at home,
The New Model of an Army of 21000 horse and foot, voted in Parliament.
as well as if the said Ordinance had, then, been past: Upon the conclusion of
the debate it was, now, therefore Ordered and Voted, that Sir Thomas Fairfax
should be Commander in chief of the 21000 Horse and Foot to be now raised
according to the New Model, and Major General Skippon to be Major General
of the whole Army; and then they proceeded to nominate the Colonells of each
Regiment for the said Model, which were 21 in all, An Ordinance for raising
Many to maintain the new Army.
whereof Colonel Holborn, and Colonel Rossiter, were 2 in the first place;
And the House, then, took into consideration the completing of an Ordinance for
the raising of Moneys to maintain the said Army, which shortly after was
perfectly completed in all particulars, whereof more, in their more proper
places.

About January the 24, we had most certain intelligence by Letters out of
Cheshire, which were read in Parliament, in the House of Commons, of a very
great overthrow given to the Enemies forces near Chester, by ever to be
renowned Sir William Breretons forces, the manner whereof was, A brave victory
obtained by ever to be renowned Sir William Breretons forces near unto Chester.
in brief, thus related. That the Enemy drew forth all the strength of Horse
and Foot, that they could get together in and about Chester, and marched thence
with an intention to relieve Beeston castle, then strongly besieged by Sir
William Brereton, whereof Leivtenant Colonel Jones and Sergeant Major Brooks,
having intelligence, they fell upon them in their passage and so undauntedly
dealt with them, that in a short time they had totally routed the whole body of
the Enemies Army both Horse and Foot, slew 50 of them in the place, and near
200 wounded; They took prisoners 2 Colonells, one Leivtenant Colonel, 2
Sergeant Majors, 6 Captains, 10 Leivtenants, 4 Ensigns, 3 Sergeants, and one
Corporal; They took also 200 horse, and 200 men prisoners, with 400 Arms and
much Ammunition, whereby (as it may be easiled judged) Chester Garrison was
much weakened, and disabled to hold out long, the then present siege.

And about the 26 instant, we received also certain knowledge of a notable and
brave piece of Service performed by Major General Craford, then Governor of
Ailsbury, who going with but about 90 horse to seek quarter for his Soldiers,
and finding none one way, he wheeled about toward Them and unexpectedly fell
upon a 120 horse of the Enemies, among whom was Colonel Bleyer, Governor of
Walling ford Castle, who when they saw each other, both these Champions did not
take the advantage of each other, A brave piece of service performed by valiant
Colo. Craford, against Colon. Bleyer and his party.
but in a fair and open field, drew into battalia, and sent out their forlorn
hopes of each side, who presently charged one another, and so both bodies met,
and both these Commanders bravely disputed the business a while in a fiery and
steely language, and with much interchangeable courage, on both sides; But, at
last, our party most undauntedly routed the Enemy, Colonel Craford having
himself very sorely wounded Colonel Bleyer in this fight; but his horse not
being maimed, his heels did his Master more service than his own hands could,
and carried him fiercely away, half dead, out of the field, all the rest, both
horse and men, being either taken or killed, save only about 13 or 14 who escaped
with the wounded Governor, 20 were so sorely wounded that they could not be
brought prisoners into Ailsbury, and not being capable of doing any further
hurt, they left them behind, to creep (if they could) to their own Surgeons
and seek their own cure. The 2 Governors, as we were credibly informed,
meeting together, in person, in this brave encounter, assaulted each other in a
single combat, and for a while bravely on both sides maintained the duel,
till Bleyer received a most dangerous wound, and as I said before, by his
horses swiftness escaped away. We lost but 3 men of ours, in this furious
fight, and so ours most victoriously returned to Ailsbury, with their prisoners.

About the 28 of this instant, the Committee of the County of Kent, (that brave
unanimous County, most happy by the nobleness of an enobled Gentry) presented
a petition to the House of Commons, The County of Kent petition the Parliament
for their setting forward of the Self-denying Ordinance.
wherein they expressed great thankfulness unto them for their indefatigable
and constant care and pains for the good of the public Affairs of the
Kingdom; unto which also they declared their singular good affection and
faithfulness: And humbly also prayed that the House would proceed in fully
passing the Self-denying Ordinance, for the disabling of the Members of either
House to bear any Office in the Commonwealth, during the time of these Wars
(which Ordinance, though it had about this time clearly passed in the House of
Commons, yet received some long stop and contradiction in the House of Peers)
which Petition of those Kentish Gentlemen, was received with great acceptance,
and thanks returned to the Petitioners, with promise of their best endeavors to
hasten it. Some other particulars were also inserted in their Petition,
concerning some particular distempers and greivances in that County, which were
referred to a Committee, and in special concerning the unnatural Conspirators
for the betraying of Dover Castle, and Chattam, in Kent, who were then kept in
durance to be in due time called to a severe account for that most vile and
treacherous design, which was afterward effected, with the death of diverse of
the chief ringleaders therein.

Finally about the 30 of this instant January, we received certain
intelligence out of Warwickeshire, of the singular good success of Major
Purefoy, at Compton House against the Enemy, as by his own Letter will more
fully appear, which for the Readers better content and satisfaction, I have
thought fit here to insert.

The Copy of Sergeant Major Purefoyes Letter (the brave Governor of Compton
House in Warwickshire) to his Colonel, Colonel Purefoy.
SIR,
I Shall here, briefly relate (for all passages would be too tedious to
trouble you withal) how that first I desire, with all my Soul, that God may
have all the praise and glory which is due to a God that has now and ever
showed himself unto me, almost by miracles, in delivering me and all under my
Command, from very many and most eminent dangers. This night, about 2 of the
clock, a 1000 or 1200 horse and foot of the Enemies fell upon me at Compton,
stormed my Outworks, gained the Stables, and cut down my great Drawbridge,
possessed themselves of all my Troop of Horses, and took about 30 of my foot
Soldiers in their beds, A sudden and most dangerous assault of about 1200 of
the Enemy upon Compton House
who lay over the Stables, and all this was done almost before a man could
think what to do: We received this fierce alarm, as we had good cause, and
presently made good the new Skonce, before the Stonebridge, and beat them out
of the great Court, there being about 200 entered, and ready to storm the
Skonce; but (by Gods mercy) we gave them so hot a sally, Ours bravely sally
out upon the Enemy and beat them back
that we forced them to retreat back to the Stables, Barnes, and Brew House,
where from the windows they played very hot upon us; I then commanded
Leivtenant Purefoy and my Quartermaster (having no other Officers of quality
at home, the rest being abroad, with about 30 of my best Troopers) to sally out
upon the Enemy with a party of some 40. and to attempt the regaining of the
Brew House, and the rooms above, which instantly they did, with most gallant
resolution and courage, Sergeant Bird was one that came not short in bravery of
any. 40 of ours most bravely beat the Enemy.
This party, I say, fought thus with the Enemy, and came to push of Pike, nay,
to the swords point, and laid about them so bravely, that they forced the Enemy
to fly from chamber to chamber, Whereupon, I presently sent out my youngest
brother, the Ensign, with my 3 Corporalls of horse, and about 40 more men, to
relieve the first party; And I assure you, Sir, the young Boy fought well, and
led on his men most bravely and releived his brother, by which means, all the
upper rooms were regained, and now the Enemies kept only the Stables and the
Barnes which they held stoutly, but my resolute Soldiers did then so thunder
their horse, and Reserves of foot that stood within Pistol shot, Sir William
and Sir Charles Co^pton beaten back and the Outworks recovered.
that Sir William and Sir Charles Compton, (who were there present) began to
give ground, which, my Soldiers easily perceiving, some leapt out at the
windows, and so into the Outworks, by which means I recovered my Outworks
again, and made a sally-port, by which the Enemy endeavored to retreat at, but
finding they were frustrated of their hopes, and that my Musketteers did play
so hot upon the great Drawbridge, that they could not be releived; and
withal, we having beaten the Enemy out of that work, which we stormed, when
you took the House, The great drawbridg recovered and the Enemy coopt up.
I had time, thereby, to recover fully the great Drawbridge, and instantly got
new Ropes, and new Locks, and drew it up again in-spight of them all. Now by
this means, all those (whose names are here with enclosed to you) were all in
Cobs pound, having no means in the world to retreat, whereupon they fought
desperately for the space of 3 hours, and the valiant Comptons perceiving
their extreme loss, attempted 3 several times to storm and regain my
Outworks, A fierce fight on both sides.
but all the 3 times were beaten off with as much resolution (I praise the
Lord) and gallantry of my Soldiers, as could be expressed by men. The Enemy
within set fir^ on the hay, straw, and all combustible stuff, to smother my
men out of the upper rooms, which did indeed much annoy them, and the Enemy,
without, threw at least an 100 hand-granadoes upon the houses, so as they set
them on fire in 3 several places; Whereupon Sir Charles and Sir William
thinking all their own, Sir Charles and Sir Will Compton proffer to parley, but
rejected.
sent a Trumpeter to parley, but I commanded that none should parley, nor would
I permit the Trumpeter to speak at all unto me, and ^ain he would have said
something to the Soldiers, but I commanded him upon his life to be gone and
not to return any more upon his peril, and we continued in fight still, and
the foresaid fire did so increase that I thought it fit to offer quarter to all
those that were in the Stable, A fierce assault made on the enemy in the stable.
for their lives only, but they would not hear me. Upon which I drew all my
men together, and fell violently in upon them, in which assault were slain and
taken prisoners, all whose names are in the ensuing List. This did so
dis-hearten the Comptons and all their forces, that they presently drew off all
their foot, and only faced me with their horse, and sent another Trumpeter to
parley, The Enemy enforced to retreat and be gone
but I commanded to give fire upon him; that he returned with no other an
answer, but what a Musket could speak. And thus by Gods providence and mercy
we were clearly rid of them. Sir, this is as true and short a narration, as I
could conveniently give you. I am (as we are all)

Your obliged Servants and Kinsmen, George and William Purefoy.
Compton, Jan. 30. 1644. We recovered all our own men, again, that the Enemy
had taken.




A List of the Officers, and Soldiers slain and taken Prisoners.Captains 3.
Leivtenants 2. one Ensign, one Quartermaster, one Cornet; ^ Corporalls, 3
Sergeants, Troopers and foot Soldiers, about 50. The slain, and the prizes and
prisoners taken
besides 6 Cartloades of wounded men carried off, and near upon 40 Common
Soldiers left dead behind them, in and about the House or Garrison. Of mine
own men both horse and foot, only one was desperately wounded, and another
slightly hurt, but not one, I say, was slain; a rare and even wonderful
providence indeed. We took of the Enemies horse and foot arms, an 100 Muskets,
40 Pistolls, and about 20 hand-granadoes. This fight began about 2 of the clock
in the morning, and continued till about 9. in which time the Enemy stormed us
4 several times, and were still beaten off; A most remarkable Victory and
Deliverance.
the number of them were both horse and foot between a 1000 and 1200 as their
prisoners confessed. With their hand-granadoes, they desperately fired our
stables, barnes, and brew house in 3 several places, but did us no more
considerable hurt; and we lost about 20 horse, and some of our Muskets. And
was not here, good Reader, a most remarkable evidence and undeniable testimony
of Gods strong arm with us, in putting such a resolute and courageous spirit
into the heart of our Soldiers, and so admirably delivering them from the rage
of such a resolute and furious enemy?

And at the same time, we had also farther certain information, that the very
next night that this foresaid defeat was performed, 6 Troops of horse
belonging to the Garrison of Northampton, went forth thence to discover what
parties of the Kings were happily Another brave defeat given to a part of the
foresaid Enemies horse in their hoped return home, by Northampton Horse.
to be found about the Country (not knowing at all of the foresaid brave
defeat at Compton House) and fell upon 3 Troops of the same Enemies whch had
been so beaten before at Compton House, and were now quartered, in their
return, that night, in Kings-Sutton, near Banbury, where Northampton forces
took 57 horse and 6 prisoners, the rest of their men getting into the Church
there, and into another great house close by it. Northampton forces lost in
this adventure but one man, who was shot as he went to fasten a Petarre unto
the Church door, and one more was wounded; All the horse taken as aforesaid,
they sold at Northampton the next day of their return home. The Burning-Bush
not consumed.


And here now again, good Reader, be pleased to make a little stay, A brief
and grateful recital of all this last Months Parliamentary mercies.
and with a gracious and grateful heart, a little to muse and meditate on (and
that with wonder and amazement too) the many and mavelous acts of Gods most
precious providence in all the remarkable passages of this month also, in
preserving his blessed Bush, still Burning, but unconsumed still, in the midst
of so many emflagration^, as namely, In the death Carew, and the Hothams. The
brave exploits of our forces about Winchester, and Ailsbury; Colonel Laughorns
brave services in Wales, related by renowned Captain Swanleyes Letter to the
Robber, that Prince of Pilferers, by renowned Major General Brown at
Abbington; together with the brave beating of the Enemies at Plymouth; And
Colonel Holborns good services in the West. The New-Modell-Army William
Brer^tons forces in Cheshire; Together with Colonel Crafords good service; And
the zeal of the Kentish Gentry for the good of the Kingdom. And in the last,
not least, most famous defeat given to the fierce Royalists at Compton House;
And the good service of the Northampton forces, now last related.

And, now, then, tell me, good Reader, whether England has not just cause, in
admiration, and adoration of our English Isreal's great and glorious Shepherd,
who neither slumbers nor sleeps, in most happy, though most unholy, sinful and
ungrateful Englands constant conservation, to sing, and say, with that
Princely Prophet, Psalm. 76. 4, 5.
King David, Thou art (O Lord our God) more glorious and excellent than the
mountains of prey; The stout hearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep,
and none of the men of might have found their hands. Surely, therefore, even
the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of his fury shall thou
restrain. February. 1644.
But now to go on.

AND now in the entrance into the first observation of this Month of
Februaries wonder of the Burning Bush not consumed, I shall begin with the
information of a very pretty piece of service performed by some of the
Parliaments Forces near Melton Mowberry, A brave passage of Gods providence at
Sir Erasmus de la Fountains house near unto Melton Mowberry.
which was thus: A party of Horse from Beaver Castle, came suddenly and
secretly to assault some of our Leicestershire Forces, who were making a
Garrison at Sir Erasmus de la Fountains House near Melton, aforesaid, with a
full intent and hope to have surprised them, but were happily frustrated of
their expectation; For, the Parliaments forces having notice of the Enemies
approach, they valiantly repulsed them, took and slew about 8 of them, and
during the time of the skirmish, some of our nimble Soldiers running hastily
to supply the want of powder, unawares set one or 2 barrels of powder on fire,
which suddenly blew up one part of Sir Erasmus his House, and did very little
other hurt; But see the wise and good providence of God, who turned this little
loss into a far greater gain and benefit, for by this means, at the least
300 pounds worth of Plate and many good Arms were discovered, which had before
been hid in the ground, and thus made good prize, to be employed for the
Parliaments service and benefit.

And about the same time, we were also certainly informed by Letters out of
Leicestershire, that a party from Ashbey de la Zoneb, came to Cole-Orton, Ashby
Cavalei^s beaten soundly at Cole-Orton in Leicestershire
intending to have surprised our men there, and to have plundered the Town; but
they mist of their aim, and in the attempt lost above 70 or 80 of their horse.
Very good helps to carry on the business this Winter season.

And about the 6 of this instant February, we received credible intelligence
out of Wales, that Colonel Gerard with all the strength he could raise at
that time, came against Cardigan Castle (which he understood was but meanly
provided of necessaries) and therefore besieged it; whereof valiant Colonel
Jones was then Governor. Gerard by a stratagem having got into the Town, A
brave defeat given to Colo. Gerard, before Cardigan in Wales.
brake down the Bridge between it and Pembrokeshire, which was near the Town
and Castle of Cardigan, that so no releife might come to them; and heerupon,
he presently by a Trumpeter sent a summons to the Castle. But courageous
Colonel Jones returned an answer to this effect. That he had in the Castle
300 raw hides, and when all other necessaries failed, they would eat them, and
when they were spent, he and his Soldiers would come forth and fight for
their lives, and neither give nor take quarter, and in the interim would keep
the Castle. In which mean time, the brave Colonel sent to renowned Colonel
Laughorn, to come to his releif, which he promised and did; Col. Laughorn
bravely releives Colonel Jones at Cardigan*
but when this valiant Colonel came to the Bridge, he found it broken down,
as aforesaid, which was some impediment to his desire, but yet, like an
invincible Caesar resolving, Aut viam invenire aut facere, with Fagots, boards,
and such like helps, he made away to pass over the River, and whiles he was
getting over, he caused an Arrow to be shot into the Castle with a Letter in
it, to give them notice that he was come, and so presently he fell upon the
Enemy on one side, and Colonel Jones issuing out of the Castle on the other
side, they soon gave Gerard enough to do and put Gerard and all his forces to
a total rout, The prisoners and prizes.
took and slew 350 of them, 200 being found dead on the place, they took also
600 Arms, 150 prisoners, among whom were diverse Officers and men of quality
and 4 brass pieces of Ordinance.

Much about this foresaid time was that great bluster of a Parturiunt montes,
nascitur ridiculus mus; The Treaty for a pretended Peace at Vxbridge.
as, indeed, at last it proved. I mean the Treaty of Peace at Vxbridge; In
which interim, a Petition was contrived by some mischeivous Malignants of the
County of Buckingham, wherein one Sir John Laurence of the same County was a
great stickler, and was afterward, for it, sent for to London, and committed
to safe custody. Buckingham Malignan^s petition the Parliament Commissioners in
the midst of the Treaty.
Which Petition was intended to be presented to the Parliament Commissioners
at Vxbridge, in the very midst of the time of their Treaty; the effect of this
Petition was; That Religion might be established in this Kingdom, as in the
purest times (which, indeed, were very impure, especially in point of
Discipline, which was mere Popish) of Queen Elizabeth: That, thus, these
malignant Petitioners might the more subtly and slily, incense the other (
Popish or Atheistical) Oxonian Commissioners, and the whole Malignant party,
the apparent and known Enemies to the truly intended pure Reformation of
Religion, and so to make this plot to conduce much to the breaking off of this
Treaty, and that upon the dissolution thereof, the King and his party might
with the better color) declare and publish to the world (though most falsely)
that the Parliament was the only cause of the annihilating of this Treaty, A
notorious plot by the Buckingham petition against the Parliament.
and so consequently Enemies to Peace, and thus bring an universal odium upon
the Parliament; and their party, whose unsettled and unstable spirits, wholely
addicted to faction and novelties, would not admit of any thing but their own
pretended Reformation, but rather chose the continuance and increase of War
and bloodshed. And for the more full and clear assurance (forsooth) of this
their most foul and false accusation, and, indeed, for the firmer
corroborating of this their most dangerous and devilish plot and design; they
at Oxford had already, before hand, drawn up a Full Declaration, and translated
it into several Languages, that thus, as soon as they had treated as far as
they had plotted and preintended, A Declaration prepared and printed at Oxford,
to be spread over the 3 Kingdoms, and into forain parts touching the cause of
the breach of the Treaty.
they might speedily disperse those their foresaid Declarations, both over all
our 3 Kingdoms, and also into all other Foreign parts, to prepossesse them
with those their most gross and abominable untruths, and so delude them, and
all ours, by most falsely laying the cause of the breach of this (on their side)
mere mock-Treaty, upon the innocent Parliament; Thus, hoping, I say, by these
specious pretenses (having pre-occupated the hearts and belief of the people)
that they could not easily be undeceived at the second hand.

But see now the admirable wisdom and justice of our God against them, and his
great mercy toward us, who so ordered the issue, and the upshot of that Treaty,
that by the refusal of 3 Articles, mainly and primarily to be insisted on,
and by the Kings Commissioners to be condescended unto, to the Parliaments
Commissioners, namely, 1. The Settlement of the true Reformed Religion. 2. The
Establishment of the Militia for a season, in the power of the Parliament. The
true cause of the dissolution of the Treaty at Vxbridge.
3. The prosecution of the War against the Rebels of Ireland, and disclaiming
that accursed Cessation of Arms with them, that by their most unjust refusal,
I say, of these 3 Articles, whereof, not one would be fairly granted, and
especially by those Oxford Commissioners, so irreligious and even Atheistical
justifying, and that (in the Kings name) that most horrid and hideous Rebellion
in Ireland, sealed with the most inhumane massacre and bloody slaughter and
murdering of almost 200000 innocent English Protestants, the Kings said
Commissioners, most irreligiously and audaciously daring openly to profess
that his Majesty their Master could not in point of Honor, The wicked
Cessation of arms in Ireland. justified by the Kings Commission at Vxbridge.
Justice, and Conscience, yield to the Parliaments desire therein; whereby, I
say, even this unreasonable and irreligious refusal of the Parliaments most
just and righteous demands (notwithstanding the foresaid Declaration framed and
forged on the impious anvill of Don Digbies vicious invention at Oxford,
whereby they thought to have gained much credit, reputation, and advantage to
their party, yet) I say, by this refusal, they became great losers in the
affections of the people over the whole Kingdom, Malum consilium consulioribus
pessi^^^.
who also saw that in the space of full 20 days sitting, they would not (as I
touched before) agree to any one Proposition of the Parliaments, which so gross
miscarriage of things, especially in that abominable justification of the Irish
Rebellion must needs lie upon them as a most odiously black indelible stain of
intolerable ignominy and disgrace to all succeeding p^sterity. And, indeed, to
speak the truth plainly, what good could be expected from a Treaty which was
to be held with a seduced and misled King, a degenerated and ignoble Nobility,
a proud and superstitious Clergy, an ambitious and atheistical Gentry, and an
irreligious and most malignant Common people? But now to proceed.

About the 8 of this instant February, there came Letters to the Committee of
both Kingdoms, of an excellent piece of service performed by Major Bridges,
Governor of Warwick Castle, the particulars whereof, for the Readers better
satisfaction, I will set down in the words of the Majors own Letter, which was
as follows.

Sir,
I doubt not but you will be glad to hear of the good success which God has
given unto me, in delivering into my hands a Garrison of the Enemies called
Stoke House in Glocestershire but borders on Warwickeshire, A brave piece of
service performed by Major Bridges, Governor of Warwick, at Stok-New-house in
Worcestershire.
where, together with the House, I also took a Troop of Horse; And it will be
the more remarkable in respect of the goodness of God, when we consider the
small power I had to do it, and the place it stood in, being between 2 of the
Enemies Garrisons, the one was Cambden, but 2 miles distant, the other Evisham,
7 miles distant. But I being affected with the sad complaints of the Country,
and considering the danger of delays, and having notice that the Enemy wrought
hard to perfect the Fortifications, resolved to take the present opportunity;
and that my design might be carried on with the more privacy, wherein much of
my safety consisted, the Regiment of our County being absent or not in
readiness, I sent 2 of the 3 Companies of mine own Garrison, by small parties,
into the Country, as to gather Contribution, but commanded the Officers not to
return till I gave them orders; to these 2 Companies I got an addition of 60
Foot, commanded by one of my Captains, of the Town-Company, with some part of
mine own Troop and about 70 Horse, belonging to the Committee of
Worcestershire, and thus I marched all that night, and being come to the House
I began to storm it, and the next day fell upon the House and stables, by break
of day, both at once. The House was of stone very strong; they within it had
made up the windows and doors with brick and stone, and defended the House
very stoutly for about an hour and a half, but at length we entered by force,
and took the House and all therein, The House taken by storm and all in it.
without the loss of one man, (blessed be the Lord) notwithstanding that in
all that time we were without shelter, and the bullets and stones flew thick
about our ears. Since this, I heard that the Enemy drew out of Evisham and
Cambden, to relieve their Friends, but could not come up time enough; by which
means (God so appointing) I returned with my prisoners and spoil unmolested, a
List whereof you have herewith immediately following: And to conclude, the said
House being a Papists, and the whole Garrison of that Religion, to prevent the
building of any more such Rookes nests, I fired the House, and desire, you
would with us, praise God for this Victory. Sir,

Your Servant, John Bridges.
Warwick Castle, Feb. 8. 1644.

A List of the Prisoners taken by Major Bridges, Governor of Warwick Castle,
at Stoke House in Gloucestershire, Captain Edward Brent, Captain George Brent,
Captain Richard Canning, Captain Smith, Captain Thomas Canning; together with
about 30 more, Officers and Gentlemen of quality, all Papists, and many other
common Soldiers.

About the 10 of this instant we were also credibly informed by Letters out of
Cheshire, that Captain Stones (a brave active and loyal Commander under Sir
William Brereton, and now Governor of Eccleshall Castle, Partshall Garrison
taken by brave Major Stones, Governor of Eccleshall Castle.
in the County of Stafford) with a small party marched against Partshall House,
another Popish Garrison of the Enemies, which was strongly fortified and Moated
about; He taking the opportunity of the Drawbridge, being let down, suddenly
forced his passage, surprised the Centinells, and so fell in among the whole
Garrison, fought bravely with them for a good season, killed many of them in
the fight, and took prisoners, Colonel Ashbey, the Governor, with diverse
Gentlemen of quality, a Jesuit, which was their Priest, and Son and Heir to a
Popish Knight, and about 60 Soldiers; and thus we were possessed of the whole
House, with all the Arms and Ammunition, and other good prize which was within
it.

We also were credibly assured by Letters from Abbington, about the 14 of this
instant February, that Major General Brown, that most renowned, Major General
Brown active about Oxford.
valiant, and active Commander, sent forth a party of Horse toward Harrington,
who having intelligence, where the Enemy kept a Court of Guard, about half a
mile from Harrington, our said Forces got between them and the Town, by which
means they surprised the whole Guard, being 19 men, and brought them all
prisoners into Abbington. And that the said Noble Major General hearing of
some provisions which were going from some Malignants in those parts, to
Oxford, he sent out a party to intercept them, who took 27 Horse load of Corn,
Cheese, and other provisions of which they had then no little want at Oxford.

About the 16 instant we were informed by Letters out of the North, A brave
defeat given to the Enemy by Colo. Lamberts forces at Heightley in Yorkshire.
that about 150 of the Enemies Horse from Skipton, fell upon the Parliaments
quarters at Heightley, where they suddenly surprising our Guards, they came
into the Town and took near an 100 prisoners, and 60 Horse with their booty:
But as they were about to retreat, Colonel Lamberts men being quartered near
hand took the alarm and came to relieve Colonel (...) men (whose quarters had
been thus beaten up, the Colonel himself being then absent) and performed
their parts so ^allantly, that they rescued all our own prisoners, and most of
the booty which the Enemy had taken, killed 15 of them on the place, took about
20 of them prisoners, wounded and took the Commander in Chief of the Enemies
party, Captain Hugher; killed his Leivetenant also, and pursued the rest to the
very gates of Skipt^n. On our side was lost in this service Captain Samon, one
of Colonel Lamberts Commanders and about 8 Soldiers.

About the 18 of this instant February, Ever to be honored Sir Tho. Fairfax
come to London, and sent for to the house of Commons in Parliament, to receive
from them the honor of General of all the Kingdoms forces.
noble and renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax, being nominated and chosen to be the
Chief General of all the Kingdoms forces and Armies, came to London, out of
Yorkshire, in a private manner, desiring to avoid all ostentation; there were
in company with him, Colonel Sir William Constable, Colonel Rigbey, Colonel
Sandi^s, and Colonel Alured, with some other Officers; and for the more
expeditious setting forth of this most noble General, according to an
Ordinance passed by both Houses of Parliament, the Commons appointed a
Committee to consider how moneys, clothes and other necessary recruite for his
Army might be speedily and most conveniently procured, and to enable him
completely to march into the field with a fit train of Artillery, etc. to be
repaired and every way made fit for him as soon as money came in upon the
Assessement, by the Ordinance for the said Army. And Sir Thomas being now come
to Town, within a day or 2 after the House of Commons sent for him by 4 of the
Members of that House, which was the respect given him, and when he came into
the House, as a farther addition of honor, a Chair was set for him to sit
down upon, but most modestly he refused it. Then, Mr. Speaker told him what
he had in Command from the House, to deliver unto him, which was, The great
trust which the Kingdom reposed in him in the Command of this Army, and the
good opinion they had of him for his valor and fidelity, giving him thanks, in
the name of the whole House, for the many and great services he had done for
the public in defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and encouraging him to
go on in the same, as he had begun, wherein he should much honor God, and
endeer his Country and Kingdom unto him, which he assured him, would not be
unmindfull of him, and his labor, love, and loyalty to it, in due time: But of
this more hereafter.

About the 20 of this instant, we had certain information by Letters out of
the Northern parts, of the most welcome news of the taking of the Town and
Church of Scarborough, which was strongly fortified, together with the Haven
and at least an 120 ships, 32 pieces of Ordnance, and much other rich prize; by
that most active, valiant, and successful Soldier, and brave Commander Sir
John Meldrum; the manner of it being said to be thus: This noble Colonel Sir
John Meldrum stormed the Town in 4 several places, Scarborough Town, Church
and Haven, taken by valiant Sir John Meldrum.
with English and Scottish Soldiers, who went on with such gallantry, that
they gained the Town and Church, with the loss only of 11 of their men. In the
Church they took 80 prisoners, and with them, he that had been Governor of
Hemsley Castle. But the most base and cowardly apostate Cholmley, when he
perceived the Town like to be lost, sled into the Castle, and was bravely
pursued, and one of the works thereof entered, but the white Tower in the Castle
commanding that work, Cholmley fled into the Castle endeavors an escape by Sea.
they beat our men out of it again with stones. The Liver-hearted Cholml^y (now
despairing together with the conscientiousnesse of his former guilt in his most
treacherous defection from the Parliament, endeavored to escape by Sea, in his
Pinnace (or rather his running Horse, as he called it) which then rode at
Anchor at a little distance, to help him at a strait or dead lift; but such was
the activity of Sir John Meldrum, that with boats he got between the Pinnace
and the Land, and so his cowardship was forced to confine himself into the
Castle again. Cholmley had 5 Dunkirk Vessels with him at Scarborough.
This apostate Sir Hugh Cholmley had 5 Dunkirk Vessels with him at Scarborough,
who for a while gave interruption to our men in storming the Town, but our
Cannoneers sunck 2 of them with their Ordnance, and the other 3 fled for it.
Before the storm Sir Hugh was summoned to yield the Town: but like himself, he
gave a base and scornful answer, and when the Townsmen would have yielded the
Town, he brought Soldiers out of the Castle, and compelled them to fight in
the defense of it as long as they were able. But heerof more, in its own proper
place. Only, in the interim, take this own Letter of Sir Hugh Cholmleyes, which
he wrote to some Commander in the Kings Army, but was intercepted by the way,
and which was as follows.

SIR,
WE are now blockt up close in the Castle, and diverse of our Soldiers run
away to the Enemy, and it is to be feared that the ill accommodation will
daily decrease our number: You know the consequ^nce, and believe me it
requires speedy supply, for reasons which I may not express: A Letter of Sir
Hugh Cholmleys intercepted.
I pray you signify where or from whence I may expect and hope for releif, and
whether any expectance from the Queen, or Ireland, or probability of a good
issue from the Treaty; of which particulars I desire to be satisfied, that I
may not be totally ignorant: Not that the failing of any, or of all these
shall make me quit this trust otherwise than becomes a Gentleman, and good
subject: Your Colonel Wharton salutes you. And I am

Your humble Servant, Hugh Cholmley.
Scar. Castle, Feb. 24. Here are 10 Colors of Scots, as I imagine, though not
above 800 men of them; but Meldrum (who commands in Chief, and is the most
active man here) has 6 or 700 more of the Lord Fairfaxes Foot.




About February the 22. we had certain intelligence of a brave piece of
service, done by a party of Colonel John Heynes his Regiment, which was
certified to be thus. A brave defeat given to the Enemy by Major Temple, near
Dennington.
That the said Colonel receiving intelligence of a French Regiment of Horse,
and some other Troops of Gorings Brigade, quartered near Newberry, he sent
out a party of his Regiment from Okingham, under the command of Major Temple,
to beat up their quarters, which party after a very hard march, coming near
the Enemies quarters, they understood that the said party were all drawn off.
But they had also farther intelligence of another party of the Enemies
quartered at Ham, 8 miles from Dennington Castle, whither they instantly
advanced, and fell upon them in their quarters, took there 40 good Horse, and
all their Arms, together with about an 100 li. of Contribution money, which
the Enemy had gathered thereabout, took prisoners, Major William Maxwell,
Agitant General to Prince Maurice, Captain Robert Paddon, Captain of a Troop
of Horse, John Cox his Leivtenant, and 24 common Soldiers, and so returned
safe with their prisoners and prizes unto Ockingbam.

And about the 24 of this instant, we were certainly informed, by a Letter
written from Captain Pierce to Sir John Young, a worthy member of the House of
Commons, Another brave defeat given to that apostate Skellum Greenvil, at
Plymouth.
of a brave defeat given to that base apostate Skellum Greenvill, before
Plymouth, which said Letter containing a full relation thereof, I have here
(for the Readers better content and satisfaction) inserted, which was as
follows.

Sir, The good success which it has pleased God to give our Forces, lately,
makes me set pen to paper, thereby desiring to inform you that upon the 18 of
February, the Enemy having the night before made a work upon the old work at
Mount Stamford, with a very large line on both sides from the work: The Seamen
in the morning fell on them, and took one half moon, which was made at the
South-end of the line; but the Enemies horse coming upon them, forced them to
retreat, but with no loss on our side, blessed be God; Upon which we were
all commanded to Arms; Several companies were drawn out to go over, and a
Troops of Horse; One being still quartered on that side, to join with some Sea
men, taken on shore for that purpose; all (I think) consisting of about 500.
and all the rest of the Garrison were commanded to march out to face the Enemy
on the North side, and were drawn without our Line, within Musket shot of their
work under the hill, the said hill much befreinding us, so as they could not
play much upon us. All we did was only sending out small parties to shoot, as
if we intended to fall on, that so they might draw off some of their forces
from the other side of the water, where our purpose was to fall on; and
accordingly they did draw off some of their Horse, and so we crossing their
expectation, fell on where we were least looked for, and about 2 of the clock
in the afternoon, our foot, who were most of them Sea men, marched up most
resolutely to Mount Stamford, the forlorn hope of our Horse going before, and
the Reserve with them, in the bottom, who had the advantage of some hedges,
The brave resolution of Plymouth men, in winning Mount Stamford, and beating
away the Enemy.
which they well-lined with our Musketteers, who fired upon the Enemy, and they
on us, where and when were poured out as mighty Vollies of shot as I have ever
seen or heard, and whiles our foot were getting up the hill, our horse and the
Enemies met; who most resolutely and bravely disputed the business not long,
even about half an hour, and made the Enemy rather trust to their horse legs
than to their own swords, our horse following them amain; and our foot se^ing
what good success the horse had, went, nay rather, ran up to the Enemies work
with their Colors in their hands, and instantly made the Enemy fly for it,
and thus routing totally all their horse and foot bravely, took possession of
the whole work, and pursued the Enemy in their flight above a mile, hewing, and
cutting them amain as they basely fled.

Now the names of those we took prisoners were Leivtenant Colonel Mohun, a
Leivtenant Colonel of Horse; Major Richard Heal, Baronet Heales brother;
Captain Maynard (who had formerly taken up Arms on our side) Captain Hill,
Captain Aston, and Captain Hatchins, Leivtenant Waring, Leivtenant Inglet,
Leivtenant Ashford, Leivtenant Manwaring, Ensign Halsie, Ensign Battishill,
and of private men about an 108. We also took 300 Arms, in the work of Mount
Stamford, some barrells of powder, good store of Mattocks, Shovels and Faggots,
and some Horses; on our part we had but one man slain, and that by an
accident, some few hurt, and but one man taken by the Enemy. After this brave
bickering we had a day set apart for a special Thanksgiving to God for this
great Victory; and very shortly after called a Council of War to try such of
them as had heretofore taken up arms on our side, but were now revolted and
proceeded against 3 of them, viz. Captain Maynard, Leivtenant Ashford, and
Ensign Battishill, who were executed the next day, and some others afterward
followed.

And about the latter end of this Month of February, we received the most
welcome news of the most memorable and sudden surprisall of the strong Town of
Shrewsbury by Colonel Mitton, that most active and loyal Commander, and
Colonel Bowyer, assisted by Sir William Breretons, and Colonel Mittons
forces; together with the eminent prisoners and prizes taken by those
Parliament forces, which was certified and ratified by several Letters out of
Shropshire, sent to London, with the exact and true relation of the manner of
the taking of it, it being a place of great concernment, and one of the most
considerable Vpland Garrisons, which the King then held in the whole Kingdom:
I shall therefore give the Reader a most true though brief narration thereof,
extracted out of the Letters written from the Committees of Shrewsbury, to the
Speaker of the House of Commons, with the List of the prisoners and prizes
taken therein; which was as follows.

Right honorable Sir,
IT has pleased God miraculously to deliver the strong Town of Shrewsbury,
into our hands, with all the Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers therein; The
brave and strong Town of Shrewsbury surprised and taken.
a List of the chief of whom we have sent enclosed to you. The manner of
taking of it was briefly thus. Upon the 22 of this Month of February, we drew
out of our Garrisons of Wem, Moreton, and Stoke 250 horse, and the like number
of foot, Sir William Brereton having sent us 250 foot, and 350 horse, which
party by our Order was commanded by Leivtenant Colonel Rincking, (who in the
Marshalling and managing of this design deserves much honor) and Captain
Willy^r, together with Mr. Huson, a Minister, who also most valiantly and
bravely led on the firelockes, with 50 Troopers dismounted under the Command of
Leivtenant Bendebne, who led on their men with great courage and undaunted
resolutions, after whom also followed 350 foot more, which by Severn side
stormed the Town, near unto the Castle-wall, and marched unto the Market-house,
and there surprised the Main-guard, and then sent a party to secure the
Castle-forehead-Gate, which was effected without much difficulty; and after a
quarter of an hour, the drawbridge was let down and the gate opened, where
valiant Colonel Mitton, Colonel Bowyer, The Town of Shrewsbury entered by ours.
and all the Gentlemen of this Committee, with the horse, entered, and
immediately became Masters of the Town, and within 4 hours after, the Castle
was surrendered upon quarter, for all but the Irish to march to Ludlow; and then
the Enemy delivered up a strong Out-work in Frankwell, upon bare quarter for
their lives.

By 12 of the clock at noon, The Castle taken.
we became absolute Masters of the Castle and Town; wherein were taken many
considerable prisoners, good store of Ammunition, and great store of Ordnance.
The Committee of Wem, took as great care as possibly could be, that the
well-affected in the Town might not in any measure suffer or be plundered, and
therefore the Officers kept off the Soldiers from plundering the Town, that so
the Committee might see right down, and none but Malignants only to suffer. The
Committee gave present notice hereof, to Sir William Brereton, certifying him
what they had done, who thereupon took care for forces to lie near them, to
relieve Colonel Mitton, if occasion should be. The whole Country, I mean
especially the well-affected party, were exceeding glad of this, and desired
that Colonel Mitton might be Governor thereof, being well known unto them
all, to be a most honest cordial, and well-affected Gentleman, and of
singular and true integrity to the Parliaments Cause, whereof by many real
experiments they had strong and indubitable ground and knowledge. Our horse,
the day before had a long and weary march, they having been sent to surprise
Sir William, and Sir Thomas Whitmore, a Parliament man, whereof more
immediately. Sir, we shall not trouble you any further, but to subscribe our
selves.

Your most humble Servants. A. Lloyd, Sam. Moore, Tho. Hunt, To. Clives, Rob.
Cariton, Leigh. Owen.
Salop, Feb. 24. 1644.

A List of the prisoners taken in Salop, as aforesaid. Sir Michael Ernley
Knight, and his Brother; Sir Rich. Lee Baronet; Sir Thomas Harris, Baronet; Sir
Henry Frederick-Thyn, Baronet; Sir William Owen Knight; Sir John Wild senior,
Knight; Sir John Wild, junior, Knight; Sir Thomas Lister Knight: Together with
11 Esquires; The prisoners and prizes.
2 Leivtenant Colonels, one Major; 2 Doctors; 8 Captains; 15 Gentlemen; 3
Ancients; 4 Sargeants; 9 or 10 other Officers, and about 50 other prisoners,
whereof some were Irish. One Captain and 5 others were slain. We also took 15
pieces of Ordnance, many hundreds of Arms; diverse barrels of powder; All
Prince Maurice his Magazine; The Town, the Castle and all the Works; diverse
Carriages, bag and baggage of the Princes; Besides many other prisoners and
purchases, not discovered when this List was gathered. We lost only 2 men. And
was not this a most rare and remarkable mercy and famous Victory indeed; and
never to be obliterated out of the Tables of eternal memory and gratitude? As
accordingly and most worthily, it was shortly after Ordered by the Parliament,
The Parl. gratitude for this good news.
that a Solemn day of public Thanksgiving to God should be kept; And 20 li.
was given to the first messenger that brought this most welcome news; and 10
li. to the second.

And here I must desire the Reader to take notice of the most wise and
righteous disposal of this great mercy unto us by the great and glorious
Moderatour of all things in Heaven and Earth; A remarkable nore and singular
passage of divine providence, in this famous victory.
Viz. That this so rare and famous defeat, given to the impious Enemies of Gods
Cause and Truth, was upon the very same day that the Mock-Treaty, (or rather
Plot-Treaty) at Vxbridge, was happily dissolved, namely, Saturday, Feb. 22.
1645. A passage of singular divine providence, and not slightly to be
pretermitted of us. But now to go on.

Much also about the foresaid time, it was most certainly informed, that a
party of Sir William Breretons forces (as was forementioned) under the command
of Sir John Price, Apsley-House in Shropshire taken by Sir William Brereton.
a worthy Member of the House of Commons, had taken Apsley House in Shropshire,
and therein Sir William Whitmore, and Sir Thomas his Son; Sir Fra. Oately, Mr.
Owen, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Griffith, and diverse other Gentlemen of quality, and
about 60 Common Soldiers, as they were sitting upon a Commission of Array to
raise forces for Prince Maurice; and they pursued the said Prince also, who
still avoided Sir William, and at last got over Severn toward Chester, on the
Welsh side. And from Ailsbury we had also, about the same time, certain
intelligence, Colo. Crafords good service, at Roesham, near Oxford.
that that brave Commander Colonel Craford had performed a brave piece of
service about Roesham 3 or 4 miles from Oxford, where he fell upon a party of
the Enemy, and took 40 Horse with their Riders and Arms, among whom was a
Sergeant Major, a Cornet, and some other Officers.

And upon the 28 of this instant February, Letters came to the Parliament from
ever renowned Colonel Massey, of a great Victory obtained by some of his
forces under his brothers Command; Who (in the Forest of Dean) fell upon Sir
John Winter, A most brave Victory obtained by Colon. Massies forces in the For
rest of Dean.
routed him, and made himself swim the River of Wye, in which passage 60 of his
men were drowned, 70 slain on the place, besides Colonel Gam, and Leivtenant
Colonel Winter, and 120 taken prisoners, and a 140 horse taken, 2 Leivtenant
Colonells, one Major, 4 Captains, and other Commanders and Officers, together
with 300 Arms. And upon this Relation, a Letter of Thanks from the House of
Commons was Ordered to be sent to Colonel Massey for his good service, and an
Order also passed presently for providing money for so deserving a Commander.

And now, good Reader, let me desire thee here to stay a little, and to take a
summary and short survey of the rare and rich mercies of this Month also, The
Burning-Bush not consumed.
even of the Burning Bush still Unconsumed, nay rather, in the midst of furious
flames, gallantly grown, and much improved, as has been this month most
evidently expressed, both, 1.
In that notable passage of Providence at Sir Erasmus de la Fountains House; In
the sound beating of Ashby Cavaliers at Cole-Orton; 2.
and the brave defeat given to Welsh Gerrard, at Cardigan Castle. In that
Mock-Treaty at Vxbridge; and that brave piece of service performed by Major
Bridges, at Stoke-New-House in Gloucestershire; Together with Major Jones, his
valiant taking of Partshall Garrison; and Major General Brownes activity about
Oxford; In the brave defeat at Heightley in Yorkshire; 3.
And the happy arrival at London, of Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Parliament, to
receive his Commission to be Generalissimo of all the Armies of the Kingdom.
4.
In the most valiant taking of Scarborough Town, Church and Haven; The brave
defeat given to the Enemies near Dennington, by valiant Major Temple; Together
with that renowned repulse given to Greenvill at Plymouth. 5.
In the most happy and famous surprizall of the strong Town and Castle of
Shrewsbury, and all the rich prizes therein. 6.
And, finally, In the taking of Apsley House in Shropshire; The brave service
of Colonel Craford at Roesham near Oxford; and the famous defeat given to the
Enemies by renowned Colonel Massy, in the Forest of Dean.

In due and deep consideration and most grateful contemplation of all which so
rare and rich mercies of this Month, let thy soul be still and ever ravished
and rapt up with wonder and admiration at the infinite and unfathomed depth of
this Gods free love and blessed bounty to his poor despised Church and
Children, With which, Mat. 28. 20.
according to his faithful promise, he still abides, and so will continue
even to the end of the world, to sustain and support it, maugre all the
malicious machinations of Satan, and all his malignant Agents; And, therefore
let us, with Christian courage and boldness exult in the rock of our
Salvation, and with the undaunted Spirit and goldly resolution of renowned
Luther, sing and say (as we have most just cause) The Lord of Hosts is with
us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Psalm. 46. 11.
But now to proceed.

AND here we shall again begin the comfortable contemplation of the next
ensuing Month of Marches works of wonder, March. 1644.
to the high honor of our wonder-working God, with that famous b^sinesse of
the most admirable and rare recovery of the Town of Weymouth in the West, which
was thus related.

About the beginning of this Month of March, Melcomb-Regis bravely maintained,
and Weymouth most admirably regained, by Colon, Sydenham.
1644. we first received intelligence by Letters from that faithful and most
valiant and vigilant Sea-Commander, Captain Batten, Vice Admiral of the
Parliaments Navy, by Sea; That he had then lately releived Melcombe-Regis,
which (after the treacherous loss of Weymouth, the February before) still held
out against the Enemy by Gods special and mighty assistance and blessing on
the famous, faithful, and indefatigable endeavors of renowned Colonel
Sydenham, notwithstanding, I say, that poor Weymouth had been trecherously
betrayed (by many of its own malignant Inhabitants) into the Enemies hands.
That in this great straight, I say, and exigent of time and danger, renowned
Captain Batten being by divine providence come thither with his ships, releived
them with such provisions as at that time they most wanted; and that,
therewith, he had landed there an 100 of his stout Seamen, and that the Enemy
might make the less use of the Town of Weymouth, Colonel Sydenham was
necessitated to fire the ships which the Enemy had on Weymouth side, Colo.
Sydenham necessitated to fire the ships in Weymouth Haven.
which (having the benefit of a fair wind fit for his design) he afterward
performed accordingly, and not only burnt diverse ships, but part of the Town
of Weymouth also, which in that exigent, could not be avoided. Now renowned
Colonel Sydenham with his brave Soldiers, and resolute Seamen all this while
maintained Melcombe with admirable gallantry and courage, and at length, they
most undauntedly re-gained the Chappell-fort of Weymouth, The Chappel-fort in
Weymouth regained.
and therein 60 of the Enemies taken prisoners. And in this furious skirmish of
thus re-gaining Chappell-fort, we took besides those in the Fort, one
Leivtenant Colonel, one Major, 3 Captains, 3 Leivtenants, and a 100 common
Soldiers, with store of provisions which the Enemy had newly got together, And
a brave booty therein obtained.
and all this with the loss of but one man of ours, (a remarkable mercy of the
Lord unto us) which did so inrage the Enemy, that Goring would needs be
revenged, and vowed to assault us all at once, as after this he fruitlesly
endeavored, whereof more anon in its due place.

This certain intelligence was at that time farther confirmed by 2 several
Letters of Sir Lewis Dives, which had been intercepted by the Garrison of Lyme,
2 Letters from Sir Lewis Dives intercepted.
the one of them to Sir John Barkley, Governor of Exeter, the other to the
Governor of Bristol; In which Letters he signified the taking of the said
Chappell-fort by Colonel Sydenhams forces, and therefore desired Sir Richard
Greenvill (that Skellum and base apostate) to come away speedily with his
promised 1500 horse, and that the said Governors would hasten away the 500
foot they promised to Colonel Goring and himself; for, else, says he in his
said Letters, The Crown of England is in danger to be lost, if Weymouth should
be re-gained, by the Parliaments Forces. Now Goring, in this interim, being
extremely vexed at the loss of the Chappel-fort, Goring is extremly vexed at the
loss of the Chapel fort.
and considering that it was a very great prejudice to his other intended
proceedings, he therefore resolved to fall again upon that Fort, and that they
might (as they conceived) the more effectually do it, it was concluded by a
Council of War to fall both upon that Fort, and on the Town of Melcomb also,
at once, and in several places; and this to be done (as most works of
darkness are) in the midst of the night. But, it pleased the Lord so
graciously to order it, that the very same Evening that this storm was
intended, one of our Soldiers who had been taken prisoner by the Enemy, made
an escape, and came into Melcombe, Gorings resolution to fall upon Chapel fort
and the Town of Melcomb at once, discovered and prepared for.
and gave the Governor notice of the Enemies resolution, and that they would
fall upon them, that night; so that by this means our men prepared themselves
to stand stoutly upon their guard, and the Enemy came accordingly and assaulted
the line about Melcomb, in 5 or 6 several places together, and the Chapel
fort also at the same time, and did it with great violence and resolution; but
were most bravely resisted by our men, till such time as the treacherous
Townsmen within, The treachery of the Townsmen of Melcomb
let in many of the Enemies forces through their back-doores, and so the Enemy
came on their backs and made them somewhat to retreat; In which retreat, the
Enemy being much strengthened by the assistance of the Town-Malignants, valiant
Major Francis Sydenham was slain, a great loss unto us. But undaunted Colonel
Sydenham observing this great strait, and brave Captain Batten also (who in
this business deserved great honor and commendation, together with his
valiant Seamen also, who most willingly came on shore to hazard their lives
in this service, The Enemy tho trecherously let in to Melcomb, yet bravely
beaten our again with a great loss.
and fought most undauntedly, and for the sam^ merited much praise and reward
too) they both did mightily encourage their men, both with their words and
examples too, not to shrink, but to follow on close upon the Enemy, and so led
them up again into the very face of the Enemy, and enforced the Enemy to a
swift retreat back again into Weymouth, with the loss of at least 250 of their
men, who were slain and drowned in the River.

Now the Enemy being thus retreated, our brave-spirited Soldiers stood still
upon their guard, with expectation that the Enemy would have come on again, but
they did not; for, the next morning, about 10 of the clock, the Enemy (as
appeared) stricken with some panick fear, The Enemy also basely fly out of
Weymouth
were all sneakt away out of Weymouth also, and secretly and suddenly had
marched away, both horse and foot, in great haste, guarding their Rear with
their Horse, leaving their own Colors behind them in their Fort, with all the
Ordnance they took from us, and 2 pieces more, and some barrells of powder, And
leave much good prize behind them.
with a great overplus of Arms and Ammunition, Victual, and other good booty,
which had been brought thither by the Enemy; and, indeed, they took nothing
away with them, but only some plunder of the Town.

And thus after a very tedious siege, and much hard service for 18 days and
nights together (during all which time our valia Soldiers put off neither
arms, nor clothes, as I was credibly informed) they by Gods infinite mercy
obtained a most happy and comfortable enlargement and freedom from their
cruel and murtherous-minded Enemies; Goring and Dives marched away from
Weymouth, to Dorchester.
And thus Goring and Dives, who were both present in this service marched away
to Dorchester, with their horse and foot, which were above 4000. whereas ours
that were environed by them were not above 900. being also discouraged (or at
least we justly might have been) for want of releif, and our little or no hope
of relief; besides the former success of the Enemies, and yet that ours should
so gallantly quit themselves, and so impregnably oppose and fall upon their
Enemies, when they were at their strongest, and themselves in the lowest and
most desperate condition, and besides, the Townsmen within being treacherous
unto them, of whom above 40 had conspired to seize on the Fort which Colonel
Sydenham possessed, and by procuring false keys to the prison doors to let
out all the prisoners, and also (as I touched before) to let in the enemies at
their back-doores; but the plot of the false keys was timely discovered and
prevented, many of the Malignant Conspirators apprehended and imprisoned, some
in this fight were slain, and some wounded, and those imprisoned, in a fit
posture to be hanged, as afterward they were: We lost but 10 men on our side,
in all this hot and furious service; The visible and most apparent hand of God
in all this service.
All which premises considered, it must needs be granted that the hand of God
was, indeed, most visibly seen in the whole carriage of this admirable action
and famous defeat, wherein, I say, was an apparent vision of our present
Parliamentary mighty wonder; Viz. The Burning Bush in the midst of such furious
flames, not consumed; To God alone, therefore, be all the honor and glory of
it.

And March the 8 we had certain intelligence that a ship carrying 28 pieces of
Ordnance, laden with store of arms and Ammunition was come into Weymouth from
Rhoan in France, supposing Weymouth had still been in the Enemies possession;
Two ships came in unto the Parliaments possession at Weymouth.
and so was seized on for the Parliaments use. Yea, and about the same time,
even 3 or 4 hours after the Enemy had quitted the Outworks of Weymouth
(whereof you have at large heard before) a lusty serviceable ship of Weymouth,
called the Endeavor, carrying in her 12 pieces of Ordnance, and laden with Salt
and other commodities (belonging to some Malignants of those parts) which ship
then lay close under Portland Castle, but having, as it seemed many honest
Seamen in her, suddenly they cut her Cables, and swiftly, and of its own
accord, came off to Captain Batten, then at Weymouth and Melcomb, although the
Castle of Portland had made at least 7 or 8 shots at her. And thus we see how
God most graciously blessed the affairs of that Town, at that time, both by
Sea and by Land; to him alone be all the praise and glory of it.

Shortly after, to wit, on Wednesday, March the 12. Both Houses of Parliament
most piously concurred for the keeping of a Solemn day of Thanksgiving to
Almighty God, A day of Solemn Thanksgiving at Christ Church in London.
at Christ-Church in London, for all these so many and marveilous rich mercies
of the Lord unto us, Since the happy dissolution of that foresaid Treaty at
Vxbridge; as namely, for the winning of Scarborough Town, and Haven;
Shrewsbury, so unexpectedly and admirably put into the Parliaments hands; The
extraordinary recovering of Weymouth, and even miraculous preservation of
Melcomb Regis, etc. Where and at which foresaid time, Reverend, Learned, and
Religious Mr. ^rrowsmith, and Mr. Vines, Preached before the Lords and Commons
of Parliament, the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of London, accompanying
them there, at that holy service. And both Houses of Parliament immediately
after passed an Ordinance for the payment of 2000 pound, 2000 li. ordered to be
paid to Weymouth.
to the brave Garrison of Weymouth, for the encouragement and reward of the
good service done there, and for a supply of some necessaries in that Town.

And besides all these remarkable m^^cies of our good God to the Parliament,
whereof you have most fully been informed, since, and even at the dissolution
of that Mock-Treaty at Vxbridge; We were yet farther credibly assured by
Letters from Ailsbury, about March the 16. That the King lost the Troop of
Horse belonging to his own Lifeguard; The Kings own Life guard Troop of horse
taken by us, near unto Oxford.
the manner of the taking of which prize was thus related. Ailsbury Garrison
having intelligence of diverse of the Kings horse, quartered out of Oxford, for
want of necessaries (about this time) within the Town (they that have spoiled a
most fruitful Kingdom, will shortly, I hope, want bread and Pease for
themselves.) Heerupon, valiant Captain Abricomie, a Scottish Commander in
Ailsbury, and Major Ennis of Newport-pagnell, marched from their Garrisons
toward Oxford, with a party of horse to Killington, where, accordingly, they
met with the Kings own Troop, as they had been informed. Our party went over at
Islip Mill, and there they found the Enemy entrenched on the other side of the
River; but our party of horse had carried Fagots and so filled-up the Trench
with them and with earth, and so handled it that they blew up the Bridge,
forced the Turn-pike and Chain, surprised the Guard, marched into the Town,
took 40 gallant horse, worth (some said) 50 li. and Captain Cheyworth,
Commissary General to the King, also the Kings Surgeons own mate, with
other prisoners; and in their return home, they took 4 more Cavalierian
Troopers driving Cattle to the Kings quarters, All which (praised be the Lord)
they brought home safely, without any wound or loss of a man.

About March the 14. the House of Commons received Letters from Sir William
Brereton, that brave Commander, and pious Patriot of his Country, informing
them of the singular good condition of Shrewshury; and also of a notable defeat
given to the Forces of Prince Maurice, A brave defeat given to Prince Maurice
his forces at Holt-bridge, by valiant Leivtenant Colonel Jones.
by a party of Sir William Breretons at Holt-Bridge, in Cheshire, under the
Command of valiant Leivtenant Colonel Jones, the manner whereof was thus.
Prince Maurice, being still greatly vexed in his mind at the sad loss of
Shrewsbury, and as vigilantly as possibly he could, watching to catch and lay
hold on all opportunities to be revenged on the Parliaments party, at last
resolved upon one, and therefore sent a party of foot over the River of Dee,
which parts Cheshire and Wales, and about 13 Companies got over the said River,
by laying over it a Bridge of Canvas dipped in Pitch, over which 3 men might
march abrest. These all being thus past over, intended in a dark night, to have
surprised Sir Williams said Garrison at Holt-bridge, and to have forced their
passage that way to some other farther design; which Garrison, the Prince
understood was maintained by only 2 Companies of Firelocks under the Command of
Leivtenant Colonel Jones, who being thus, now, suddenly assaulted by the said
numerous enemy, yet had his men in order and readiness to receive them, and
entertained them with such a successful volley of shot, and with such valor
and gallantry, that at the very first encounter and giving of fire, he put
them to the rout and swift retreat, The slain.
killed in the pursuit Colonel Owen a Knight, and about an 100 Officers and
Common Soldiers, took diverse prisoners and Arms, and 5 Colors, forced the
Enemy back again in great confusion over the River, in which passage many were
drowned; and in which service we lost only 6 men that were slain, and among
them, Major Jackson a valiant man and brave Commander.

About the 16 instant, came Letters from ever to be honored Sir William
Waller, giving an account of a notable defeat given by his forces to the
Winchesterian Cavaliers, A brave defeat given to the Enemy by Sir William
Waller^ forces.
the manner, thus. Colonel Ogle, Governor of Winchester for the King, sent
out a party to beat up Sir Williams quarters, thinking to take them at
unawares; But, contrary to their expectation, they were most gallantly received
by our men, and Colonel Philips the Commander in chief of the Enemies party
was slain in the skirmish togewith Leivtenant Colonel Gardener, The slain.
and diverse others taken prisoners, and the rest sent back again by
weeping-crosse with a flea in their ears.

And about the 18 of this instant March, we received farther intelligence by
other Letters from Colonel Cook, and renowned Sir William Waller, of a very
great and famous Victory obtained by the said Sir William, and valiant and
virtuous Leivtenant General Cromwell at the Devizes in Wilts, A great victory
obtained by Sir William Waller and Leivtenant-Gen. Cromwell, against Colon.
Long, at the Devizes.
against Colonel Sir James Long, high Sheriff of Wiles, and his whole
Regiment, being the same horse which conveyed or conducted the Prince from
Oxford to Bristol; which said Letter making a full and exact relation thereof,
I have here for the Readers better content and satisfaction thought fit to
insert, verbatim, as it was Printed and published by authority, which was as
follows.

Noble Sir,
SInce Colonel Long was returned from conveying the Prince, with the Bishop of
Armagh, and diverse of the Oxford Nobility, to Bristol, we had intelligence
that he was coming toward the Devizes, having a gallant Regiment of Horse,
consisting of about 400 men, hereupon Sir William Waller endeavored to get
betwixt him and the Town; but having a long march, he got to the Devizes
before Sir William approached, and was quartered there, with Colonel Sir
Charles Lloyd, the Governor thereof, for about two days, by which time Sir
William Waller made his approach.

On Monday the 10 of this present March, he quartered with his whole Army at
Almesbury, Normanton, Lake, Dearne, and Derrington, and a very strong party was
commanded forth, out of which were drawn diverse Scouts, which were sent toward
the Devizes, Stepstone, and other parts, to discover the Enemy, and what
strength they were of, some whereof returned in the evening with intelligence,
that Colonel Long was in the Devizes, with a Posse Comitatus, or the County
Forces, for this Long is the Kings high Sheriff of the County of Wilts, son to
Sir Walter Long, who lately deceased, who being in drink, fell from his horse
near Chich^ster, and broke his neck, and his son has been a very active man
against the Parliament, ever since he has begged his Wardship, which put him
to much travel and pains, for which he almost spurred the horse to death
that had broke his Fathers neck; for he had vowed before he came off his back
to get his Wardship. This intelligence caused Sir William to advance toward
the Devizes that night, having also advertisement, that the Enemies works about
the Town were very slight, and when his Army were on their march about a mile
from Almsbury, he drew them up into a Body, and four out of every Troop, to
go on the Forlorn Hope.

On Tuesday morning very early, our Forlorn Hope gave the Enemy an Alarm (the
whole Army marching all night) upon which all Colonel Longs Regiment, which
were quartered in and near the Devizes, drew into a Body, and news being
brought thereof to Sir William, he made some stay, and at the first seemed
rather to prepare for defense, then to give an assault, and divides his Horse
into three Brigades, the first commanded by himself, quartered near Po^^rn,
Woodington, and the Devizes, the next Brigade was commanded by Leivtenant
General Cromwell, and the third by Sir Hadzer Waller, a kinsman of Sir
Williams, which Brigade joined together, and wheeled about, and fetched a large
compass, that they might not be discovered by the Enemy, and fell in between
them and the Bath.

On Wednesday morning, Sir William Waller drew up his Forces to fall upon the
Enemy, and they having discovered that Sir William had a purpose to give them a
visit, Colonel Long, with the Horse left the Devizes, and retreated toward
Bath, not having notice of General Cromwels readiness on that side to receive
them, and Sir Charles Lloyd the Governor of the Devizes, with most of the Foot
slighted their Works, and retreated into the Castle, thinking that they were
not able to defend the Town: Sir William hearing that Colonel Long was
marching away, he pursued him very close in the Rear, and when the Enemy were
a little past Milchin thinking by the swiftness of their March to make their
escape away, Colonel Cromwell appeared in the Van, betwixt him and Bradford,
which he having notice of, Colonel Long would have returned back again, but
could make no way of escape, the passes being narrow, and the Country so
fortified with quick-set hedges, that he was as it were in a pound.

We took from the Enemy the 400 Horse, and 300 Prisoners: we took Colonel Long
himself the Kings high Sheriff, their Commander in chief, Captain Web, and 7
Captains more, the Under-Sheriffe, 7 Cornets, with many other Officers. We
took also 340 Arms; and of this whole Regiment, which was the best (as we
understand) the King has, there escaped but 30. we lost but two men on our
side, and but 4 of the Enemy were killed.

Colonel Ludlow is now (thanks be to God) sole high Sheriff of this County:
his competitor (being now taken prisoner) is in custodia Mariscallorum, with
the greatest part of his Commanders and Officers, and his whole Regiment
utterly extirpated. Colonel Ludlowes approach hither is now most earnestly
desired to join with us, in regard this County, in which we hope there will
be found but little opposition, though we have been lately heavy laden with
infinite numbers of barbarous villains. To God be the praise, who has so
graciously looked upon our sufferings. The Garrison of Long ford hearing o^ so
many losses to the Kings Army, in several places, one upon the neck of
another, are in great distraction, and almost hopeless of subsisting, having
not above sixteen Horse, and they are very poor judes, to fetch in provisions,
of which it is conceived, they begin to be straightened: and for their men, they
are most of them forced, of which (we hope) there will shortly be given a
very good account.

We hear Colonel Goring does still retreat before us: it is thought he
intends to join with Colonel Barkley the Governor of Excester; and Sir
William Waller is marching toward Colonel Holborn at Taunton, and intends to
draw out what strength he can out of Sommersetshire to join with him, and so
to lose no time to pursue after. So with my due respects and humble service, I
rest.

Your faithful and affectionate Servant.
Southampton March 18. 1644.

Here follows a Copy of Sir William Wallers own Letter.
Sir,
Colonel Cook and Captain Butler have written at large unto you, and therefore
I shall only confirm it, that with Gods gracious assistance we have routed
the best Regiment the King had in the West; of 400 Horse, there escaped not 30.
the Colonel, Sir James Long, eight Captains, and 7 Cornets were taken, and
most of the other Officers, with about 300 prisoners. This fell out in
Wiltshire, between Troughbridge and Stepstone. We are now marching toward
honest Holborn, with whom (by the grace of God) we will join, or stick half
way.

William Waller.
March 18. 1644. A List of what was taken.
Col. Sir James Long, the high Sheriff. The Vnder-Sheriffe. 8 Captains. 7
Cornets. 400 Horse. 340 Arms. 300 Prisoners. Goring pursued by W. Waller





About the 20 instant, Letters from Abbington informed us, that the brave
Garrison there seemed to be in a perpetual motion against the nest of Oxonian
humming Hornets; and that, as on other days, The activity of the brave
Garrison of Abbington under valiant Major General Brown.
so on the 14 of this instant March, valiant and vigilant Major General Brown
drew forth a party of about 300 Horse, toward Chislington-Bridge, part of which
were brought to Wheatley-Bridge, and Melton to hinder Oxford Market, and about
10 of the clock, they joined and ma^ched to Hedington, where they took 4 or 5
Carts laden with provisions for Oxford; They of Oxford also fell down another
way and took 2 Carts going for Abbington; but in the return of Colonel Browns
party, they were happily met withal, and after a short, but sharp and hot
skirmish, they of Abbington had the better, slew 7 or 8 on the place, took
between 30 and 40 prisoners, the chief Commander of the party, Cornet Gardener
was also taken, and our friends Carts, and all the Market folk, whom they had
taken prisoners, rescued; 3 of the prisoners then taken, were Irish, and
therefore presently executed according to the Ordinance of Parliament; and thus
they returned without the loss of one man. And the House of Commons in
Parliament (about this time) taking into consideration the fidelity and valor
of this brave Garrison of Abbington, (whose successful actions have, The
Parliaments justly high respect to Abbington Garrison.
indeed, crowned them with the Laurell-boughes of perpetual fame and
honorable memory, under the command of their wise and most valiant Governor,
Major General Brown) they Ordered that the Committee of Both Kingdoms should
sign a Warrant, presently, for a 1000 pound to be forthwith issued out and
disposed of for the good and encouragement of that Garrison of Abbington.

And on this March the 22 a conference was had between both Houses of
Parliament, touching the ratification of the roll of Sir Thomas Fairfax his
Officers or Colonells for the New-Modelled-Army at which Conference there was
now at last a most happy concurrence of the Peers with the Commons, The happy
concurrence of the House of Peers with the Commons about the List of Sir Tho.
Fairfaxes Commanders of his New Model Army.
in approving the List (a business which had hung in much suspense and had
much retarded the setting forth of the Army, and thereby much sadded the hearts
of the best affected, and only gladded the hearts of the Malignants) this
List, I say, of Sir Thomas his Commanders was now most happily consented unto
by the Peers, without any alteration at all, which was so acceptable to the
House of Commons, that upon the report thereof to their House, they appointed a
Committee to prepare a Message to the Lords to congratulate their happy
concurrence, and to assure them of the real affection and endeavors of the
House of Commons to support their Lordships in their Honors and Privileges;
And this being certainly so (as indeed it was) it did for the present, and will
for the future, take off that reproach which the Malignants and incendiaries
about the Town gave out; A malicious slander of the Malignants happily thwatted
to their shame.
That the Commons did endeavor and use means to diminish the privileges of
the Peers; Whereat, I say, our pernicious Malignants much rejoiced, and
impiously hoped it was so indeed, but were thus most happily frustrated of
their wicked expectation therein; Ever magnified be our good God and gracious
Father for it.

And now the List being thus past and perfected, the New-Modelled Army was
expedited shortly after into the field, to Gods high honor and our unspeakable
comfort, as, in due time and place, shall be abundantly manifested. The said
List of Commanders being a thing of so high concernment, I have here therefore
thought fit to insert it, for the Readers better content, and for the
honorable memory of the Persons and the Thing it self.

Sir Thomas Fairfax Commander in chief. Major General Skippon. Officers of the
Horse.
Colonel Middleton Colonel Sidney Colonel Graves Colonel Sheffield Colonel
Vermudon Colonel Whaley Colonel Sir M. Levisay Colonel Fleetwood Colonel
Rossiter Colonel Sir Robert Pie.
Officers of the Foot.
Colonel Crayford Colonel Berkley Colonel Aldridge Colonel Holborne
Colonel Fortescue Colonel Inglesby Colonel Montague Colonel Pickering
Colonel Welden Colonel Rainsborow.

And this also is very observable by us, that (for the more happy advance of
this New-Army,) it pleased the Lord to put into the hearts of our
Parliamentary-Worthies, that among all the other necessary provisions both for
the hastening and the happifying also of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army into the
field, Order taken by the Parliament as well for the spiritual as the Martial
Discipline of the Army.
they took special care of the Spiritual Discipline thereof, by sufficient
and able Preachers to go along with them, as well as of the Martial
Discipline by honest and valiant Commanders, the House of Commons, therefore,
Ordered that the Assembly of Divines should nominate and present to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, such pious and learned Preachers as they knew every way fit and able
for that service. And is not such an Army like to thrive (think you) where
piety and probity, as well as courage and magnanimity is so piously and
prudently endeavored?

About the 24 of this instant, the Lords in Parliament were pleased to bring
the ear of the godly education of the Kings Children at Whitehall, The
Parliaments care for the godly education of the 2 young Princes at White Hall,
by the Earl of Nort^umberland
into their thoughts and serious consideration* and thereupon to make the most
Noble Earl of Northumberland Governor and his virtuous Lady Governesse of
them, and to Order an Annual allowance for their encouragement therein of 3000
pound. A worthy act, indeed, and may justly bring to our thought^ the brave and
blessed education given to young King Edward (...) 6. and to Queen Elizabeth of
ever happy memory, the recover^^^ (under God) of the Gospel out of Eg^ptian
dark Popery, and who were the glory of our English nation for these many years.
And we doubt not (as we pray) but those 2 most noble and honorable
personages will make it their study and care to have those 2 young Princes
instructed and brought up so virtuously and piously that they may prove 2
glorious and illustrious Stars, not only in the firmameut of these 3
Kingdoms, but even of all Christendom.

And about the 26 instant, Colonel Massy gives the Enemy a defeat nee^ unto
Bristol.
we received Letters out of Gloucestershire, which certified that a party of
Colonel Massies horse had routed a party of the Cavaliers which were sent from
Bristol by Sir Ralph Hopton toward Prince Maurice, and in the skirmish had
taken Colonel Roberts a great Malignant of Herefordshire, besides 7 Officers,
and 40 common Soldiers prisoners.

And much about the latter end of this Month of March, the House of Commons in
Parliament took into their consideration some of their well-deserving
Soldiers, and their great arrears, and among these, chiefly, that brave,
unspotted and ever to be honored Commander in Arms, Major General Skippon,
and thereupon ordered that his Arreares should by audit be given in, Fidelity
and good service rewarded and encouraged by the Parliament.
and in the mean time, because he had been long without pay, they ordered that
500 pound should be presently paid unto him in part of his Arreares. And about
the same time an Order past the House, (worthy to be recorded to their praise
and honor) it being full of piety and Christian charity; Viz. That out of the
Moneys given for Composition by some able Delinquents, there should be a 1000
pound paid to poor men that had lost their horses, Wagons and Carts, the
Summer before, in the service of the Parliament, and that 500 pound more should
be paid to poor Widows whose husbands had been slain in the service of the
State.

And now, good Reader, stay here a little, and take a short revise and serious
advice on this Months mercies and marveilous passages of divine providence and
preservation of this his Parliamentary Burning Bush not Consumed, The
Burning-Bush not c^nsumed.
although environed with most violent and vehement furious flames of Malignant
wrath and rage against it, as has been most evident in all the particulars
forementioned, both, In that most famous defeat given to the proud Goring and
Dives at Weymouth, and Melcomb-Regis; Together with the seasonable seizing on
the 2 ships which by providence were put into the possession of the Parliaments
friends there. In the seizing upon a whole Troop of Horse being the Maurices
forces at Holt-Bridge. Together with a fine defeat given to Colonel Ogles
forces at Winchester. In that brave Victory obtained by Sir William Waller, and
General Cromwell, over Colonel Long and his forces at the Devizes. Together
with the brave activity of Abbington Garrison about Oxford. In the most happy
harmony and sweet concurrence of the House of Peers in Parliament, with the
House of Commons, about the List of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Colonels and
Commanders; and their pious care for the well-ordering of his New-Modelled
Army, as well with Spiritual as Martial Parliaments godly care for the royal
and religious education of the Kings 2 young children at White Hall; Colonel
Massies defeat given to the Enemy at or near Bristol; And the Parliaments most
worthy respect and regard to the fidelity and good service of such as had been
active and serviceable to the Commonwealth, to comfort and encourage them
therein.

Upon gracious and grateful sight and serious consideration of all which
precious premises, who (me thinks) can forbear, justly and ingenuously to
confess and acknowledge with holy David, Thou (O Lord) have made us rejoice
through thy works, Psalm. 92 4, 5.
and we will triumph in the operations of thy hands. O Lord, how great and
gracious are all thy doings toward us, and thy thoughts of Love and goodness
exceeding deep? But now to go on.

ANd here I shall begin this Month of April with a most holy and happy
Aprill-shewre, April. 1645.
likely, by Gods blessing and gracious breathing on it, to prove most
frugiferous in the happy production of many fragrant flowers, the ensuing
Spring, and succeeding Summer; and to make way for a copious crop of blessings,
and happy Harvest to the glory of our ever-living, and all-good-giving God, and
to the unspeakable comfort of his poor despised Church and Children; and this
it was.

About the 4 of this present April, a conference was held by the Lords with
the House of Commons, which was managed by the Lord Say, at which was offered
by the House of Peers, to the House of Commons.

1. That the Commissioners of the Great Seal might be continued.

2. They desired that a proportionable number of Lords being appointed to join
with the Members of Both Houses of Parliament, might be equally employed in
the great affairs of the Kingdom. And, as a farther demonstration of the
earnest desire their Lordships had of the continuance of a happy union and
correspondency of spirits and affections between Both Houses, a Declaration of
the Lords in Parliament was read, A most singular sign of Gods love and good
will to this poor Kingdom, even the most happy harmony of Both Houses.
wherein they declared; That they would ever be careful to maintain the
privileges of the Commons as their own, and should be ready to concur with
them in all things, for the good and safety of the Kingdom, whatsoever some
malicious and ill-affected persons (endeavoring thereby to divide between them)
might report to the contrary; which (...) they left with the House of Commons,
to remain upon Record, (...) testimony of their real intentions to Posterity.

This passage (together with a former of this kind, on the part of the House
of Commons, declaring their sincere resolutions to maintain the privileges of
the House of Peers, and which their said Declaration, being first read, was
also left with the Lords to be Recorded by them also to all Posterity.) I
thought fit to relate, thus exactly, because I considered and took notice of
them both, as sovereign healings of former jealousies between Both Houses, and
these their happy concurrencies, as a special blessing from Heaven, and as one
of the greatest tokens of Gods love and favor to this Kingdom, and most
conducing to the peace thereof, and to the salving and curing of the bloody
oppressive distractions wherewith all things therein have been infested and
almost broken in pieces; especially also considering that it has been all
along, the great and main plot of the Enemies of the Peace and Parliament of
this Kingdom, to breed and feed jealousies in the Houses; Whereas, now, such
happy correspondencies will be their greatest discouragements, and by this
harmonious concord, the expedition of our Southern Army, now bravely set on
foot and gone forth under renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax, was most happily
hastened on; the sweet and blessed effects whereof, you will now every day hear
of more and more, to the glory of God and comfort of the Kingdom; as in their
proper places, I shall now by Gods assistance have occasion to make clear unto
you.

About the 6 of this instant April, the House of Commons in Parliament
received Letters from renowned, active and loyal General Brown from
Abbington, concerning some late exploits performed by the forces under his
Command, the substance whereof was as follows, Viz. That he having had
intelligence that some provisions were at Chalgrove, a Townsome 7 miles distant
from Abbington, going to Oxford, sent a party of Horse thither, where they took
one Beard, Diverse brave exploits performed by renowned General Browns forc^s
at Abbington
a Wine-Cooper, who had then brought 6 pieces (or Pipes) of Sack from London,
to convey them to Oxford, but both Wine and Cooper were thus prevented from
going thither in ha^^e. These forces also being then advertised that some other
Carriages were going to Oxford, they pursued them, and within a mile of Oxford
overtaking them, took a Wagon laden with Sugar and other good provisions for
that Garrison, and so brought both Sack and Sugar safe to Abbington. They also
took several packs of (...) loath going thither, which, with the horses they
sent safe to Abbington. And presently upon this, notice being given of a party
of the Enemies quartering at Thorp, about 3 miles from Farrington, a Major was
sent out from Abbington, with a party of Horse, but the greatest part of the
Enemy had escaped before this Majors approach; only an Irish Major (being
locked up in his Chamber) refusing quarter, was thereupon slain, 5 or 6 others
were taken prisoners, and 19 good Horse seized on. The same Letters also
certified farther, that one Captain English, a notorious Villain, on the Kings
side, then a prisoner, taken by the forces of Abbington, and there imprisoned,
endeavoring to make an escape through a hole, near unto a Vault, he fell into
the said Vault, Capt. English choakt in a Vault at Abbington.
and was therein choked; so that instead of getting loose he stook faster
than ever before. Also upon some intelligence that the forementioned party of
Horse, was nearly engaged with the Enemy, the Major General sent about 600
Foot out of Abbington, who marched 8 miles that morning, and conducted the
prizes gotten in unto Abbington; and at their return, the most generous and
noble Major General gave 12 pence a piece to each of the Foot to encourage
them, and the Cana^y Sack and other provisions taken, were disposed of, and
distributed to the rest.

About the 8 instant we were credibly informed by Letters from the Committee
at Redding of the brave service performed by that famous and faithful
Soldier, Renowned Major General Skippon singular good service in reducing his
Soldiers to the New-M^delled-Army.
that brave Commander and pious Patriot of his Country, Major General Skippon,
in the quiet and peaceable reduction of his Soldiers, there, to serve under
the Command of renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax, now the most prous, piudent, and
valiant Generalissimo, of the Parliaments New-M^delled Army; who, being at
Redding, made a most excellent, pious, and pithy hortatory Speech to all his
Soldiers, and delivered it with such grave Emphasis, Martial courage, and
prudent sweetness, as gave general satisfaction and full content unto them
all, insomuch that 5 Regiments of the Renowned End of Essex, late Lord
General, his Forces, and 5 Companies of the Lord Ruberts were most ready and
willing to serve under Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Command, and not a dissenting
Soldier, or Commander, or discontented Country man was discovered among them
all, but they all expressed their clear and cheerful approbation and good
liking of this the Parliaments thus reducing of the Army, being all reduced
into 3 Regiments, and were all drawn in^o 3 several Churches, and there
enrolled; and diverse who had formerly been Officers in the former Army, were,
now, very willing to be Listed as Common Soldiers in this New-Modell, which
was now in great forwardness to go forth into the field; Yea, and the late
Lord Generals Troop of his Lifeguard, freely offered themselves of Sir Thomas
his service and Command; most happy presages of much good to follow when
Soldiers so joyfully and freely undertake to undergo the yoke of necessary
Martial Command and Service. The truth of all which premises is farther and
fully confirmed by the foresaid renowned Major Generals own Letter to the
Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons, which, for the Readers better
satisfaction and content, I have here thought fit, as most worthy to be
inserted, which was as follows.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons Assembled in Parliament at Westminster; These present.
Deservedly honored Sir,
YEsterday and this day, by Gods continued help and blessing, all His
Excellencies Horse are reduced and settled into Colonel Graves, Sir Robert
Pyes, and Colonel Sheffields Regiments, except Colonel Dalbeirs and Beurs
Regiments, which are commanded to Gloucester. All the Officers that are laid
aside, did with all readiness and submissive obedience observe the commands of
the inferior Officers, having listed themselves again as private Troopers; So
that hitherto (blessed be God) this great, and I hope useful work for the
public has been carried beyond our expectation that have been employed about
it. To morrow, if the Lord will, I shall reduce and settle Colonel Weldens,
and Colonel Holborns Regiments of Foot, which were with Sir William Waller,
and n^w quarter at Ockingham; And I shall further endeavor with all diligence
and faithfulness, whatsoever shall advance the public service. Those
Regiments of horse which were his Excellencies and Sir William Belfores, do
most humbly ^rave (as I do on their behalf) that they may have that which
Colonel Graves says was promised to them. I have not else to trouble you with
now, but begging pardon for my being so often troublesome to you (the
conjunction of things now forcing the same) and humbly crave to be esteemed

Your most faithful Servant, Ph. Skippon.
Beconfield, the 14 of April, 1645. 9 at night.

Also about the 10 of this instant, we had certain intelligence out of
Scotland (for I intend to take in the Martial performances of our loyal and
loving brethren the Scots, so far forth as they have near interest and
dependence on those of our own Kingdom and State) we had, I say, certain
intelligence out of Scotland, that after a former surprizall of near upon 800
horse load of provisions which were going to that desperate rebel Montrosse,
the said Montrosse and his Popish or rather Atheistical co-partner in blood
and villainy, A brave victory obtained by Major General Vrrey against the Lord
Montrosse in Scotland.
Mac O Donnel, an Irish Caniball, with their whole body came to Duncall,
whether Major General Vrrey, with the forces under his command pursued him;
but upon his March Montrosse was fled, as if he intended for Saint Johnstons,
but afterward turned toward Aberdene, Major Vrrey still pursuing him,
whereupon Montrosse wheeled about (now, indeed) toward St. Johnstons, so that
General Vrrey fearing he would enter Dundee, sent to the Town to stand upon
their guard against the Enemy, assuring them they should not ^ail of his speedy
help, which accordingly they found.

About the Evening Montrosse fell upon the Town and burnt the Suburbs, but was
bravely entertained by the honest-hearted Townsmen, who valiantly kept the
Market place, where they had some hot bickering with Montrosses forces, where
the Townsmen lost not above 10 men, but slew many of the Enemy in the place,
during which encounter, General Vrrey came up with his forces, as he
promised, and fell upon the Enemy in the Town, slew 400 upon the place, and
took near as many prisoners, 4 great barrells of powder (being all they had
there) took all their field pieces, their bag and baggage, and dispersed the
Enemy, and had at this time, utterly spoiled and ruinated them, had not the
darkness of the night hindered his pursuit of them. The Honorable House of
Commons taking into consideration this prosperous success which it pleased the
Lord to give our brethren in Scotland, which was of much concernment, A Solemn
day of Thanksgiving appointed and kept in London, etc. for this great victory.
not only for the hoped peace of that Kingdom, but of this also, they therefore
Ordered that public Thanksgiving should be made for the same, the (then) next
ensuing Lords Day, in the several Parish Churches in London and Westminster,
and within the Line of Communication; and a Committee of the Lords and Commons
addressed themselves to the Scottish Commissioners, to congratulate them in
that happy and seasonable Victory.

About the 14 instant, among diverse other useful Ordinances of Parliament,
there was one passed by the House of Commons, for exempting the University of
Cambridge from all Military Taxes and other Contributions to the public
Service: That nothing contained in any Ordinance or Ordinances of Parliament,
Cambridge is by the Parliament highly privileged, and Learning like to be
highly honored and advanced.
for, or concerning the imposing, levying, or paying of any assessements, taxes
or charges whatsoever, as well already made and charged, as hereafter to be
made and charged by any former Ordinances, shall not be extended to charge the
said University, or any the Colleges or Halls therein, or any the Rents or
Revenues belonging thereunto, nor to charge any Master, Fellow, or Scholar of
any the said Colleges, or any Reader, Officer, or Minister of the said
University or Colleges, for, or in regard of any Wages, Stipend, or Profit due
to them, or any of them, in respect of their places and employments in the said
University; any thing in the said Ordinances to the contrary, notwithstanding.
Provided, that the Tenants who enjoy Leases from the said University and
Colleges, do claim no freedom or exemption, Malignant slanderers mouths
against the Parliament stopped
or advantage by this said Ordinance. Here, therefore, that old Prelaticall
slander of the Malignant Enemies, is already clearly confuted, who maliciously
and falsely give out, as if the Parliament were or would be haters, and
discountenancers of Learning and parts, whereas they ever a^med at the
advancement thereof by a most necessary Reformation and cleansing of the
University from its old stale, and stinking lees, and corrupted and corrupting
dregs of Popery, Arminianism, superstition, profaneness, and even open
atheism, as was too evident, in so many Prelaticall, Popish, and Arminian
creatures therein, such superstitious, idle-addle-headed Governors, so many
formalists, and politicians in Divinity, mere Atheists in conversation, who
constantly infected the better wits and ingenous Spirits, inducing and drawing
them by their most prevalent pernicious examples to their own ways and wicked
practices: But, now the Fountain being purifyed and cleansed, the streams must
needs run abroad more clear into Church and Commonwealth, by Gods blessing on
the means.

About the 16 of this instant April, we had sudden and certain intelligence
out of Kent that about 3 or 400 mad-headed and discontented Malignants, part of
the rascality of that County were gotten into a body, and had put themselves
into a second open Rebellion, and had taken Sir Percivall Hearts house near
Farningham, and had got diverse horse and Arms, A second rebellion in Ke^t, but
soon suppressed by valiant Colonel Blunt.
which might threaten some danger to that flourishing County; but by the speedy
provision and care of the Committee and Gentry of that County, the Serpent was
crushed in the Egg; for they had instantly ordered and authorized noble
Colonel Blunt, (who, indeed merited much honor in this Service) to raise
forces in the County for the suppressing of them, who used such industry,
wisdom, courage, and fidelity therein, that he had soon raised a body of
about 2000 horse and foot in one afternoon, and part of the next morning, and
with quick expedition marched after them with 4 field pieces toward Lunnington
House, and having found them out, resolutely set upon them, and had soon
utterly routed and dispersed them, took 50 of their principal Ringleaders,
who were clapped up in safe custody, till they might be proceeded against by
Martiall-Law. And thus (praised be the Lord) this spark of rebellion, not
being neglected was as timely quenched, as it was soon kindled.

Much about which said time, we were certainly informed by Letters out of
Hampshire, that a party of renowned Colonel Nortons horse from Southampton
being upon a design to fortify Rumsey and so to straiten the Enemies Garrison
at Winchester; which the better to effect, a party of his horse, I say, under
the Command of Major Stewart were drawn out to face Winchester, A brave ^ef at
given to the Enemy at Rumsey, by valiant Colon. No tens forces.
and so to keep the Enemy in play, whilst Rumsey was thus fortifying; which was
done accordingly, and after some small skirmishing, Major Stewart retreated
with the loss of 4 or 5 of his men, and as many of the Enemies; upon his
retreat the Enemy advanced; but now Major Stewart, being seconded by a fresh
party from Rumsey, set again upon them, routed, and pursued them, killed
Leivtenant Coard and 6 or 7 more on the place, took Captain Heath, Cornet
Barnes, and 4 or 5 other Officers, and about 30 horse and their Riders
prisoners, and brought them safe to Rumsey, and afterward sent them to
Southampton. In this service, Major Stewart received a shot in the thigh, but
not mortal, only a badge of honor unto him, praised be the Lord for it.

About the 18 instant, we had clear intimation and knowledge of diverse of the
Lords and Peers of the Kingdom, who having formerly deserted the Parliament,
Diverse of the Lords at Oxford come in unto the Parliament
and shown themselves in open opposition, or, at best, in sly and faithless
tergiversation from the Cause of God, maintained by this present Parliament;
yet now at the length, the Lord (as we hope) having opened their eyes of
understanding to see their error, and persuaded their hearts (as we trust) to
cleave to his Truth, in sincerity and cordial loyalty; and therefore now, I
say, diverse of them were come in unto the Parliament from Oxford, and took
their Oath, and the Solemn Covenant to be true and faithful to the service of
the Parliament, to the uttermost of their abilities, both with their lives and
fortunes.

First, there came in about the 10 of this instant, 3 Earls, and 3 Lords; The
Earls and Lords names that are returned from Oxford to the Parliament.
Viz. The Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Clare, and the Earl of Leicester; the
Lord Pawlet, the Lord Conway, and the Lord Rich. And since that, 5 more came
in, and took the same Oath and Covenant, Viz. the Earl of Westmerland, the Earl
of Tenet, the Earl of Monmouth, and the Lord Savill. The rest we pray and
trust, will also in the Lords due time see their foul errors, and seeing, be
ashamed, and sin no more in that kind.

And about the 20 of this instant April, we received certain intelligence by
a Letter from a Member of the Committee of Worcester, then residing at Warwick,
concerning a great and brave defeat given to Prince Maurice his forces in
Worcestershire; which Letter coming to my hands, I have here for the Readers
better content and satisfaction inserted, which was as follows.

SIR,
I Sent you (by an express which was carried into Banbury) the relation of a
great Victory, A brave defeat given to Prince Maurice his forces in
Worcestershire.
which God in mercy gave unto us against Prince Maurice his Horse; And of my
apprehension of a very happy opportunity for the reducing of that County to the
obedience of the Parliament, were some wants of ours supplied. All the Enemies
horse in Worcestershire, particularly Prince Maurice his Regiment, Sir John
Knotsfords Regiment, with the County Troop, commanded by Captain Wild; the
Reformado Troop, commanded by Captain Pitchard; and the Hartlebury Troop,
commanded by Captain Gunter; being all between 5 or 600 Horse, drew up and
faced Warwick, upon a hill about a mile distant from the Town, ( Warwickeshire
horse being a day before, drawn away toward Gloucester) the remaining forces
here belonging to Warwick, as also those of our Horses remaining in Warwick,
were immediately commanded forth; Viz. 20 horse that appertained to Colonel
Bridges, 2 Captains of our Committee, viz. Captain Milward with his Troop, and
Captain Halford, with so many Horse as could immediately be got ready.

Also 2 Troops consisting of about 80 Horse, which came before from Newport
Pagnell, marching toward Gloucester. So that in all, we drew out a party of
about 150 Horse, which Major Hawksworth commanded, and 200 Foot, commanded by
Major Bridges.

It pleased God, that after some hours skirmishing with them, ours, twice
charging them through and through with admirable courage, the Enemy giving
ground, and retreating, till they came to a Lane and place of advantage, that
our Horse charged them again, Captain Pitchard was shot and taken prisoner by
our Captain Halford, who expressed much courage, and singled out Major
Pilkinton, and after they had each of them discharged their Pist^ls, fell to it
with their swords, Captain Halford struck off his headpeice and perriwigge with
the first blow, and with the next, gave him a wound on his head. Captain
Halford seeing Major Hawksworth dangerously engaged amongst the Enemies Horse,
made up to his releif, with his Cornet Parsons, and releived him, only his
Cornet was shot through his neck, but the wound not mortal. The issue of all
was this; the whole body of the Enemy utterly routed, about 60 prisoners taken;
amongst which, the great Philistine Pitchard (Captain of the Reformadoes) being
shot in four places, was taken prisoner. Also Captain George Action, Captain
Souch Cartwright, Son to Sir Philip Cartwright, late Governo^r of Jersey, Major
Pilkinton slain
with other Officers and Gentlemen of quality. Amongst others that were slain,
besides Major Pilkinton, who commanded in chief, one of the Bar^sleyes, a
Gentleman of a good family in our County, and diverse others not yet known.

We brought off at least 140 Horse taken from the Enemy, and the whole body of
them scattered all to pieces, by 8 miles (...).

This great body of the Enemy being all their Horse appertaining to them in our
County, was thus broken by the gallantry of our men.

In this action, I give not any eminent or particular mark of bravery on any
one, all doing so exceeding well. But the valor of Major Hawksworth was so
much taken notice of by the Enemy, that they termed him, The Devil in Buffe.

Were we able to follow the blow, and so keep down their now dejected spirits;
Our friends here, of whom you have heard much, would doubtless be more bold
and appear in our behalf, and of how great consequence that may be, I forbear
to express.

Guy Mouldsworth, Leivtenant Colonel to the Princes own Regiment, was taken,
and engaged his honor to be a true prisoner: We understand by the Trumpeter
this day, that he intends to come and resign up himself to us. This Captain
Pitchard is a pernicious villain, who the day before he was taken, pulled down
the house of one Mr. Hunt, a Member of our Committee. I pray you be a
petitioner to the Parliament, that he may not be exchanged without us, he
being our prisoner; as also that we may be permitted to secure our prisoners
in Warwick castle, which hitherto has not been granted us, which, besides the
hazard, has occasioned great expense, we being necessitated to hire Keepers
to look to them.

I have omitted one thing, which is the wonder of the mercy, that in all this
service, which lasted many hours, we lost not one man, only our Cornet
Parsons wounded. The enemy had plundered the Country of 200 beasts, and had
robbed some Carriers of their Cloth; all which we rescued and restored.

We have had 2 Trumpeters from Worcester to know what prisoners we have,
their Letters ask not after any particulars, but we know they miss many.

There are hitherto of all the Enemies Horse, not above 50 returned to
Worcester, which dropped in by two or three at a time, and being rid so exceeding
hard, it is believed are made unserviceable.

Your affectionate Servant, N. L.


About the 22 of this instant April, we received certain intelligence by
Letters from about Oxford, both from renowned Leivtenant General Cromwell,
from valiant and active Major General Brown, and others of credit and repute
in their Armies, of diverse memorable victories and brave defeats given to the
Enemy, Diverse brave victories and defeats given to the Enemy about Oxford. Sir
Tho Fairfax advanced into the field, and set down before Oxford.
at the (then) siege of Oxford, by ever to be honored Sir Thomas Fairfax,
General of the Parliaments Armies over the whole Kingdom and now thus far
advanced into the field, and set down before Oxford, which victories being all
exactly set forth in their Letters to the Parliament; and to several friends
in London, I shall here for the Readers better content and satisfaction set
down the most material things extracted and faithfully collected out of their
several Letters; which were as follows:

Upon the 23 of this instant April, there were quartered between 2 and 3000
horse about Oxford, to stop the Kings Artillery and Carriages from passing out,
which were ready in Oxford (with a Convoy) to march (as intelligence was given)
toward Rupert. An extract out of Letters of Leivtenant Genesis Cromwels victory at
Oxford.
And Leivtenant General Cromwell, having intelligence that they intended to
pass through Shotover-Wood, he drew toward Woodstock, and so thereabout
toward Islip, to be ready to attend their motion, in case they came that way.
At last, he had intelligence that about 100 horse and foot were marching
toward him; whereupon some of our men showed themselves in a small party, which
drew the Enemy near, and Command was given by Leivtenant General Cromwell,
that all our Forces should be in a readiness, and upon their watch all the
night, for fear of the Enemy, which was carefully done, the Leivtenant General
himself, being in his own person (to encourage them) all the while with them,
for, there came intelligence that the Enemy intended to watch an opportunity to
take our Forces at an advantage, and so to set suddenly upon them, of which our
security they much presumed, but found our men too vigilant for them: A brave
victory obtained by Leivten. Genesis Cromwell near Islip by Oxford.
For, ere ours were looked for by the Enemy, Leivtenant General Cromwell fell
upon them near Islip (where, proved to be a Brigade of above a 1000. under the
command of the Earl of Northampton, and were part of the Queens Regiment, part
of the Lord Wilmots, and part of the Earls own Regiments) and bravely beat
them at their own game; fighting with them most valiantly (though the best
horse the King had) and at the second charge entered their whole body or
squadron of the Enemy, and greatly disordered them, following this advantage
with so much courage and gallantry, The Enemy is totally routed.
that in a short time they totally routed them, following them in hot pursuit
above 3 miles, killed and took above 200. enforcing at the least 60 of them to
drown themselves, by making too much speed to get over a water. In which fight
we also took 400 horse, 3 Colors, whereof one was the Queens, richly
embroydered with a Crown in the midst, and 18 Flower de Luces wrought in gold,
with a golden cross on the top, we took also about 20 Officers, and diverse
arms, wounded many who fled into Oxford, and some into Blechington-House.
Whereupon renowned Leivtenant General Cromwell, sent away his prisoners and
marched against the said Blechington, Blechington-house summoned and surrendered
beset it, and summoned Colonel Windebank to surrender that Garrison unto him,
which after some dispute about it (it being a strong Garrison, and now as
strongly surrounded) was surrendered to Leivtenant General Cromwell, upon
condition for the Soldiers to march away with their lives. The Leivtenant
General took there 250 Muskets, 70 Horse, a 100 Pikes and other Arms, 3
barrels of powder with Match and other Ammunition.

And upon the 26 of this instant April, Major General Brown having notice
that Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Horse were so near him, he drew a party out of
Abbington to march that way, to be in a readiness, Major General Browns
brave defeat given to the Enemy about Oxford.
(if occasion were) who marching toward Longworth, had notice of a party of the
Enemy to be about Buckland, so they marched that way, but the Enemy was gone
toward Farringdon; But Major General Brownes forces followed them so close,
that they overtook them, and fell upon them, took a Captain 3 other Officers,
and 10 prisoners, with which they intended presently to have returned toward
Abbington, but having intelligence of another party of the Enemies, that were
coming from the Devizes, intended (as was supposed) for Oxford, Scouts were
sent to find them out, and having discovered them, Major General Brownes
forces fell upon them, and presently put them to the rout, took a Colonel, a
Sergeant Major, 3 Captains, 3 Leivtenants, and diverse other prisoners, besides
horse and arms, and carried them all safe to Abbington.

And the very same day toward Evening, Colonel Feins gives the Enemy a brave
defeat.
Colonel Feines, with his Regiment, having intelligence of a party of the
Enemies that were come near Witney, he drew toward them, and with much
gallantry fell upon them, and in the fight and flight of the Enemy, took from
them a 120 horse, 3 Colors, 40 prisoners, and 50 Arms.

About the 28 instant, Leivtenant General Cromwell had intelligence that a
party of the Enemies Foot, (under the Command of Sir Henry Vaughan, formerly a
Member of the House of Commons, but, since, one of the Oxford Juncto) were also
about Witney, toward Farringdon; wherefore he drew that way, intending to fall
upon them the next morning, Another brave victory obtained by Leivtenant
General Cromwell, at Bampton-Bush, over Sir Henry Vaughan and his forces.
if he could reach them; and sending forth Scouts to discover the motions of
Colonel Vaughan, and receiving advertisement that he quartered near
Bampton-Bush, he marched on that way, parting his Body into several
Squadrons, and with valiant courage marched up close unto them, the Enemy
having little courage to fight (so terrible was the very name of Cromwell to
them) instantly begged quarter for their lives, which was granted them; and so
Leivtenant General Cromwell took their Colonel Sir Henry Vaughan, A brave
prize taken.
who was their Commander in Chief, 2 Leivtenant Colonells, 1 Sergeant Major, 5
Captains, 8 Leivtenants, 8 Ensigns, 1 Doctor, who was Chaplain to them, whose
name was Dunse; 20 Sergeants, and other inferior Officers, 230 prisoners, and
about 200 Arms, some powder, match, and Ammunition, with such provisions as
they had with them; And the rest of the day was spent in public worship of
God, and giving thanks to the Lord (through-out those our Armies, which were
within the hearing and knowledge of these great Victories) for the same.

Finally, about the latter end of this Month of April, we had certain
intelligence of the singular good agreement and sweet harmony of affections in
renowned Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army, The singular good estate of our Army at
Oxford, under the noble General Sir Tho. Fairfax.
and that the Soldiers expressed very much love, affection, and cheerful
obedience to their said noble General Sir Thomas, and to one another in all
their several relations in the Army, and that many of those that were thought
to be discontented men, and had been Officers under the most noble Earl of
Essex, had now cheerfully listed themselves under Sir Thomas Fairfax, Our Army
at this time was 4000 horse and 13000 foot.
as common Soldiers, both Horse and foot. And that the last muster of the
Horse and Foot of his whole Army, at that time, was 4000 Horse, and 13000 Foot,
and that some Regiments of horse and foot were then advanced toward distressed
(yet courageous) Tauntons releif, whereof more in its proper place.

And about this time, our most prudent and provident State-Promethei of Both
Houses of Parliament, The business of the Admiralty and Sea-affairs is taken
into consideration.
having so well Ordered their Land-affaires, now, also took into their serious
consideration the business of the Admiralty and Sea-affaires, how they might
be best ordered and managed for the best good and most considerable advantage
and improvement every way of the welfare of our republic; The most noble and
renowned Earl of Warwick (then, before, Lord Admiral) being called from that
public employment by the late Selfe-denying-Ordinance; and they looking upon
this business as a matter of no less weighty concernment than the safety,
under God, of 3 Kingdoms: Wherefore, at last, they came to this resolution,
that the business of the Admiralty should be managed by Commissioners of Both
Houses, to continue for 6 months, Commissioners for the Admiralty nominated
and so proceeded to nominate them who were to be employed in this great
trust; Viz. The Earl of Warwick, for the House of Peers; and Mr. Bence, and
Mr. Peregrin^ Pelham, of the House of Commons; the prosperous managing of which
so weighty trust and employment, by which foresaid Parliamentary Worthies, we
shall have occasion to make farther mention in its proper place.

And now, good Reader, let me here again desire thee with godly and grateful
patience, to make a little stay, and to take a short survey and sweet review
of all the rich and rare mercies of this Month also; The Burning-Bush not
consumed.
And therein to see and admire how graciously and gloriously the Lord has
dwelt in his Parliamentary Burning-Bush, Unconsumed, both, In the most sweet
and singular harmony and good agreement between Both Houses of Parliament,
revived by the House of Peers, for the faster binding of the mutual
affections of Both Houses together; And the good services of Major General
Browns forces about Abbington. In the singular Skippon, in so fully and fairly
reducing the Officers and Soldiers of the former old Army, to serve under Sir
Thomas Fairfax, in his New-Modelled-Armie, a business of high concernment, as
things then stood. In the brave victory which the Lord gave to our loving
Scotland, by Major General V^rey against Montrosse; And the honorable
encouragement of Literature in the University of Cambridge, by our pious and
prudent Parliament. In the seasonable and successful appeasing of that Second
Rebellion in Kent; And the brave defeat given to the Enemy by valiant Colonel
Norton, at Rumsey. In the happy reduction Oxford to the Parliaments party:
Together with that brave defeat given to Prince Mau^ices forces in
Worcestershire. And lastly, In those famous defeates and Brown, and Leivtenant
General Cromwell, against the Enemies forces about Oxford; The singular good
estate and happy harmony of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army, now, in the field and
advanced to Oxford; And the provident and prudent settling of the Sea-affaires,
as well as Land-affaires, in managing the Admiralty of the Seas, by most wise
and loyal Commissioners, All which rare mercies and prudent passages of State,
seriously considered, and (as they ought) most gratefully recogitated, has not
England, sinful England most just cause, still, to expostulate with it self,
and cordially to confess with holy David, Psalm 30 11, 12.
Thou, O Lord, have turned, for us, our mourning into dancing; Thou have put
off our sackcloth, and girded us with gladness, for this very end, that our
glory (even our hearts, tongues, and lives) may still sing praises to thee our
God. Therefore, O Lord, our God, to thee alone we will give thanks and praises
for ever and ever. And now to proceed.

May. 1645.
ANd here now I shall begin this Month of Mayes memorable mercies with that
most remarkable deliverance from imminent danger, which the Lord most
graciously wrought for that famous, faithful, and ever to be honored gallant
Commander, Colonel Massy, which was certified by his own Letter to London,
May the 4. whereof, because our foule-mouthed Malignants had with full-mouthed
false boasts and bragges vapoured so much, and vaunted of a mighty defeat given
by the Enemy, to that famous and fortunate Commander. I therefore have here
thought fit to give the Reader (for his farther satisfaction and fuller
content) a sight of the true Copy of the said Letter, which was as follows.

Sir,
ON the 21 of this instant April, The Copy of Colon. Massies own Letter
setting forth his great danger and as great deliverance.
Prince Rupert, marching all that night, came the next morning, April 22 from
Ledbury, where, I then, was, but the Enemy intercepting 8 of my Scouts, we had
no intelligence, till they were near at hand upon us. The Enemies advanced and
charged into the Town upon us, and my self, with diverse Gentlemen, Viz. Major
Harlow, Leivtenant Colonel Kerle, Major Bacchus, Captain Gifford, Captain
More, and Captain Baily, with some others, and some common Soldiers, with the
assistance of 200 Musketteers, out of the County Forces, received them, and so
soon as we received the Alarm, we drew out upon them, and marching close up
to them, fell on them, beat them to a retreat, and made it good against them,
so long till my foot might retreat a secure way to Gloucester. After the foot
we marched off, and out of the Town we had two or three hot charges upon
them, where we slew near forty of the Enemies men, and many of them that were
killed at this charge being Officers of quality and esteem. On our part we had
very few killed, not above 6 or 7. but I was enforced my self still to charge
in the head of all my Troops, to encourage the Warwick and Northampton horse, I
and my Officers bearing the heat of the day.

At length, intending to retreat to our place of advantage (some horse, of
those sent to me not standing to it, as they should have done) the Enemy got
in amongst our foot, but we redeemed that again, and marched off into the
field.

The Enemy have sent us a List of the Prisoners which they took from us: the
number by their own List is 110 prisoners, but above 80 of them were none of my
men, only such Country people as they swept away with them in their retreat,
that did never bear Arms, only they carried them away to cause them by money,
or making friends for exchange, to redeem themselves: my Major, Sergeant-Major
Bacchus is desperately wounded in the head, and was carried away prisoner by
the Enemy to Hereford. Major Harlow had a slight wound in the head, and
another in the arm, but came bravely off; Captain Baily, and Captain Foster,
with some other common men of ours are taken prisoners by them. I have sent for
their freedom by exchange of some of those prisoners I took from them, many of
them being men of quality, and ^now to redeem them all, if they were thrice as
many

Prince Rupert sent me word by my Trumpeter that I sent, that in the fight he
sought me out, but knew me not till after, no more than I knew him. But it
seems we charged each other, and he shot my horse under me, and I did as
much for him. At that charge many Commanders of theirs fell. Prince Rupert is
(I hear) very much enraged to undertake so great and toilsome a march, and so
much to miss his end. I had by Gods blessing my intendment, and stopped his
present march Northward, to God be the glory. Prince Ruperts Army by the
report of the Country, is noised about to be 6 or 7000 horse and foot: who
are now upon their march again toward Ludlow, and so, as I hear, intend for
Salo^ if they be not prevented again, which must be by a more considerable
strength than I have.

The forces that were with me, were in all about 500 foot, and 350 horse, nor
were these all with me at Lydbury, for my Guards were not come. The Enemy
braglittle of their getting, but lament much; the names of the Commanders and
Officers that were slain by us, I shall send you by the next.

Your humble Servant Edward Massy.
April 25. 1645. Post script. My last Letter told you that Lydney House was
fired and Sir John Winter ran away by the light of the flames, and for haste
overran two of his great Gunnes, one Demi-Culverin, one Saker, and 3 brases of
Iron murderers, which he left behind at Lydney, to do me a courtesy.

Sir John fired all the way he went, till our forces drove them to a full
flight over the Bridge.




The consideration of this gallant service of Colonel Massies, and all his
former successes rendered him most honorable in the thoughts of his endeared
friends, the Honorable House of Commons, who presently after the reading
thereof, fell into consultation how to reward him in some measure to his great
deservings, and thereupon it was Ordered that an Ordinance of Parliament should
be brought in for the settling 1000 pound per annu^^ on Colonel Massy, during
his life.

And likewise Ordered, that he should have 200 pound bestowed upon him, for
his extraordinary valor and gallantry in this fight, and because these moneys
might be speedily issued to him, it was Ordered that the Committee for the
Kings Revenue should make payment forthwith of this sum. And a Letter of
thanks was ordered likewise to be sent to Colonel Massy, desiring him to go
on in such honorable designs, and that he should never want the
encouragement of the Houses of Parliament.

About the 8 of this instant May, we also received certain intelligence by
Letters out of Warwickeshire, The good success and valiant services of the the
Parliaments forces at Warwick, under Major Purefoy.
of the good success of the Parliaments forces in those parts under the
Command of valiant Major Purefoy, testified also by his own Letter to the
Committee of Parliament at Coventry, and by them to London, the substance of
which Letter was, as follows.

Noble Gentlemen,
I Cannot but give you notice of some skirmishes lately performed by my Troop.
As first, that my said Troop scouting abroad to discover the Enemies actions,
we encountered a party of them, skirmished with them, and in the fight took
Colonel Francis Wortley, Son and h^ire to Sir Francis Wortley, that prime and
pernicious Royalist. Since that I marched out again with my Troop and faced
Banbury within twice Musket shot for above an hours space, and drew out a
forlorn hope, and sent, then into Nelthrop where they met with a party of the
Enemies foot, pursued them to the very Turn-pike, killed one of them, and
brought off 6 prisoners, without any loss to our selves.

Immediately after I sent out a party of 30 good Horse, who bravely fell into
the Rear of the Kings Army, within a mile of Stow, and after a stout assault
upon them, ours took prisoners Prince Ruperts Gun-Smith, 4 Reformadoes of his
Lifeguard, Prince Mourice his Surgeon, A brave prize taken.
his chief Cook, his Farrier, with some other common Troopers, 12 good horses,
7 case of pistol^, 12 swords; and all this taken without any loss at all on
our part, praised be the Lord for it; and and 100 pieces of gold was taken
^one of their pockets. Since this also I sent out another party to ^udgell them
up in their Rear, and my said party marched straight to Cambden, and found the
Garrison set on fire, but the party entered the Town, and found 200 foot in the
streets, and about an 100 horse in the stables there, which unexpected sight
increased my men's courage and resolution, and they seeing themselves engaged,
charged quite through them all, and through the whole Town, where they
discovering the Kings forces within half a ^^ile of the Town, at their
rendevour, charged therefore through them again, killed 14 upon the ground,
besides many more wounded, put them all to run, and quit the Town, and my men
came off without any loss, and brought 3 good horses with them.


And about the 12 of this instant we received certain ^ntelligence by Letters
out of the West, of the long expected, and much longed for assurance of the
releif of the distressed and much straightened Town of Taunton, The happy releif
of the precious Town of Taunton, by renowned Sir Tho Fairfaxes forces under the
command of Col. Welden, and Col. Graves.
by Colonel Welden, and Colonel Graves and their valiant forces designed by
renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax for that purpose. In which Town there were very
many precious souls, and most faithful Servants of the Lord, who were all
with admirable Christian courage resolved, ^^gether with their brave and most
undaunted Governor, Colonel Blake, to hold out to the uttermost of their
dearest hearts blood, rather than to trust to the present perfidious Articles,
and thereby the future intolerable tyranny, and baseness of a most disloyal,
bloody, and barbarous Enemy. The manner of the releif whereof, being succinctly
certified by valiant Colonel Weldens own Letter to Sir Thomas Fairfax, I have
here thought fit, for my Readers better content and satisfaction to insert,
only here and there I have made bold to interlace a word or two very material
and pertinent to the present business; which was as follows.

To the Right honorable Sir Thomas Fairfax, Commander in chief of the Army,
raised for the defense of the King and Parliament.
Right Honorable,
ACcording to your Command, I shall now give an account of the good success
wherewith God has graciously blessed this party hitherto. After a long and
weary march, wherein we lost no time (and wherein was such wise and
Christian-like Discipline, The brave Discipline of our Army in the West.
exercised all along as was admired by the Country people, Proclamation having
been made, That it should be death for any man to plunder any thing from any
person) we thus at length came, upon the Lords day, May 11, before Taunton,
and at our near approach to it, we shot off 3 or 4 pieces of Ordnance, to give
notice to the Town that we were come to their releif, our releif come to
Taunton.
at the hearing and hope whereof, valiant and vigilant Colonel Blake, from a
high place, by a prospective-glasse discovered our Brigade, and thereby greatly
encouraged his Soldiers, and the honest Townsmen, who had had fierce assaults
the Friday and Saturday before; And Hopton had sent a sharp Summons to the
Town, Hopton (...) to Taunt^ to surrender.
Threatening them, if they would not surrender it, he would take it by force,
and put them all to the sword, except 7 persons only, that were in the Town.
To which the Governor stoutly returned a negative answer, as brave as Hoptons
was cruel, Colonel Blakes reply.
saying, He would not deliver the Town, but would keep it to the last man; As
for those 7 m^n whom he promised to spare, he desired that Hopton would send
their names, and he would send him their bodies presently. But to come more
fully to the work it self.

Being now before the Town, I sent out 10 of my men, who fell upon an 100 of
theirs, and killed and took some of them who could not believe or be
persuaded, but that we were the Lord Gorings forces, and we were within 4
miles of the Town before they would believe we were come against them; and
then about 4 of the clock in the afternoon, they being fully convinced who we
were, they raised the siege, and confusedly ran away by night in great
disorder, The siege raised and the Enemies fled.
some toward Bridgewater, and some toward Exeter, blocking up the way with
trees and other combersome matter, whereby our forces could not pursue them.
And truly Gods goodness and special providence appeared migh^^ly to this
poor Town at this time, in that we should come to their releif in the very
nick of time only, The seasonablenesse of Taunton ^^leif at this time.
and pinch of their utmost straights coming on them, all their Ammunition
being now quite spent, very much of the Town being burnt, even at least 200
houses by the rage of the Enemy; and yet the Town extraordinarily defended all
this while witly impregnable courage, yea, notwithstanding that the Enemy many
times entered by storm, at breaches they had made, but were still most
magnanimously beaten out again, with the loss of at least a 1000 slain before
the Town in this siege, The Enemies loss before Taunton.
and about a 1000 Arms left behind them for haste, and diverse barrells of
powder, with other Ammunition and provision, and the Enemy taking along with
them 12 or 14 Cart loads of their dead men, besides many wounded.

We found about 200 wounded men of ours in the Town, and not above an 100
slain in all this siege, praised be the Lord for it. Since I came here, in 6
weeks time, I saw a wonderful change, scarce a man to be seen in a whole
Village, so barbarously had the Enemy unpeopled the Country. I shall in all
humility acquaint you with what I hear. My Regiment is designed for the West, I
humbly entreat, if it be possible, I may wait on your honor, in your Army,
which if your Excellency shall please to grant, it will much oblige,

Your most humble Servant Ralph Welden.
Palmister, May 11. 1645.

After the reading of this Letter in the House of Commons, they began to
consider of this great mercy, and therefore Ordered in the first place, That
there should be a public Thanksgiving in all the Churches and Chapels in
London, and Lines of Communication on the next Lords day for the relieving of
this distressed Town, that so God may have the honor due unto him for it. In
the next place the House Ordered that a Letter should be writ to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, giving him the Thanks of the House for his great care and faithful
service in omitting of no time for the releif of Taunton, and that Sir Thomas
Fairfax should be desired to take particular notice of this gallant service of
Colonel Welden.

A Letter was likewise Ordered to be sent from the House to the Town of
Taunton, and to the Governor and Soldiers therein, to give them the hearty
Thanks of the Parliament for this extraordinary gallant service in maintaining
the Town against the Enemy so long; But the special regard that the Parliament
had of this Garrison, rested not there, for, An Order was made likewise by the
House, for the bestowing of 2000 pound upon the Soldiers of that Garrison, for
their valor and courage in this service. And as an earnest of a further reward
to the undaunted and ever honored Governor Colonel Blake, It was likewise
Ordered that 500 pound should be paid to him forthwith for his own use.

The House likewise taking into consideration that by reason of the late
tedious and unwearyed marches of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes foot, they had worn out
their shoes, and were in great need of supply, it was further Ordered, That it
should be referred to the Committee for the Army to provide, and forthwith
send down shoes for Sir Thomas Fairfaxes foot.

The House of Commons further made an Order of reference to the Committee of
Both Kingdoms, to take care that no advantage be lost by the releif of
Taunton, but to use their endeavor to improve it to the best advantage of the
West; and the whole Kingdom, and we have great cause to hope that care will
be taken thereof accordingly.

About the 15 of this instant May, our most provident Parliamentary Statists,
for the more prudent regulating of the General Sir Thomas Fairfaxes
New-Modelled Army, Ordered certain very excellent Orders to be observed by all
Officers and Soldiers, from the Commissioners of the Army, to the meanest
Soldier; both to take care of false Musters, Excellent Orders appointed by the
Parliament, for the well-regulating of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes new Army.
of plundering, of buying Horses for the State, taken by the Soldiers, that
they should be marked by the Mark-Master of the Army, etc. To forbid any
Officers to quarter in any house, but by Ticket from the Quartermaster, and to
pay ready money for man's meat and horse meat, according to the rates set down,
and in case any money should be wanting to any man, he must receive a Ticket
for it, etc. That Teames or any horses in Plough or Cart, are not to be taken,
except in case of necessity, and then also by Warrant from the Commander in
Chief.

Diverse other good Orders were then also ordained and appointed, which, are
like, by Gods mercy, to produce good effects, and a happy conclusion of this
present unhappy War, especially since we know it is Gods way, The hopeful
effects of a well regulated army.
when we manage our affairs without violence and wrong; and we see, the
Country, us the Army passes along, is extraordinarily taken with love and
affection toward them, at the sight of their fair and honest demeanor.

And here I cannot omit to make mention of another singular mercy of God unto
us in our Armies, Viz. The most excellent love and good agreement of Major
General Cromwell, and of Major General Brown (though both o^ brave and high
Spirits) all the time of their being together at and about Oxford; Major
General Cromwell, and Major General Brown, compared to David and Jonathan.
and elsewhere, in all Orders and Commands, even beyond compare; yea, even
striving who should prefer the Service, and honor of other more than of
himself, as if David's and Jonathans 2 souls were transmigrated, and mutually
united in one body. O, if such sweetness and oneness of hearts and affections
had been found among our Commanders formerly, we had, certainly, now been in a
far better condition, than as yet we are like to be in.

About the 20 of this instant, our most noble pious and grateful Parliamentary
Worthies took into their serious thoughts, the payment of the arrears of the
most noble late Lord General, The Parliaments most singular gratitude for the
good services done to the kingdom by the Right honorable the Earl of Essex and
others.
the Earl of Essex, whose faithful and noble services for the State, will make
his name most honorable to posterity, and Ordered the payment thereof partly
out of the Kings Revenues, and partly out of Haberdashers Hall in London; And
as a farther pledge of the Kingdoms love and gratitude to the said most noble
Earl; and as a requital of his great losses sustained by the Enemy, for his
constant and loyal adherence to the Parliament, and the Kingdoms just Cause,
an Ordinance of Parliament was passed by the House of Commons, for the settling
of 10000 pound per annum upon the said noble Earl, out of the sale of Papists
and Delinquents Estates.

The House also took into consideration the good service of the party that
lately releived Taunton, The Soldiers that releived Taunton gratefully
remembered by the Parliament.
under the Command of Colonel Welden, and Colonel Graves, and agreed upon a
certain pay for them, during their service in the West, and Ordered that 3000
pound should be charged Monthly upon the Excise for 4 Months, for the
payment of those Forces. The House likewise considered the most gallant service
and high deserts of that noble and brave Commander Sir John Meldrum (slain not
long afterward, to our great loss and sorrow, at the siege of
Scarborough-Castle) and in particular, Renowned Sir John Meld^u^s gallant
service required.
his last brave Service in winning the Town, Haven, and shipping of
Scarborough, as also the brave assault he last made upon the said Castle of
Scarborough, when he received his most unhappy deaths-wound; They Ordered that
a Letter of Thanks should be wrote unto him, and that 500 li. should be added
to the 1000 pound formerly given him by both Houses of Parliament, to be
bestowed upon him as an earnest of their affections to him; and they then also
took order for moneys to pay his well-deserving Soldiers as had been desired.
And they having formerly bestowed 200 pound per annum, Mr. Owen Occo^elly taken
into farther consideration for his loyal discovery of the Irish plot.
upon Owen Occonelly for his good Service, in discovering the plot in Ireland,
who not receiving the same according to the said Order, the House of Commons
therefore Ordered the due and constant payment of the said 200 pound per annum,
out of the old customs of the Kingdom; Thus, Honos alit arts; and virtus
compensata crescit.

And about the 23 instant, we had Letters out of Staffordshire, which
certified, that when the Kings forces advanced for the releif of Chester, (then
most hopefully besieged by ever to be honored Sir William Brereton) by
Stafford and Shropshire; The brave services of valiant Captain Stone, Governor
of Sta^^^d castle against the Enemy.
Captain Stone, the valiant and active Governor of Stafford for the
Parliament, gave the Enemy several successful visits, in their Rear, at they
past along, and did good execution upon them therein. And, first, how he sent
out a party of his Horse, who fell upon a party of the Enemies, quartered at
W^lverhampton, killed 16 on the place, took 26 Horse, and most of their Riders,
and returned without any loss, the Kings own quarters being then not above 2
miles off it. That presently after this, he sent out another party, even the
next day, who fell upon the Enemy, quartered in the field near Newport in
Shr^pshire, brought away 60 horse, killed a Captain, and about 20 others in the
place; And the next day following this, that he sent out another paity that
fell upon their quarters, at Pancridge, killed 3. took 4 prisoners, and 7
horses.

About the 28 of this instant May, being that Months day of a public Fast or
humiliation, and Reverend Mr. Henderson one of the Scottish Commissioners, and
reverend Mr. Whitaker, Preaching before the House of Peers, A blessed return of
Prayer.
that day, in the Abbey at Westminster; and before the House of Commons
Reverend Mr. Caryll, and Mr. Ford: as we were, that day, laboring in prayers
and other acts of humiliation, to draw near to our God, we found the Lord in
mercy, drawing near to us; for, the Fast day being ended, there came Letters
from renowned Colonel Massy, which gave us the happy intelligence of the
taking of the strong Garrison of Evesham, Evesham taken by renowned Colon.
Massy.
the manner whereof was, briefly, thus: Colonel Massy with about 800 horse,
and 600 foot, having lain before Evesham, a day or 2 stormed the Town, and took
it in an hours storming. In which service we received less loss than could
have been expected in such a hot piece of service, as, for the time, it proved;
not above 4 or 5 of our Soldiers slain, and 2 Officers besides, and about 30
common Soldiers wounded. We slew of the Enemies, 10 or 11. took diverse
Officers and common Soldiers, The prisoners and prizes taken
to the number of about 548. and near upon an 120 good horses; a List of the
prime prisoners, was as follows. Colonel Robert Leg, Governor of the
Town, Colonel Foster, Leivtenant Colonel Bellingham, Major Travillian, 13
Captains, 16 Leivtenants, 3 Reformadoes, 20 inferior Officers, together with
20 barrels of Gunpowder, 700 fire-armes, and 2 Tuns of Match. The taking of
this brave Garrison was a very considerable piece of service in many respects,
and this not the least, namely, that by this means, almost all Worcestershire
will be freed, and mightily secured, from Cavalierian Contributions, which,
before, were frequently gathered for the King.

And about the 30 of this instant, we were credibly informed by Letters out of
Hampshire, that a party of horse and foot belonging to Colonel Norton, marched
forth upon a design on Lan^ford-House. The horse were commanded by Captain
Betsworth, Captain Smibark, and Captain Gerson; The foot were under the command
of young Murford; A brave defeat given to the Enemy by Col. Norton at Langford
house in Hampshire.
with part of these forces they placed an ambuscado near the foresaid House,
undiscovered to the Enemy, and Colonel Griffith, seeing some of our forces
facing the House, sallyed forth to encounter them, whereupon ours retreated to
their ambuscado, the Enemy hotly pursued them, but were now as fiercely as
unexpectedly assaulted and charged by ours on every side, who took them all
prisoners, finding no way to escape. There were surprised, Colonel Griffith,
the Governor of Langford House, his Captain, Leivtenant, a Cornet, 8 other
Officers, 64 prisoners besides of common Soldiers, and all their Arms, and 10
of them slain upon the place.

And here, good Reader, let me again desire thee to make another very short
stay for a most just and deserved grateful Comtemplation on all the fair and
famous mercies of this Month also; and therein to see and admire the continued
Miraculous wonder of our Parliamentary Burning-Bush still Unconsumed, The
Burning-Bush not consumed.
notwithstanding the many singeing, yea, scorching assaults and hot attempts,
constantly Massy, from Prince Ruperts plot or design to Puref^yes forces in
Warwick^shire. In the as singularly Taunton, and the setting at liberty of so
many precious Souls as that long siege had curbed and coopt in from necessary
comforts. And the excellent Orders set out by the Parliament, for the
well-regulating Thomas Fairfaxes New-Modelled Army. In the happy harmony of our
prime Commanders in the Army; And the Parliaments most noble and renowned
gratitude to those that have well deserved of the Kingdom, by their industrious
and loyal Stone, Governor of Stafford against the enemy; And the happy taking
of Eveshams strong Garrison by renowned Colonel Massy, and therein a most
notable return of Prayer. And lastly, In that brave defeat given to our
Cavalierian adversaries, by valiant and loyal Colonel Norton.

All which premises of this Month of May, prudently, piously and gratefully
considered; O say, good Reader, whether we have not most just cause,
continually to praise our ever-living, and all-good-giving God, Isai. 25. 1.
and with the holy Prophet, to break forth into Soul-exulting, and God-exalting
raptures of joy and gratitude, and to confess and say, O Lord, thou art our
God, and we will exalt thee, and will everlastingly praise thy name; for thou
haste done wonderful things for us: and thy counsels of old (and of later
times too) are nothing but faithfulness and truth unto us. But now to proceed.

ANd here now we will begin the farther contemplation and just admiration of
the rich and rare mercies (I had almost said miracles) of this Month of June
also, June. 1645.
with the cordial and comfortable mention of a most excellent Petition,
exhibited about the beginning of this Month, on the 4 or 6 day thereof, to the
House of Commons in Parliament, by the right Honorable Lord Major of London,
together with the Aldermen and Common-Councill of the said most famous and ever
to be renowned City, The most famous City of Londons most excellent Petition
to the Parliament, touching the then present sad condition of the Kingdom.
touching their deep apprehension of diverse disastrous sad and sorrowful
accidents, lately fallen out in the Kingdom to the great greit of the best
Members thereof; laying down also, in their prudent and provident thoughts,
some most probable grounds and causes of all those sad and sorrowful losses
which had (notwithstanding all our undeniable precious mercies forementioned)
befalne the Parliamentary Cause; (a true representation, therefore, still, of
the Burning-Bush Unconsumed) and humbly therefore tendering the conceived
remedies thereof, and the likely prevention of more, by Gods gracious
assistance, if seriously and seasonably seen unto. Which Petition, for the
excellency thereof, and for the Readers better content and satisfaction,
together with the Parliaments most fair and favorable answer thereunto, I have
thought fit, here to insert, which was as follows.

To the Right honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons
House of Parliament, The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of London, in Common Council Assembled.
Shows,
THat the Inhabitants of this City, and parts adjacent, are generally most
deeply sensible of these pressing miseries, A Copy of the Petition of the
Citizens of London to the Parliament.
under which they and the whole Kingdom now groan; And that imminent ruin
which is coming upon both, through the releiving of Chester, the unexpressible
loss of Leicester, the barbarous cruelty executed there, the danger of the
rest of our Garrisons, and well-affected thereabouts, and the increasing and
prevailing of the Enemy by Sea and Land, like a mighty Torrent; That (among
other causes which have had a deep influence upon this most sad posture of our
condition) the said Inhabitants apprehend, that the not completing of Sir
Thomas Fairfaxes Army (according to an Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf,)
the want of such a Committee in that Army, as may give our Commanders in chief,
power and encouragement to improve all present advantages without attending
Commands and Directions from remote Councels. The calling back of Leivtenant
General Cromwell, and Major General Brown, when they were pursuing the Enemy;
The not advancing of our Brethren of Scotland into these Southern parts; The
great decay of Trade, and discouragements of Merchants for want of a constant
convey, His Majesty's publishing his sense of the proceedings at the late
Treaty, and the Parliament not publishing their sense thereof.

And their resolutions against free trade by Sea to such Ports as are or shall
be in the power of the Enemy, have been the chief; That great numbers of those
Inhabitants have lately expressed their earnest desires (by Petition and
otherwise, to the representative body of the City, in Common Council
Assembled,) That this their deep sense and apprehensions might be forthwith
made known to both Houses of Parliament, Their humble suit that the remedies
may be speedily considered of, and effectually executed; and their
resolutions, according to all former expressions, that they will not think
their lives, nor any thing they possess, too dear to hazard for your
encouragement and preservation.

Thereupon the Petitioners (for prevention of further miseries,
inconveniences, and the utter ruin of the Parliament, of this City and
Kingdom, make it their humble request to this Honorable House, That care may
be taken for the speedy recruiting of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, and for his
encouragement, That such a Committee may be sent with that Army, as may give
our Commanders in chief (of whose faithfulness the Kingdom has had so large
testimony) power and encouragement to improve all present advantages aforesaid:
That the said Army (or such part thereof as in your wisdom shall seem meet)
may be ordered forthwith to march toward our enemies in the field, as well
for the regaining of Leicester (if it be possible before it be made
impregnable by fortifications; as also for prevention of the Enemies further
surprising of other places of strength, and destroying the rest who have
appeared in defense of the Parliament, and for preservation of the Kingdom.
That our Brethren of Scotland may be more earnestly pressed to march Southward;
That Leivtenant General Cromwell may presently have power to raise and command
the Association, until such other course be taken, as may tend to the safety
of those Counties, and of this City and Kingdom. That the Navy may be so
ordered, as may encourage Merchants, and advance Trade, by having constant
convoyes. That the proceedings of the late Treaty, may be forthwith published
by the Parliament, and their resolution against free Trade, as aforesaid.

And the Petitioners, as in duty, shall pray, etc.
Vera Copia. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Mercurii Junii 4. 1645.
Resolved, etc.
THat the Answer to the Petitioners shall be, That the House will take the
particulars of the Petition into serious consideration. And do return them
Thanks for their good affections. And as to their desire of leave to present
the like to the House of Peers, this House leaves it to themselves, and to
their own discretion.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

About the 8 of this instant June, we had credible information, by Letters out
of Cheshire, that a party of the Enemies forces about Chester, were sent out by
Byron the Governor of Chester, some few miles, A brave defeat given to the
Enemies near Chester, by valiant Leiv^en. Col, Venables.
a forraging into the Country thereabout, and especially to Broxton hundred,
with imperious Warrants to fetch in Contribution-money, where they plundered
all they could find, worth carrying with them, and took diverse of our men
prisoners: Whereof Leivtenant Colonel Venables hearing, he made use of this
opportunity, and marched forth with a party from Tarvin, and having got between
the Enemies and the Town, he charged them with such courage and resolution,
that he totally routed the whole party, and took from them 180 prisoners,
whereof about 20 were Captains, Leivtenants, and other Officers in Arms, and
some of a degree above Captains; he also took in this service 50 horse, and
about 200 Arms, besides diverse slain in the conflict, and having thus releived
his captive and plundered friends, and suppressed the Enemies, he returned with
honor and triumph to his quarters.

And about the 10 instant we received certain intelligence of a brave piece of
service performed by valiant, active, and loyal Colonel Rossiter, and
Colonel Gray, against a party of the Newark^rs, A most brave defeat given to
the Newarkers, at Hough^^ house by valiant and active Colon. Rossit^r.
who marched under the Command of Colonel Will^ his own Major, who marched all
night, and at 6 of the clock in the morning appeared in a full body, and came
before Hougha^-House, which the Enemy having thus now beset, wondered to see
not any of our men awake in the whole Garrison to make any resistance; for a
while they did forbear to assault the place, fearing ours might have prepared
some stratag^m within; but some new intelligence administering other counsels,
and putting by that fear, they almost at once forced the bridge and entered the
House, where they found them all fast asleep, not dreading or dreaming of the
approach of any Enemy.

Being now entered, they used them not (whom they found within) as our King
Richard, of old, used a Soldier of his, (whom he killed, because he found
him sleeping, and not watching and standing on his guard, as he ought, saying,
I leave thee now, but as I found thee.) A just reward of a sleeping soldier,
according to the rules of Martial Discipline.
but they made them all prisoners to themselves, not to the grave, and so
manacling their hands and fettering their feet with cords, they carried them
out of the House, man by man, and laid them on the ground, leaving them there a
while to take another nappe, if they could, on the other side of the Moate, in
which mean time they ranged about the House for plunder, and began to nestle
themselves in their new-got Garrison. But Colonel Rossiter having received the
alarm, by some farther private intelligence, did immediately draw forth with
all his Horse, and Colonel Gray advanced with him, with 3 Companies of Foot,
and coming before the House, ^olon. Rossiter bravely recovers Houg^m house.
they found our men in a sad obligation, fast bound both hand and foot, and
lying on the ground, without the Moate, under the command of the Enemies shot.
These men they first heartily laughed at, and then instantly unbound them, and
about 12 of the clock at noon, Colonel Rossiter drew out 10 men of every
Troop, who were commanded by Captain Norwood his own Captain Leivtenant, and
the foot being led on by Colonel Gray himself, above the middle in water, who
all with admirable courage stormed the House on all sides, and after a sharp
assault they forcibly took it. We had many horse shot in this service, 6 men
killed, and about 20 wounded. We killed diverse of the Enemies, and took
prisoners every man that survived in the House; Viz. Major Broughton (Major to
Colonel Willis, Governor of Newark) Commander in chief of these our Enemies,
and at this present, The prisoners and prizes taken at Nougham houses recovery
Governor of this House; Captain William Thorold, a very active man for the
King in those parts, Captain John Johnson; Captain Strickland, the chief
Standard bearer, 55 other Officers, Gentlemen of Arms, Reformadoes, and
Troopers, 60 horses, above an 100 Arms, good store of Match, powder, ball, and
other provision. And thus, by Gods good providence, we suddenly recovered this
strong Garrison again, which had been so suddenly and sleepily lost.

About the 14 of this instant June, we received the most happy and most
welcome news, by Letters out of the West, of that most famous and glorious
Victory, which it pleased the Lord of Hosts, our ever good and gracious God,
the mighty and merciful keeper of his English Israel, to give unto us at the
Town of Naseby in Northamptonshire, which was certified and ascertained unto us
from thence both by Letters from his Excellency the most renowned General Sir
Thomas Fairfax himself, The most famous fight and glorious victory obtained at
Naseby in Northamptonshire, over the Kings forces, exactly described.
from renowned Leivtenant General Cromwell, and also from Colonel Leighton,
and Colonel Herb^rt, 2 of the most worthy Committee for the said Army, and 2
most valiant and victorious Commanders and actours in this most famous fight
and most precious Victory; the substance of all which famous fight, I have here
endeavored with all fidelity and clearness of truth and with what convenient
brevity I possibly could, to set forth and describe for the Readers full
content and satisfaction, which was as follows.

About the 12 of June our noble General being come with his forces, near the
Kings Army, which then were principally in and about Daventry, The Kings Army
at Daventry
we had some fears grounded upon the advantage of ground, with strong
intrenchments on his Majesty's part; as also because valiant Leivtenant
General Cromwell, was not yet come unto us, we not being willing to engage
without him; and yet our near approaching giving the Enemy opportunity of
fighting us (had they pleased) to their great advantage, The Kings Army not
willing to fight marches toward Southa^^.
but by Gods providence they did not, for what reason we knew not, and so were
delivered of those fears, partly by the royal Armies leaving their advantages
and marching toward Southam, and partly also by the arrival of Cromwell,
though but with 700 horse, the same morning. Now we being thus reinforced by
the coming of Cromwell, and the party he brought, we resolved to follow the
Enemy, The Royal army advanced to Harborough.
who left the way to Warwick, which was woodland, for what reason, likewise,
we knew not, and wheeled to Harborough; whereof we having full knowledge,
advanced after them, and that night had our quarters in and about Gilsborough,
and immediately after they and we moved to Nazeby, And from thence to N^s^by.
in which field the fight was fought. We saw the Enemy, about 6 of the clock
in the morning (for there was Champian land enough) advanced toward us in a
full body, which I assure you was as much joy to ours (who sought this above
all) as it was to hear they had left Daventry, which was not little.

As touching the ordering of our Army for the battall; The General appointed
Leivtenant General Cromwell to the right wing of Horse, The manner of
Marshalling our Army for the battle.
and Colonel Ireton, at that time, made Commissary General of the Horse, to
the lest wing, Himself and valiant and virtuous Major General Skippon, to the
Infantry and body of the Army, and in this posture we marched to meet our
resolute Enemy, who, I confess, seemed unto us, to come on with undaunted
courage, The Kings Army advances toward us.
as who would not, having a King with them, that was able to honor them at
present, and to promise large revenues afterward, to all those that fought
valiantly?

Being come within Cannon-shot, the Ordnance began to play; but that being
found, at Marstone Moore, and other places, but a loss of time, we resolved
not to want and lose daylight, as is too usual, but to charge with the first.
Whereupon, about 10 or 11 of the clock, The fight begins.
the Trumpets began to sound, the Drums to beat, the Horses to neigh and
praunce about, as smelling the battle; and now, thought both sides, now, an
afternoon for a whole Kingdom, nay for 3 whole Kingdoms, now, Caesar or
Nothing, was, we may suppose, the voice of their Army. And, The Liberties of
England, may well be said to be the voice of our Army; to whom, me thinks
their most noble General Sir Thomas Fairfax, said to his Soldiers, as in such
a case religious King Hezekiah said to his Army. 2 Ch^^o^. 32. 7, 8
Be strong and courageous (my brave Commanders and Soldiers) be not afraid
nor dismayed for the Kings Army, nor for all the multitude of his Horse and
Riders that are come together; for (according to our Signall-word) there are
more with us (we having God our Friend) than are with them. With them is but an
arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God, to help us and to fight our
battails. As so, indeed, he did, as now you shall immediately hear. The
Enemies word was, Queen Mary. Our word was, God is our strength. And so he was
indeed, as you shall see in the sequel. The Enemy had bean stalks in their
hats, we generally nothing.

And now each wing of both sides charged one another with great eagerness and
violence, our Dragoones began the battle, flanking the right wing of the
Enemies Horse, as they charged our left wing of Horse the Foot charged not each
other, Here the fight was very hot and furious on both sides.
till they were within 12 paces one of another, and could not charge above
twice, but were at push of pike. The Enemies foot gave a little back, and so
did some few of ours, and in the beginning of the fight, the day was very
doubtful, but then the right wing of our Horse (wherein the General was in
person) charged in the flanck of the blew Regiment of the Enemies foot, who,
indeed stood to it, The Kings blue Regiment of Foot ^uinated and destroyed.
to the last man, abundance of them being slain, and all the rest surrounded,
wounded and taken prisoners; These (who were the very hope of their Infantry)
being lost, horse and foot gave back.

But here also the fight continuing with equal might and courage for the space
of less than half an hour, they had somewhat shattered our left wing, and
made them give back, and were almost masters of our Artillery; Our left Wing is
some what shattered.
And, here (as we have it from credible relation) a party of the enemies brake
through our left wing of Horse, came quite behind our Rear of our Train, the
Leader of them being a person somewhat in habit like our General, in a red
Montero, as our General had; He came as a friend, and our Commander of the
guard of the Train went with his hat in his hand, and asked him how the day
went, thinking verily he had been our General; The Cavalier (who we since
heard for certain was Rupert) asked him and the rest, if they would have
quarter, whereupon, they cried no, gave fire instantly, and most bravely beat
him off, making him fly for his life, and his companions.

But, as I touched before, our right wing had done more upon them, The Enemy is
beaten by our right Wing.
and besides, our left wing bravely recovered their strength and ground, and,
within half an hour, or a very little more, we had quite driven them out of
the field, and so broken all their foot, that we verily believe there went not
off a hundred in any one party or body. After this first hot shock so received,
they rallyed again, The King himself rallyed his Horse again.
and put their horse into a posture to charge us, which party we were assured
the King himself led up and charged with, but What will he do, when he shall
go about to charge against God, and his Countries best friends? For this body
was also (as the rest of them) possessed with such a fear, that though the King
in that foresaid rallying of this body, The Kings words to his Soldiers.
cried out unto them, Face about once more, and give one charge more, and
recover the day. But here also it most mercifully pleased the Lord, that the
fresh forces of valiant and active Colonel Rossiter, most fortunately came in
unto us before the battle was quite ended, who being all, I say, fresh men,
and unexpectedly falling on, did admirably help to complete the Victory, and to
pursue the Enemy with their fresh horse, with great slaughter, even within the
sight of Leicester: So, they, by Gods great mercy, together with our horse and
foot, came on, I say, with such impregnable and invincible courage, that we
made them all fly again, and we, after the breech of them, killing, as fast as
we could, The Enemy is beaten again.
all we found in arms, and here, happy was he that was best mounted to fly
fastest, for, the renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax, and valiant Major
General Skippon, fell sorely upon them; and magnanimous Leivtenant General
Cromwell, pursued their horse, with a full carreir, about 12 or 13 miles, at
least, even within 2 or 3 miles of Leicester, The Enemy is pursued 12 or 13
miles, within 3 miles of Leicester. The high and prime praise of this victory
given to God in the first place. The Renowned General next, as most worthy
praise.
the longest pursuit that ever was since this unhappy Warrebegan.

Thus by Gods infinite mercy we had a great and wonderful victory, yea, as
great as ever since the war began, if not greater. Which Victory, as it is in
the first and prime place to be most justly attributed to our good God alone,
as the chief Cause, and giver of it unto us: So also in the next place to his
valiant instruments, and whom God only made so valiant and victorious over
their Cavalierian Enemies, and of these in the first place, renowned Sir Thomas
Fairfax has merited exceedingly, showing such courage and resolution, as has
rarely been seen in any, which, truly, did so animate the Soldiers by his
undaunted example, as is hardly to be expressed; for, certainly, had you seen
him, and how his spirit was raised, it would have made an impression in you,
never to be obliterated, God knows it is not here hyperbolized, but a real
Truth. Courageous Major General Skippon.
And as for Major General Skippon, he also did as magnanimously and valiantly
as man could do, and was a great terror to the Enemy, receiving a wound in
his side, by a Musket bullet in this fight, but, blessed be God, not mortal,
only, an indelible badge of Honor unto him. Valiant Leivtenant General
Cormwell.
Valiant Leivtenant General Cromwell also did admirable bravely in this fight,
he and his right wing of horse having expressed incomparable gallantry in this
fight, even to the amazement of their adversaries. Yea, and to speak the truth,
all our Officers and Soldiers did as bravely and courageously as could be.
Commissary General Ireton did valiantly also behave himself in this fight,
Commissary General Ireton and Colonel Butler.
and was sorely wounded, but not mortally, and so was Colonel Butler, both of
undaunted courage, and did singularly well in this great service. But I would
not willingly attribute more to one Commander than to another; The Enemies Foot
fought also very stoutly.
for, indeed (as I touched before) they did all as gallantly as ever men on
earth could do, and so did the Enemies foot, which, before the battle we
least valued, Rupert and Maurice having at least 2000 horse more than we had,
that charged fiercely on us at first, but were so well received by ours
(though, at first, our left wing gave back a little) that their hearts were
broken at the very first, especially by the thickness of our reserves, and
their orderly and timely coming on.

And thus we having taken 8 pieces of Ordnance in the field, whereof 2 were
Demi-Cannons, one whole Culverin, we also possessed all the rest of their
Ordnance and their Carriages, bag and baggage, Good store of Biscuit and
Cheese takes, to refresh our Soldiers at the end of the Fight. Our Soldiers
marched to Harborough that night.
abundance of Coaches, and rich plunder (whereof more anon, more particularly)
Carts, and Boats, and great store of Biscuit and Cheese (a seasonable
refreshment for our honest Soldiers that had marched so hard the day and night
before, and had not had a bit of bread to a Regiment, for their refreshment)
thus the Foot and all the Train marched that night, to Harborough, (about 4
miles from Naseby) where then the head-quarter lay.

It was credibly conceived, by the testimony of those that saw it, and
purposely viewed Immediately after the fight, that from the battle to
Harborough, there were not slain above, about 700. together with those slain in
the field running away, but in the pursuit, between Harborough and Leicester,
The slain in the Field of the Enemies.
at least 3 or 400 more were slain, abundance of them sorely wounded, and
diverse persons of note or quality fell among them; one with a Star and a
red-Crosse on his Coat, conceived to have been the Duke of Lenox, but it was
not he. 4 Lords came mortally wounded (as was credibly reported to us) to
Harborough, The Ensigns of the Enemies taken in the field.
but durst not stay there; We took all the Foot Colors in the field, the
Kings own Colors with the Lion and Crown, with this Motto, Dieu et Mon Droit.
The Queens Colors, and the Princes Colors, and the Duke of Yorkes Standard.
We got the plunder of the Kings Coach, and his precious Cabinet, that famous
tell-tale of the Kings and Queens works of darkness, etc. But of all these
things more particularly by and by.

One great encouragement to our Common Soldiers to fall on the more
courageously, One great encouragement to our Soldiers to fight bravely, was
the rich plunder of the Enemies.
was, the rich plunder the Enemy had (their purses and pockets too, being full
of money, and the plunder of poor Leicestershire) which God now made a means
of their ruin and destruction in this fight, for, indeed our Soldiers got
very great plenty of gold and silver out of most of their pockets that were
slain. Prince Rupert also, or rather Prince Robber, had brought into the field
many Irish women, inhumane Whores, with Skeans or long Irish kniv^^ about them,
to cut the throats of our wounded men, and of such prisoners as they pleased,
(the wives of the bloody Rebels in Ireland, Very many Irish Queanes in the
field, how they were used.
his Majesty's dearly beloved Subjects) to whom our Soldiers would grant no
quarter, about a 100 of them were slain on the ground, and most of the rest of
the whores, and Camp-sluts, that attended that wicked Army, were marked in
their faces or noses with slashes and cuts, and some cut off; just rewards for
such wicked strumpets.

The slain on our part, in this most memorable fight, was not in all full 200.
The slain on out side in the Fight.
and not one above a Captain. Sir Jacob Ashleyes Coach was taken, with great
store of plunder in it; and himself was very near taking, for we got the cap
off his head, and in Sir Jacobs Coach, Letters of Nicholas the Court-lyer,
wherein was, among others, A most slanderous and abominable lie of Secretary
Nicholas put upon the Parliament.
this expression, in one of them; That the Parliament had given particular
direction to the General, to give the King no quarter, but to kill him, if
taken; A most abominably false and impudent lie, like unto all the rest of
their irreligious practices.

The Army after this marched toward Leicester, following the pursuit, not
willing to give the Enemy any rest, or liberty to rally, our horse especially
being close in their Rear, and Colonel Rossiter (who came seasonably to the
engagement, The Victory pursued by our Horse toward Leicester.
and bravely charged where our Noble General was) following apace in the
pursulte of the Enemy, as aforesaid, where, now, for a while, we will leave
them.

And here, now, I shall in its most proper place, for the high honor and glory
of our wonder-working God, and the admiration and astonishment of my present
Readers, A List of what loss the King did sustain in this famous fight. The
slain and wounded.
and their succeeding Posterity; give you the most exact List of the slain,
prisoners, and prizes taken in this most famous and glorious Victory, which was
as follows. Slain in the fight and slight, about 3000. and between 3 and 400
Whores and Irish Queans. One Lord or eminent personage slain and found dead,
with a Star and a red-Crosse upon his coat. 4 Lords mortally wounded, Prince
Rupert bruised, and Sir Jacob Ashley hurt on the head, his head-peice beaten
off, and himself near taken.

Prisoners, Prisoners.
Colonel Sir William Vaughan; Colonel Sir William Bridges; Col. Sir. Bridge;
Col. Sir Richard Page; Colonel Bands; Col. Bunkley; Col. Theoph. Gilbie; Col.
Nevill; Leivtenant Colonells 7. Sergeant Majors 12. Captains 55. Leivtenants
55. Ensigns 45. besides of inferior Officers, above 200. 2000 horse with
their riders, many Ladies and Gentlewomen; of the Kings Officers and Servants,
11 or 12. besides 4 of his footmen, and one of Prince Maurices; In all above
4000 prisoners. Arms, at least 9000. Prizes.
6 rich Coaches, and other Coaches besides; The Kings own Coach, and therein
that Cabinet of Secret Letters, of the Kings and Queens, since this fight
Printed and published to the amazement of the world. Ruperts Coach also, and
both the Kings and Ruperts Sumpters with much wealth and riches, The Kings
Standard, the Queens Standard, Prince Charles his Standard, the Duke of Yorkes
Standard, and Ruperts Standard; 6 Colors of Horse; and 40 Colors of Foot; one
whereof represented a pair of horns, with this Motto; Come Cuckold. Which
being one of the first Colors that were taken, the word was, on the pursuit,
returned to the Enemy with much mirth and scorn, among Soldiers; Taken also,
12 pieces of Ordnance; 40 (...) Gunpowder; 200 Carriages; 12 Carriages of
Boats, with their Anchors and Cables; In sum, all their bag and baggage.
(...) King himself fled toward, and so clean through Leicester. Thus now, in
this most famous and renowned Victory did the Lord indeed, show himself, as
Moses sweetly sets him out, Glorious (...) holiness, (...).
fearful in Praises, and doing wonders. Triumphing gloriously and overthrowing
both the horse and his rider. And, truly, so much the more glorious may this
Victory appear unto us, and the hand of God most evidently be seen in it,
(...) on the Victory.
as to Gideon, against those Enemies of God (though, it is true, the number of
men in the Army was not much different, yet, it is most true, that the King had
full 2000 horse more than we) yet, I say, this Victory will most notably
appear to be Gods Victory, graciously given to us, if we consider both the
time and condition of the kingdom as then it was; And also the very Army it
self.

First, ^1.
This Victory was bestowed upon us at such a time, when as our spirits were
(and that most justly) very low, The (...) and condition of the Kingdom.
and exceedingly dejected, both by onr loss of Leicester, but a little before,
and thereby also the Kings releiving of West-Chester, we having at that time a
marveilous great possibility of taking it, 1.
but now were utterly frustrated of it. The Kingdom fourfold sad condition at
this time.


Also the great sadness we then were in for the danger of Taunton, at this
season, a second time besieged strictly by outrageous Goring and Hopton; 2.
Besides, the great murmurings at this time, of most men, 3.
about our brethren of Scotlands not advancing Southward, as was expected and,
4.
then, greatly desired.

And Secondly, 2.
if we consider the Army it self, O, the wonderful base and despicable
esteem that was thereof, Considering the Army it self
not only in the Kings Army, and Malignants, but even among very many seeming
friends among us, and those no mean ones too! O how did they disparage,
undervalue, and contemn, as it were, this New-Modelled Army, calling it, a New
Nodelled Army, jeering them, as a company of young Tyroes, The new Modeled Army
despised and scorned.
or fresh-water-Souldiers; heerby, as much as in them was, to discountenance
and dis-hearten the most noble General himself, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and to
weaken the hands, and despond the spirits of his Soldiers; if God himself had
not mightily upheld them, and put as it were, an extraordinary spirit and
courage into them; most remarkably making good that most excellent passage of
the Apostle. 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
That God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
the seeming weak thing of the world to confound the things which are mighty:
And base things (in the worlds esteem) and things which are despised, yea, and
things which are not, God has chosen (as here we see) to bring to naught,
things which are.

And here, me thinks, I cannot pretermit, but most justly make honorable
mention of what I have been credibly informed of touching our most noble and
renowned General himself; An Excellent note touching the General himself,
about this fight and Victory.
Viz. That he was observed before this fight to have been exceeding merry and
cheerful in his carriage and countenance among his Commanders and Soldiers:
But after this victory was obtained, he continually day by day carried himself
with very much settleed gravity of countenance, lowliness, and meekness of
face and heart, as giving God all the honor, and willing to take none to
himself. Two rare postures in a victorious General or Commander.
Two rare postures, indeed, of a pious and prudent Cornelius, or Commander, and
fit for all Soldiers, especially Saintlike Soldiers to practice and imitate.
For, indeed, both He, I mean this our most renowned General, and all of us
with him, might most justly (as reverend Mr. Marshall, in his excellent
Thanksgiving Sermon at Christ-Church, Reverend Mr. Marshall in his Thanksgiving
Sermon at Christ-Church in London.
the Thursday following this famous Victory) say concerning this glorious
Victory, as the most noble and renowned late Lord General, nobly said at
Keinton-Victory; Never more of God, and less of man. And therefore, as we
were most justly bound, our most pious and prudent Parliamentary Worthies,
immediately upon their perfect knowledge and understanding of this so glorious
a Victory, as you have, thus, fully heard, appointed a day of Solemn
Thanksgiving to be celebrated to the high honor and praise of our great and
gracious Wonder-working God, a Copy of which their Order, I have here inserted,
which was as follows.

Die Lunae, Junii 16. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that Thursday next shall be
set apart for a day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God, in all the
Churches and Chapels within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Lines of
Communication, and weekly bills of Mortallity, For the great and glorious
Victory obtained by the Parliaments Army, under the Command of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, against the Forces of the King. And Mr. Marshall and Mr. Vines be
desired to Preach at Christ-Church, before the Parliament. And that the Lord
Major, Aldermen, and Common Council do meet the Parliament there. And it is
further Ordered, That Friday being the 27 of this instant June, be set apart
for a public day of Thanksgiving for this Victory, in all the Churches and
Chappells in the several Counties of the Kingdom, under the power of the
Parliament.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

About the 15 of this instant, there came Letters out of Shropshire, which
certified of several good services performed by Colonel Mittons forces in
those parts; and for better satisfaction, I have here thought fit to insert the
Copy of the Letter it self, which was sent to renowned Colonel Mitton himself,
which was as follows.

SIR,
I Being desired by Leivtenant Colonel Goldgay, to certify our late
proceedings at Oswestree, and the good success wherewith it pleased God to
bless your Forces there; The good Service of valiant Colonel Mitt^^^ Forces
in Shropshire.
I am humbly bold thus to trouble you. On Tuesday, the third of this present
June, your Troop with a considerable party of your Foot marched unto Clerk,
being commanded by Leivtenant Colonel Goldgay, where we took 27 horse from
under their walls, being the best horse I have seen together in Wales: We
drawing off in order, the Enemy sallyed out, came through the wood with
firelocks, thinking to redeem their loss; charged our Rear-guard of horse,
whom Captain Simpkins caused to face about, and fall on them (lying in the
manner of an ambuscado) which they did, and soon got through them, and got
betwixt them and home, killed 2 of them, took 24. the Governors Leivtenant
being one, and his Organist, whose loss has caused a general Melancholy in
the Castle, and if he be not changed, their mirth and devotion (it is to be
feared) will perish together.

On Thursday the 6 instant, we marched in the like posture to Shraden, went
close under their works, took from them 24 good horse, which was the greatest
part of Dr. Charles Vaughan (then Governor) his Troop; we expected them also
to sally out, but the Dr. though he has forgotten his Preaching, since he
turned Cavalier, yet remembered his Grammar-rule, Optimum est aliena frui
insania. For, being warned by the folly and harm of Cherkmen, he was content
to sleep within doors in a whole skin, and to suffer us to march away with our
prize, without any of their lets or least disturbance. This we did without the
loss or hurt of any one man of ours. We ascribe the praise and memory of the
work to that God, who has hitherto crowned your endeavors with success; and I
doubt not, in despite of malice will do so still, under whose banner of love
I leave you, and humbly rest yours to Command.


And now upon the 19 of this instant June, being the next ensuing Thursday,
after the happy tidings of the foresaid most famous Victory at Naseby,
(according as our most pious and prudent Parliamentary Senators, had formerly
Ordered, and as our most renowned General himself Sir Thomas Fairfax had
earnestly desired by the Messenger, by whom the relation of the victory was
first brought) a day of Solemn Thanksgiving was celebrated, A day of solemn
Thanksgiving set apart to praise the Lord for the late great Victory at Naseby,
which was especially celebrated at Christ-Church in London.
and wholly set apart to give all the glory of that great Victory and mighty
mercy to the Lord alone, as it was most due, in all Churches and Chapels
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Lines of Communication;
which was, as on this day, most solemnly performed in a special manner at
Christ-Church in London, where reverend and religious Mr. Marshall, and Mr.
Vines preached that day before the whole Body of the Parliament, both Lords and
Commons, whom the Lord Major, the Aldermen and Common Council of London met
there, and had invited the said most honorable Lords and Commons to dine with
them, that day in their City, at Grocers hall.

And, here, I hope it will not be offensive, or tedious, to my Reader, to give
him a short sight or intimation of the manner of the gallant entertainment the
City gave the Parliament at Grocers Hall that day, not to mention the Messes of
their dainty cheer, which in great plenty was provided answerable to so
honorable an Assembly, but only to show you the special guests, and the
order of their placing according to their state and Orders; which was thus.

At the upper end of the Hall sat the Lord Major.

On the left hand.
The Prince Elector. Earl of Northumberland Earl of Kent Earl of Essex Earl
of Manchester Lord North Earl of Elgar. Lord Brighton Two of the Scotch
Commissioners.
On the right hand.
Earl of Pembroke Earl of Nottingham Earl of Salisbury Earl of Denbigh
Earl of Bullingbrook One Scotch Lord The Lord Say.
There were three Tables more in the Hall.

On the right hand going up, sat
Mr. Speaker at the upper end entering to the door toward the Parlour. Then all
the other Members of the House of Commons, in order. So for the middle Table,
and the like for the left hand Table going up toward the Lord Majors Table.
In the Parlour.
All the Assembly of Divines in order.
In the upper Room over that, sat
The Recorder of London, at the upper end. The Aldermen on the left hand. The
Common Council and diverse Gentlemen of quality on the right. After these the
Lord Majors Officers that attended, and diverse others sat down in the same
room where the Aldermen and the rest dined. The Trumpets continued sounding
all the time of the Feast.
After Dinner and Thanks given by Mr. Marshall, both Houses of Parliament, the
Assembly of Divines, the Aldermen of the City, and all the rest being assembled
in the Hall, they sang the 46 Psalm and after that departed.

And, Friday, June the 27 then next ensuing, was ordered by the Parliament to
be set apart for a public day of Thanksgiving for this Victory in all the
Churches and Chapels in the several Counties of the Kingdom under the power
of the Parliament. The thanks of the Parliament sent to the noble General and
his field officers* A jewel of 500 li. to be sent as a present to Sir Tho
Fairfax from the Parliament.
The House also ordered that Letters of thanks should be written and expedited
to the renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax,and his Field-Officers, for their
extraordinary valor, fidelity and judgment in this famous service against the
Enemy; And they likewise ordered, that 2 worthy Members of the House of Commons
should bestow, at least 500 pound upon a jewel to be presented to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, as an earnest of their love and affection to him: The messengers of
this victory rewarded.
And as for the Gentleman that brought this happy news to the Parliament, from
Sir Thomas, in farther testimony of their great affection to their foresaid
renowned General, the Parliament most prudently ordered that an 100 pound
should be bestowed upon the first messenger; 40 pound upon the second; and for
the other messengers that came from Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Secretary, they also
were all well gratified for their pains. The House also, about that time, fell
into a particular debate of the gallant, great and faithful service of that
heroic and most valiant Commander, Leivtenant General Cromwell, and of the
former desires of the Officers of the Horse under the Command of the General
Sir Thomas Fairfax, to have him Command them, as their Leivtenant General, and
considering the great necessity of continuing him in that employment,
notwithstanding the Self-denying Ordinance; after a long and serious debate of
this business, they ordered that Leivtenant General Cromwell, should continue
Leivtenant General of the Horse, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
during the pleasure of Both Houses, and that he should receive pay, as
Leivtenant General from the time of the establishment of Sir Thomas Fairfax
his Army, and they sent to the Lords for their concurrence, which was assented
unto by them.

Leicester regained, and the news thereof brought to London, on the Thanksgiving
day in the morning, the more to sweete^ that days joy.
And upon the foresaid 19 of this instant June, Both the Houses of Parliament,
and the prime Body of the City of London, keeping the day of Solemn
Thanksgiving, as has been forementioned; It pleased the Lord (as a farther
addition to our former great Cause of Thankfulness, and as an exact
completing of our present just joy that day) that that very day in the morning
before the Sermons began, the most welcome news of the happy regaining of the
Town of Leicester, by ever to be renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax was brought to
London; the particulars whereof, I have here thought fit to insert for the
Readers better content and clearer satisfaction, as they were related in a
Letter from an eminent person there in the Army, which was as follows.

Honored Sir,
Upon the routing of the Kings Army at Naseby, as aforesaid, Sir John Gell
gathered together all the forces of Darbishire, Nottinghamshire, and the
adjacent parts, The manner of the regaining of Leicester.
that possibly he could, and on Monday the 16 instant, they met with ^ome of
the Kings horse and took 200 of them; and another party met with some of the
Newarkers, and fell upon them, routed them, took 60 horse, 42 prisoners, and 80
Arms.

On the said Monday June the 16. Sir Thomas Fairfax lay before Leicester, and
sent in a Summons to the Town, to require the Governor to surrender it to him
for the use of the Parliament; and putting it to them to consider how the King
was routed, and showing them what use they might make of that Clemency, with
diverse other very gallant expressions to the summons, to advertise them how
much better it was for them to surrender than to force him to take it by
storming.

To this summons the Enemy sent a negative Answer, positively this, that they
would not surrender it; whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax called a Council of War
to consult about the storming of it, which was soon concluded on; that they
should prepare all things in readiness to round it the next day: which was
done with all expedition, not losing any time.

So they sell presently to raising of Batteries, and doing all things that were
necessary for the storming thereof, according as they had appointed, and
continued providing every thing that was requisite for the d^ing thereof, to
be in a readiness to batter it the next day, and sent into the Country
thereabouts for such helps as were necessary for the work, which went on with
great speed both night and day; so desirous we are to have a speedy end of the
work, that there may be an end of these Wars if possible.

On Tuesday the 17 of June, we drew down our Ordnance and played with our
pieces against the Town, we stormed it, playing with our Ordnance very hot on
the Newark side, which we conceived was their greatest strength; And in short
time we made a breach in their works, which struck such a terror into the
hearts of the Enemy, that the Governor sent to us to desire a Parley, and
offered to surrender upon very fair terms; as upon capitulation should be
agreed upon.

To this request (Sir Thomas Fairfax being willing to save the spilling of
innocent blood as much as may be) he assented* and promised speedily to send
in Commissioners for the Treaty, and called a Council of War, and it was
agreed that Colonel Pickering, and Colonel Rainsborough should go into
Leicester, to treat with the Governor about the surrendering the said Garrison
to Sir Thomas Fairfax. And accordingly a safe conduct was desired for them,
which being sent they went to Capitulate with the Governor about the surrender
thereof.

In the mean time Sir Thomas Fairfax was not idle, nor did he lose any time;
but went on providing and furnishing himself with Pittars, Carts, Hay,
Grenades, Ladders, and all other things necessary for storming; resolving to
fall on at their return, in case that they should not agree, not knowing how
things might fall out, during which time there was both great pains and care
taken by all in their places for the going on in the said work.

In the mean time we had intelligence that the King was on Monday the 16 of
June at Sheffield; that he came from Ashby de la zonch thither, with about
2000 horse, or more, the day before, viz. Sunday night, and marched that
morning ( viz. Monday morning) to a Randevouz, near unto Dudley Castle,
wherewith the Litchfield and Dudley horse, and others, that came in to their
Rendevouzes, the King had, The Kings flying from Leicester.
then, about 3000 horse, as it was conjectured by the Country people which saw
them. But to leave him in this his most unhappy flying progress, occasioned by
his own unholy miscarriages, and unnatural waged war against God and his
best Subjects; and to come to our present business.

All the rest of that foresaid Monday, June the 16. our Commissioners were in
capitulation with the Enemy in Leicester, and the Army went on preparing for a
storm, Preparation to storm Leicester.
having received no answer all that night, and looking for the return of our
Commissioners, the next morning, and so very early resolving to fall on, if
they had not agreed with the Enemy.

But upon Wednesday, June 18 about 2 of the clock, the Commissioners, viz.
Leicester surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax upon composition.
Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonel Pickering returned with a full conclusion,
that the Town of Leicester was to be surrendered and delivered up to the King
and Parliaments use, upon fair and fitting Articles of agreement on both sides;
namely, that Loughborough, or Hastings that pestilent Rob-carryer should have
quarter for his life, and liberty to depart both he and his Officers and
Soldiers that would, with a safe convoy for their persons, etc. But to leave
all Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance great and small, bag and baggage behind them
in the Town, save only what was agreed on for the Officers in the Articles.

With those Articles at large expressed, our Commissioners being returned unto
Sir Thomas Fairfax, certifying farther, how marveilous joyful the poor Town
of Leicester was, at the hearing of the said agreement, and that they should
be rid of the Cavalierian Roysters; which accordingly was performed, and on
Wednesday morning about 10 of the clock, Sir Thomas was permitted with all his
forces to enter into Leicester, The prize taken in Leicester
and take possession thereof for the use of the King and Parliament. Wherein
was left, 14 pieces of Ordnance; 30 Colors, 2000 Arms; 500 Horse, 50 barrels
of Gunpowder; And all other their Arms and Ammunition, and provisions in great
plenty with all their bag and baggage.

And thus you see the Lord does wonderfully for us still, yea, above the reach
of man's wisdom: and truly we cannot but much admire the goodness of Almighty
God unto us, in doing so great things for us; we cannot ascribe it to any but
to the hand of God alone, who, indeed, is the Lord of Hosts, the God of
battails, and the only giver of all Victories, to whom alone therefore be all
the honor and glory, and praise, Amen, and Amen.


About the 20 of this instant June, the prisoners which were taken by most
renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax, and famous and faithful Major General Skippon,
The Prisoners taken at Naseby fight, being near 5000, with 55 Colors, etc.
brought up to London.
at Naseby fight forementioned, being near upon 5000 in number, were conveyed
from Northampton to London, and being brought into London, they all marched
clean through the City, with all the Colors, Standards, and Ensigns, yea,
even the Kings and Queens Royal Standards, about 55 in number, which were all
carried in triumph, in the faces of the prisoners, who were thus led along to
Martins-Lane end, in the Strand, the chief Officers and Commanders being
separated from the Common Soldiers, were conducted by several guards to
Peter-House in Aldersgatestreet, The prisoners disposed of into several holds.
the Common Soldiers were disposed of in the New Military Garden, guarded by
the Green and Yellow Regiments of the Trained Bands of the City of London;
where they had liberty to discourse and talk with their Malignant friends; and
where and when some of them most audaciously entered many dangerous speeches;
other some confessed and complained they were pressed men, and enforced to take up
Arms for the King.

The next day of their being there, The usage of the Cavalierian prisoners by
our Parliament.
which was the Lords day (for they came into London on the Saturday) they had 2
eminently learned and pious Divines appointed to preach unto them, and (such
was the piety and charity of our renowned Parliamentary Worthies, that) 200
pound was presently allotted to provide bread and beer for them, which was
distributed among them the same night of their coming to Town. I appeal, then,
to the very est and most malicious malignant that is, whether the usage were
not far more Christian-like, than that most base, barbarous, and inhumanely
cruel usage of our forces in Atheistical Cornwall, (though Articles and
conditions to the contrary were consented to by the King himself, who was there
present) where they, poor souls, were very many of them stripped naked, and
enforced to march through water and mudde, The usage of our Parliaments
prisoners by the King and his Cavaliers.
thick and thin, yea, and some to go in that naked condition, without or bread
or drink, some 30. some 40. some almost 50 miles: Besides this, how many of
ours have been imprisoned at Oxford, Marleborough, and other places, who have
been tied, and manacled their necks and heels together, and many of them
starved to death, yea, even wilfully murdered in prison, as I may justly say,
in not being allowed sustenance or Surgeons to heal their grievous wounds;
where is you see here our Parliament piously and mercifully provided both
sustenance, and Surgeons for their prisoners bodies and souls too, blessed
be the Lord for it.

Much also about the foresaid time, Our Brethren of Scotlands advance to
Nottingham.
we had certain information, that our loyal and loving brethren of Scotland,
were, now, advanced and arrived at Nottingham, with 7000 foot, and 4000 horse,
expecting command for their removal, and promoving of some great design for
the good of the Kingdom, and for the carrying on of the hopeful
re-establishment of a happy and holy peace among us; and that in this their
advance, their horse in their march on the way met with some of the Kings
straggling, scattered and broken Troops fled from Naseby, and took at least 60
horse and their Riders near Skipton.

And much about the same time we had certain intelligence by Letters out of
Dorsetshire, that Captain Butler having assured information that the Kings
Garrison at Corff-Castle had store of Cattle, and that they turned them out to
grazing every day, but fearing our forces, A brave exploit performed by the
Garrison of Wareham in the West.
they brought them into the Castle every night; he therefore drew forth out of
Wareham, a party of horse and foot in the night, being assisted by Captain
Jordon, and Captain Lawrence, and lay undiscovered all the night till morning,
and at break of day, the Enemy in the Castle having turned out the Cattle and
horse to grass, Captain Butler who commanded the horse drew near the Castle,
and faced the Enemy, whiles Captain Jordan, and Captain Laurence drew up the
foot, entered the Town, beat the Enemy to the Castle, and bravely kept them
play, whiles the horse drove away their Cattle from under their very walls, to
the number of, at least 140. and took about 20 good horse, and brought them all
off safely to Wareham, in great triumph and joy, without the loss of one man.

And about the 22 of June, we had credible information, by Letters out of
Cheshire, A brave defeat given to the Enemy by valiant Colo. Jones in Cheshire.
that Colonel Jones, a Gentleman of approved valor and fidelity to the
Parliaments Cause, having command of about 1300 horse and foot, (the horse were
Sir William Breretons, who himself was gone up to London, by virtue of the
Self-denying Ordinance) and he having assured intelligence of a party of the
Kings, consisting of about 1700. near Kidderminster in Worcestershire, about 12
miles from Worcester, he most courageously fell upon them, killed above 40 on
the place, took 300 horse and a 100 prisoners, among whom was a Leivtenant
Colonel, a Captain, and some other Officers, the remainder of them escaping
fled to Beudly and Worcester, which was, indeed, their head Quarter.

About the 26 of this instant June, our most renowned, and ever to be most
highly honored General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, sent a Letter to the high and
honorable Court, and House of Commans in Parliament, The Kings Cabinet of
Letters taken at Naseby sent to the Parliament, and the Letters opened and read.
wherein he certified his sending up to the said House that most precious
present and memorable mercy of the Lord unto us, I mean, The Kings Cabinet,
full of His and the Queens Letters, taken in the late famous fight and most
glorious Victory at Naseby; which, Sir Thomas most prudently and humbly
desired, in his Letter, might be read in a full House, and public audience of
all the Commons in Parliament; which accordingly was performed, and therein
were most happily discovered admirable matters of as great importance as ever
were discovered since the beginning of these most unhappy and unnatural
Wars; which, 4 Main heads of the Letters.
in brief, were to this effect. First, there was found a Declaration of his
Majesty's intentions for the settling of Peace and Religion in this Kingdom, 1.
certified by a Letter to the Queen, wherein he does assure her that no
agreement shall be made, but what shall be approved by her, and that all Laws
made against Popery shall be repealed; and yet when Letters came from Oxford
to the Parliament touching a Treaty, and in the Propositions for Peace, there
were verbal expressions that Laws should be made against Popery.

Secondly, 2.
he acquainted the Queen, that he intended to make a firm peace with his good
Subjects (the Irish Rebels) and that several Acts called Paynings-Law, made in
behalf of the Protestants of that Kingdom should be repealed; But in lieu
thereof 40000 Irish were expected to help on the Wars in England, for he
must wage War (he said) till this Perpetual Parliament (as he termed it)
were dissolved, for, otherwise, he could never Order things to His or Her
content.

Thirdly, 3.
in another Letter, the Queen chid the King, in that he did (in the Treaty at
Vxbridge) acknowledge the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, to be a
Parliament; which is answered in other Letters, then taken, that he did not
positively acknowledge it a Parliament, it being otherwise to be construed,
though they were so simple not to find it out. And that it was entered upon
Record among the Acts of the Kings Council, that it was not done out of any
intent to have Posterity to think that he did truly acknowledge it a
Parliament. In other Letters he also writes, That, His long Parliament would
in a short time he dissolved. In others, That, if forces could be sent to the
King out of forain Kingdoms, he would cause all the Acts of Parliament
against Papists, to be repealed.

Fourthly, 4.
the King found fault (in other Letters) that he could not prevail with his
Juncto at Oxford (which he called his Mongrell Parliament) to pass a Vote
against the Lords and Commons at Westminster, (which he called his perpetual
Parliament) that they are not a lawful Parliament, saying, Some of them were
so over-witty, some stark, fools, and others so fantastical, that he cannot
make them due any things to his content. The Queen also, in one Letter, desired
the King to give Jermin thanks for his care of her, and for his good service
there; And the King promised not to go a jot from the little paper she sent
him. Many other such like notable passages were in those Letters, but I leave
the Reader for fuller satisfaction therein to the Parliaments Declaration, The
Cabinet of Letters publicly read in Guild Hall in London, and afterward
printed and published with Annotations.
and the Letters themselves, which, shortly after, were printed and published
by Order of Parliament, with excellent annotations upon them, after they had
first been publicly read in a Common Hall, in the Guild Hall, in London, by a
Committee of both Houses of Parliament, met there for that very purpose, the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, together with
a mighty confluence of Citizens of all sorts and ranks, being assembled
thither, at the reading of the Letters and Annotations upon then, who by their
shouts and exhibilations declared their marveilous dislike and disapprobations
of the Kings and Queens evil expressions in them; and on the contrary, their
high approbation of the Parliaments proceedings, by their unanimous
acclamations upon the observations made on the said Letters by the Members of
the House of Commons) to the amazement, of the (then) present hearers, and the
future wonder and astonishment of Posterity, either Malignants or others; But
to go on.

About the 28 of this instant June, Stckesey Castle and Caus-Castle taken by
the Committee of Shrewsburies forces, and a brave Victory obtained by them,
besides.
we had certain intelligence by particular Letters out of Shropshire, of
diverse brave services performed by the valiant and active forces of Shrewsbury
Garrison, commanded by the Committee, there, namely of the taking in of Stoksey
and Caus-Castles, places of great strength and importance in those parts; The
substance of which Letters, and true relation of which said Victories, I have
here for brevities sake, faithfully set down, for the Readers full content and
satisfaction, which were as follows.

SIR,
THere was drawn out of this Garrison by order from the Committee, 500 foot,
and 300 horse, viz. part of Colonel Mackworths Regiment, and part of Colonel
Lloyds Regiment, both of them march^d along in the service, our forces marched
within five miles of Ludlow; the design being to reduce that part of this
County, and to secure it, by placing some Garrisons there, to block up Ludlow;
with a party of horse they viewed Howgate and Braincroft Castles, both of which
the Enemy had much demolished, notwithstanding they placed the Lord Calvine in
Braincroft Castle, and fell to repair and fortify it, in the interim, they
sent Leivtenant Colonel Riveling to view Stokesey Castle, a Garrison of the
Enemies; the place was conceived considerable, therefore the next morning we
drew up to it, and summoned it, but the Governor Captain Dauret, refused;
thereupon we prepared for a storm, being ready to fall on, gave a second
summons, which was hearkened unto, a parley admitted, and the Castle delivered
up, and is now Garrisoned by us: One of these Castles commands all Cordale, a
rich and fertile part of the County; the other secures all Stretonsdale, so
that Ludlow is blockt up on this side, and has only Hereford to range in,
continuing in these parts, for the securing these Garrisons, Sir Mich.
Woodhouse, Governor of Ludlow, one that came out of Ireland, procures all the
Kings Garrisons for above 20 miles compass, to draw out for his releif; Colon.
Lunsford from Monmouth; Colonel Sands from Worcester; Colonel Skudamore from
Hereford; Sir Mich. Woodhouse from Ludlow; forces from Hartlebury, and other
Garrisons, all which made a body of about 2000 horse and foot, which marched up
near Braincroft Castle, we being too weak to encounter with them, marched to
Wistenstow, within a mile of Stook, the better to enforce our selves from
Shrewsbury and Montgomery, whither we sent for forces, but came not in time
enough; the Enemies, contrary to our expectation, judging Stook of more
consequence, made haste thither, to besiege it, of whose approach, the
Colonells having intelligence, with advice of the field-Officers, drew our,
resolving to fight, our horse made what haste they could to come in, Captain
Fouks troop, to which were joined some Reformadoes, fell upon a body of the
Enemies horse, being 200. and routed them, the foot marched on with gallant
resolution, beat up all their ambuscadoes in the hedges for a mile together,
until they came to the main body, which after an hours fight, we routed and
dispersed. In this business Leivtenant Colonel Rinking deserves much honor,
in which he showed as much valor as a man could do, and also the other
Colonels did very gallantly; we slew near 100 on the place, took above 300
common Soldiers, about 60 Officers and Gentleman, all their Ordnance, bag and
baggage, 4 barrels of powder, a good quantity of match and bullets, 100 horse,
some Gentlemen of quality were slain; there being most of the Gallantry of
Herefordshire. Sir William Crofts slain.
In the action Sir William Crofts the best head-peice, and activest man in that
County was slain on the place, the Governor of Ludlow and Monmouth hardly
escaped, Sir Mich. Woodhouse his horse being taken. The glory of this great
action belongs only to God, who was pleased to make weak means isntrumental
all to do so great a work: Major Fenwick who behaved himself gallantly is
wounded, but we hope not mortally.

There were taken in this fight:
Colonel James Boughton Capt. Walter Neale Capt. George Wright Capt. Tho.
Stait. Capt. Leivten. Joseph Singe 2 Cornets 3 Ensigns 2 Leivtenants 3
Sergeants 9 Quartermasters 7 Corporalls 5 Waggoners 3 Montrosses. Gerrard
Steel, Physician. Richard Richardson, Surgeon, And many Gentlemen.
After this fight we returned to Salop, and marched out on the 14 of June
early, with 13 Colors of foot, and 5 Troops of Horse, toward Bridgenorth: On
the 16 day there was sent hither 26 prisoners, most of them Officers, taken, as
I understand, coming toward Bridgenorth, amongst these prisoners there were
four Parsons, Viz. Parson Avacham, and Parson Ambler, these two have been
wicked Incendiaries, the other two I knew not: this feat being done, our forces
faced about, and before any of us knew of it, were set down before Ca^s-Castle,
within 7 miles of this town, which is a strong Garrison of the Enemies; we are
close up to the walls already, if we be not disturbed by a greater strength,
I hope we shall carry it; all the Gentlemen of the Committee but one, are in
this service, and very active.


By Letters from Shropshire, of the 23 of June, we were certified, that the
strong Castle of Cause, after 7 days siege, was taken by the forces of
Shropshire, the Officers and Soldiers marched out with their single arms,
without any baggage, all the Horse are delivered up to the Committees, for the
service of the public. It is a place of great concernment, and stands upon a
Rock not Mineable, by this the Country is cleared on that side Severne, to
Ludlow, and quite up to Montgomery, the County is in a good condition, and will
be very speedily put into a brave posture. The Forces, (as one of credit
reports, that came thence since the taking of Cause) are now before Shrawdon
Castle.

Much also about the foresaid time, we received certain information by Letters
out of* Cheshire, that valiant Colonel Venables, Governor of Tarvin, having
intelligence that a party of Chester forces were going forth to the releif of
Caus-Castle, in the ti^e when it was besieged as aforesaid; A brave defeat
given to the Enemies by valiant Colonel Venables in Cheshire.
this vigilant Colonel, I say, in the night time, drew forth a party out of
his Garrison, went over the River of Dee, on the Welsh-side, where he met with
that party of the Kings, fell bravely upon them, who being thus suddenly and
unexpectedly assaulted, were soon put to the Rout, where he took Sir John
Powell, a Commissioner for the Kings Array, and who had formerly been High
Sheriff of the County of Chester, together with 40 more prisoners, whereof
some were Officers, and about an 100 horse, and good store of Arms; and thus
also prevented that design of the Enemies.

And about the latter end of this instant Ju^e, we had certain intelligence
out of the West, Heywo^th in Wilts taken by the forces of Sir Tho. Fairfax
of the taking of Heyworth in Wiltshire by the forces of our most renowned
General* Sir Thomas Fairfax, in his way more Westward; which was thus
performed. When the Enemy heard that our forces drew neer-unto them, a party of
them fled into the Church; but afterward their Commander in chief, drew them
out of the Church to guard the Bridge, at one end of the Town, which, for a
while, they pretty valiantly maintained, but were soon-forced to forsake it,
Sir Thomas Not slain.
with the loss of Colonel Sir Thomas Not, and diverse others, who were slain
in the place on the Enemies part; where, also, we took an 100 Arms, and other
Ammunition, together with 60 prisoners.

And here, good Reader, let me again desire thee to stay a while (and that
mo^^ justly) in great and grateful admiration and contemplation of the most
remarkable and precious providence of our good God, A sweet and summary recital
of all the excellent Parliamentary mercies of this Month.
and his most mighty and merciful protection and preservation of his
maiveilously maligned Church, the Parliaments Cause, The Burning-Bush not
consumed.
which, most like Moses his Burning-Bush, has this Month also in a most high
measure been preserved with no less than Celestial assistance in the midst
of so many fierce and furious ^lames of regal Malignity* The Burning-Bush
flourishing in flames.
not only from being even quite extinct and consumed; but even mirac^lously
made to prosper and flourish in flames, maugre all the might and machinations
of its proudest and most politic pressing and oppressing Enemies, as is most
eminently and evidently to be seen and acknowledged.

First, 1.
in that affectionate and feeling. Petition of the Citizens of London to the
Parliament, touching the then present sad and low condition of the whole
Kingdom; Together with that brave defeat given to the Enemies near Chester, by
valiant Leivtenant Colonel Venables: And that of renowned Rossiter at
H^ugh^m-House.

Especially, 2.
in that most famous, glorious and ever to be recorded Victory, most worthy to
be deeply engraven in never to be obliterated Characters, of most grateful
and gracious hearts, far more precious and pleasing to God than richest and
costliest Capitall-Letters of Gold, I mean, that most memorable Victory at
Naseby in Northamptonshire, given by our good God to his va^iant and virtuous,
his gallant and godly servant Sir Thomas Fairfax, the Parliaments most renowned
General. 3.
In the excellent successes of the Parliaments forces against their Enemies in
Shropshire; And the sacred and solemn celebration of a Day of Thanksgiving to
our allgood-giving God, for that foresaid great Victory in special; And the
Parliaments honorable gratitude to Gods Instruments therein; 4.
A rare and right way to beget more blessings. In the most happy regaining of
Leicester out of the Harpeian-hands of Enemies; And the triumphant conduction
of the Naseby Prisoners to London, there to be kept in custody; yet used there
with Christian mercy and clemency. 5.
In our loyal and loving Brethren of Scotlands nearer advance unto us, to help
the Lord against the Mighty; Together with that brave defeat given to our
Enemies by the Garrison of Wareham in the W^st; And valiant* Colonel Joneses
also against our adversaries in Cheshire. 6.
In the Lords admirable good providence in bringing to light and public
knowledge the Kings and Queens most ungodly designs for the ruinating of all
their 3 late most flourishing Kingdoms, by the happy apprehension of the Kings
Cabinet of Letters; Together with the continued good success of our forces in
S^ropshire; in the taking of Stokesey Castle, Caus-Castle, and Heighworth in
Wiltshire. In the most serious and sanctmonious rumination, A succinct return
of gratitude to God for all the great Parliamentary mercies of this Month.
and recogitation of all which most rich and rare Parliamentary Mercies and
Victories, most sweet and singular passages and fair footsteps of divine
providence and preservation, O how should our hearts b^e r^nzed and raised up
to an exceeding high pitch of praise and incessant and redundant gratitude to
our so good, so great, so gracious God, who has so gloriously, and so
graciously wrought all these great things for us, especially that most famous
and glorious, and never sufficiently to be admired mercy in Nasebies admirable
and most advantageous Victory; Concerning which, O how can England, greatly
beloved England (though most ungrateful and sinful England) but in infinitely
bound and unbounded-exultation and admiration, confess and say with the Holy
Prophet, Isai. 42. 13.
that, The Lord went forth (in this famous fight) as a mighty man, stirring up
jealousy and wrath, as a man of War, and mightily prevailing against his
enemies. By whom, Chap. 29. 20.
the terrible one is brought to naught, the scorners are consumed, and all that
maliciously watched for iniquity, and blood, are righteously cut off. And
therefore, I say, O how justly may we here take up that of the pious Prophet
David, and with him most cordially sing and say, If it had not been the Lord
who was on our side, now may England say; if it had not been the Lord who was
on our side, Psalm. 124. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, etc.
when men rose up against us, They had swallowed us up quick, when their rage
and wrath was kindled against us. Then the waters had overwhelmed us; Yea, the
proud waves had gone over our Souls. But, blessed, O, for ever blessed be the
Lord, who has not given us (as justly for our sins he might) a prey to their
mouths. For our Soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare; and all our help
stands in the name of the Lord; Hallelujah, therefore, Hallelujah, praised and
ever blessed and glorified be the name of the Lord.

July. 1645.
ANd now to proceed in our farther progress to the continued contemplation of
this admirable still continued wonder of the Burning-Bush Unconsumed, and,
therein, of the rich and rare mercies of our ever blessed and bountiful God,
the unexhaustible fountain of all goodness to us his English Israel:

And first, I shall acquaint the Reader, that whiles our most miserably seduced
King, was fleeting from place to place between Bristoll and the Forest of
Dean, etc. and (taking fierce and furious illegal courses to recruite his
mangled Army, even almost quite broken in pieces at Nasebies famous fight)
among the poor and perplexed inhabitants of Herefordshire, Worcester, and such
parts of Gloucestershire, as he had any power in to strengthen and revive his
now gasping, A day of humiliation appointed by Order of Parliament, and kept by
the Assembly of Divines in several Churches in London, to seek a blessing on
our forces in the West.
and near expiring desperate designs in the West, with Goring and Greenvill,
devilish Dives, and the rest. In this interim, I say, our most pious and
prudent Parliament had Ordered, by a special Ordinance from the House of
Commons, that the Assembly of Divines at Westminster should upon Tuesday the
first of this instant July, seek the Lord our God for his continued aid and
assistance in blessing the proceedings of our forces (then also gathering into
the West) in a set day of Humiliation, in the City of London, which was
accordingly performed by diverse of the most eminent Members of the said
Assembly, who all that day did Preach and Pray, in these following places, Viz.
In the Abbey at Westminster, in Christ-Church in London; Blackfriars, Dunstans
West, Dunstans East, Michael Cornhill, Olaves Southwark, Algate, and
Aldermanbury. A Jove o^ne principium. And are not those works like to prosper
indeed, which are begun in the Lord? Yes certainly, as now we shall yet
farther illustrate, and set forth in their subsequent and most proper places.

And much about the very same time, there being a strong suspicion of dangerous
persons, to lurk and lie hid and harbored in a house in Long-Acres, near
Covent Garden, which had been the House of one Mr. Catesby, where once the
Popes Nuncio lay, and was entertained; this House, I say, being suspected, was
suddenly searched by authority thereunto given, and there they found and
apprehended at least 29 or 30 Carts load of Papists and pernicious Malignants
goods to a great value, At least 29 or 30 Carts load of Popish goods
apprehended in a house in Long-Acre, near Covent. Garden.
being very much thereof rich goods indeed, which was all taken away and
carried to Haberdashers-Hall, or to Cambden-House. There was among them also
very much Popish apish trumpery, as Crucifixes, Images, and many Popish Books,
which were laid up and kept till a due time to be reduced into ashes by the
fire, the best use that could be made of such Roman Babylonish babyish
fooleries; and the rest of the goods to be sold to the best advantage, and the
money to be disposed of by Order of Parliament, for the use and supply of the
Parliaments Garrisons and forces in the West.

About the 4 of this instant, Our Brethren of Scotlands excellent Remonstrance
presented to the King.
our most loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland published a most pious and
modest Remonstrance, which they had lately before sent and (for certain) had
presented to the King himself; wherein they showed themselves full of godly
zeal and fidelity to God, the King and Parliament of England, which being
singularly worthy of special notice, but too large to be here inserted at
full, as it was delivered, I shall here, only, for brevities sake, give the
godly Reader some of the most memorable passages or heads thereof, The Heads
of* it.
which were to this effect.

First, 1.
that his Majesty would be pleased to call to mind their often neglected
addresses to him heretofore, and after their prayers to God for him, and his
Posterity, they certified, how unfaithful they should be to God and his
Majesty, if they should conceal the present danger wherein he is, a danger
infinitely greater than the displeasure of his people. They therefore in the
humility and grief of their Souls did prostrate themselves before his Throne,
and in the name of our Lord and Master, Jesus Christ; (...) bold to warn him
that the guilt which cleaves so fast to his Throne, and his Soul, is such, as
if not timely repented will involve him and his Posterity under the wrath of
the ever-living God.

Next, 2.
they freely proceeded to acquaint his Majesty what were the occasions of his
great and growing danger, in which, if they should be silent, their conscience
would condemn them, and the stones themselves would find expressions. As
first, for his being guilty of the shedding of the blood of many thousands of
his best Subjects. Secondly, for permitting the Mass, and other Idolatry, both
in his Family and Dominions. Thirdly, for his authorizing the book of Sports,
and by consequence the profanation of the Lords Day. Fourthly, for his not
punishing of public scandalls in and about his ^ourt. Fifthly, for the
shutting of his ears from the humble and just desires of his faithful
Subjects. Sixthly, for his complying too much with the Popish party many ways,
and namely by concluding the Cessation of Arms in Ireland, and embracing the
Counsels of those who have not set God, nor his good before their eyes.
Seventhly, for resisting, and by Arms opposing this Cause, which so much
concerns the glory of God, his own honor and happiness, and the peace and
safety of his Kingdoms. Eighthly, for some other private causes of which his
Majesty is conscious to himself. It being not the desire of these grave and
reverend men to have mentioned any particulars, if that they had not already
been public and known: For all these, and for every one of them they implore
his Majesty to fall down at the footstool of the King of Glory, to acknowledge
his offenses, to make haste to repentance, and to labor for peace with God
through Jesus Christ, that the Son of God may reign over him and his Kingdoms
in his pure Ordinances, and the Government of the Church.

Moreover, they desire his Majesty to take notice that they are not staggering
or faint hearted, through diffidence of the success of their Cause, and the
Covenant of the three Kingdoms, unto which as God has already given many
testimonies of his favor and blessing, so it shall be their unshaken
confidence that this is the work and Cause of God, which shall gloriously
prevail against all opposition, and from which with the assistance of the
Grace of God they shall never suffer themselves to be divided or withdrawn,
but shall zealously and constantly in their several Vocations endeavor with
their Estates and Lives to pursue and advance the same.

This Remonstrance being so full of piety to God, and allegiance to the King,
is able (some would think) to beget a better opinion in the stubbornest
Malignants, concerning the proceedings of our Brethren the Scots, and either to
persuade, or convince them to a better understanding of them. The Lord Digby
has returned answer that his Majesty will take it into consideration, who
knows but that God may so move his Royal heart that the Letters of this paper
may be more effectual than an Army of men in the field, and be a happy means
to reduce the King to his Parliament? But notwithstanding all this, he still
goes on in a most hardened condition, like a most miserable Prince. For, as we
well knew, in the mean while, he was making what possible speed he could to
recover new strength. His Warrants are issued forth for supplies of men, whiles
the miserable and desolate Country, that a long time has suffered under the
calamity of war, can lend him but little assistance either for men or money:
We heard that a great part of his Horsemen were wounded in Naseby fight, and
that he lately made a halt and stayed the longer in Wales to understand the
inclinations of the people: Indeed his Army might well halt, when that so many
of his men were wounded, and our swords have not so deeply wounded his men, as
he has wounded his own honor by calling over the Irish to assist him. They
say that there are a Legion or Brigade of Irish consisting of about 4000. who
are newly landed to assist him. I suspect the truth thereof, and have reason to
be doubtful of it, because I find that our greatest Intelligencers cannot
agree amongst themselves, and do much vary in what place they are landed. It
is very likely that many are come over, but not so many as are commonly
reported.

And are the barbarous and prodigious Acts of the Irish in their own Kingdom
such pleasing cruelties, that they must be sent for into England, to act them
over again here? Must the West, which suffered the last year under the horrid
lust and fury of the French, be now the Stage where the Irish shall act their
Tragedies. Rouse up thy self thou desolate and much afflicted West, thou have
now the means to shake off the yoke of thy Subjection, if thou art so happy as
to apprehend the means of thy deliverance. But to go on.

About the 6 of this instant July, whiles the poor King was thus fruitlesly
struggling ( Per fas and nefas) to recruite his foresaid broken Army; The
Garrison of Dudley castle shrewdly put to it, and ^orely defeated by our
forces, and our brethren of Scotland.
our most noble and renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax was now in the West,
endeavoring with all fidelity and magnanimity of spirit, to purchase (by Gods
assistance) Liberty to those long distressed parts of the Kingdom, and just
honor to himself; and, as credible information affirmed, had sent a choice
body of horse to Gloucester, to observe the motion of the Kings Army, and to
attend the landing of his forces on this side the River Severn, which he could
not do without apparent danger. In which interim, we had certain intelligence
that the Kings Garrison of Dudley Castle was shrewdly put to it: For, as they
were abroad plundering the Country therabout, Captain Hunt sell upon a party of
them, and having slain some, he took many horse from them, and diverse
prisoners whom he carried with him to Warwick.

Since which also (as we were credibly informed) our Brethren of Scotland
lighted on another party of them, and after a brave conflict with them, wherein
diverse of the Enemies were slain on the place, they made them less in number
by at least 80 horse than they were before. And shortly after this we were,
for certain, certified, that the Governor of Stafford, came up with a party of
horse, and gave an alarm to the Castle it self; Dudley castle faced and
outfaced by the Governor of Stafford.
Whereupon the Enemy not enduring the affront, drew forth into the field,
thinking, indeed, our party not to be so strong as afterward they found it;
and to increase this their apprehension and conceit therein, Colonel Ashburst
politickly retreated, on purpose to draw them from their place of refuge, and
to gain more miles to follow the pursuit; which by Gods mercy they resolutely
intended. Now the Enemy (thinking all their own) came on as far as
Wolverhampton after him, where the brave Colonel facing about and giving them
a violent charge, brake quite through them, and charging them again, he
absolutely routed them, and took many prisoners, among whom were 2 Captains, 3
Leivtenants and other Officers, about 60 horse, and much Arms, all which he
brought safely into Stafford.

And much about the foresaid time, we had certain intelligence by Letters from
that much honored Patriot Sir William Armyne, and Mr. Carlisle surrendered to
our brethren the Scots.
Henry Darley, and the rest of the Commissioners of the North, that the Town of
Carlisle, which had diverse weeks been besieged by a party of the Scottish Army,
under the Command of the noble Earl of Callender, was now surrendered to our
said Brethren of Scotland, upon Articles of agreement; viz. in brief, that Sir
Thomas Glemham, then Governor thereof, and his Soldiers should march with
their Arms to Newark, etc. But that they left behind them in the Town, great
store of Arms and Ammunition, 20 pieces of Ordnance, and much other good
provision.

About the 8 instant we were certainly informed, that shortly after the good
success of our Shrewsbury forces, in the taking of Caus-Castle,
Shrawarden-Castle in Shrop^shire surrendered to Colon. Macworth.
forementioned, valiant Colonel Mackworth marched to Shrawarden-Castle, where,
after summons and some shot sent forth, a parley was offered and accepted, and
the said Castle on conditions surrendered to him, wherein they found some
competent store of Arms, one Drake, and much other good provision, and the
Enemy therein being about 300 in number were sent away to Ludlow, as they
desired, and our forces presently after this, with valiant Colonel Mackworth
marched to Higharchall Castle.

And about the 10 of this instant July, Our most renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax
and noble Major General Massy met near Taunton.
we had certain information by Letters out of the West, that the Right
honorable and most renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax, and ever to be
honored Major General Massey, being happily conjoined with their forces into
one body at Branford, they now marched forward to Taunton, and understanding by
their Scouts in what posture the Enemy was; now a third time sat down about
that notable eyesore of theirs, terribly maligned Taunton, they advanced
toward them; But Goring hearing of Sir Thomas his approach, drew off to Chard,
and not daring to fight drew off all his Army from before Taunton, Taunton most
happily releived a third time.
and marched quite away from them, whereby that brave Town and the thousands of
most precious Souls therein, were now a third time (blessed be the Lord)
clearly set at Liberty from farther fear and danger of those their base and
barbarous blood-thirsty Enemies, who like devouring Locusts had lain long
lurking about their parts and quarters, in greedy gaping hope every day to have
eaten them up: But, who being thus happily driven away, the Country round about
came in unto them most joyfully, with all kind of provisions in abundance,
Great plenty of provision and a full Market already at Taunton.
whereby they had presently a most plentiful Market kept among them.

The preservation of this Town, was, indeed, of very great concernment and most
worthily to be accounted no less than a marveilous mercy from heaven, and
therefore to give the Lord our God all due honor and praise for the same; And
withal we may not neglect his instruments therein, but in the next place
highly praise and prize their love and labors, especially here also to make
particular mention of the ever to be honored General Sir Thomas Fairfax, who
after so much hardship in Marches, Siege, and Battle, The brief, but deserved
honor of our renowned General.
in so short a time, trod so much ground, as to come so seasonably to the
releif of so many brave spirited and undaunted resolved Soldiers and
honest-hearted inhabitants, who with so much difficulty (and in much want of
necessaries) had maintained themselves and defended the Town against a very
potent, and most pestilent and blood-thirsty Atheistical adversary.

About the same time also came certain intelligence unto us by Letters out of
Gloucestershire, that a party of the Parliaments forces being before Barkley
Castle, A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Barkley castle.
at a distance, to keep in the Enemy from ranging abroad, there being about 15
or 16 horse, that were as Sentinels, attending the Castle; the Enemy prepared a
party from within, of about 300 horse and foot, and came forth thinking to
surprise the said Sentinells; but those few horse discovering the Enemies
approach unto them, took the best advantage they possibly could, and bravely
defended themselves till the alarm came to the rest of their horse, who
thereupon came in speedily to their rescue, and fell upon the Enemy with much
courage, and routed them, killed 16 in the place, whereof 2 were forward
Captains, many were wounded, and about 40 taken prisoners, Sir Charles Lucas,
the Governor of the Castle was there in person in the fight, and escaped with
a wound, as we were informed; we took also at the same time 30 horse and
upward, and a 100 Arms, and pursued the Enemy to the very Castle-gates, and,
in this brave service, we lost not above 3 men. And thus we see, the Lord
does great things for us every day, ever magnified be his name therein.

And about the 12 instant, A pious Petition exhibited to the Parliament by the
Inhabitants of Westminster.
diverse Gentlemen and others of the City of Westminster, came to the
Parliament, and presented a petition to the House of Commons, in the name of
the whole City of Westminster, setting forth the great happiness and
privilege they now enjoy by the care of the Parliament, and unwearied pains
of the Divines of the Assembly, that preach the morning Lecture weekly at the
Abbey in Westminster, whereby many that lived in Darkness and Ignorance for
many years together do now see the light of the Gospel more clearly and
plainly than ever, their humble suite to the House was, that the said Ministers
so preaching weekly, viz. Dr. Stanton, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Palmer, Mr.
Hill, and Mr. Whittaker, may have a competent maintenance allowed them out of
the Revenues of the late Dean and Chapter of the said Abbey, that so they may
in some measure be enabled to subsist and encouraged to go on in this great
work of converting and bringing Souls daily nearer to God. After reading of
this Petition and debate thereupon, an Ordinance was read and Committed to a
Committee, for regulating the College of Westminster, after which the House
gave Order, the Petitioners should be called in before the House, where Mr.
Speaker in the Name and by command of the whole House, informed the Petitioners
that the House had read and debated their Petition, and had likewise read an
Ordinance for regulating the College of Westminster, and had put them both in
a way to their satisfaction, and returned them the thanks of that House for
their care and zeal for the public.

Much also about the foresaid time, we received certain information by Letters
from Abbington, of the prosperous success and brave exploits of our forces
under the command of that most valiant and vigilant Commander Major General
Brown; the substance of one of which Letters was to this effect. viz.

SIR,
I Presume you have already heard of the taking of 65 Wallingford Horses, by
our noble Major Generals forces. Likewise, how at Farrington we took 40 more,
The prosperous success of our forces at Abbington, under the Command of
valiant Major General Brown.
many prisoners, and some of note. Since which, the Enemy fell upon our New
Garrison at Gaunt House, with 500 horse and 300 foot, and one piece of
Ordnance; they being forces drawn from Oxford, Woodstock, and Farrington,
Commanded by Leg, then, Governor of Oxford; they fell upon our horse
quarters, and began to drive away our Horse, but a small party of our foot
forces out of Gaunt Garrison, beat them out of the grounds, whiles our men had
time to recover some of our horses again, with which they pursued the Enemy
above 3 miles, recovered all their horse which the Enemy had gotten, save a
matter of 3 or 4. killed 10 of them, took 14 prisoners, and 30 horse of theirs,
and this service they performed with less than 20 horse. Since which, our
horse joined with them of Gaunt House, fell into the quarters of a Regiment of
the Kings, which came to recruite the Kings Garrison at Radcot-Bridge, where
ours took 70 of the Enemies Horse, the Colonells own Colors (himself escaping
by wading over the water) together with some prisoners. And immediately upon
this good success they marched to Woodstock, into the Enemies quarters, there,
and took a Captain prisoner, with 5 or 6 others, and about 30 horse: And thus
it pleased the Lord to prosper our forces in all their attempts, and to enable
them to come off, still, with little or no loss.


And about the same time our most prudent and provident Parliamentary Statists,
having lately before deligated and chosen some of the Members of Both Houses,
to go as their Commissioners to the Parliament then begun in Scotland,
Commissioners sent to the Parliament in Scotland, and a Committee sent to the
Scotsh army
with instructions given them by our Parliament, for managing of affairs
there, in a reciprocal form (for the firmer combining of mutual love, and the
fairlyer carrying on of the affairs of Both Kingdoms, with full content on
both sides) as our loving brethren the Scots, have their Commissioners residing
here constantly with our Parliament in England; the names of which
Commissioners nominated and appointed to go thither, were, the Lord Wharton,
for the House of Peers, Sir Henry Vane, Senior; Sir William Armyne; Mr. Darley,
and Mr. Goodwin for the House of Commons. And reverend Mr. Marshall, and Mr.
Strong, Members of the Assembly of Divines, were ordered to go along with
them. So also there was a Committee of Lords and Commons ordered to be
resident with the Army of our Brethren the Scots, then, in Worcestershire, to
farther their advances for the benefit and safety of the Kingdom, and (if the
Lords will be so) to shorten the lingering plague of the Sword among us; The
names of this Committee, thus nominated to be with the Scots Army were; the
Earl of and the Lord Mountague, for the House of Peers; and Sir John Cabell,
Mr. Purefoy, Mr. Salway, and Mr. Baynton, for the House of Commons.

And, now, about the 14 of this instant, we had certain and comfortable
intelligence, that about the 9 of this instant July, being Wednesday, active,
honest, and most valiant Major General Massy, being sent forth, by our most
noble General Sir Thomas Fairfax, with a party of Horse and Dragoones, about
5000. besides foot; The famous defeat given to Gorings army at Lang-port in the
West.
had the honor of giving the first blow of a most famous and victorious
skirmish, and brave defeat given to the Enemy, at or about Lang-port; which
very blow made the Soul and Spirit of the advers Army to tremble, and faint,
and fly away. For, The first victorious blow given by renowned Major General
Massy.
he instantly fell upon about 2000 of Gorings horse in Ilmore, who, as soon as
our men came in sight of them, ran away, in great fear and confusion, and Major
General Massies forces followed and pursued them almost to their very Garrison
of Lang-port, where their foot were all quartered, and their horse at Abersoil,
and the parts adjacent; The prisoners and prizes taken at the first onset.
In which first blow of this famous defeat, this noble Major General took at
least 5 or 600 horse, about 300 prisoners, whereof were 2 Majors, 6 Captains, 9
Colors, and slew above 20 in the place; The Enemy in this their hasty retreat,
or rather plain flight from our men, still cut up the Bridges as they past,
which our men, notwithstanding, made up as fast as they brake them down; Major
General Massies policy in pursuit of his Enemies.
for, politic Major General Massy had 2 Regiments of Dragoones, which rode
with Spades and Pickaxes, and a third also with pallisadoes for these very
purposes.

On Thursday, July the 10. our renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfax, by 3 of
the clock in the morning, drew out that part of the Army, which he had with
him into Sutton fields, the rest continuing with Major General Massy, on the
other side of the River; the General had with him 7 Regiments of Horse; Our
renowned Genesis Sir Thomas Fairfax prepares for a fight
Viz. his own, Leivtenant General Cromwells, Colonel Whaleyes, Colonel
Vermudens, Colon. Graves, Colon. Riches, Colon. Fleetwoods, and Colonel
Butlers, which scarce made 2800 horse; he had all his foot with him, save the
Musketteers of 3 Regiments. Our Signal word was, God with us. The Enemies word
was, Bristoll. Early also the same morning the Enemy drew into the field and
about 7 of the clock had made themselves Masters of a pass, The Enemy also
drew forth into the field.
which lay in the midst between our body and theirs, being the only way for
our men to make way to fall upon them, where there could not march above 4 a
breast, and up to the belly in water, and their horses ready to swim, in no
little danger as they past on, and in which place the Enemy did both front and
flank them on both sides (and therefore you may easily judge what a hard task
they were put unto) and in this posture they stood till about 11 of the clock,
The straits of our forces in the Rivers.
they having in the mean time sent away most of their Ammunition bag and
baggage, The effects of the foresaid defeat.
led horses and other Lumber to Bridgewater, fearing (it seemed) to stand to
the Battle, having been so much discouraged by the defeat given them by valiant
Massy as aforesaid, on the day before. Now, when as General Fairfaxes
forlornes marched nigh the Enemy (they having divided themselves on the hill,
The Enemy put into an amazed rout and flight.
on which they stood, into several divisions and squadrons of horse and foot)
our foot fired upon them in Vollies, and our Ordnance played so quick and sure,
that the Enemy were soon routed, and seemed as in a maze, not knowing which way
to fly, to avoid the execution of our Cannon, yet all this while they
maintained the passage, which was in hot dispute between them and us, yet at
last within an hour or thereabout, we, though with difficulty gained it, and
sent horse to second our foot. Major Bethel, Major Bethels brave courage and
resolution.
with his troop only, went on in the first place, being to go up a steep hill
to charge; by that time that he came near, the Enemy drew on in a vast body of
Horse against him, and had also Musketteirs in a hedge, which did flank him,
and somewhat front him also, yet this brave Major managed the charge with such
gallantry, that he routed 2 of their divisions of about 400. received the
charge of the third division, both in front and flank, but at last being
overpowered by reason of their numbers increasing upon him, he bravely
retired to the Generals Regiment, which was not far behind him; Col.
Desborough bravely charges the Enemy, and helps Major Bethel.
and Colonel Desborough, with the Generals Troops, sheltered him by his
flank, and charged up himself with about 200 horse, and dispersed and scattered
the Enemy, and gave freedom thereby for all our horse and foot to draw into
bodies, whereupon the enemy fell to plain running, not being able to endure the
charge. The General, Leivtenant General, and some other Officers, being on
the hill at this charge, commended it for as brave and resolute a piece of
service as any they had seen performed since the beginning of these wars; The
Enemy put to ^light.
Our men having thus put the Enemy to flight, pursued them within 4 miles of
Bridgewater; And in the flight, the Enemy passing through their own Garrison of
Langport, most mischeivously and desperately fired the Town at the Bridge end,
The Enemies in their flight most desperately did set the Town of Lang-port on
fire.
to hinder our men in the pursuit; but renowned Leivt. Genesis Cromwell himself,
and his resolute Soldiers undauntedly resolved to pass through fire (as
renowned Massy had before, through water, as was forementioned) after them;
and so through the midst of Lang-port they passed, although the fire was
flaming very hot on both sides of them, there being about 20 houses in all
burnt down. And here me thinks, I cannot but take special notice of the
faithfulness of our good God, in all his holy and righteous promises, which
to his children as they are always in Christ, yea and Amen: so at this time,
in a special and most peculiar manner, that faithful promise of his by the
Prophet Isaiah, was most exactly here fulfilled to these his Saints and
Christian Soldiers. When thou possessed through the waters I will be with thee,
Isa. 43. 2, 3.
and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou also passest
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee; for I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel, and thy Savior. O the
most particular and exact performance of this good word of God here, now, I
say, to these his faithful ones. Even to wonder and admiration.

And thus it pleased the Lord to give us a glorious day of it, by this so
famous a defeat, God the great and only giver of this famous Victory.
and apparent Victory; Let the glory thereof be ascribed primarily to our good
God, as to the Author and giver of all Victories; And in the next place, to
his pious, prudent, and valiant instruments, our renowned General Sir Thomas
Fairfax, His Instruments therein.
Leivtenant General Massy, and Leivtenant General Cromwell, and the rest of
those valiant Commanders and Soldiers, who were deeply engaged therein.

A true and perfect List of the slain, prisoners, and prizes taken from the
Enemy in this famous defeat.
Slain.
Gorings Quartermaster General of Horse. Gorings Quartermaster General of
Foot. 60 Officers, that were buried about Weston, whereof some very eminent
men. 200 that were left dead upon the place, whereof many Officers, 100. or
very nigh, drowned.
Wounded.
Goring himself had a cut with a Sword over the ear. Sir Thomas Aston, and 3
or 4 Knights more wounded.
Taken Prisoners.
Leivtenant General Blothridge, alias Bertridge, Leivtenant General of the
Ordnance. Colon. Slingsby of Horse. Colon. Hunningham of Horse. Leivten. Col.
Standish of Horse. Leivten. Col. Gamble of Horse. 3 Majors of Horse. 4 Captains
of Horse. 11 Leivtenants of Horse. 20 Cornets of Horse. Colonels, Leivtenant
Colonels, Majors, Captains, and Officers of Foot, have not yet sent in their
Lists, save only 3 of the Captains of Horse. 60 Inferior Officers at least.
1900 Prisoners.
Taken besides.
35 Colors of Horse. 21 Colors of Foot. 2 Field pieces. 4000 and odd Arms.
3 Cart-load of Ammunition. 3 Cart-load of other purchase. 2000 Horse taken and
above. Diverse Arms both of Horse and Foot, daily found in the ditches, which
the enemy threw away when they fled. The Camp Wh^res fled away th^row the
hedges. 700 of those that are taken, petition to serve the Parliament.
The loss on our part.
2 Reformado Captains slain. Major Bethells thumb and forefingers shattered.
Colon. Butlers Captain Leivtenant slain. Colonel Cook shot on the mouth
slightly on his upper lip. 4 or 5 of Bethels Troop slain, and about 16 of his
Troop wounded, and very few more killed on our side.

The House of Commons Ordered, upon the happy intelligence of this famous
Victory, that 200 pound should be given to valiant Major Bethell for his
special service in this brave fight; Major Bethel and Major Harrison, that
brought the news of this victory rewarded
And two good horses to be given to valiant and virtuous Major Harrison, who
brought the news thereof.

And especially (as was most boundenly fit) our most renowned Worthies in
Parliament, Ordered and appointed that a solemn day of Thanksgiving should be
celebrated for the Lords exceeding great mercy and goodness unto us; the Copy
of which their Order, I have here thought fit to insert, as it was printed and
published by their authority, which was as follows.

Die Lunae 14 Julii. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, that Tuesday being
the 22 of this instant July, shall be set apart for a public day of
Thanksgiving to Almighty God, in all Churches and Chapels through the whole
Kingdom under the power of the Parliament, for the great and glorious Victory
obtained by the Parliaments forces, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, on
the Enemies forces in the West: And that on the same day, the Ministers do
likewise take notice of the great mercy of God in preserving the City of
London, during the sitting of this Parliament, from the infection of the
Plague, and that this order be printed and published.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Committee
of the several Counties do take care that the Order for a public day of
Thanksgiving on Tuesday sevennight be dispersed to the several Parishes in
the respective Counties; And that the Counties do keep the same day; And that
the Members of this House that serve for the several Counties do send these
Orders to the respective Committees accordingly.

And now all that I shall add for the farther illustration of the just praise
and glory of God, Observations and special serious notes upon this ^amous
victory.
touching this famous fight and glorious Victory, shall be only these few
serious and material Observations upon the same.

First, 1.
that had not God made our Soldiers forget all their weariness, and many
other former and present difficulties, and so hasted this famous work, the
Enemy had certainly been reinforced with at least 5000 Welsh foot, whereof
1500 were already come over Severn at that time.

Secondly, 2.
Greenvile, that vile Apostate, and perfidious fugitive, had undoubtedly
brought down as many out of Cornwall, with all whom we must of necessity have
buckled jointly together, and so have undergone far greater difficulty.

Thirdly, that now we having thus happily dissipated and scattered this great
Army of his Majesty's then in being, 3.
not an Army is left unto him, in any parts of the Kingdom, but such as may
be, with an ordinary active power, still scattered and discomfitted, and soon
(by Gods blessing) be brought to nothing.

Fourthly, 4.
that if the Clubmen (then risen up in Arms in those Counties, and whereof I
shall speak more particularly anon) join with us, now after this admirable
success, they also may all suddenly be at quiet, and quickly see good days,
and the West all ours.

Fifthly, 5.
I here also desire Gods people, with me, to take special notice of our most
renowned Generals wisdom, valor, and unparallelled expedition in this whole
service, ever since he first began it; and that (according to the rules of
War) the honor of all (next under our most great and glorious Lord God) is
chiefly due to him; and that it is most clear, that his rare Discipline and
sweet Harmony with his forces, with Gods blessing thereon has been his Crown.

Sixthly, 6.
consider the place where this defeat was given, viz. a poor oppressed Country,
and that in the remote parts of the Kingdom, that so from the one end of the
Land to the other, we and all they may see and know that God is for us and
with us; and it was also near the place where the remaining part of the Enemy
lay, and it is a mercy to be near the Enemy, and that in a conquering way,
too; and not to be forced to go and seek him up and down.

Seventhly, 7.
consider the persons by whom God gave this victory, namely (as I touched
before in our famous Naseby fight) that despised Army, which was the scorn and
byword of many, both seeming friends and open foes, of whom, O, said some,
They Will never fight, being fearful young Soldiers. O, says another, You will
quickly see an end of this poor New-Modelled Army, I warrant you. Alas, alas,
says a third, There is no worth in any of them all, only they pretend
Religion, forsooth, but there is not a good Soldier among them, and therefore
they shall never be able to stand against the Kings brave Army, of old, able,
experienced Soldiers. Thus, they proudly, presumptuously, yea, most foolishly,
despised the day of small things. And forgate, that, of wise Solomon, That the
race was not to the swift, nor the battle to the rider.

Eighthly, 8.
and lastly, take notice to what persons God had given the benefit of this
blessed Victory, namely (that though indeed, it must needs be granted and with
comfort recorded, it was and is the most religious and praying Army that ever
this Kingdom beheld, yet mixed with very many wicked concomitants, and rude
and irreligious coadjutors, as instruments therein) yet, I say, in general)
for us, in this Kingdom, who are a people most unfit for, most unworthy of
such and so rare mercies, who have not yet repented us of our former
abominations; Yea, who as much as in us is, refuse our own mercies, had not God
thus freely loved us. And therefore, O what infinite and ineffable praise and
thanksgivings are due to our God, who thus continually heales our backslidings,
and loves us thus freely! But now to proceed.

And now to perform my promise concerning the Western Clubmen, a disorderly
rabble, The Western Clubmen.
and rude company of Mongrell Malignants, and rotten-hearted nauseous Newtrals,
now about this time, and lately before risen up in the West; Of whom, I
confess, I have hitherto made no mention, nor of their baseness, obstinacy,
and insolency; both those of Wilts, Dorsetshire, and Sommersetshire, because I
looked on them, as on a rude and undigested body of tergiversatious Batts, and
impious Atheistical heathens, worshipping the Sunrising, The Clubmen come in
to the Parliaments party.
and frighted at the Setting of it: Who now seeing the rising of this Sun of
Victory in the Parliaments Horizon, especially the Sommersetshire Clubmen, who
indeed, at the very first seemed to be somewhat active Clubbers against
Hopton, Stowell, and the rest of those Royalists, and Roysterly incendiaries,
of the Western parts: They now all began to appear for victorious Fairfax; and
besides about 80 of Gorings forces, whom they had seized upon, and disarmed
before this fight, they brought along with them; who willingly also offered
their service to the Parliament; And after this they brought in many others of
Gorings men prisoners to our forces, and did other good service and stiff
execution against the Enemy, wherever they fastened on them.

Upon the 22 of this instant, the public day of Thanksgiving for the good
success of the Parliaments Army at Lang-port, was according to Order of
Parliament, The manner of the celebration of the Solemn Thanksgiving-day in
London, for the famous Victory over our Enemies at Langport.
forementioned, solemnly celebrated in all the Churches and Chapels in
London, and Westminster, and within the Lines of Communication; And the
Collections and contributions, gathered that day, in all Churches and Chapels
aforesaid, were for the releif of our distressed brethren in the West, to
refresh in some present measure, their afflicted loins.

And in the evening of that day, after the performance of the public and
private holy duties thereof to the Lord our God, other external expressions of
joy and thankfulness, were performed also all over the City, ringing of Bells,
and making of Bonfires, especially in Cheapside, whither a great many of Popish
pictures, Crucifixes, Images, Popish Books, and such like paultry Romish
trumpery, which, not long before, I told you, were taken in Long-Acre, were now
brought, and just in the place where the gilded gaudy Cross formerly stood,
were in a mighty Bonfire built up with firpoles, and faggots, burnt to ashes,
in the presence of multitudes of people, triumphing at the sight of it.

Upon the 26 of this instant July, came another most happy and plentiful
increase of our comfort, by Letters out of the West to London, of the certain
taking of one part of the strong Town of Bridgewater, by our most renowned and
heroick-hearted General Sir Thomas Fairfaxes forces; Bridgewater taken by
storm.
and immediately after of the total taking thereof by storm; The exact manner
whereof I have here thought fit, for the Readers fuller content and
satisfaction, to insert and set down, in a Letter sent by a worthy Gentleman of
Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army, who was a special actor in the Service, to the
Speaker of the House of Commons, which was as follows.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the House of Commons.
SIR,
I Writ to you formerly, of the late Battle with Goring, and of the taking of
Lang-port and Borough, two Garrisons of the Enemy; since which time, the Army
has blocked up Bridgewater, in nature of a siege, and yet have refreshed
themselves, being necessitated to lie still (if no Enemy had been near) till
our money came up, which arrived here on Wednesday; and the Army, Horse and
Foot, being Mustered, were paid on Friday and Saturday, the rest this day. But
Action being most proper for this Army, in order to settling the peace of this
Kingdom; the General in pursuance of his first opinion moved again to storm
the Town (for that he was certainly informed they had Victuals, and would be
a work of time to gain it) It was unanimously (at last) agreed unto, that is,
to storm it, this morning about two of the clock. Yesterday being the Lords
day, Mr. Peter's in the forenoon, and Mr. Bolls in the afternoon applied
themselves to the encouragement of the Soldiers on any design they went about,
to look upon Christ in all their actions, and to be valiant in his Cause; and
about 7 at night our Foot being drawn out, and those that commanded the Storm,
and Forlorn, Master Peter's (in the field) gave them an exhortation to do their
duties, and God enabled them accordingly: For this morning, July 21. about two
a clock, the Generals Regiment began the storm, being seconded by others, and
gave not over till they were atop of the Works with their Colors, and gained
the pieces that played upon them, and let down the Bridge* whereupon Captain
Reynolds, a valiant young Gentleman, entered with a Forlorn-Hope of horse,
scoured the Streets, and beat them out of the hither Town into the further (our
Pikes standing bravely to the horse.) This possessed the Enemy with that fear,
being much perplexed at our taking the hither Town, and 500 prisoners that were
part of those that maintained the hither Works: That the Enemy for the most
part quitted the Line on the other side, where we were in hope the other part
of our Force had stormed the Town, and entered; but they only gave an hot alarm
while we stormed (it seems being not then ready for it (though the time agreed
on) so we lost the carrying the whole Town this time: The prisoners being
brought to the Church, above 500 in all, with Officers; 2 Leivtenant Colonells,
they assured they wanted not Ammunition, nor Victuals, only meat for Horses and
Cattle; we lost not 20 men in the storm, though in man's judgment, such was
the fierceness of it for an hour, one would not think less than a 1000 could
be slain; It was dark, and it so pleased God that they shot over for the most
part. There was not one Officer of note slain, though many in person led on
their men, and did gallantly, as Leivtenant Colonel Jackson, Leivtenant
Colonel to the General, and Colonel Hewson of Colonel Pickerings Regiment.
The Enemy being still hardened in heart, was so far from yielding, that with
Grenades and other things, they fired that part of the Town we were in, and
hardly left 3 houses standing: this much in^aged our men to see their villainy,
and the General not a little troubled to see a Town destroyed, summoned it
once more, sending his Trumpet about 5 in the evening, they within were so
peremptory, that they would not so much as offer to come to a treaty, whereupon
the General commanded the Town to be stormed on the other side, the morrow
morning.

July 22. Tuesday, at the dawning of the day the General (as the night before)
in person gave order for the forces on this side, to give a fierce alarm with
great and small shot, while they on the other side fell on, which on our side
was done with great resolution, and but that the tide was up, we might alone
have gained the Town. They on the other side, again failing to fall on, only
giving an alarm. God by his providence so ordering it that something was
wanting, and I hope in the Lord it was for the best, and for the preservation
of many a man's life. For this day, the hot alarm working nothing upon them,
which indeed was almost a second storm, the General was enraged against them,
and lest the innocent should suffer among the nocent, sent a Trumpet to the
Governor to let all women and children come out of the Town by 4 a clock this
afternoon. And accordingly, the Lady Governesse, (one too guilty of the misery
of that place) the Lady Hawley, Mistress Mar and diverse others came out, this
being done, our great Guns and Morter-peices, with fire-bals, hot Irons, etc.
played against the Town, and instantly fired it in 3 places, the wind being
great increased the fire, and all on a flame on a sudden, such a terror it
wrought upon them, that Tom Elliot came running out to the General for a
parley. The General answered him, the Governor refused it the last night, and
now that he had brought this misery on himself, the General would not admit
of a Treaty, yet if he would submit to mercy he should have it, in the mean
time till he returned a speedy and positive answer, if any Soldier in the
Town offered to take off a slate on the house, or quench the fire, our
Soldiers cried the cessation should be void, and we would take all
advantages, this so amazed them that instantly they came out, and cried mercy
for the Lords sake, so it was agreed on, and quarter they have for their lives,
and have liberty to save the Town; but as those lately come out say, the
Townsmen do not so fast quench the fire, as the Soldiers within in despite of
this Army, set it on fire in fresh places. I heard Sir John Hele, Mr. Speak,
and other of the Commissioners say, there are about 40 pieces of Ordnance, 40
hundred weight of Match, powder proportionable, victuals for 2000 soldiers for
4 Months; 500 we took the other day, above 1000 yet within; Commanders,
Reformadoes, Gentlemen, and fat Priests, its conceived above 200. Treasure in
Plate, rich Jewels, etc. conceived, and estimated to be worth, at least, an
100000 pound, but all we feared would be consumed with the fire; The works of
the Town, we found to be as strong as any in England, the Moat was very deep,
yet our foot most fearlesly waded through, all the bridges failing, but one,
and so we got over; It was also about 30 foot wide. This bearer saw the storm,
before he came away, be pleased Sir, to move for a reward for his pains.

July this 22. 1645. at 12 at night.
July 25. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Letter concerning
the taking of Bridgewater, be forthwith Printed and published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


There was taken in Bridgewater, as follows; viz. Col. Windham, the
Governor, Sir Hugh Windham, his son, Sir John Digbey, who (as it was reported)
dyed in the Town, Sir Francis Courtney, Tho. Elliot, and 2 or 3 other Knights,
6 Colonells, 14 Leivtenant Colonells, and Sergeant Majors, 100 Captains,
Leivtenants, and other Officers, 40 Gentlemen of note, 42 Pieces of Ordnance,
one of which was the Lord Generals Warning-peice, taken in Cornwall, and
another P. Ruperts pocket-pistoll, 5000 Arms, 800 Horse, 2000 Prisoners, 600
Oxen, 10 Load of Ammunition, 40 Tun of Match, all Gorings Carriages, bag and
baggage, a 100000 pounds worth of treasure, 4 Months provision in the Town.

The Messenger that brought the news was called into the House of Commons, and
had 30 pound given him as a reward. The Enemy quitted 3 small Garrisons near
Bridgewater upon the taking thereof. And that which yet more excellently and
eminently sweetens this great mercy unto us, A most exact and precious return
of our Prayers.
was, that it pleased the Lord, who is the only true God that hears prayers,
that this great blessing was granted unto us, upon Tuesday, July the 22. which
was a day set apart in London, in a special manner to seek the Lord by prayer
and humiliation, for this very thing, which, I say, the Lord gave in unto us on
the same day we sought it, as a most certain and blessed return of Prayer. O,
who (then) would not still, and for ever, trust such a gracious God and benign
and bountiful Lord and Master?

And here also I have fit opportunity to give my Reader one note more, touching
this business of Bridgewater, viz. That one Mr. Peter's being sent from thence
by Sir Tho. One Mr. Peter's presented 3 Commissions to the Parliament, taken by
Sir Tho. Fairfax in Bridgewater.
Fairfax, our most renowned General, with his own Letter to the Parliament,
for the confirmation of the truth of the premises, touching the storming and
winning of Bridgewater; He also brought with him 3 Commissions out of the
West, which he then also presented to the House of Commons, The Contents of
which were from the Prince, to one Mr. Philips, a Gentleman of that Country, to
raise a Regiment of horse, a Regiment of foot, and a Regiment of Dragoones; The
Commissions were dated in January last.

There were likewise other papers from the said Prince Charles, by which the
whole design of the Clubmen was made manifest, The plot and design of the
Clubmen discovered.
and how they were drawn into a snare to fight against the Parliament, and to
gather themselves together in such a mutinous manner, and into disorderly
bodies without any heads, till Commanders were sent and set over them. But, as
in part ye have heard, it pleased the Lord to frustrate their policies and to
bring their mischief upon their own heads, apparently seen by the late coming
in of the Sommersetshire Clubmen, to the assistance of our noble General Sir
Thomas, and their late frequent galling of Gorings Army. But now to proceed.

See still, good Reader, the admirable and unexhaustible bounty of our good
God; for, the taking of Bridgewater was not all the good news which this 26 day
of July produced unto us; for, on the very same day, Sir Rowland Edgerton (who
came with a Letter out of the North intimating the surrender of the strong
Castle of Pontefract) was also called into the House of Commons, Pontefract
Castle surrendered to the Parliament.
to relate the manner of it, which he did; and had thanks returned by the
House, for his special service and diligence in it. When he came away our
Soldiers had entered the Castle, wherein was exceeding great store of treasure,
and much Ammunition. The particulars of the surrender of which said Castle was
thus related in a Letter, sent from the Committee at York to the Parliament.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
WE thought fit the last week to summon Pontefract-Castle, which caused the
Enemy to desire a Treaty; Whereupon Colonel Wastell, Col. Copley, Col.
Overton, Col. Bright, or any three of them were authorized to treat; and this
day it was agreed that the Castle shall be delivered up to the use of the
Parliament, to morrow at 8 of the clock in the morning, with all the things
therein, save that the Officers were allowed to carry away what is properly
their own, so that it exceed not what a cloak-bagge will contain; and the
Soldiers to march to Newark, with 200 Muskets, and 200 Pikes. We consented to
so good conditions, because the Plague was very hot in the Country, and
especially in that Town; of which some of our Soldiers are dead. We are also
in Treaty with Scarborough, which we hope shortly will be reduced. Thus much
we thought fit to give you notice of, desiring the House may be acquainted
therewith, From

Your very affectionate Friends and humble Servants, Francis Pierrepont,
Wilfrid Lawson, Henry Cholmley.
York the 20 of July 1645.

And upon the 28 instant, we received most certain intelligence by Letters out
of the North, of the happy surrender also of the strong Castle of Scarborough,
Scarborough Castle surrendered to the Parliament.]
to that most valiant and brave Commander and loyal Patriot Colonel Boynton,
who lay before it, as Commander in chief of those forces, since the decease of
that thrice noble and renowned Soldier and pious Cornelius, Sir John Meldrum.
Which said strong Castle was surrendered on fair conditions. Viz. That Sir Hugh
Cholmley, that wicked Apostate, should march out with his forces to Newark, if
he pleased, or be transported into Holland, which, indeed, he desired. In
the Castle he left great store of Arms and Ammunition, and 25 pieces of
Ordnance.

And about the 29 of this instant July came certain intelligence to the House
of Commons in Parliament, by Letters from the Scottish Army at Ludbury in
Wales; concerning the taking in of Cannon-Froom, a strong and considerable
Garrison of the Enemies, which was taken by assault, Cannon Froom taken by our
Brethren of Scotland.
in which storm at least 70 of the Enemies were slain, and but 8 of the Scots
and some 20 hurt: The Governor, Colonel Barnold, was therein taken prisoner
(and mortally wounded in the fight) together with Captain Brisk, Captain Houk,
and 30 other prisoners; and all the Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein
seized on for the King and Parliament. And the House of Commons had debate
touching this and all the good service of our loyal Brethren of Scotland, and
Ordered that a Letter of Thanks should be sent to the Earl of Leven, signed by
Mr. Speaker in acknowledgement of his faithful Service for this Kingdom; and
farther therefore Ordered that a Jewel of 500 pound should be with all
covenient speed sent to the Earl of Leven, A jewel of 500 li. sent by the
Parliament to General Leven as a badge of honor to him.
and be bestowed upon him as a badge of favor and respects from Both Houses
of Parliament, to his Excellency, for the unwearyed and faithful services
since his coming over with the Scots Army into this Kingdom.

An excellent way, by gratitude to spur on the spirits, and fasten the
affections of our Soldiers to go on in their fidelity and industry for the
prosperous advance of the affairs of the Kingdom. And about the same time we
received certain assurance by Letters out of the West, that the forces of that
gallant Garrison of Lyme had taken Chadwick-House belonging to Count Arundell a
great Papist, Chadwick house in the West taken.
a place that did much mischief and annoyance to those parts, and lay within 6
miles of Lyme; There were above an 100 prisoners and their Arms taken in it,
30 horse, 3 barrels of powder, and good store of other provisions and
Ammunition.

Much also about the same time we were certainly informed of the rendition and
delivering up of Rabby Castle in Durham, Rabby Castle surrendered to the
Parliament.
upon fair and easy Articles or conditions; viz. The Officers to march away
with their Arms to Newark (that cage of unclean birds,) and the common
Soldiers, with their lives, only upon their legs, with sticks in their
hands. They left 300 good Arms behind them, and good store of powder and
Ammunition.

And upon the 30 of this instant July, (to make this Month a most completely
victorious Month, Bathe also surrendered into the Parliaments possession, with
the manner thereof.
indeed) it pleased the Lord to deliver up also into the Parliaments happy
possession, the strong Garrison of the Town of Bathe; which was related in a
Letter sent from thence by an eminent Commander and actour in the same, which,
for the Readers better content and full satisfaction, I have here thought fit
to insert and impart, as it was Printed and published by authority, which was
as follows.

SIR,
AS I gave you an account of the taking of Bridgewater, so God multiplying his
mercies upon us, we having taken in Bath also, I shall briefly give you an
account thereof: only I cannot omit something yet behind of Bridgewater, for
we have found 6 pieces of Ordnance which the Enemy had hid, and there is left
besides what was destroyed by the fire, 44 barrels of Gunpowder, and 4000
weight of Match.

On Saturday last, Sir Thomas Fairfax marched out of Bridgewater, Leivtenant
General Cromwell has been ill, but God be thanked he mends, that night we
marched to Marstock, about nine miles on the way to Sherburn, where we
quartered that night and Sunday night.

On the Lords day, we heard that Rupert had been himself in person (the day
before) at Bath with Sir Thomas Bridges, to encourage him to keep it against
us, promising him releif in case he should be besieged.

On Monday the 28 of July, 1645. the General marched to Sherborn, about 14
miles from Marstock: Major General Massy was left further West: And the same
day, viz. Monday, about 60 horse, (most Welsh) came from Prince Rupert to
strengthen Bath; and other Officers with them to Govern the Town, because that
Prince Rupert had found, when he was there two days before, that Sir Thomas
Bridges was quite out of heart to keep it: for the very name of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, strikes a terror to the Enemy. But when they were come into Bath, the
Town cried out as one man, all against the Welsh: No Welsh, no Welsh: Neither
did Sir Thomas Bridges take it well, that he should be displaced, and another
put in; which caused a great division in the Town, that the Officers and Horse
would not stay to dispute it: yet nevertheless some Welsh stayed in the Town,
which did much displease both the Governor, Officers, Townsmen; yea, and the
Garrison Soldiers also.

On Tuesday, the General sent two Regiments of horse and two Troops of
Dragoons, under the Command of Colonel Rich, to view and give account of the
condition of the Garrison of Bath, then held by Sir Thomas Bridges for the King.

The Army removed to Wells, Colonel Pickering is with a party before Sherborn,
a nest of most mischeivous vermin, under whom the Country has much suffered,
and by whom before we came thither some of our own messengers have been taken,
and our Letters intercepted, and the Country do wholly complain against them
for very great plunderers, and barbarous neighbors.

We made on toward Bath, having no foot at all with us, only the aforesaid 2
Regiments of horse, and 2 Companies of Dragoones, and about an hour before
Sunset, the South side was close beset, the Dragoones lay about Holliwell, and
we kept them on the South, and on the West parts of the Town; But the North
part of the Town lay open, for we came not to block them up, nor had we
Forces to do it, then, present there: The Enemy might have gone away on the
North part of the Town, in despite of all that we could do to hinder them,
but God did so infatuate them, that they had not power, as in our former
victories, so particularly in this taking of Bath, the hand of God was much
seen for us.

About Sunset we gained Holliwell; and placed our Dragoones within half
Pistol shot of the Gate on the Bridge at Bath, where there was some
skirmishing, and the Dragoones behaved themselves very gallantly. In the night
the Enemy within took several Allarms; and were in great fear of us; I
conceive they knew not our strength, only before had some intelligence of the
advance of our Army.

On this present Wednesday morning the Enemy heard of a party from Malmsbury,
on the North side of them, but they were not considerable, but they were struck
with such a fear that Sir Thomas Bridges sent a Messenger very early forth of
Bath to us, to desire a parley, which we wondered at, so we presently held a
parley with them, and by Sunrising had the Garrison of Bath delivered up to us,
upon very good Conditions.

1. All, both Officers and Soldiers to have quarter for their lives.

2 That Sir Thomas Bridges, and all the Officers be permitted to march away to
Bristoll, without let or molestation.

3 That Sir Thomas Bridges, and all other Field Officers, and Captains have
liberty to march away with Horse, and Arms.

4 That all Officers under the degree of Captains, march away without Arms
(only staves in their hands) to Bristoll.

5 That Sir Thomas Bridges, with all the Officers aforesaid, do immediately
march out of the Garrison, and surrender it to Colonel Rich, for the service
of the Parliament.

6 That all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, be surrendered also.

7 The common Soldiers to be left all prisoners.

All which was done, and we were possessed of the Garrison by break of the day;
And truly you may think it a strange thing for horse to take a Town, and no
foot within 15 miles of it, but you may see how God infatuates men, and
possesses them with a fear, that deprives them of wisdom and courage.

Bath July 30. 1645.

A List of what was taken in the Garrison of Bath, by Colonel Rich, on
Wednesday, July 30. 1645. Left in the Town, according to the Articles
aforesaid, 200 prisoners, which were 100 Garrison Soldiers, and 100 Welsh that
came in but three hours before, into Bath. 200 Muskets, an 100 Pikes, 6 pieces
of Ordnance, 10 barrels of Gunpounder; 10 barrels of other Ammunition; a great
quantity of Match and Bullet; Sir Thomas Bridges his Standard Colors in the
Royal Fort, 5 Colors besides; good store of Victual and other provisions;
some Pistols and Swords; all Sir Thomas his bag and baggage, besides the
Arms and provisions of the Townsmen; Together with diverse Halbert-Round^eads
and other weapons.

This Garrison was of great consequence for the straitning of the passage to
Bristoll, whereof more in its more proper place.

And that which makes this mercy much the sweeter and spiritually comfortable
to us, is; that, as that former famous mercy of Bridgewater, was given in unto
us, even whiles we were a praying for that mercy upon occasion of a special
and extraordinary Fast Day: A most remarkable return, or rather, gracious
prevention of Prayer.
So this likewise was unexpectedly cast into our laps, even in the very time
and on the day of our Solemn set Monthly Fast Day; even as a gracious
prevention of our Prayers, the Lord, heerin, most exactly verifying his own
faithful promise by the Prophet; I am found of them that sought me not. Isa.
65. Ibid. ^.
And according to that also in the same Chapter. Before they call, I will
answer; and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear. And is not here a
gracious God indeed? and is not our God, a bountifull-handed, and free-hearted
Master, indeed, who pays us our wages, before our work is done; and that,
far more than we asked, or ever did or could deserve? yes, most certainly.

And for the farther and clearer confirmation, ratification and admirable, yea,
almost incredible, illustration of this truth, give me leave, A most
singularly pious motion, as zealously as piously put into execution.
good Reader, to put thee in mind, how that much about the beginning of June
last, it pleased the Lord to hint in the heart of a godly Minister (by name Mr.
White, Preaching occasionally at reverend and religious Mr. Cases Church in
Milkestreet in London) the impregnable, and even invincible power of Prayer,
and of what precious consequence and concernment it might be for the
advancement of Gods glorious Cause, if Gods people would be pleased every
morning constantly to set apart, half an hour, or an hour at most, to seek
the Lord by servent Prayer, for a special blessing upon the present great
affairs, and negotiations of the Kingdom, both by Counsel and War, for the
good of Church and State, The Monthly morning prayers in London religiously
begun by reverend Mr. Case.
which hint, or holy alarm (as I may call it) reverend and religious, pious and
painful Mr. Case, cheerfully laying hold on, presently began this godly work,
and for the space of one whole Month, upheld it in his own Church most
sacredly and sweetly; Whom, reverend and religious Mr. Calamy (as I take it)
immediately succeeded all the next ensuing Month, and so this most blessed
work has continued and constantly been carried on, to the high honor and
glory of our Prayer-hearing God, the wonderful good of the Kingdom; and the
unexpressible joy and comfort of Gods people especially, who have been
partakers and actours in it; The blessed effects and precious returns of
prayer, ever since the foresaid free will-offering of daily ^orning prayers
began.
For, as it has been most justly observed; O, what sweet and singular
successes have been given to all our Armies ever since this pious and precious
work began! not a Month, nay, a week, nay, scarsely 2 days have past without
a blessing on our Armies, if not a Victory, in one part of the Kingdom or
other; Take, good Reader, but a succinct Summary of what God has done, heerin,
only since June and July now last past; the rest I shall give thee afterward in
their more proper places. As namely, First, That most famous and glorious
victory at Naseby; The singular good success of our forces in Shropshire; The
last releif of Taunton; The admirable re-taking of Leicester; Highwarth, and
Ilchester; The late forementioned famous Victory obtained (by Gods mighty
assistance) through fire and water, at Lang-port and Buroughs, which famous
victory we obtained that day month, whereon we obtained Naseby Victory; rare
mercies, indeed, two famous Field-victories obtained in the space of one
Month. The surrender of Carlisle; The reconcilement, and coming in of the
Western Clubmen to the Parliaments party; The winning of strong Bridgewater;
and strange and speedy obtaining of Bath; The gaining of the strong Castles of
Pontefract, Scarborough, Cannon-Fr^^, Chadwick-house, and Rabby Castle; In
these Field-victories, and 10 or 11 strong Garrisons and Castles above 10000
prisoners taken, above 50 or 60 pieces of Ordnance; Much above 10000 Arms, and
great plenty of Ammunition, bag and baggage; and all this done within the
space of less than two Months. Tell me now then, good Reader, and speak thy
conscience freely, do not all these rare and almost incredible mercies,
clearly confirm the truth of what I have affirmed, that ever since the Throne
of grace has been so constantly and daily pressed with Prayer, our faithful
Prayer-hearing God, has admirably crowned his own works in us and for us! June
and July last, justly entitled, Menses Mirabiles.
And say, I pray thee, may I not most justly style these two Months of June
and July, Menses Mirabiles, two most deservedly admired Months? And have thou
not now again (good Reader) seen, and that in a most abundant measure, this our
great Miracle, The Burning-Bush not consumed.
and amazing-wonder, even, The Burning-Bush, not only, not Consumed, but
gloriously made to spread and flourish, in the midst of all the most fierce,
and furious flames of Antichristian, Atheistical, and Maligaant wrath and
outrageous fury? Yes certainly, I know thou will easily and truly acknowledge
it; and that, if ever, here, was that faithful word of the Lord confirmed and
made good, to his maligned Church and children. Isa. 54* 17.
Now weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that
shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn; This is the heritage
of the Servants of the Lord, and their righteousness and salvation is only of
the Lord. Not unto us, therefore, Lord, Psalm. 115.
not unto us; but unto thy name alone, we give all the honor and glory of all
these great and gracious deliverances, and many and mighty mercies. Psalm. 32. 7.
Thou only have thus encompast us with Songs of deliverance. Thy mighty hand,
and thy strong and outstretched arm, alone, has gotten to thy self, and
given to us, these great and glorious Victories; to thee alone therefore ^ee
all the honor and glory, throughout all generations.

And now to go on in the continuation and happy contemplation of this next
Months most memorable Wonder of our Burning-Bush, the Parliaments Cause,
August. 1645.
still un-consumed, still eminently prospered. And here I shall begin this
Months observation; herein, with that brave defeat given to the Enemy, by that
valiant, active and faithful Commander, Captain Allen, near Stamford in
Lincolneshire, which was as follows:

About the beginning of this Month of August, 1645. we received Letters of
certain intelligence from Burleigh House, A brave defeat given to the Enemy by
Captain Allen, near Stamford, in Lincolnshire.
in those parts, that a party of Newarkers being joined with Belvoyre Forces,
to the number of about 300 in all, were gathering Taxes or Contribution Money
about Stamford and the parts thereabout; whereof valiant Captain Allen having
notice, he, with Captain Collins, drew forth all the Horse belonging to the
Garrison, being in number not above 130. or 140. at most, whereof some were
Dragoones which came after, who found the Enemy near Carlebie, retreating
homeward with their Prisoners and Plunder, among whom they had taken an
Alderman of Stamford, Sir Robert Dallison being their Commander in Chief, and
they above two for one of ours, where a hot encounter was begun between them;
for, our men notwithstanding, set upon them with admirable resolution, and were
(as it must be confessed) at first gallantly received, but, I say, after a
sharp and short dispute, it pleased God to do much for ours, and to make
courageous Captain Allen a special instrument of a brave victory, his brave
Soldiers taking more than ordinary courage, at his valiant and undaunted
behavior among them, insomuch that they utterly routed the Enemy, leaving dead
and desperately wounded twelve or fourteen on the place, and took Prisoners
Captain King and Captain Smith, took 51. Prisoners besides, and 80. Horse,
whereof Sir Robert Dallisons was one, but himself had escaped; besides they
took Major Coney, Captain Styles, Lieutenant Nicholsen, Lieutenant Thorp,
Lieutenant Nicholas Mahum, Cornet Metcalf, Thomas Martin, Adrian Scroop, and
some other Reformadoes, and rescued and brought safely home again above twenty
honest Countrymen, whom they were carrying away prisoners; and thus, I say,
they all returned triumphantly home again, with not a man of their own killed
or mortally wounded, a rare mercy and preservation indeed; to God be all the
glory thereof.

About the fourth of this instant August, Letters were sent from the Army in
the West, to the Parliament, and read in the House of Commons, concerning his
Excellencies Sir Thomas Fairfaxes entering of the Town of Sherburne, and
besieging of the Castle; and of a fight in that interim with the unruly Clubmen
of Derset and Wiltshire, especially, who still remained very refractory and
insolent, but were at last soundly beaten into better behavior, by renowned
Lieut. The taking of all the Kings Commissioners, as they sat in Counsel at
Shaftsbury, and were brought Prisoners to Sherburne by Colonel Fleetwood.
Genesis Cromwell, as by his own Letter to the Parliament, was certified of and
which notable bickering and brave defeat, I shall here give the Reader a
summary and satisfactory account, in these two particular Relations following;
and first concerning the surprising of the Kings Commissioners at Shaftsbury,
it was briefly thus: The General being marched from the Leaguer westward upon
some intended designs that way, left Sherburne Castle still sufficiently
besieged; and the Enemy seeing their friends straightned in the Castle, used
means for some addresses to be made to the King for some course to be taken for
their relief, and procured a Letter from the King to that purpose, which was
sent to his Agents of the Clubmen, to gather strength for the raising of the
Siege upon Sir Thomas Fairfaxes advance. The Leaders of the Clubmen receiving
these Letters from the King, met at Shaftsbury on Saturday the 2 of August,
1645. to consult what course to take for the effecting thereof, having their
Instructions ready; some observations were made, that they were not full enough
for the carrying on of this design, and that therefore three more might be
added to them. But in the mean while our wise and vigilant General, Sir
Thomas, hearing of the proceedings of these Clubmen, and doubting that if they
should go on, they might much impede the proceedings of those whom he had left
at Sherburne Castle, for the taking thereof, where were in that Leagner
Colonel Pickering with a Brigade of 2000. Foot, and Colonel Whaleys Regiment
of Horse, to whom the General returned the same day, (being Saturday) to
Sherburne, whether being come, and having taken up his head Quarter there, he
presently from thence sent away Colonel Fleetwood, with his own and Colonel
Whaleys Regiment of Horse, to speed to Shaftsbury, so to oppose and destroy the
Kings Commissioners Jesuiticall design there against us: With which two
Regiments Colonel Fleetwood forthwith marched to Shaftsbury, dividing his
Forces, that so, when he came near the said Town, he might, and did, surround
it, as a Guard with his Forces, whilst the rest marched into Shaftsbury, where
the Commissioners were then sitting, and thus they surprised them all, no^ one
of them escaping, whom thus taken, they brought Prisoners to Sherburne, where
they were all examined one by one, and our as virtuous as valiant General, His
Excellencies most excellent demeanor with the Kings Commissioners in their
Examinations.
learnedly and religiously confuted them all one by one, the Clergy by
Scripture, and his Advocate Young by Law; showing them plainly how they
themselves had dangerously acted contrary to their own principles and
pretenses. The List of all their names was also sent together with this
relation, the particular mention whereof, for brevities sake, I forbear; the
total number of them was full 50. some of the chiefest of them were these,
Master John Saintlo, Master Richard Buckridge, Master William Smith, Master
Jarvis, Master Hollis, Master Lovell, Master Estmond, Master Goodwin, Master
Davis, etc. and diverse of them most pestilently Malignant Priests or Ministers.

And at the foresaid time, we received the certain intelligence of the routing
and dispersing of 2500. of the forementioned Clubmen, by valiant Lieutenant
General Cromwell, which were gathered in a body in battalia upon
Hambleton-Hill, near Blanford, which in brief was performed as follows;

The Kings Commissioners, The routing and dispersing of 2500 Clubmen, by
Lieutenant General Cromwell, upon Hambleton Hill, near Blanford in the West.
who were the heads and Ringleaders, of the refractory Clubmen of Dorcester and
Wilts, being all surprised and imprisoned, as was before related: The said
Clubmen most peremptorily and insolently sent (upon the Lords Day at night) to
have their Leaders re-delivered unto them, and caused their Bells to be rung in
all places, and Alarms to be given in their ^^all way of rising, and about
2500. of them instantly met in a body at Hambleton-hill, with their Colors
displayed, which were all white (for they had gotten white silken Colors) and
their Drums and several Weapons, Muskets, Pikes, Pistols, Birding-Peeces,
Bills, Halberts, and many other several Weapons, and had thus drawn themselves
into a Body. Whereupon Lieutenant General Cromwell, with 500. Dragoones, and
500. more in a reserve to march after them, marched out from the Leaguer toward
these ^^toward Clubmen, and facing them, they drew into Battalia, and stood in
a great and ancient Roman-work, which is upon those hills, and admitted a
Parley. Lieutenant General Cromwell demanded of them the reason of their
rising. They answered, To redeem their Heads, or Leaders, requiring their
Commissioners to be delivered to them, and then they said they would return
home, but without their Leaders they would not disband.

Lieutenant General Cromwell returned answer, That they had them Prisoners;
And that they were to answer for what they had done; and that they were at
Sherburne with the General, and made a very full and worthy speech to them, to
persuade them to be wise, and return home in peace; showing them how they have
been misled by a company of Malignants: and declaring what care the General
had taken to secure their Estates, and settle peace amongst them, and what
comfort they found that submitted thereunto.

But the Clubmen were very unruly; vapouring, and protesting punctually to
rescue and redeem their Leaders, (and indeed they are the very notorious
Ringleaders of the Malignants of these parts) but the moderate party
(especially about Sommersetshire) do much deride their folly.

Lieutenant General Cromwell took great pains to appease them without shedding
of blood, but nothing would satisfy them, but to have (their Leaders) their
Heads, delivered to them.

Whereupon, the Clubmen being in Battalia, Lieutenant General Cromwell drew up
his Forces, and charged them with the 500. Dragoons, and slew some 12 of them,
wounded many, took some 200 or 300 Prisoners, of the most notorious of them,
and routed and dispersed the rest, who fled all home, leaving their Colors and
their Arms behind them. And we hope that now they will no more trouble us
again.

A List of what was taken from the Clubmen in the fight between them and
Lieutenant General Cromwell at Hambleton-hill on Monday the 4. of August,
1645. TWo thousand five hundred routed. Three hundred taken Prisoners. Twelve
slain upon the place. Many wounded. Two thousand Arms of all sorts, viz.
Muskets, Pikes, Pistols, Halberts, Birding-peeces, etc. All their Colors, and
Drums, and other Baggage. On our side we lost only three men and some wounded.

About the eigth of this instant we had certain intelligence out of Wales,
that that most valiant, active, and faithful Commander in those parts Major
General Laughorne, was also very sucessefull in those parts of Wales; A famous
defeat given to the Enemy in Wales, by valiant and faithful Major General
Laughhorne.
and understanding that the Kings designs and hopes were now quite frustrated
of receiving any more strength out of Wales, and that therefore the ravenous
Royalists, yet residing there in Garrisons, being out of hope of further help
and subsistence, then what they had or could get by plunder, they began
therefore to consume and destroy the Inhabitants hopes of their then present
Harvest, that thus nothing might be left undone (as much as in them lay) to
make Wales as miserable as the West, and truly unhappy indeed: Their Commanders
in Chief were Major General Stradling, and Major Edg^^ton: But this, I say,
the noble Major General understanding, he came with his Forces, and fell upon
them (at Colby-Moore, within three miles of Haverford-West, or thereabout) as
they were firing the Country and Corn, The Prisoners and Prizes taken at
Colby-Moore.
and that with such success and courage, that after a sharp encounter he
enforced the Enemy to fly with the loss of at least 150 of their men, who were
slain upon the place, and in rout and pursuit of whom, took three Colonels,
twelve Majors, forty other Officers, 700 Prisoners, four Pieces of Ordnance,
five Barrels of Powder, 1000 Arms, and all the Carriages that the Enemy had.
There were hearty thanks given to Almighty God, for the great Victory, by Order
from the Parliament, upon the next ensuing Lords Day, in all the Churches in
London. And indeed this brave Victory was the more remarkable, because our
Forces in those parts had been a long time before kept very low, and the
Country had suffered much by the violence and fury of Gerrard. But now this
most active, loyal, and valiant Major General, prosecuting this his Victory
and good Success, took also the Town and Castle of Haverford-West,
Haverford-West stormed and taken, both Town and Castle.
by a speedy storming of it, and in it 120 Common Soldiers, 20 Commanders and
Officers in Arms, whereof one Colonel, one Lieutenant Colonel, and one
Major, also one Piece of Ordnance, and about 150 Arms.

About the 12 of this instant August, we also received certain information by
Letters from our most renowned General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, That about the
tenth instant, that strong Castle of Sherburne, Sherburne Castle stormed and
taken by renowned Sir Tho. Fairfax.
which the Enemy had vaunted would continue and hold out a half years Siege at
least, was most valiantly stormed, and the next day taken, the manner whereof,
was in brief as follows; Upon the tenth, as aforesaid, our great Guns began
to batter the strong wall of the Castle, between the two lesser Towers thereof,
and had soon beaten down one of them, and before six of the Clock that night,
had made a breach in the Wall, so as twelve a breast might enter, whereupon the
most noble General sent a Drum with a third Summons, to surrender the Castle,
signifying with all, That if he were put to a Storm, they within would be left
inexcusable: But Sir Lewis Dives (then Governor) detained the Drum, and when
the Drum spoke some words (as Sir Lewis thought) sawcily, he told him he was in
the presence of a better man than his General, and sent no Answer till two of
the clock on Friday morning, and then he sent a Drum with this Message in
writing to the General.

Sir Lewis Dives his Answer to the Generals Summons.
SIR, I must acknowledge the advantage you have of me, by being Master of my
Walls, and that you may think me obstinate without reason, I have sent this
Drum unto you, to let you know, that if I may have such Conditions from you, as
are fit for a soldier and a Gentleman, with honor to accept, I shall
surrender this Castle into your hands, otherwise I shall esteem it a far
greater happiness to bury my bones in it, and the same resolution have all
those that are with me. And give me leave to add this, That your Victory will
be crowned with more honor by granting it, than you will gain glory by the
winning it, with the loss of so much blood as it will cost.

I am your Servant Lewis Dives
Sherburne Castle, August 15. 1645.

Upon the receipt of this Answer, our men presently prepared to storm the
Castle, which they performed with so much courage and resolution, that
instantly twenty of the Cabs leaped over the Wall, and came to our men, crying
for Quarter, the rest of them within, being as much amazed as the former, cried
out for a Parley, but then it was too late, only Quarter was given them for
their lives, and so our men entered the Castle, where they took Prisoners, The
Prisoners and prizes taken.
Sir Lewis Dives, Colonel and Governor of the Castle, together with his Lady,
Colonel Sir John Strangewaies, one of the Lord Pawlets Sons; one Sir Cotton
Knight, and Lieutenant Colonel Russell an Attorney, and sometime Sub-Governour
of Weymouth for the King, two Apostate Members of the House of Commons, diverse
of the Commissioners of Array, 9 Captains, 11 Lieutenants, 3 Cornets, 5
Colors, 55 Malignant Gentlemen of Wiltshire, and Dorsetshire, 10 Malignant
Priests, 400 Common Soldiers, above 800 Arms, 16 Pieces of Ordnance, a Mortar
Piece, and a Murderer, 60 Barrels of powder, great store of Provisions and
rich housholdstuffe, together with other good plunder, which the Enemy had
before taken from the Country, all which plunder our brave Soldiers merrily
divided among them, and that most deservedly. There were few of the Enemies
slain in the storm, and as few left unstript of what was worth anything, The
slain on our side.
after the Storm. We lost not above 94 men in all this siege and taking of the
Castle, whereof Captain Dove, and two other Captains slain with him.

About Aug. 16. our most pious Parliamentary Worthies religiously Ordered, That
(for the further advancement of the work of Reformation in matters of
Religion) First, That no Bibles should be vented in this Kingdom, The
Parliaments most pious and prudent care for the Reformation of matters in
Religion.
without the perusal of the Assembly of Divines, or such other persons as
should be thereunto appointed* Also, That all the Knights and Burgesses of the
several Counties of the Kingdom, within the power of the Parliament, should
send printed Books of the Directory for Gods Worship, fairly bound up in
Leather, unto the Committees of Parliament, residing in the respective Counties
of England and Wales, who should with all convenient speed send the same, and
cause them to be delivered unto the several respective Constables, or other
Officers, of all the several Parishes, and respective Chappalries and
Donatives within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, and the Port
and Town of Barwick, that is to say, one Book to the respective Constables,
and other Officers of every one of the said Parishes, Chappelries and
Donatives, to be paid for by the Inhabitants within the said several Parishes
and Chappelries.

And it is further hereby Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That if any
person or persons whatsoever shall at any time or times hereafter abuse or
cause the aforesaid Book of Common Prayer to be abused in any Church, Chapel,
or public place of Worship, or in any private place or Family, within the
Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, or Port and Town of Barwick, that
then every such person so offending therein, shall for the first offense
forfeit and pay the sum of five pounds of lawful English money, for the
second offense the sum of ten pounds, and for the third offense shall
suffer one whole years imprisonment, without Bail or Main prize.

And it is further Ordained, that every Minister which shall not henceforth
pursue and observe the Directory for Public Worship, according to the true
intent and meaning thereof, in all exercises of the public Worship of God
within this Realm of England, and dominion of Wales, and within the Town and
Port of Barwick, shall for every time that he shall so offend, lose and forseit
the sum of forty shillings of lawful English money. And that what person
soever shall with intent to bring the said Directory into contempt and neglect,
or to raise opposition against it, Preach, Write, Print, or cause to be written
or printed, any thing in the derogation or depraving of the said Book, or any
thing therein contained, or any part thereof, shall lose and forfeit for every
such offense, such a sum of money, as shall at the time of his conviction be
thought fit to be imposed upon him, by those before whom he shall have his
trial, provided, that it be not less than five pounds, and not exceeding the
sum of fifty pounds.

And be it further ordained by the authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall be at any time hereafter impeached or molested, of, or for any of
the offenses last above mentioned, hereafter to be committed or done contrary
to this Ordinance, unless he or they so offending be thereof indicted at the
next or second general Sessions, to be holden before any Justices of Oyre, and
determiner, or Justices of Assize, or before the Justices of Peace at their
general quarter Sessions next after any offense committed or done contrary to
the tenor of this Ordinance, and that he be thereby lawfully convicted
according to the Laws of this Realm, by verdict of twelve men, or by his own
confession.

It is further Ordered and Ordained, That all Common Prayer Books remaining in
Parish Churches and Chapels, shall within a month after the publishing of
this Ordinance, be by the Churchwardens, or Constables of the respective
Parishes, under the penalty of forty shillings, to be employed as aforesaid,
carried unto the Committees of the respective Counties, where they shall be
found, to be disposed of as the Parliament shall direct.

And about the 20. of this instant, we were for certain informed by Letters
out of the Northern parts of the Kingdom, that about this time the English and
Scottish forces were very considerable in Horse and Dragoones, for the
preservation of those parts from the rage of the Royalists, viz. That
Lieutenant General Lesley with 5000. The good condition of our Forces in the
North, and the Kings Plot there frustrated, and his Forces defeated.
Horse and Dragoons, valiant Col. Ros^^er with 1000. and the Nottingham, Darby,
and Staffordshire Horse joined with Major General Poyntz, had their Rendezvous
near Doncaster, and were complete 10000. Horse and Dragoones, their foot being
left at York, for their better safety and security; the Kings great desire and
design being at this time (as they were certainly informed) to get further
into the North, but valiant and vigilant Major General Poyntz took special
care to prevent him, and to secure the passages at Ferribridge, so to impede
his progress that way; yet at last the King was come on as near as Doncaster,
and had made Proclamation that all should come in to him to go along with him
to York, where he hoped to make a second Nest to nestle his devouring
Cormorants again, but findeing no appearance answerable to his expectation, but
contrariwise all our Forces ready to receive him, he therefore made a speedy
retreat back again, in which his retreat a party of our Horse fell fiercely
upon his rear, and ferretted them soundly, where they took the Lord Harris, a
Papist, Prisoner, together with 100. Horse, and diverse Prisoners, and forced
the King to fly away thence to Newarke.

About the 24. of this instant, the prime Prisoners taken by our renowned
General Sir Thomas Fairfax at Sherburn-Castle were brought to London by Sea,
Sir Lewis Dives, and Sir George Strangwaies brought prisoners to the Parliament
and two of the chief of them, were (as this day) brought to the House of
Commons, viz. Sir Lewis Dives, late Governor of Sherburn Castle for the King,
and Col. Sir George Strangewaies formerly a Member of that House, who were by a
strong Guard attended, and at last caused to come into the House to the Bar,
where Dives demeaned himself very supercilliously and proudly, seeming to
refuse to kneel on both his knees til he was compelled unto it; and then the
Speaker of the House of Commons, told him, that he was much to be lamented, who
notwithstanding that he had been a means to shed so much innocent blood, and
had committed so much Treason against his native Kingdom, endeavoring to
destroy the same, and helping (as much as in him was) to draw the King from his
Parliament; and yet that his heart should no more (nay not at all) relent, but
that he looked before that Honorable presence, as one whom God had given over
to hardness of heart, and impudency of carriage; he therefore for his Treasons
pronounced the Commitment of him, and of Sir George Strangewaies, to the Tower
of London, there to remain Prisoners till Justice should farther proceed
against them.

And about the 28. instant, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, our most
renowned General, having his Leaguer, now before Bristoll, we had certain
intelligence from them, that the Clubmen of Gloucester, and Somersetshire
expressed much affection to Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army, Sir Thomas Fairfaxes
Leaguer before Bristoll, and the taking of the strong Fort called Portshead
point.
and afforded them a gallant Party, for the taking of this brave and strong
City of Bristoll; and that Somersetshire had raised at least 2000. men, and
were joined with Sir Thomas in the taking of the strong Fort called
Portshead-point, the true and exact manner whereof being related by a Letter
sent from an eminent Commander in the said Leaguer, to the Speaker of the House
of Commons in Parliament; I have here thought fit for the Readers better
content and satisfaction to insert the said Letter verbatim, as it was printed
and published by authority, which was as follows.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons.
SIR, I wrote unto you the other day in what posture we were before the Town,
we have since incroached upon our Enemies, and in many places got within
Pistol shot, and have had hot incounters with them: On Monday morning last
about four a Clock they sallyed out again, and we watched how to catch them,
and that evening we took Sir Bernard Ashley the best Soldier in Bristoll, and
killed Col. Daniel, for he had seven bullets in his body, but being so near the
works, we durst not alight to bring off his body, Sir Bernard Ashley we have
Prisoner, though sore wounded: The other day, at our first coming, we shot Sir
Richard Crane (another great favourer of Ruports) through the thighe, of which
he lies dangerously ill, the party of Foot under Lieutenant Col. Kempson, has
taken the strong Fort of Ports-head point, and therein ^ix pieces of Ordnance,
and one Demy-culvering, so our Ships may come in freely into Severne; we have
also seized on one Ship in Avon, with twelve piece of Ordnance. The last night
we were all up in Arms, expecting a Sally out, of one thousand Horse upon our
Guards, being extreme wet weather all night long; the Enemy drew out under
their Works, but their Scouts discerning our readiness came not on, besides
they had a most fierce Alarm, Ports-head point was taken, and the Parliament
Ships coming up the River, the Towns men were dismayed, and threw down Arms,
Rupert imprisoned some of them, and thus is the condition of affairs for the
present. We had by this raised as good Works against theirs as may be, and if
Goring come on of the other hand: But singly, either of them we fear not. I am
in great have, and can write no more but that I am, Sir,

Your most humble servant.
From before Bristoll, Aug. 28. 1645. at 4. in the afternoon. Colonel Morgan
is before Barklay Castle, and the General has sent a Regiment of Horse to his
assistance. Our Horse before Bristoll have done five days and nights duty,
never coming off the Field.




And about the 30 of this instant August, came certain information by Letters
to London from Redding, that a Party of about 120 Horse from Wallingford and
Dennington, came into those parts to gather Contribution Money, even within a
mile of Redding; Colonel Baxter the Governor of Reading, with Captain Pile,
and as many Horse and Dragoones of their Troops as could be presently made
ready, which was not above 30 or 40 in all at most, understanding thereof, sent
to Colonel Moore and Captain Buroughs, A brave defeat given to the Enemy near
Redding.
who then had about 100 of Abington Horse quartered also at Redding to prepare
for his Reserve. The Enemy upon their March homeward ware closely followed by
the Governors party whose forlorn hope forced the Enemies Rear guard to their
body at which their body faced about, and caused our forlorn to retreat, and
they perceiving our number to be but small, pursued the Governor through and
through, yet he had but one man slain, and eight of his men were taken
Prisoners, and the Governors sword was cut off to the hilt, for upon the
Enemies facing about upon ours, the Governor seeing the Enemies advantage to
be at least four to one, did forbear an engagement, till he had sent one of
his Captains to know how far behind the Abington horse were, Ours worsted at
the first by false intelligence.
and to give them the Word, who returned to the Governor, and told him they
were at hand, which proved otherwise, to the hazard of the Governor, and his
whole party, then engaging, as you have heard. See here therefore how much
conducing to the welfare of martial affairs, true intelligence is, and how
the want of it proves destructive. In this interim, at length, and seasonably
enough, came in Colonel Moore, and Captain Buroughs with their horse, and
they, now, with the Governors Horse and Dragoones, being rallied again, very
fiercely charged the Enemy again, The Enemy quite routed and a brave victory
obtained.
bravely routed them, regained their prisoners, took about 50 Horse of the
Enemies, 60 Arms, 23 Prisoners, one Major, one Captain, and sorely wounded
another, and slew 13 of them on the ground, and in their pursuit, which ours
had upon them for at least five miles: The rest escaped by flight to tell their
fellows at Wallingford what a brave prize and purchase they had got. We had
but that one man slain upon the place, forementioned, and two dyed since of
their wounds. The Governor, Colonel Moore, Captain Pile, Captain Buroughs,
and Quartermaster Barker, behaved themselves with much gallantry in this
business, and generally the Soldiers fought all of them very bravely; but
most justly to God be all the praise of the victory.

And about the same time we also understood for certain, by Letters out of
Shropshire, That the brave and active Garrison of Shrewsbury fell also upon a
party of the Enemies at Bishops-Castle, Valiant Major Fenicks good Service at
Bishops Castle in Shropshire.
in that County, as they were hot in plundring the Fair, which was then kept
there, whom they bravely and suddenly routed, rescued all the plunder, took
200 of the Enemies Horse, and many Prisoners: This Service was performed by
valiant Major Fenick, and the Enemies party was from Ludlow and Bridge-North.

And here, now, good Reader, let me desire thee to make a little pause and
parley with thy heart and soul, in the serious contemplation and consideration
of the rich and rare mercies of this month also, The Burning-Bush unconsumed.
wherein thou have most remarkably seen the faithful performance of this our
still-continued mighty and marvelous wonder of The Burning-Bush unconsumed, or
rather indeed, more and more prospered and preserved, in the midst of such, and
so many fierce and furious flashes and flames of mischief and malignity, in
outrageous opposition Allens brave defeat given to the Enemy near Stamford
Lincolnshire: In the surprisall of the Kings Commissioners at Shaftsbury by
Colonel Fleetwood: In the routing of the Clubmen by Lieutenant General
Cromwell: In the famous defeat given to the Wales, by Major General Laughorne:
In the storming Sherburne Castle, by renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax: In the
Parliaments pious and prudent care for the reformation of matters in Religion:
In the good condition of our Forces in North, whereby a dangerous design of
the Kings was frustrated and his forces defeated: In our most noble and
renowned Generals winning of that strong Fort at Bristoll, called Ports-head
Point: In that brave, but dangerous defeat given to the Enemy Reading: And
Major Fenicks defeat given to the Enemy at Bishops-Castle in Shropshire: All
which rare Parliamentary Mercies, bestowed on us, and sore pinches and pulls
thus from time to time, put upon and wrested from our vile and vexatious
Enemies: O how ought the gracious and grateful recordation and consideration
thereof, work upon our spirits, and affect our souls with unexpressible
gratitude to our God, the most merciful, wise, and wonderful worker of them,
and cause us to break forth with holy David, that sweet singer of Israel, into
this holy ecstasy of exultation and rejoicing, sing and say, Psalm. 6^. 6, 7. 8,
Our souls wait, yea wait only upon God, for our expectation is only from him.
He only is our rock and our salvation, he is our defense, whereby we are not
moved. In the Lord our God is our salvation, and our only glory, yea he is the
rock of our strength, and our righteousness, therefore will we trust in him
still, and at all times. And thus now to proceed, September. 1645.


And here I shall begin the yet further sight and survey of this next ensuing
Months marvel, and most worthily to be admired wonder of this our still
unconsumed Burning-Bush, in representing to the Reader in the first place, an
excellent Declaration, set forth and sent into Wales, by the wisdom and
providence of the most renowned Lords and Commons in Parliament, about the
beginning of this Month of September, 1645. providently (I say) and prudently
to undeceive that pitifully misled and abused people, A most foul and false
projected slander of the Royaiists to abuse the Parliament and people of Wales.
who had been over-perswaded, and made to believe, all along, and all over that
whole Dominion and Principality, even as much as possibly might be, by the
lying and irreligious Royalists, That the Parliament mainly endeavored to make
a Conquest of their Country, and to gratify our Brethren of Scotland with the
total donation of it unto them, as a reward and requital of their assistance
in this present War; thus, most maliciously and falsely to slander the
Parliaments proceedings, and thus the more to exasperate the thoughts, and stir
and stimulate the spirits and spleen of the naturally restie Welchmen, against
the Parliament; which said Declaration, for the Readers better content and
satisfaction, and for the excellency of the thing it self, I have here thought
fit to insert it, as it was printed and published by Authority, which was as
follows.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
Die Lunae 8. September. 1645.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, are informed that by
the subtle and malicious practices of a Popish and Malignant party, opposite to
Gods Cause and the prosperity of this Kingdom, it has been insinuated and
infused into sundry of the Inhabitants of his Majesty's Do^^inions of Wales, to
dis-affect and poison them against the proceedings of the Parliament, That it
was their intention to gratify our Brethren of Scotland for their assistance
in these our extremities drawn upon us by the said Popish and Malignant party,
with the Estates and Lands of the said Inhabitants, which is so absolutely
false, that it never entered into their thoughts, and consequently needed no
refutation: Yet that the Subjects of this Kingdom, inhabiting within the said
Dominion of Wales, may receive full and befiting satisfaction, and We and our
Brethren of Scotland Vindication against so foul and so barbarous an
aspersion, the said Lords and Commons do testify and declare to all persons
whatsoever, to whom these shall come, That they do much abhor and detest an Act
of such Injustice and Inhumanity, and that they are so far from doing any
such thing, that if any of the said Inhabitants upon due sense and sorrow for
any of their Crimes and Misdemeanors committed against the present Parliament,
shall submit and apply themselves by humble Petition to the Parliament, and
desire the favor of, and reconciliation to the same, the said Lords and
Commons will be thereupon ready to receive any and all such, upon such
reasonable terms as the wisdom of the Parliament shall think in some measure
proportionable to the qualities and degrees of their several offenses, and
thereupon yield them all such aid and assistance, as they shall reasonably
desire, and the Parliament be able to (...) Provided always that this shall
not extend to any that are excepted from pardon within the Propositions lately
presented to his Majesty for a safe and well grounded Peace.

Jo. Brown Cler.
Parliamentorum.
And here now the Reader may be pleased to remember, That about the latter end
of the last Months Relations I intimated our renowned Gener^^s b^leaguering
and besieging of the strong Town or City of Bristoll, and what a good beginning
he had made there, in taking from the Enemy that strong Fort of theirs, called
Portshead-Point, And now about the ninth of this instant September, as we were
credibly informed, our noble and pious General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, resolving
to set effectually upon the work of winning and subduing the City to the
Parliaments just obedience, for the better and more happy and hopeful
effecting whereof, he most rightly and religiously resolved first to seek the
Lords assistance therein, A day of Humiliation in the Generals Army before the
storming of Bristoll.
and therefore appointed a day of holy humiliation to be solemnly kept
throughout the whole Army, which was accordingly performed* and then they all
prepared to storm the City suddenly, the Somerset Clubmen having at a meeting,
at a place called Dunderry, declared themselves with great alacrity and
readiness to give Sir Thomas their best assistance, for the regaining of this
said City of Bristoll. But before the storming thereof you must take notice,
that our most noble and renowned General had sent his Summons to Prince
Rupert, Bristoll summoned.
the then Governor thereof, to have it surrendered unto him on fair and ^itting
Articles or Propositions, which Rupert put off with tricks and delays, and
desires to send, first to his Uncle the King, ere he would or could resolve
ought therein: Thus showing himself in his old proper Colors, pre^ending one
thing and intending another, only to gain time till his Counter-Scarffs, and
inner-Lines were fully finished, about which (at that time) they were very
active and nimble (as indeed it beloved them) day and night. But to be brief,
all relations to a true Treaty being broken off, and in this the Prince and his
Confederates within, being left inexcusable, for refusing the fair and
honorable Conditions which noble Sir Thomas, like himself, had tendered unto
him, very fair, I say, and honorable; and therefore the blood that was to be
shed and inevitably spilt to be challenged at their hands, and laid on their
heads; It was now therefore (I say) peremptorily resolved on Tuesday night,
being the 9 of September* Bristoll stormed, and the manner thereof.
to storm the City, the manner of the storm was before thus agreed on, ^^lon
Welden was to have one Brigade, consisting of four T^unton Regiments, viz.
Colonel Welden, Col. Twoolds^y, Colonel Fort^soues, and Colonel Herberts
Regiments, who were to make good Somersetshire side, and to storm in three
places. Col. Mountague to command the Generals Brigade, consisting of the
Generals, Col. Mountagues, Col. Pickerings, and Sir Hardresse W^llers.
Regiments, to storm on both sides of Lawford Gate, Col. Rainsborough had
another Brigade, consisting of his own, Major General Skippons, Colonel
Hammonds, Col. Birches, and Col. Barkleys Regiments, to storm on this side the
River Froom, beginning on the right hand of the Sally-Port, The disposal of
all the Brigades and Regiments about Bristoll.
up to Priors-Fort, and 200. of this Brigade to go in Boats with the Seamen, to
storm Water-Port. One regiment of Foot and another of Horse to be moving up and
down in the Closes before the Royall-Fort, to alarm them; and one Regiment of
Dragoones, with two of Horse, to attempt the Line and Works by Clifton and
Washingtons breach. The manner of the storm being thus agreed on Tuesday at
night, all the Army, Horse and Foot, round the City, were set in a posture to
fall on; the signs to give notice when the storm should begin, were by
kindling a fire of straw, and shooting of four great Gunnes. Our Word, The
Word. Col. Rainsboroughs brave service on his part.
during the Storm, was David, and after the Line was entered, the Word was, The
Lord of Hosts. About two of the Clock in the morning the storm began, the
Soldiers shouted for joy, the service was very hot for a time, especially with
Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade, who with a party of his Forces spent 3 hours
in the storming of Pryers-Fort, a place of great advantage, which piece of
Service was as bravely performed, as ever thing was done by man, in regard they
were put to the utmost, by scaling-Ladders to win the Fort. They cut in pieces
most of the Forces within this Fort, and made the rest unserviceable, and gave
no Quarter to Major Price in the Fort. This Brigade took four great Pieces in
this Fort, And Colonel Mountagues on his part.
and two more in a Redoubt, and Colonel Mountagues Brigade took sixteen Pieces
in the several Works and Half-Moons which they gained by storming. The other
Brigade under Colonel Welden, fell on Somersetshire side, with a great deal of
resolution, but when the Ladders were set to the Works, they were too short,
the moat being very deep, so that they only alarmed the Enemy. The Clubmen who
fell on at Bedminster, much terrified the Enemy. Our loss of men was
inconsiderable, yea, almost not credible, considering their fierce brunts. And
truly in Colonel Rainsborough and Colonel Mountagues Brigade, not forty men
were lost, and our Horse entered with our Foot, the Pioneers having thrown down
the Line, and beaten off the Enemies Horse, and took Colonel Tailor, formerly
a Member of Parliament, being mortally wounded. We had on our part Captain
Ireton sore wounded, who was a Captain of Horse, an honest and stout man, Major
Bethel was slightly wounded; Major Saintleger, and two Majors more of the
Enemies part, and diverse others were taken Prisoners. Now ours, by this time,
being thus made masters of the most part of the Town, Almost all the Town taken.
and all their Works, but only the Main Fort; Rupert fled into the Castle, and
ours being about to plant Ordnance against it, Rupert being fled into the
Castle, desires a Parley.
on Wednesday morning about eight of the clock, Rupert sent to desire a Parley,
but the Soldiers were generally unwilling to hearken to any terms of Treaty,
since, now, they were in so fair a way of taking all by force; but the thrice
noble General, out of his generous and noble disposition, and resolution to
mercy, rather than to see so brave a Town burnt to ashes and destroyed (
Rupert having already fired it in three places, and vowed to burn all ere he
would yield without Articles of agreement) satisfied his Soldiers, and
condiscended to a Treaty, which by six of the clock on that Wednesday night
produced too honorable terms for such a mischievous and bloody Prince: The
Town and Castle of Bristoll surrendered on Articles of Agreement.
Colonel Murrey and another Knight being sent to the General, as Hostages for
the performance of those Articles, which were about ten in number, which here,
for brevities sake, I omit particularly to mention; and Sir Robert Pie, and Sir
Hardresse Waller were sent as Hostages to the Prince. And things on both sides
yielded to and promised being exactly performed accordingly, the Prince and his
train issued out of Bristoll, accompanied some part of his way by our renowned
General, and ours immediately possessed of the City and Castle, with all
therein, save what Rupert was permitted on the Agreement to have with him;
Intelligence of the taking of Bristoll brought to the Parliament, and the
Messengers rewarded.
all which premises were confirmed by the testimony and intelligence of three
several Messengers, sent to London immediately to the Parliament, with Letters
from Bristoll, to the House of Commons, which Messengers had, by Order of the
House, 60 l. to be divided among them, for their reward, in bringing this most
welcome news to the Parliament. And it was ordered, That on the next ensuing
Lords Day, deserved and bounden thanks should be given to Almighty God, in all
Parish Churches and Chapels within the Line of Communication and Bills of
Mortality in London and Westminster, Thanks returned to God for the thus
regaining of the City of Bristoll.
for the great and good success which God had given to our Forces under the
Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, in taking the City of Bristoll, with the Castle
and Forts thereof. And on the Lords Day fortnight following, October. 5. like
bounden thanks to be given also in all the Parish Churches within the power of
the Parliament, through all England and Wales.

Our most renowned General, upon his return from Rupert, viewed the Royal
Fort in Bristol, which he esteemed one of the bravest citadels in all England,
in it were 24 Pieces mounted upon five bastions, powder in quantity answerable,
The strength and Wealth of the City of Bristoll when it was taken.
victual in abundance of all sorts, 80 or 100 tun of Beer, Bread sufficient
to serve almost 100000 men a day: Upon the Line, Castle and Forts, might be in
all about 200 Pieces of Ordnance then mounted, and 300 Barrels of Powder, Match
and Powder proportionable, a great Magazine of Arms; some reported (and that by
the last and best intelligence) 7000. ten small Ships in the Harbor, ten
Commanders slain, The Enemies loss and our gain at Bristoll.
one Colonel mortally wounded, sixty Officers and Soldiers slain in the
storm, 37 desperately wounded: In the said storm we also took prisoners, 20
Officers in Arms, 200 Common Soldiers, and about 1000 after the taking of the
City of Bristoll, forsook the Enemy, and chose rather to fight with Sir Thomas
Fairfax, than to side any longer with the Kings Cormorants; we also took (in
special) Basalisk, the Warning-Peece which was lost in Cornwall, the year
before, with some other Pieces of ours, then also lost, so that, at Naseby,
Bridgewater, and here in Bristoll, we have re-taken all the brave Pieces of
Ordnance, we had lost before in the West. All this rare and admirable success
was the Lords doing, and is and ought to be most mavelous in our eyes, to him
alone therefore be all the praise and glory most worthily ascribed for ever and
ever. Renowned and religious Major General Skippon made Governor of Bristoll.
Diverse Gentlemen of the West did petition to the House of Commons, that
renowned and religious Major General Skippon, that famous Commander in Arms,
should be made Governor of the City of Bristoll, which was accordingly (and
that most worthily) condescended unto by the Parliament. And now to proceed.

About the 12 instant, we received certain intelligence by Letters from
Shrewsbury, that the valiant and victorious forces of that brave and most
active Garrison, Shrewsburies defeat given to the Enemy at Bridge-North.
having intelligence in what posture the Enemy lay at Bridge-North, they
suddenly and silently marched thither, and undiscovered fell upon the
Sentinels, soon surprised them, entered the Town it self, and there fell upon
the Enemy, drove them into the Castle, slew some of them, and took some
prisoners that the Enemy had of theirs, took about 180. Horse, and some good
pillage, all which they safely brought away, and returned triumphantly to
Shrewsbury again.

And about the 14 instant, we were for certain informed by ^^tters from
Coventry, that Lieutenant Colonel Phips, a brave and ^ut Gentleman of that
famous City, being requested (as a Phisi^^an) to visit the Lady Lucie at
Churlcot, about three miles from ^arwick, Gods special preservation of
Lieutenant Col. Phips of Coventry, from the danger of the Enemy.
it being within the Parliaments Garrisons, and therefore he might have thought
himself secure enough, but it seemed the Enemy had some private intelligence
hereof, and from Banbury a party of their Horse secretly attended his coming
back, and about two miles from Warwick, or little more, at their best
advantage, they discovered themselves upon him, and ere discovered, had
surrounded him, and riding up close unto him, to have laid hold on him, he
stoutly with his Sword kept them off, his man assisting him, whereupon they
shot several Pistols at him, killed his man in the place, but the brave
Lieutenant Colonel himself with his Sword only, valiantly defended himself,
and violently brake through six or seven of the Enemy, who stood to stop him in
a strait passage, and thus outriding them, got to Warwick without any hurt at
all. This was that valiant and faithful Phips, who was the chief instrument
(under God) of preserving Coventry, when the King was (at the first beginning
of this War) before it. And this, though a particular passage, yet having so
much of Gods providence and preservation in it, and that to one of the
Parliaments first and so fast friends, I thought it worthy to be here inserted,
for Gods glory, and the honor of his cause, and the faithful upholders of it.

And whereas it had pleased the Lord, in his most wise disposal and righteous
ordering of all things, as about this time, and sometime not long before, to
permit Montrosse, that most desperate and Atheistical Rebel in Scotland,
sorely and very suddenly to overrunne and spoil that Kingdom of Scotland, The
sudden most strange condition of Scotland by Montrosse.
by the cursed help of some additionall Irish Rebels, then come unto him, and
thereby to work such a mighty and sudden overture of things there, as made us
all (and that most justly) stand amazed to see that Kingdom so soon and so
universally reduced into such a deep deluge of danger and distraction; and
whereby Montrosse was lifted up to such a height of pride, and insolent
arrogance, as to go about to summon a Parliament, as Lord Paramount, and
already King of Scotland, and to force diverse rebellious and traiterous Lords
of that Kingdom (then in durance in Edenborough) out of prison, and to be set
at liberty, and sent to him, as his beloved brethren in iniquity with him, as
upon his command they were: And yet, notwithstanding all this, how admirably
and graciously again, it pleased the Lord, on a sudden, to revive this seeming
dying Kingdom, The as sudden and most admirable alteration of things again in
Scotland, to Gods glory, and that Kingdoms comfort.
and (in the midst of all Montrosses ruff and puff of pride) to disappoint
and dissipate his high-built hopes and vapourous villainies of insufferable
pride and oppression, exercised by him on the poor helpless Inhabitants where
he came. The manner whereof I shall desire the Reader to receive in this
ensuing relation extracted (for brevities sake) out of an authentic narration
thereof, sent from Barwick, immediately after the great and glorious victory
which God gave those our loving Brethren in Scotland, which was as follows:

About the 12 of this instant September, 1645. being Friday, a day of fasting
and humiliation in Scotland, and valiant and victorious Lieutenant General
David Lesley, being then come into Scotland, advanced with his Forces within
three miles of the place where Montrosses Army lay quartered, A brief Relation
of the brave and famous Victory obtained by our Brethren of Scotland, against
Montrosse in Scotland.
in Philip-Haugh, not far from Selkirk, and the morrow being Saturday, Sept.
13. he marched close up within view of the Enemy, who about 10 of the clock
that morning, according to his usual manner, had made choice of a most
advantageous ground, wherein they had entrenched themselves, having upon the
one hand an unpassable ditch, and on the other dikes and hedges, and where
these were not strong enough, they had fortified them by casting up ditches,
and lyning their hedges strongly with Musketeers: After viewing one another,
and some slight skirmishes, parties, in this kind, growing greater on both
sides, at last our Van advanced close upon the Enemy, and for almost an hour
(being between 11 and 12 of the clock) it was hotly disputed, The fight begun.
our Horse endeavoring to break through and the Enemy with great resolution
maintaining their ground, but at length Lieutenant General Lesley charging
very desperately upon the head of his own Regiment, broke the body of the
Enemies Foot, Montrosse discomfited.
after which they went all in a confusion and disorder, and the Horse wanting
their Foot, were not able to make great opposition; the Foot were hereupon cut
off and taken, whereof 100 were Irish, 100 Irish shot to death.
who were all since shot to death at a post, many of the Horse were killed on
the place, and many taken, but more in the pursuit, for they rallied again,
which, by Gods providence, occasioned their greater overthrow, The Earl of
Crawford slain.
and gave opportunity to our Horse to encounter them. Here the Earl of
Crawford the General of their Horse, was slain, the Lord Ogleby, and
Nathaniel Gordon, one of their most active Commanders were taken; of the Foot
and Horse, The slain in this Fight on the Enemies side.
it was then conceived there were between 2000 and 3000 killed. And this is
remarkable in this great business, that God should be pleased to cast into our
hands again, those prisoners that had been delivered up basely by the
Malignants in Edenborough, to Montrosse. The slain on our side.
We lost on our side Captain Barclay, and Captain Dundasse, and a very few of
our other Soldiers, but had div^rs wounded, yet killed and wounded there were
not in all above 100. The Lord of Hosts put a spirit of courage into our
Officers and Soldiers, for all of them behaved themselves most resolutely and
bravely, and after the battle, we understood for certain, that diverse of the
Enemies were killed and taken by the Country people. All Montrosses Bag and
Baggage taken.
Montrosse himself escaped with a few Horse, leaving behind him all his
baggage, among which we found his own Commission from the King, and diverse
other Commissions for Lieutenants in the several Counties, together with a
Roll of all such as had received protections from him, which did serve us as a
good Vidimus for the payment of our Soldiers. And that the greatness of Gods
goodness may shine forth in this Victory the more illustriously, I shall here
give the Reader a List of the Prisoners and slain in this remarkable Fight and
famous Victory.

Prisoners of note taken, besides those were killed at the Battle fought at
Philip-Haugh, within three miles of Selkirk in Tividale, upon the 13. September.
1645. and since in the pursuit.
Prisoners of note taken.
THe Earl of Traquaire. Lord Seaton. Lord Drummond. Lord Ogleby. Lord Gray.
Lord Linton. The Lord Napers eldest Son. The Baron of Drum, younger. The Baron
of Reasyth. The Lord of Derceys eldest Son. Granchild to the late pretended
Archbishop of S. Andrews. The Lord of Pury Ogleby the younger. Sir Robert
Spotswood, pretended Secretary of State, and Son to the late pretended
Archbishop S. Andrews. Sir John Hay, sometimes Clarke Register. Sir James
Douglas, Son to the Earl of Morton. Sir David Murray. Sir John Byres. Sir
Nathaniel Gordon. Sir Alexander Lesly, Sergeant Major General. Sir William
Rollock. William Murray, Brother to the Earl of Tullibrand. Col. William
Stewart, adjutant-Generall. Col. James Hay. O Cain, Lieutenant-Colonell to the
Irish. The Sergeant Major to the Earl of Antrim, and di^^rs Gentlemen.
Prisoners of note killed.
LOdwick Lindsay. Earl of Crawford, General of the Horse. The Baron of
Innerleigh. The Baron of Tough. The Baron of Cambusnethen, younger. And Common
Soldiers (as was touched before) between 2 and 3000.

In all which Fight, our friends of the Scots lost not one Noble man, or any
Officer of note, save only Lieutenant General Middletons Father, whom
Montrosse (before the Fight too) murdered in his bed, a grave old Gentleman
that never took up Arms at all against him. All Montrosses Carriages and
Ammunition were taken, all his Bag and Baggage, and above 4000 Arms.

And that Gods due glory may yet more illustriously appear in this famous
Fight, and rare Victory, I shall desire the Reader to take notice of these
remarkable Observations on this Fight and Victory; Observations on this Fight.
As

Montrosse having had so long a time after this last great Victory, before
Lesly came, yet he had not gotten many thousands together.

Scotland complied with the Enemy, either to preach to them, or to pray for
them.







Fast, or day of humiliation, as a precious return of our poor Prayers.

Seventhly and lastly, that in the conclusion of the fight, a paperbook
Montrosse; So as, all the rotten members in the Kingdom of Scotland were
thereby discovered in an hour, and many of them cut off in a short time, in
this their overthrow. Our Soldiers all cried out (after the victory) Give all
the glory to God, and none to us.

This relation of this famous victory (though acted in and chiefly interested
on the kingdom of Scotland, The relation of inserting this relation of
Scotland into this our English Parliamentary Chronicle.
yet) having so much of God in it, and no small influence on us of England
also, our Scottish-Brethrens welfare and ours being so mutually embarked, as
it were in one and the same vessel, I could not therefore pretermit it
insilence, but most justly make this honorable mention of it, in this our
Parliamentarie-Chronicle. But now to proceed.

About the 18. of this instant September, it pleases the Lord to show himself
wonderfully for us at the City or Town of Chester in giving (there) unto
renowned Sir William Breretons forces left under the Command of that valiant,
The SuburB, of the City of Chester wo^ by valiant active Colo^^^ Jones.
active, and faithful Colonel Jones and Adjutant General Louthane, a most
admirable victory and such singular prosperous success upon that City, as
gave us extraordinary hopes and probability of the timely total reduction
thereof to the obedience of the Praliament; which having been most exactly and
faithfully certified and set forth by letters from thence, I have here thought
fit to give the Reader (for his full content and satisfaction therein) the
Copy of one, most authentic, from a special Commander and actor therein;
which was as follows.

SIr,
It has pleased the good hand of Gods providence and assistance to lead us on
so prosperously and successefully in these parts of Cheshire, that our Leaguer
at Beeston-Castle has continually kept the said Castle in great awe, and so
kept in the enemy also at the City of Chester, The manner entering in the
Subu^^^ of Chester (...) our forces.
on Chester-side, as that they could not at any time offend us, but if they
durst be so bold as to sally forth, it has still turned to their own
prejudice. And now, lately, we heard for certain, that Byron, their Governor,
went out of Chester, on the welsh side, and we having much longed for noble Sir
William Breretons coming down to command in chief among us, which would (no
doubt) ere this time, have been an occasion of at least doubling our forces for
the better and strong managing of our affairs here; But, however, we being
unwilling to loose any advantage which we could possibly gain or might be
happily administered to us, have at this time, attempted a great design, yea,
such an one, as you will (justly) wonder at, especially knowing the smallnes of
our strength; yet (to God alone be all the praise and glory) we are now* both
able to give a very good account of it, for the present, and we doubt not by
Gods assistance, we shall be able so to do for the future. But, noble Sir, not
to trouble you any farther with a tedious preamble, time being precious with us
at this time especially; The business was thus.

On Friday last, September 19, 1645. We called a Council of War in the
Leaguer before Beeston Castle, to consult about the marching to Chester, to
storm that Garrison, and concluded that it should be done forthwith: So we
stole away from the Leaguer that night, the Enemy within the Castle knowing
nothing at all of the business; and drew off about 1300. horse and foot from
the Siege, Colonel Jones commanded the horse, and Adjutant General Louthany
the foot, and the next morning before the Enemy were awake, we came upon them,
having marched all that night through the Moors, passing over the River at
Hupley, and so on by the way of Wareton, not so much as staying at Christleton
to refresh our selves, lest by our stay we should loose the opportunity, or be
discovered. We marched that night about eight miles, and passed before break
of day between Christleton and Hunnington, and so on to Boughton, all which we
carried on so privately, that the Enemy had not so much as an alarm in the
City.

We came before the City on the North east side thereof, where we made no stop,
but presently fell to storming, and by break of day were got upon their Works,
and many of us got over in several places, before they heard any thing of us
we took their works between Cowland and Boughton, quite to the walls of the
City, the enemy still flying before us, we pursued them to the inner-worke
which they shut up against us, but we forced open the gates at the bars, and
still followed them, driving them into the East gate, which we had prevented
them of, had we not been stopped by the fastening of the gate which they did to
gain opportunity to fly into the city; we lost in all this, not above 2. men
killed, many wounded, the enemy carried away their dead all but one body, many
of note on their side are wounded, and we believe many slain, two of their
(...) works we have taken, and all that side of the Suburbs, and doubt not but
in Gods good time to give a fair account of the whole City. The Enemy within,
we hear, are about 1000. of whom many stiff Malignants* we trust we shall be
able to go on, in this work so well begun by our God for us, if the Kings
whole strength come not against us, before we have competent supplies sent to
relieve and strengthen us. Though money be scanty among our Soldiers, yet are
they not permitted to Plunder the inhabitants of any thing, nor to drive away
their Cattle. One part of the Enemy fled into Saint Warburge Minster, some at
the Eastgate, and some at Newgate; we have gained all between the Rack and
the Gate going into S. Warburge As for the North gate, we doubt not but we
shall soon determine that, we have also taken the ^oors, and the Inner-workes
there, together with the Major of the Cities house. Where we took his Sword
and his Mare, which, it seemed, for have to fly into the City, he had left
behind him.

Sir, I am your humble Servant.
Eare-gate, in Chester, Sept. 19. 1645.

The Messenger that brought this welcome News to the Parliament, had 10. l.
given him by Order from the House of Commons.

About the 20. instant we were also for certain informed that the King was
preparing to march to O^ford to Congratulate, or (...) contest and alter^ate
with his Nephew ^upert, about his so easy (as he conceived) surrender of
Bristol into the Parliaments power. But, having at that time, sent most of his
horse into (...) to compel men and money, but received nothing but (...) to
both ^his demands therein, his Messengers and Agents being in mo^^ danger of
blows than hope of supplies; they therefore returned toward his Ma^estie to tell
what course entertainment they found there; A brave defeat given to a party of
the Kings horse about Kidderminster by renowned Major General Poyntz.
see also how it pleased the Lord that if should (...), that in their way to
the king they met with a har^^ and (...) salutation than the former; for,
Valiant and vigilant Major. Genesis (...) having notice of this their march, and
also that they intended to beat up his quarters, and so to give the King the
(...) passage to Oxford; but, I say, this noble Major General, (...) on the
way about Kidd^rminster, and before they expected him, he bravely fell upon
them and soon routed them, in which conflict, he took about 150 of their
horse, slew about 100. of them on the place and (...), took diverse prisoners,
whereof some were Commanders ^ooke above 200. arms and 3. Carriages the rest
escaped by flight. It was credibly said that the King himself was then in
person with them and fled to Worcester, with those that escaped; This most
active and faithful Commander, Major Gen: Poyntz, resolving, by Gods
assistance, to make it his maine work to watch the Kings motions which way
soever he coasted about the Northen parts.

And about September 22. We had certain intelligence by Letters out of Wales,
that the Town and Castle of Cardiffe in Wales were surrendered to the
Parliaments forces there, which business in brief, was effected thus.

The hard pressures, Cardiff Town and Castle surrendered to the Parliaments
forces.
now, imposed upon those Brittanes among the Mountains (for now that they
begin to open their eyes, I will give them that ancient title) made them now at
last to look toward their true preservers, the Parliament, the Country
therefore unanimously stood upon terms of their own defense against the
ravenous Royalists oppressive power, and so sent to our Noble General Sir Tho.
Fairfax, beseeching his assistance, upon faithful assurance from them all, of
real compliance and submission to his Commands, whereupon, he presently sent
Colonel Herbert with a considerable party unto them; upon whose approach, the
Clubmen of the Country (for, into such a posture and body they were gathered)
cheerfully came in unto him and joined in a body with him, and presently the
Town and Castle of Cardiff, as aforesaid, were surrendered all unto him; in
which there were between 16. and 20. pieces of Ordinance small and great, 3. or
400. arms, 10. barrells of powder, and much ammunition and other provisions.

About September. 24, we had certain intelligence by Letters out of the West,
that the Devizes, both Town and Castle, were also yealded up to renowned
Lieutenant General Cr^^well, The Devires Town and Castle taken by valiant
Leivtenant General Cromwell.
who first sent a Summons to the Governor thereof, but received a flat
denial; Whereupon the valiant Lieutenant General Cromwell, wished the (...) to
look to himself, the Governor replying, bad him (...) it and take it, or
else ^e was never like to have it. Hereupon the undaunted Lieutenant General,
no more disputed the matter in words, but with Swords, roaring Ordnance, and
thundering threats from the Canons mouths, which soon shook the Castle, and
therewith changed the Governors former seeming resolutions, into a desire of a
Parley about a surrender, which the Noble Lieutenant General granted. But then
he desired those Articles and Conditions before offered, which now the
Lieutenant General refused to grant; yet (as he said, because he desired not
to shed blood) he was content to give liberty to all Gentlemen and Commanders
to ride away to any of the Kings Garrisons within thirty miles, or to have
liberty to go beyond Seas, or to return to their own peaceable habitations,
and the Common Soldiers to march away without any Arms, but not with the
Officers, nor to the Garrisons whither they meant, but whither else they would,
either to their own homes, or to some other Garrisons. To this they were glad
to agree, and so delivered up the Town, with all the Arms and Ammunition. There
were in the Castle five Pieces of Ordinance; Provisions for a year, 20 Barrels
of Beef, 200 Flitches of Bacon, much Wheat and Malt, the Castle well
fortified, 300 men in it: Yet the Lord (striking the Enemies hearts within,
with fear and terror) caused them thus easily to surrender (...) us: And the
Messenger that brought the News hereof to the Parliament, had 10 l. ordered to
be given unto him.

And about the 26 instant, we had further certain information by Letters out
of the West, (...) House in Wiltshire, surrendered to the Parliament.
of the taking of Lacock-House in Wiltshire, which was surrendered to Colonel
Dev^^tux, and others of our Forces, that besieged it, upon fair Conditions,
viz. That the Governor, Officers and Soldiers, should march away with their
own proper Arms, and that the House, with all the other Arms, Ammunition,
and Provisions therein, should be surrendered to our Forces. And much about the
same time, the House of Commons received a Letter from Col. General Laughorne,
Dated at Haverford-West, which informed the said House, of the singular good
success which it has pleased the Lord to give their Forces in those parts,
All Pembrokeshire reduced to the Parliaments obedience.
against the Enemy, and that they had fully cleared all the County of Pembroke.
Upon the reading whereof, the House entered into serious debate thereon, and for
the more cheerful further prosecution of the Service of the State in those
parts, the House ordered that 2000. l. should be charged in course upon the
receipt of the Excize, with consideration also for forbearance thereof, for the
speedy supply of the Forces under the command of the said Col. General. And
for the encouragement, and at a gratuity to the said Noble, The Parliaments
gratitude to Colonel General Laughorne.
(...) and Faithful Colonel Genrall Laughorne, the House ordered, That the
Estate of John ^arlow of (...), Gentleman, who had been long in actual Arms
against the Parliament, shall be settled by Ordinance of Parliament, upon the
said Col. General, and his Heirs. The House also Ordered, That the Ministers
of the several Churches and Chapels in London, Thanksgiving to God for these
so great mercies.
Westminster, and (...) of (...), should the next Lords day give thanks to
Almighty God, for the happy success of our Forces, in clearing the whole
County of Pembroke, for the surrender of the (...), and of Lacock-House also in
Wiltshire; and it was ordered, That the Lord Major of the City of London should
give timely notice thereof accordingly.

About the 28. instant, came certain intelligence by Letters out of Cheshire,
to the Parliament, of a very great and notable Victory which our good God was
graciously pleased to give to their Forces under the Command of valiant, The
famous Victory obtained by Major Genesis Poyntz. at Routon Heath, near Chester.
active, and loyal, Major General Pointz, against the Forces of the King,
within three or four miles at the (...), of the City of Chester, the manner
whereof was in brief thus; The King resenting the great danger he was in, of
the utter loss of West^hester, which, in all probability, was like suddenly to
come to pass, if speedy relief came not unto them: Our Forces which besieged
them, since the taking of the Suburbs thereof, having by their batter^es made a
breach in the Wall, The King prepares to relieve Westchester.
and purposing (...). The King, I say, having knowledge of this their danger,
resolved with what strength he possibly could make, presently to advance
thither, and with between ^ and 5000 Horse and Dragoones, part whereof he had
drayned out of many of his Garrisons, made all the speed he could to come
timely to their help. In which interim, Major General Poyntz, who indeed has
deserved much honor for his constant activity in the whole Service, and
resolution (as I told you before) most diligently to attend the Kings Motions,
having intelligence hereof, and renowned Colonel Rossiter with his Horse,
being come up to General Poyntz, Major General Poyntz, his admirable activity
to follow and prevent the King.
and the Scottish and Cheshire Horse being joined with them, they all thus
conjoined together, marched away with extraordinary expedition for Westhester,
and went on without any possible intermission, day and night, to get before the
King, and withal in his way, took in a strong House, with a Drawbridge moated
(which stood in the way of his march) in less than an hours space. And after
a very hard march, as I said, day and night, on the 24 of September. in the
morning, his van curriers discovered the Enemy upon a Moore or Heath, within
three or four miles at most of Chester, called Rowton-Moore. Whereupon
(notwithstanding his former tedious, Major General Poyntz, his remarkable
march to prevent or overtake the King.
and even overtyring marches of near upon 300 miles, not resting above a day
in a place together with diverse difficulties which he was forced to pass
through, and all this to prevent, or at least overtake the King, yet, I say,
notwithstanding all these) he immediately drew into order, and advanced upon
them (though all his forces were not then come up together) for he supposed and
hoped to take the Enemy at unawares, it being probable they could have no
intelligence of his being so near, though it proved otherwise, for his Letters
(written that night to the Commander within the out-Lines of Chester, giving
notice of his advance) were intercepted, and the Enemy being possessed of the
advantage of ground, and in order confronted our Van led by Colonel Hugh
Bethell in the midst of a Lane betwixt two Moors, The fight begun fiercely.
covered with the armed men of both Ba^taliaes, where was given a very sharp
and gallant charge by both parties, for after Pistols were discharged at half
Pikes distance, they disputed the matter with their Swords a full quarter of an
hour, The Enemy put to a retreat.
neither yielding ground to other, till at length the Enemy was forced to
retreat, whom our men pursuing, were reencountred by a fresh reserve at the
Lanes mouth, and they were likewise discomfited; and a third, but being over
powered were in the end forced to retreat through the Lane^ incapable of
receiving a Reserve to second them: O^rs sorely put to it.
here we had some loss, the Enemy pursuing to the Lanes end, but were beaten
back, for there was space for our Reserves to advance; Colonel Bethell and
Colonel Graves were then sore wounded, after this the General perceiving the
Enemy lay upon his advantage, Col. Bethell and Col. Graves sorely wounded.
only skir^^^ed him with some flying parties, while he held correspondency
with his friends in Chester Suburbs, whose sign was the discharge of two
pieces of Ordnance, when they would issue out with Horse and Foot to join^ with
him, upon whose appearing the Enemy quitted their station, and the General
with a party advanced to take the most convenient ground, giving command in
Colonel Parsons, Quartermaster general of the Army (Colonel Sandies who
performed the duty of Commissary General of the Horse, Ours much (...) by the
Enemy.
during the aforesaid march, being then employed to the Committee of both
Kingdoms) to order up the rest, which was opportunely done, for they joined
with the Auxiliary forces of Horse and Foot in the enemies ground, and were
drawn into many small Divisions and Reserves, being much overnumbred by the
Enemy, who accounted themselves 5000 Horse, and General Poyntz not above 2500
Horse, besides two small bodies of Foot, who were disposed in the two outmost
intervals of Horse; upon the very instant of this juncture the Enemy advanced
with their whole Body, and the General (leaving the charge of the reserves to
Colonel Parsons) took care of, and led up the Van Divisions, with which,
Major General Poyntz, his Horse wounded on the head.
after a round volly of shot from the Foot, he joined battle, charging the
Enemy in Front and Flanck, where his horse was deeply wounded on the head,
being continually seconded with reserves as often as there was occasion, the
rest being kept entire followed at a due distance; The prevailing General put
the Enemy to a total rout, The admirable courage of Major General Poyntz.
and although the pursuit was as hot as could be expected from such wearied
Horse, through narrow durty lanes, and over ditches, the Enemy rallied in a
great moore wide of Chester, in two vast bodies, a great distance assunder; the
first (not without some dispute) were again routed, and the other likewise, who
retreated upon the Warwick Regiment with such violence, The Enemy routed, mixed
with, and troubled ours.
as bore them away confusedly, intermixed with the flying Enemy, up to the
Outworks of the Suburbs, the Musketeers within were never the less liberal
of their Gunshot, but the Divine providence appeared much in the distribution
of the impartial Bullets, few or none lighting upon our men, though many of
the Enemy were found there expiring.

A Body of horse all the while of these last disputes appeared fixed on the top
of a hill, The Enemy appeared again in a body on a hill.
a little distant on that side Chester, wherein the King was very confidently
reputed to be, for confronting whereof, a party of Foot winged with Colonel
Lidcot, and Colonel Bethels Regiments, were drawn into a convenient Close in
the bottom, as a grand Reserve; but the night by this time falling, the body on
the hill appeared not, and those in the bottom returned to their comrades
sasiated with slaughter, prisoners, and booty of the vanquished Enemy: While
these things were thus agitated in the field, the remainder of Foot left with
Colonel Lowthian in the Suburbs were not idle, for the Enemy made a strong
sally upon them out of the City, The Enemy sallyed out of the City, are
repulsed.
and were more strenuously repulsed, the number of the slain, of the prisoners
and horse taken, is not yet known, but is generally conjectured 800 slain,
1500 men and 2000. horses taken, there was brought in that night the
underwritten list, of the considerablest men taken and slain in the fight
which was as follows: Sir Thomas D^bridgecourt, Sir Thomas Gore, Colonel
Thomas Weston, son to the Earl of Portland, and 6 more Colonells; 7.
Leivtenant Colonells; 5. Majors; 19. Captains, to one whereof the Queen had
given a Scarffe to wear for her sake; 14. Leivtenants; 7. Cornets; 19. Gent.
of his Majesty's Lifeguard; 20. other Gent. 5. Trumpeters; 4. Quartermasters.
There were slain in this fight (as we were credibly informed) 2. Lords,
whereof the one for certain was the Lord Bernhard Stuart, the Kings kinsman,
Prisoners and prizes taken. The slain. The Lord Bernhard Earl. of Litchfield.
Earl of Litchfieild; Sir Bryan Stapleton (a new made Knight the Kings Agent
for the bringing over of 10000. men out of Ireland; one Colonel; one
Leivtenant Colonel; with about 400. more Officers and Common Soldiers.
Between 800 and 1000. others taken prisoners; Great store of arms, much good
pillage, and many more horse and men taken in the pursuit, whose exact number
and conditions could not so suddenly be certified.

After the reading of Colonel Parsons Letter in Parliament (whose relation, as
aforesaid, I have principally followed) the House of Commons entered into
serious Debate of the prosecutions of this great victory; And ordered that
certain Members of that House should be forthwith sent down to Sir. Tho.
Fairefax, then at (...), to inform him and the Army of this good success
which it had pleased the Lord to give our forces, under the command of Major
Genesis Poyntz, and of the condition of the North, and to desire a supply of
forces to be sent thither upon a design, not, then, fit to be revealed in
public. A day of deserved thanksgiving appointed by order of Parliament.
They also ordered that the Thursday then next ensuing should be appointed a
day of Thanksgiven for this great victory, in the City of London, Westminster,
and Lines of (...); and the Thursday 7 night following for all the Counties
within the power of the Parliament. 500. ^. Sent as a token to renowned Major
General Poynz.
And (...) an encouragement to that worthy and Gallant Soldier (...) Genesis
Poynez, they ordered that 500. l, should be bestowed (...) him as a testimony
of the affection of the Houses toward (...).

And that which made this excellent victory the more sweet and remarkable to
us was, that it was given us, Even as a return of prayers or as a blessed
prevention of prayer to set an edge of Spiritual zeal on our hearts in
prayer, it being obtained and given in unto us by the wise and gracious power
and providence of our good God and bountiful and ever blessed Father upon the
24. of this instant Septem. which was that Months public solemn fast day.
Other, who would not faithfully wait, rest and rely on such and so liberal a
God, who is readier to give than we to ask?

And this September the 29. according to the Ancient annu^ll custom of the
renowned City of London, Alderman Adams chosen Lord Major of the City of London.
there was an election of their New Lord Major of the said City for the year
ensuing, at the Guild Hall in London, where, and at which time the Citizens,
whom it concerned, advisedly and most unanimously chose Alderman Adams, a
pious, prudent, Gentleman and grave Citizen to be their Lord Major. In whose
most happy choice this renowned City is most like (by the mercy of God) to be
as happy and honorable every way after this year of his Major (...) as ever
it was by any of his former famous and faithful Pr^decessours. And about this
foresaid time, the Commons assembled in Parliament received an Ordinance from
the House of (...), for making of a new Baron of the Exchequer, which was read
and past there and returned back immediately to the Lords and fully past there
also, Religious Mr. Tomlins made a Baron of the Exchequer.
in the blanck whereof the House of Commons nominated and inserted for that
place, Richard Tomlins, Esquir, a Counselor of the Inner Temple a faithful,
worthy and pious Patriot, as in a special manner, his fidelity was formerly
manifested to injurious persecuted pious Master Pri^^e, for whom (in those
dangerous days) he was of Counsel and stood close unto (...), did most
abundantly declare. And about this time also (...) Parliamentary States
prudently and providently took into their serious Consideration, not only the
choice of some new and truly well deserving Serjants of Law to be now
necessarily made Judges viz. Sergeant Rolls to be a Judge in the King's Bench
Sergeant (...) a Judge in the Common-Plea's and Sergeant (...) another of the
Barons of the Exchequer. Other well deserving. Gentlemen of the Law made Judges
by the Parliament.
But also for the future avoiding and prevention of those ungodly corruptions
which have been formerly in those places, it was most piously and prudently
ordered that 1000. l. Per annum should be allowed to each Judge out of the
Reve^^^ to be paid (...) of Fees, Liv^ries and such like former allowances. A
happy and holy Commonwealth (...) most like to be established, when both
worthy, learned, pious and prudent Governors, Judges and Magistrates fearing
God and hating Covetousness, are thus chosen to fit at the Helm of Authority
and Judicature, and also such courses taken, as may in all likelihood, and
equity (by Gods Grace especially) restrain wonted corruption and briberie, and
fairly induce them to do Justice to all without partiality and avarice; which
the Lord in mercy grant unto us, that Justice now at length may run about like
Rivers in our streets as the Prophet speaks, Amen and Amen.

About the end of this September, we received certain intelligence, that
Barclay Castle in Gloucestershire was surrendered to valiant and active Colonel
Morgan, and Colonel Rainsborough, the taking whereof, being a place of such
strength, and the manner of taking of it, worthy an exact relation, I have
therefore thought (...), Barkley Castle surrendree to valiant Colonel Morgan
and Colonel Rainsborough.
for the Readers better content and satisfaction therein, to insert the Letter
of a special actor and Commander in that service and siege, which was as
follows:

SIR; Understanding that you desire to be acquainted with the true manner of
our taking in of Barclay Castle, which it seems you have not yet had a full
Relation of, I have therefore here satisfied your desire, and given you a full
and faithful account thereof, which was thus; The (...) was difficult, the
Castle strong, and the Enemy within, especially (...) Goveenour, Sir Charles
Lucas, (...) obstinate at an Enemy could be, yet (...) our Forces were joined
with those of Sir Tho. Fairfaxes, whereof valiant Colonel Rainsborough had the
Command, we made (...) long stay, but ^ell presently upon their out Works;
then our men most gallantly marched up unto their Guard in the Town, which was
a strong Work indeed, out of which we beat them, and presently took it: In
which (...) many of our men were drowned, and some few slain; but having thus
gotten into that Work, we planted our great Guns against the Tower, and
battered it much, and they returned the like roaring resolutions to us, with
cuse shot of bullets, (...), and such like matter, and killed some of (...) men,
amongst whom John Freeman Lieutenant to Major Dobson (...), me, he had three
(...) given him at one time, in the breast, flank, and (...). Our men
notwithstanding this, went on (...), sealing (...) with much resolution, which
occasioned Sir Charles to desire a (...), and offer (...) to depart. There were
three of our great Guns (...), which were planted against the Tower of the
Church. The (...) had planted a (...) upon the top of the Tower, but our men
made such batteries that they were glad to take it down: Upon the top of the
Tower the Enemy placed a Flag of^ defiance (as they (...) it) which (...) of
our Regiments boldly and bravely got up the walls and took (...)* but whilst
he was vapouring (...) the top of the Tower, a part of the Tower he stood on
(being much broken and battered by our Gun) (...) him, so that he fell down,
and was killed with the stones that fell upon him, and two more that came after
him, to help him, were killed likewise. The business was the more difficult
and dangerous by reason that what our men did was open, and at midday. Upon
the Enemies (...) order was taken to divide the plunder of the Castle, and it
was concluded, that if our Captains would deposite 500 l. in money, which
should be divided among the Soldiers, to each five shillings, they should
(...) the plunder of the Castle; the which five of our Captains did, namely,
Major White, Captain Stevenson, Captain Piagot, Captain (...) and one more,
and so paid the Soldiers, and took the (...) was very much Beef, Bacon,
Butter, Cheese, Meal, Wheat, (...) and a great quantity of other things, 300
flitches of (...) room, many Cattle, insomuch that it is thought, that there
was victuals for 300 men for five months. This illustrates the (...) of God in
(...) it was so soon taken, the storms were so hard and sharp, and the
^^dders weighty to rear for scaling. During the siege, many of the Enemy
thought to have got out of the Church into the Castle at the (...) our men,
although there were many cross Brest-Workes in the Churchyard, made such
have, and came in with such courage and resolution, that (...) got between the
Enemy and the Castle, and did much execution upon them. The Enemy in the Castle
all the time much annoyed our men, but the Lord in the end (blessed be his holy
name for it) gave us the victory, and the Country is much s^eed from that most
intesti^^ oppressor Sir Charles Lucas. Thus you have the manner of subduing the
great Enemy, according to my best knowledge and intelligence. And so let all
thine Enemies, O God, perish, and be put to shame and dishonor.

And now, good Reader, I shall here desire thee, with my self, to make a little
stand and stay, again deservedly to look upon and contemplate with thy most
serious thoughts and grateful heart, the most rich and rare Parliamentary
mercies, and the various Victories, and triumphaut trophies of honor, even the
most real demonstrations of the truth of this months remarkable Wonder, The
Burning-Bush unconsumed.
of The Burning-Bush (still) unconsumed, yea, mightily, and even miraculously
prospered and preserved, maugre the mischief of all the fierce and most
furious flames of Antichristian and Atheistical wrath and rage, round about
it, as is most evidently and eminently apparent, both in our renowned
Parliamentary Worthies Wales, by an excellent Declaration against the Royalists
foul and false slanders. In the happy recovery of the City of Bristoll from
Rupert and his ravenous Royalists. In renowned and religious Major General
Skippons being made Governor of Bristoll: Shrewsburies defeat given to the
Enemy at Bridge-North, and the remarkable preservation of Lieutenant Colonel
Phips out of the Enemies hands. In Gods admirable mercy to our distressed
Brethren of Scotland, Montrosse, but returning his intended mischief upon his
own head. In giving such a memorable Chester, by our possessing of the Suburbs
thereof. In that brave defeat given Kiddarminster, by valiant General Poyntz.
In delivering up unto us the Town and Castle of Cardiffe in Wales, Welsh to
the Parliament. In the rendition of the Devizes and Lacock-House Garrison in
Wiltshire, and the reduction of all Pembrokeshire Parliament. In the famous
defeat given Rowton-Moore. And in the establishing of pious and prudent
Magistrates and Judges; Together Barkley-Castle, into the power of the
Parliament. At the serious sight and deep and due consideration and
contemplation of all these rich and rare Parliamentary Mercies, Not a month, a
week, nay hardly a day, void of one mercy or other unto us.
O who can choose but stand amazed and wondering at the unfathomed free favor,
and unbottomed bounty of our good God unto us? O wonderful, what, never a
month? never a week? nay I may almost say, never a day, for so many months
together, but a Victory, or a rich and rare Mercy, granted unto us, and
conferred upon us? O then let there never be a month, never be a lip, a heart,
or a tongue, empty of; but, contrariwise may they ever be most full of the high
and most honorable praises of our great and good God, Psalm. 68. 19. Psalm. 32.
7.
even the God of our salvation, who thus daily loads us with his loving
kindness, and thus constantly encompasses us with songs of deliverances. But
now to go on.

October. 1645.
And here now I shall begin the serious and sacred observation and contemplation
of the mavelous mercies of our wonder-working, God, in the progress of this
month also, with that brave defeat given to our Enemies Forces, by that
valiant and vigilant Commander Colonel Moore, A brave defeat given to the
Enemy by Colonel Moore Governor of Gaunt-house.
Governor of Gaunt-House, a Parliamentary Garrison, which lies within about
eight miles from Oxford, from whom we had credible information, that about the
beginning of this instant October, this valiant Colonel being gone forth with
a party of about 200 Horse, met with a party of about 500 Horse of the Enemies
at Kidlington, and that he (notwithstanding the great dis-proportion and
unequality of their number to his) skirmished most courageously with them
well-nigh three hours together, and at last, by Gods assistance, put them to
the rout, and pursued them, even to the Gates of Oxford. In which brave
bickering and pursuit, they took prisoners, Master Sackvile, the Earl of
Dorsets second son, Leivetenant Colonel Simth, one of the Kings Pages, and
Prince Ruperts Chaplain, 2 Gunners, one Trumpeter, and about ^0. Common
Soldiers. And that, upon the same day, our quicksighted soldiers took 2
Barges laden with Coals, Cheese, slate and other commodities, as they were
going up the River to Oxford. Farleigh-Castle in Somersetsh. taken.
And about the same time, also, we received certain intelligence out of the
West, that Farleigh-Castle in Somersetshire (whereof Colonel Hungerford,
brother to Sir Edward Hungerford, was Governor) was then, for certain,
surrendered up to the Parliaments forces; the Commanders wherein being allowed
to have only horse and arms to march forth withal and the Common-souldeirs
to depart without either. About the second of this instant we received Letters
out of the Northern parts of the kingdom from Colonel Overton, Sandal-Castle
in Yorkshire taken.
which were read in the House of Commons, dated from Sandall-Castle in
Yorkshire* by which it was for certain signified, that the said Sandall-Castle
(after the space of 3. weeks Seige) was surrendered to Colonel Overton, upon
Articles agreed on between him and Colonel Bon^vant, then Governor of this
Castle; viz. That 12. of the prime Officers in the Castle should have liberty
to march forth with their Horses and Swords, and to carry with them a spare
suite of Clothes, and the rest of the Soldiers to depart only with the clothes
on their backs, and Staves in their hands. The Governor and Gentlemen, being
allowed each of them a Horse to carry them away to Welbeck-house, as they
desired, but their Horses to be returned by their Convoy; and all the
Ammunition and provisions of war, in the Castle to be left to Colonel
Overton, which was accordingly performed.

About the 4. instant, we were also certainly informed, that valiant and
victorions Leivten. Winchester Town and Castle taken by victorious Leivten.
General Cromwell.
General Cromwell, being without much difficulty or disturbance entered into
and fully possessed of the Town of Winchester, and having new round begi^^ the
Castle, and planted his Ordinance against it, was resolved to storm it; which
the Governor thereof, Colonel Ogle perceiving, he was at first content to
have a parley about the surrender of it; But in the mean time some troops
ariving thither, with noble and ever to be renowned Sir William Waller, whose
this Castle was, and who was now come to the Leivtenant General to asist him
as occasion might require; the Enemy within, falsely supposing that this was
releife, sent to them, they presently took down their White Flaggs, and
refused to proceed in the proffered parley, hoping now their said supposed
relief would break in unto them, but indeed none appeared, as they hoped, in
which interim, which was all that instant Lord's Day, The list of what was taken
from the edemie in Winchester Castle.
the noble Leivtenant General having forborne them, but now finding them thus
to baffle with him, on the Monday morning following, he played violently upon
the Castle with his great Ordinance, and made a breach so wide in the
Castle-wall, that many men might enter in a breast; hereupon the Leivtenant
General resolved to proceed to storm the Castle, and to make the Enemy repent
his foresaid dallying with him; and yet, loath to pursue a course of vengeance
and unwilling to make an effusion of blood, if it might be avoided, he therefore
thought fit, once more, to send them in Articles fit for him to require and for
them fairly to yield unto, before he proceeded to the extremest rigor; which,
in breife were gladly condescended unto by the Governor, and the Castle with
all the Arms, Ordnance and Ammunition, and other provisions therein surredred
into the possession of the noble Leivtenant General. The were taken in the
Castle, 7. Pieces of Ordnance, 17. Barrells of powder, 2000. weight of Musket
bullets, 800. weight of Match, 700. Muskets (besides Pikes, Halberts and other
such like weapons) and at least 100. Horse; 38. Hogsheads of Beef and Pork,
powdered; 1500. weight of Cheese, 800. pots of Butter, 140 quarters of Wheat and
Meal, 7000 weight of Biscuit, 112. Hogsheads of strong Bear, 3. Hogsheads of
French-Wines; 10. quarters of salt, 20. bushells of Oatemeal, 70. dozen of
Candles, 30. load of Wood; 40. quarters of Charcoale, 30. bushels of
Sea-coales, and 4. quarters of Fresh-beefe ready killed, and 14. sheep. All
this fore said mighty store of provisions of all sorts thus left in the Castle
unabused and unembezelled by the Enemy, Visrount Ogle, the la^e Governor (a
resolute and desperate Soldiers, with 200 gentlemen, Officers and their
Servants, 680. horse and foot) marched away to Wood-stock, The strength of
Winchester-Castle.
and so for Oxford. The unexpected so soon surrender of this place, was so much
the more remarkable (to the great praise and glory of our wonderworking God)
not only in regard of all that store of provisions, but also in that the Castle
it self was exceeding strongly fortified, completely manned, and plentifully
furnished (as you have heard) with all kinds of provisions; for the
fortifications, were of the strongest military Architects in the Kingdom;
for, when our men had made tha^ foresaid breach in the wall (which produced the
parley) they had 3. works more to have stormed, each-higher than the other,
before they could have entered the Castle, beside such a desperate resolute
Soldier as the Governor was held and known to be. All these serious
circumstances, considered, it makes I say, this Gods mercy to us the more
glorious; and gives no little persuasion that certainly, now the hearts of the
stoutest Royalists begin (by the power of our God) to faint and fail them;
blessed, for ever blessed be the Lord for it. And, thus now, renowned, Sir
William Waller is fully repossessed of his new House. But to proceed; About
the 8. of this instant October our most prudent Parliamentary Senators took
into their circumspect consideration, the coming in of Malignants or
Delinquents to their party; The Parliaments intended mercy even to Malignants
and Delinquents.
and that though, of necessity the Sword must be still and stiffly held-up, yet
out of a pious and zealous desire to hasten a period to these unhappie Civil
broils, and to mix clemency with all their actions; they thought good to
propound an other day of grace or favor unto them; to wit, till the 1. of
December, then, next ensuing, by which time, all that were or should be capable
of this mercy might come in and compound for their Delinquencie; for which
purpose, a Committee at Gold-Smiths-Hall in London was appointed and a Vote in
Parliament passed to that effect. And withal, that all such persons of what
rank or quality soever that did thus come in and compound for their
Delinquencie, should also after this their composition sue-out and pass their
Pardon under the Great-Seale of England or else their former Composition to be
void and of none effect unto them; but they to be apprehended and proceeded
against as Spies. This indeed being a most wise and excellent way, both a
little to pull-downe their proud Spirits in the necessitated acknowledgement of
their most foul offenses, The Excellent wisdom and justice of the
Parliament, mixed with their foresaid mercy.
and to^ly (upon rols and record) as a black spot and indelible sline upon
them to posterity, of their being such perfidious and pernicious betrayers and
destroyers (as much in them was) of their own dear native Country, to the
utter rvine of themselves their wives and children, by slavery and tyranny
over their bodies and Souls.

About the 10* instant we were certainly given to understand of the powerful
and propitious hand of Gods good providence and mercy unto us, in giving in
that strong and most pestilent and pernicious den of thieves and robbers, I
mean Bazing-house, in, Hampshire into the Parliaments possession by the
martial valor and industry of renouned and victorious Lieutenant General
Cromwall together with the brave Commander Colonel D^Albeire, Bazing-House
taken.
the substance of the manner of the taking of it, being fully related by
victorious Lieutenant General Cromwells letter brought by Colonel Hamond to
the honorable Speaker of the House of Commons and there read, I have here
thought fit (for the Readers better content and satisfaction to Insert the
same, which was as follows.

SIR,
I thank God, I can give you a good account of Bazing. After our batteries
placed, we settled the several posts for the storm; Colonel Dalberte was to
be on the North-side of the house next the Grange, Colonel Pickering on his
left hand, and Sir Hardresse Wallers and Colonel Mountagues Regiments next
him; We stormed this morning after six of the clock, the signal for falling
on was the firing four of our Canon, which being done, our men fell on with
great resolution and cheerfulness, we took the two Houses without any
considerable loss to ourselves; Colonel Pickering, stormed the new House,
passed through and got the Gate of the Old House, whereupon they summoned a
Parley, with our men would not hear, in the mean time Colonel Mountagues,
and Sir Hardresse Wallers Regiments assaulted the strongest Work, where the
Enemy kept his Court of guard, which with great resolution they recovered,
beating the Enemy from a whole Culverin and from this Work,; which having
done, they drew their Ladders after them, and got over another Work, and the
House-Wall before they could (...) Sir Hardresse Waller performing his duty
with (...) and diligence, was shot on the Armw, but not dangerous, we have had
little loss, many of the Enemies our men put to the Sword, and some Officers
of quality; most of the rest we have prisoners, amongst which the Marquess,
and Sir Robert Peake, with diverse other Officers, whom I have Ordered to be
sent up to you: We have taken about ten pieces of Ordnance, with much
Ammunition, and our Soldiers a good encouragement. I humbly offer to you, to
have this place utterly slighted, for these following reasons. It will ask
about eight hundred men to manage it, it is no Frontier, the Country is poor
about it, the place exceedingly ruined by our Batteries and Mortar pieces, and
a fire which fell upon the place since our taking it; If you please to take
some out of the Garrison at Farnham, some out of Chichester, and a good part of
the Foot which were here under Dalbier, and make a strong Quarter at Newbery
with three or four Troops of Horses, I dare be confident it would not only be
a curb to Dennington, but a security and a Frontier to all these parts, in as
much as Newbery lies upon the River, and will prevent any incurtion from
Dennington, Wallingford or Farringdon into these parts, and by lying there,
will make the Trade most secure between Bristoll and London for all Carriages.
And I believe the Gentlemen of Sussex and Hampshire will with more
cheerfulness contribute, to maintain a Garrison on the Frontier, (...) in
their (...) which will have less safety in it. Sir I hope not to delay, but
more toward the West to morrow: and to be as diligent as I may in my
expedition thither, I must speak my judgment to you, that if you intend to
have your work carried on, Recruits of Foot must be had, and a course taken to
pay your Army, also believe me Sir, it may not be able to answer the w^rk^ you
have for it to do. I entreated Colonel Hammond to wait upon you, who was
taken by a mistake whilst we lay before this garrison, whom God safely
delivered to us to our great joy, but to his loss of almost all he had, which
the Enemy took from him, The Lord grant that these mercies may be acknowledged
withal thankfulness, God exceedingly abounds in his goodness to us, and will
not be weary until Righteousness and Peace meet; and that he has brought
forth a glorious work for the happiness of this poor Kingdom, wherein
desires to serve God and you with a faithful hand.

Your most humble servant Oliver Cromwell.
Basingstoke 14. October. 1645.

I shall first present you with the particulars of the success, at
Basing-house in the prizes and prisoners taken. There were taken as follows,
viz. The Marquess of Winchester, Sir Robert Pe^ke Governor, A list of the
prizes and prisoners taken at Bazing-House.
Sir Inigo Jones the grand Surveyor, four Roman Catholic Priests (reserved
for the Gallows) twenty Gentlewomen, 180. common prisoners, ten pieces of
Ordnance, twenty barrels of Gunpowder, nine Colors, 3000. Arms, 200. Horse,
8000. l. worth of Clothes, Beds and other goods, many Firkins of Butter, a
great quantity of Cloth, much bullet, and match, many Crucifixes, Popish
Pictures and Books, near a thousand Chests, Trunkes and Boxes, 400. quarters
of Corn, 200. barrels of Beer, 300. flitches of Bacon, an hundred bags of
Malt, 40000. weight of Cheese, the Marquess of Winchesters Plate, Cabinet and
Jewels, worth above 5000. l. Sir Robert Peakes 500. l. besides a Box of brass
Plates, the Marquesses rich Bed and furniture which cost 1300. l. one common
soldier found 300. l. in gold hid in a hole, about 4000. l. ready money, a
great quantity of Wine, and many Hogsheads of Beer, besides the Ladies
wardrope, which furnished many of our Soldiers wives with Gowns and
Petticoats. Slain, Major C^st, six Priests, Robinson the Players son, only
one woman, The slain and wounded.
who fell a railing upon our soldiers at their entrance, calling them
Roundheads, and Rebels to the King; whereupon one of our soldiers cut her on
the head, and near 300. common soldiers, Doctor Griffin sometimes of
Dunstanes in the West, late of old Fish-street, taken and sore wounded, and
three of his daughters, much Ammunition taken. The loss on the Parliaments
side in this desperate service was (blessed be God) not much, Sir Hardres
Waller, who behaved himself gallantly, wounded, and not above ten others in
all slain outright, though about eighty, or an hundred wounded. The word which
the religious Major Genesis chose, when he came to sit down before that popish
Garrison was out of the 115. Psalm, concerning the worshippers of Images:
Their gods are the works of men's hands, wood and stone, eyes they have and see
not, ears and hear not, and hands and handle not; And that word of God was
made good in the enemy, who upon the Storm had not strength to handle their
weapons to defend themselves, but were delivered to the mercy of our soldiers.
A great part of the Pillage was sold to the Country people, who likewise had a
good part of the prey, and carried many Cartloades away. The House burnt down
and demolished.

After the reading the Letters of Bazing, the House began to debate of some
further timely service of the gallant valiant and religious Soldiers which
might be done in those parts for the better clearing the passage into the West,
and the result of all was, that Letters should be written to several
Committees to join forces with those that stormed Bazing for the taking of the
Castle of Dennington, etc. The House likewise ordered that the Ministers in the
several Churches and Chappells in London and Lines of Communication, should on
the next Lords day in their several Churches and Chapels give thanks to God
for his great mercy in delivering up Winchester and Bazing House into our hands.

And about the 12. of this instant October; we had certain intelligence by
letters from Gloucester that the valiant, Active and faithful Governor
thereof, Colonel Morgan (the most worthy Successor therein, of even to be
honored Major General M^ssi^) with about 300. horse and 400. foot, part
whereof was sent unto him by the then deputy Governor of Bristol, Colonel
Fleet-wood, assisted also by the Monmouthshire men, Chepstow Town and Castle in
Monmouthshire. besieged and taken by valiant Colonel Morgan.
having taken the town of Chepstow, besieged and summoned the Castle, but the
Governor thereof, Colonel Fitz-Morris returned a peremptory negative answer;
whereupon valiant Colonel Morgan planted 2 great pieces of Ordnance, and a
morter-peece for battery, and made a breach into the Castle; whereupon the
Governor sent presently to desire a parley, but Colonel Morgan as presently
returned answer, That now it was too late; whereupon all the Soldiers issuing
forth fell down upon their knees, crying, Quarter, quarter, for Gods sake, and
wholly referred themselves to the Generals mercy, and the Castle was instantly
surrendered to him. There were in the Castle, Colonel Fitz-Morris the
Governor, Major Bridgeman, and an 106. Common Soldiers, who were all carried
prisoners to Gloucester. They took, besides, in the castle, 30 horse and their
furniture, 18. pieces of Ordnance great and small, 16. barrells of Gunpouder, 2
Harque bushes, 6. tun of lead, great store of fire-workes, 30. beefs in powder,
30. barrells of salt, 4000. weight of biscuit, a butt of Sack, 3. Hogsheads of
Methegline, 4. Hogsheads of beer and Ale, 70. bushels of Oat-meale, 10.
bushells of Pease and Beans, and 30. bushels of Wheat, many firkins of butter,
400. weight of cheese, with store of other provisions and ammunition. And we
were, about the same time, for certain, informed, that Sir Trevor Williams and
very many Gentlemen of Glamorganshire and Monmouthshire had freely and
faithfully declared themselves for the Parliament; and as a testimony thereof
had raised 1500. Soldiers out of both those Counties for the Parliaments
service, and resolved suddenly to besiege Mon^^th; the effects whereof you
shall see fully related in its proper place. And thus we see how triumphantly
the Lord, now rides on in glory for the blessed advancement of his Great
Cause: ever magnified and praised be his great and most glorious name therein.
The Parliaments piety and gratitude.
The Messenger that brought this welcome. News to the Parliament was rewarded
by them, with the gift of 10 l. for his pains in the journey; And the House
also most piously and gratefully ordered that thanks should be given to
Almighty God, on the Lord's Day then next ensuing, for the happy surrender of
Chepstow Town and Castle, as also of Winchester and (...); And they farther
ordered that thanks and a reward should be sent to that faithful and valiant
Commander Colonel Morgan. A right way, indeed, to thrive and proceed
victoriously and successfully, where God is in his mercies exalted, and virtue
and valor is not left without honor and reward.

About the 14. of this instant October, the Vote in Parliament for sending
forth writ^ for the election of new Members of the House of Commons for filling
up the vacancie of those that were Deceased or had perfidiously deserted the
House, was put in execution; and a Letter being read in the House of Commons,
sent from the Major of Sandwitch by a Member of the House of Peers, to procure
the election of a Member to sit and serve in Parliament (of his nominating)
according to the writ sent down thither for that purpose; The Parliaments
integrity, about the election of new Members for the House of Commons. The writ
for the right choosing of Members of the House of Commons.
Whereupon the Commons on serious debate on this business, referred the same
to the Committee of Privileges, the result whereof was; That it was ordered,
that for the future, a Copy of the Order of the House of Commons made in Anno
1641. should be sent down with all writs for new elections; A Copy of which
Order, for the Readers better satisfaction, and for the clearing of our most
renowned Parliaments integrity, in this, as in all other their faithful
managing of the States-affaires, I have here inserted, which was as follows.

WHereas the House of Commons has received Information, that Letters from
Peers are directed to Boroughs, that now are to (...) Elections of Members to
serve in this Parliament: They conceived that all Letters of that nature from
any Peers of this (...) do necessarily tend to the violation of the
Privileges of Parliament, and the freedom of Elections of the Members, that
ought to serve in the House of Commons; and do declare, That notwithstanding
such Letters, all Persons, to whom Elections of Knights and Burgesses do
belong, ought to proceed to their Elections, with that freedom, which by the
Laws of the Realm, and of Right they ought to do, and do expect, that if any
such Letters from any Peers of the Realm, shall hereafter be sent unto them,
That the parties receiving the same shall certify the contents thereof, or
bring the Letters themselves to the Speaker of the House of Commons.

October. 10. There came a Letter from Abington to renowned Major General Brown,
the most worthy Governor thereof, being then in London, of a gallant piece of
Service performed by that brave Garrison against the Enemy at Farringdon, the
particular whereof, take in the said Letter, sent from valiant and active
Colonel Pain, the said Major Generals Deputy- Governor, which was as
follows;

SIR,
A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Farringdon, by Abington Forces,
The last night, viz. Tuesday 14 instant, I marched forth with a party of Foot,
and all our Horse, to Farringdon, where we came so near the taking of that
Garrison, that I my self heard the Enemy earnestly call to draw up the Bridge,
our Foot being then within a stones cast of them, before they could draw it up;
yet we lost not our labor; for, we bickering and skirmishing with them there,
took about 100 Horse of theirs four Captains, one Lieutenant, four
Quartermasters one Sergeant, 17 Troopers, eight Foot Soldiers, and one Drum,
in all about 37 Prisoners, and slew two upon their Works: All this being done
with the loss of one man only on our side, and we safely returned home the
next day by 12 of the Clock, Praised be God for it.

Your Honors humble Servant, George Pain.
Abington, October. 15. 1645.

About the 18 of this instant, came certain intelligence by Letters to the
Parliament, of a notable defeat given by renowned, active and faithful Col.
Rossiter: to the Forces of Banbury, conducting those two pernicious Princes,
Rupert and Maurice to Newarke to the King their Uncle, being there, the manner
whereof was to this effect: The two Princes aforesaid perfidiously pretending
(as afterward it most evidently appeared) resolutions forsooth to depart the
kingdom, and desirous first to see and speak with their Uncle the King, had a
Convoy of Banbury Horse to guard them thither, A brave defeat given by Col:
Rossiter to the Banbury Forces which conducted the two Princes to Newarke.
in all about six Troops, and thus they marched toward the King, to take their
leave (forsooth) of him, before they would cross the Sea and be gone. And
thus, I say, they marched on all that first night; but intelligence hereof came
to valiant Colonel Rossiter, being then at Grantham, whereupon all in that
Garrison, being 300. and 400 more which lay at Stamford, were drawn to Melton
by the said renowned Colonel, to meet with them by the way, but upon
intelligence again from Burleigh, that the report of the Princes coming was
false, our Horse were ordered to march back to Grantham, in which interim the
Princes passed on, even almost to Eelvoyre, without any opposition all the way.
But suddenly again, Colonel Rossiter now having most certain information,
that the Princes were come a little beyond Belvoyre, toward Newarke, the
Princes, then, determining and deeming themselves past danger, they were
sending back the Banbury Horse, but as they passed by Burleigh Garrison, they
were set upon in their rear by valiant Captain Allen, with his Troop of
Horse, who then took some of them prisoners, but himself in person being too
far engaged, Valiant Captain Allen, Governor of Burleigh Garrison, unhappily
slain.
was unfortunately shot, and since dyed of the wound, a great loss unto us, he
having been a most faithful, active, and courageous Commander. But Colonel
Rossiter being then at Melton; and now, I say, understanding for certain, that
the Princes were got to Belvoyre, being very unwilling their Forces should
pass so freely from him; without a martial salutation, made haste after them,
and ordered his march with such secrecy and celerity, that he was wholly
undiscovered, until he fell upon them in their passage from Belvoyre to
Newarke, where, I say, he overtooke them, and set upon them, who thereupon
faced us twice or thrice, as though they would have charged us, but upon our so
sudden onset, they ran for it, but ours following close upon them, had soon
routed them, where we paid them to purpose, took at least 60 Gentlemen
prisoners, one Major, three Captains, 140 Horse, Prince Maurice his Trumpeter,
with his Banner and Trumpet, in which bickering we wounded and killed diverse of
them, some of whom men of quality, the Princes themselves were forced to ride a
pace for it, and so escaped our hands with about 100 Horse, and got to Newarke,
but with what a pannick fear, we may easily guess.

About the 20 instant, we had also certain information by a Letter out of the
West, from renowned Lieutenant General Cromwell, in the Parliament, Langford
House near Salisbury taken.
of the surrendering of Langford-House, a strong Garrison of the Enemies near
Salisbury, unto him, for the King and Parliament, which was no sooner summoned,
than the Summons condescended to by Sir Bartholomew Pell, then Governor
thereof, and upon Articles of Agreement between Colonel Hewson, and Major
Kelsey, in the name of Lieutenant General Cromwell, and the said Sir
Bartholomew Pell and Major Edmond Wedale, Commanders in Chief in the said
House, it was surrendered.

This Garrison was the 21 Garrison or strong Hold that had been taken from the
Enemy this Summer and Autumn-season (a sore fall of the leaf to the Royalists,
enough to make them starve and die the ensuing Winter) and all this done by the
so contemned New-Modell-Armie, under the Command of the most Noble and Renowned
General, A note most worthy to be taken notice of.
precious Sir Thomas Fairfax, besides those taken in other parts, by other
Commanders, as P^^^efract, Sc^^rough, and others in the North.

Now let any, yea all the old Soldiers in England, nay (I may dare to say, in
Christendom) show us the like done; so many strong Castles, Forts, and
Garrisons taken in any part of Europe, in six years, as have been thus taken
in this Kingdom, by our young despised Soldiers, in less than five or six
months. O that we could and would therefore have evermore in our tongue^ and
hearts, holy David's Quid retribu^^mus? What shall we repay to the Lord for
them? O that we would, especially, faithfully pay our Vow our most Solemn
Covenant, in reforming our lives, and building the House of this our so
glorious Wonder-working God, the God and only giver of all these so many, so
mighty, yea so mavelous, if not miraculous mercies.

Much also about the aforesaid time, we were certified by Letters from
Coventry, Sir William Vaughan^ Regiment bravely beaten.
that Sir William Vaughans Regiment coming from Newark to Litchfield, and
thence intending for Bridge-North, was opportunely met with by a party from
Tamworth, who falling bravely upon them, soon routed them, slew diverse of them
on the place, and took from them at least 100 Horse and Arms, the rest
escaped by flight.

And about the 22 of this instant October, came certain intelligence by
Letters out of the Northern parts of the Kingdom, of a most memorable and
famous defeat given to the Enemy at S^erburne in the North, by the Parliaments
forces in those parts, which for the Readers better content and satisfaction,
and for the more full and faithful Narration of the thing it self, I have
thought fit to give you that valiant and active Commander Colonel Copleyes
own Letter, The famous defeat given to the Enemy at Sherburne in Yorkshire.
sent to the Honorable Commissioners for the War in Yorkshire, this brave
Colonel himself being (under God) a principal and most valiant actor and
instrument of the Victory: which was as follows;

Honorable Gentlmen:
MY haste last night made my Relation then sent, Col. Copleyes Letter touching
the most famous defeat given to the Enemy at Sherburne.
both short and unsatisfactory. This I now present, is for your further and
full satisfaction, touching our late fight with the Enemy at Sherburne. Upon
intelligence of the Kings advance to Blythe, with part of his Horse, we
appointed a Rendezvouze on Tuesday morning, purposely to have slapt his advance
by Doncaster, but hearing that he had a Rendezvouze that morning at Worksope,
and thereby fearing his advance into Cheshire, we kept our Quarters and the
Guard at Doncaster, as usually, only that we might be in readiness, I also
appointed a Rendezvouze of all our Horse, at two of the Clock on Tuesday
evening. In which interim the Enemy had advanced, beyond our expectation, from
Worksope through Doncaster by day light, and beat up our Guard at Cusworth,
about six or seven of the clock, and in Scawsby-Keyes they quartered, and so
marched strait to Ferribridge the next morning, and thence to Sherburne, where
they met with a Countryman, who told them that our men were prepared for their
coming as so indeed a party of ours were, of about 800 Foot and some Horse,
upon whom the Enemy fiercely falling (being but a handful to them) they soon
routed the Horse, beat Colonel Wrens Regiment, at the North side of Sherburne,
The Enemy surprizeth our Forces in Sherburne, both Horse and Foot.
and took all the Foot Prisoners, disarmed them all presently, and laid their
Arms in a great heap in Sherburme street, till they could get Carriages to
take or send them away, for their further use* But, we having certain
intelligence hereof, marched thither with all speed, and being now come to
Sherburne, we drew up our Horse, and ordered them into bodies for Charges and
Reserves. But here, first we fell into a great strait, for we durst not march
through Milford, fearing the Enemies with their Dragoones, (for, we heard they
had such, but they had none) might have put us into disorder; but above the
Town, through the hedges, which also was some inconvenience, The difficulties
our Forces met about Sherburne.
we were forced (whom we came near Sherburne, and the Enemy drawing out
against us) to draw over a narrow way, through an impossable Brook, which we
knew not of, having much ado thereby to bring our bodies again into order,
which truly might have occasioned the loss of the day unto us, had not the
Enemy been somewhat too late (being busy with their Arms and Prisoners taken
in the Town, as God had wisely disposed of it for us) in drawing out of the
Town. So, thus, then, by Gods assistance, I brought up against every of the
Enemies bodies (as near as I could) a body of ours, Both parties meet together
in the Field.
and resolutely faced them in the Field, both parties striving who should be
soonest in Battalia. But here let me give thee (good Reader) a sight of Sir
Marmaduke Langdales Speech, made to his Soldiers in the Field, before the
Fight began, which came to my hand, and was unquestionably a true Copy of the
substance thereof; and this it was:

Gentlemen:
YOu are all gallant men, The substance of Sir Marmaduke Langdalet Speech to
his Soldiers before this fight.
and have done bravely, but there are some that seek to scandalize your
gallantry for the loss of Naseby Field, but I hope you will redeem your
reputation, and still maintain that gallant report which you ever had. I am
sure you have done such businesses, as never have been done in any war with
such a number, your march from Oxford, first beating of Rossiter, and the
relief of Pomfret, the like I believe was never done; And I hope you are
Gentlemen, and that you will still maintain it, and redeem that which you
have lost; For mine own part, I will not have you upon any design, but where
I will lead you my self.

And thus now, I say, he led them on into the Field.

Now the Enemy being also much flusht and encouraged with their late good
success against us, The fight begun.
charged valiantly upon us, and ours answered them with as brave gallantry as
could be; at first the left wings on both sides were routed, The Enemy routed
and put to flight.
but in the conclusion, our Reserves coming on so seasonably and courageously,
the Enemy was forced to fly, and we, by Gods blessing, got the day, though I
must confess, diverse of our Horse (as I touched before) were routed at first,
and the mischief fell most upon my Regiment, The Lord Digby wounded in the
Fight, and four Pistols fired on Sir Marmaduke Langdale. The Enemy pursued
three miles.
who charged the only gallant men (the Reformadoes) that the Enemy had. One of
their chief Commanders (the Lord Digby by name) was wounded, as we were
credibly informed, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale himself also had four Pistols
fired upon him, but whether he was wounded or not, was then uncertain unto us.
But the Victory was clearly ours (ever magnified and praised be our great and
gracious God) and we solely kept the Field, and pursued the Enemy at least
three miles together, Many prisoners were taken, we believe 400 at least, Sir
Richard Hutton was slain upon the place, whose Corpse his kindred (having
protection thereunto) buried in the place he formerly had desired to be laid
in. I have here sent the List of their slain and prime prisoners taken by us,
Scarcely ten of our men slain.
which you shall receive by Colonel Lilburne. Many of our men were wounded,
but hardly ten slain. This was certainly a great business, and a rare mercy
unto us, for the Enemy made themselves absolutely sure to have been in the City
of York that night, The importance of this business.
or the next day at farthest; but now they are scattered (blessed be the Lord
for it:) And that which was not the least part of our Victory, we recovered
again all our men and Arms which they had before taken from us in Sherburne,
All our men and Arms recovered that were taken before.
as also the prevention of the Enemies intended march to Montrose in Scotland,
which (with the taking of York in the way) was the maine design which the
Enemy eagerly aimed at, in this their thus undertaken march. Not unto us Lord,
not unto us, but to thy name alone, we give (as most due) all the honor and
glory hereof. Honorable Gentlemen, your desire of a full relation, has made
me thus tedious, for which I crave your pardon. I shall present your Order to
the Officers and Soldiers, in the expression of your good acceptance of: this
our Service, and your farther intended care for us; And for the present I rest

Your most humble Servant Chr. Copley.
October. 16. 1645.
A List of the prime Prisoners, and of the Prizes taken at this Battle at
Sherburne, on Wednesday, October. 15. 1645. about four of the Clock in the
afternoon.
COl. Sir Francis Anderson. Col. Bulmer. Col. Chayton. Col. Carnaby. Lieut. Col
Matthew Wentworth. Lieut. Col. Gordon. Major Graythorn. Captain Leneon, Master
of the Ordnance. Capt. James Cholmley. wounded. Capt. Marshall. wounded. Capt.
Pudsey. wounded. And four Captains more. Capt. Lieut. Salter. Lieut: John
Turner, and diverse other Reformadoes. Master Duke Tunstall, a great Papist. Mr.
Clavering. Mr. Lowither. Col. Sir Francis Carnaby slain. Col. Sir Richard
Hutton slain, and 40 more. Mr. Slingsby sore wounded. Col. Clavering and
Carnabyes Colors taken, with diverse other Colors. Lord Digbyes Coach, and the
Kings Surgeon in it; but eespecially his Cabinet, wherein were diverse Letters,
some whereof of great consequence, written in a new Character, and the Character
also found, which could open all. Much gallant Pillage. We lost not ten men,
but many wounded. The Enemy were about 1600 intended for Montrosse, ours about
2250. About six hundred of the Enemy gone toward Skipton. 300 or 400 Troopers
taken, and about six hundred Horses. 40 slain, and many wounded. The Countess
of Nidsdale taken, and some other Ladies.

About October 24 we received certain intelligence by Letters from the most
renowned General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, his Excellency, to the Parliament, as
also by other unquestionable informations out of the West, The admirable and
almost miraculous taking in of Tiverton Town and Castle.
of the taking of the Town, Church and Castle of Tiverton, by his Excellencies
Forces in those parts; the manner whereof, in brief, was thus faithfully
related: Upon Thursday, October. 16. Major General Massy was ordered by the
General to advance to Tiverton, and so to quarter beyond the River with his
Brigade, which accordingly he did, and soon possessed himself of the Town of
Tiverton, Major General Massy enters Tiverton.
forcing the Enemy out of it, only those that had got into the Church and
Castle to keep those places as long as they could. It was then conceived hard
for us, nay almost impossible for us to hinder the Enemies Horse from marching
Eastward, if they would have attempted it with their whole strength, except
Lieutenant General Cromwell (with his whole Brigade) did come up timely to us.
On Friday the 17 instant, the General Sir Thomas Fairfax himself, The
General fits down before the Castle and Church.
sat down before Tiverton Castle and Church, to take them in, and summoned
the Enemy to deliver them up; of which being denied, we planted our
battering-Peeces against them, which work went forward that day and the next.

On Saturday, October. 18. our batteries being finished, by the afternoon. Upon
the Lords Day, October. 19. the General caused several great Pieces to be
planted on the Batteries, against the Castle, very early in the morning, so
that they were ready to play by break of day, and all our Canon began to play
about seven of the Clock that morning, against the Castles; and the Enemy from
thence answered us with their Pieces, but (blessed be God) did no execution
upon any of us. But, see the admirable and all-directing power and providence
of our wonder-working God, for us, namely, The admirable providence of God,
here, that one of our Canoneers shootes a shot at adventure, and breaks down
the Drawbridge of the Castle.
that after some shot which we had made against them, one of our Canoneers, by
one shot from his Piece of Ordnance, most gallantly and admirably (if not
almost miraculously) in a moment performed this most difficult business for
us; for, at that one shot, it pleased the Lord so to direct the Bullet, (just
like him, 2 Chronicles. 18. 33. which drew a bow at a venture, and shot his arrow
at King Ahab, so that he dyed, as the Lord had said by the Prophet) so, I say,
the Lord did so direct this bullet, shot at a venture, that it brake the Chain
of the Drawbridge quite in Pieces, whereupon the Drawbridge, presently fell
down, and thereby made the passage open for our entrance into the Castle,
which most happy opportunity, our Soldiers seeing, instantly laid hold
thereon, and without any Order from the General, chose rather courageously to
fight, than to stand still and look on, when God gave them so fit and fair an
occasion; which their resolution took so good effect, that they soon
possessed themselves of all, The Castle and Church entered by (...) Soldiers.
presently entered the Castle and Church, in which on flat we had only four men
slain: And though we entered thus, yet, such was the mild, moderate, and
gentle carriage of the General, and such his desire to spare the effusion of
blood, that, I say, notwithstanding they took it by storm, yet he himself
gave command that Quarter should be given to all that were alive, The Generals
clemency.
which was accordingly performed. We took in the Castle, Sir Gilbert Tal^^^,
Governor of the place, above 20 other Officers and Gentlemen of note and
quality, The Prisoners and prizes taken in the Church and Castle.
and among them, one Master Kemp, a grand Malignant Priest, above 200 Common
Soldiers, four Pieces of Ordnance, thirty Barrels of Powder, 500 Arms, and
store of other Ammunition, Provision and Treasure, good prey for the Soldiers
pains, who so well deserved it. The Works of this Castle (as the General
himself testified) were as strong and regular as ever he saw, and this Garrison
of singular good use, both in order to the straitning of Exeter, as also for
securing of any thing for his Army, whiles it stays in the West. O how are we
therefore bound to our so great and glorious wonder-working (...) who thus
felicitates and facilitates our great and most dangerous endeavors, for the
effecting and finishing of his gracious Work of Reformation among us! ever
magnified and blessed be his holy name, which exceeds all praises, for ever and
ever.

About the 26 instant, we had also certain intelligence out of Wales of the
excellent and most hopeful condition of things in that Principality, The good
condition of Wales for the Parliament.
viz. That the whole County of Pembrokeshire was totally reduced to the
obedience of the Parliament, and the greatest part of Glamorganshire; where
generally the Inhabitants showed themselves very forward and active for the
Parliament, so as five or 6000 had taken up Arms against the Common Enemy of
their true peace and welfare, and many of them had joined themselves to valiant
Colonel Morgan, and had done great good Service already in those parts, and
had taken Sir John Strangewayes, a great stickler for the Royal Party.
Carmarthen Town and Castle taken.
And that the Town and Castle of Carmarthen were surrendered to valiant,
victorious and faithful Major General Laughorne, for the use and service of
the King and Parliament: And that the Inhabitants all there about had
unanimously and publicly made Declaration of their resolved fidelity to the
Parliament, and had to that purpose subscribed many hands and names, in the
behalf of the rest, according to their spontaneous consent and agreement, in a
Declaration to the said Major General in these words:

WE whose names are subscribed, The Declaration of the County of Carmarthen.
in the name of our selves and all the Inhabitants of this County, do
absolutely declare for King and Parliament, and will with our lives and
fortunes, assist the Forces raised by the Parliament, against any other
whatsoever, that shall seek to invade these Countries, and do desire to be
received into the King and Parliaments protection, according to the Declaration
of Major General Laughhorne. And as for Contribution, we also willingly submit
thereunto, proportionably to our neighbor Counties.

October. 11. 1645.

About the 28 instant we were further certainly informed by Letters out of
Wales, that the Town and Castle of Monmouth were taken by valiant Colonel
Morgan, Monmouth Town and Castle taken by Colonel Morgan.
with the assistance of the Clubmen of those parts, under the conduct of Sir
Trevor Williams, being 1500 Foot and 200 Horse; the manner of the taking of
them, in brief was thus:

Upon Colonel Morgans advance that way, with all those and his own Forces,
and his near approach to the Town, the Enemy voluntarily (but out of just
strong fear of him) quickly qui^^ted the Town, and drew all their Soldiers
into the Castle (for, the Kings recruits since his sore loss at Naseby, had
drained his Garrisons half dry) whether they betook themselves for their
present best refuge. And as soon as Colonel Morgan came to make demand of the
Town, the Townsmen and Inhabitants presently gave him all he could desire of
them, and fair admittance to (...). As soon as he was entered the Town, he
sent Summons to the Castle, The manner of taking the Castle.
but received a flat denial, whereupon he summoned in the Country, to bring in
Spades, Shovels, Mattocks, Baskets, etc. which was expeditiously and in short
time performed by them: The next day he began to mine, and to salute the Enemy
with some shot, and this presently produced a Parley, and the Parley soon
brought forth Conditions, upon which the Castle was delivered up to the valiant
Colonel. There were not in all above 130 within the Castle. The prizes taken
in the Castle.
We took in it seven Pieces of Ordnance, 400 Muskets and Pikes, ten or twelve
barrels of Powder, 25 Barrels of Brimstone and Saltpeter, together with good
store of other Ammunition and Provision. The truth of all this was consumed by
Colonel Morgans own Letter to the Parliament, after the reading whereof, the
Commons ordered that thanks should be returned to Almighty God, for all these
great mercies in those parts, The Parliaments gratitude to God for these great
mercies, and thanks to Col. Morgan.
the next Lords Day, in all Churches and Chapels in and about London and
Westminster. And further Ordered, That a Letter of thanks should be returned
to the said valiant Colonel Morgan, for this and all his other gallant and
faithful services for the State, since his having command of Gloucester, and
that the said Colonel Morgan should have the command of all the Forces of the
County of Gloucester. And as for the Government of Monmouth, it was conferred
upon Sir Trevor Williams, a worthy, religious, and gallant Gentleman, A fit and
faire-way indeed, by gratifying the well-deserving, to engage their hearts and
affections more and more to the State and Kingdom.

And much about the foresaid time the Letters taken in the Lord Digbies Coach
at Sherburne conflict (as has been touched before) were read at a Conference of
both Houses of Parliament: The Letters taken in the Lord Digbyes Coach at
Sherburne in Yorkshire, read in the Parliament.
In diverse whereof, to the Marquess of Ormond in Ireland, his Majesty much
bewailes his low and decaying condition, since Naseby Battle, and advises him,
if he can, to make a Peace with his Irish Catholic Subjects, or at least a
Cessation: But however, though he hazard the loss of that Kingdom, that he
should come away in person, The substance of 3. or 4. of those Letters.
unto him, withal the forces Arms and Ammunition, that he could get and
command from thence, leaving the rest, (namely, the Protestants on the
Parliament-side) and the Rebels, to dispute the business together. And to
encourage the Marquess therein, he promised him, that if he did prosper, he
should be preferred to all the dignity that possibly could be conferred upon a
subject; but if his Majesty's undertakings succeeded ill (as it was most like
they would, being altogether against God and his Truth) he and the rest of his
followers would have the honor to die nobly in a good cause.

In another Letter upon occasion of Prince Ruperts advising him to a treaty
with the Parliament; his Majesty checks the said Prince for it, wonders he was
so much misled; tells him, that to condescend lower than his terms at Vxbridge,
would be as bad as a submission, which, he would never do so long as he lived.
And, in another Letter dated at Newarke, October to the King declares the
grounds of his coming to Newarke rather than any other Garrison, it being most
unlikely to be besieged; Colonel General Poyntz being (as the Letter said)
much broken with pursuing him: That he had the greatest strength thence to
break out upon occasion, and to get to Montrosse, who by an express, gave him
to understand, that his Condition, and late ^ent was not so bad and so great as
was reported, but that he was in a good condition, and by an addition of forces
from Kalcan, who were coming to him, he should be able to assist the King, etc.
In all which premises, we may all see, with what poor and vain hopes, mere
Egyptian-Reeds, the King rests on and feeds himself; and thereby, thus, more
and more hardens his heart from hearing or yiedling any fit and fair
accommodations with his people and Parliament, About the 30. of this instant
October, we had certain intelligence by a Letter under the hands of famous and
faithful Colonel Mitton, Colonel Jones and Adjutant Louthian, that the
enemy being industrious to relieve that Garrison of West-Chester, and knowing
that the loss of that would be the surrender of all the other; A brave defeat
given to the enemy near Denbigh Castle, who intended to relieve Chester.
They had, therefore, drawn a party out of their Garrisons of Worcester, Ludlow,
Bridgenorth and other Garrisons thereabout, 2400 viz. 1700. Horse and 700. foot
and Commanded by Sir William Vaughan, being all in one body near
Denbigh-Castle, which was about 22. miles from Chester. Whereupon, our forces
calling a Council of War, what was best to be done, whether to suffer the
Enemy to come nearer, or to go out and right with them they concluded to go
out, and so drew forth about 1400. horse and 100 foot, leaving the Works
sufficiently manned before Chester; and on Saturday they came to the enemy
near Denbigh Castle, sent a forelorne hope under the command of Captain
Otter, the Body being commanded by gallant Colonel General Mitton, the Horse
led up by Colonel Jones, the Foot by Adjeant Louthian, who fell on the enemy
with as much gallantrie as could be expected, there being under their command
some Lancashire horse, some of Warwickeshire and Shropshire, etc. each Officer
and Soldier deserving honor for their resolution and action; among which
Major Hanksworth of Warwick (...) Major Sanders of Derby did very gallant
service: in short, we wholly routed the enemy, took between five and six
hundred horse, and above four hundred foot, slew above an hundred on the
place, and pursued them six miles, doing great execution all the way, so as in
the evening there was not above one hundred left together of the enemy. The
particulars could not then be related; this Messenger came on Tuesday night,
and had fifty pounds given him for the intelligence; And the Parliament also
ordered that letters of thanks, should be sent from that House to Colonel
Mitton, and the rest for this and all their other faithful Service to the
state.

And not long after the foresaid time we had yet farther information by Letters
from those parts, that renowned, religious and victorious Sir William Brereton,
was now safely arived (as had been long and earnestly desired by the Country,
there) at the Leaguer, before West Chester, and that valiant and vigilant
Colonel Jones having certain notice that Sir William (...), Another brave
defeat given to the Enemy at Holt-bridge, where Sir William Byren was taken
prisoner.
the bloody Lord Byrons brother, knowing well the wants and shalts of his said
brother Governor of Chester, had therefore got together what provisions he
possibly could make and scrape up together, and all the forces he could raise
to the number of about 400. near Holt, with an intent thus to relieve the City
of Chester on the Welch-side thereof. But I say, brave and active Colonel
Jones, knowing hereof, chose rather to march out unto him by the way, than to
be more dangeously molested near the City walls where he lay, and so leaving a
sufficient guard about the Town in the Leaguer, went forth, and met him on the
way, bravely encountered him, wherein the fight, having soon routed him, he
took Sir William (...) himself, their Commander in Chief, Prisoner, with
about 50. other prisoners and horse, slew diverse on the place, took diverse
hors-loades of their provision, wherewith they intended to have relieved the
City; and thus, by Gods goodness hindered this design also; thus, by Gods
mercy, hastening our hopes of the sooner surrender of the said Town unto us.

And about the 31. instant, came the most Excellent news (with which I shall
conclude this most Memorable Month also). Another most famous defeat and brave
victory over the Lord Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, in their march into
Scotland, to join with Montrosse.
of a most famous defeat and remarkable routing of the forces of the Lord
Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, in their hoped and intended hot and furious
march into Scotland to join with Montrosse his forces there, for a farther
great mischief to that poor kingdom, and ours also (had not the Lord
graciously prevented it) afterward, upon their success in this intended
design of theirs. Which famous defeat was brought to the Parliament, by Sir
William Adison, who came to London out of the North and brought the true
intelligence thereof; the particulars whereof were as follows: The Lord
Digby, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale having sent to Boulton and others of their
party in Lancashire, Cumberland and other places to come in unto them and join
with them in their March toward Scotland, where they intended to join with
Montrosse, as aforesaid, They marched from Skippon Northward, and endeavored to
have passed by Kirby-Linsdale, but Colonel Briggs having intelligence of this
their design, The Lord Digby crossed in his way and forced to go another way.
made good a pass against them, whereby he forced them to turn by the way of
the Sands about Partmake to get into Cumberland, their Chief guide being Sir
William Hudlestone (a new made Oxford-Knight and desperate Malignant) who also
engaged what party he could to their assistance and brought them to
Millum-Castle, which was his own House, on the Seacoasts.

About which time there was some four or five ships seen upon those coasts,
and thereupon conceived that they were laden with Irish to join with Digby
about White-Haven, but they proved some of our own Navy. It seems that Digbies
design was to have gone into Scotland, to have joined with Montrosse; which
design, he (it seems was much encouraged in by Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir
William Huddlestone) who is grown so great a man with Digby of late, that he
is confident to be added to the new moddell of Lords.

Thus by their activity they had gotten together about one thousand horse under
the command of the Lord Digbie, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and with them were
upon their march toward Montrosse.

Lieutenant General David Lesley with about two thousand was upon his advance
toward them, and lay between them and M^^trosse, to hinder their conjunction
with Digby; in the mean while the well-affected Gentry of Cumberland were
forced to fly for their security; the enemy plundering, and using great
cruelty all the way as they passed: insomuch that the country people made a
great acclamation against them.

General Lesley sent out a Brigade of about 1100. horse, under the command of
Major General Van-drusk, to pursue the enemy; and a Regiment of English horse
also were designed after them to gain a pass, in case the enemy came back to
hinder their retreats.

Major General Van-drusk with the Scots Brigade pursued the enemy so close,
that they discovered them in their march, and endeavored to force them to
engage, which the enemy endeavored to avoid; Major General Van-drusk divided
his then, and made good several passes; but by reason of the lowness of the
tide, Digby and Langdale got away over the Fords; over which, Van-drusk
followed them: the enemy fled over another water, and so over three or four
several places one after another, so long till the flowing of the Sea came in
after they had passed the last Ford, and before Van-drusk could with his body
get over, the waters were swelled too high to pursue further; whereby Digby got
an opportunity with his forces to escape them.

In the mean while the Lord Balmersnoth with what forces he could raise out of
the Frontiers of Scotland, prepared to oppose Digby, who with his party, (
Digby it seems having intelligence thereof,) occasioned his retreat, and so
wheeling about escaped his forces, and avoided engagement at that time, but all
this while Digby increased, and gathered forces; and was 1000 at the least and
committed many (...), and villainous plunderings, with his men in all places
where he came, sparing neither friend nor foe; yet all this while Digby and
Langdale avoided all our forces, and it seems had guides that were perfect in
the ways where he was to march, so that he escaped every parts all this
while; but yet we met with him afterward with a small party, and it pleased
God to make them so far powerful against them as to rout and spoil them.

Sir John Brown, a very gallant active man, undertook with a small party of
between 4. and 500. to seek out Digby and his nimble brigade, that had so many
qui^^es, and turnings, and if it were possible to force them to engage: which
he performed with great wisdom and valor.

Sir John Brown divided his small party, about 150. were sent to make good a
pass, whilst the rest being not above 300. marched out toward the enemy, Sir
John Brown having then Intelligence that the Lord Digby, Sir Marmaduke
Langdale and the rest, in number about 1000. were about Carlisle sands, thither
he hasted after them, and Digby (it seems) having Intelligence of forces
coming against him, (but it is probable knew not the number, for he) fled from
them, nearer to the Sea, whether Sir John Brown followed them, and it pleased
God to give him an opportunity to fall on the enemy, the thing that Sir John
much desired, and the tide being up Sir John Brown gained a pass, which is a
kind of pass over a place which he got and made good; and though he was so
few, and the enemy so many, yet Sir John Brown was resolved to engage, and to
run that hazard, trusting in Gods al-sufficiency, and accordingly drew up.

But Sir John Brown, though willing to hazard his own person, yet he sent away
his Coullers to General Lesly, with some other things that could not do much
help but hinder the fight; and sent word to General Lasly, what a resolution
he had to force Digby to engage; and what an opportunity he had to do it;
which though so few, yet with those he had he would run the hazard, his
number being then not full 500. but well mounted, and Armed.

Upon their approach the Lord Digby took an alarm in his quarters, and
understanding that the party were but small, drew into a posture to fight with
them, divided his forces into two bodies, one of which stayed with him, and the
other Commanded by Sir (...) Langdale; Digby stayed with his party, and
Langdales came up toward Sir John Brown, and they faced each other a while,
the enemy being then surrounded by the waters.

Sir John Brown sent Captain Lesly on the forlone hope, who drew up; and
being met by the enemy charged them very gallantly, the reserve charged up to
him seasonably with Sir John Brown; and all of them in their several places,
(according to their degrees) did all very much and in short time brake through
their body and routed them; Their reserve some, of them, came up, but most
fled; And in this action Sir John Brown himself deported himself with as
much gallantry as any man in the world could do, the whole body being not
discouraged, though in number so much overmatched.

For the particulars of those that were killed, and taken, I refer you to the
list, where all the particulars are certified, according to Sir John Brownes
own letter.

The Lord Digby had a clear rout as ever was given to any; The Lord Digby
himself, with Sir Marmaduke Langdale and others of his chief Officers that
escaped fled over to the Isle of man in a Cock-Boat: The Isle of man is a
malignant Island, between Cumberland and Ireland; the Earl of Derby is the
Governor thereof for the King: and of others that escaped there are diverse
taken straglers, and their Horse and Arms, but in a body there are none heard
of, save only about 200. that are fled toward B^^m; and a party are sent to
stop them from getting in thereto, if they can, but of them that are fled that
way of the Enemies many of them are fore wounded.

A List of what was slain, and what was taken by Sir John Brown at the routing
of the Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdale at Carlisle Sands.
On the Enemies part.
ONe hundred slain upon the place. Many wounded.
Taken Prisoners.
DIgby his Quartermaster General. 1 Colonel of Langdales Brigade. 2
Lieutenant Colonels. 3 Captains of Horse. Diverse other Officers. Many
Prisoners.
Taken besides.
TWo Hundred Horse and Arms. The Lord Digbyes own Standard. Sir Marmaduke
Langdales Standard. 3 Colors of Horse.
On our part.
SIr John Brown shot through his side, but not mortally, for he is able to fit
upon his Horse back. Captain Lesley wounded. 30 and odd slain, amongst whom
some Officers, but none of note that I hear of. 50 or there abouts wounded on
our side in all. Digby and Langdale with 1000 Horse, were totally routed by Sir
John Brown, with a party of about 500. and Digby and Langdale fled to the Isle
of Man in a Cockboat.

And upon the intelligence hereof, an Order passed both Houses of Parliament,
to this effect: It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That the Ministers in the several Congregations in the Cities of
London and Westminster, and Lines of Communication, do upon Wednesday next,
being the 5 of November, take notice of the great mercy of Almighty God, in
preserving and continuing this present Parliament, now full five years
complete, notwithstanding all the designs and machinations of the Enemy
against them; And likewise to make most thankful mention of Gods great mercy
in the defeating of the Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke Langdales Forces in
Scotland, by Sir John Brown of Fardell Knight: And that the Lord Mayor be
desired to give the several Ministers timely notice of this Order.

And now, good Reader, let me entreat thee (as there is very great reason) here
to make a little stay, and even to stand amazed in the serious and most
grateful re-view and re-cogitation of the still continued and multiplied
mercies of our most good and gracious wonder-working God, in this Month also,
to his blessed Burning-Bush, The Burning-Bush unconsumed.
still, I say, both unconsumed, and also made most prosperously to stand and
flourish in the midst of all the rough and outrageous conflagrations and
combustions of Malignants power and policy, might and mischievous
machinations, to have utterly (...) and destroyed it, root and branch, had not
God, I say, the great and gracious, the most wise and vigilant Watchman, over
his poor maligned English-Israel stood for them, as has been mightily Moore
Governor of G^^nt-House, the taking of Far^igh Castle in Somersetshire, and of
Sandall Castle in Yorkshire. In the happy surrender of the Town and Castle of
Winchester, into the Parliaments power; and the pious resolutions of our
Parliament to deal mercifully with Malignants and Delinquents, notwithstanding
their intended merciless cruelty toward us; and yet herein also the
Parliaments prudence and providence for the safety and welfare of the Kingdom.
In the Bazing-House, that pernicious den of thieves, and thus cleansing that
foul and filthy Augean-stall; together with the taking of Chepstow Town and
Castle by Colonel Margan. In the cleared integrity of the Parliament, touching
(...) of new Members unto them; the brave defeat given to the Abington Forces;
together with that other brave Rossiter to Banbury Forces near Newarke. In the
taking of Langford-House near Salisbury; and the soundly beating of Sir William
Vaughans Forces by Tamworth Garrison. In the famous defeat given to the Enemy
at Sherburne his Yorkshire, by valiant Colonel Copley; and the admirable, and
almost miraculous taking of Tiverton Town and Castle. In the Wales, for the
reducing of that Principality to the Parliaments obedience; and the taking in
of (...) and Monmouth Towns and Castles to the Parliaments party. And lastly,
In the discovery of Digbies Letters, the brave defeat Denbigh Castle, coming to
relieve Chester; And that other brave defeat given to Sir William Byron on the
like intention to relieve Westchester, where he was taken Prisoner: Together
with that last, not least, famous defeat given again to the Lord Digby and
Langdale, in their mischievously intended march into Scotland to Montrose. Upon
the most weighty and worthy grateful consideration of all which most memorable
and admirable Parliamentary mercies, and mighty blessings; O what infinite
cause have we, O in what innumerable and indissoluble bonds of obliged
gratitude are we everlastingly bound to bless the Lord, Isa. 25. 9, 10, 11.
our thus great and gracious wonder-working God? And with the pious Prophet to
be enlarged in our hearts and tongues with abundant expressions of joyful
confessions and exultations in our God, and to sing and say, in this our day,
Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he has saved us; This is the
Lord, we have trusted in him, and now he has made us to be glad and rejoice in
his mighty salvations, for he has trodden down Moab ( our most proud and
politic adversaries) under his feet, even as straw is trodden down for the
dunghill. Isa. 28. 29.
This also comes all forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in
counsel, and most excellent in working. Go on, O Lord, we pray thee still to
make thy great name more and more glorious, Psalm. 9. 19, 20.
and let not men prevail; Let still these irreligi^us Royalists be judged in
thy sight; Put them still in fear, O Lord, that they may know they (...) men.
So shall we thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture, give thanks (...) to
thee, and bless thy name (as we do this day) for ever and ever. (...) now to
go on.

And here, November. 1645.
now, we will begin the yet further most grateful contemplation and admiration
of the most memorable Parliamentary Mercies of this next ensuing Month also of
Novem. 1645. with a most notable evidence and testimony of the most prudent and
provident care and vigilance of our Parliamentary Senators, for the good and
welfare of the Kingdom, every way, in two memorable Ordinances of Parliament,
Two excellent Ordinances of Parliament.
ratified by the Lords and (...). The one giving power to the Committee of
Goldsmiths-Hall in London, to tender the Solemn League or Covenant, to all
persons coming unto them out of the Kings Quarters to compound for their
Delinquency; And the other for the enabling of the Commissioners of the Great
Seal, and the other Committees in their several Counties, to tender an Oath to
all such persons of what degree or quality soever, that shall come into the
Parliaments protection. Both which Ordinances, together with the foresaid Oath,
I have thought fit, for the Readers better content and satisfaction, here to
insert, as they were printed and published by authority of Parliament, which
were as follows:

Die Sabbathi 1 November. 1645.
An Order of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, giving Power to the
Committee of Gold-Smiths-Hall, to tender the solemn League and Covenant to all
such Persons that come out of the Kings Quarters to compound for their
Delinquency.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled; That the Committee
of Goldsmiths-Hall shall have Power to tender the solemn League and Covenant
to all persons that come out of the Kings Quarters to that Committee to
compound, either upon Master Speakers Pass or otherwise, and to secure such as
shall refuse to take the Covenant, until they shall conform thereunto.

Joh. Brown Cler Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi 5. April. 1645.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all and
every person of what degree or quality soever, that has lived or shall live
within the Kings quarters, or been syding, assisting, or adhering unto the
Forces raised against the Parliment, and has or shall come to inhabit or
reside under the power and protection of the Parliament shall swear upon the
holy Evangelist in manner following.

I A. B. do swear from my heart, That I will not directly nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause against
the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two Houses of
Parliament in this Cause or War. And I do likewise swear that my coming
and submitting my self under the power and protection of the Parliament, is
without any manner of design, whatsoever, to the prejudice of the proceedings
of the two Houses of this present Parliament, and without the direction,
privity, or advice of the King, or any of his Council, or Officers, other than
what I have now made known. So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

About the 2 of this instant November, we received certain intelligence by
Letters from the Northern parts, about Newark, that the King being then in
Newark, and extreme stricktly eyed and watched by faithful and active Major
General Poyntz, Shelford-house stormed and taken by valiant Major Genesis Poyntz.
and that he could not stir any whither, but still the Major General was on
his back molesting his designs, and especially, he, at this time, lying about
Shelford House, his Majesty fearing the Major General intended at last, to
lock him up within Newark walls, and so at length to block him up for a siege;
The King therefore would very feign have been nibling with him, watching
opportunity to dislodge him (if it might be) from so near an offensive
neighborhood, had therefore a purpose (at least made a show thereof) to set
upon the Major General, in his quarters. But the sedulous and watchful Major
General being too circumspect to be so caught asleep upon his Couch of
Security, and having timely notice of a party of the kings out of Newark
approaching toward him, had his forces in a fit and defensive posture; which
also the enemy by their Scouts understanding, immediately they turned their
course back again to Newark and durst do nothing upon them. Whereupon the
noble and most active Gen^rall resolved that now he would do something on the
Enemy, and that to purpose too; and thereupon fell close upon Shelford-House,
a strong Garrison of the Enemies) sent a Summons to the Governor which was
flatly denied, Shelford-house summoned.
by reason that they expected (and made no doubt of) speedy relief by Newark
horse; which as was briefly touched before, failed them, they only making a
show as if they would have helped them, but presently faced about and very
peaceably departed to Newark. And now also the Major General having received
an additionall strength from valiant and active Colonel Rossiter, he
presently, on the foresaid denial, stormed the House and very resolutly got
over the works, The House taken.
which was, indeed gallantly defended by the enemy, and disputed most hotly on
both sides for about half an hours space, at the swords point; the Enemy
(standing upon their honor, fortunes, and strength of their works) chose
rather to die in their obstinacy than to ask for quarter, upon which their
desperate pertinacy (there being about 180 of them in the house) most of them
suffered by the edge of the sword, A sore slaughter made in the House by the
Enemies obstinancie.
for we slew above 140. and gave quarter, not to above 30. or 40. at most,
among whom was the Governor, Son to the Earl of Chesterfield, who had
received many dangerous wounds, and some (it was believed) mortal. Now this
strong Garrison being thus subdued, we had thereby much fairer opportunity and
accommodation for the besieging of Newark; but yet for the present, Major
General Poyntz his design was next for Worton, whereof more in its more
proper place.

Much about the same time we had credible information by Letters out of the
North, Digbyes late scattered forces being rallyed again, are again met with
and miserably mangled and brought to nothing.
that since the routing of that brave upstart Commander the Lord Digbies forces
upon C^rlile-Sands, forementioned, His scattered forces which remained after
that rout, being afterward rallyed together again into a body, they marched
toward Dumfreez in Scotland but were happily met with all again; some of them
by Sir John Brown of Fordell, who fought with them, put them to flight and
took 100. more of them. Another party of them that fled toward Beeston-Castle,
were incoun^^ed by Colonel Brigges, and the Lancashire forces and 200 more
were taken by (...) also. Likewise above (...) of them flying through (...)
withal, by Major General Van-(...)* So that the (...) party of 1600. of the
Kings prime horse under the Conduct of Digby that (...) now turned (...)
General (...)-man, was thus (...) spoiled and taken; only Digby himself, and
La^gdale, the Lord (...) Sir William (...) and not to more (as was credibly
informed) had the unhappy happiness to prolong their shame and-miserie, by
escaping in a small Frigot, or Cock-boat, or some such like small vessel, to
the Isle of Man, there to condole their distress with their as unworthy and
ignoble unsuccessefull Copesmate the Earl of Darby, Governor of the said Isle.

And about the 3. Instant we were credibly informed, by Letters out of Wales,
that valiant and Victorious Major General (...) had taken in Abarashwait,
Abarashwait, a strong Garrison of the enemies in Cardiganshire taken. Thanks
returned to the Lord, on this 5. of November for the happy preservation and
Continuation of this present Parliament. Thanks and praises also returned to
the Lord by order of Parliament for the City of Londons preservation from the
plague of Pestilence.
a strong Garrison of the Enemies in Cardiganshire, and therein a Pieces of
Ordnance, 200. Arms, and all their Ammunition, Bag and Baggage; So that, now,
not only all (...) but the rest also of Major General Laugh^^^s association i^
(...) of all the Enemies forces and Garrisons.

November the 5. being the (...) day of solemn thanksgiving, or, the annual
(...) of Englands former wonderful deliverance from that unparalleld (next to
this present Epidemicall-(...) of the (...), and Atheistical Malignants
against this Parliament, and indeed I may say all Christendom where the (...)
Religion was professed) the Popish-Powder-Plot, I say, was with great and
accustomed Solemnity observed and kept throughout London and Westminster; And
among other things, Comm^^rated on this days Solemn Celebration, the Ministers
were desired by Order from the Parliament to return humble and hearty thanks
to God, as for the special deliverance (as upon that day) from the Popish
intended Powder Plot (a full and exact History whereof, I my self have written
and is extant in print) So likewise, for Gods wonderful preservation over, and
(...) of this present Parliament, now (...) 5. years together complete;
notwithstanding the many most mischeivous Plots Diabolical Practices and most
Malignant Machinations of the Enemies to have (...) and dissolved it. Also
(...) like humble and hearty thanks and (...) should be tended and a^cribed to
the Lord for his most gracious and merciful continuing this great and most
populous City of London in so much health and welfare, especially from the
noisome Infection of the Plague of Pestilence, especially, also in such a time,
when very many parts of the Countries round about it, were sorely visited and
afflicted with it; And the like solemn thanksgiving was ordered, throughout all
the Parliaments quarters, a most pious and Commendable act in our most renowned
Parliament arie-worthies, and unquestionably well-pleasing to the Lord in
Christ Jesus.

About the 6. of this instant, we received certain intelligence by Letters out
of the Northern parts of the Kingdom, concerning the farther active
proceedings of that valiant and experienced Commander, Worton Garrison
surrendered
Major General Poyntz, whose forces were now near unto W^rton (a House
belonging to the Lord Caworth) before which they being approached, and all
things prepared for a storm, they first summoned the Garrison, and the Enemy
thereupon soon condescended to Articles of Agreement for the surrender
thereof; viz: to march out the next morning by 10. of the clock, with Arms and
Baggage, and the works to be slighted. This House was indeed very strong, but
Shelford-Quarter frighted them sorely. There were taken in this Worton-House
150. Arms, 40. Pikes, 3. Barrels of Powder, a proportionable quantity of
Match, and Bullet, 2. vessels of strong-beer, and store of other provisions.
Wiverton Garrison taken.
After this they clapped down before Wiverton-garrison; which they finding to be
a very strong place also, the General, upon treat^^, agreed that the Enemy
should march away with bag and baggage to Banbury; the Governor thereof, Sir
Robert Terrill was a known Papist; And thus also this strong hold was
surrendered into the Parliaments possession. Lastly, our forces came before
Welbeck, the Marquess of Newcastles House, another strong hold of the Enemies
where after some agitation and articles agreed upon (one whereof was that
Tickbill Castle should be slighted, Welbeck-house surrendered.
and we in lieu thereof to have this strong-House slighted also) it was, at
last, surrendered and quitted by the Enemy, who marched thence to Newarke,
leaving us to slight the House, as was agreed on, and the the Country thereby
was brought into much safety and security from former continual danger.

About the 8. of this instant November, we had unquestionable information out
of Wales of the remarkable Overture and change of things, almost over that
whole Dominion, especially in the County of Glamorganshire, how the active
Gentry and inhabitants thereof did most unanimously unit themselves into a firm
confederation for the expulsion of their plundring Enemies, the ^renous
Royalists, out of their Country, and for putting themselves under the
protection and power of the Parliament, that so they might enjoy their houses
and estates free from plunder and mine; And that the Reader may see upon what
firm and solid grounds these their undertakings were most discreetly and
advis^dly laid, I shall give you an ample fight and satisfaction in this their
own ensuing Declaration.

A Declaration of the Knights. Gentlemen and Freeholders of the County of
Glamorgan, 25. October. 1645.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God of his infinite goodness to bless the
weak endeavors of the well-affected Gentry and Commons, of this County, to
free themselves from those over-mastering powers, and arbitrary pressures they
gr^^^d under, whereof they have been desirous of a long time to be freed, and
now by the providence of God are in some measure restored to the Law and
undoubted liberties belonging to the freeborn subjects of this Kingdom.

We have therefore thought our selves bound to testify before all the world
our most hearty and unfeined thankfulness unto Almighty God for so great a
mercy extended toward us. And also our most humble and hearty thanks unto that
supreme wise council of this Kingdom the Parliament for their unparalleld
and unwearied care of the public, and their particular favors to this our
Country, in sending Captain Robert Moulton Admiral of the Seas, and other
Gentlemen since to assist and countenance our endeavors against the violence
of the enemy of the peace and quietness of the Kingdom. And we do all
hereby declare, that albeit being formerly over mastered by forces so far,
that we were not able to appear so readily as the duty we owed to his Majesty
and the great Council required of us. Yet our affections ever sided and
adheared to them, and our firm resolution is from hence forward to hazard our
lives for their preservation, who have so long adventured theirs for the good
and welfare of the Kingdom; and no longer to be lookers on, but joint
laborers, by the direction and protection of the Parliament, in the happy
stablishing this kingdom in a happy peace, as far as our exhausted abilities
will extend, for the preservation of the true reformed protestant Religion, His
Majesty's royal person, prosperity and dignity, the ^oo^ing and preserving,
the (...) of the (...) Kingdoms of England, Scotland (...), the rights and
privileges of the Parliament, the Laws of the Land, which (...) and property
of the Subject.

All which we will endeavor to maintain with the (...) of our lives. And this
unfeined Declaration we (...) from our hearts, and ^^^^fie under our hands.

About the tenth of this Instant we had certain intelligence by various
Letters out of the North, of the surrender of Bolton Castle to the Parliament
Forces: Bolton Castle in the North surrendered.
and that the defendants therein, the Colonel Scroop, and the rest of his
Officers and Commanders, had liberty to march away thence to Newark with their
Horse and Arms, and the other inferior Officers and Soldiers only with their
Swords. There were taken in this Castle about 100 Muskets 50 Pikes, two Barrels
of Powder, and good store of other Provisions.

And much about the same time we had certain information by Letters from
Gloucester, A brave defeat given to the Enemy near Canon-Froom, and a notable
Engine taken from them.
that that valiant and most active Governor of Gloucester had intelligence of
a design against Canon-Froom by the Enemy in Hereford, for the storming and
surprising of it, with a strange Engine which they had provided for that
purpose, and brought along with them; marching thus forth out of Hereford with
about 400 men, with their Governor, they only faced the House, and after that
wh^^led about toward Malvern Hills, to meet with additionall Forces from
Worcester, f^lly to besiege it, whereof the Governor of Canon-Froom having
knowledge and considering his present dis-furnishment of things necessary to
defend the Garrison against a siege or assault, he sent to valiant Colonel
Morgan to Gloucester, Col. Morgan frights away the Enemy.
praying his assistance, who presently came forth to help him with 500 Horse
and 200 Foot, and marched to Ridley, where he joined with 300 of Corstane men,
but the Enemy having notice thereof (lying then about Ledbury) posted thence
quite away, The Engine is left behind.
but had left behind them the strange Engine (which sorely frighted our men at
Froom) guarded with two or three Troops of Horse from Hereford, till they
returned. In the intrim those that had faced Canon-Froom, as was touched before,
falling in at Ledbury, in their way to Malvern, to refresh themselves there, a
Quartermaster of Canon-Froom, with about twelve only of their Horse,
accidentally being forth to view the Coasts and coming through the Town, not
knowing of the Roysters being there, fell upon them all, and seeing themselves
suddenly engaged cried out Fall one, Fall ane, slew two on the place, and
brought away five prisoners, past by the Engine without much ado, the Enemy It
seems being amazed at the sudden onset, and unprovided, some drinking, and
others careless of any such attempt, cried Horse, Horse, and went away in a
distracted manner, where they surprised the Engine within a mile and half of
the place, drove away the Troops that were with it, seized on it, with the two
Captains, and many prisoners, and brought all, with their Ladders and other
Instruments provided for the storm, to the Garrison of Canon-Froom; upon the
coming in whereof, such a shout was made, that all the Country rang of it. The
Engine was such a one, as the like has not been known since these wars: The
Roysters called it a Sow. The Engine was called a Sow.
It was carried upon great wheels, and to be drawn with Oxen, it was made
with rooms or lofts one over another, musket proof, and very strong, out of
which were holes to play and shoot out. The description of it.
It was so high, that it was above all the Works at Canon-Froom, so that they
could discharge over the Works; besides which, a door opened to bring them
into the Works, out of which went a Bridge for their entrance. The Garrison was
then in such a condition, that had they not been thus disappointed, in all
probability this Engine had effected their intended design; but, God be
praised, it was prevented. On the Lords day following, November 9. Master Jackson
a Minister in Gloucester, having information thereof in the morning (before
Sermon) gave public thanks in the Pulpit, for so great a deliverance, and
unexpected, and unlikely preservation.

About the twelfth of this instant a Messenger from the Right Reverend Assembly
of Divines at Westminster, was tendered to both (...) of Parliament, therein
acquainting them, that according to an Order sent unto them from the
Parliament, November. 20. 164^. they had now fully perused the Psalms, Master
Rouses Psalms approved of by the Assemb^y of Divines.
translated into English out of the Original Hebrew Tongue, by learned and
much honored Master Rouse, conceiving them very fit to be publicly made use
of through the Kingdom: and that they had likewise perused the Psalms
translated by Master Barton, a reverend and learned Minister of the City of
London, who (they acknowledged) deserved much commendation for his great pains
and abilities therein also; but conceived the other most fit for public use,
which were accordingly authorized by the Parliament, whereof more in its due
place.

And about the 14 of this instant November. we were certainly informed that
Colonel Sir Thomas Aston (lately before made Lord Ashton, forsooth) who in the
beginning of this Parliament was a mighty stickler for the Prelates, and a
chief Agent to get hands to Petitions for supporting of the Bishops
Hierarchy, A brave defeat given to the Lord Ashton, and himself slain therein.
and was one of their grand Champions of a Laick, as they termed them, to write
in defense of them:) That this Ashton, I say, came with a party to seek some
additionall relief for the King his Master about Dudley Castle, and those
parts, of whose design valiant, active, and loyal Colonel Stone, Governor
of Stafford, having intelligence, sent out a party, and encountered him in the
way, who soon routed all his party, which was in number about 100 Horse or
more, took at least 80 of them, slew some on the ground, sorely wounded the
said Lord Ashton, who within a seven night after (as was for certain informed)
dyed of his wounds (yet he lived to see his darling Episcopacy and many base
apostatizing Bishops to die and fall before him, a just increment and addition
to his other wretchedness,) the remainder of his Horse which was about twelve
or sixteen at most, fled for their lives to Worcester, to carry news of their
Leaders good success and fair recruit in that design. And much about the
same time we were also credibly informed that Major Blundell of Reading, with a
party of Horse, met with a party of the Kings, the most of them being Gentlemen
of his Life Guard, About forty of the Kings Life Guard surprised by Major
Blundell of Reading.
near unto their Garrison at Wallingford, where they were most jovially
revelling in their Nectar-Cups, all whom he there suddenly surprised, being
about 40 of them, and carried away with him prisoners to Reading, without any
resistance.

Upon the 17 of this instant November, the anniversary commemeration of the
happy and blessed inauguration or coronation of that most peerlesse and
precious Princess of ever blessed memory, eternally to be renowned pious,
magnanimous and Heroic Queen Elizabeth, was still, even to this day, most
solemnly celebrated in the famous and faithful City of London, The just and
glorious commemoration of rare and renowned Queen Elizabeth on the 17 of
November.
and in some places Sermons preached on her most happy memorial, and thus
incessantly has continued, notwithstanding her so long decease above 40
years; In which regard, this (me thinks) is a most remarkable note, and worthy
most Christian serious observation with all true English Protestants and
sincere Christians, (and which I desire the godly Reader to take special
notice of, as most pertinent to these times) that, notwithstanding, I say, her
so long decease, she should still so constantly and cheerfully be so highly
honored, and so zealously remembered (being as it were most deeply engraven
with indelible Characters of gratitude and joy) in the hearts of the heartiest
surviving Subjects of this Kingdom, yea, and their posterity after them, and
that for so many years together after her death, verifying that faithful word
of the Lord, Them that honor me, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Psalm. 112. 6.
I will honor. And that of the holy Prophet David, The righteous shall be had
in everlasting remembrance. Whereas her immediate Successor King James (which
makes the wonder indeed remarkable) a Prince, I confess, learned and wise
(after the worlds esteem,) yea, and bred and brought up in the Protestant
Religion all his days, A brief, but bad and sad mention of King James his
life and death.
and in his reign in Scotland held a precise Puritan, but managing his whole
Reign in the Kingdom of England in such an unresolved way (to say no more)
for God and true piety, and in such a doubling condition twixt Protestantisme
and Popery, as extremely encouraging Popish Jesuits and tyrannical Prelates
in both their impious and Antichristian ways and wiles, even to the (then)
brewing, and (now, and of late times before) broaching of all these most bloody
and pernicious modern mischiefs, now (most justly) fallen upon us, even now,
I say, in his most unhappy Sons days, and all for our so juggling dealings with
our God, in (then) turning true piety into mere policy and machivilianisme,
and in our now of late more evident base backslidings from our first Love, the
Lord Jesus.

See therefore, I say, (good Reader) how our most wise and just God has
contrariwise verified that righteous saying of his, They that despise me shall
be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Prove. 10. 7.
And that of the wise King Solomon, The name of the wicked shall rot. For, ever
since King James his decease, his memory has perished among his people, who
^^ver since the time of his death to this very day, King James quite forgotten
in the hearts of his people.
has had one years annual commemoration of his name and memory, but is
extinct and dead in the hearts of his people, as his Corpse lies dead and
putrefying in the Urn of his Sepulcher. Whereas, had King James and King
Charles his Son, been sincere and cordial indeed to their (but merely
pretended) Principles, King James and King Charles not true to their Principles.
of true piety and the Protestant Christian Religion, O how happy had England
been? O how glorious and illustrious had the name and memory of these two
Princes been to the present age and its posterity! Had, I say, these two
immediate Successors of that pious Princess lovely Elizabeth, been as truly
zealous for God in the suppression of Popery and Papists, King James, King
Charles, and Queen Elizabeth paraleld together in point of Reformation.
as she was (who, considering she was but a woman, and began the Work of
Reformation first of all, and had therefore a hard pull of it, the light of
true Religion then breaking forth with much difficulty, and in a glimmering
light and weak twinkling condition, yet was carried on by her, and through
Divine assistance, brake forth through the clouds of many and mighty
oppositions, especially I mean in Doctrine, to a most fair and hopeful
condition.) O, I say, had they closely and faithfully followed this work, how
had it, long ere this time, flourished (by Gods gracious assistance, who loves
truth in the inner parts) and grown up to tall growth, in Discipline also as
well as Doctrine, and in all probability, been brought to a great perfection?
But, alas, see (in brief) the unhappy difference; She was still guided by her
most wise, Queen Elizabeth's rule.
grave, and faithful Counselors (who were all* for the most part, brave
Statists, and solid Commonwealths men) and by her Parliaments, by which
means, and by whose wisdom and providence, not only the Protestant Religion
was strongly established, but the Trade of the Kingdom, abroad and at home,
mightily increased, and her happy Subjects marvellously enriched: Whereas, King
James and King Charles rule.
both King James and his Son King Charles, by their strange juggling and
dallying with Religion, and now at last palpably and downright fighting
against God (though, still, as covertly as they can) led therein by loose,
lewd, and upstart Lords and Counselors, Priests and Prelates, who strove
strenuously to have made their lust our Laws, Parliaments made the Kings
Stauking Horses to get Subsidies.
rejecting to be ruled by their Parliaments, but making these only their
Staulking-Horses, to get money for the someting of their illegal designs, and
their dissolving them, without any redress of grievances, thus introducing all
kinds of oppression upon the Subjects Estates, bodies and souls, by mere and
monstrous Arbitrary Tyranny: Thus, I say, making not only themselves, but
also their formerly famous and flourishing Kingdoms, Arbitrary Tyranny.
(as much as in them lay) most unhappy every way, being most miserably
impoverished, and almost totally and most ruthfully ruinated, The Power of
godliness to be beaten down.
and all this, I say, by juggling with Religion (in the prime place) and
dal^ying and dissembling with the Lord, who (though we our selves may be herein
easily deceived) cannot be mocked, Popery or profaneness to be set up; in
Germanies blood.
and all this to beat down the power of godliness, and to set up Popery or
Atheism and Prophanasse; for confirmation of all which, witness, O witness,
the Oceans of Christian blood shed all over desolate Germany, and in special
the ruruine of the Palatinate, and King James his Offspring, all which let
England judge, if England might not have timely saved in King James his time,
if King James had pleased, witness the blood of most woefully ruinated Rochell,
Roc^els and the Isle of Rees blood.
and all the brave English blood spilt in the Isle of Ree, in King Charles his
days, witness, O witness, the late most lamentable Irish Massacree of almost
200000 English innocent souls there, Irelands blood.
far worse than so many dogs destroyed. Yea, witness all the (still) fresh
gashes and bleedings, or rather gushing streams, nay floods of blood, of
Scotland and England to this day: England and Scotlands blood.
To say no more of other secret streams of blood which Heaven, the most
righteous revenger thereof, will certainly reveal and vindicate in his due
time) and all this for the impious enjoyment of a cursed Spanish Match, Other
blood not yet revealed.
and the satisfying of the lust of a Popish Lady, a proud Prelaticall and
Atheistical inconsiderable party of consciencelesse Cabinet-Counsellors, The
Authors of all this.
and juggling Junctoe's (of whom the Law takes no notice) whose only aims,
interests and engagements herein, have been to ruinate Religion in the power
and purity of it, and to open a wide gushing sluice to Popery and Atheism, and
base slavery of bodies and souls, The crafty color of all this.
upon the poor miserable abused and seduced Subject, and all, under the
specious (but most fallacious) vales and vizards of Protestantisme, unity and
universal conformity. Pardon, good Reader, I pray thee, this somewhat large
digression, if so I may call it, yet, certainly, a very necessary one, and
whereunto I have been thus far transported by my ardent zeal and fervor for
God and my distressed Country, especially being thereunto fairly led by
occasion of this 17 of Novembers happy commemoration of that precious Paragon
of her age and sex, eternally to be renowned Queen Elizabeth. But now to
proceed.

About the 20 of this instant November, we had certain intelligence by Letters
out of the West, that a Bark going from Falmouth toward Foy, A brave prize
taken at Sea by Plymouth Garrison.
laden with Kerseyes to the value of 1500 l. was (by some neglect of the
Mariners, and a great mist which happened at Sea) driven into a creek, near
Plymouth, from whence a Boat was sent to demand and know whom they were for,
the Mariners thinking themselves to be in his Majesty's Quarters, answered,
They were for the King. Hereupon our boat left them, and acquainting the
Governor of Plymouth therewith, he sent forth several Boats, with Musketeers
to take the Bark, which they did, after some resistance, and some few slain on
both side, and so brought it safely into Plymouth, to be made use of for the
King and Parliament.

And about November the 24. we also received certain information by Letters
out of Gloucestershire of a brave defeat given to the Enemy in those parts,
which also was confirmed by another Letter, especially from Malmsbury, the
substance whereof was as follows: That upon occasion of planting and
fortifying a Garrison for the Parliaments party by renowned and active
Colonel Morgan, the valiant and faithful Governor of Gloucester, at Sir
Henry Fred. A brave defeat given to the enemy in Gloucestershire, where Major
Duet, that French Renegado was slain.
Thynnes House, at Kempsford, in that County; the Enemy belonging to Rad-Court
and Farringdon, being enraged at it, and much offended that they should have a
troublesome neighbor so near them, to straighten and curb their former
accustomed excursions into the Country for contribution-money and plunder:
They therefore came forth with a party of about 30. horse to impede and
disturb their works begun. Whereupon Captain Moore (who had the Command of
Malmsbury foot, left at Letch-lad by Colonel Morgan) drew out 60. Musketeers,
with which he bravely flankt the Enemy, slew 2. of them, shot their Captain
in the thigh, and so made retreat; but this their Commander swore in a rage,
that they would ere long be avenged upon our forces, and thereupon they
presently fetched in unto them Major Duet (that French-Renegado and base
apostate from the Parliaments service, who, since his defection, had been a
Scourge and vexation to those parts, though most Commonly with loss to
himself) who came that very evening with 100. foot and 120. horse, purposing
to have surprised ours in their works, and now to be revenged on them, for his
friends former repulse; but valiant and vigilant Captain Moore timely
discovered them, sent out another party of Musketters, and the
Gloucester-horse thereabout, having taken the Alarm, drew forth also to the
Encounter, set fiercely upon the Enemy, Major Duet slai^e.
put them to the rout; pursued the chase, mortally wounded Major Duet himself,
unhorst him, threw him into the dire, where, within 4 or 5 hours after, he was
found dead (a just hand of God now, at last, upon such a disloyal and
faithless apostate from the honest Cause which he first undertook) they also
slew another Captain and 20. The prisoners and prizes taken.
more Common Soldiers, upon the place, took 30. prisoners whereof one was a
Corner, and 5. of the Kings Lifeguard, 40. horse, and 60 fire-armes, And thu^
having by Gods great mercy (to whom alone be all the praise and glory thereof)
chaced them close to Rad-cot-Bridge even almost to their very works, they
returned victoriously safe to their Garrison, without the lose of any one man
of theirs slain, only 2. or 3. wounded, but not mortally.

Finally, about the latter end of this November it pleased the Lord to put into
the hearts of our most prudent and provident Parliamentarie-Statists, for the
more luculent and clear manifestation of their hearts integrity to manage all
matters for the greater honor of that great and supreme Court of Parliament,
A Notable testimony of the Parliaments integrity touching Protections and
Bribes.
and the fairer evidence of their own personal sincerity in and about the
same; to take into their serious debate, the great prejudice which many have
received by protection of Members of Parliament, and their servants or
attendants, and therefore, how the same might be remedied for the future. The
result whereof came, at last, to this issue, that they appointed a Committee of
New elected Members, who were to meet certain days, weekly, with power to
hear and examine complaints of such as have suffered in that nature. And also
to receive such complaints as shall upon just ground be brought against any
Member of Parliament for taking of Bribes or for any other act of injustice
whatsoever. Certainly such acts of justice as these (especially being
faithfully and effectually carried on) will make this (already) most famous
Parliament much more famous and illustrious to all posterity, and cannot but
most justly stop the mouths of all malicious-hearted Malignants and others who
have or shall endeavor injuriously to scandalize their honorable proceedings.

And here, now, again (good Reader) let me desire thee to stay a while to make
a most grateful review, and there in to admire the rare and remarkable
Parliamentarie-mercies of this month also, in the clear and most
demonstrative ratification of this admirable wonder of the Burning-Bush still
unconsumed, The Burning-Bush unconsumed.
and rarely kept and recovered from the many menaced distractions of it, by the
incessant assailant furious flames and conflagrations flashing continually
round about it, as has been most apparently seen and set forth, both in the
Parliaments provident care and Circumspection for the safety and welfare of the
Kingdom and City of London, 1.
in those two excellent Orders against Delinquents. 2.
In the taking in of Shelford-House; And miserably taring in pieces of the Lord
Digbies late scattered forces again rallyed into a Abarashwait, a strong
Garrison of the Enemy in Cardiganshire into the Parliaments power; And the
grateful recordation of the Parliaments happy preservation from the malicious
machinations, of the plotting Enemies thereof, Worton-Garrison, Wiverton and
Welbeck-house; And the spontaneous falling off of all Glamorganshire from the
Kings pernicious party. Bolton-Castle in the North to the Parliaments forces;
And the brave defeat given to the Enemy at Cannon-Froom, and surprisall (then)
of a notable Engine for battery Sow. In the notable defeat given to the Lord
Ashton and his forces, where himself was slain. And the brave prize taken at
Sea from the Enemy, by Plymouth Garrison. Duet, that French renegado
Parliaments integrity, shining forth in that excellent order of theirs against
Parliaments protections and taking of bribes. All which graciously and
gratefully considered can amount to no less, than a most cordial and
comfortable acknowledgement and confession of the Lords unchangeable free grace
and unexhaustible bounty to us his most unworthy people of England, even to
admiration and astonishment to all our neighbor Nations round about us; And
that therefore they may and must most justly cause, yea compellus, with
thankful thoughts, Psalm. 60. 12.
hearts and tongues to confess and say with holy David, Through the Lord alone
we have done thus valiantly, and he it is that ^ath thus graciously and
gloriously trod down our Enemies. Isaiah, 41. 10. 11.
Yea, He it is that has bidden us not to be afraid of our most potent or
politic Enemies, since he is with us; and that we should not be dismayed,
because he is our God and mighty defense, who thus has strengthened us, helped
and upheld us, with the right hand of his power and righteousness. And now
(therefore) behold (and beholding, O admire it) all those* that were incensed
against us are ashamed and confounded; they are even become as nothing and they
that stubbornly strove with us are mightily destroyed and perish before us.
Psalm. 116,
O, then, what shall we return to the Lord for all these great and amazing
mercies to us? O what are we able to repay to our God for all these free and
utterly undeserved favors thus copiously confered upon us? O let us all
faithfully and thank fully take the Cup of Salvation and praise the name of the
Lord our God, and readily and really pay our vows to this wonder-working God
of our Salvation.

But now to proceed to the yet farther progress of the contemplation and
admiration of the continued wonder of the Burning-Bush unconsumed, December.
1645.
nay rather, more and more dressed and made to flourish in the midst of the
flames of this Month also of December, 1645. And here we shall first begin
with some of our loyal and loving Brethren of Scotlands actions about Newarke,
whether they being now come in to our assistance, with a very considerable Army
of Horse and Foot, to help to besiege this stubborn, rebellious, and very
pernicious Town, to bring it under the Parliaments obedience.

About the beginning of this instant December, Newark besieged, and Muschamp
Bridge and Fort taken by our Brethren of Scotland.
the Scottish Commissioners received Letters from his Excellency, General
Lesley, Earl of Leven, fully informing the particulars of his taking of
Muschamp Bridge, by his Forces, viz. That about the 6 of November last, his
Army being advanced within about a mile or two of Newark, the General caused a
Line to be drawn close to Muschamp-Bridge, and there placed some Musketteers,
intending to cross the River and storm the Fort upon the other side; but the
Enemy apprehending the design, resolved to cut off the Bridge, and upon the 28
in the morning before break of day, they sallyed out upon the Scots, and
attempted the cutting off the Bridge, but were most resolutely and bravely
beaten from it by the Muketeers with little loss to our friends, which the
Enemy perceiving, set fire to the Drawbridge, but the Scots falling stoutly on
them again, beat them back, and very closely pursued them, and made them
forsake all their Works, and so our valiant Brethren became masters both of the
Bridge and strong Fort, and now have very closely besieged that part of the
Town. Upon the reading of which Letter in Parliament, the thanks of the Houses
were returned to the Scottish Commissioners, and a vote passed, That his
Excellency General Lesley, for the better and more orderly managing of the
Siege against Newarke, General Lesley made Commander in chief of all the
Forces both English and Scottish before Newark.
should command in chief all the Forces, as well English as Scottish, before
Newarke. Which Vote was fully and freely assented unto by both Houses of Lords
and Commons, where now we will leave them till another opportunity, with our
prayers for their prosperity in this great work and proceed.

About the fourth of this instant December, a Letter, Petition, and Declaration
of the County of Brecknock in Wales, was presented to the House of Commons, and
there read, declaring their firm resolutions to comply with, and wholly to
submit unto the commands of the Parliament, The County of Brecknock in Wales
comes in to the Parliament.
which Declaration, bearing date November. 23. 1645. for the fullness and
excellency thereof, and for the Readers better content and satisfaction, I have
here inserted verbatim, as it was printed and published by authority; which was
as follows.

WE the Gentry and Inhabitants of the County of Brecknock, whose names are
subscribed, do declare and profess, That we are fully satisfied in conscience,
that the two Houses of Parliament now sitting at Westminster, are the true and
undoubted lawful Parliament of England, and the supreme Court of Judicature of
the Kingdom; To whose judgment and determination we do and will in conscience
of our Loyalty, and not by terror or constraint, submit our selves, our lives
and fortunes.

We are also persuaded and confess, That the Arms taken up and continued by
authority of Parliament in this defensive War, are raised and continued in
their own just defense, and for the just defense of the Protestant Religion,
the Person and Honor of the Kings Majesty, the Privileges of Parliament, and
the liberty of the Subject; And that the Forces raised or to be raised within
the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, without their consent, are
raised and employed for destruction of Parliaments, fomenting and establishing
Popery, Prelacy, and an illegal Arbitrary Government.

In apprehension whereof, we do unanimously resolve, and firmly engage, and
undertake that we, with all persons under our power and command, will from
henceforward, to the extremest hazard of our lives and fortunes, adhere to,
and assist the Forces raised or to be raised by authority of Parliament,
against all other Forces raised or to be raised against them, or without their
consent; and we shall willingly and cheerfully join with Mayor General
Laughorne, and those three associated Counties whereof he is Mayor General,
and with the County of Glamorgan, with whom we are already associated; and
contribute our utmost assistance and endeavors proportionably to the said
respective Counties, in such way as Mayor General Laughorn shall think fit,
and meetest for the Service of the Parliament.

And from this resolution and engagement we shall not swerve or recead, by
adhering to the contrary party, or imbra^ing a detestable neutrality, either by
persuasion dread, or any other motive whatsoever.

After the reading and debate of this Declaration and the other Pape^s from the
County of Brecknock, it was referred to the Committee of Gloucester to draw a
Letter in answer to the same, and inform them how that the Houses of
Parliament had granted their requests, and do cheerfully accept of them, and
commend their submission and declarative resolutions as aforesaid, etc.

And about the sixth of this instant, there came Letters to the Speaker of the
House of Commons certainly signifying the surrenner of Latham House in
Lancashire, a strong and pernicious Garrison which had much infested that
County, which, having been the busy, yet cowardly Earl of Darbies House, had
been held and maintained against the Parliaments Forces for the space of two
years at least, by the Countess of Darby, (the said Earls Lady) that stout
Virago, who proved the better Soldier of the two, and had so long, indeed,
bravely maintained the same against us, and was now enforced to yield it up
only for want of bread and drink, for they had above six weeks drunk
nothing but water, but had store enough of other provisions, and about 200.
Common Soldiers. Latham House taken.
The Governor alone was to depart with his Horse and Arms, and ten pounds in
money; the Officers above the degree of a Lieutenant, only with their Swords:
All the rest only with staves in their hands, and to depart to the Kings next
Garrison, or home to their houses if they pleased, and the House, with all
therein, Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, to be delivered up for the use of the
Parliament. In which there was taken eight Pieces of Ordnance, six Murderers,
500 Arms, with store of other Provisions and Ammunition, with great plenty of
rich prizes and pillage. By the reducing of this House, the whole County of
Lancashire is now totally set at liberty, and cleared of all its Enemies; and
Colonel B^oth, and the other Forces which lay before it, advanced thence
toward Chester to join with Sir William Breretons Forces before Westchester.

About the eighth of this instant, we also received certain intelligence by
Letters out of the West, that his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces had
taken in Fulford House, a strong Garrison also of the Enemies on the other side
of Exeter, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein. Fulford House taken.
By the taking of which Garrison the way was made fully open to Plymouth, so
that our Army there had a free passage to advance for their relief, which not
long after was also happily effected, whereof more in its more proper place.

And now about the 20 of this instant December, Letters were read in the House
of Commons, both from Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Birch, fully relating the
particulars of the taking of the Town and Castle of Hereford; the substance of
both which Letters, together with other unquestionable information whereof, I
have here, for the Readers better content and full satisfaction therein, set
down a true and exact Narration, which was as follows.

Colonel Birch having been not long before in London, Hereford surprised and
taken by a brave stratagem.
was by Order from the Committee of both Kingdoms, sent post to his Forces at
Bristoll, for the effecting of some design against the City of Hereford,
(which ever since our Brethren the Scots raised their siege thence, was grown
very jocond, proud and secure of all danger) from thence he marched to
Gloucester, to advise with Colonel Morgan about the design, but finding the
way, which was at first intended, altogether frustrate, and the Governor of
Gloucester at that time not very well, Colonel Birch went with Sir John
Bridges near to Hereford, and sent for thither two Gentlemen with whom Sir John
had treated before about matters tending to this business, who were then out
of Hereford, fearing to come into the Town; and there Colonel Birch was fully
satisfied concerning the Enemies supine security, and the apparent negligence
of the Guards of the Town, being, I say, most fearlesse of any approaching
danger to them.

And now Colonel Birch consulting again with Colonel Morgan, whom now he
found in perfect health, and most active to promote the work; Col. Morgan and
Col. Birch provide to promote the design.
presently Colonel Morgan provided about 1100 Horse and Foot to join with
Colonel Birches 900 Foot, and his own Troop, being about 50 more Horse, which
were quartered about Gloucester, to be ready at an hours warning, whenever
they should be called, and ordered to furnish themselves with knap-sacks and
provisions for a long march; and so about Monday, December. 15. they began to
march from Gloucester, at which time, the snow being almost knee deep, they
were constrained to march in file one by one, both Horse and Foot, and so to
keep one track, intending to reach to Hereford that night; but, The Soldiers
sore march the first setting forth.
I say, the snow was so deep, and the weather so extreme cold, that the Foot
Soldiers had a very hard march, insomuch that three of them died by the way,
the Foot being to beat their way through the snow. Here Colonel Morgan and
Colonel Birch were constrained to make an hault before they had marched within
six miles of Hereford, but their forlorn hope had marched within two miles
thereof, and were so near engagement, that they came not off without some
difficulty: But the two gallant Commanders finding that they were discovered
(the better to color their business) marched back half way to Gloucester
with part of their foot, and lodged them at Ledburie, 10. or 12. miles from
Hereford, and others of their horse marched almost to Gloucester. After which,
having rested their foot (and the Enemy now conceiving that they were marched
back and quite gone) suddenly, on Wednesday, December the 17. about 9. of the
clock they marched again toward Hereford, The whole army come near unto
Hereford.
the same way and in files, as before, and came by midnight within twice
Musket Shot of Hereford, and there rested the whole body of the Army, being
2000. Horse and foot effective. Now here I must remember you, that Colonel
Birch, as you heard before, had been in these parts 4. or 5. days before to
lay the design, and to view the ground with those worthy Gentlemen fore
mentioned, Sir John Bridges and the others; At which time, it pleased the Lord
to put an excellent prize and opportunity into their hands, which they
accordingly, (by Gods assistance) wisely made an excellent improve meant of, and
which took also most answerably. For about that time Scudamore, the Governor
of Hereford had sent out a warrant under his own hand to the High Constable of
an adjacent Town for Laborers to be sent into Hereford, to break the ice
about the City; now this warrant they had happily laid hold on, and taken,
from the high-Constable, the substance of which warrant was thus:

THese are straightly to Charge and Command you to send to my Garrison at
Hereford out of your hundred, A Copy of the warrant which helped to win
Hereford.
a hundredth able men, with spades, Shovells, Pickaxes, and other necessaries
fit for Pi^ners, for his Majesty's Service, whereof you are not to sail, as
you will answer the contrary, at your utmost peril.

Barnabas Scudamore
Given under my hand this 14. of December. 1645.
Now the Governor of Gloucesters Secretary had made a return to this
warrant, as from the high Constable of the hundred, expressing; That he had now
sent the Constable of such a Town with 6. men to work, the rest were to
follow. And upon this ground Colonel Birch had plotted and contrived the work
as follows; The manner of managing the business with the Constable and his
warrant.
He had provided 6. faithful and resolute men, in the form of Laborers, and
one more with them (a stout and resolute Livetenant) to be as a Constable with
this warrant to bring thos^ his Townsmen to work in the City; To whom (for
their present encouragement) he had given a good sum of money in hand and had
promised them a larger reward on their faithful performance, which accordingly
they all did, as now you shall hear. These 6 men and their Constable, together
with 150. firelocks, in the dark of the night, lodged near the Gate of the
City in one of the burnt houses, within Pistol shot of the bridge, even as
near as the ground would possibly admit; In all which time, ours with careful
Spies and Scouts kept back all intelligence from the Enemy, So that they never
discovered or suspected us, after our first retreat toward Gloucester* Now I
say, these Firelockes, were for the better managing of the business, left to
Colonel Birches Leiutenant Colonel Hammond; who, indeed, carried the
business bravely and behaved himself most gallantly therein; and the maine
body of foot, Colonel Birch himself led, and Colonel Morgan the horse, but
the forlorn hope of horse, which were first to enter, was Commanded by brave
Captain Temple. These things being thus designed, in the morning after that
the trevalley was beaten, and upon the first letting-downe of the drawbridge,
The drawbridge is let down.
3. men came out of the City, not discerning any body (the Firelocks lay so
close) and now the Constable, with a hedgebill on his shoulder and the other 6.
Soldiers, like homely Country Laborers, with spades and Mattocks, came forth
to their work; and the 3. foresaid men went along on their way, seeing none
else, till they came beyond the hill, and then perceiving our men, they spoke
pretty loud to themselves, What do all these men here? Whereupon they were
instantly surprised and snapt-up, and so could not stir back to give any notice
of ought they saw. And now the Constable and (...) Laborers were come to the
Drawbridge, where the guard began to examine them; The Constable told the
Centinell, that he was come to do his work with those workmen according to
his warrant from the Governor, which they presently desired to see; the
Constable showed it him, and so he and the rest looking on it, to read it, the
6. men came close to them, and were now on the top of the bridge, and as they
were reading the warrant the Constable with his hedge-^ill knocked down the
Centinell who instantly fell down dead at his feet, The Constable knocks down
the Centinell.
the other Laborers killed 2. more of them and so all these 7. kept the others
in play bus^ing at the Bridge, to over master them, all which Leiutenant
Colonel Hammond seeing who stood on the top of the hill to watch the Event,
The Firelocks rush out and haste to the City.
and so gave the sign to all the Firelocks, by houlding up and shaking his Hat
unto them, even all the 150. that lay coucht in the house; whereupon, out they
all rushed, and came speedily, but yet orderly to the Bridge where they found
the Constable and his Laborers, close at their work, indeed, and so the
Firelocks making way for the horse, and the horse close following them, over
the Bridge they got, and into the Town they entered, Captain^ Temple and Sir
John Bridges marched on in the forlorn hope of horse, Leivtenant Colonel
Hammond with the forlorn hope of Firelocks, and Captain Aldern with the
reserve of foot; and thus I say, they entered bravely; Captain Temple with his
horse-troope doing special good service, making his way to the mainguard,
where his horse was shot under him, and he fought so stoutly that his sword
also was broken in his hand to the very hilt, and three of his Troopers only
being slain, which was all the loss that we sustained of our men in this
whole work and some wounded. The Commanders both of horse and foot, I mean
especially both Colonel Morgan and Colonel Birch, did most excellent service,
from the first to the last of this brave service, and so did the rest of the
Commanders and Officers, and went on so gallantly and undauntedly
(notwithstanding that they and their Soldiers had layen out all that cold
night) that they quickly seized on all the guards, The Town fully entered, and
obtained.
insomuch that at last many of the Enemy had got through the market place up
to their chambers, and thence discharged their Muskets and Pistolls upon our
men (and many of the Malignant Townsmen did the like out of their windows)
which so enraged our men that they slew 8. in the streets; but when the Enemy
saw our men come in so fast and in great numbers, they cried out for quarter.
By this means the Soldiers fell to^^^^ndering and rifling, and took what
they could catch, from which the Governor of Gloucester Colonel Morgan could
by no means restrain them, for they accounted all their own in regard they
entered the City by an ouslat and had so much opposition; And thus by 12. of the
clock that night they had fully got the whole City and taken most of their
prisoners. This mercy was wonderful unto us let the Lord have all the honor
and praise thereof, who made in so succesfull unto us in all the particulars of
it from the first to the last.

A List of the prisoners and prizes thus taken in Hereford, by Collell Morgan,
Governor of Gloucester, and Colonel Birch, now made Governor of Hereford.
THe Lord Brudenell, the Bishop of Hereford, by name, Doctor Cook, Sir Fra.
Howard, Sir Marmaduke Floyd, Sir Henry Beding-field, Sir Walter Blunt, and 2.
Lords and Knights 21. in number.
more of the Blunts, both Knights also and Papists, Sir Rich. Kennish, Sir
Richard Weston, Sir Thomas Lunsford, Sir George Vaugham, Sir Gyles Mumpessons,
Sir John Stepney, Sir Fra. Lloyd, Sir Philip Jones, Sir Edw. Morgan Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton, Sir Richard Basset* Leivtenant Colonells and Majors, 10.
in number, besides Judge Jenkins.
Sir Henry Spiller, Sir Roger Bodingham, Lieutenant Colonel Price, Leivtenant
Col. Jones, Lieutenant Colonel Jews, Lieutenant Colonel Tooley, Many Gentl.
of Quality.
and Lieutenant Colonel Jefferies; Major Mathewes* and Major Sayer, Major
Lewis, Major Roberts, At least 2000. Papists.
Major Price; and also Judge Jenkins. Captains, 9. Secretary Barnes; 4.
Leivtenants 3. Cornets one Ensign, one Quartermaster; one Commissarie 2.
Gentelmen of worth and quality, besides Mounseiur Peter Morlet, French Gent. 3.
Surgeons; together with many other Officers and Troopers of worth and
quality; and by the relation of the Townsmen, there were at least 2000.
Papists of all conditions then in the Town, who had fled hither for their
security, since the taking of Chepstow and other places there abouts. We took
there also 12. pieces of Ordnance, but as for the rest of the Magazine and
Ammunition, there was not then a full account given thereof it being then so
scattered and dispersed in the Town.

Of what consequence this Town is unto us, may appear in that the whole
County of Hereford is (by thus obtaining of this City) brought into the
obedience of the ^arliament; The great consequence of the obtainning this City.
and not only so, but all South Wales, and a good Omen for the reducing of
Ragland Castle, all provisions and intercourse being stopped out of Wales also
to Worcester and Ludlow, and the Enemies of other Garrisons thereabout, being
by this means in a fair way of reduction, to the Parliament, this next
Spring, by the gracious assistance of our good God.

Colonel Morgans Secretary, The Messengers of this good news to the
Parliament rewarded.
who first brought the intelligence of this so gallant piece of service to the
Parliament, had 50 l. given him for his pains therein; and Colonel Birches
Messenger had 20 l. given to him also, by Order from both Houses of Parliament.

And the Parliament taking into serious consideration, Orders of Parliament
voted and confirmed upon this great providence of God.
the extraordinary providence, and unexpected (much more immerited) mercy of
God, in thus gaining this strong City, and that with so little loss of blood,
made thereupon these several Orders following:

First, 1
That on the next Lords Day bounden thanks should be rendered to Almighty God,
for this great mercy, by the Ministers in their several Congregations
throughout London and Westminster, and the Lines of Communication.

Secondly, 2
That Colonel Birch should be Governor of Hereford, and the Committee of both
Kingdoms to send him his Commission, and that his Regiment should be recruited
to 1200 men, according to his own desire.

Thirdly, 3
That 6000 l. should be charged on the Excize, and forthwith paid in, to be at
the disposal of the Committee of both Kingdoms, for the payment of his
Forces, and to discharge his engagements to his Soldiers, for their activity
and fidelity in this design.

Fourthly, 4
That 1600 suits of clothes, knap-sacks, shoes and stockings, should be
speedily sent to the Common Soldiers of the Garrison of Gloucester, that had
so great a hand in the performance of this great and good service in thus
taking of Hereford.

And fifthly* 5
and lastly, The House of Commons religiously and piously considering this
business to be the work of God alone, and that his hand was chiefly visible
in it: They therefore to improve this mercy to Gods farther and future honor
and glory, took into their most serious consideration the settling of able and
faithful Preachers, both in Gloucester and Hereford, and for that purpose
there was an Ordinance t^ice read and committed for the uniting of several
Churches in the City of Gloucester into one only Congregation, and allowed
among them 300 l. per annum, Great gratitude expressed by the Parliamen^, both
to God and man, for this great mercy.
to be paid to the respective Ministers of them, out of the Revenues of the
Dean and Chapter of that City, and the disposal of them to be in the power of
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of that City, and the vacant
meeting-places in the City to be set apart for a Library, an English-Schoole, a
Magazine for Arms, and other public uses, for the honor of that famous and
faithful City. Also, that a confirmation should also be made of all the Lands,
Liberties, and Franchises heretofore granted under the Great Seal of England,
unto this said City and Corporation. And likewise for the better encouragement
of the Soldiers of that City, the House Ordered that 30 l. a week should be
paid to the Officers of the Trained Bands, that do service at the Main-Guard
thereof, there being near 200 that do constant duty there. And shortly after
also Lieutenant Barrow, (for, so was his name, that so neatly and notably acted
the Constables part, whereby we thus became possessours of Hereford, being come
to London, was admitted into the House of Commons, where he made a narrative of
the whole business to the House, and afterward being ordered to withdraw, the
House ordered that 100 l. should be forthwith issued out of Haberdashers-Hall
to the said Lieutenant Barrow, Lieutenant Barrow, the pretended Constable,
rewarded by the Parliament.
for his present support, and further ordered, That the sum of 50 l. per
annum should be conferred on him and his heirs for ever, for this his gallant
undertakings in that service, to be truly paid him out of the Estate of Sir
Henry Lingen, a notorious Delinquent near Hereford. A rare and singular act of
encouragement to stir up the hearts of honest and active Soldiers to cheerful
industry and fidelity in this the Parliaments most just and righteous Cause.
And now put all these together, and then say, was not here an ample and pious
retribution of bounden gratitude, both to God and men, his Instruments for this
great goodness and mercy to us? yes certainly, and therefore most worthy to be
recorded to Posterity, for the Parliaments indelible honor. But now to proceed.

About the 23 of this instant December, we had certain intelligence by Letters
out of the West, Canon-Tean, a strong Fort, taken at Exeter.
that our most renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces had taken
Canon-Tean, a strong Fort or Block-House of the Enemies, by which means they
had the command well-nigh of all the River of Ex; it was gained by storm, and
they found among those of the Enemies slain in the enterprise, a Lieutenant
Colonel, and two Captains, and diverse Common Soldiers, and that after the
taking thereof, there came voluntarily in unto Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces
thereabout, a Cornet of the Enemies, with 30 good Horse, who had revolted from
them. Also by other Letters out of the West, we were certainly informed, that a
party of his Excellencies Forces there had taken in another strong Garrison of
the Enemies, lying upon the said River, Callyntine House taken.
West of Excetor, called Callyntine House, and therein between thirty and forty
Horse, as many prisoners and their Arms; by the gaining of which place the
Enemy is much more straightened than before, and the passage upon the River is
quite blocked up.

And about December. 26. the House of Commons received Letters from the Northern
parts of the Kingdom, of the rendition of the strong Garrison of Skipton
Castle, which had been long besieged by our Forces, the Enemy having had fair
Conditions and clear performances of the same, Skipton Castle surrendered to the
Parliament.
viz. To march away with their Arms, either to Newarke, Oxford, or Hereford, of
the taking whereof, it seems they then had not had information or knowledge.
Now upon the reading of this Letter, the House referred the further
consideration thereof to the Committee of the North. This surrender of Skipton
Castle in Craven, was, no doubt, of very great consequence; for by this means,
not only all York shire, is cleared and happily reduced to the obedience of
the Parliament, but also all Northumberland, The Freedom of almost all the
Northern parts.
Cumberland, Westmerland, and Lancashire, the Enemy not having any one Garrison
in their hands in all those parts of the Kingdom, nearer then is Newark. A
wonderful mercy indeed, and most worthy our dearest and deepest engagements of
(...) gratitude to the Lord our most blessed and bountiful Fountain of all
our good. And, O that the sweet and serious consideration hereof might raise
and rouse up our souls to an earnest and ardent desire and endeavor for the
building of Gods House who thus even in the first place hastens the building of
ours.

And about the latter end of this Month of December, the prudent and provident
Senators and Common Council of the most renowned City of London, The singular
providence of the City of London, and of the Parliament for the defense and
safety of the said* City.
with a joint and most unanimous consent among themselves, at a Common Council
h^ld in their Guild Hall, resolved, that in regard of the many designs of the
Enemy against the said City, 500 Horse should be forthwith raised for the (...)
thereof, and to prevent any audacious ^^tinies or insurrections that might
probably happen, by reason of the multitude (...) Delinquen^s and Royalists,
which were then la^^ly come out of the Kings Quarters; And that the Guards of
the City should be doubled, and that every one should contribute according to
their ability, toward the maintenance thereof. And the Commons in Parliament,
likewise referred it to a Committee to consider how the prisoners in the Tower
of London might be secured, removed, or confined to their Chambers, and that
they might be prevented from giving or holding any correspondence unto and with
the Enemy: And the said Committee was likewise to consider, in like manner, of
all the other Prisons in London, and to prevent intelligence between them also
and the Enemy. And immediately after it (for the more fully enabling of the
said renowned City, to terrify and overawe their open and secret Enemies) the
House of Commons passed an Ordinance for the establishing of a Court-Martiall
in the said City of London, for the trial of Spies and other noxious
Delinquents, who shall come out of the Kings Quarters, to lurk and watch for
opportunities of doing mischief, and named several Commanders and Gentlemen
who were to be Members of that Council.

And here, now, good Reader, be pleased again to make a little pause,
seriously to ponder and consider in thy most thankful heart, the unexhaustible
over-flowings in bounty and blessings, and the unwearied outgoings of thy
wonder-working God, in this Months mighty mercies also, and most memorable
benedictions on this his blessed Burning-Bush still unconsumed, The
Burning-Bush not consumed.
still marvellously preserved and maintained in a most fair and flourishing
state and condition, maugre the many and mighty flames of the fiery and
restless rage of the Royalists, continually menacing and molesting the same,
as has been most copiously discovered, both in our most loyal and loving
Brethren of Scotlands faithful and valiant assistance Newarle, and their brave
winning of Muschamp Bridge and Fort there: And the voluntary submission of the
County of Brecknock in Wales, to the obedience of the Parliament. Latham House
in Lancashire, and Fulford in the West. In the most remarkable and happy
surprisall of the Town and Castle of Hereford, by a notable stratagem, wherein
the hand of God was most admirably evident. In delivering Canon-Tean; and that
strong Garrison of Callyntine-House at Exeter into the Parliaments possession,
and thereby happy rendition of Skipton Castle, also a strong hold of the
Enemies into our hands, whereby almost all the Northern parts of the Kingdom
were set at liberty. And sixthly and lastly, In putting into the hearts of our
Worthies in Parliament, and the loyal Citizens of London, prudently and
providently to foresee future probable contingent dangers, and carefully to
forecast to prevent and avoid them. All which rare and remarkable Parliamentary
Mercies, gratefully and graciously put together, give us great cause with holy
David to sing and say, Psalm. 62. 7, 8.
In God the Lord alone is our salvation and our glory, the rock of our
strength, and our sure refuge is in God. O therefore let us trust in him at all
times, and pour out our hearts before him, in all holy and humble
acknowledgements, that God alone is a refuge unto us. But to go on.

And now I shall again begin the serious survey of the rich and rare mercies
of God to this his Burning-Bush the Parliaments Cause, January. 1646.
in this ensuing Month of January, with a memorable passage of fidelity in the
Governor of Plymouth Colonel Kerre, who having been most vehemently tempted
by Sir John Digby, Brother to the traitorous George Lord Digby, who then
commanded in chief those Forces of the Kings, which so long had besieged this
brave and loyal Town of Plymouth, this young treacherous Royalist, I say,
having by Letters, Messages, and mighty promises of a reward of 10000 l. in
money, and high preferment in the Kings Army, endeavored to entice the noble
and loyal Governor to betray and give up this brave Town into the Enemies
hands: He contrariwise most loyally disdaining such base and treacherous
underhand-dealings, returned that traitorous Knight this noble Answer, which
for the honor of this brave Gentleman's so faithful resolution, I have thought
exceeding fit, here to insert, which was as follows:

SIR,
YOur motion to treason I have seen, and detest it, it is below my spirit for a
personal injury (supposed only by an Enemy) to take a National Revenge, and
for a punctilio of honor to take advice from Hell, and to betray my trust; I
am sorry that one so ingenious as your self should (...) your natural parts
only to do mischief, yet I have no reason to ^^der much at your persuasion to
treachery, because I have had experience of the endeavor of your Family to
corrupt others also; I remember the Gunpowder-plot, and withal, the Letter
which not long since your Brother wrote to my Lord Roberts, tending to the same
subject, and his negotiation with Major General Brown at Abington: Surely
these principles came from Spain, but you should have told me also that
Spanish Proverb, To love the Y reason, and hate the Traitor.

Sir, if my counsel may take with you, then I beseech you to consider of the
evil counsel which you and your party have given to his Majesty, whereby the
Kingdom, especially those parts under your power, are become almost a
desolation. And when you have thought upon the sad effects of these wars, then
let your heart tell you this truth, that much of the blood and rapine in this
Country must lie upon your account, and guilt may enforce you to seek for
terms of Reconciliation, first with God, then with the Representative Body of
the Kingdom, whom you have se highly offended: Let not this advice from him
whom you call Enemy, be despised, as you hope for mercy, and the respects of
him, who according to the National Covenant resolves to be,

Assuredly your Servant, JAMES KERRE.


How the young Gallant did blush (if at least he had any shame in him) at the
perusal of this Letter, I leave to all the ingenuous Readers to judge. It was
a brave letter indeed, and most worthy to live in Cedar, or to be engraven in
indelible Marble, and out live them both to this brave Gentleman's eternal
honor; which being speedily after made known to the Parliament, was (and that
most justly) most gratefully resented by both Houses, and he rewarded with the
present gift of 500. l. and most loving assurance of farther preferment on the
first and sit opportunity. And presently after this, the Lord, to show his
detestation of all such disloyal traitorous enterprises, as a punishment of
this particular impious instigation to this treason, crowned the loyal
Governor of this Town of Plymouth with a fair occasion of just revenge, and
put a fit opportunity into his hands of singular good success against this
Treacherous Enemy, which had there long besieged them, Plymouths singular good
success against their besieging Enemies* Canterbury Fort taken.
which was intimated by Letters to a worthy Member of the House of Commons in
Parliament, in their taking of 2. Forts from the Enemy, which had been a great
annoyance to those our loyal friends and by which victory they then got more
elbow-roome and liberty to enlarge their quarters than before, the particulars
whereof were as follows. Our men, after a small dispute, took from the
Enemy Canterburie-Fort, and in it 17. Prisoners; And afterward marched to
Saint Bendeaux, Saint Beudeaux taken.
where after a hot skirmish of an hour and a half long, our men took the
Church-yeard, which was strongly fortified and the Church also, and in it, 140.
Prisoners, among whom was Major Stukeley, a Major of horse, Major Salt, Capt.
^rice, Captain, Edmonds, Capt. Lap, Capt. Baker, 3. Leivtenants, 3. The
prisoners and prizes taken.
Ensigns, 8. Sergeants, 55. Horse, 2. Barrels of Powder and 100. men's Arms
(besides the Arms taken in Canterbury-Foot) with Match and Bullet
proportionable; there were 10. of the Enemies slain, The slain on both sides.
and 7. of ours, whereof Major Heynes was one, and about 20. more of our men
wounded. And thus the Lord was graciously pleased to show favor unto us, that
we might justly raise up our hearts with thankfulness unto him.

About the 6. of this instant Januarie, we had again Letters from our noble
Generals Army in the West, certifying that his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
and Leivtenant General Cromwell made a general Rendevouz, and afterward
advanced into the Enemies quarters, resolving either to enforce them to fight,
or at least to remove more remotely toward Corn-wall into the quarters from
whence they came; A brave victory obtained by our Forces at Bovy-Tracy in the
West.
And thereupon, a party was drawn up farther West which fell upon them in their
quarters at Tracie, and beat them out of them, and out of the field also; and
in the pursuit of them, we took 4. Colonels, 3. Leiutenant Colonels, 5. Majors,
11. Capt. and other Officers, The prisoners and prizes taken.
7. Colors, whereof one having the Crown, and C. R. upon it; 400. horse at
least, 300 Arms, 140 Prisoners, 150. head of Cattle, and store of other
provisions, designed for the releife of Exeter which, thus, now (blessed be the
Lord) came short of it. After this, our renowned General pursuing his victory
came to Ilminster, which he also took, with all the ammunition, in it, Iminster
taken.
where some Commanders of the Enemy had much a do to save themselves, but by
throwing good store of money out of windows into the streets among our
Soldiers, which whiles they gathered up, the said Commanders and Officers in a
dark night (as it was then) escaped by a back way, and saved their lives,
whiles our men were tardy to pursue them. After this also our forces advanced
to Ashburton, Ashburton taken.
but the enemy having received a hot alarm by those that escaped, as before
mentioned, they speedily quitted that place also (being then their head
quarter) in great Confusion, and amazement, sending their foot one way and
their horse another, but our forlorn hope pursued them so fast through the
Town of Ashburton that we took above 20 horse, and 9 or 10 prisoners there,
and took the Town, with all the Arms and Ammunition in it. Then the General
advanced to Totnes, where the Enemy had a Foot Quarter, as having been the
Princes Head Quarter, Totnes taken.
where his Life Guard lay, and where indeed we thought the Enemy would have
disputed our pass; but our Forces following on close upon them, soon frighted
them thence also, took that strong Garrison, with all the Arms and Ammunition
in it: yea, and immediately after this also our Army marching and advancing on
still, Okehampton taken.
reduced Okehampton, a strong Garrison of the Enemi^s, to the obedience of the
Parliament, where we also took (as was credibly related to me) two Colonels,
five Captains, 20 Horse, and many prisoners. And it was credibly informed and
assured, that since that overthrow given to the Enemy at Bovie-Tracy,
aforementioned, we have taken from them at least 1000 of the Enemies Prisoners,
many of whom were Commanders and Gentlemen, of no small repute in the Princes
Army.

And has not the Lord, here, admirably appeared for the comfort and hopeful
flourishing condition of this his Burning-Bush, his just and upright Cause? yes
certainly, even to the amazement of our Enemies and to the stopping of the
black and foul mouths of Malignant envy it self; for ever glorified and
omnified be our wonder-working God for it. But to proceed.

About the tenth of this instant, two Letters were read in the House of Commons
from the Commissioners for the Parliament, residing in Ireland, the one dated
the 19 of November. 1645. from Belfast, the other the 22 of December. last, from
the same place, relating the great and singular good success which it pleased
God to give to our handful of Forces under the conduct and command of Sir
William Cole, The most brave victory over the Rebels in Ireland at Sligo.
Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Francis^Hamilton, against the Rebels in Ireland, in
the Province of Cannaught and Vlster, and particularly and especially of that
most memorable and remarkable deliverance and great victory over them at Sligo*
And upon reading of the said Letters, the House ordered that the next Lords Day
the Ministers in their several Churches within London and Westminster, should
return humble and hearty thanks to Almighty God for this great Victory. And
that the Reader may the better see what cause we have in an extraordinary
manner to congratulate and give thanks with our Brethren, for the same, and for
the Readers better content and satisfaction, as also because this Victory has
no small influence upon, and reference unto the great and present affairs of
our own Kingdom, as in the sequel you will clearly see, I have therefore here
thought it very fit and pertinent to our present history, to insert the
particulars of that brave and famous Victory, which was as follows:

On Sunday the 17 of October last, the Irish Rebels having surrounded Sligo
with 1000 Foot, and 300 Horse, the Garrison seeing little hope of the advance
of the Vlster Forces (who were then near them at Bandron) though unknown to
them, conceived it absolutely necessary to hazard the fighting with the Rebels
with their own strength, and Sir William Coals Troops, rather than to starve
themselves and lose their out Garrisons which were blocked up, the Enemy lying
between them; Captain Richard Coot and Captain Richard Cole commanded our
Horse being two hundred, who charged the Rebels Horse very resolutely, and fell
in to the sword pell mell, and beat them among the divisions of their own
Foot, and routed them, which Lieutenant Colonel Saunderson seconded with the
Foot, and Sir Francis Hamilton came also with his Troops in the nick of time,
and had the execution of the Rebels for five miles, their Foot taking flight
upon giving ground of their Horse. In the pursuit their Commander and President
of that Province was slain (the titular Archbishop of Tuain.) Our men took
one hundred and fifty of their Horse, with Pistols, all their Baggage, Tents
and Ammunition; there were two Wagons with rich Spoil, and many in them, they
took several of their Standards and Colors, 24 Drums, and Officers of note,
in number 48 who are now prisoners in Sligo, about two hundred of their men lay
killed in the place, and many more had been, if plunder had not been preferred
before execution by our Foot; we had but one killed of Sir William Coals Troop,
and some Horsemen hurt, and some Horse.

There were of the Irish Rebels taken Prisoners at Sligo as follows:

Great Morogh ve Divo O Flabeety, Lieutenant Colonel to Richard Bourk, Cosen
German to the Earl of Clanrickard and his next Hair. John Garye, Lieutenant
Colonel to Sir Tibbot Bourk, eldest Son to the Lord of May. Richard Bourk,
Major to Richard Bourk the Earl of Clanrickards Heir, and Son to Sir
William Bourk, Brother to the late Earl of Clanrickard. Captain William O
Shaghuise brother to Sir Roger O Shaghuise. Captain Garret Dillon, Son to
Sir Lucas Dillon, who says that his Father was shot in the thigh. Captain To.
Castallogh.

Killed. Edward Brown, Captain of 100 Musketeers out of Galloway, brother to
Jeffery Brown the Lawyer. Three Lieutenants of Foot. The slain
Two Cornets. Three Engines. Killed also the Titular Archbishop of Tuain, the
Rebels president of Cannaught, a principal incendiary in that Kingdom, in
whose pockets were found Letters and other papers of great importance, and for
his own particular an Order from the Council of Kilkenny, for leavying the
arreares of his Bishopric, together with several other prisoners of inferior
quality both of Horse and Foot, and 22 or 23 were drowned.

And here now I shall desire the Reader (by way of introduction, to what I have
further to say touching this Irish Victory, and especially some of the Papers
taken from this foresaid Archbishop of Tuain) to take special notice of the
admirable wisdom and providentiall mercy of the Lord unto us therein, Gods
good providence in the apprehension of certain Papers and Letters from the
Archbishop of Tuain.
viz. That in regard of the wonderful great and good success, which the Lord
has lately given to our Forces in the West of our own Kingdom, and the King
finding what bad success he has of late had (as well as all along, indeed,
for the most part) in all the parts of the Kingdom, both West and North, now
therefore sent Letter after Letter to the Parliament, for the procuring of a
(pretended) well grounded Peace, and the way (nay, forsooth, the only way, in
the opinion of the subtle Oxonians,) that must lead thereto, he propounded to
be by a Treaty nay, when that could not serve, by a Personal Treaty in
himself, proffering himself to come in person to our Parliament. The danger of
Treaties with our Malignant adversaries.
But our prudent Parliament, who by much experience knew very well of what
danger and disadvantage such Treaties have been, and this also of the Kings
personal coming (in this juncture of time) would be, both to foment pernicious
delays and abusive designs, Yea of a Personal Treaty with the King himself.
for raising desperate parties to spoil us all, resolved therefore most
peremptorily to go a nearer way to work, to wit, by drawing up Bills, and to
present them to the King, to have them immediately signed and made Acts. But
now that the Reader, I say, may see how fairly the King meant, Remarkable
mischief, and impiety discovered in the Kings party.
both in sending Letters thus for a Treaty of Peace, yea, and proffering
himself in person to treat of Peace, I have here thought fit to set down the
substance of one of his Letters, sent to the Parliament for this purpose,
verbatim, and most faithfully, as it was printed and published, and therewith
also a Declaration, of his compacting with the Rebels in Ireland, against God,
our Religion, and his English Protestant Subjects, yea the whole Kingdom and
Parliament: And then, I say, the impartial Reader may see how crossely and
craftily (yet most accursedly) things were carried underhand, even with extreme
Atheism and impiety; and now, I say, for the full clearing hereof, take here
first a true Copy of the Kings Letter to our Parliament, expressing his even
greedy seeming desire of Peace with his Parliament and his Protestant People;
and then you shall have the other Letter or Declaration sent into Ireland, and
then be amazed and confounded in thy thoughts at such hideous and horrid, yea
even hellish dissimulation.

Upon Friday, Jan. 16. another Trumpet (for you must know by the way, as I
touched before, diverse former Trumpets and Messages had been sent) came from
the King with a Letter directed to the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro
tempore, the substance of which Letter was.

C. R.

HIs Majesty does express his great wonder, A Copy of the Kings Letter to the
Parliament.
that whereas he had sent a gracious Message on the 26 of December last, the
subject whereof was for a Treaty for peace, that the Parliament should return
no Answer to that Message ever since. He much admired what should become of his
Trumpeter* whom he sent unto them in December last, having heard (...) news of
him since his departure from Oxford unto London: He seems to be very careful
of the Government of the Church, and desires that it may continue as in the
days of Queen Elizabeth and King James of blessed and perpetual memory: yet
he expresses, that because the Act it abolished for the use of the Book of
Common Prayer, he is not altogether averse that the Directory shall pass as it
is now used in some Churches of London, and this He is content to condescend
unto for the ease of tender consciences, He makes no question but that He
shall give both his Houses of Parliament a full content for the choice of the
Lord Admiral and other Officers of State if He finds his Houses of Parliament
inclinable to a Treaty for peace, in which he intends to assist in Person, He
expresses a special care to satisfy the Scots in their arreares, and to
discharge the expenses of the City, and for the business of Ireland He
doubts not but He shall give His Subjects of England perfect satisfaction.

Subscribed. Given at our Court at Oxford, Jan. 15. 1645.

This is the substance of his Majesty's Letter, which though communicated by
former pens, was read in the House this day, and it is the rather here
inserted, because you may see how cross it is to His Majesty's Letter sent to
Ireland, and sealed with his highness Signature and Royal Signet, which
Letter, together with other papers of great concernment, were found in the
pocket of the Archbishop of Tuain, slain at Sligo in Ireland, the tenor of
which Letter was as follows:

C. R.

CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith:
To our trusty and right well beloved cousin, Edward Earl of Glamorgan,
greeting.
WE reposing great and special trust and confidence in your approved wisdom
and fidelity, do by these (as firmly as under our great Seal, to all intents
and purposes) authorize and give you power to treat and conclude with the Roman
Catholics in our Kingdom of Ireland, if upon necessity any thing be
condescended to, wherein our Lieutenant cannot so well be seen, as not fit for
us, at the present, publicly to own: We therefore charge you to proceed
according to this our Warrant, with all possible secrecy, and for whatsoever
you shall engage your self upon such valuable considerations, as you in your
judgment shall think fit, we promise in the word of a King and a Christian,
to ratify and perform the same that shall be granted by you, and under your
Hand and Seal, the said Confederate Catholics having by their supplies
testified their zeal to our service, and this shall be in each particular a
sufficient Warrant to you.

Given at our Court at Oxford under our Signet and Royal Segnature in the
twenty year of our reign, etc.

It was therefore ordered by the said Earl in the Kings behalf,

1 That all the professors of the Roman Religion in Ireland, of whatsoever
degree or quality shall enjoy the free and public use of the Roman Catholic
Religion.

2 That the professors of the said Roman Religion shall enjoy all the Churches
within the Kingdom of Ireland, other than such as are now actually enjoyed by
his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

3 That all the Roman Catholic Subjects of Ireland should be exempted from the
jurisdiction of the Protestant Clergy.

4 (...) whereas there was an Act made (...) Parliament holden in Dublin in the
second year of Queen Elizabeth, entitled, An act restoring to the Crown the
ancient Right and Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical; and for the
abolishing of all foreign and Popish power repugnant to the same. And whereas
there was another Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the
Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, and sundry m^cts laid upon the
professions of the Roman Religion: it is accorded and granted that a Parliament
shall be called in Ireland, and that an Act shall pass for the relief of his
Majesty's subjects; and that neither of the said Statutes, nor only branch,
Article, clause or sentence in them, neither in any other Statute made either
by his Majiesty or any of his Predecessors, touching the free and public use
of the Catholic Religion shall extend or be of my force to prejudice the
professors of the Roman Church for any matter or cause whatsoever.

And these things and some other of the like nature being granted by the King,
according to his promise made in the word of a Christian and a King, the
Confederate Catholics did oblige themselves to bring in the number of 10000
men, who are to be armed there, one half with Muske^s, the other with Pikes, to
be shipped to serve his Majesty in England, Wales, Scotland, at his Majesty
shall appoint.

Thus have I set forth the Kings Letter to the Parliament on the one side, and
his Letter or Declaration to the most bloody and barbarous Rebels of Ireland on
the other side: And now how the King is able to reconcile these two vast
contrarities, and to give the Kingdom and Parliament full satisfaction (as in
that Letter to them he says he will) concerning the affairs in Ireland, let
the world judge, and God and his own soul be witness. Therefore the
Parliament (as by Gods mercy to us they have done all things hitherto, for the
most part, with much moderation and (...)) did very (...) (I think) present to
his Majesty in the^^ Letter or Declaration sent unto him, The sum of the
Parliaments Answer to the Kings Letter for a treaty for a pretended peace.
on their knowledge of these things, that the war in Ireland being fomented and
prolonged by his Majesty, to the utter ruin almost of the Kingdom of England
and Scotland, that until satisfaction and security be (...) given to (...)
Kingdoms for the same, his Majesty's coming to London could not be convenient
nor assented unto. Thus, I say, the Parliaments providence (next under the
infinite wisdom and mercy of our good God) has still wonderfully discovered
and disappointed all the pestilent plots and dangerous designs of our
adversaries, and (maugre all their malicious machinations and craftiest
combinations) made all our Parliamentary great, grave, and godly affairs, go
on with wonderful safety and security, ever magnified and praised be the Lords
most glorious mercies for it. But now to proceed.

About the 14 of this instant January, we received certain intelligence by
Letters out of the West, that the Enemy in those parts continued in a most
distracted condition, flying still before us, and our men loosing no advantage
and opportunity to pursue them. And that they no sooner had heard of our Forces
approach toward Plymouth, but (as they were in their Garrisons and Holds before
Plymouth about Plympton) they immediately forsook them to provide for
themselves by a shameful flight, Plymouth totally relieved and relinquished by
the Enemies.
and were no sooner fled, but our men became masters of their Works. There were
found in Plympton, upon this the Enemies hasty flight, seven pieces of
Ordnance, which in that confused haste they were not able to draw off, there
were also taken diverse barrels of powder, and great store of Arms and
Ammunition; and it much joyed the Garrison of Plymouth, to see a full
deliverance come so soon and so unexpectedly, Plymouth made good advantage of
the flight of their Enemies.
and that in the depth of snow and dead of Winter, whereas according to
ordinary reason there could, in such a time, no relief be expected. But the
Garrison of Plymouth, to be sure, made good use of the flying condition of
their Enemies, for immediately they sallyed forth after them, and took about
60 of them, one whereof was said to be a Commander of note, and one of the most
active against the Parliament in those parts.

And as the Garrison of Plymouth was active, so our renowned General Sir
Thomas Fairfax, with his most loyal and active Forces would loose no time or
opportunity, but took all occasions of the Enemies fears and flights, and
following them close made them quit Sir Francis Drakes House, Sir Francis
Drakes House taken.
which they had made a strong Garrison, and our men took possession of it. And
then Sir Thomas commanded a considerable party to march to Dartmouth, who with
much willingness undertook the march, and the Town being summoned, the Enemy
not only refused to submit, but sent out a party to fire some out houses,
Dartmouth summoned.
supposing that they might* be beneficial to us during the siege; but our
Forces routed the party, took 40 Horse, and diverse prisoners, and slew the
Lieutenant Colonel that commanded the said party. And in the mean time Sir
Thomas Fairfax sent to Captain Batten, Vice Admiral of the Parliaments Ships
in the Western stood, Captain Batten Vice Admiral helps to besiege Dartmouth
Sy Sea.
to come up to Dartmouth (...), because he would storm it both by Sea and by
Land, whereof more in its more proper place.

January the 16 a Petition was (...) to the House of Peers, in the name of the
Lord Mayor, Alde ^men, and Common Council of the City of London, The City of
London petitions the Parliament about Church Government.
for the speedy settling of Church Government in the City, and over the whole
Kingdom, (as the day before they had presented one of the same to the House of
Commons) and upon the presenting of the Petition, Alderman Gibbs made a Speech
to their Lordships, and after some consideration of the Petition, the Lords
returned them a most acceptable answer which Petition together with the Answer
thereunto, from the Lords, for the Readers better content and satisfaction, and
the honor of that most famous and renowned City, in such a pious Act and
Petition, I have thought fit here to insert them, which were as follows.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS now Assembled in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council Assembled.
Shows;
THat in November. last the Petitioners made it their humble request to this
honorable House, That Church Government might be settled; and are most humbly
thank full for your favorable interpretation thereof* proceeding from the good
intentions of the Common Council, who are resolved, according to their duty,
to have a tender respect to the Privileges of Parliament, whereby the
Liberties of the City and Kingdom are preserved: That in December last, at the
choice of new Common Council men for the year ensuing, the Inhabitants of
most of the Wards in this City petitioned their respective Aldermen in their
Wardmote, to move your Petitioners to make their further address to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the speedy settling of Church Government
within this City, and against Toleration, as by a Copy of one of the said
Petitions annexed appeared.

That private Meetings, especially on the Lords Day, (of which there are at
least eleven in one Parish) are multiplied, whereby the public Congregations,
Ordinances, and godly (...), are very much neglected and contemned, as if they
were Antichristian, and our present times were like the Primitive persecutions,
or as if we were still under the Tyranny of the Prelaticall Government, and by
reason of such (...), and the preaching of women and other ignorant persons,
superstition, Heresy, Schism, and Profaness are much increased, (...)
divided, and such Blasphemies as the Petitioners tremble to think on; uttered,
to the high dishonor of Almighty God.

That the Petitioners are informed that diverse persons have an inte^^tion to
Petition this Honorable House, for a Toleration of such Doctrines at are
against our Covenants; under the Notion of Liberty of Consel^^.

The Petitioners therefore having no power of themselves to suppress or
overcome these growing evils; Do, according to their Covenant, reveal and
make the same known to this Honorable House, and for timely prevention and
removal thereof do (...) the Pre^^^sses may be taken into your most serious
consideration; And that Church Government (...) speedily, (...) to our most
Solemn Covenant, with the most high God, in such manner and form, as to your
Wisdoms shall seem most agreeable thereunto, before me be destroyed one by
another through (...) and divisions; And that no Toleration be granted, either
of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Prophannesse, or of any
thing contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness; And that all
private Meetings, contrary to the said Covenant (the rather in regard of the
sad effects thereof) may be restrained,

And the Petitioners shall pray, etc. MICHELL.

To the Right Worshipful the Alderman and Common Council men of the Ward of
Farrington within at their Wardmoot; A representation of the Humble desires of
the Inhabitants of the said Ward.
I THat Church Government may speedily be settled within the City, before we be
utterly ruined with rents and divisions.

II That this Government may be that which is agreeable to the Word of God, and
example of the best Reformed Churches, according (...) solemn League and
Covenant with the most high God.

III That no Toleration either the Popery, Prelacy, Schism, Heresy,
Superstition, Prophamenesse, or any thing contrary to sound Doctrine, or the
power of godliness, may at all be yielded unto, as being against the Word of
God, and contrary to the very Letter of our Covenant.

And these our most humble and earnest desires, which we are obliged and
encouraged also to make, by reason of our said Covenant, we entreat the Right
Worshipful the Alderman, and Common Council men of this Ward, to represent to
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Honorable Court of
Common Council at their first sitting, that they would make their further
address to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the ob^aining of these our
just and necessary desires.

The Answer to the said Petition, pronounced by the Speaker of the House of
Peers.
THe Lords have always had great experience of the care and good affections of
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, for which
they are glad of any opportunity to express their great sense, and to return
their hearty thanks, and (...) especially upon this occasion, wherein the
Common Council have ma^^^ so great zeal and faithfulness to the true Worship
of Almighty (...) and care for the Peace and well ordering of the City of
London, (...) the whole Kingdom is so nearly concerned; The Lords therefore
(...) of the Petition now presented unto them, and the expressions of that
worthy Alderman made unto their Lordships* have commanded me in their names to
give ye further and larger acknowledgements for your great care and endeavors
to prevent so growing a mischief, giving ye this assurance, That as they have
been very forward formerly to do what in them lay for a settlement of
Church Government, so they shall still continue to advance and perfect a Work
so much tending to the glory of God, and to the ^er^ing of the Peace of the
Kingdom, holding themselves thereunto obliged by their solemn League and
Covenant; and they do seriously recommend it to the care of the Lord Mayor, and
such at (...) in Office in the City, to suppress and prevent such great
Offenses by you mentioned, which are so much to the dishonor of God and the
disturbance of the present and future good Government of the City of London.
And wherein ye shall find your selves wanting in power, the Lords will be
ready to contribute their authority for your encouragement and assistance.

And about the 20 of this instant January we were credibly informed by Letters
from Abington, of an excellent exploit performed by the Forces of most active,
loyal, and renowned Major General Brown, A brave defeat given to Wallingford
Forces by Major General Brownes Forces.
against Wallingford Horse, in which he had taken Lieutenant Colonel Lour, the
Deputy Governor of Wallingford, some other Officers and Prisoners of note, 50
of the Enemies Horse, their Riders and Arms, and also rescued 30 Horse which
the Enemy had before taken of ours, by which defeat Wallingford Garrison was
much weakened.

On the 23 of this instant, we received happy and most welcome news out of the
West, of the taking of Dartmouth, with the Castle, Ordnance, Dartmouth Town
and Castle taken by storm.
etc. by storm on Sunday night, Jan. 19. and there was also a Letter read in
Parliament from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, of all the particulars of
the storming and taking of the said strong Town and Castle, with a List of the
Prisoners therein taken, which being a full and authentic narrative of the
whole business, I have here, for the Readers better content and satisfaction,
inserted a true Copy of the said Letter, which was as follows:

My Lords and Gentlemen:
AFter my coming to Totnes, the Enemy rising in great disorder from the siege
at Plymouth, and leaving their Guns and some Ammunition behind them; I
considered with those about me of attempting upon Dartmouth, and it being
concluded affirmatively, I caused two Regiments of Foot to march to Ditsam, The
relation of the manner of taking Dartmouth, signified by Sir Thomus Fairfaxes
Letter to the Parliament.
and two to Sucheflemming, being on the West of Dart River. I having summoned
the place before, resolved upon Sunday night to attempt it by storm, which was
agreed to be done in three places. The first Post was on the West Gate by
Colonel Hamond, the second on the North end of the Town, by Lieutenant
Colonel Pride, and the third on Tonstall Church and Works, by Colonel
Fortescue; the time resolved on was in the evening. Our men fell on
accordingly, with great resolution, (to whom Colonel Lamberts Regiment was a
Reserve, and to alarm the Enemies elsewhere) Colonel Hamond entered the West
Gate, where four Guns were planted, and two upon the Mill-Pool, upon his Flank
the Enemy ^^ring his great guns but once, his men that had the forlorn hope
did very gallantly (as indeed they did all) and went freely on, and beat off
the Enemy, and possessed one Fort after another, viz. Mount-Flaggon, the West
Gate, and Paradise Fort, and beat off the Main-Guards, where were taken four
Lieutenant Colonels, and so we possessed the Town from the West Gate to little
Dartmouth. (...) the interim Lieutenant Colonel Pride attempted the North part
of the Town, called Harness, where beating off the Enemy be entered it, and
took about eighty prisoners in it, and by it possessed all the North part of
the Town unto the Drawbridge, which divided the North part from the rest of the
Town: where Colonel Hamonds men and his met; Colonel Fortescue with his men,
attempted Tunstall Church, which was very well manned with above 100 men, and
having in it ten Guns: His men, after some dispute, with good resolution entered
the place and possessed it, so that by this time the Enemy was beaten out of
all, except the great Fort on the East side of the River, called Kingsworth
Fort, and the Castle, with the Fort which lay over the Castle, at the mouth of
the Harbou^, called Gallant Bover,: to which last the Governor, with the Earl
of Newport, and as many as escaped out fled. After they were forced from their
strength out of the Town, the Governor coming back from the Castle to see what
posture the Town was in, had a remarkable shot as he was in the Boat, one
sitting by him, a Musket shot was made at the Boat, which pierced the Boat, and
through both the thighs of one that was next unto him, and about three inches
into his own thigh, upon which he retreated to the Castle. Our Dragoons, with
two Companies of our Firelocks, and some Seamen, were ordered only to alarm
Kingsworth Fort, wherein was Sir Henry Carry with his Regiment, having in it 11
Guns, and 12 Barrels of powder, and convenient proportion of Ammunition. This
was a very strong Fort, with about four good Bulworkes, strong enough to have
made a troublesome resistance: but the Enemy came willingly to terms: and to
save time I willingly condescended to let Sir Henry Carry march away with the
rest, leaving the Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition, with all Provisions in the Fort
to me, and all engaging themselves never to take up Arms more against the
Parliament, which was accordingly performed. Next morning being thus master of
all but the Castle, and Gallants Bower, I summoned that, the Governor was
willing to listen unto me, but I held him to those terms upon which after some
dispute he yielded, which was to deliver himself and all Officers and Soldiers
upon quarter: he sent me out Colonel Seamor and Master Denham for Hostages,
with whom came out the Earl of Newport, and all was this day performed
accordingly. In this Fort and Castle were 11 Guns, with proportion of
Ammunition and Provisions. We have taken in the Harbor two men of War, one
belonging to the Governor of Barnstable, with 12 Guns, Burden 200 Tuns, the
other belonging to Newcastle, formerly Captain Johnsons; of ten Tuns; In the
Town one hundred and three pieces of Ordnance, and about 600 prisoners, and 100
Horse, with good proportion of Arms and Ammunition exact particulars, whereof I
am not able to give your Lordship at present an account; There being many of
the Inhabitants of this Town Soldiers in Plymouth, and some Officers. And
understanding that that Town had 2500 in Garrison, besides Townsmen, I have
sent thither for 500 Foot for this place, who quickly will increase to more:
and to this I desire your approbation: for having found more work to do, I
held it not fit to weaken my Army, especially considering the Recruits designed
by you. I doubt will be too long before they come. I have given your Lordship a
brief account of this service, which I desire may be accounted a sweet mercy of
God in a very fitting season, and only ascribed to him who truly did direct and
act it, and made all the preparation to it, both in the ordering our hearts,
and giving health to the Army, which labored two months ago extremely of
sickness, but is now in good disposition generally to health. I can say, I
find it to be in the hearts of all here, in all integrity to serve you: And
that it is so, is still the mercy of God: for surely the success of your
affairs, only depends upon the ordering of a gracious providence, which is no
less visible in your councels, (which we congratulate) than amongst us; that
being the common root and spring of all, and which, can and will carry you
through the greatest difficulties, and us in serving you, until God has
finished, his own work: wherein to profess the obligation and readiness of my
self and the Army, by the same good hand of God, is all the undertaking of

Your Lordship most humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.
Dartmouth, Jan 20. 1645. A List of the Prisoners and Prizes taken at
Dartmouth, Jan, 19. 1645.
Prisoners taken.
SIr Hugh Pollard Baron, Governor of the Town. The Earl of Newport. Colonel
Saymor. Master Denman, Baron Denmans Son. Lieutenant Colonel Nicholas
Codrington. Lieut. Col. Bluet. Lieut. Col. Thomas Warkland. Lieut. Col. Searl.
Major Francis Fielf^rd Major Hooper. Captains 16. Lieutenants 14. Ensigns 10
Cornet, (...) and others not then brought in. Master Reynolds, Gentleman of
Arms, besides 6 Gentlemen of note of the Country, and diverse others. Diverse
Ministers or Priests, and many inferior Officers. Common Soldiers betwixt 800
and 1000 who were all set at liberty, and to repair in peace to their dwelling
houses, who took it as a great favor, as also did the whole Country to whom
they were related. Prizes taken.
Many Barrels of Powder. 1000 Arms; besides many broken ones. Two men of War in
the Harbor, the one belonging to Barnstable, the other to New Castle. And 60
Sail of Ships, both great and small. 120 Pieces of Ordnance ready planted,
with those 13 in Gallows-Brow. In all, by Sea and Land, near upon 200. 100
Horse. 8 Horse Colors. 5 Foot Colors. 7 Standards of Foot Colors, and one
with the Kings own picture on it. Major Pollard slain on the Enemies side.
Major Pollard of the Enemies part slain in the storm.



After the reading of this Letter the Commons in Parliament took into their
serious consideration, the great and worthy valor, and singular good success
of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and reserted it to a Committee to
consider how the 5000. Deserved thanks and reward given to our renowned
General Sir Thomas Fairfax.
l. per annum, formerly voted to be conferred on his Excellency and his Heynes
for ever, might be presently settled, possessed, and enjoyed by him. They
likewise ordered, That a Letter should be written to his Excellency, to return
the thanks of both Houses of Parliament, for his noble valor and unwearied
pains in the service of the State, and particularly in the storming of
Dartmouth, and to inform him what a great mercy the Parliament esteems this
business of Dartmouth, and how highly they respect and esteem of his
Excellency, and his designs and undertakings.

And here, now, I shall desire the Reader (for Gods greater glory and high
honor) to consider seriously, and most graciously and gratefully, Certain
observations on the Premises.
how admirable wisely, powerfully and advantagiously, (for us) the Lord carried
on all these late great works in these few ensuing observations, worthy our
cordial consideration.

As first, That God all along cast such a pannick fear upon our Enemies, such
a Magor-Misabib into their hearts and spirits, that they were a continual
terror to themselves, and that since our taking of Bovi^-Tracy, God has given
into our hands near 1000 of the Enemies Horse; and that upon the advance of a
party of ours from Credi^^on, the Enemies fled, and only ^ix of Colonel
Okeyes Dragoones put 500 of their Horse from their post, at which time they
fled from Plymouth, leaving their Guns, Arms, and Ammunition, behind them.

Secondly, That Captain Batten, Vice Admiral of the Parliaments Ships, coming
to block up Dartmouth by Sea (as our noble General Sir Thomas Fairfax had
ordered him) li^ upon a Ship of the Enemies, bound for France, wherein were
many Gentlemen of quality, and money and jewels to a good quantity, together
with many other rich (...).

Thirdly, which is indeed very remarkable, That till our Forces came before
Dartmouth, in at least seven weeks space, there had been little or no (...)
upon that (...); but now our Army being there, there was such a mighty shole of
Mu^^its taken, as comfortably fed our Army, and which so continued among them
to the great admiration of all the Inhabitants.

Fourthly, That in the storming of the Town, though all things answered not
the appointments of the Council of War, yet there was no confusion or
miscarriage in the whole work, and withal, that we had very fair weather all
the time of the siege and storm, even to a minute, till the Town was taken,
and then only it rained much.

Fifthly, That notwithstanding the great strength of the Fortifications of the
Town, and in men and Ordnance also, yet it was taken without much bloodshed, we
having lost but two men in all the whole work, that we could possibly hear,
of, which was even a miraculous mercy to us; considering, I say, that there
were (...) strong Works and Forts in it, and about 100 Pieces ready mounted and
manned, which might have been thought sufficient to have maintained the Town
and Harbor against a very potent Army.

Sixthly and lastly, That Master Peter's, one of the Ministers of the Army at
this time, presented to the Parliament diverse Colors taken in the Town and
Country, and among the rest, the Kings own first Colors, which he first
advanced at York against the Parliament, with the Kings own picture on it,
and a Sword in (...) hand, and a book in the other; together with a bundle of
brave Letters found in the Governors House in Dartmouth, some of the Princes,
some of Ruperts, some of Gorings, some of Culpeppers, and their Commissions by
Sea and Land, besides a Popish Masse-Book and an Altar, taken from the Engineer
of Dartmouth, who was a Dutch Mass Priest.

For all which so rare and remarkable free favors and mighty mere mercies, so
graciously conferred upon us, our most renowned Parliamentary Worthies most
rightly and religiously ordered a solemn day of Thanksgiving to be kept, a Copy
of which their Order I have here thought fit to insert, which was as follows:

Die Jovis, Jan. 26. 1645.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, A Solemn day of Thanksgiving
ordered to be kept in London and over the Kingdom.
do order and appoint this day fortnight, being Thursday, for a day of
Thanksgiving, for the taking in of Dartmouth and Hereford, to be kept within
the Cities of London and Westminster, the Lines of Communication, and ten miles
about; And this day three weeks for all other places over the Kingdom in the
Parliaments power.

About the 26 of this instant January we received also certain intelligence by
Letters out of Staffordshire, that Captain Stone, that valiant and active
Commander, A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Cark near Stafford.
had sent out a party of about 100 and odd Horse to beat up the Lord Molinaux
his Quarters, who fell upon the Enemy at a place called Cark, within seven
miles of Stafford, and managed their charge with such martial resolution and
dexterity, that they routed 300 of the Enemies, and took prisoners three
Captains, two Cornets, eight Reformadoes, ten inferior Officers, about 100
Horse, and diverse prisoners, above 100 Pistols: In which conflict many of the
Enemies were wounded, and some slain. And thus they returned victoriously to
Stafford again, with their Prisoners and Prizes.

And about the 28 of this instant we were certainly informed from our Army in
the West, Pouldram Castle taken.
that Pouldram Castle, which was Sir William Courteens House, a strong Garrison
of the Enemies near Exeter, was surrendered to brave Colonel Hamond, who
commanded in chief, upon these Conditions; The Officers and Soldiers to
depart to their own dwellings, leaving all their Arms behind them. There were
about 120 in the Castle, 4 Pieces of Ordnance unmounted, 5 Barrels of powder,
with Bullet and Match proportionable, but little other Provisions. His
Excellencies most courteous carriage and merciful useage of those at
Dartmouth, notwithstanding that he won it by storm, had a great influence
and operation upon the spirits of the Enemies elsewhere, and was not only a
prevalent motive to these of Pouldram Castle to yield so soon unto his
famoused mercy, but made many others also, shortly after to desert the Enemy;
The most noble and renowned Generals singular mercy and clemency toward his
Enemies.
for there being at least 120 Cornish men prisoners in Dartmouth,
notwithstanding their former, even most barbarous cruelty to ours; yet, I say,
renowned and merciful Sir Thomas Fairfax, (as I was credibly informed) set
them all at liberty, and gave them two shillings a man to bear their charges.
And was not here a heaping of Coals of fire on their heads (as our Savior
commands and commends in his Disciples) and a rare way of winning of hearts,
even of those formerly heathenish cruel Cornish Enemies. Those of them that
would stay and take up Arms for the Parliament (as diverse did) he gave them
^^ree shillings a piece: to all the Seamen in prison he freely gave their
liberty, and to all their Common Soldiers, unwilling to take up Arms, he gave
Passes to go to their own habitations; nay to several Officers (of whom any
of the fair conditioned Townsmen could give any good Character) he also gave
Passes to go to their own homes also, on promise of future fair and peaceable
demeanor toward the Parliament and their friends. This indulgent and most
noble favor, thus showed by his Excellency, was not altogether fruitless unto
us immediately after, for some of those Officers proved very serviceable to our
Army in some of their succeeding designs; nor could less good effects be
expected from many others where his Excellency occasionally made his Martial
progress and advances; whereby he has most certainly, and more and more most
worthily been crowned with ancient Caesar's more than Golden Diadems of
perpetual same and honor, Sir Thomas Fairfax a second Caesar.
viz. Caesar noster Anglicus, dando sublevando, and ignoscendo, Gloriam adeptus
est. But now to proceed.

About the latter end of this Month of January, we had further certain
intelligence by Letters from Dartmouth, in the West, that a Bark which came
from France, putting in at Dartmouth, not knowing it was in the Parliaments
hands, and being come within command, A Ship from France taken at Dartmouth,
with Letters of great consequence.
before they discovered it, was there instantly seized on. But special order
and directions having been given to the Master of the Ship, that in case he saw
himself in danger to be taken by any of the Parliaments Forces, he should throw
his packets of Letters overboard into the Sea, which now he had accordingly
done; but it being upon examination confessed, Colonel Lambert presently
commanded out boats to search for them, and to see if they could epsy any such
Packets floating on the waters toward the shore, which by Gods good providence
at last they found so indeed, and took them up and brought them to the noble
Colonel, even Letters of great concernment from the Queen, Jermine and Goring,
which were all speedily posted up to the Parliament. And thus, besides the
prize of the Ship and the fraught therein, the Lord was most graciously
pleased, even by our Enemies themselves, (and especially by admirable
interception of their Letters from time to time, even all along) to lay open
and discover unto us the most hidden (I had almost said the most hideous)
secrets of their hellish hearts against us, and thereby giving us fair and
seasonable opportunities (by his blessed assistance) to prevent and avoid their
intended malice and mischief toward us; blessed, O ever blessed be the pure
and precious grace and mere mercy of our good God unto us.

And here now again, good Reader, I shall desire thee in thy wonted patience
and piety, together with me, to make another short stay, and take a summarie
and brief survey and grateful revise of all the sweet and salubrious mercies
of this month also, so much conducing to the health and happiness of this
long languishing Church and State, The Burning-Bush unconsumed.
to the dressing, pruning, and prospering of this our Burning-Bush still (as
you see) unconsumed, the Parliaments just Cause, thus still sustained in the
midst of all the fiery machinations and flaming molestations, burning and
blazing round about it, as has been most comfortably and conspicuously seen to
us all, 1
both in the great mercy of our God, in so upholding the heart of the renowned
Governor of Plymouth, with such impregnable loyalty and fidelity to the
Parliament and its most just Cause, as not to betray that great trust committed
to him by the Parliament, in safe-guarding the said famous Town from the paws
and possession of the Enemy; and also in the singular good success which
immediately after the Lord gave to those his loyal befieged servants, against
their besieging Enemies, as a just reward of their late base battery of
treachery shot against it. 2
In that famous defeat given also to the Enemy at B^vie-Tracy; and our winning
of Ilminster, Ashburton, Totnes and Okebampton; together with the famous
victory obtained against the Rebels of Ireland at Sligo, 3
and the excellent effects ensuing thereon. In the most happy total relief of
Plymouth from a long and dangerous siege, by base and blood-thirsty Enemies,
and recovery of Sir Francis Drakes House, 4
a strong Garrison also, out of their hands. In Gods great goodness unto us*
in still stirring up the hearts, and raising up the spirits of the most
renowned Citizens of London, to stand close to his truth, and to be very
zealous for the building up of Gods House, as was most eminently evident in
their most excellent Petitions to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the
speeding thereof. 5
In the most happy surprizall of the Town and Castle of Dartmouth, a mighty
mercy unto us indeed, it being a place of great consequence to the whole
Kingdom, and a fair and famous Haven and inlet from other foreign parts. 6
And sixthly and lastly. In that brave defeat given to the Enemy at C^rk near
Stafford; the taking in of P^^ldram Castle by Sir Thomas Fairf^^s forces in the
West; and his most Excellent and amiable demeanor among the people of those
parts, even like a second Julius Caesar. Together with the most seasonable
surprisall of that Ship from France in Dartmouth harbor, by which that (...)
of Letters of so great Concernment was also by Gods g^^d providence apprehended
and found floating on the waves of the Sea. All which most gratefully put
together, and seriously and sanctimoniously considered can amount to no less
than a most large acknowledgement of our most dear and Deep en^^gement to the
Lord our God in all the bonds of most bonden gratitude; and therefore to break
out into holy and hearty zeal (...) Cordial thankfulness and with the good
Prophet to con^^^^ and say, Jer. 10. 7.
Who would not fear and love thee (O King of Nations) (...) to thee alone
indeed, it does appertain; for as much as among all (...) and strong man of
the Nations and all their kingdoms, their (...) like unto the Lord our God:
Zecha. 25.
Who has most mercifully and (...) been a wall of fire to us, this unworthy
Jerusalem, round (...) as, and the only glory in the midst among us. But now
to proceed.

And here now I shall begin the farther prosperous per (...) in the comfortable
contemplation of the continued wonder of the Burning-Bush unconsumed in this
Month also of February 1646. February. 1646.
with the certain intelligence by letters out of the North-(...) parts of the
Kingdom, about the beginning of the (...) of February, 1646. That the strong
and almost impregna^^ Garrison called (...)-Castle, being one of the strongest
and (...) buildings in the Kingdom, Belvoir-Castle surrendered to the Parliament
and therefore called Belvoir, (...) word, signifying a Fair-Prospect, which
had 66 steps or (...) unto it, and therefore might well overlook the Country,
which (for the most part, being valleys round about it) seemed (...) yield
obey^^^ce to this Castle, which now, I say, is reduced (...) obedience of the
Parliament, Sir lartis Lucas, the Governor thereof* withal the Commanders,
Officers and Soldiers therein, (...) permission to march away to Litch-field,
upon more honorable terms, indeed, than they deserved.

And (...) Thursday, February they came letters out of Cheshire, The City of
Westchester taken.
from that (...), faithful, and religious Commander, Sir Willi^^ (...), of the
most happy surrender of the strong and long (...) Castle of West-Chester, into
the noble Commanders (...), for the use of the King and Parliament. And that
which made the mercy much more sweet and remarkable, was, that the surrender of
this Town was a clear and most evident return of the prayers of Gods people,
who had the fast day before the Month of January been pressing the throne of
grace for this great mercy in particular. A most sweet and evident return of
Prayer.
And now this Thursday February, 6. being the day of solemn Thankesgiving, set
a part by special command of the Parliament, for Gods great goodness in the
obtaining of the strong Town and Castle of Dartbmouth, whiles the Parliament
was in the midst of that God-delighting duty of Thankesgiving in
Margrets-Church in Westminster, there came a Gentleman belonging to renowned
Sir William Brereton with letters directed to the Speaker of the House of
Commons, certifying that the City and Castle of Chester were surrendered to Sir
William for the use of the King and Parliament, the third day of this instant
February, about the hours of 11 or 12. at Noone, upon very fair, yea indeed,
too fair terms and conditions to such a bloody Butcher as Byron was, Chester
surrendered upon very conditions, and the reason thereof.
save only in mercy and pity to the poor and miserably long-besieged
without, and much abused within Inhabitants of the City, and to avoid the utter
ruin and devastation thereof, which this bloody Byron had vowed rather than to
surrender on terms inferior to those now thus granted: For, in the present
condition thereof, it was exceedingly impoverished by the Enemies obstinacy
and cruelty within, very little provisions to be found therein, save only of
arms and ammunition, whereof indeed was good store. The particulars whereof
take in this list thereof, The prizes taken in the City of Chester
the best and fullest that was then imparted to us. There were taken in the
City of (...) upon the surrender thereof, 300. Pieces of Ordnance, 3000. arms,
20. Ships and smaller Vessels, 40. Barrells of Powder and good store of
Bullet, 2000. Bandileers, 200. Firelocks, ^2. Skenes of Match, 200. Horse, 300.
Sadles and other furniture, 30. Hogsheads of Wine, 17. Firkins of Butter, very
little Cheese, 20 Wagons, 17. Flitches of Bacon, and a little salt-beefe for
the Officers, 8000. Ounces of Plate and good store of other rich treasure in
Byrons quarters, for Byron himself was permitted to carry away with him not
above 50. l. in money; the Seal of the County-Palatine, a 1000. Records and
Evidences; there were also in the City, two Powder-Mills, and 250. Irish
Prisoners.

This City and that of Dartmouth were of singular concernment and very great
mercies to the Parliament, and their loss so (...) the greater to the Enemy
(blessed be our God for it) for^ this of Chester was most Convenient for
landing of the Irish-R^^^, and that of Dart-mouth, for the French; besides the
strength which the Enemy had in them, which is now by this means much weakened
and scattered, and our forces also which were a^^ them now at liberty to be
elsewhere employed on other useful and important avocations toward Oxford,
Litchf^ild, or some such places.

About the 8. of this instant February, we had certain intelligence by
Letters from Leicester, that a party of about 80. horse and 40. dragoones were
sent out of Leicester under the command of Major Meeres a very valiant and
discreet Gentleman by night, into Ashbie de la Zouth, A brave defeat given to
the Enemy at Ashbie de-la Zouth.
who carried on the design exceeding ^^avely, and marched with such expedition
and privacie, that they came to Ashbi^ about 11. of the clock, that night,
altogether undiscovered, which was about 12. miles march, whither being come,
they suddenly surprised the Centinells, fell in at the Turnpike, broke the
chain, and entered the Town, took near 100. of the Enemies Horse, being the
greatest part of the horse of that Garrison, 30. whereof were ready Sadled, and
fitted to have gone forth upon some design of theirs, all of them excellent
good horses, and some of them worth, 20. 30. and near 40. l. a horse; they
took store of arms, and more other Pillage, released diverse prisoners, and
some Country men whom the Enemy had taken for ransomes; and thus having
plundered the Town, in part of requital of the many mischiefe^ and plundring
of that Garrison to the Parli^^^ts friends, all these (...) friends, returned
to Leicester without the least molestation: the Enemy (who was in the great
House or Close) either not (...) the alarm or nor daring to come forth at all
against them. And thus, I say, they came safely back again to Leicester, with
all their horse, prize and pillage.

And about the 10. of this instant we received certain information by Letters
out of the West, The good and prosperous success of our army in the West.
of the most prosperous proceedings of the Parliaments forces in those parts;
And how the Enemy did mightily desert their Colors and Commanders; yea and
how that some of the Commanders themselves with their Soldiers came in unto
our renowned General Sir Thomas Fairfaxes party, and in particular, that a
Commander with a party of Horse from the Princes Army came voluntarily and
proffered his Service to his Excellency, who was most nobly entertained by our
renowned General. And the said Commander did also assure his Excellency, that
as soon as opportunity did serve, diverse more intended to come away from the
Enemy (a great part whereof were North-Countrie Gentlemen:) who had an earnest
desire to serve his Excellency; And that a party of Sir Franis Drakes regiment
went to visit a guard of the Enemies kept at Burrington, where they took the
Major and all his guard being about 40. Horse in number; this party of ours
was commanded by Major Stephens, he that formerly routed Gorings Brigade and
took his Colors from him.

About the 12. of the instant February, our prudent and provident Worthies of
the House of Commons took into their serious consideration the great
obstructions in several parts of the kingdom, and how much it might prejudice
the people, in case they should not enjoy the benefit of the Laws of the
kingdom: Whereupon, The Assizes of Oyer and Terminer revived.
they ordered, That (as formerly) Commissions should be issued forth under the
Great-Seale of England to the justices of Assizes, and Oyer and Terminet,
Goale-deliveries and Nisi-prius should continue and proceed in their power in
their Circuits, according to former Votes and instructions. A singular good
work, indeed, and much conducing to settlement of the peace and tranquillity of
the Commonwealth; the long intermission whereof (which could not till now be
well remedied by reason of the Civill-warres among us) having been of great
prejudice to the whole Kingdom.

And the 19. of this instant February being Thursday, the House had ordered a
day should be set a part as a solemn day of Thankesgiving for the great mercy
of God to this Kingdom for the happy surrender of the City of Chester into
the Parliaments possession, A Solemn Thanksgiving for Chester, and a
charitable Collection made.
and that a Collection should be made in all the Churches, for the releife of
the Sick, mained and wounded Soldiers that lay before that place; and
likewise for the releife of other distressed people in and about that City,
who had suffered much and been brought into great poverty and misery by the
enemies there. And our most loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland kept the
like solemn-day of Thanksgiving in their army, to bless God with us for this
great mercy unto us. And see and admire, as a farther ground of Thankefulnes,
and to raise up our Spirits to a higher pitch of bounden gratitude; Even the
very same morning that we were praising the Lord for that great mercy so
graciously received, there came yet more joyful news to the Parliament, of a
great overthrow given by his Excellency renowned Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces,
to the Enemy at Torrington in the West, A fresh spur to quicken the spirit of
praises.
the particulars of which so memorable a victory, cannot (I conceive) but be of
most singular satisfaction to the Kingdom and people of God, especially; I
shall therefore give the Reader a full and faithful intimation thereof, as it
was sent in a Letter from a Gentleman of piety, credit, and eminency, in his
Excellencies Army, and was read in the House of Commons, Febr. the 20. which
was as follows:

SIR,
SAturday, Febr. 14. our Army marched from Crediton and the quarters thereabout
to Chimleigh, Sunday they marched very early to a Rendezvouze some two miles in
the way to Torrington, with intention to have gone on, but our Parties of horse
bringing in some prisoners, by whose examination we could not certainly learn
which way the Enemy bent, whereupon another party was sent out of Colonel
Butlers Troop, the forlorn of which party being twelve took twelve of the Lord
Gorings Lifeguard, and 24 Horse, and brought them to the General, upon their
examination it appears, the Enemy was ignorant of our motion; The Lord Hopton
was in Torrington. And further, that a party of the Enemies Horse was at
Burrington, the General sent a party of Horse to meet with them, under
command of Captain Barry, who accordingly charged the Enemy, put them to a
rout, shot Lieutenant Colonel Dundash a Renegado, and of the Lord Cleevelands
Brigade, and took several prisoners, and brought Dundash three miles on the
way, but being mortally wounded, was enforced to leave him at Ringdash a foot
quarter of ours. Also another party of Horse toward the East met with the
Enemy, taking some Prisoners and Horse, and shot Major Bret; by this time a
Bridge was made up some two miles off Chimleigh, so that our Army might with
convenience march over, but the day being so far spent, it was not held fit to
march with the whole Army, so three Regiments of Horse and three of Foot
marched some four miles toward the Enemy; that night the rest returned to
Chimleigh, with Orders to march. Monday Feb. 16. the General with that part of
the Army that was at Chimleigh marched up to the rest of the Army and within
five miles of Torrington had a general Rendezvouze both of Horse and Foot,
drew them up in Batalia, and so marched up toward the Enemy.

When we came within two miles of Torringron, our forlorn hope of Horse
charged theirs, put them to retreat, whereupon they came on again with a very
strong party, and put ours to a stand; the reserves of our forlorn being come
up, and some foot, forced them to their Body again, our forlorn of horse
pursued and alarmed them at Squire Rolls his house, within a mile of Torrington
where they began to fortify, but the Enemy perceiving our Foot came up, quit
the House, and drew their Forces to Torrington, and our forlorn of Horse
advanced after them.

The Enemy drew their Foot out of the Town into the closes about a quarter of a
mile, our forlorn hope of Foot lined the hedges, and so faced each other about
two hours, within half Musket shot e^changed many shot, and there was then
continual skirmishing by the Forlornes and Reserves on both sides, and some
Prisoners taken; by this time it began to be dark, and a Council of War was
called, whether to engage before day or not, whereupon the General, Lieutenant
General, with the rest of the Colonels, deferred a Resolution a little time,
and rid to the forlorn hope, to see in what posture they were while they were
there, the Tattoo was heard to beat in the Town, which assured us the Enemy
continued in the Town, not flying away, as was reported, but to be certain,
six Dragoones were commanded to creep under a hedge near the Barracadoes, and
to give fire, to see whether they would answer, by which we might know whether
they stood to defend the Town.

The Enemy received the charge, and answered it with a very sharp volley of
shot. Our forlorn hope seeing the Dragoons engaged gave fire: whereupon the
Enemy gave fire all along the hedges and Works; thereupon the Reserve to the
forlorn came on to relieve them, and so being engaged, the whole Army advanced,
and about eight at night the battle began some six fields from the Town, and
we fought from hedge to hedge until we beat them into their Barracadoes, which
they maintained for an hour after very resolutely, our men being often
repulsed, yet at last got over the Barracadoes, and forced the Enemy into the
Town: whereupon the Horse were let in, who scouring the streets were received
by the Enemy, and a hot charge given by both parties, yet it pleased God at the
last we do (...) them out of the Barracadoes at the furthest end of the Town,
and by this time many prisoners were taken and put into the Church, but far
more escaped being dark, Torrington Church fired by the Enemy.
over the hedges and by-ways, which was not possible for us to prevent,
throwing down their Arms, and every man flying several ways. Our Forces were
no sooner possessed of the Town, but the Enemies Magazine which they left in the
Church was fired, whether on purpose by the Enemy, or by accident, we cannot
yet learn: but it proved a terrible blow not only blazing up the Church; with
all the wood and lead that was upon it, deforming many houses in the Town, but
killed some of the Prisoners in the Church, and some of our men that were in
the Churchyard: two great Webs of Lead fell within twice a Horse length of the
General, but it pleased God he escaped, though in eminent danger; many others
being hurt both with the Timber, Stones and Lead, most of the Town was shaken
by this blow, being the terriblest that has been seen in the memory of man,
there being about 80 Barrels of powder blown up together, and one barell which
was blown out of the Church into the street, which took not fire.

The Enemy perceiving their Magazine to be (...) fired, gave one charge more
with their horse up to our Barracadoes, commanded by Sir John Digby, but our
Musketeers gave fire, whereupon they took their farewell, our first instantly
advanced through the Town after them, and began the pursue about 11 of the
clock at night.


Hoptons Army totally routed.
Thus it has pleased God in an instant to scatter those Forces of the Lord
Hoptons, his infantry being taken, slain, and totally routed, his horse, many
taken and dispersed, and the rest gone in great disorder toward Cornwall, where
shortly I hope we shall meet with the remnant left of that crew, and put an end
to the Field Enemy in the West of England. They confessed they had 8 Regiments of
Horse, consisting of 2500 men; some other of their Officers that are prisoners,
The valor of the Cornish men.
say 3000. Indeed they are very resolute men, sought valiantly, and after they
were chased from hedge to hedge, defended their Barracadoes and Works at push
of Pike, and with the butt end of their Muskets, till our Foot got over a hedge
and flankd them, so that they were forced to quit it.

They were old Cornish Foot, and all Green^iles and Gorings old Soldiers, both
English and Irish, who were engaged in this service, but now are scattered. We
have abundance of men wounded, both Officers and Soldiers, more than have been
at any storm since the Army came forth, for indeed every hedge was as it were
a Bulwark to the Enemy, so strong are their hedges in those parts, but few of
ours killed, many of the Enemies, both Horse and Foot. Let the glory of the
victory be all given to God. Our first Word in this fight was Emanuell, God
with us, and a Far Push in our hats. Their Word was, We are with you, and a
handkercheif tied about their right Arms, but by taking some of ours prisoners
the Enemy had gained the Word and Sign^^, and therefore we changed our Word,
which was Truth, and a handkercheif or white mark in our hats.

A true List of the Prisoners, and of the number slain and wounded on both
sides in this fierce fight and brave victory at Torrington. Prisoners, prizes,
and spoil, in and after this fight. The slain in this fight.
PRisoners taken of the Enemies 600. among whom were many of quality, even 80
of the Princes Lifeguard, 30 of Hoptons Lifeguard, one Lieutenant Colonel, 9
or 10 Captains, 6 Lieutenants, one Cornet, 3 Ensigns, together with other
Officers, 200 Horse, 3000 Arms, Hopton himself shot in the thigh near the
belly, one Letter said shot dangerously in the belly, Sir John Digby wounded in
the head, and some others of note sorely wounded, and Major Threave, and
Captain Fry and other Officers slain. Of the Enemies slain in the City by
firing the Magazine 200. full 80 barrels of powder blown up in the Church,
which (as was most credibly and for certain informed) was done on purpose by
Hoptons instigation, who gave 20 l. to one of their own party to fire the
same, a most cruel act. 20 of ours slain in the fight, and by blowing up the
Magazine, and no more; and about 100 wounded. The Lord Hoptons Commission to be
General under the Prince, Sir John Digbies Commission to be Governor of the
Forces before Plymouth, and other Papers of consequence taken. Of the Lord
Hoptons about 400 or 500 li. in money left behind at his Quarters, with much
plunder left in Portmantles, and in other places behind them. All the Enemies
bag and baggage taken, and great store of provisions taken in the Town; the
Enemy totally routed and fled in great disorder into Cornwall, The Parliaments
gratuity to the Messengers that brought this good news.
and ours still in the pursuit of them. The two Messengers that brought the
Letters intimating this great victory, were called into the House of Commons,
and had 40 l. given them, as a gratuity for their pains in the journey. And the
Messenger that brought this foresaid List and other Letters in confirmation of
this great victory, had 20 l. given to him also. A day of solemn thanksgiving
set apart for this great Victory at Torrington.


And upon the 23 of this instant Febr. the House of Commons ordered that
Thursday come fortnight being the 11 of March, a day of solemn Thanksgiving,
should be kept in London and Westminster, and within ten miles about, for this
great mercy and brave victory at Torrington; And for the Country it was
ordered that in respect Thursday 7. night was by a former order appointed a day
of Thankesgiving for the surrender of Chester, in the several Counties under
the Parliaments power, that on the same day, hearty thanks should likewise be
rendered by the Ministers of the several Counties for this other great mercy at
Torrington.

The Court of Wards utterly put down.
Upon the 24. instant, the House of Parliament taking occasion by an ordinance
for the discharging of the Ward-ship of the Heyres-male of Sir Christopher
Wray, late a most worthy Member of the House of Commons; They fell upon a
serious debate touching the Legality or Illegality of Wardships in general,
and after some time spent therein, they ordered that the Court of Wardships it
self, and all Wardships Austres les Mains Primer Seisins, and all other
charges incident to the said Office should be from that present day taken away;
And all Tenures of homage and all fines, licenses, pardons of Alienation etc.
should be likewise taken away. This Vote being presently sent up to the Lords
House for their Concurrence, their Lordships concurred accordingly therein. And
for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I have thought fit to set down the
Copy of the order or Vote it self, verbatim, which was as follows.

A Copy of the Order or Vote in Parliament for putting down the Court of Wards.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that
the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Wardship, Lilerie, Primer Seisins, and
Austres les Maines, and all other charges insident or rising for or by reason
of Wardship, Livery, Primer Seisin, or Austres les Maines be from this day
taken away, and that all Tenures by Homage, and all Fynes, Lycences, Seisures,
and Pardons for alienation, and all other charges insident thereunto he
likewise taken away, and that all Tenures by Knights service, either of his
Majesty or others, or by Knights service or Soccage in Capite of his Majesty,
be turned into free and Common Soccage.

This act of grace and happiness to the Kingdom I conceive not to be inferior
to any of the former Acts or Votes passed by the Parliament, and must needs be
extraordinary acceptable especially to the Gentry of England, who by means of
that Court were kept under in a mighty deal of homage and vassalrie in their
Children and estates; and they, therefore, now so much the more bound to do
God the more good spiritual service by how much he has thus set them and
theirs at such an enlarged liberty and freedom from this temporal service.

About the 26. of this instant February, we had certain and full confirmation
by Letters both from active and courageous Colonel Birch of the famous
victory obtained over the Enemy at Cardiffe by the Parliaments forces under
the Command of valiant and faithful Major General Laughorn, Sir Trevor
Williams and Colonel Morgan, the substance whereof was, as follows:

Ragland-Castle in Wales having long time been fortified by the Earl of
Worcester, a Papist, did of late much increase in strength, and committed many
cruelties upon the County of Monmouth, plundring, firing and destroying Towns
and Houses, having the whole Country under their power, except some few
Garrisons of the Parliaments, The brave victory obtained over the Enemy at
Cardiffe in Glamorganshire
no way able to resist them: Now, at length, the Ragland horse drew toward
Cardiffe in Glamorganshire being a Parliament Garrison; whereupon the Governor
and Committee there sent to Colonel Kern, lately made High-Sheriffe of that
Shire by the Parliament, and to the rest of the Country to rise in a body, to
oppose the Enemy. But contrary to expectation, this Colonel Kern and the
Malignant Gentry being at their Rendevouz, so prevailed with the people thus
now raised, as to besiege Cardiffe, Colonel Kern the High-Sheriffe revolts and
joins with the Malig. Gentry against the Par^iament.
which was done with about 2000. men; and so in a short time they took the
Town; having also the assistance of the Malignant Townsmen. Hereupon the
Governor, Committee and Soldiers, betook themselves to the Castle; And Gods
good providence so ordered it, that Major General Laughorn, Sir Trevor
Williams and Colonel Keyrl and a party sent from Bristol from Major General
Skippon, came in good season to their assistance; (for, the Governor and
Committee, as I touched before, had sent to them and to Colonel Morgan, to
acquaint them with their estate; their provisions were now almost spent in the
Castle) and being so come fought most valiantly with the Country men and
Ragland forces (who were joined on a Heath near the Town) and at length, by
Gods great mercy to us, routed them and just upon the nick thereof, Colonel
Morgan with a party from Gloucester came in also unto them and did brave
service in the pursuit of the Enemy where they slew many and took many
prisoners and forced them to fly back to the Town; but Major General
Laughorn pursued them and releived the Castle, the enemy continuing in the
Town a while, till at last Articles were agreed on that they should march away
with (...) flying, match lighted (...) But having marched some pretty distance
from the Town, (...) was given by the Enemy for ^^^ach of their articles,
whereupon both sides were engaged in a second very hot fight, A second fight
and brave victory.
in which were slain and drowned of the Enemy at least 400. above 500. taken
prisoners, the rest were all scattered and fled; we lost very few men in this
service, though many were hurt. This service, certainly, was of very great
concernment, The slain, prisoners and prizes.
and rightly considered with the circumstances, was none of the least mercies,
among many of our late famous successes and victories, which God vouchsafed us.
For had the Treacherous plot took effect by this Colonel Kerns defaction and
the revolt of this County of Glamorgan, The great concernment of this victory
South Wales had been lost again, which probably would have afforded many
thousands to the king, to join in a body with Sir Jacob Ashley, who, to this
end and on this hope had drawn his forces this way from Oxford to Worcester
and so forward hither, thus to join and make strong recruites; and also to
have gathered together their scattered quarter'd-men that came from Chester
with Byron, and at Garrisons thereabout, and thus to make a fair army in the
field presently. But, our God (with whom they consulted not) saw and smiled at
their malice and mischief, and has thus most graciously crushed this
Cockatri^e in the Egg; and made this dangerous defigne, a mere blasted Embrio
dying in the womb; ever magnified and blessed be the Lord our good God for it.

Upon the intelligence of which most famous victory to the Parliament, The
Parliaments gratitude to Mayor Genesis Laughorn for this good service.
it was ordered that 1000 l. should be forthwith charged upon the Excise for
the payment of renowned Major General Laughornes forces. And the Commons
conferred upon himself an additionall considerable estate, in regard of the
singular good service, now and formerly performed by him most faithfully and
successefully for the King and Parliament.

And upon the 28. of this instant February we received most certain
intelligence of the taking of Corff-Castle, which being fully related in a
Letter sent from those parts from a special good hand, I have here for the
Readers better content and satisfaction, inserted a Copy thereof, which was, as
follows: Sir There being in Corffe-castle, One Leiutenant Colonel Pitman,
who had formerly served the Lord Inchiquin, in Ireland; upon some intimation
given that he had a desire to do the Parliament an acceptable service in
procuring this Castle to be delivered up to the Parliaments possession, Corffe
Castle delivered up to the Parliament.
in case he might have a protection granted him. Accordingly a protection was
here privately procured, and sent down unto him; and thereupon the plot was
thus laid, viz. Lieutenant Colonel Pitman having speech with Captain
Aniketell the Governor told him, that if he would give way unto it he would
go into Somersetshire and privately get 100. men more, and bring them into the
Castle, and then considering what had been formerly done he made no question
but they should beat off the besiegers, and make them quit the place: and that
he would find means to color his going out by obtaining leave to go for an
exchange of a friend of his for one of the Parliaments side that was prisoner
in the Castle; Which being assented unto, and leave given by Colonel Bingham
for him to go forth accordingly; an appointment was made, and the design so
laid, as that Pitman under the Color of bringing in the 100. men for the enemy
should bring in 100. of the Parliaments Soldiers, and that the besiegers
should give the onset the same time. Accordingly 100. commanded men were taken
out of several Companies of the Garrison of Waymouth, and secretly marched to
Lulworth castle, whence they marched away with some 30. or 40. more joined with
them, as silently as they could until they came to the place; Lieutenant
Colonel Pitman leading them on to the Sally-port, where Captain Aniketill the
Governor stood to welcome them with much courtesy, some of the men being
Somersetshiremen, fitted for the purpose, he being that Countryman, yet some
intermixed amongst them in a disguised habit who knew all parts of the castle.
When 50 of these were entered, Captain Aniketill seeing many yet behind
refused to suffer any more to enter, saying, those were enough, and more than
he could tell what to do with; at which Pitman seemed to be very angry,
saying, he had done him wrong in causing him to bring men so far with the
hazard of their lives, and then to shut them out, and make them lie in the
cold, and to be in danger of having their throats cut. But those that were
taken in got presently some of them into the Kings Tower, others into the
Queens Tower, and the rest into the two Platformes, standing upon their guard,
and making it good, expecting the besiegers would give the onset by scalado or
otherwise, it being about two of the clock after midnight, and thus it
continved three or four (...), the besiegers in all that time never falling
on, and the Garrison in the mean space shooting and vapouring and threatening
to cut the throats of all that were entered. But those 50. standing stoutly to
it, at last when it was open day the besiegers, when they saw their friends
that were formerly entered to be on the tops of the Towers platformes, then they
began to show themselves, and the enemy bestowed some shot on them but without
doing any harm. At last the Garrison seeing themselves betrayed, and that it
was bootlesse for them to stand it out any longer demanded a parley; which was
granted and agreement made that all their lives should be spared, and those
that were of the Town should return quietly to their houses, whereupon two by
a ladder came over the walls. The rest seeing it, began again to shoot and so
brake quarter: so as in conclusion they all became prisoners at discretion,
their lives excepted being sevenscore in number or thereabout. The Soldiers
got store of plunder; besides which, there were found 17. barrels of powder,
with match, etc. good store of victual, besides 30. prisoners or thereabout
set at liberty.

In this Action there was but one man lost on the Parliaments side, though the
Enemy shot often and threw down great stones from the wall. And thus the Lord,
every way mightily showed himself for us, to the glory of his own great name,
the good of us his unworthy servants and the great dread and amazement of all
our implacable and incorrigible enemies, to him, therefore, alone, be all the
honor and glory of all these our most memorable mercies and mighty
deliverances.

And here I shall again desire the godly Reader to make a short stay, and to
take a brief and grateful review of all the rare and rich mercies of this
Month also, in the Lords admirable preservation and advancement of the
prosperity of this his Burning-Bush, thus, still not Consumed, nay
contrariwise, still freshly flourishing and preserved, The Burning Bush not
Consumed.
both, in the reducing of Belvoir castle, the fair City of Chester, Town and
Castle to the obedience of the Parliament, 1.
In the brave defeat given to the Enemy at Ashbie de la Zouch and the
prosperous proceedings of our forces in the 2.
West. 3.
In the establishment of the judges to ride their Circuites again, and keeping
quarterly Assizes in all Countries (...) the power of the Parliament. 4
In the famous defeat given to the Enemy at Torrington in the West, and totally
routing Hoptons Army there. 5
In putting down the Court of Wards; the famous preservation of Cardiffe Town
and Castle, and mighty victory obtained therein: 6
And the stratagemicall possession of the strong Garrison of Corff-Castle. All
which remarkable mercies seriously considered, and gratefully preponderated, O
how great cause have we all with holy David frequently and frevently to enter
into that his sweet Soul-Soliloquie, and pious expostulation with our own
hearts, Psalm. 116. 12, 13, 14.
What shall we re-pay and render to the Lord for all his benefits thus heaped
and multiplied upon us? But take the Cup of salvation, and pay our Vows unto
the Lord, which we have made in the depth of our d^lorous days unto him. But
now proceed.

And now we shall again begin the most amiable and delectable March. 1646.
progress in the comfortable contemplation of the Parliamentary Mercies of
this Month of March. 1646. with the farther most famous successful
proceedings of our victorious Army in the West, since the coming thereof into
Cornwall; and therein particularly their taking of Launceston, a strong
Garrison of the Enemies in that Country, Launceston in Cornwall taken by the
Parliaments Forces.
which being fully and truly related in a Letter by that worthy Gentlemen
Master Rushworth, our most noble General Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Secretary, sent
to the Speaker to the honorable House of Commons, I have here given the Reader
an exact and true Copy thereof, which was as follows;

SIR,
UPon Tuesday the 24 of Febr. the General began his march with the Army from
Bedford, and part from Torrington, and quartered that night at Holsworth, being
12 miles from one place, and 15 miles from the other, an extraordinary rainy
day, and ways extraordinary deep. Wednesday the 25 we advanced from Holsworth
to Launceston, being ten long miles, that the Enemy might be the more amazed at
the Armies entering of Cornwall, Colonel Butler was sent from Holsworth with a
party of 1000 Horse and 400 Dragoons, on Tuesday night as far as Stratton in
Cornwall, to beat up the Enemies Quarters, and accordingly that night he passed
the River, where the Enemy had raised up a Brest-Worke at Tamarton Bridge, and
broke down the Bridge to hinder our passage over, but presently quit the
passage, whereupon he forced the Horse as well as Foot, that kept Guard, to
retreat to their other Guards. and (...) to the place appointed for their
drawing together upon an (...), when he charged their Horse several times: at
last it pleased God to put the Enemy to the flight. He took about 300 Horse
and 80 prisoners, he had more prisoners and some of quality, but the Soldiers
minding their ^^ry and booty in Horses, many of the prisoners escaped; this
party of Horse of the Enemies being about 800 that lay to keep Guard upon the
River Tamar, was commanded by Major General Web, who with the rest of the
Commanders, were put to a disorderly Retreat, with the rest of their Horses;
which gave them such an alarm toward the North parts of Cornwall, that it
forced them to draw their Horse back, the rest of the Army marching to
Launceston, which amazed them likewise on the left hand, that if their
intentions were for breaking through, we could not tell what resolution to
take. When we came within two miles of Launceston, we met with their Scouts,
having taken several of them, we understood that Colonel Basset with Horse
and Foot was resolved to keep Launceston, and not to permit our entrance into
the same, whereupon the forlorn hope of Horse and Foot were sent to force
entrance into the Town, the Enemy shut the Gates, made some opposition, but at
last quit the Town, and that disorderly; we took some prisoners, and killed
some (...) of them, night being come on, the rest escaped in the dark; the
Arms and Magazine in the Town we seized upon; we find the Country, and
particularly the place, to express much joy at our coming, though they were
made believe by the Enemy, that the Army would give no quarter to any Cornish
man or woman, which they did for the most part believe, and was the cause of a
great terror upon them: but our Soldiers, notwithstanding the opposition they
had at their entering of Launceston, did not so much as plunder any one house,
nor did any other prejudice to the Town, that we can hear of, but I hope will
so demean themselves in pursuance of the Generals Proclamation, as we shall
conquer the Cornish sooner by our civility than by the Sword. Thus far into
Cornwall it pleased God to prosper things with us, and I hope when we come more
into the heart of the County, we shall not find so many Enemies as friends.
Very speedily you shall receive a fuller account from

Your humble Servant, J. R.
Launceston, 26. of Febr. 1645. about nine a clock in the morning.

And upon the 2 of this instant March, Abington most ^ercely a^sauled, and most
bravely defended and preserved.
the honorable Houses of Parliament took the Garrison of Abington into their
consideration; and it was ordered that moneys should speedly be sent down for
the payment of it, as indeed it most worthily deserved, whom the Lord did most
admirably assist and preserve from most dangerous and desperate ruin, by a
most furious assault so daily made upon them by the Enemy from Oxford; whereof,
as this day we were given to understand, and as by this ensuing Letter to
renowned Major General Brown, is most apparent, even unto full satisfaction,
which was as follows:

Honorable Sir;
I Had not an opportunity to send my Letters formerly written, but now God has
afforded an accasion to speed away his Messenger on purpose, to let you know,
that the last night the Enemy drew out of Oxford with a strong party of 1000
Horse, and all the strength they could make of (...), and notwithstanding all
our parties abroad, and our Horse Guard, they came between Thrupp and Norcot to
Barton House, and kept covert till day light, and lay still after the Ravalue
was beaten, and our out-Centinels called in, and then suddenly arising out of
their Ambushment, taking the advantage, our Works (being caved out) at the
Spurr, and other places, forced our Guards, beat them all from the Works,
entered above 300 men, possessed themselves of Abby-Guard, Spur-Guard, Wayne-Guard
and Barn, pressed hard toward the Prison, where three of their men were
slain between Master Dues House and the Prison, by which time we had taken
the Alarm, and our men were got together, and made good the passage, and then
fearing least they should possess themselves of Bore-Bridge, and so let in
their Horse, (which they had in great numbers about our Works) I commanded a
party toward the Bridge, and lodged them in the old Redoubt at Bore-Lane end,
which was of much good use for us; for, by keeping that, we kept the Town. I
also sent another party which did very good service at Wainyard. In the (...)
time our Horse did most gallantly charge their Foot, routed their Musketeers,
and we had doubtless taken most of them that were over the Work, but that they
were preserved by a strong body of their Pikes. Major Blundell and Colonel
Washburn came in unto us in good time, Our men most bravely charges the Enemy.
charged gallantly through the thickest of them, which so terrified them, that
being on all sides beset, they quit their ground, tumbled over the Works faster
than they came in; The Enemies beaten out of the Town.
and besides them they carried away, we took 13 prisoners of them. There were
slain on our party but two Common Soldiers: Captain Tailor, Captain Maddocks,
Quartermaster Cox, were dangerously wounded; The hurt on our side.
Major Blundell slightly hurt with a Halbert on the thigh, Captain Keeling shot
in the hand, Colonel Washburn had his great bay horse slain under him,
Quartermaster Arnot and Major Blundels Cornet Horses were slain, and many of
our men sorely wounded. The dispute was very harsh for the time, but God gave
our men such spirits, that scorning death, they resolved rather to lose their
lives than the Town, and some of them fought most desperately in their shirts
only as they started out of their beds, Some of ours most desperately fought
in their shirts only.
and could but snatch up their weapons, and fly to their Horses. Our Horse
Guard that lay without Ockbridge ran all away, whether for fear of the
Enemy, or for fear of being called to an account for their neglect, I know
not, they were part of Sussex Troop. I desire you will please to order the
Officers of Colonel Rainsboroughs Regiment to come down to look to their
charge, there being here but four of ten Commanders. I am informed that the
King has sworn he will have Abbington and will fire it; The King vowed to
have Abington, and to fire it.
and that this night again we shall be assaulted with 2500 men; I doubt not,
if he come, but he shall find us better ^^aided than before. Sir, I beseech
you be pleased to hasten down some (...) for the relief of our poor men, whose
necessities are great, and their need of encouragement as great. Sir, I shall
desire to approve my self, to the utmost of my power,

Your Honors most humble Servant, George Pain.
Abington, March 2. 1645.

And here, good Reader, I shall desire thee to take notice of Gods
extraordinary providence in the preservation of this Town, A passage of
special providence in the preservation of Abington.
i^ one especial passage, which was omitted in the Letter, whereof I was
credibly informed, viz. That the Enemy having got the Magazine in their power,
or so near it, that they might have fired it yet were so confident that the
Town was certainly theirs, that though they might, yet they therefore did not:
whereas, I say, had they doubted the taking of it, they would, no doubt, have
done it, and then had irrecoverably mastered the Town, our Soldiers not having
above three charges of powder left them at that time, and so might easily have
been all destroyed and taken. Besides, had they taken this Town, Abingtons bad
and sad condition had it now been taken.
they would have first plundered it to purpose, and carried away whatever was
portable and worth having, and then unquestionably, have set the whole Town on
fire, as not being tenable by them, as their case then stood, the King (at this
time) necessitated to draw all the Soldiers into the Field, for the forming of
a Field Army, and not able to keep or increase Garrisons, especially this
Garrison at this time. Therefore, I say, see what an admirable mercy, and
special providence and protection of the Lord was here seen to this Town; and
therefore what great praise and Thanksgiving is due to the Lord for the same.
But to go on.

Upon the 4. of this instant we received the certain intelligence and
confirmation of the surrender of the strong Garrison of Ashbie de la Zouch,
Ashbie de la-Zouch surrendered to the Parliament.
to Leicester forces. The conditions of the surrender were, that Hastings,
alias, the Lord of Loughborough, together with his brother the Earl of
Huntington and Colonel Perkins should have their estates unsequestred,
protections for their persons, and passes to go beyond Sea; the rest of the
Officers to have liberty to compound for their sequestration, and passes (if
desired) to go beyond Sea also; and the Garrison to be slighted. Too good
Conditions indeed, for such a desperate and wicked Rob-Caryer as Hastings was,
but that the Kingdom may be glad to be rid of such wretches. The surrender was
made accordingly on Monday, the second instant. We took therein. 5. Pieces of
Ordnance, about 300. Arms, little ammunition, and no great store of other
provisions. A great mercy and mighty preservation of the peace and tranquillity
of all those ad-jacent Parts about it, for which let God have all the due
praise and glory. Our Armies singular good success in Cornwall, and the taking
of Bodman Listithiel and VVare Bridge.


About the 6. of this instant March, we had farther certain information of the
singular good success of our army in the West passing on most prosperously by
God Almighty guard and guidance; The sum of which days intelligence was
contained in these 2. ensuing Letters from Master Rushworth, which was as
follows:

To the Honorable W. Lenthall Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
IN my last I acquainted you with the Armies coming to Launceston and of the
taking 300. horse near Stratton. By reason of the long, marches the Foot had
taken, and many straglers behind, the General and the Army rested at
Launceston two days; and on Saturday last, the Army advanced five or six miles
toward Bodman. And this day the Horse and Foot had a General Rendezouz upon
the Downs within eight Miles of Bodman; the Forlorn Hope being sent out, they
(...) with the Eenmies Scouts, there being eight of them together, which our
men took (not one escaping) they all confess they had no intelligence of our
coming; that they belonged to a Guard of 300. Horse that was kept on a Pass
within three miles of Bodman; and within two miles where they were taken, the
Army advancing near to that place, we discovered a Body of the Enemies Horse,
at about two miles distance, who made a stand, and faced us for a while; but
before ever we came were them, retreated to Bodman: As we were upon the Moore,
intelligence came. That the two Companies of Dragoons that were sent toward
Camelford the other day, and had possessed an House, the better to gain
intelligence, if the Enemy intended to break through Eastward, were in some
hazard by a great Body of the Enemies Horse that were (...) between them and
the Randezvouz, and forced them into a Close for their security; whereupon a
thousand Horse were sent to relieve them, but before they came, the Dragoons
themselves had beaten off the Enemy, and made good their retreat to a Church,
without the loss of a man. Sir James Smith with his Brigade, was the man that
had a Design to have surprised them; but now we are in a manner gotten
between him and Bodman; for the Army quarters in the field, and all the
Villages hereabouts, that he can hardly make his retreat, unless he took the
opportunity before our Horse came up. At our coming into Cornwall, especially
at Launceston, we found the people possessed with an opinion, That there would be
no mercy shown unto the Cornish; but after a day being at Launceston, the Town
seeing the carriage of the Soldiers so fair, and not one House plundered (not
so much as the Governors own house) and the Country being possessed with the
like opinion of the civil carriage of this Army, came into the Market, and
brought in provisions for supply of our Forces; but in regard Gorings Forces
had plundered the Country of all their Horse, people were glad to bring it in
on their backs. And Friday being the day for the Posse of the whole Countey to
appear at Bodman, all the North part of Cornwall refused to appear, they
positively affirming, They found us Friends, and not Enemies; and those that
were on the Westside of Bodman, likewise refused to come in, saying, They had
not greater Enemies than Gorings Horse that were among them. A Gentleman whom I
spoke withal this day, who was at their meeting said, The Horse only
appeared, the Posse Foot wholly refused to come in; and indeed, there cannot be
a greater advantage to us, than to drive Gorings Horse before us; for their
carriages are so barbarous, that they made every man's hand against them where
they came: The Army had been this night at Bodman, but in regard the Enemy is
numerous in Horse, and that we marched much upon the Downs, and was like to be
late before we could get in, it was held fit to quarter in the Fields and
Villages thereabouts, and the next day to march in a close Body, Horse and
Foot, though it be the slower way, yet it is the more secure: The Prisoners
that were taken this day, told me, they were glad with all their hearts they
were taken upon so fair quarter; for they knew they should be all taken at
last (they said) and that they give themselves already for lost: And indeed,
God has stricken their hearts with a terror. Some Gentlemen of quality have
sent privately for protections, whose not appearing against us, though not for
us, keeps all that part of the Country in where they are; And just now we have
intelligence, that the Lord Mohun is unwilling to obey the Lord Hoptons
Commands, and rather stands upon his Guard against his Forces, than to assist
him with any: as far as I can conceive in my poor judgment, we shall drive
the Enemy to a corner; and it may please God to bring their Horse to accept of
conditions as well as formerly they did bring our Foot; for unless this very
night they do break through, which they can hardly do, considering how our
Forces are laid, we have them then before us to the Lands end.

Your most humble Servant, J.R.
St. Blessenden, March 1. 1645.
THe Messenger staying till the morning, I thought fit to give you this further
account of the Enemies motion and our proceedings: This morning by break of
the day, the Army was drawn to a Rendezvous upon the Heath within two miles of
Bodman, a party being sent out to discover if the Enemy were in the Town,
brought Intelligence they quit the Town last night about ten of the clock,
Horse and Foot, the Lord Hopton bringing up the Rear himself: The most of the
Foot they had were Welchmen, having Leeks in their Hats, and drunk, and went
out disorderly: They marched toward Truro with a good part of their horse; the
rest of their Horse we this morning received Intelligence marched towords
Warre-Bridge, as if they intended to go Eastward; whereupon Lieutenant
General Cromwell who went the night before to relieve our Dragoons, was sent
unto by the Generell to desire him to secure the passage at Ware-Bridge, by
placing some Dragoons there; who being there with one thousand Horse, and four
hundred Dragoons, will give a seasonable interruption to the Enemies advance
that way. We find the Towns-people in Bodman no ways fearful of our coming,
rather desiring it: They say they have had no Market these two Market days, by
reason that Gorings Horse robbed the Market people, and take away their Horses.
There were two Regiments of Foot and two of Horse sent this morning from their
Rendezvous about nine of the clock, to assist those forces at Ware-Bridge,
thereby we might the better drive the Enemy before us into a narrow compass of
Land. At this place where we are, we may see the Sea on both hands; if the
Enemy had had any gallantry left in them, they would have showed it upon our
approach to Bodman, their only strength consisting in Horse, where they had
room enough upon the Downs to play their Game, but they never appeared but
once, and that at two miles distance, and retreated, I have spoken with some of
the Inhabitants of this Town, who were at the grand Posse at Bodman on Friday
last, and they affirm, That of the whole County of Cornwall, there did not
appear Eighty men; but Gorings Horse, and the Horse of the County, all
appeared in a great body, Those Foot that were in Bodman, were some of the
Runawayes from Torrington, and some Welchmen that were left at Launceston, and
fled hither, and some others of the Country, in all to the number of four
hundred at the most, which is the only body of Infantry they have left that we
can yet hear of: the same Intelligencer confirmed, That the Lord Mahone is
either restrained or wounded by the Lord Hopton; yet the certainty thereof,
more than the public report of the Country, we cannot yet hear. I doubt it
falls out ill we have not a Squadron of Ships toward Fulmouth, where no doubt
they may have rich booty, and intercept persons of great quality. Several
Letters have been sent unto Plymouth, to the Commander in chief upon these
Coasts; we hope that they will yet come seasonable: The Prince is at Pendennis,
and I believe within two days will be in France if the wind hold. The head
Quarter was this night at Bodman; three Regiments marched to Listithiel to
secure the passage that way: the Forlorn hope of Horse that went thither, made
the Enemy quit their Guard at Listithiel; and receiving Information that four
Wain-load of Ammunition was in the way to go from Listithiel to Foy, six of
the Troopers rode after it, and made the Convoy defert their charge, and
brought back the four load of Ammunition this night to Bodman, there being
(...) to every draught: Likewise a party being sent out another way, overtooke
forty two Musketeers, who had their Matches lighted, and Muskets laden, four
Troopers (...) up unto them, and made them all lay down their Arm, and
brought them back Prisoners to the head Quarters. Another party was sent
toward Truro, to discover whether the Enemies Horse remained in a body, and at
Castle-Den^ is discovered a body of about a thousand horse an hour before
night, which we conceive only ^^aid till the darkness of the night to draw
off, after the rest further West; they are so Alarmed by our parties, that they
are forced to keep in bodies, and can hardly goe^ to Quarter, which will
quickly make them weary and over-watch^, and altogether unfit to break through
if they had any such intention, which I believe now they have not: That we
keep strong Guards at Listithiel, Ware-Bridge, and the Fords upon both Rivers.
Sir John Greenville Lieutenant Colonel, and diverse others are taken Prisoners.

Bodman, March 2. ten at night.

About the 8 of this instant March we received most certain information, That
the valiant and most faithful Commander, Colonel Moore, Governor of
Mountgo^^ie Castle marched forth in much privaci^ with a party of about 26.
horse and 70. foot having got intelligence that Sir John Watts, late Governor
of Chirk-Castle situated within 4. miles of Osmestrie, quartered that night
within 3. miles of (...)-Castle, which with security he conceived, he might the
beaten do^ in regard the Governors troop of horse was at the siege before
High-Archall; A brave defeat given to the Enemy by valiant Colonel Moore.
and the forces of Red-castle were with Colonel Mitton before (...). But this
brave and as valiant a^ vigilant Commander, Colonel Moore, with his foresaid
small par^ie, fell suddenly and Courageously in to Sir John Watts his qu^^ters,
but the Enemi^ much good the Church about 2 hours until the doors were (...)
upon them; Whereupon our^ entered, and Sir John himself was there taken
prisoner, together with 5. Captains, 2. Lieutenants, 6. Gentlemen of worth and
quality, one Priest, 100. foot, 50. gallant horse, besides tro^pe horses and
all his baggage. These forces were appointed to have met Sir Jacob Ashley at
his Rendezvous, but were thus happily (...) by the gallantry of this noble
Colonel Moore, whereby that design was thus much lessened, blessed be the
Lord for it.

And the 12 of this instant March we received yet more excellent news of our
most noble and victorious Generals still prosperous advances into Cornwall, by
Letters from the foresaid worthy Gentleman Master Rushworth, the Generals
Secretary, to the Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons, which for the
Readers better content and full satisfaction, I have here inserted, verbatim,
as they were printed and published by authority, which were as follows:

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
IN my last I gave you an account of the Armies being at Bodman, Listithiel,
and parts thereabouts; since that time we have not advanced (it being held fit
to spend two or three days in securing as far as we are gone, and leaving all
safe behind us) the business of Mount-Edgecomb has somewhat taken up our time,
I hope to good purpose; for this day came Master Coriton, Master Lower, Master
Glanvile, (all formerly Members of the House of Commons) and Master Trevisa to
the General from Master Edgecomb, concerning the surrender of his Fort, and
disbanding of his Regiment, and the Forces thereabouts, which is agreed unto, I
hope upon such Conditions as will not be unacceptable to the Parliament. What
influence this, and the coming in of other Gentlemen of this County may have
upon the rest of the Country, you may easily perceive, especially if you
consider the quality of the persons of those that are already come in, and
desire to live under the protection of the Parliament, viz.

The Lord Mal^^^^. Sir John Trelawny Colonel Trelawney Sir Nicholas (...)
Thomas Lomax Esquire Pierce Edgeworth Esquire William Se^^^^^ Esquire Mr. Corriton. William
Bond Esquire Richard Edgeworth Esquire Mr. Glanvile Esquire Major Nicholas Saul. Capt.
William Bond of Earth. Capt. Bourn. Capt, William Saul. Alexander Lower Esquire Mr.
Francis Saul. Nathaniel Trevanion of Tregerthen Esquire Major William Trevisa of
Crokedon Esquire John Battersby Esquire Richard Spur Esquire Jo. Roe of Trewarnan Esquire
John Horndon. Col. Champernoon. Mr. Rashly. Mr. John Trevery Governor of Foy.
Mr. Bageley. Mr. Walter Hele. Lieut. Col. Fortescue. Major Warren. Sir Richard
Prideaux, High Sheriff of the County, and diverse others. Also Mr. Arrundel the
Papist, a man of power, desires to be under the Protection of the Parliament.

And as a further Testimony of the reality of some others of the Inhabitants of
this County near Saint Columb (and yet in a manner now in the power of the
Enemy) this ensuing Petition delivered by the hands of Master Vivian, with the
consent of the Inhabitants of those parts where he lives, will in some measure
show their affection to the Parliament.

To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Captain General of the
Forces raised by the High Court of Parliament under his Command; and other the
renowned Worthies of that Army.
Right Honorable:
WE (though not an acceptable number of a more unacceptable County) having by
Gods blessing, so fair an advantage of giving our due respects to your Honor,
do with them present our persons also; which we most unfainedly protest have
been hitherto by us, most unvoluntarily separated, as our former readiness and
frequent endeavors to advance this service; besides Imprisonments, Fines, and
other most miserable sufferings, can evidently testify: And therefore we first
bl^sse the great Lord of Hosts, by whose providence you are made such
victorious Ministers of our deliverance from such intolerable bondage; and
next to our great and wise Council, by whose public care and commission, we
have the happiness this day to see you Conquerors for the preservation of our
Religion, so long violated, and restitution of our liberty, so long inthralled:
Neither may we omit a grateful acknowledgement of the unexampled valor and
vigilance, which have been so magnanimously exercised for the reducing of this
unhappy Kingdom from the woeful condition of a bloody war, to so fair hopes of
an assured and most happy peace: And now since it has pleased God thus to
bless us; we presume not to motion through difference your future care of his
Glory and the Commonwealths good; having so many rare examples of your
readiness to defend both: However, give us leave as a people that to our great
grief and misery have so long a time wanted the happy influence and equity of
the Law to relieve us, to mention our desires of their reparation; whereby also
to distinguish our selves from those which have with an high hand endeavored
to subvert them: and as hitherto you have not wanted our Prayers to God for a
blessing upon your Counsels and Actions So now, your Honor shall not want the
ready, though weak assistance, so far as the lives and fortunes shall extend,
of your servants and faithful votaries.

The taking into consideration this Petition, and the coming in of the persons
before mentioned; as also the rising of the Inhabitants at Camelford,
Ginny-Hill, and other parts in the East and North of Cornwall for our
assistance; it was held fit to summon a Posse of five or six of the hundreds,
to appear at Bodman-Down to morrow being Friday, where some will be fitted with
Instructions, to impart the Generals mind unto them: For to morrow part of the
Army advances to Saint Columbe and other parts; the Enemy is retreated from
Castle Dennis, and last night had his Head Quarter about Truro: some part of
their Forces at S. Allens, and kept Guard near S. Columb; as our staying here
three days will prove to our advantage in settling these Eastern parts of the
Country; So we are confident it will do so for the Western; for Gorings Horse
will sufficiently incline the people to wish the coming of this Army for their
ease and preservation. The Enemy gave out they would plunder Truro, because the
people there already appear for us; but it was answered, Whether should they go
with their plunder when they had it: Several of the Princes servants have sent
unto the General for Passes to come in, and to repair to their homes; which I
conceive they now solicit for, in regard the Prince is gone to Sea: but where
he is landed, we yet hear not. Last night a Vessel out of Ireland came into
Padstow, the Townsmen seized upon her, and three other Vessels, going out with
plundered Goods, and sent to our Forces at Ware-Bridge for assistance, which was
this morning accordingly sent unto thme. A Spy is just now come from the
Enemies Quarters; most of their forces are North of Truro: We shall be very
near Truro to morrow night. I believe the General after one days advance will
send a Summons to the Lord Hopton. I take my leave, and rest

Your most faithful and humble Servant Jo. Rushworth.
Bodman, March 5. 1645. two in the afternoon.
SInce the writing of my Letter, here is Captain Far come from Padstow, who
with Captain Wogan boarded the Irish Vessel, and with the assistance of the
Townsmen and Townswomen put them all to the Sword but two, about thirty in all,
wicked natural Irish. God has most seasonably brought that Vessel thither:
It enrages the Country against the Kings party for bringing in of forraigners.
These are but the forerunners of many thousands speedily to come over, as by
their Packets of great concernment appears: Indeed, of so great concernment,
considering from whom they come, that it is not fit to be lightly mentioned:
they were thrown into the Sea, yet recovered; an express is to come up with
them: We have cause to bless God for such a mercy. Several of those Letters
subscribed by Glamorgan, Ormond, and Digby, were this day read to Master
Corriton, Mr. Lower, Mr. Glanvile, Mr. Trevisa, etc. And one of the two Irish
that had not his throat cut, was brought before them, which has so satisfied
them of the Kings intentions, and ready preparations to bring in bloody Irish
Rebels into this Kingdom, that they offer, to the hazard of Life and Estate, in
person to oppose them. I will say no more till the Letters come: Pardon my
haste.

Bodman, March 5. 1645. six at night.
A Summons is gone to Hopton.

Which Summons coming in here most fitly by that mention thereof and of most
singular excellency, and worthy to be recorded to posterity, I have thought
convenient and very necessary here to insert it, the Copy whereof was as
follows:

Sir, through the goodness of God to his people and his just hand against their
enemies, your forces being red^ced to such condition, as (to my sense, the same
good hand of God continuing with us, wherein alone we trust) they are not like
either to have subsistence or shelter long where they are, The Summons sent to
Hopton.
or to escape thence, nor (if they could) have they whither to go for better: I
have thought good (for prevention of more bloodshed, or of further hardship or
extremity to any, but such whose hearts God shall harden to their own
destruction to send you this Summons for your self and them to lay down
Arms, and withal a tender of such conditions (upon a present surrender and
engagement, never more to bear Arms against the Parliament) as may be better
than any thing they can rationally expect by further standing out.

First therefore to the Souldery in General, English and Forrainers, I shall
grant liberty either to go beyond Sea, or to their homes in England as they
please; and to such English as shall choose to live at home, my Protection for
the liberty of their persons, and for the immunity of their estates from all
plunder or violence of Soldiers, and all to go their ways with what they
have, saving Horse and Arms.

But of Officers in Commission, and Gentlemen of quality, I shall allow them to
go with horse for themselves and one servant or more suitable to their quality,
and with Arms befitting Gentlemen in a condition of Peace. And such Officers
as would go^ beyond Sea for other service to take with them their Arms and
full number of horses answerable to their Offices.

To all Troopers and the inferior sort of Horse Officers [bringing in and
delivering up their horses and armes] twenty shillings a man [in lieu of their
horses] to carry them home.

To English Gentlemen of considerable Estates, my Pass and Recommendation to
the Parliament for their moderate composition.

Lastly, for your Self (besides what is before employed to you in common with
others) you may be assured of such mediation to the Parliament in your behalf
both from my self and others, as for one, whom (for personal worth and many
virtues, but especially for your care of and moderation toward the Country) we
honor and esteem above any other of your party, whose Error (supposing you
more swayed with Principles of Honor and Conscience than other) we most pity
and whose happiness (so far as consistent with the public welfare) we should
delight in more than in your least suffering.

These things not from any need or other ends than Humane, and Christian]
having offered, I leave to your consideration and theirs whom they concern,
desiring your and their speedy resolving, which I pray may be such, as shall be
most for the honor of God, the peace and welfare of this poor Kingdom, and
for your and their good so far as may stand therewith.

And having herein discharged (as I conceive) the duty of an honest man, a
Soldier and a Christian, if God shall see it good to let your hearts be
hardened against your own peace, I shall (though with some regret for that ill
which shall ensue to any; yet with cheerfullnesse and rejoicing at the
righteous Judgments of God) pursue my charge and trust for the public in
another way, not doubting of the same presence and blessing which God has
hitherto vouchafed in the same Cause, to the weak endeavors of

Thomas Fairefax.
March 5. 1645.
About the 16. A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Saint Culbumbe in Cornwall,
and that Garrison taken them.
of this instant, we received more certain intelligence by Letters out of the
West, of the still continued good hand of God unto us in Cornwall, and in
particular of a brave defeat given to the Enemy by our forces there at or
about Saint Cullumbe and the taking of that Garrison from the Enemies, which
being fully and faithfully set forth to the Parliament, by master Rushworths
Letter, I have here thought fit to give the Reader a sight of the Copy thereof;
which was as follows.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Sheaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
BY the last Messenger, the Packet from Ireland taken in the vessel at Padstow,
was sent unto you, which I hope came safe to your hands; by which original
letters under the hand of the Earl of Glamorgan, you will perceive how (as
yet) he is employed for the bringing over of an Army, and what private
correspondency there is between him, the Prince, the Lord Hopton and other
persons of Note (notwithstanding, he is under the cloud of being accused of
High Treason) his being at liberty, and acting the Kings Commands in bringing
over an Army of natural Irish Rebels, and his correspondency with the Prince,
Hopton, etc. is enough to satisfy the World, by whose Command he manages that
Affair. I also acquainted you with a Summons sent to the Lord Hopton (or
rather honorable conditions) if he would instantly lay down Arms, and disband
the Forces in the West, which being sent unto him upon Thursday last, and no
Answer returned on Friday: On Saturday the Army advanced toward Saint Collumb,
and being drawn to a Rendezuouz four miles from Bodman; the Weather proved so
extreme wet, that it was not held fit to advance on any further that day; and
so the Foot were appointed to Quarters in Villages thereabouts, and a mile or
two forwards: The Horse being likewise at the Rendezvous, returned to their
Quarters; but some went to Quarter nearer the Enemy, and to the Guards, except
a very good party of about eight hundred Horse and Dragoons, commanded by
Colonel Rich, who was sent away with the same, with Orders to fall upon the
Enemy; Guards or Quarters, as he should see it most fit for the service; and
accordingly within two hours of Evening, he fell upon their Out-guards near
St. Cullumb, beat them to their Main-guard: Being then drawn up in a Body, ours
likewise drew into three Divisions; one commanded by Colonel Rich, another by
Major Fincher, and the third by Major Scroop: The Enemy seeing no way but to
fight, the Van of them gave a very good charge: Major General P^rt breaking
through one Division himself: But they were instantly put to the Rout, and we
had the pursuit of them for three or four Miles, killing many, took about an
hundred prisoners, whereof Major General Pert was one, and betwixt two hundred
and three hundred Horse. This so Alarmed the Enemy, that it made them desert
the Head-quarter for a mile, and caused them to draw all their Horse to a
Rendezvous at eleven of the Clock at night on Michel-Downe, and so continued in
the Wet in a great Rain till the next morning, thinking the whole Army had
been advanced. Our party returned to St. Collumb, and this morning brought the
Prisoners to Town. This party of the Enemies were of the Princes own Regiment,
most of them Reformadoes Officers; they confess their Soldiers are very
weary, and that if it were published among them, they might have Passes to go
home it was not in the Officers power to keep them together; They likewise
say, that most of their Officers, if they knew they might be accepted into the
protection of the Parliament, they would desert the Service.

Being asked, if they had heard any Propositions were sent unto them from the
General, offering honorable conditions both to Officers and Soldiers, they
answered they never heard of any; so by that we perceive the Lord Hopton with
some few of his Council keeps the propositions from being published: There are
some others come from thence, who say that the French are mighty inquisitive to
know whether they might be so far received into favor as to have leave to go
beyond seas: Laying all these together, we are of opinion, that it will not be
in Hoptons power to hinder a good effect to the propositions sent him; so soon
as the same is published amongst them, which before this, we hope by some means
that has been used is effectually done: This day the Generals Trumpeter that
went with the sommons, is returned with a brief answer from the Lord Hopton to
this purpose: That he had taken the letter from the General into
consideration, but the sudden advance of our forces gave an interruption to
mention at this time any particulars, but by a Trumpeter of his own he would
send a particular answer: The Trumpeter was courteously used and much respected.
This evening the Lord Hoptons Trumpeter is come with a letter in answer to the
Generals propositions, which indeed implies a willingness to end the business
of the West without more blood shed, but yet desires to be satisfied whether
the King and Parliament be not near a conclusion of a Peace; for being
entrusted by the King, it concerns him to support his honor as long he can;
and yet withal inclines to have some Country Gentleman come unto him to
satisfy him of the state of affaiers: Taking altogether, it argnes a coming to
us, though it seems yet a distance, or else a way to get time (which I rather
believe, because he invited a cessation) until some Irish do land, which is
the thing rumoured abroad in their Army, and expected to be there within eight
and forty hours; and indeed a duplicate of that Packet we intercepted at
Padstow, is since arrived with the enemy, whereby its probable they hasten
ships unto them, for the bringing over those Irish that were intended for
Chester into these parts: What ever his intention is, the General will not
lose a minute of time: All the Regiments this day advanced to and beyond
Cullomb within three miles of Truro with a great part of the horse; the
headquarter is at Bodman with one Regiment there, which we leave to secure the
pass.

To morrow the General and Lieutenant General advance after the Army, and I
believe will quarter at Truro to morrow at night: This advance as it is like to
further a good effect upon the Propositions (if God incline their hearts unto
it) so it will I hope dispatch the business before such time as any Irish can
land: If there be a Treaty it must not be such a one as shall take up above one
days time: therefore a few days will decide that business, and I hope (with
Gods blessing) much to your advantage and the peace and welfare of this
Kingdom. Major General Pert is run through the body, and shot in the body yet
not mortal: There was found in his Pocket a Copy of a Letter to the Lords,
about the Prince, either sent, or to be sent by him, advising them, That now
was a good time to Treat before our Forces advance further; declaring, That
they feared else their Condition would be desperate.

The Country is very forward to assist in the Barrocadoing up of all Lanes and
Passes, where probably the Enemy (if they intend to break through) may attempt
to pass by. This being all I have to trouble you with, I rest,

Your most faithful and Humble Servant, J. R.
Bodman, March 8. 1645.

Much also about this same time Sir Ralph Hopton looked very earnestly for new
supplies out of Ireland, Sir Ralph Hopton expects supplies out of Ireland.
and received Letters thence that he should have them, and that they were ready
for him, if he would be pleased to send forth ships to transport them over unto
him. Foy taken
But, Foy also was now taken by the Parliaments forces, and in it 13. pieces of
Ordnance and the news hereof made Pendennis tremble, Pendennis besieged.
hearing especially her enemies approaching near her, and now already
thundering against her walls; The inhabitants of Cornwall, on all sides, come in
unto renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax, being overcome as much by his mercy and
clemency, as by his might and courage, who thus drove his Enemies still before
him, terrifying Hopton also by his power and prowess and now at last inviting
him by his Summons, the effects whereof you now shall hear, namely, that about
the 18 of this instant March we received the certain intelligence of the
Demands of Sir Ralph Hopton, upon our most noble Generals Summons, which were
as follows:

Sir Ralph Hoptons Demands.
SIR,
I Received yours, bearing date the fifth of this Month, wherein I must
acknowledge much kindness from you, and a very Christian consideration of
sparing of blood: But one thing there is, I am confident, you have too much
honor to expect from me, which is, that to avoid any danger, or to enjoy any
worldly advantage, I will renounce my Masters Service, to whom I am both a
sworn Subject, and a sworn servant, that I must profess, I am resolved to
undergo all fortunes with him, and if there shall be cause, to suffer any
thing, rather than in the least point to taint my honor in that particular,
and I hope, there is not a man of any consideration in this Army, under my
command, that is not so resolved; yet in all honest and honorable ways, to
procure the peace of this Kingdom, and the sparing of Christian blood, I take
God to witness, I am, and still have been mostdesirous: And I hear, from good
hands, our Gracious Sovereign, is at present so far advised to a Treaty with
the Parliament, as that he has promised to pass four of the principal of
their Bills proposed, whereof the intrusting the Militia for seven years, in
hands agreed between them is one. I desire you to deal freely with me in that
particular, for if that be so, it will spare the labor of further Treaty;
being, for my part, ready to obey whatsoever his Majesty shall agree unto: God
indeed has of late humbled us with many ill successes, which I acknowledge as
a very certain evidence of his just judgment against us for our personal
crimes: Yet, give me leave to say, your present prosperity cannot be so
certain an evidence of his being altogether pleased with you. It is true, we
are reduced to a lower condition than we have been, yet have we a gallant body
of Horse, that being preserved to a general all accord, may be for good use
against our common Enemies, and being otherwise pressed, I may say it without
vanity, want not a resolution, at least to sell our selves at a dear rate
against any odds; Your Propositions, though they be not wholly to be consented
unto, yet if a general accord, much more desirable, be not in a likely
forwardness to prevent them, I shall be willing, that eight Commanders of
ours, with three Country Gentlemen, give a meeting as soon as you please, to an
equal number of yours at any indifferent place, to consult of this great
business, and to conclude of some Propositions that may be reasonable and
honorable for both parts, wherein I hope God will s^ bless our clear
intentions, as may procure a probable inducement to a general peace, according
to the unfaigned desire of

Your Servant, RALPH HOPTON.
March 8. 1645.
A Party of yours falling upon a Guard of ours yesterday, it is likely they
have taken some prisoners; I desire the favor from you, to receive a List of
them by this Trumpeter, till I receive a positive Answer to the contents of
this Letter, I shall not permit any of mine to attempt any thing upon any of
your Forces.

Your Servant, RALPH HOPTON.

Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Answer.
My Lord:
I Should most freely and truly inform your Lordship the best I could in any
thing that might lead you to a right understanding of things in order, to the
Peace of the Kingdom, or the real good of your self and those with you, so
far as may stand with my trust and duty to the Publiqve; to what I conceive
your more certain knowledge of that your desire to be informed in, concerning
the Kings offers to the Parliament, would not be prejudicial: But the truth
is, I can give you no other satisfaction or assurance therein, than this, That
the King has made some offers to the Parliament, and amongst them one
concerning the Militia something to the purpose, as you say you have heard, but
the just certainty what his last overtures are, or how far they have advanced
toward a general accord, I cannot at present certify; I do not hear they
have proceeded so far as to a Treaty; and I believe, That as the Parliament may
be discouraged from that way of Treaty by former experiences of the
fruitlesnesse thereof, and the ill use the same has been designed or driven
to, viz. only to gain advantages for Wars, without real intention of Peace;
so the late overtures that way are the less like to be successful, by reason
of the clear and certain discoveries the Parliament have had. That his Majesty
at the same time was and is laboring by Agents in all parts, to draw in
Foreign Forces, and especially, That the Earl of Glamorgan by Commission from
his Majesty, had concluded a Peace with the Irish Rebels on Terms extremely
dishonorable and prejudicial, upon the only condition of sending over forces
under the command of that Lord, to invade England, whereof I presume you cannot
but have heard: And though his Majesty did in a Letter to the Parliament
disavow any such agreement, and pretended he had given order to the Lord Digby,
for the attainting and impeaching the Earl of Glamorgan of high Treason, for
what he had done therein: Yet by late discoveries to the Parliament, and
especially by Letters intercepted the other day at Padstow, from the Lord
Digby, the Earl of Glamorgan and others, to Secretary Nicholas, your self,
Sir Edward Hide, the Lord Culpepper, and others, it is most clear and evident,
that the arresting of the Earl of Glamorgan, was only for a present color to
salve reputation with the people, and continue their delusion till designs
were ripe for execution: for the same peace is fully concluded with the Rebels,
the King to have the aid conditioned upon the same agreement, and the Earl of
Glamorgan at liberty again, and to command that force in chief. Now for the
overture of a meeting to treat further about the Propositions I sent; Though I
know nothing material that I can add or alter, except in circumstances; yet I
shall not refuse or decline such a meeting, or ought else that may probably
tend to the saving of blood, or preventing further misery to any; Provided that
the meeting be speedily, and number of persons not to exceed 4 or 5. But (my
Lord) when you consider what I have before related concerning foreign
Supplies, which I have reason to think you know and believe, you see what cause
I have to be jealous of advantages sought by delays, and not intermit any
time, or omit any opportunity to prosecute the service I have in hand; and that
there may be no color of your expecting that forbearance on my part, which you
offer on yours, I do the more hasten back this my resolution unto you; In
pursuance whereof I do not despise, nor shall insult upon your present
condition: I question not, nor yet shall, I hope, be much moved with that
resolution of your men: I presume not on former successes, nor present
advantage in fleshly power, but desire to trust in God alone, whose favor and
blessing to this Army above others, I do not account in what is past, or expect
in future, to be for any precedence in merit or goodness of ours, whereby we
should be more pleasing to him than others; but from his own free grace and
goodness toward his people, whose welfare, with the common good of the
Kingdom, we seek and desire with all faithfulness and integrity to pursue.
And so committing the issue of all to his good pleasure, I remain

Your humble Servant, T. FAIRFAX.
March 9. 1645. A List of such as are come in to Sir Thomas Fairfax during the
Treaty.
THirty five Lieutenant Colonels, A List of the number of (...) Gentry of
Cornwall came in to the Parliament.
Sergeant Majors, and Captains came in, March 11. Forty Gentlemen of quality
that came in the same day, some of great note. One hundred Gentlemen, and
others that have sto^ne away by parties out of the Enemies Quarters. Ninty six
common Soldiers from Penryn with Arms. Twelve more followed them. Forty from
Penryn are gone home, and have laid down their Arms, Colonel Treoanian the
Governor of Penryn (by Treaty) since. All the Officers and Soldiers in the
Fort and Harbor. Maus Castle surrendered.
The Governor of Maus Castle. All the Soldiers and Officers there. One
hundred Officers and Soldiers of Colonel Champernoones Regiment, Falmouth by
this means is ours on that side the Harbor. Two thousand Horse at least that
are ours by the Treaty. Three or four thousand Arms.



About the same time also we received certain information that Sir William
Vaughan having united himself with Colonel De Villier, Sir William Vaughau
well beaten by Captain Ashley.
had a resolution to make some new attempt again in Wales, but he and his
Company were so well entertained by Captain Ashley, who was not above half so
many in number, that the whole body of the Enemy, consisting of about 300
Horse, were encountered, routed and pursued by ours, many of the Enemy slain
and taken prisoners* the List whereof was thus in brief, five killed upon the
place, 12 mortally wounded, Captain Johnson taken Prisoner, two Captains more,
two Lieutenants, one Cornet, eighteen other Prisoners, and good store of Arms.
And by the same Letters we received further intelligence, that by the vigilant
care of the brave and active Committee of Shrewsbury there was raised a very
strong Work within less than Musket shot of HighArchall, The activity of the
brav^ Committee of Shrewsbury.
by means whereof the Enemy could not stir, either in or out, but with their
apparent danger. And at the erecting of this Fort, they took their opportunity
of the Governor of High-Archals absence, and before his return they had made
themselves so strong that although Sir Jacob Ashley came along with him with
about 1000 Horse and Foot, they were enforced to retreat and go back again,
not daring to adventure on a place so gallantly manned, and made so
inaccessible, both by art and nature as that was, which indeed was the winning
of that strong Garrison, as you shall shortly hear in its proper place.

About the 20 of this instant March we received certain knowledge of the
taking of Shruardon Castle, Shruardon Castle taken.
a place of great importance, which brave service was performed by that active
Patriot and courageous Commander Major General Mit^on. And much about the same
time also we received a full and exact relation of the remarkable success of
valiant and active Colonel Birch, before Goderich Castle, expressed by himself
in his Letter to the Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons, which was as
follows:

Honorable Sir,
SInce my last the 7 instant finding the forces of Goodrich under command of
Sir Henry Lingen, so active that a passenger could not be safe between
Gloucester and Hereford, nor could I quarter Horse abroad but they were in much
danger, nor could draw for^^^ toward Ludlow or Worcester, but they would come
near unto the City to plunder, therefore I chose rather to run the hazard of
storming the House wherein they kept their out-Guard upon their Boats, and
Stable being within 20 foot of their Castle Wall, than to suffer those former
inconveniences which was done thus; I marched out of Hereford monday night last
with 500 Horse and Foot undiscovered, until I came within Pistol shot of
Goodrich, a little before day, then fell on with 100 firelocks for the Forlorn,
and entered over the Wall near the end of their stable, the wall was very high,
yet got over before they had a full alarm, and found in the stable about
fourscore Horse and five men, which Horse I took all digging through the wall,
and turning them out the men were slain and taken, the stable with hay and
other provision burnt; In the mean time I fell on their out-Guard, in a place
called the Boat-House, which was within Pistol shot of the Castle, which held
out two hours until it was dug through, then they desired quarter for their
lives, wherein was Major Pateson Commander of the Horse, and Major Benskin and
15 Gentlemen more and Troopers, whom I brought to Hereford. This success it
pleased the Lord to give me with little loss, which is very advantageous, and
especially enabling me to perform those commands laid upon me by the right
honorable the Committee for both Kingdoms: And this day in the way as I was
coming to Gloucester to that purpose, some Horse belonging to Goodrich Castle,
way laid me, which were out on a party, when I took the rest monday night*
Goodrich Castle taken.
there being with me Colonel Kirle, and about 12 more, but not so many ready;
The Enemy stood in the way, which we perceiving, gave them a charge, their
number being 14. took and slew 12. and the other two escaping through the
River to the Castle.

For the Forces under the command of Sir Jacob Ashley they are now near
Worcester. I question not but a speedy course will be taken with them which
shall be the constant endeavor of your most thankful Servant,

John Birch.


About the 23 of this instant March we received certain intelligence of the
famous and most happy victory obtained by the Forces of ever to be honored Sir
William Brereton, valiant Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Birch, over the Forces
of Sir Jacob Ashley, which was a very hot and furious fight, our Forces being
twice worsted, The famous fight, and glorious victory obtained against Sir
Jacob Ashley.
but at last, by Gods mighty power and assistance, the victory was given to
ours at least 200 being slain on the place, 3000 totally routed, and at least
2000 Arms taken. The particular description of which most famous fight and
glorious victory, being delivered in a Letter to some Honorable Members of the
Parliament, by a Gentleman of quality and credit, under Sir William Brereton,
and by their order and authority printed and published, I have thought fit, for
the Readers better content and satisfaction, here to insert, which was as
follows:

Honorable Sir;
ACcording to my engagements, A description of the fight at Stow in the Old.
I shall give you an account of the proceedings of our Forces, in reference to
our great Victory at Stow, Sir William Brereton having intelligence of Sir
Jacob Ashleyes march, and being invited by valiant and active Colonel Morgan,
to follow and set upon him, he forthwith marched from Litchfield with about
1000 Horse to Colshell, and from thence through Warwick Town toward Stratford
upon Avon; where Sir William had intelligence that Colonel Morgan was returned
back as far as Cambden, by reason of his intelligence of the crossings and
Counter-marches of Sir Jacob Ashley, Sir Jacob Ashleyes cro^se and crafty
marches put Sir William Brereton to tedious marches.
insomuch that Sir William Brereton was forced (out of his earnest desire to
meet and join with Colonel Morgan, as was mainly intended) to march up and
down, backward and forward, at least 30 miles, to overtake him, and at last did
so, and then being joined, we all marched about a mile, by which time the
Scouts had brought us word that the Enemy was drawn up into a body near Stow
in the Old, at which all our Soldiers greatly rejoiced, being very desirous to
engage. Then we marched (the whole Army) in Battalia, Both Armies are met.
and after we had discovered them also, standing in Battalia, we faced them an
hour before we fought, both sides waiting and longing for day light. Then Sir
Will. Brereton and Colonel Morgan agreed (without any difference) in the
drawing up of the Army, which was ordered as follows; Sir William Brereton led
the right Wing of Horse, which were those that came with him from Litchfield,
and the Gloucestershire men were placed in the left Wing, Colonel Morgan
himself most gallantly led the Van, The signal Word on both sides.
our Word was God be our Guide* the Enemies Word was, Patrick and George. Upon
the first charge the Enemy forced our left Wing to a disorderly retreat, by
over pouring them, so that the victory, at first, seemed somewhat doubtful; but
Sir William Brereton most bravely going on with his right Wing of Horse, The
fight begun.
and at least 200 Firelocks, fiercely charged their left both of Horse and
Foot* and totally routed them. In which brave piece of service undau^ted and
valiant Major Hauksworth had a principal hand, and was a main help utterly
torout and put to flight all the left Wing of the Enemy, The Enemy totally
routed and pursued.
and Colonel Morgan by this time performed his charge so bravely also, and
with so much courage and good success, that having rallied his men up
gallantly again against the Enemy, he put them also to an absolute rout, and
so they pursued them into Stow, killing and wounding many in the Town, The
Lord Ashley taken prisoner.
both Gentlemen and Officers of quality, and in this pursuit Major Hawksworth
his man (as I was credibly informed) took the Lord Ashly prisoner, and all his
foot Officers were then also taken prisoners; Sir Charles Lucas also taken
prisoner.
and Sir Charles Lucas (as was credibly reported) was then also taken in the
fight, but immediately after rescued by a party of Firelocks of the Enemy, and
on his rescue fled into the Wood hard by for hoped safety; but after the fight
our forces searching the wood for straglers found there the said Sir Charles
Lucas, even he who formerly had done the King great service in the North, and
was Governor of Berkley Castle, but now, I say, was taken prisoner again and
put into safe custody.


This most remarkable piece of service being thus successefully performed, Sir
Jacob Ashleyes words to our Soldiers sitting on a Drum.
and Sir Jacob Ashley being taken Captive and wearyed in this fight, and being
ancient (for, old-ages silver hairs had quite covered over his head and beard)
the Soldiers brought him a drum to sit and rest himself upon, who being sat,
he said (as was most credibly informed) unto our Soldiers; Gentlemen, ye may
now sit down and play, for you have done all your work, if you ^all not our
among your selves. Meaning, indeed, that, now he being thus beaten, the King
had never another army in the field in the whole kingdom.

There were taken in this famous fight and glorious Victory, A List of the
prisoners and prizes taken in the battle at Stow in the Old.
Sir Jacob Ashley, alias, Lord Ashley, the General; Sir Charles Lucas, Col.
Corbet, Col. Gerrard, Col. Mouldsworth, Leivtenant-Colonell Broughton; 3.
Majors, 17. Captains, 16. Leiutenants their Marshall General, 5. Cornets, 11.
Ensigns, 3. Quartermasters, the Surgeon, and Sir William Vaughans
Chaplain, 2000, arms at least, and all their Ammunition, Bag and Baggage. A
brave, famous and most seasonable victory it was indeed, and a most hopeful
way and means of a speedy end (by Gods mercy) of all the intestine wars and
bloody broils in the Kingdom; to God alone be all the honor and glory thereof.

About the 26. of this instant March we received advertisement of the full
disbanding of all Sir Ralph Hoptons forces in the West and diverse other
occurrents of our Army there, by Letters received from Truro to the honorable
speaker of the House of Commons; One of which Letters for the Readers better
content and satisfaction, I have here inserted Verbatim, as it was printed and
published, which was as follows.

SIR,
IN my last I gave you an account of the beginning to disband the Lord Hoptons
Army, I can now satisfy you of the conclusion of that great work, this day
having put a period thereunto, except two troops of the Princes Regiment, under
the Command of Sir Francis Mackworth, which by reason of the darkness of the
night could not be conveniently dispatched, and so put off till to morrow at
seven of the clock, All the enemy to depart from Truro.
by nine it will be done; and presently after, Proclamation is to be made for
the Enemy, or any belonging unto them, immediately to depart from Truro, and all
those Ports, to be with the convoy to morrow night, or else to be taken as
Spies, and proceeded against accordingly. I have bin present at the disbanding
of these Forces, from the first to the last [except as aforesaid] and never did
see a thing done with so much civility on both sides, The extraordinary fair
carriage of the Soldiers.
and not the least appearance of insulting of ours, as if we had never bin at
variance each with other, not a reproachful word used nor the value of two
pence taken from any man by the Soldiers of this Army, though the country
people are apt enough, (if they have opportunity and the enemies Soldiers
straggle) to revenge former injuries, but the convoy (so long as the Soldiers
keep with them) suffer not the least prejudice to befall them, the number of
Brigades in all that have bin disbanded are nine, viz. the French Brigade
consisting of three Regiments; The 9. Brigades that were disbanded.
the Lord Wentworths Brigade consisting of three Regiments; Sir James Smiths
Brigade consisting of three Regiments; the Lord Clevelands Brigade consisting
of four Regiments; Major General Webbs of three Regiments, the Lord Hoptons
Brigade commanded by Colonel Rovil; the Lord Gorings Brigade of five
Regiments; the Princes Lifeguard consisting of nine troops, and 700. men armed;
Sir Richard Greenvils Reformadoes, the men that are dismounted are proper and
lusty men: Our Army to march Eastward.
Orders are given out for the Army to face about, and march Eastward, part of
it moves to morrow, the residue on Saturday, except two or three Regiments that
are to stay behind for the blocking up of Pendennis and the mount; the Castle
of Pendennis was summoned yesterday, but those within gave a peremptory answer
of refusal; and Master Arundel bears the name of Governor, but Sir John
Digby, sir Henry Kilegrew, Colonel Slaughter, Colonel Sir Abraham Chipman,
and some others of desperate Fortunes overruled the Gentleman, and make him
govern and command to serve their own ends, though it be to ruin himself.
On Wednesday the General sent this Bearer in haste with a Letter to Saint
Maws, who imbarqued himself there and went three or four Leagues to Sea, to
the Parliament ships and acquainted them with a Frigot of Dunkirk that lay in
the Harbor at Falmouth and much annoyed our men at Penny-com-quick, A Dunkerk
Frigot taken by our ships.
a place of good shelter for our men that lie against the Castle. So this
morning between one and two of the clock, a Frigot of ours put into the
Harbor, being Moonlight, had the honor to be saluted with twenty pieces of
Cannon from the Castle, but got in without any prejudice, and hauled the
Dunkirk, who instead of yielding gave two broad sides, but our Vessel presently
made up, and after a little dispute Boarded Her, put the Irish to the sword,
preserved the rest, and have them Prisoners a broad. It is a fine Vessel
belonging to Brown Bushel, commanded by Captain Lewis and will be of singular
use to clear the Harbor, if any Vessel of the Kings happen to come in, having
the benefit of Saint Mawes on the one side, and at the mouth of the Harbor,
Hilford Castle taken.
the assistance of Hilford Fort, which was this day surrendered to us, wherein
were twenty and six pieces of Ordnance; so their strong Castle of Pendennis is
of little use at Sea, and by Land of no great prejudice, considering the narrow
neck of Land it stands upon, and the Line that may be drawn from Sea to Sea,
and may be defended with as many men as are in the Castle.

Leiutenant Colonel Jngoldsby going to view the Castle, Livetenant Colonel
Ingoldsby slain by Musket shot.
received a shot from some Musketeers of the Enemies that were behind the
Mud-wals* of which he died within three hours, being a valiant and stout man,
Major Cobbet also was shot in the Arm, but not dangorously.

This is all the account time would give me leave to present you with
concerning the Army, of these parts, which I thought fit to send this Bearer
purposely withal, that you may be certainly informed of our condition, adding
this, that about an hundred with their Arms came this day* from the Mount to
Truro, the head quarters, many took up Arms with us, the rest went to their
homes.

I am Sir your Servant, J. R.
Truro, March 19. 1645.
The Messenger staying till this morning, I can now satisfy you, that the two
Troops that remained of the last night, are this morning disbanded: I have no
other news to write, but to morrow the Generals Army marches toward Exeter.

Truro, March 20 1645. at 4 in the afternoon.

And March 27 the House of Parliament in way of bounden gratitude to almighty
God, for this great mercy of the thus reducing of well-nigh all Cornwall to
their obedience, and that also of subduing and overthrowing of Sir Jacob
Ashleyes Army, and thereby obtaining a most happy and hopeful end of our
troubles, A day of solemn Thanksgiving for the forementioned great mercies to
the King.
they having first invited the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
most famous City of London, to hear two Sermons that were to be preached
before them at Christ's Church in London: In answer thereof, the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council aforesaid, invited both Houses of Parliament to a
Dinner on the same day of Thanksgiving: At which invitation Alderman Foukes
delivered himself, as from the whole City, to the House, making a Speech unto
them; and Master Speaker answered the same by command of the House in a
congratulatory way, much affection and amity being expressed mutually on both
sides.

About the 28 instant we also received certain information by Letters out of
the West, Our noble Generals advance to Exeter.
of our most noble Generals advance toward the City of Exeter, and concerning
the taking of Pouldram-Fort near Exeter, and of Inch-House also by Colonel
Welden, the Governor of Plymouth, the particulars whereof were in substance as
follows;

That about March 21. 1645. the said Colonel Welden having summoned
Inch-House, where the Enemy kept a strong Garrison; they returned a scornful
Answer: Whereupon the Colonel sent 60 Muketeers to keep them from coming out,
and appointed 60 more to follow with a Demy-Culverin: Inch-House surrendered.
But upon the landing of the first, they within begged Quarter for their lives,
and so surrendered all unto the Colonel. There was taken in that Garrison 90
Muskets, 4 Minions, and 6 Barrels of Powder. And by the same Letter we were
likewise certified of the surrender of Pouldram strong Fort, Pouldram Fort
taken.
with 18 Pieces of Ordnance in it, and much Ammunition, with other Provisions
good store* which was thus yielded up to valiant Sir Hard^esse Waller, those in
the Garrison having had (in both of them) fair Conditions to depart to their
own homes, upon engagement not to take up Arms any more against the
Parliament.

And about the 30 of this instant March we received intelligence by Letters
from that brave and active Committee of Shrewsbury, High-Archall surrendered to
the Parliament.
of their great and good success in the taking of that very strong and
considerable Garrison of High-Archall, after a short siege; and having by
Grenades and other great shot battered them for the space of nine hours
together, without intermission, it being, I say, a place of great strength, and
well fortified, and having a large deep moat about it, and in regard of the
situation of it, not thought feazable to be carried by storm; but by the
blessing of God and our continual plying of our great shot and Grenades,
which had done great execution among them, in short space we caused them to
come to a Parley, whereat it was concluded, that the Horse, all but 40 should
march away without Arms, that the Foot should all leave their Arms behind them,
and that they should leave all their Ammunition and Provision, (of which there
was great plenty) behind them, and they were to have a Convoy to Worcester, the
place they had made choice of to go unto. There marched out 212 Soldiers and
Officers, out of this Garrison. And thus Shropshire, by Gods great mercy, and
the indefatigable industry, care and valor, of their Committee is now well
cleared from all their open Enemies.

And much about the foresaid time we were certainly informed that this most
gallant and active Committee of Shrewsbury, Bridge-North Town taken by
Shrewsbury forces.
not yet resting immediately after they had thus taken in High Archall, as
aforesaid, sent out a party of Horse and Foot upon a design against
Bridge-North, but the length of the march, and the weariness of the Soldier
hindered them, so as the Town took the alarm before they could refresh
themselves a little, and go on in the design, as was intended; yet
notwithstanding the next day they summoned it. Colonel Billingsley slain in
the Storm.
Colonel Billingsley, who commanded in chief in the Town, would give no Answer
to the Summons, and Colonel Howard, who commanded the Castle, gave a flat
denial; whereupon in the afternoon, having set out three Posts, the brave
Salopians resolved to storm: One Post was assigned to Colonel Goulden, another
to Major Brain, and the third to Captain Hickson, who, at the warning given,
fell all three on with such a courage, and undaunted resolution, that they
stormed the Town, killed Colonel Billingsley in the heat of the storm,
together with some others, and took diverse prisoners, the rest of the Gentry
fled into the Castle, the North Gate Fort also stood some hot dispute, but was
likewise gained, and so the Town taken wholly into their possession; and in its
proper place we shall certify the taking in of the Castle also, which yet a
while stood out very obstinately against them.

Portland castle surrendered.
And much about the foresaid time we heard for certain out of the West, that
Portland Castle was surrendered; the Enemy within it having had liberty granted
them to go to their own homes, leaving all their Arms, and the Castles
Ammunition behind them.

And upon the 31 of this instant March we were certainly informed by a Letter
out of the West, of the taking of Exmouth Fort, the particulars whereof were as
follows in this ensuing Letter to Colonel Ceeley.

Noble Colonel;
Exmouth-Fort, near Exeter. taken.
I Beseech you to excuse my not giving you an account of the business of
Exmouth Fort till now,which has been occasioned by reason of the sudden
commands of Sir Hardresse Waller, laid upon me, to advance near the City of
Exeter. And although I know you are well acquainted with our proceedings, yet I
conceive it my duty to advertise you of our condition. The 14 instant, I
summoned the Fort, and took possession of it the next day: I have sent you
enclosed what provision was left in it. The Governor thereof, Lieutenant
Colonel Arundell desires to serve you for Ireland. Sir, we are now within
Musket shot of Mount-Hadford, and exchanging shot every minute, and God has
pleased to honor yours with the Frontier Quarters. As yet nothing has
happened that will not speak us

Colonel Ceeleys.


The forementioned note of what was left in Exmouth Fort, was 13 great iron
Pieces, 2 small Drakes, 1 of brass, 3 Murderers, unmounted, 72 Muskets, 29
Collers of Bandaleers, 10 Pikes, 10 Halberts and Partisans, 12 Barrels of
Powder, 2 bundles of Match, 1 barrel of Pease, 5 Hogsheads of Bread, 1
Hogshead of Beef, 5 Hogsheads of Salt, 1 Butt of Beer, etc.

April. 1646.
About the beginning of the Month of April, 1646. we received certain and
most welcome intelligence of the surrender of Dennington Castle, Dennington
Castle taken.
about which valiant Colonel Dalbeir having continued playing with his
Grenades into the Castle, with much fury, it at last procured this good
success, That Sir John Boys the Governor thereof, finding no hope of help or
relief, and perceiving what great danger the Castle was in; at last he agreed
to surrender it up to the said noble Colonel, for the use of the King and
Parliament. And so the Enemy immediately came forth of the Castle, having
liberty (according to their Articles) to depart to Oxford, and our Forces took
present possession of it. And thus this pernicious nest and den of Royal
Robbers and abusers of those parts of the Country, was now at last happily
emptied and cleared, and the Castle restored to its right owner again, that
most worthy and truly religious Gentleman, Master John Packer, whose formerly
it had been.

And April 2. the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, prudently taking
notice of the great confluence and resort of Papists, Malignant Officers and
Soldiers of fortune, and such as have borne Arms against the Parliament of
England, from the Enemies Garrisons and Quarters unto the Cities of London and
Westminster, and other parts within the Lines of Communication: Do for the
prevention of such inconveniences as may thereby arise, think fit to order, and
it is hereby ordered by the said Lords and Commons, That all Papists
whatsoever, and all Officers and Soldiers of fortune, and other persons that
have borne Arms against the Parliament of England, not being under restraint,
do before the sixth day of April, 1646. depart out of the Cities of London and
Westminster, and Lines of Communication: And if any such person shall continue
within the said Lines after that time, such person is hereby declared a Spy,
and shall be apprehended, imprisoned, and proceeded against as a Spy, according
to the Rules of War. And the said Lords and Commons do further orden, That all
such persons do forbear, upon the penalty aforesaid, to come within the said
Lines, without License under the hands of the Committee appointed for
Compositions at Goldsmiths-Hall. And the Committee of the Militia of London,
and the Sub-Committees in their several limits respectively, are hereby
required to keep strict Guards and Watches, and cause frequently searches to be
made, and to take care for the due execution of this Order. Provided that this
Order, nor any thing therein contained shall extend to any person or persons
who shall obtain license under the hands of the Committee of Goldsmiths-Hall,
to continue within the limits aforesaid. An Order of both Houses of Parliament
for restraint of Papists and other Delinquents from coming to the Cities of
London and Westminster. An Order also concerning the Kings private coming to
London.
Provided that this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to any person or persons who came in to the Parliament before the first of June
last 1645. and are cleared by both Houses of Parliament from their Delinquency.
Provided also that no Peer of this Realm shall resort unto the Committee for
license to continue within the limits aforesaid, but shall repair only to the
House of Peers for their said License. This Order to continue for one Month
after the sixth of April, and no longer.

And it was also further ordered and resolved on by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, That in case the King should (contrary to the advice of the
Parliament, then, already given unto him) come, or attempt to come within the
Lines of Communication, That then the Committee of the Militia of London shall
have power, and are hereby enjoined, upon advice had with the Committee of
Lords and Commons for the Army, to raise such forces as they shall think
necessary, to prevent any tumults that may arise by his coming, and to
suppress any that shall happen, and to apprehend and secure all such as shall
come with him, and to prevent resort unto him, and to secure his own Person
from danger.

About the sixth of April we received certain good news by a Letter written
to renowned Major General Brown, A brave defeat given to the Kings Horse near
Farringdon.
of a brave defeat given to the Kings Horse about Farringdon, not far from
Oxford, which Letter was read in the Honorable House of Commons, and a Copy
whereof, for the Readers better content and satisfaction therein, I have here
inserted, as it was printed and published, which was as follows:

Honorable Sir;
THe last night I had intelligence the Enemy was drawn out of Oxford, and gave
out, that they did intend to plunder Newnham, wherefore I sent to Colonel
Betsworth, to desire him to draw his Horse toward Abingdon, which he did; but
early this morning we had intelligence, that six hundred Horse marched out of
Oxon through Conmer and Fisield; whereupon I commanded forth our Horse and
Dragoons, and marched with Colonel Betsworth after the Enemy, and it pleased
God to direct us, that we found them at Farringdon, and quartered at the Towns
thereabouts; We had gallant hunting them from place to place over the hills, and
pursued them into Farringdon Town, and afterward we discovered a good party of
about two hundred, between the two Coxwels, who ran down into a Meadow, and
would have parlyed to ^urrender their Horse and Arms, but our ^^n fell on them,
and took them all, save very few that escaped: Afterward we gleaned up diverse
more in several places, so that I am confident, that party is so broken, that
the King will scarce be able to get such a body of Horse again in the
Kingdom; We took above 300 Horse, and almost as many Prisoners, there was
brought in this evening about 250 unto Abingdon, the Major and most of the
Officers of Sir William Comptons Regiment belonging to Banbury are prisoners,
it was esteemed the best Regiment the King had, and the news of their
engagement being reported at Oxford this day, that they would come off with
honor, or be lost, they sadly replied, if that Regiment were lost, they were
all undone.

There was but one man slain on our part, and not many of the Enemies.

Sir, your most humble and faithful servant, Geo. Pain.
Abington, April 3. 1646.

About the 10 of this instant April, Letters came from his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfaxes Quarters, from several Gentlemen of credit to the Committee
of both Kingdoms, and by other informations from thence, that the Articles for
the surrender of the City and Garrison of Exeter, were now fully agreed on, and
four Hostages given for performance of the same, to be surrendered into the
hands of the Parliament, on Monday April 13. 1646. and as a farther firm
pledge and assurance hereof, they immediately, upon the mutual giving of
Hostages, surrendered three of their strong Forts into the renowned Generals
hands, viz. Saint Downs Fort, on the North side; Mount-Rat-Ford, on the South
side, and a very strong House in Saint Tho. P^rish, on the West side; Treaty
about the surrender of the City of Exeter to the Parliament. Three strong Forts
already delivered up to the General.
all these were surrendered on* Thursday, April the 9. the maine substance of
the Articles was, That all within the Garrison (that would) were to march away
on April 13. being Monday, both Horse and Foot, with Arms, and to have a Convoy
either to Pendennis, or Saint* Michaels-Mount, or to Oxford, and to nominate
which of these three places they would go unto when they marched out. And those
that would, to have Passes to go beyond Sea, or laying down their Arms, to go
to their own homes, upon an engagement not to take up Arms again against the
Parliament. All the nobility, (as some of these were there) Gentry and Clergy,
in the City, to have liberty to march out with the Garrison Soldiers, with
their Horses, Arms, and their own proper goods: Justification of the large
Articles of conditions agreed unto, upon the surrender of Exeter.
One Article was mainly insisted on, concerning the Cathedral in Exeter, that,
forfooth, it might not be defaced, which was also so far agreede on. Now, if
any should imagine these (and the other) conditions to be too large for such
enemies; Let them but weigh the considerablenesse of the place, and how long it
might have held out, withal its advantages, and it may easily balance all the
rest; Besides that, now it is gained with the loss of so little bloodshed, and
in so short a time, since the Army returned out of Cornwall; That now also
upon the matter, all the West is cleared and settled in a peaceable posture; and
how considerable this is, that now the army may immediately advance and take
the opportunity to clear up these Eastern-parts, which in all probability, will
(by Gods blessing) be effected suddenly, and (we hope) an end put to these
miserable and most unhappie wars, The noble General, presently upon this,
with part of his Army, advanced now to Barnstable, which place, was of no
small Concernment for the full settling, of the p^ace of those parts, whereof
more in its due place.

Ruthin-Castle surrendered to the Parliament.
About the 14. of this instant April we received certain intelligence by a
Letter from that most faithful, valiant and Victorious Commander, Colonel
Mitton to the honorable Speaker of the House of Commons, concerning the
surrender of Ruthin castle to him, for the use of the King and Parliament; A
Copy of which Letter, for the Readers better content and fuller satisfaction,
I have here thought fit to insert, as it was printed and published by authority
of Parliament, which was as follows:

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THe Reducing of this Castle of Ruthin has cost me more time and Ammunition,
than I expected when I first laid Siege to it: At last having a Mine almost in
a readiness to spring, and Batteries prepared for a Demi-Can^n and a Culverin
to play upon it; It was this day agreed to be Surrendered upon the Conditions in
the enclosed Articles, which I was willing to accept, having perfect
Information by some that escaped out of the Castle, that there was in it
Provision upon sufficient for two months longer; which now I find to be true:
And if I should have forced it, I must have hazarded many men, and made the
place unserviceable, which is of very great use to the Re^^ement of this
Country, it being the most convenient place for a Garrison in all North Wales,
as things now stand with us. Yesterday bef^^e the break of day, a party of the
Enemy out of Denbigh Castle, being about sixscore, and thirty mounted
Firelocks, fell upon Captain Richard Price his Quarters, within two miles of
this Town; but be was vigilant, and his ^couts performed their duty so well,
that they were drawn into the field before they came upon them, which gave him
opportunity to avoid them, A brave defeat given to Denbigh forces by Colonel
Mitton.
and convey the Alarm to this Town; And thereupon Colonel Carter with a
standing Horse-guard, which we are saine to keep in the field constantly to
secure our Out quarters; and C^ptaine Simkies with my own Troop, which was
then upon the Guard in this Town, drew out and fell between them and Denbigh,
and within half a mile of their Garrison met with them, and charged them ^o
gallantly, that they broke in upon them, killed seven of them (as is said) upon
the place; and in the pursuit, took four Captains, one Lieutenant, two
Cornets, diverse Troopers, and about forty Horse, with the loss of one man of
our side. The Siege at Hoult has of late been if great difficulty and hazard
to those fe^ men I have there: For the drawing off of the Cheshire Firelocks
from that Service, without any privity, gave the Enemy an advantage to burn
the Guard the Firelocks kept (which cost the Country much to fortify) and
above forty dwelling Houses more in the Town, and exposed my men (who lay in
open Qnarters, and were fewer in number than the Enemy within were) to their
power, which necessitated my men to be upon continual duty. Upon the first of
April the Enemy sallied out and fell upon Major Sadlers Quarters, resolving to
put all my men in that House to the Sword, which they had been like to effect,
had not a Guard which was placed in the Mo^^it, Captain Cottingham slain.
erected by us three days before relieved them: In this storm I lost six
men, and fourteen wounded; if the Enemy there were killed their Commander
Captain Cottingham a Papist, a Lie^tenant, and two more, and many wounded:
There has been never a day* since, but they sallied out constantly twice or
thrice a day, and as constantly beaten i^. This service, and the furnishing of
such Garrisons which are reduced, occasions the expense of very much Powder and
Match; and therefore, I humbly desire, that the Honorable House will be please
to grant, that I may have a hundred Barrels of Powder, and four or five
hundred Firelocks sent me, and that some course may be perscribed to convey it
down speedily; the carriage and Convoy of the last Powder I had, cost above
half as much as the Powder was worth. And further, that they, will be pleased
to appoint a Governor for this Castle, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Mason, is a
very faithful active and godly Gentleman, and the most knowing man in his
profession that we have in these parts, having been a Soldier, above twenty
years, and lost his command in Ireland, because he refused to bear Arms
against the Parliament and if this place were worthy of him, I should make bold
to recommend him to their consideration. This nevertheless, I leave to their
Wisdoms to determine, and rest.

Your very humble Servant, THO. MITTON
Ruthin the 8. of April. 1646.

In that brave defeat given by Colonel Mittons forces, Prisoners and prizes
taken at Denbigh and Ruthin.
to their Denbigh Enemies, were taken these prisoners and prizes following.
Taken prisoners, Captain Win, Captain Hugh Morris, Captain Morgan,
Captain Pickering, 1 Lieutenant, 2 Cornets, diverse Gentlemen and
Common-Souldiers, 40. Horse, diverse Arms, 7. slain upon the place. In Ruthin
we took all their Arms and Ammunition, Bag and Baggage, and all the Irish
therein were left to be disposed of by us according to the Ordinance of
Parliament. Also valiant and faithful Sir Trenor Williams (as we were credibly
informed by letters out of Wales) did bravely set upon 100. of the Enemies
near Ragland, The Raglanders soundly beaten by Sir Trevor Williams.
which belonged to the crooked now made Lord Charles Sommerset, Governor of
Ragland-castle, where, I say, valiant Sir Trevor routed all the said party,
took 45. prisoners, whereof one Captain and 10. other Officers and Gentlemen,
30. Horse, 20. Muskets, 12. Firelocks, 14. slain on the place, diverse sorely
wounded the rest f^ed and dispersed. And 2. days after this fight there came
in unto Sir Trevor Williams (as we were certainly informed by letters from
thence) from Ragland-castle, Many Gentlemen of Wales came out of Ragland castle
to Sir Trevor and submitted to the Parliament.
2. Colonels, 2. Lieutenant Colonells, 3. Lievtenants, 3. Cornets, and 11.
other Horsemen with them, all Gentlemen of the upper-Countries, desiring to
submit themselves to the Parliament, upon the Reading of which Letters
aforesaid from Colonel Mitton, the House ordered (according to his desire)
that Lieutenant Colonel Mason should be Governor of Ruthin-castle; And Master
Fog the Minister (a very faithful and active Gentleman for the Parliament ever
since these wars began) who brought the Letter, Master Fog a Minister
rewarded for his Loyalty to the Parliament.
was called into the House of Commons, and had 50. l. given him for his pains
in bringing the same, and for his other brave services in the field.

The strong Garrison of the City of Exeter surrendered to the Parliament. The
first letter.
About the 16. of this instant April we received full assurance of the clear
and total surrender of the strong Garrison of the City of Exeter by Letters
out of the West a Copy of two whereof I have here thought fit for the Readers
better content and satisfaction to insert, which were as follows:

Sir, Having been employed in the agitating of the treaty for the surrendering
of Exeter, I might crave pardon if I give you not so full an account of our
proceedings here as I desire. We had to do with Lawyers and Civilians who
lengthened out our debate by their niceties, so that the treaty ended not till
the day of the writing hereof, when they finished the Articles, and agreed to
march forth on Monday, next. The conditions were honorable, viz. in brief; To
march with Arms, Colors flying, Drums beating and Bullets, to Oxford, and the
Cornish into Cornwall. I will not trouble you with particulars, but send you
the Articles by the next; Hostages were delivered for the performance of things
promised, and for farther assurance unto us, 3. strong Forts were delivered up
unto us in hand, as has been touched before. The Townsmen were very glad of
the agreement. The General is this night come to Tiverton and intends, to
morrow to be before Barnstable and to summon it. The treaty was absolutely
concluded yesterday in Exeter; we sat up night and day about it. I will not
trouble you any more till afurther opportunity, but remain

Sir, Your most humble servant,
April 9. late at night. Columb-John House. Postscript. At Market-jew, near
the Mount we took lately of the Mountmen, 60 prisoners, the most of that
Garrison. Also a Captain in Pendennis came-off unto us with 80. men more. We
understand that in Pendennis they have nothing but Salt-beefe tainted, and and
that they cannot subsist long; They have but little bread, and their Wine
almost spent, The second Letter.
we hope well shortly of both places.




The other Letter was this.

Sir;
Though I have but little News, yet I could not omit this opportunity of
sending to you; The manner of their marching out of the City of Exeter.
we entered the City of Exeter on Monday last, according to the Articles. Sir
Jacob Berckley the Governor, with about 2000, being marched forth, 700,
whereof being Cornish, as soon as they were out of the City gates faced
Westward and resolving for their own homes, cried out thus, Every man to his
own home, Every man to his own home, and so laying down their arms departed
accordingly, the like resolution had most of the rest, so that Sir Jacob was
like to have but a small remnant to do his Majesty any service at Oxford; The
Princes Highness went forth with them, leaving behind them in the City, at least
3. Months provision, 150. barrells of powder, about 1500. Muskets, and above
40. pieces of Ordnance.


About the 18. of this instant April came certain intelligence out of the
West by letters to London of the surrendering of the Town and Castle of
Barnstable into the Parliaments hands, Branstable Town and C^stle surrendered.
with all the Arms and Ammunition therein (much upon the same terms and
Articles which were granted to Exeter) by Sir Allen Apsley, Governor thereof.
And shortly after also we understood of the surrendering of Saint
Michaels-Mount in Cornwall, Sir Michaels-Mount surrendered.
that inpregnable and almost inaccessable strong fort, whereof Sir Arthur
Basset was Governor; who, with the rest, that would, and were therein, had
liberty to depart into the Island of Silly. In this Mount were taken an 100.
barrells of Powder, 500. Muskets, 100. Pikes, 30. Pieces of Ordinances, 3.
Murdering Pieces, 80. Tun of Wine, with store of other provisions.

And about the 20. Titbury-Castle surrendered.
instant we had certain News of the surrender of Titbury-castle, a place of
much Consequence and strength also, and which will contribute much to the
reducing of Litchfield-close; which said Castle was surrendered also on fair
conditions to the content of the Garrison-Souldiers thereof. And much about the
same time we were most certainly informed of the surrender of Aburisthwait to
Colonel Powell (Commander Aburisthwait Castle in Wales surrendered.
in Chief under renowned Major General Laughorne) by Colonel Whitney,
Governor thereof; upon very fair terms and conditions, as was witnessed by
valiant and victorious Major General Laughornes own Letter to the Parliament.
And we had farther information of the surrender of Dunstar-castle in the West,
Dunstar-Castle surrendered.
which was yielded up to renowned Colonel Blake, the brave Governor of
Taunton, upon very fair and honorable terms; by noble Sir Thomas Fairfaxes
example of Clemency and Mercy; Our WesternArmie advanced toward Oxford.
Which Castle, was surrendered up for the use of King and Parliament, by Sir
Francis Windham, then Governor of Dunstar-Castle; as was also certified to the
Parliament by Colonel Blakes own Letter.

About the 24. of this instant April our Western army was advanced backward
and come toward Oxford for the beleaguring thereof and forming of a Seige round
about it; And about this time a part of our said Army having already besieged
the Garrison of Woodstock, Woodstock-Garrison surrendered.
and lain now before it some short time battering that brave and ancient
Manor house with our Ordnance, and the besieged considering there was no hope
of relief to be expected, our other forces lying also so close about Oxford
that they durst not stir out; It was now therefore, at length surrendered to
Colonel Rainsborough upon very fair terms and honorable Articles of
agreement from the said Valiant Colonel and those other Courageous Commanders
who jointly adventured their lives for the Service of the State: For, the
besieged were to depart thence to Oxford, and to leave all their Ammunition and
furniture of war behind them, and only the Officers permitted to have their
Swords along with them.

And about the 28. instant we received the certain intelligence of the
surrender of Bridge-North-castle into the hands of the Bridge North Castle
surrendered.
brave and most active Shropshire forces upon fair conditions and articles of
accord, the Common Soldiers therein to march away with their hands in their
Pockets, and the Officers only with their Swords, Sir Robert Howard the
Governor and 3. other Knights with their Horse and 2. Servants a piece; But,
one Latham an arch Villain for Malignancie, and who had been the maine cause
of burning the Town, not long before, was justly delivered up to the justice
of the Parliament to suffer most worthily for such a most base and abominable
scelerous fact. They left behind them in the Castle, at least 6. weeks
provision a Demi-cannon, with other Ordnance, at least 500. Arms and 50.
Horse, The place was a piece of great strength; there were within the Castle
about 400. The just praise of the most faithful and active Committee of
Shrewsbury.
fighting men, the besiegers not above 700. in all. Thus have we often heard of
the brave services of those gallant Salopaons and even incomparable actions of
that active and successful Committee of Shrewsbury for the good of their
Country and kingdom; To God be all the glory and praise who thus, still,
Crowns us with victories, and thereby thus encompasses us with songs of
deliverance.

And much about the foresaid time we were certainly given to understand by
Letters to the Parliament from Colonel Rainsborough that the Duke of Richmond;
The Duke of Lenox and others come in unto the Parliament.
the Earl of Lindsey, the Kings Cup Bearer; Sir William Fleetwood, the Kings
Standard Bearer, and Knight Martial, Sir Edward Sydenham, and Master Carew of
the Bedchamber were come in unto him, casting themselves upon the mercy of
the Parliament; whereupon the House presently ordered that they all should be
committed prisoners to Warwick-Castle.

And upon the 29. of this instant April, being the solemn Fast Day of this
Month, after both the Sermons before the Lords in the Abbey at Westminster, and
the Commons Sermons in MargretsChurch, were ended; The House of Commons sitting
a while in Parliament, received certain intelligence of the Kings escaping out
of Oxford, The King escaped out of Oxford, in a disguised manner.
in a disguised manner between Sunday-night and Munday-morning, with 2. others
in his Company, whereof Master A^bhurnh^un was one, who was pretended to be
the Kings Master, and the King and the other party, must be Ashburnhams
Servants; and the King himself (as it was credibly and Constantly related)
must go along under the name of Harry, Master Ashburnhams man; and thus I say,
these 3. went forth of Oxford together, the King also carrying a cloak-bag or
portmantle behind him on his horse, like a Servingman indeed, but whether or
which way he went was not then known; for (as it was reported) the better to
conceal the way of his departure* there went out 3. at every part of the City,
at the same instant time, that so, none should be able to discover in which of
the Companies the King was. It seemed (as, since, we heard) his Lords in Oxford
were desirous of his departure, hoping thereby, to have the beter conditions
for themselves, looking more, it seemed, at their own safety than at the
Kings preservation, who hereby may plainly see, whose interests they have all
this while driven on. Ah, good Reader, see here, and seriously consider in thy
soul, with fear and trembling and amazement, how truly, how justly, God most
wise, most righteous, has made good that word of his. 1* Sam. 2. 30.
Those that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed. O, that we would faithfully and fruitfully lay these remarkable
examples thereof to our hearts, and walk answerably for the time to come.

Now upon the 4 of May 1646. May. 1646.
so soon as ever our most noble General had received certain intelligence of
his Majesty's departure ou^ of Oxford, as abovesaid, he immediately, by his
Letters and Messengers, informed the Parliament thereof, giving them farther to
understand the great confidence (though mightily mistaken, as a^on you shall
plainly understand) of those that came out of Oxford to his Excellency, The
Parliament informed of the Kings departure out of Oxford toward London.
and their constant affirmations (as those that saw but the shallow superficies
of the business only) that the King was certainly come into or near unto
London, upon which information the Commons in Parliament had much debate and
the House of Peers also the like, and considering the danger that might ensue
by concealing and hiding the Kings person, they appointed a Committee forthwith
to prepare and draw up something to be published touching all such as should
harbor or conceal the harboring of the King; and accordingly an Order was
drawn up by this Committee, reported to the House, and assented unto by the
House of Peers, and likewise passed by them, and ^y Order of both Houses to be
published throughout London and Westminster, by beat of Drum or sound of
Trumpet, which was accordingly performed, the said Order being to this effect:

ORdered, Both Houses of Parliaments Order published throughout London and
Westminster, touching concealing the King.
that it be declared, and it is hereby declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, That what person soever shall harbor or conceal, or
know of the harboring or concealing of the Kings person, and shall not reveal
it immediately to the Speakers of both Houses, shall be proceeded against as a
Traitor to the Common Wealth, forfeit his whole Estate, and die without mercy.

The Parliament also about this foresaid time seriously considering that a
former Ordinance for putting out of the Lines of Communication, The Parliaments
providence for the welfare of the City of London.
all Papists, Officers and Soldiers of fortune, that have come out of the
Kings Quarters, was now expired, and the danger that might happen by permitting
such to abide within the City of London, no whit slacking, but rather
increasing: An Ordinance was therefore read the first and second time, and
committed to a Committee for the continuance of the said former Ordinance for a
Month longer, and that all such Papists and Soldiers should remove themselves
^wenty miles distant from the City. An Ordinance was likewise read and assented
to, giving power to the Militia of London, to search within twenty miles of
London, for all Papists, Malignants, and other suspected persons, and to secure
and disarm them, and likewise to search for Arms, and this power to continue
for twenty days longer.

And now upon the sixth of this instant May, the much expected news of the
Kings discovery and place of abode, was by a most excellent Letter (sent to the
Commissioners of both Kingdoms, and so to the Parliament) brought to London,
which Letter, for the eminency and excellency thereof, and for the just honor
of our ever most worthily deserving loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland, I
have here thought fit in the first place to set forth and show to the honest
and godly Reader, for his just joy, comfort and content, which was as follows:

The Letter from the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, to the
Commissioners of both Houses, concerning his Majesty's coming to the Scottish
Army. Dated at Southwell, May the 5.
Right Honorable,
THe discharging of our selves of the duty we owe to the Kingdom of England, A
Copy of the ^etter from the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, to the
Commissioners of both Houses, concerning His Majesty's coming to the Scotch
Army.
to you as Commissioners from the same, moves us to acquaint you with the Kings
coming into our Army this morning; which having overtaken us unexpectedly, has
filled us with amazement, and made us like men that dream. We cannot think
that He could have been so unadvised in his Resolutions, is to have cast
himself upon us, without a real intention to give full satisfaction to both
Kingdoms, in all their just and reasonable Demands, in all those things that
concern Religion and Righteousness; whatsoever be His disposition or
resolution, you may be assured, That we shall never entertain any thought, nor
correspond with any purpose, nor countenance me any endeavors that may in any
circumstance incroach upon our League and Covenant, or weaken the union or
confidence between the Nations: That Union, unto our Kingdom was the matter of
many prayers; and as nothing was more joyful to us than to have it set on
foot, so hitherto have we thought nothing too dear to maintain it; and we trust
to walk with such faithfulness and truth in this particular, that as we have
the testimony of a good conscience within our selves, so you and all the world
shall see, that we mind your interest with as much integrity and care as our
own, being confident you will entertain no other thoughts of us.

Signed by the Warrant and Command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland. LOTHIAN.
Southwel, May 5. 1646.
For the Right Honorable the Commissioners of the Parliament of England.

In the next place I shall give the Reader a summary narrative The manner of
the Kings coming into the Scots Army, and discovering himself unto them.
of the manner of the discovery of His Majesty to most noble and renowned
General Lesley Earl of Leven, as it was related to the Commissioners of
Scotland by the Secretary of the Scots Army, and printed and published by
authority, which was as follows:

A Messenger being come from the foresaid noble General of the Scots Army,
being one of the Secretaries there, came to the Scots Commissioners at
Westminster, and thus related the ^ings coming in unto them: The first time
that we could hear where his Majesty was after he came out of Oxford, was on
Saturday the second of May instant, and then he was within some two miles of
London, as is told the Army, and on Monday night, May the fourth, His Majesty
lay in Stamford upon a bed with his Clothes on all night, and that morning
passed two of the Parliaments Guards, but could not be known, because His Beard
was shaved, and His Lock cut, or neatly put up.

On Tuesday morning His Majesty came to Southwell to the Scots. Army, and
General Leven having intelligence that His Majesty was come into their
Garrison, for, some Officers that were upon the Guard that saw Him, had some
suspicion of Him that it was the King, who making it known, a search was made
three hours before they could hear where he was, and about noone His Majesty
sent to General Leven, letting him know he was there, (and that he was then
with the French Agent) and that he would cast Himself upon them, whereupon
there was advertisement given to the Scots Commissioners of His Majesty's being
there, who with General Leven went to His Majesty, and caused him to remove
his Q^arters to Kellam, Lieutenant General David Lesleys Quarters, where there
was much amazement to see into how low a condition His Majesty was brought.

General Leven had some Treaty with His Majesty about the surrender of
Newarke, desiring Him to give Order to Bellassis the Governor for the delivery
thereof, and His Majesty offered to surrender it to them, but General Leven
answered, that to remove all jealousies they must yield to have it to be
surrendered to the Parliament of England: and his Majesty was prevailed with to
send to the Governor to give Order for the surrender thereof to the Parliament
of England accordingly, which was agreed wednesday the 6 instant by the
Commissioners, as may appear by the following Articles; After which agreement
the Scots Forces (being willing to ease the Country thereabouts, who have been
so long charged with so great an Army) with all cheerfulness and willingness,
removed their Quarters more North ward, the King still remaining with Lieut.
General David Lesley, and care being taken for fresh Clothes, and other
refreshments for His Majesty: and the General taking care to remove to some
more convenient and fresh Quarters, and being resolved to take care and charge
of His Majesty, until both Kingdoms be agreed, to which to submit for the
disposing of His Majesty's Person.

There are few Armies without some disorder, by some that cannot be prevented,
yet the chief of those that manage the business amongst our Brethren of
Scotland, and our Commissioners, carry on all things with great wisdom, and it
is hoped will prevent all differences, as may appear by this ensuing Letter
from the Commissioners Quarters.

Gentlemen,
YOu are all now satisfied where the King is, though perhaps you will not know
whilst this come to your hands, that he is this afternoon marched away
Northwards with all the Scots Army, both Horse and Foot, we believe it is only
into fresh Quarters, till the desires of the Parliament may be signified unto
them, how they would have the Army disposed of, we have found a very exceeding
fair correspondency with the old Scots General, and all the Commissioners,
who have been ready to comply with us in all reasonable demands, as we on the
other ^ide have not been wanting to express to them the like respects in my
thing within our power, and for the Kings being in their Quarters, they do
assure us that as His Majesty was unexpected, so they will use all care that
His abode with them shall not be in the least manner prejudicial to the
i^terest of the two Kingdoms; The Governor of Newark has come out to us, and
is wondrous fair conditioned, and promises to submit to whatsoever we shall
advise, and will be careful to preserve all things in the Garrison for the
public use, till the time of Surrender.

BALDERTON. May the 7.
Newark surrendered to the King and Parliament.
Upon the ninth of this instant May a Colonel from Newarke brought Letters to
the House of Commons, from the Commissioners of the Parliament of England
before Newark, of the certain surrender thereof to the Commissioners for the
Parliament, for the use of King and Parliament, together with the Articles of
agreement for the surrender thereof, which in sum and substance were thus
much, That the Garrison, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, be
surrendered to the said Commissioners; The sum of the Articles of Agreement.
The Governor, Officers, Gentlemen, Clergymen, and Soldiers of the Garrison
to march away; All Officers and Gentlemen with their Horses and Swords, and
their own proper goods, the Common Soldiers with staves in their hands, and
their own goods; Our Brethren of Scotland drew off from Newarke.
and thus, I say, to march to any Garrison of the Kings, not besieged (if they
found any) or to their own homes, and to have three months time to endeavor to
make their peace with the Parliament, or that failing, to be allowed Passes to
go beyond Sea. Upon which agreement our Brethren of Scotlands Army drew off
from Newark, and retreated about four miles, and the King with them in the
Army, as you have heard in brief before. After the reading of the said Letters
the House ordered that 100. l. should be bestowed upon the said Colonel that
brought these Letters, for this and many other his for^er good services
performed by him, during the siege of Newarke. The House likewise ordered that
30 l. should be bestowed upon the first Messenger that brought the news of the
agreement on the said Articles for the surrender of Newarke. The House was also
informed that Master Row Secretary to the Commissioners before Newarke, was at
the Door, who was presently called in, and he also informed the House of the
manner of His Majesty's coming in to the Scotch Army, and the House ordered
that 50 l. should be bestowed on him as a gratuity for this and other former
services to the State.

Thus Newarke is now open and free again, and the Tradesmen are preparing to
furnish their Shops, our Soldiers have already bought diverse things of them,
and the Country have a free market, but it cannot be expected to be much,
whilst the sickness is in the Town; but to God be the praise, who has done
this great work for us, to deliver this strong hold of the Enemies into our
hands; I pray God, that others (so oppressed) may have the like mercy, and
peace and truth be seded amongst us, which is the prayers of

Your humble Servant, S. R.
Balderton, May 9. 1646. A List of what was taken in Newarke on Friday the
eight of May, 1646.
ONe great Piece of Ordnance called Sweet-lips. 11 Great Pieces of Ordnance
more. 2 Mortar Pieces. Diverse Drakes and small Pieces. 4000 Arms gathered,
diverse Arms not taken in. 40 Barrels of Gunpowder. Many thousand weight of
Bullets and Lead, Match and other Ammunition, proportionable and plentiful.
Little fresh meat, only Poultry, and that very scarce. Salt meat some plenty,
but much of it tainted, and not fit to be eaten. Butter and Cheese some store.
Beer and Wine many Barrels. Corn good store. Fuel for fire very little.
A List of the Lords, Knights, Colonels, and chief of the Gentry that marched
out of Newark to their own homes, to submit to the Ordinances of Parliament.
Lords.
LOrd Bellasis, Governor. Lord Davencourt. Lord Laxington.
Knights.
Sir John Burrell. Sir Guy Palms. Sir Charles Dalison. Sir Robert Dalison. Sir
Robert Tredway. Sir George Hennings. Sir Jarvis Skroop. Sir Philip Constable.
Sir Thomas Ingram. Sir Bryan Balmes. Sir Jarvis Nevill. Sir Simon Fanshaw. And
others.
Great Clergymen.
DOctor Farmer, Chancellor of Lincoln. Doctor March Dean of Yroke. Doctor
Hurst, and others.
Chief Officers.
MAjor General Air. Colonel Gilby. Colonel Trollop. Colonel Herne.
Colonel Darsey. Colonel Atkins. And others.
The most malignant Aldermen of the Town were.
The Major of Newark. Alderman Atkinson. Alderman Standish. And others.




And upon the same ninth of May, aforesaid, being Saturday, we received the
certain intelligence of the surrendering of the Castle of Banbury, Banbury
Castle surre^dred to the Parliament.
such another most pestilent, pernicious, and vexatious den of Thieves and
Royal Robbers, as was Bazing House in Hampshire, and especially most vexatious
and pernicious to the Inhabitants of Northamptonshire, its next neighbor; but
now at last, I say, by Gods great mercy, and the valor and virtue of our brave
Commanders and Soldiers, brought upon its knees of submission, being given up
to that brave and courageous Commander Colonel Whaley, by Sir William Compton,
then Governor thereof, upon fair and honorable Articles of agreement, which
was done on Friday, May the 8. the substance of those articles also being to
this effect: That all the Officers were to march away with Horses and Swords,
but the Common Soldiers without Arms, their wearing apparel, and half their
moneys by just account; and both Officers and Soldiers to have Passes to any
place in England or Wales, not beleaguered, the City of London excepted; and
those that desire it, Passes to go beyond Sea: and that upon these Conditions
the Castle of Banbury to be delivered up as aforesaid, to Colonel Whaley, with
all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition and Colors, without imbezlement, for the
use of the Parliament, which was accordingly performed on the said Friday in
the forenoone.

And now the Houses taking into their just and serious consideration, the great
and many mercies of God to us in our Forces, and by them also to the whole
Kingdom, both in thus surrendering Newark and Banbury, now in our power and
possession, and that Tuesday, May the 12 having been formerly appointed a day
of solemn thankesgiving to Almighty God, A day of Solemn thanksgiving to the
Lord for late great mercies to us.
throughout London and Westminster and 20. miles adjacent round about it, for
the happy surrender of Exeter and other great mercies, not long before
conferred upon us, together with this none of the least, of now at last the
Lords giving our King into the hands and harbor and custody of our most
Loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland. It was therefore Ordered that on this
said day of Solemn thanksgiving the several Churches and Chappells in the City
of London and Westminster, and 20. miles about it should likewise give most
hearty thanks to the Lord our God for all these subsequent and additionall
rich and rare mercies; and that Tewsday seven night following, being May 19.
should be kept as a Solemn day of Thankesgiving by all the Ministers in the
Country over the whole Kingdom and Dominion of Wales within the power of
Parliament.

About the 16. of this instant May came Letters from valiant and active
Colonel Morgan, giving us certain intelligence of the taking of
Hartlebury-castle, lying between Dudley and Worcester and was the Bishop of
Worcesters seat, Hartlebury Castle taken.
a hopeful omen for the taking of Worcester it self also, indue time. Which
Castle being now surrendered to brave Colonel Morgan, the Officers marched
forth with Horse and Arms, Troopers and Common Soldiers with out Arms, and
all the rest of the Articles being according to agreement fairly performed on
both sides, the brave Colonel took possession of the Castle; The prizes taken
therein.
wherein also were taken, 6. pieces of Ordnance, 200. Arms, 15. barrells of
powder, match and bullet proportionable and a full proportion of all manner of
prosions for 200. men for 6. months at least.

And about the 20. instant we received certain information by Letters from
valiant and active Colonel Birch also of the agreement for the surrender of
that strong Castle and Garrison of Ludlow which was delivered on the like
conditions to those of Hartleburie. Ludlow surrendered to the Parliament.


And here, I must acquaint the Reader that the Lord having by his most wise and
admirable providence in some hopeful Some hopeful sweet effects of the kings
being in the custody of our loyal Brethren of Scotland.
measure given a blessed return to all the prayers of Gods faithful ones over
the whole kingdom in bringing in the Person of the King unto us and committing
him unto the care and custody of our Loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland;
some sweets, of this remarkable overture of these things began now to break
forth to the comfort of our hearts for the present, and hopeful persuasion, if
not assurance, of more good to follow in the Lords good time, as was now
manifested both by a Letter sent by his Majesty to the Lords and Commons, in
the Parliament of England at Westminster Assembled, which his Majesty desired
might be Communicated with Both Houses, which accordingly was done at a
conference, where and when the said Letter was read; and another letter to the
Commissionres of the Parliament of Scotland. And those being passages of
special Eminency and wherein the whole Kingdom may no doubt desire to be in
some measure (at least) satisfied, I shall therefore for the Readers content
herein be somewhat more larger than Ordinary though, there by, I increase both
mine own pains and charges at the press in giving the Reader the substance
of some of them, which was as follows:

That his Majesty is not come into the Scots Army out of any intent to divide
the Kingdoms in affection, The sum of the kings Letto the Parliament of
England.
or prolong the War, but that he might secure his person, and labor the
composing the difference between him and his Kingdoms, and settle all well: and
in regard Religion is the chief point, he desires that may be first insisted
upon and settled according to the advice of the Assembly of Divines of both
Kingdoms assembled at Westminster: And for the Militia, he is willing to concur
with that propounded at Vxbridge, that it be in such hands as shall be agreed
for 7. years: And for Ireland, he will do what he can to satisfy desires of
that kind: And for the disbanding of his Armies, and sleighting Garrisons, and
so avoiding the effusion of more blood; he is willing, likewise to call in all
such Commissions as any have at Sea from him, and accordingly has done: As for
his Towns he is willing to surrender, and that they be slieghted, and
accordingly has sent to Sir Thomas Glemham: only in regard there are some
such there, as have faithfully served him in the preservation of his person, he
desires they may have honorable and good terms, and that had, the surrender
of Oxford shall be a rule to the rest of the Towns, Cities, and Castles; that
all Forces may be dis^anded to the quiet and ease of both the Nations: likewise
that the debts of the Kingdom be paid he shall be willing, with some other
particulars, but these are the chief.

The Letter from His Majesty to the Commissioners of the Parliament of
Scotland is as follows Verbatim.

CHARLES R.
Right trusty and welbeloved Couzens and Counselors, right trusty and right
welbeloved Couzens, trusty and welbeloved, Councellers, And trusty and
welbeloved, We greet you well.
AFter so long and sad an interruption of the happy understanding betwixt Us
and Our good Subjects of our Kingdom of Scotland (which has exceedingly
afflicted Us) and lest the sad effects thereof may have alienated the
affections of many of that Kingdom from Us, and preferring nothing to the love
of Our subjects on which Our safety and greatness most depends, and without
which We propose not to our selves any happiness, We have thought fit to labor
to dispossess them of all prejudices, rather by showing them Our present
Resolutions, than by remembering them of Our former differences, having come
hither with a full and absolute intention to give all just satisfaction to the
joint desires of both Our Kingdoms, And with no thought either to continue
this unnatural War any longer, or to make a division betwixt the Kingdoms, but
to comply with our Parliaments and those entrusted by them in every thing, for
settling of Truth and Peace. Your Commissioners have offered to Us diverse Papers
in your name, expressing Your Loyal intentions toward Us, for which we cannot
but return you hearty thanks, And shall study to apply Our selves totally to
the Counsels and advices of Our Parliaments. We have already sent a Message to
the two Houses of Our Parliament of England and your Commissioners at London,
which we hope will give satisfaction. We have likewise written to all such
within Our Kingdom of Scotland, as have any Commission from Us, to lay down
Arms, disband their forces, and render their Garrisons, And have written to
Our Agents and Ministers abroad for recalling all Commissions issued forth by
Our Authority to any at Sea against any of Our Subjects of either Kingdom; And
have sent Letters to the Governor of Our City of Oxford, to quit that Garrison
upon honorable conditions, and disband Our forces there which being granted to
him, we have resolved presently to give the like order to all Our other
Garrisons and forces within this Kingdom. And that the truth of these Our
Royal intentions may be made known to all Our good Subjects of Scotland, We
desire a Proclamation may be printed and published together with this Letter,
at all convenient places, hoping none will believe but that this is Our
voluntary and cordial resolution and proceeds from no other grounds than Our
deep sense of the bleeding condition of Our Kingdoms. And that Our Real
intentions are with the blessing of God and his favorable assistance) to join
with Our Parliament in settling Religion here in purity (after the advice of the
Divines of both Kingdoms assembled at Westminster) And Our Subjects of both
Kingdoms in freedom and safety. So expecting your Counsels and advices in
every thing wherein we shall be concerned. We bid you very heartily farewell.

From Newcastle, May 10. 1646.

Besides these likewise, the King, to show his love to the City of London, also
sent a Letter to the said most famous City which being but short, I shall for
my Readers better content and satisfaction, here insert, which was as follows.

CHARLES REX.

RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. Having expressed Our
resolutions to the two Houses of Our Parliament of England, and the Committee
of Estates of Our Parliament of Scotland, to give all just satisfaction to the
joint desires of both Kingdoms, we have now likewise thought fit to assure the
two chief Cities of both Our Kingdoms, That nothing is more grievous to Us,
then the troubles and distractions of Our people, And that nothing on earth is
more desired by us, then, that in Religion and Peace with all the comfortable
Fruits of both, they may henceforth live under Us in all godliness and
honesty; And this profession we make for no other end, but that you may know
immediately from Our selves, Our integrity and full resolutions to comply with
our Parliaments in every thing for settling truth and peace. And our desire to
have all things speedily concluded, which shall be found requisite for that
end, That Our return to that Our ancient City, may be to the satisfaction of
Our Parliament, the good liking of you, and all our good people, and to our
own greater joy and comfort, we bid you heartily farewell.

From Newcastle the 19. of May, 1646.

And upon the 26. of this instant May the most renowned famous and faithful
Citizens of London, in their most Cordial zeal for Gods glory, the honor of
Religion, hatred of damnable doctrines, errors and Schisms (wherewith the
City was then extremely infected and infested) and for the honest honorable
vindication of themselves as touching their Solemn League and Covenant in
promoting the long desired establishment of a godly Church Government in City
and Country and over the whole Kingdom, exhibited to Both Houses of Parliament
(which I must, and that most worthily inroule in this our
Parliamentarie-Chronicle, among the rare and most remarkable mercies of our
good God unto us in thus raising up the Spirits of these most renowned Citizens
to such a high place and pitch of godly zeal and faithful courage) exhibited,
I say, The famous City Remonstrance exhibited to Both Houses of Parliament.
a most noble and renowned Remonstrance or Petition, in the name of the Lord
Major and Aldermen and Common Council of that most Honorable City of London,
wherein their piety and Cordial integrity to God, the Church and State was
most Copiously and right Christianly Demonstrated, to the perpetuated honor
and indelible dignity of those renowned Citizens, especially of their never
sufficiently honored and renowned religious and pious Lord Major, Alderman
Adams who told his Brethren (who in their prudence and providence for weighty
reasons best known among themselves, not willing to let their noble Lord Major
go along with them to the exhibiting of the said Remonstrance) told them, I
say, with expression of much fervor and zeal therein, That, Though his Person
was not permitted, yet his heart he assured them, most affectionately went
along with them. Which said rare and religious Remonstrance, both for the
Readers better content and satisfaction (especially it having been so basely
and abusively scandalized by a rabble of rotten hearted impious and impudent
Sectaries of the City) and for the super-eminent Excellency of the Thing it
self, speaking, indeed, much merited honor for it self, I have here thought
fit to insert it, which was as follows.

And, here, first (good Reader) thou shall see the honor which the most
Honorable House of Lords in Parliament put upon it, in giving special Order
for the speedy printing and publishing of it to all the world; and then after
it, thou shall have their most noble and ever to be renowned resent, and
singular approbation and Commendation of it, immediately after it.

Die Martis, 26 Maii. 1646.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That the
Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of
the City of London, this day exhibited to the House of Peers, and their
Lordships Answer thereunto, shall be forthwith printed and published; And the
care for the true printing thereof, is hereby specially recommended unto
Colonel John Bellamie, who is by this Order authorized and required to print
and publish the same accordingly: And none else are to presume to print and
publish the same, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS Assembled in High Court of Parliament.
The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons
of the City of London, in Common Council assembled.
OUR duty, in the first place, does lead us to begin all our Addresses, as we
most heartily and humbly do these, with all due and humble acknowledgement of
the great Labors and endeavors which Your Lordships have, these many years,
employed, in Reformation both of the Church and Commonwealth, and in
preservation of both, with the humble tender of our constant devotion to serve
the Parliament, according to our Covenant made before Almighty God.

In the next place, we most humbly crave pardon, although we do presume to
return again unto your Lordships, and humbly, yet plainly, lay open the
sorrows and fears of our hearts, even in this season, when as God has
blessed your Armies with the greatest successes, Remonstrance of the State of
the Kingdom, page 19.
and that man might persuade himself that the War is almost at an end.

For first, when we remember that it has been long since declared to be far
from any purpose or desire to let loose the golden Reins of Discipline and
Government in the Church, or to leave private persons, or particular
Congregations, to take up what form of Divine Service they please; when we
look upon what both Houses have resolved against Brownisme, and Anabaptisme,
properly so called, when we meditate on our Protestation and Covenant.

And lastly, The Parliaments Declaration, upon his Majesty's Declaration after
the Battle at Edgehill. page 659.
when we peruse the Directory, and other Ordinances for Presbyteriall
Government, and yet find private and separate Congregations daily erected in
diverse parts of the City, and elsewhere, and commonly frequented, (and
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, and almost all manner of Heresies, Schisms, and
Blasphemies, boldly vented and maintained, by such as, to the point of
Church Government, profess themselves Independent) we cannot but be astonished
at the swarms of Sectaries, which discover themselves every where, who, if by
their endeavors, they should get into places of profit and trust, in Martial
and Civil affairs, it may tend much to the disturbance of the Public Peace
both of the Church and Commonwealth.

We also cannot but call to mind what Vows we have made to God in the same
Covenant, as well as our former Protestations, to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our Consciences, of our Loyalty, and
that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just Power and
Greatness, and do humbly rest in the assurance we have received in the many
former Declarations of both Houses, concerning their intentions toward his
Majesty, his Royal Posterity, and the Peace of this Kingdom, which we doubt
not but your Lordships will pursue with all speedy dispatch of Propositions to
his Majesty, now whilst God does so mercifully and miracuously go along with
your Armies in all the parts of the Kingdom.

We may not in the next place forget our Brethren of Scotland, how first they
were invited to engage with this Kingdom in Gods Cause, when yet they were at
peace at home, in what Covenant this Nation is mutually linked with them, at
what time, in relation both to the weak condition of our Forces then, and the
season of the year, they adventured upon an Enemy warmly lodged and well armed
and prepared; what they have since suffered for this Cause in their own
Kingdom, how successful ever since God has made our Forces in suppressing
the Common Enemies of both Nations, and what present hopes we have of a
well-setled Peace, while we continue in this mutual amity; And then cannot but
lament the many jealousies which the Enemies of our Peace, Union, and good
Government, do now strive to beget between both Nations, and tremble at the sad
effects thereof, if not timely prevented by the wisdom of the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms.

We cannot also omit humbly to represent unto your Lordships consideration, how
many Citizens have already suffered, and how many more will be undone, if your
Lordships shall still make use of that ancient Privilege, to protect your
selves, the Assistants of this Honorable House, and the Servants of both, and
others, from being proceeded against in any course of Law for Debt, which now,
because this Parliament has already sat so long, and is likely, by reason of
the unsettlednesse of affairs to sit much longer, would especially require
some expedient for relief of so many as otherwise must daily suffer under this
Privilege.

And now that the Kingdom is almost reduced, by which means the Revenues of the
Kingdom will be unburthened, and the Customs and Excise increase, and the
public charge of the Kingdom decrease, now that Delinquents do daily come in
and compound, and now that the Enemy has but few Holds left, we hope that the
great and extraordinary Taxes and burdens on this City and their Trade, shall
be in the future abated; that the Debts owing to the City and Citizens of
London, either by particular Assurances of the Parliament, or upon the Public
Faith of the Kingdom, be taken care for and discharged, as well as those
assigned upon the Excise, and may not be diverted from the uses appointed by
former Acts and Ordinances.

And we humbly crave have to present to the consideration of this Honorable
House, the Committee of Haberdash^rs-hall, as being one of the greatest
grievances of this City, and which, so long as it is continued, does hinder the
concoursie of people thereunto, and tends much to the destruction of the
Trade, and Inhabitants thereof.

And now also we doubt not but God will give the Parliament some better means
and opportunity for the relief of our bleeding Brethren in Ireland, and the
suppressing of those horrid Rebels, and reducing of that Kingdom, wherein,
besides the public and common interest, we are particularly concerned.

Lastly, we should have much to say for this City, if we could imagine that its
fidelity and constant services and devotions to the Parliament could either be
questioned or forgotten, that little we shall express on the part of the City,
is, not to repeat how zealous we have been in the Cause of God, and this
Parliament, how we have spilt our blood, and spent and laid out our selves and
our Estates in maintenance thereof; how many public acknowledgements we have
by us of the favorable acceptance of them, and promises to leave Testimonies
thereof to all future ages; but only to beseech your Lordships to consider how
much our hearts may justly be dejected, now that God has followed your
endeavors, and our prayers, with so many successes, and brought the War to a
probable period, as to the sense of man: That the Enemies of our Peace should
strive now to sow jealousies between the Parliament and this City, as has been
too evident of late, and particularly should so far prevail, as to be able to
render the chief Magistrate of this City, the Lord Mayor, suspected, unto whom
we cannot but give this just Testimony, That he in his place has faithfully
behaved himself, and carefully dischaged his Office.

We could add much more of the daily invectives against us from the Pulpit,
and other places where the Boutefew's of these Sectaries are admitted, the
scurrilous and seditious Pamphlets daily broached in, and against the City: And
the great contempt of, and discouragement unto the Ministers of the Gospel, who
adhere to the Presbyteriall Government: But we shall conclude with this brief
and humble representation of our Petition and desires to your Lordships in the
name of the whole City.

I. That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all
private and separate Congregations.

II. That all Anabaptists, Brownists, Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, and
all such Sectaries as conform not to the public Discipline established, or to
be established by Parliament, may be fully declared against, and some
effectual course settled for proceeding against such persons.

III. That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdom, so all may be equally
required to yield obedience unto the Government set forth, or to be set forth
by the Parliament.

IV. That no This desire of the City of London is no more, nor other in effect
than the House of Commons in Parliament it self voted (as most justly) at the
taking of the Protestation, May 5. 1641.
person disaffected to the Presbyteriall Government set forth, or to be set
forth by the Parliament, may be employed in any place of public Trust.

V. That your Lordships will please to hasten Propositions to His Majesty, for
settling of a safe and well grounded Peace amongst us, after so long and
unnatural a war.

VI. That your Lordships, according to the Covenant and Treaties, will please
to study all means to preserve the Union between the two Nations of England and
Scotland, and to remove all jealousies which may endanger our mutual agreement.

VII. That your Lordships will please to consider of some means whereby the
privilege which the Members of this Honorable House, and their Assistants,
and the Servants of both, and others enjoy, by being protected and exempted
from being proceeded against for their debts, may be so qualified, as that the
Subject may be able to recover his own in some due time.

VIII. That all public Revenues and Receipts may be employed to public uses,
that so the Taxes of the City may be abated.

IX. That the Estates and Compositions of Delinquents may, according to the
engagements by Ordinances of Parliament, be applied to discharge the great
sums owing to this City and Citizens.

X. That the Plymouth Duty may be taken off the Trade, especially now that the
West is reduced.

XI. That the Committee at Haberdashers-Hall may be presently dissolved, or at
least so limited and regulated, as that the City may have no cause of complaint.

XII. That the reducing of the Kingdom of Ireland may be taken into
consideration, before the good party there be too far wasted and discouraged.

XIII. That the Lord Mayor of this City may be fully vindicated.

XIV. And lastly, and above all, That your Lordships will please not to look
upon any expressions of this our Remonstrance and Petition, as charging any
thing upon your Lordships, or as intended to entrench upon any privileges of
this Honorable House, but favorably to accept thereof, and so to interpret
the same, as from a single and humble heart it is sincerely, and without any
by-ends, or to comply with any party whatsoever, intended and breathed forth
from the sad heart of the Petitioners, who are overwhelmed with many fears on
all sides. And who call God, the Searcher of all hearts, to witness, that
according to their Covenant and duty, their zeal, devotion and obedience, is
as servant and prostrate as ever to serve the Parliament with their Lives and
Estates, against all the Enemies of our Peace, and to conjoyn the City more and
more to the Parliament, and to maintain the Union of both Nations against all
Opposers whatsoever.

All which we humbly submit unto the wisdom of this Honorable House.
26. Maii. 1646. The Answer of the Lords in Parliament to the Remonstrance and
Petition of the City of London.
THe Lords are very sensible of the great fidelity and constant services of the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, to this
present Parliament, which they shall never forget; They acknowledge their
zeal, expressed upon all occasions in the Cause of God and this Parliament,
and how readily they have spilt their blood, and spent and laid out themselves
and their Estates in the maintenance thereof.

They are well satisfied with your Expressions and Care to settle the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, according to the Covenant, and with your desires
to have all Heresies, Schisms, and Blasphemies suppressed, as also with your
respect to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the Liberties of
the Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend his Majesty's Person and Authority,
in the preservation of the true Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
his Royal Posterity, and the Peace of the Kingdoms: As also with your desires
for the continuance of that union between us and our Brethren of Scotland; Of
whose services and sufferings we shall not only hold a grateful memory, but
upon all occasions give a Retaliation. Unto all which we hold our selves
equally with you obliged, by our Solemn League and Covenant.

As to the person of the Lord Mayor, the Lords hold a high esteem of him,
according to his Merit, and have commanded me to let you know, that nothing
has passed this House at any time in prejudice of him; And when the
particulars wherein he finds himself agrieved shall be made known unto them,
they shall be ready in a Parliamentary way to do him right.

The Lords will take the other particulars of (...) Petition into serious and
speedy consideration; And have commanded me to give you hearty thanks for the
Real Testimonies of duty and good affections, which not only by your words,
but by your Actions, you have constantly manifested unto them.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

And the very same day and time the said noble Citizens exhibited the like
Remonstrance and Petition to the honorable House of Commons, of which I say no
more, but leave it to the Lords most gracious and righteous wisdom and mercy,
for a happy return in his own due time.

But that which is yet farther very memorable and remarkable in this business
(which I only touched before, and as you saw it most evidently true before) was,
That the very day before the Remonstrance was exhibited in Parliament, the
Kings Majesty himself (as it were to honor and encourage them in that their
famous and faithful resolution) sent a particular Letter to the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council (...) which, they being all at that time
assembled in their Guild Hall, was publicly read in the audience of them all;
And, which is yet more memorably remarkable, and worthy serious and sacred
observation, That a day or two at the farthest after they had exhibited their
Remonstrance, as aforesaid, the truly religious, and sincerely affected
Ministers of two Counties, Suffolk and Essex, (as it were to back the Cities
brave Remonstrance) exhibited a most excellent Petition to the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, attested by at least 300 Ministers hands, subscribed to
it, which also for the piety and excellency of it, I have thought fit, for the
Readers better delight and satisfaction here to insert, which was as follows:

To the Right Honorable the House of Lords now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of the Ministers of the Counties of Suffolk and Essex.
concerning the Church Government, presented to the Right Honorable Houses of
Parliament.
Shows,
THat your solemn League and Covenant, great and glorious Victories, the
expectation of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, the longing desires of
our Brethren of Scotland, the humble Petitions of the Reverend Assembly, and
the great City of this Kingdom, the pressing miseries of the Orthodox and
well-affected Ministers and People in the Country, cry aloud to your Honors
for a settling of Church Government according to the Word. From the want of
this it is, Right Honorable, that the name of the most High God is blasphemed,
his precious truths corrupted, his Word despised, his Ministers discouraged,
his Ordinances vilified. Hence it is, that Schism, Heresy, Ignorance,
Profaneness, and Atheism, flow in upon us, Seducers multiply, grow daring
and insolent, pernicious Books poison many souls, ^^ety and learning decay
apace, very many Congregations ly waste without Pastors, the Sacrament of
Baptism by many neglected, and by many re-iterated, the Lords Supper generally
dis-used or exceedingly profaned, confusion and ruin threatening us in all our
Quarters.

In all humility therefore acknowledging your unwearied labors for the
public good, your successful endeavors for saving this Kingdom, your
hopeful beginnings of a blessed Reformation; we out of conscience and in
tender regard to the glory of God, and the salvation of our people, beseech
your Honors, That a form of Church Government, according to the Word of God,
and the example of the best Reformed Churches, may with all possible speed be
perfected, and confirmed by your civil sanction; that Schismatics, Heretics,
seducing Teachers, and soul-subverting Books, be effectually suppressed; That
further care may be had of Ordination for a supply of able and Orthodox
Ministers, and all good means used to make up the sad breaches in this our
Sion. So shall the Church of God be settled, your hands strengthened, the sacred
Covenant performed, our fears prevented, the Judgments of God diverted.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
The Lords Answer to the said Petition.
THe Lords are glad to find this zeal and care in the Ministry of the
Counties of Suffolk and Essex, for the preventing the further increase of
Heresy and Profaneness, and for the promoting a growth in the power of
godliness. The Lords desire you to continue still in your endeavors therein,
and they will not be wanting to give you all encouragement. They have commanded
me to give you thanks for your expressions of your good affections to the
Parliament and this Cause, and do assure you that they will improve their power
for the suppressing of Error, Heresy, seducing Teachers, and soul-subverting
Book, and likewise for the settling of Church Government according to the Word
of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, to which they hold
themselves obliged by their solemn League and Covenant, and that their
Lordships have appointed that their Petition with this answer shall be printed
and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

The Answer of the House of Commons to the Minister Petition.
Die Mercurii 27. Maii. 1646.
THe House being informed that diverse Ministers of the Counties of folk and
Essex were at the door, they were called in, and presented to the House a
Petition, entitled, The humble Petition of the Ministers of Suffolk and
Essex, the which was read.

The Ministers were again called in, and Master Speaker by command of the
House acquainted them, That most of the particular desires of their Petition
are now under consideration, and they hope will be brought to a settlement
speedily: That the House is very sensible, that through some intervening
obstructions the Church Government has not been so fully settled as they
desire, and that they give them thanks for their good affections, and desire
them to put all Ordinances in execution concerning Church Government as lie
within their power.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

This special act also of Divine providence so oportunely bringing in these
Ministers Petition, much to the very same effect as the Cities Remonstrance
was, and full of much piety and zeal for God and his Great Cause the present
miserably distracted and distorted Church by abominable Errors and Scismes, I
could not but most gratefully and gladly record in these our
Parliamentarie-Annals, as no small mercy of the Lord unto us and worthy to be
taken notice of to the glory of God and honor of those two most worthily to be
honored Counties.

Salcoomb Regis Surrendered. Bostol-House also yielded up to the Parliament.
And about the third of June,1646. We were certainly informed of the taking of
Salcomb-Regis which was surrendered to Colonel Welden; and also that
Bostol-house a most pestilent and pernicious Garrison of the Enemies, was also
yeeled up unto the power and possession of the Parliament.

And upon the 4. of June, it pleased the Lord to put into the hearts of our
most worthy Parliamentarie worthies to set forth an Ordinance of Parliament for
the better settlement of Presbyterian Church Government.
Ordinance of Parliament for the settlement of that great scruple and Question
among Gods people as touching the point of worthy or unworthy Communicants at
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and for the more full and certain
establishment of the Presbyterian Church Government; a mercy long and most
earnestly desired by all, except our most pernicious and disorderly Se^^aries
and Libertines: And the Ordinance to continue thus for the space of three
years.

And whereas I gave a hint or touch before, of our Cause of jealousy that the
Kings putting himself into the hands of our loving and loyal brethren of
Scotland, and his writting of fair and smoth Letters was not so Cordial as we
did and could have desired (how ever we trust and pray the Lord who has the
hearts of Kings in his hands and can turn them as the Rivers of water, May and
will in his good time hear the prayers of his people therein also) I shall
here give the Reader a notable Demonstration that our said jelousie was not
groundless, as may too evidently appear, by this ensuing Letter of his
Majesty's (if it were his Majesty's own act whereof there is some uncertai^^ty
it being assured that his Majesty disclaimed it, and so it is hoped it was not
his, but that most wicked Agents, Secretary Nicholases) sent to the Marq of
Ormond in Ireland, a little before he departed from Oxford, which showed his
still hollow and unholy heart to plot and foment new inlargements of our bloody
broils and Civil wars, which Letter being sent by Ormond to that loyal and
brave Commander in Arms Major General Monroe in Ireland, and by him to the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland by Sir Robert King, I have here
thought fit to insert it verbatim, as it was printed and published by order of
Parliament which was as follows.

CHARLES REX.

RIght trust and entirely beloved Cousins and Concellors, We greet you well,
having used all possible and honorable means, by sending many gracious
Messages to the two Houses of Parliament, wherein we have offered them all
they have heretofore desired, few or none will believe this that have had any
knowledge of the Parliaments just desires, and what the answers have been to
them,) and desire from them nothing but what they themselves (since these
unhappy wars) have offered, to procure Our Personal Treaty with them, for a
safe and well grounded Peace, and having in stead of a dutiful and peaceable
return to Our said Messages, received in stead thereof either no answer at
all, or such as argues nothing will satisfy them, but the ruin not only of
Us, Our Posterity and Friends, but even of Monarchy it self; and having lately
received very good security, that We and all that do or shall adhere to Us,
shall be safe in Our Honors, Persons and Conferences, in the Scottish Army, and
that they shall really and effectually join with Us, and with such as will
come in unto Us and join with them, for Our preservation, and shall employ
their Arms, and Forces to assist Us to the procuring of a happy and well
grounded Peace for the good of Us and our Kingdoms, in the recovery of Our
just Right: We have resolved to put our selves to the hazard of passing into
the Scots Army now lying before Newarke, and if it shall please God that We
come safe thither, We are resolved to use our best endeavors with their
assistance, and with the conjunction of the Forces under the Marquess of
Montrosse, and such of Our well affected Subjects of England as shall rise for
Us, to procure if it may be an honorable and speedy Peace, and those who
hitherto refused to give ear to any means tending thereunto, of which Our
resolution We held it necessary to give you this advertisement, as well to
satisfy you and all Our Counsel and Loyal Subjects with you (to whom We will
that you communicate these Our Letters (that failling in Our earnest and
sincere endeavors by Treaty to put an end to the miseries of these Kingdoms;
We esteemed Our self obliged to leave no probable expedition unattempted to
preserve Our Crown and Friends from the usurpation and tyranny of those whose
actions declare so manifestly their Design to overthrow the Laws and happy
established Government of this Kingdom. And now We have made known to you Our
Resolvtion, We recommend to your special care the disposing and managing of
Our affairs on that side as you shall conceive most for Our Honor and service,
being confident the course We have taken (though with some hazard to Our
Person) will have a good influence on that Our Kingdom and defer, if not
altogether prevent the Rebels ( meaning the Parliament) transporting of Forces
from them into that Kingdom. And We desire you to satisfy all Our well
affected Subjects on that side, of Our Princely care of them, whereof they
shall receive the effect as soon as God shall enable Us.

We desire you to use some means to let Us and Our Council at Oxon here
frequently from you, and of your actions and conditions there; and so God
prosper your Loyal Endeavors.

SATURDAY, June 6.

Thus have you seen the Kings Letter full indeed, of much evil, and
Demonstration of no change of heart from his former bloody, cruel and unkingly
practices of the ruin of himself and his Kingdoms, as much in as him lay, if
indeed, it were his own act, as it was too strongly presumed to be: upon
which many jelousies being raised and founded against our Loyal brethren of
Scotland; they therefore in vindication of their own integrity presented a
Declaration to the Houses of Parliament in the name of the Commissioners of
Scotland, which was read accordingly, and which I have here thought fit to
insert, for the Readers better content and satisfaction, which was as follows.

For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore.
Right Honorable:
THis enclosed paper having very lately come to our hands, which although it
has not so much as color enough to deceive, yet nevertheless as General
Major Monro, in testimony of his integrity, did communicate the thing to the
Commissioners of Parliament in Vlster, so we for preventing mistakes (many
Copies of the same thing being spread among the people) have thought good to
communicate the same to the Honorable Houses, with our sense upon it, that by
their wisdom and reciprocal care, a right understanding in all things may
still be preserved between the Kingdoms. Whether any such Letter was signed by
the King at Oxford, or whether it was invented of purpose to support a
declining party, we do not know; what may concern the King in it, we leave to
himself, who, as he has since the date of that paper expressed contrary
intentions and resolutions in his Messages to both Kingdoms, so he can best
tell what he wrote at that time, we are only to speak to the matter of the
paper which comes from the hand of Secretary Nicholas, unto whose informations
what credit ought to be given the Houses very well know, It does consist in our
perfect knowledge and (we declare it with as much confidence as ever we did or
can do any thing) that the matter of the paper, so far as concerns any
assurance or capitulation for joining of Forces, or for combining against the
Houses of Parliament, or any other private or public agreement whatsoever,
between the King upon the one part, and the Kingdom of Scotland their Army, or
any in their name, and having power from them, upon the other part, is a most
damnable untruth. We shall not need to express how improbable it is, if there
had been any such agreement, that the King about the same time should have sent
a Message to both Houses, offering to come to London, and to follow their
advice in all things, without offering any satisfaction to the Kingdom of
Scotland, and that before he received the answer of the Houses he should write
such a Letter to Ireland, and give order to make it known, not only to his
Privy Council, but to his other Subjects of that Kingdom. Nor will we insist
how improbable it is that the King should make this known to the Marquess of
Ormond, and neglect to acquaint the late Earl of Montrosse, who had been much
more concerned, and who would, no doubt, if he had known any such thing, have
communicated the same to General Major Middleton, and prevented the defeating
of himself, his associates and forces, about the middle of May, after the King
was with the Scottish Army. Nor how unlikely it is that he who is for the time
Commander in chief for the Scottish forces in Ireland, should be for the space
of seven or eight weeks totally ignorant of any such agreement, or if he had
known any such thing, that he would have communicated it to the Commissioners
of the Parliament, and immediately marched himself to the fields against the
Enemy. Nor shall we need to call to mind the expressions in the Lord Digbies
intercepted Letters, which gave our Nation the character of such as could not
be gained to that side, no not after all applications used. There are other
more sure, and more public Testimonies since the date of that lying Paper,
which make the falsehood of it more than palpable, as if divine providence had
purposely ordered all the late actions of the Kingdom of Scotland, and of
their Forces, both before and since the third of April, to be so many real
confutations of that groundless invention: We mean, several late fights
with the Rebels under the late Earl of Montrosse and Allaster Mac Donald; the
delivery of Newark, the restraining and debarring of Delinquents and Malignants
from the Kings Person, and from our Army, the late public Declarations of the
Church and State of Scotland in the beginning of April, as likewise of the
General and Committee with the Army, agreed upon about the end of April, and
published the 15 of May in Scotland, against a Band of the Earl of Seaforth
and his Associates; As for other reasons, so especially for this, that the said
Band did tend to the weakening of the confidence and Union between the two
Kingdoms firmly joined and mutually engaged for assistance to each other in
this Cause, as may appear more fully by the Declarations herewith presented.
Nor can we pass the Paper delivered to the King by the Committee of Estates
upon the 15 of May last, that if His Majesty should delay to go about the
readiest ways and means to satisfy both his Kingdoms, they would be
necessitated for their own exoneration to acquaint the Committee of both
Kingdoms at London, that a course might be taken by joint advice of both
Kingdoms, for attaining the just ends expressed in the Solemn League and
Covenant. We shall say no more of this particular, God has his own time to
make manifest, who have dealt sincerely, and who falsely; and as our Nation did
refuse to join with the Enemies Forces when they were strongest, and did join
with our Brethren of England in their weakest and most necessitous condition,
so we shall never look for a blessing from God upon either Nation longer than
they continue faithful to God, and to each other, according to the Covenant
and Treaty. And we do confidently expect from the wisdom and Justice of the
Honorable Houses, that this and such like Papers shall find no more credit
here, than Papers and Declarations against themselves did formerly find in
Scotland, and that Declarations and public Papers from the Kingdom of
Scotland, or their Committees or Commissioners, shall have such acceptance
with both Houses, as they desire Declarations from themselves, or Papers from
any in their Name, may have with their Brethren of Scotland. Nor do we doubt
but God will dissipate all these clouds of calumnies and mis-understandings
endeavored thereby, and will give such a frame of spirit to both Nations, as
may continue them in a brotherly accord and mutual confidence for the good
both of this, and of the succeeding Generations, which has been, is, and shall
be most earnestly wished and faithfully endeavored by

Your very affectionate friends, and humble servants. Lauderdaill. Johnston.
Charles Erskine, Henry Kennedie. Robert Barnlay.
Worcester House, the 8. of June, 1646.
Die Lunae 8 Junii, 1646.
Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That the Letter of the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland. Dated the 8 of this instant June,
1646. shall be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cleric.
Parliamentorum.
And because there were many suspicions and jealousies loved and fomented in
the hearts, and uttered too frequently by the tongues of many ill affected ones
to our fair loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland, That they would not easily
be got out of the Kingddome of England, no not when our wars were quite ended
and we had no more need of them among us, as some, yea many of them maliciously
took upon them to conceive, and spatter abroad with their base and busy
tongues; I have therefore also here thought fit to insert another Letter or
Declaration, enclosed in the foresaid Letter or Declaration to the Lords in
Parliament, by the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, as was
forementioned, which I conceive may and will give fair and full satisfaction,
touching that suspicion also, to those that are not too much biased with
prejudice and partiallity, which was as follows:

IT is not light but grievous to us to hear of any disorders at all committed
by any person in that Army (how great soever the necessities be unto which they
are redacted, or that our Army should be any longer burdensome to this
Kingdom. And we do in the Name of that Kingdom and Army declare and assure,
That as they came into this Kingdom upon an earnest invitation from both
Houses of Parliament, and for the ends expressed in the Covenant and Treaty,
and Declaration of both Kingdoms, (the close whereof does express the
resolution of both to have Truth and Peace settled upon a firm Foundation
before their laying down of Arms) so their continuance neither is nor shall be
made use of to the least encroachment upon the Government of this Kingdom; nor
to any other ends besides those expressed in the Covenant and Treaty: And how
soon soever Religion and Peace shall be settled accordingly, our Army and
Garrisons shall forthwith remove out of this Kingdom. And these things we
shall wish may be speedily done, and that the Propositions for a safe and well
grounded Peace which did for a very short time remain in our ^ands) may now
after so long expectation, be sent to the King, that upon his Royal consent to
the desires of his People for settling and securing of Religion and Peace, his
Majesty may return to his Parliament, here, all Armies may be disbanded, the
heavy pressures of the Subjects ended, and the Kingdoms may remain in a firm
Peace and Union to all Posterity, according to the Solemn League and Covenant.

3 June 1646.
These most honest, and (as I conceive) most abundantly satisfactory
expressions and demonstrations of our honest and loyal Brethren, besides all
their former faithful performances of all things promised and protested by
them, and exacted from them ever since the beginning of coming among us, may,
me thinks give full content and assurance too, to us all of their integrity and
faithful intentions to deal most honestly and uprightly with us in all things;
in the maine, I mean, especially, notwithstanding the most shameless and
graceless calumniating tongues and selfe-seeking ungodly intentions and
Satanicall desire of seditious Spirits to make a most sad and scelerous
fraction and Division between two such Brother-Nations as we are or ought to
be: But let them take heed, who ev^r they be least the severe and bitter curse
of God fall not heavily on their heads and hearts too, who thus dare play fast
and loose with sacreed Covenants and endeavor to separate (and that to a most
bloody Division) those whom God has so graciously conjoined: for, for my part,
I never read or heard but that the Lord (the righteous judge, to whom
vengeance belongs) did first or last, soon or late revenge most sadly and
severely perfidious Covenant-breakers. But to proceed:

Bostoll Garrison surrendered.
About the 8. of this instant June a Letter was read in the House of Commons
from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax, and therein Articles enclosed for the
surrender of Bostol Garrison, thereof I made brief m^ntion only before; but
now is most fully confirmed; The Articles were to this effect: That the
Governor, Sir William Campion and all Officers in Commission should march away
with their horse and arms, and those that desired to go beyond Sea should
have passes, and they that desired to make their compositions should be
effectually recommended by the General to the Parliament, that their fines
should not exceed two years revenue; the Common Soldiers to march away
without arms to their own homes. Hostages were given for performance of these
conditions, and the Garrison to be surrendered immediately to our forces for the
use of the King and Parliament.

Carnarvan Town and Castle surrendered.
And upon the 11. of June a Letter was brought to the House of Commons with
Articles of the surrender of Carnarvan Town and Castle by Byron the Governor
thereof to renowned Colonel Mitton and the House after the reading thereof
considered of a Governor for the said Garrison, and having experience of the
integrity, valor and fidelity of Colonel Thomas Glyn, they nominated and
appointed him Governor of the said Town and Castle.

Upon intelligence whereof the House of Commons ordered that thanks should be
given in all Churches throughout London the next Lords day, and likewise for
Ludlow, Dudley-Castle and Carnarvan.

About the 14. of this instant June we received certain knowledge from New
Castle of the Kings resolution to give speedy order for the surrendering of all
the rest of his Garrisons, which yet held out against the Parliament a Copy
whereof I have here thought fit to insert which was as follows.

CHARLES REX.

HAving resolved to comply with the designs of the Parliament in every thing
that may be for the good of the Subjects and leave no means unassayed for
removing of differences betwixt us; Therefore we have thought fit, the more to
evidence the reality of our intentions of settling a happy and firm peace, to
require you, upon honorable conditions to quit those Towns, Castles, and
Forts entrusted by you to us, and to disband all the forces under your several
commands.

New Castle the 10. June 1646.
TO our trusty and welbeloved Sir Thomas Glemham, Sir Thomas Tidsley, Colonel
Henry Washington, Colonel Thomas Blague, Governors of our Towns and Castles
of Oxford, Worcester, Litchfield, and Wallingford; and all other Commanders of
any other Towns, Castles, or Forts, within the Kingdom of England or Dominion
of Wales.
About the 19. of this instant June, the Parliament having had much and long
debate about the Propositions to be sent to be signed by the King, and
especially about the settlement of the Militia of the Kingdom, at last there
was a happy Compliance of Both Houses about it; And it was resolved upon the
question, That the Militia shall be in the power of Both Houses of Parliament
for 20. The Propositions for a well grounded Peace resolved and in special
(...) of the Kingdom.
years; and in case after 20. years there be occasion to use Arms by any
insurrection at home or foreign invasion and the Lord and Commons agree
thereunto, if the King will not concur, yet it shall be Lawful for the Lords
and Commons to proceed in that war and exercise of that Militia for the
safety and peace of the Kingdom: And immediately after this the Proposions
were by Both Houses of Parliament sent to the Commissioners of Scotland for
their assent and concurrence in them.

And much about the same time, there was aspeciall m^e^ing of the Divines of
London and W^stminster and within the Lines of Communication, at Zion-Colledge,
where three of them for all the rest, spent 5 hours or there about in prayer
to beg direction from The Ministers of London and Westminsters pious meeting
and religion resolution in Zion College.
God about the acting and putting in execution the Presbyterian
Church Government according to the late Ordinance of Parliament, enabling and
authorizing them thereunto; And some that were present there and Members of
that Assembly assured me that they never saw or heard of a more zealous and
earnest seeking of the Lord, and their prayers were uttered with such fervencie
and burning zeal that very many there present were so extraordinarily ravished
in spirit, as caused very many tears to be shed and deep and heartily sighs
and groans to be sent up to Heaven; And this holy work being ended, they
began to debate of the work to be acted by them, and though at first they
excepted against some things in the Ordinance of Parliament, yet at length by
Gods special providence, it was resolved with an unanimous consent, yea,
Nemine Contradicente, to put on the work, and rest upon God and the
Parliament, for the Composing of what was found wanting by practical
experience; only for the better satisfaction of their own consciences therein
and to show forth to the whole Church of God, as well abroad as at home, their
advised care therein, they immediately upon it resolved on certain Considerable
Causions, on which they under took the work, and printed and published them, I
say, to the view of the World. An excellent passage of prudence and providence,
in my poor judgment, and worthy such a reverend and religious Assembly.

Letters from Sir Thomas Fairefax. Articles for the Surrender of Oxford and the
Messengers rewarded by the Parliament.
And about the 22. instant the House of Commons in Parliament taking into
consideration a Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax, and the
Articles (which are extant at large in print, and too large to be here
inserted,) for the Surrender of Oxford into the possession of the Parliament,
and having spent much time in debate thereof, and being informed that one D^ll
the Chaplain of their Army before Oxford, who brought the Letter and Articles
was at the door, the House thereupon ordered that he should be called in, and
gave him the sum of 50. l. for his pains in the journey; and that one Master
Heath another messenger from his Excellency should have 30 l. for a gratuity,
for Letters which he brought about the said business, and likewise 20 l. to
one Master Thredder.

The Duke of York to come from Oxford to S. James-House.
They likewise considered (about the same time) of the reception and maintenance
of the Duke of York in Saint James with the Kings other two children, and
there to be provided for in an honorable and Princely way, as those two of his
Majesty's children were. And about the 25. instant came Letters from renowned
and victorious Colonel Mitton from Carnarvan with Articles enclosed for the
surrender of Beaumorris Town and Beaumorris Town and Castle surrendered
Castle, a very strong Garrison in Wales which much annoyed the Country in
those parts, and the Houses after the reading thereof ordered that the said
Colonel Mitton should be Governor of the said strong Town and Castle, and
ordered that a Commission should be granted to him accordingly.

And on Wednesday June 25. the City and Garrison of Oxford was surrendered to
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax according to the agreement. Many (we
understood at that time) made doubt whether it were surrendered or no, but we
can assure them it for truth, being an eye witness thereof the manner briefly
was thus. To pass by the several quarters of our Army, and the managing of
the Line and works raised against Oxford, The manner of the surrender of Oxford.
a Guard was placed of several Regiments of Foot and Horse from the entrance
into Oxon, at the East Port or Gate on both sides the way to Wheatly, which way
the Enemy were to march; the surrender by the Articles should have been by ten
of the clock, at which time some part of the Garrison marched forth and diverse
Coaches with Gentry, and their Wives and many the day before with Carriages
Bag and Baggage, but the maine body marched not forth until about two in the
afternoon on Wednesday, at which time there fell a very bitter and violent
storm of Rain which held for about an hour (some lesser showers we had
besides likewise that day, but suddenly after the Enemy were marched forth, and
ours about to enter Oxford the storms ceased, and the rest of the day very
clear and fair, and this by the way some do observe as very remarkable. And
also that there was the like stormy weather at the surrender of Leicester,
Bristol, and Exeter; about two of the (clock as before) they marched forth
both Officers and Soldiers, with their Arms in very good order with bag and
baggage, both Officers and Soldiers generally demeaned themselves very civilly
(except some few that were drunk) and as themselves say on our parts, never
were Articles more punctually observed than by us, neither officer nor soldier
offering them the least prejudice or used any reproachful language to them, as
they marched; that which many grieved to see, was that there should be so many
Irishmen and women amongst them, such a company of women, English Drabbes, and
Irish trulls as would have made a rotten Regiment, these are those that used
constantly to follow that Army, and whose naughtiness is so well known we
need not mention it; the number that marched out were adjudged to be between
3, and 4000. besides those that marched out before, and many of the Gentry,
Clergy, and some Commanders that stayed behind in Oxford by permission until
such time as they had Passes to go beyond Sea, and some to their own homes;
the Garrison in the whole (as they report) consisted of above 7000. Soldiers
in pay, townsmen and Scholars that bore arms. After the Governor, Officers,
and Soldiers were marched forth, the Keys of the City and Forts delivered to
the General, his Excellency gave order for 3 foot Regiments to march into
Oxford which was done accordingly, and the guards presently placed, the
Soldiers carried themselves with so much civility to the Citizens as was
admired, not any one of them I am confident being damnified by the entrance of
our men to the worth of six pence, and I may boldly speak it being then
present in Oxford, and observed the whole passage, courteous language and
entertainment there was on both sides, and not the least disorder: not much
provisions were found in the City either for horse or man, only salted Beef
and Corn a good quantity, a few Peace and Beans, but very little Hay, within
two or three hours after we had entered, the Country people that lived near
adjacent brought in what provisions they had, or could so suddenly provide,
and some fresh meat, for the which they received ready monyes, and not a
Soldier of ours had, or desired one penny worth of any commodity, but what
they gave ready monyes for; there was in the Garrison about 30. piece of
Ordnance ready mounted, and their Works very strong and large, which to have
stormed would have cost the lives of very many men, too precious to be so cast
away, when we might have it upon more reasonable terms, and we conceived none
will imagine the conditions granted over large, if they but consider the
strength of the place. But this I leave to others to judge.

And on the 26. of this instant June, the Houses took into Consideration
several Papers presented to the Grand-Committee of Both Houses from the
Marquess of Argyle, and the Scottish Commissioners here recident, of very
singular and special Concernment and much conducing to the farther clearing of
their (most ^^justly suspected) integrity toward us, and of their loving
consent to the Propositions now fitted to be sent to his Majesty, for the more
full completing our hopes of a well-grounded Peace; I have here thought fit to
insert two or three of them especially the said pious Earl of Argyles
excellent Speech made unto them, and a Paper concerning their said full consent
to the Propositions, both which I have conceived most worthy to be recorded in
these our Parliamentary Annals, as no small mercy of the Lord unto us, in thus
so graciously clearing their unspotted fidelity, and of the most blessedly
defeating the impious designs of the secret and crafty (but most malicious)
enemies of our Peace and Unity, which were as follows:

The Marquess of ARGYLES Speech to the Grand Committee, concerning
Propositions of Peace to be sent to his MAJESTY.
My Lords and Gentlemen:
THough I have had the honor to be named by the Kingdom of Scotland, in all
the Commissions which had relation to this Kingdom, since the beginning of
this War; yet I had never the happiness to be with your Lordships till now,
wherein I reverence Gods providence, that he has brought me hither at such an
opportunity, when I may boldly say, it is in the power of the two Kingdoms,
yea, I may say, in your Lordships power to make us both happy, if you make good
use of this occasion, by settling Religion, and the Peace and Union of these
Kingdoms.

The work of Reformation in these Kingdoms is so great a work, as no Age nor
History can parallel since Christ's days, for no one Nation had ever such a
Reformation set forth unto them, much less three Kingdoms; so that this
Generation may truly think themselves happy, if they can be isntrumental in
it. And as the work is very great, so it cannot be expected but it must have
great and powerful Enemies; not only flesh and blood which hate to be
reformed, but likewise Principalities and Powers, the Rulers of the darkness
of this world: and spiritual wickednesses in high places. As the dangers are
great, we must look the better to our duties, and the best way to perform
these is to keep us by the Rules which are to be found in our National
Covenant, principally the Word of God, and in its own place, the example of
the best Reformed Churches; and in our way we must beware of some Rocks, which
are temptations both upon the right, and upon the left hand, so that we must
hold the middle path. Upon the one part we should take heed, not to settle
lawless liberty in Religion, whereby in stead of Uniformity, we should set up
a thousand Heresies and Schisms, which is directly contrary and destructive to
one Covenant. Upon the other part, we are to look that we persecute not piety
and peaceable men, who cannot through scruple of Conscience come up in all
things to the Common Rule; but that they may have such a forbearance as may be
according to the Word of God, may consist with the Covenant, and not be
destructive to the Rule it self, nor to the Peace of the Church and Kingdom,
wherein I will insist no further, either to wrong your Lordships patience or
judgments, who I doubt not will be very careful to do every thing according
to our Covenant.

As to the other point concerning the Peace and Union of the Kingdoms, I know
it is that which all profess they desire, I hope it is that all do (...) at;
sure I am, it is that which all men ought to study and endeavor. And I think
it not amiss to remember your Lordships of some former experiences, as an
argument to move us to be wife for the future. If the Kingdom of England in
the 1640. year of God, then sitting in Parliament, had concurred, as they were
desired, against the Kingdom of Scotland, no question we had been brought to
many difficulties, which blessed be God was by the wisdom of the Honorable
Houses prevented. So likewise when this Kingdom was in difficulties, if the
Kingdom of Scotland had not willingly, yea cheerfully sacrificed their peace
to conc^^^e with this Kingdom, your Lordships all know what might have been
the danger. Therefore let us hold fast that Union which is so happily
established betwixt us, and let nothing make us again two, who are so many
wai^s one* all of one Language, in one ^and, all under one King, one in
Religion, yea one in Covenant; so that in effect we differ in nothing but in
Name (as Brethren do) which I wish were also removed that we might be
altogether one, if the two Kingdoms should (...); for I dare say, not the
greatest Kingdom in the Earth can prejudice both, so much as one of them may
do the other.

I will forbear at this time to speak of the many jealousies I hear are
suggested, for as I do not love them, so I delight not to mention them, only
one I cannot forbear to speak of, as if the Kingdom of Scotland were too
much affected with the Kings interest. I will not deny but the Kingdom of
Scotland, by reason of the Reign of many Kings his Progenitors over them, has
a natural affection to his Majesty, whereby they wish he may be rather
reformed then ruined; yet experience may tell, their personal regard to him
has never made them forget that common Rule, The safety of the People is the
Supreme Law. So likewise their love to Monarchy makes them very desirous that
it may be rathe^ regulated than destroyed, which I hope I need not to mention
further to your Lordships, who, I trust are of the same mind.

I know likewise there are many jealousies and unjust aspersions cast upon our
Armies in England and Ireland, I can, if it were needful, presently produce
heads of a Declaration intended by the Army in England, for vindicating
themselves from such injuries, and showing the clearness of their resolutions
and integrity, both in the Cause, and toward this Kingdom, wherein their
undertakings and coming in at such a season of the year, their hard
sufferings, and constant endeavors since may be sufficient testimonies.
Therefore I am the more bold to desire your Lordships, that so long as they
stay in England (which I wish may be for a short time) they may be supplied
with some moneys, and their Quarters enlarged, least their lying in too narrow
Quarters make the burden insupportable to that exhausted corner of the Country
where they now remain, and so beget outcries against them, when they are not
able to discharge their Quarters, as other Armies within the Kingdom.

As for the Army in Ireland, I have been an eye witness to their sufferings,
and so may speak of it likewise upon certain knowledge, That never men have
suffered greater hardships who might have been provided, for they have lived
many times upon a few Beans measured out to them by number, and never had any
other drink but Water. And when they were in some better condition, they had
but an Irish peck of rough Oats for a whole week. And now at their best
condition, when they are quartered upon the Country (which is able to
entertain them only for a very short time) they have only an Irish peck of
Oatmeale, or a shilling in the ten days, both for meat and drink. Therefore
according to the many desires given in to the Honorable Houses for that end, I
humbly entreat that your Lordships will take care to provide for them, so long
as it is thought fit they remain in that Kingdom.

For a renewed testimony of our earnest desires to comply with the Honorable
Houses for settling the peace of these Kingdoms so much longed for, we do
return unto your Lordships the Propositions of Peace (which we received on
Tuesday last) with our consent thereunto, wishing they may be hasted to his
Majesty, who has so often called for them. And I likewise offer to your
Lordships the Copy of his Majesty's Letter to my Lord of Ormond, discharging
him from any further meddling in any Treaty with the Rebels in Ireland, I hope
in order to his Majesty's further condescending to the settling of that
Proposition concerning Ireland, and the rest of the Propositions now to be sent
unto him. Another Paper there is which concerns the supplying of the Scottish
Armies in England and Ireland, and the perfecting of the Accounts between the
Kingdoms, together with a Letter from General Monro to the Committee of
Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the state of affairs in
Ireland. All which when your Lordships have considered, I trust you will take
such course therein as may satisfy our just desires, may put an end to our
present troubles, and settle these Kingdoms in a happy peace.

A Paper delivered in from the Commissioners of Scotland concerning the
PROPOSITIONS.
IT is a twelve month since we did earnestly press the sending of
Propositions to the King for a safe and well-grounded Peace; In answer
whereunto the Honorable Houses were pleased to acquaint us, That they had
resolved Propositions should be sent to his Majesty, but did intend to make
some alterations in the former Propositions, and after eight or nine months
deliberation, we received from the Honorable Houses some of those
Propositions; and though we did find therein very material additions,
alterations, and omissions, which for their great importance, and the interest
of the Kingdom of Scotland therein, might very well have required the delay of
an Answer until the Estates of that Kingdom had been consullted; yet so
unwilling were we to retard the means of Peace, that in a fortnights time we
returned an Answer upon the whole Propositions; and the Houses of Parliament
not resting satisfied therewith, in less than ten days we prepared a further
Answer; wherein we did very much comply with the desires of the Honorable
Houses, especially in the matter of settling the Militia of England, and
Ireland, and in other things did show our readiness to hear, or propose such
expedients as might determine any differencer, so that in a whole years time
the Propositions have not remained in our hands the space of four weeks,
which we only mention to clear our proceedings from mistakes and aspersions;
and the Houses having now after two months farther deliberation delivered unto
us upon the 23. of this instant June, all the Propositions they intend to send
to the King at this time; We do, without any delay, return such an Answer and
resolution thereupon, as will be unto the present and future Generations, one
undeniable testimony (besides many others) of the integrity and faithfulness
of the Kingdom of Scotland in their solemn League and Covenant, of their love
to Peace, and earnest desire to satisfy their Brethren of England in those
things which concern the good and Government of this Kingdom; being further
resolved touching the Kingdom of Scotland, That as nothing of single or sole
concernment to that Nation did engage them in this War, so nothing of that
nature shall continue the same. Although these Propositions now to be sent do
much differ from the Propositons formerly agreed upon by the Parliament of both
Kingdoms, and the most material additions, omissions, and alterations are in
such particulars as concern the joint interest, and mutual considered and
(...) of both Kingdoms, which were as we conceive much better provided for,
and strengthened by the former Propositions him by these. Although the
particular Propositions presented by Us, concerning the Kingdom of Scotland
are not yet agreed unto by the Houses of Parliament, as was offered in their
Papers of the tenth of April. Although diverse Propositions of joint
concernment be now super^^ded, and the sending of them delayed to a more
covenient time, as is ^^pressed in the Votes of both Houses of the twenty sixth
of March; and ^^though (which is to us more than all the rest) those Ordinances
of Parliament unto which the fifth and sixth Propositions do relate, (and were
therefore communicated unto Us upon our desire to see what the Houses had
already agreed upon concerning Religion) do not contain the establishment of
such a Reformation of Religion, and uniformity as was expected, and was the
chief end of our engagement in this War; and as all these Ordinances put
together come short of what we wished, so there are some particulars which we
conceive to be inconsistent with the Word of God, and the example of the best
reformed Churches, and therefore cannot in our consciences consent unto them;
which particulars were expressed to both Houses in the Remonstrance of the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland of the date, March 26. 1646. Yet
nevertheless we do so earnestly desire, and so highly value the easing of the
heavy Pressures under which both Kingdoms groan, and the bringing of this
bloody lasting war to a speedy and happy and, considering with-all that not
only the Book of Common Prayer, and the Prelaticall Government are abolished,
and a Common Directory of Worship established in both Kingdoms, but that
likewise the Ordinances before mentioned do contain diverse Parts of a Positive
Reformation, and uniformity in Church Government, unto which we formerly gave
our consent in our answer upon the whole Propositions of Peace, of the 20. of
April, and for so happy beginning, and so good a foundation laid for the
future, we heartily thank God, and do acknowledge the Zeal, Piety, and
Wisdom of the Honorable Houses therein, remembering also that those
Ordinances do not contain the whole moddell of Church Government, and that
the Houses had been pleased to express [ that it cannot be expected that a
perfect Rule in every particular should be settled all at once, but that there
will be need of suppliments, and additions, and happily of alterations in some
things, as experience shall bring to light the necessity thereof] upon these
Considerations as we do cheerfully consent to many material Parts of these
Propositions, so we Resolve to make no let, but to give way to the sending of
such other particulars therein contained, with which we are unsatisfied in the
matters for the Reasons formerly Represented to both Houses, of which some
still stand in force, though others of them be taken away by the new
expedients, it being always understood that our not Dissenting from, nor our
opposing of the sending of the Propositions as they now stand, shall be no
prejudice nor impediment to all or any one of the Articles of the Solemn
League and Covenant, especially to the first Article, concerning the
preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, against our common enemies, the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, and example
of the best Reformed Churches, and the bringing of the Churches of God in the
three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, form of Church Government, Directory for Worship, and
Catechizing; which thing both Kingdoms are by Covenant obliged sincerely and
really to endeavor, and that not for a time, but constantly, so that neither
of the Kingdoms can be loosed or acquitted from the most strait and solemn
obligation of their continued and constant endeavoring these good ends so
far as any of them is not yet attained, it being also understood that our
concurrence to the sending of the Propositions shall be without prejudice to
any Agreement or Treaty between the Kingdoms, and shall not infringe any
engagement made to the Kingdom of Scotland, nor be any hinderance to our
insisting upon the other Propositions already made known to the Houses; and it
being understood that it is not our Judgment that every particular and
circumstance of th^se Propositions is of so great importance to these
Kingdoms, as Peace and War should depend thereupon.

Upon these grounds which we make known only for clearing our consciences, and
for discharging Our selves in the trust put upon us, without the least thought
of retarding the so much longed for Peace; We condescend and agree that the
Propositions as they are now resolved upon be in the name of both Kingdoms
presented to the King, whose heart we beseech the Lord wholly to incline to the
Councels of Truth and Peace.

June 25. 1646.
Die Veneris 26. Iunii, 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, that the Marquess of Argyles
Speech, with the Paper concerning the Propositions be forthwith printed and
published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

And at the same time with the foresaid Paper there was another Paper delivered
in unto the Parliament, being a Letter from his Majesty to the Marquess of
Ormond, in Ireland, discharging all further Treaty with the Irish Rebels (for
thus now blessed be God, His Majesty was pleased to term them, not Catholic
Subjects, as formerly) and this being a business of so high and eminent
concernment, I have here also thought fit to give the Reader a Copy thereof,
which was as follows.

CHARLES. REX.

His Majesty's Letter to the Marquess of Ormond.
RIght trusty, etc. Having long with much grief looked upon the sad condition
which our Kingdom of Ireland has bin in these diverse years through the wicked
and desperate Rebellion there, and the bloody effects which have ensued
thereupon, for the settling whereof we would have wholly applied our selves, if
the difference betwixt us and our subjects here had not diverted and withdrawn
us, and not having bin able by force (for that respect) to reduce them, we were
necessitated for the present safety of our Protestant subjects there, to give
you power and authority to treat with them, upon such pious, honorable, and
safe grounds as the good of that our Kingdom did then require, But for many
reasons too long for a Letter, We think fit to require you to proceed no
farther in Treaty with the Rebels, nor to engage us upon any conditions with
them after sight hereof, And having formerly ^ound such Real proofs of your
ready obedience to our commands, We doubt not of your care in this; wherein our
service and the good of the Protestant subjects in Ireland, is so much
con^erned.

From New Castle the 11. of June, 1646.

The Propositions for Peace sent to the King.
And upon the 29. of this instant June, the Lords and Commons in Parliament held
a serious debate and Consultation about the the time, and persons by whom to
send away the Propositions for a happy Peace among us (which now they had quite
finished, and as was forementioned our Dear Brethren of Scotland had fully and
fairly assented unto) for his Majesty to sign and confirm unto us. And now all
these late and last admirable pass^ges of Divine provicence thus sweetly and
amiably concurring to make us a most happy (o-that they may make us a most
holy) people by our gracious and grateful improvement of them to the best
advantage of Gods glory and our best good both for Soul and body, I will now
most joyfully and thankfully close up all with that of the blessed Prophet
David, Psalm. 30 11, 12
that sacred and sugared Singer of Israel. Thou O Lord, have, for us, turned our
mourning into Dancing; thou have put off our Sackcloth, and girded as with
gladness. To the end that our Glory may Sing praise to thee, and not be
silent; O Lord our God we will therefore give thanks to thee for ever and ever.

And thus, I a poor weak and most unworthie instrument, the meanest, I say
and most unable of many thousands, having now, by the good hand and help of
Divine providence, even by the only aid and assistance of the Lord my good
God, led you on (my Dear Christian brethren) thus far in the full and fair
view and perusal of this so famous and renowned history (though I confess in
a very plain and unpolisht style) and in the most blessed and beautiful sight
of this admirable and amiable wonder of the Burning-Bush, Ehen-Ezer.
hitherto Vncons^med, yea, hitherto, I say, even most miraculously prospered
and preserved even to a strongly hoped period of our bloody wars, and happy
enjoyment of sweet and precious Peace, I say, if now at last Pride and wanton
ingratitude to God and men (I mean mainly, our Loyal and loving Brethren of
Scotland) cut us not short thereof in the haven of our hoped happiness: not
withstanding all the most violent flames of malice, and virulent fury of
unreasonable and outrageous men, yea of such Ephesian Beasts as the holy
Apostle Paul was forced to fight with for the vindication of his great Masters
immaculate Cause, unsported Truth: what shall I say more unto you all, my dear
Brethren, the honest and happy Readers of this honorable History, the blessed
eyewitnesses, and possessors of all these rich and rare forementioned mercies?
The summary use of all.
I will now most thankfully shut up all with a word or two (and but a brief
word or two) as having in all my former parts of this Parliamentary Chroni^le
said so much already in this kind) of Christian Caution, Caution and
Exhortation.
and Exhortation to you all in general, as to mine own soul in particular;
First then, has our good God out of his mere mercy and free favor and grace
in Christ Jesus only, 1 Caution.
been so bountiful unto us, a sinful Nation, as thus to load us with his
love, even then when we have been loading him with our sins and provocations?
Has he thus remembered us in our low estate, as not only to let us be, as at
this day, a Nation, a People; but a beloved Nation, yea even as it were a
people desired? Has the Lord not only given us our lives as a prey unto us,
but also given our cruell-hearted and bloudy-minded enemies, as bread for us to
eat and devour? And, Zechar. 10. 5.
herein fulfilled and made good his Word and Promise to his people; That they
shall be as mighty men which tread down their Enemies in the mire of the
streets, in the battle, and that they shall fight because the Lord is with
them, and that the Riders on Horses shall be confounded; Has the Lord, I say,
done all this for us to the full, and yet shall we still go on to break his
Commandments, Ezra 9. 6.
and say in our hearts, we are delivered to do all kind of wickedness and
abomination? Would not the Lord then be very angry with us, till he had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, no aescaping for us? Should we
not thus too justly cause that complaint of Moses against the Children of
Israel, to come fully against us. Deuteronomy 32. 6.
Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise? O what will all our
Victories and successes avail us, and what a most miserable Conquest will it
be unto us that all our Kingdoms enemies are conquered unto us; if our own
Souls, if our own Consciences be conquered and led captive at the Devils will,
by our inbred base lusts, and unconquered corruptions? O will not these, think
you, gangrene our souls and bodies too, and bring upon us a far worse and
Epidemicall destruction both to our bodies and souls; yea, I say, to our whole
Kingdom and Estates, Ier. 37. 10.
and make our late v^nquished enemies, though thus smitten, weak and wounded,
to he raised up again against us (as the Lord threatened by the Prophet) if we
securely and rebelliously retain our old sins and transgressions against him?
O let us then most seriously, yea, I say, frequently and servently think upon
that known Caution of our most blessed Savior himself, to the Lame man whom
he had healed of an old infirmity, John 5. 14.
Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee; least having been cleansed
from our former old Jesuiticall and Prelaticall tyrannies over our souls and
consciences, and Monarchical Arbitrary oppressions and vexation^ over our
Estates and Liberties; lest I say, being healed and dispossessed of these
Devils incarnate, we grow supine and careless, yea ungrateful and graceless,
Mat. 12. 45.
and so God suffer those Satan's to return, who finding all both in Church and
State swept and garnisht with security and impiety, they enter again into our
hearts and houses, with seven other Devils worse (if possible) than themselves,
and then our last condition prove far worse than the former.

Let us therefore for this purpose, 2 Exhortation
remember our late solemn Covenant to our God (whatsoever any profane Esaus,
and Sons of Belial: or decei^full hearted Sons of Schi^^^ and S^^^tion
impiously be^ch or broa^h against it) of a Nation^ll and Personal Reformation;
Reformation both National and personal.
and let us now deal seriously (as then we seemed to promise) and be in good
earnest with our God, in a speedy and effectual building of his House after
the clearest Scripture manner, and with the purest Reformed Churches of the
world. Building of Gods house.
O therefore, that our renowned Parliament would seriously and sincerely do
something herein, especially for the purging of Gods House, at this time,
Schism and Error petitioned against.
from dangerous and damnable Errors, Schisms and blasphemous Opinions of too
audacious and most impudent Sectaries, who (if not timely and truly removed)
will, like mortiferous gangreenes, The danger of it briefly described.
indeed, prodigiously ulcerate, and most pestilentially vulnerate, even to the
very heart, the whole Body of Church and State; for indeed, no disease is so
dangerous both to soul and body as that in Religion, which infects the soul,
and offends God most of all; The building of Gods house petitioned.
Error (I say) obstinate Error being that stiffenecked Strumpet which most
odiously adulterates the Marriage Bed of Faith, and causes the most dangerous
divorce twixt Christ and his Spouse, Hest. 6. 3.
the Soul. O therefore I say, that our most worthy Parliamentary Patriots, the
Kingdoms able Physicians, would seasonably and seriously set upon this great
cure, by settling a Church Government among us, according to the tenor of our
holy League and sacred Covenant; O that these our most renowned Parliamentary
Scaligers, having made that honest, righteous, and just objection or scrutinie
among themselves, which Heathen Ahasuerus made to himself and his Nobles,
touching noble and welldeserving Mordecay. But what honor and dignity has
been done for him? So they, but what extraordinary thing, what due dignity and
honor have we done for our best-deserving good God, that has so admirably
hastened to build the House of our State and Kingdom? And would now thereupon
seriously hasten effectually to build his House, The great fault and ^ayling of
these times.
and (casting away with true Christian courage and confidence all cursed
carnal pleas, and graceless and groundless false fears) trust God with the
issues and effects, as all-sufficient to patronage and protect his own
acceptable work (as this unquestionably is) maugre the mal^ce of malignant or
fraudulent opposers whomsoever.

Now what reasons they have hereunto, yea what grounds and encouragements
beyond expression, they have extraordinarily to stimulate and stir up their
hearts to this so noble and renowned a work, who (certainly) sees not, Who
wilfully and wickedly blindes not his eyes? Yet notwithstanding, a little more
(now at last) to rub up their memories, Scripture Eye Salve.
and clear up the eyes of my Christian Brethren with a little
Scripture-collyrium, or Eye Salve of evidences; I shall desire the godly
Reader, with pious patience, seriously to consider and peruse these few
following* 2 Chronicles. 16. 9 Gods eye of providence over us.
Textuall testimonies. First, have not the eyes of the Lord (ever since this
Parliament began) in a most eminent and evident manner) run too and fro,
throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland; yea, and into France and Denmark
too, to preserve us, and to prevent our enemies intended mischiefs against us,
and thus, shown himself most strong and most wise in the behalf of them
(though a small remnant in England, Scotland, and Ireland) whose hearts were
perfect toward him? Has not the Lord (as he promised by the Prophet) turned
our days of fasting, Zeche. 8. 1^. Our Fasts turned into Feasts.
and of humiliation, into days of feasting and congratulation; even the fast
of our first Month and Year, and the fast of our fourth and fifth month and
year as I may say, to be to us his English Judah, joy and gladness, and
cheerful feasts and times of great and glorious Thanksgivings; O therefore, O
therefore I say, That we would cordially and constantly love the Truth and
Peace. Again, has not the Lord made good that good word of his unto us, Number.
23. 13.
and have we not all seen, and found, and felt to our unexpressible joy and
comfort, that certainly there could be no enchantment against Gods Jacob, No
enchanment or Divination against Gods Israel.
nor any Divination against his Israelites (and who are they but princely
prevailers, in Prayer, and sacred supplanters of sinful enormities, some
gleanings of both which sorts, by Christ who has strengthened them, I doubt
not but God has found amongst us) for, even according to these times it may
justly be said of Jacob and Israel, (of England and Scotland) what and how many
admirable things has God wrought for us, Isa 54. 17.
not suffering any weapon that was formed against us to prosper, No weapon
formed against us has pro^pered.
and graciously condemning every tongue that rose up in rash and wrathful
judgment against us. Nay, and has not the Lord, again, on the other side,
made good his faithful promise to us his people, excellently set forth by holy
Jeremy; that all they that thirsted to devour us, are themselves devoured,
Jer. 30. 16, 17. Our devourers are devoured, and our spoyler^ are spoiled.
and all our adversaries, even every one of them have tasted misery; and they
that spoiled us are spoiled, and all (for the most part) that preyed upon us,
the Lord has given as a prey unto us; but, has mercifully (as the Prophet
there excellently and most pertinently to our purpose, and case and condition
goes on) restored health unto us, and graciously healed us of our formerly felt
and feared wounds; the enemy having called and counted us outcasts. (even
Traitors and Rebels) saying in scorn and derision of us, This is Sion, (these
are the fasting and Praying Roundheads) whom no man seeks after, but to
deride and ruinate them. Ezekiel 20. 38 The rega^^ Rebels purged out of the
Kingdom.
Again, has not the Lord according to his yet further most faithful promise,
by his holy Prophet Ezekiel, purged out from among us the Rebels indeed, both
English, Irish, French, and Germane Rebels, who sorely transgressed against our
God; and has forced them forth out of our Country and Kingdom, where they
sojourned (witness Windebanke, Finch, Newcastle, Goring, both Father and
Son, Jermine, Digby, Langdale, and the rest) and God would not let them enter
into, nor abide in our now most hopeful Land of rest and peace: Isay 66. 5.
yea, The Royalists impious hypocrisy unmasked.
has not the Lord (as he further said of them by pious Isaiah) accordingly
made it good unto us? Your Brethren (the Royalists) that hated you, and
strugled and strove to cast you out, and pretending (but most falsely) that it
was for my names sake, deceitfully said, Let the Lord be glorified; but this
our wise, our righteous and good God has contrariwise appeared unto our joy,
and they themselves are confounded and ashamed. All this, I say, the Lord has
done for us; all these ample and admirable testimonies we have seen and found
to assure us that God is with us, Great encouragements for Gods Children.
and therefore we ought wonderfully to be confirmed and encouraged against
whatsoever men or Devils can do against us; wherefore from all these p^evalent
premises on our enemies, and precious promises made good to us, Job 5. 27.
Mark this O England.
we may justly say with holy Job; Lo, thus we have searched and seen; so it
is, hear it ( O England) and know thou it for thy good. The Lord is wise in
heart, and mighty in strength; who ever hardened himself against him and has
prospered? Isa 19. 11, 12, 13, 14.
None certainly, A true description of the Kings Counselors.
for as the Prophet Isaiah excellently to this purpose, surely the Princes and
Grandees of the world, even carnal and Atheistical machivillian Statists are
very fools, and the counsel of such wifest Counselors is but base and
brutish; for (as he goes on admirably) how say ye of Pharaah (so I of
Bristoll, Cottington, and Digby) I am the Son of the wise, the Son of
ancient Princes and Peers: But where are they now? Where are those wise men?
What Is become of their craftiest cursed Counsel? hence therefore we may
clearly conclude with Jethro, Exodus 18. 11.
Moses Father in Law, and with him say most certainly, Now I know that the Lord
is greater than all gods, than all the most potent and politic Peers and
Potentates of the world, for in those very things wherein they dealt most
proudly, Isa 51. 12, 13.
and lifted up themselves most superciliously, A just objurgation, and too true
taxation on all.
he has admirably all along been still above them; Give me leave now therefore
in a word or two for conclusion, to speak plainly to any, to all of what
rank, order, or condition soever they be; Who art thou (O cowardly, carnal
man, so leaning on the arm of Flesh, and consulting with mere carnal reason)
that thou should still notwithstanding all that has been done, and said,
and seen be afraid of man that shall dye; yea, thus dye (as thou have, heard
and seen) with shame and obloquie; or that thou should^t dread any Son of
Man which shall be made as Grass? And forgettest the Lord thy God and Maker,
and have manifested too evidently that thou fear continually every day with
strange pusilanimity, unchristianly cowardice, fond and false fears and
imaginary conceited Chimera's; and all this forsooth because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to devour and destroy, and yet (says the
Lord unto thee) where is the fury of the oppressor? Psalm. ^6. 7, 10 An
exhortation to Christian courage and godly resolution.
what is become of all his braggs and boastings, even to this day? O let us then
put on Princely David's Christian courage and resolution, and fear and confide
in the Lord alone, and with his invincible magnanimity of soul and spirit say,
and say most justly, Thou, even thou alone, O Lord, art to be feared; for, who
may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? For thou have made the wrath of man
(as it is at this day) to praise thee, and the remainder of his wrath thou have
wonderfully restrained, as is most evident to all (...) eyes and understanding.
O therefore I say, again and again to our Honorable Parliament, and
reverend* Assembly, to the noble City of London, and our famous Army, since we
have seen with our eyes, Exodus 19. 4, 5.
as well as by the hearing of our ears, what the Lord our God has done to our
unreasonable and incorrigible enemies on the one side; and how he has most
graciously borne us, as it were on Eagles wings, and brought us (in his
infinite mere mercy) thus near unto himself; on the other side. Break off
from sin.
O therefore I say to my self; to all; O that we would now at length obey his
voice indeed, O that we would now break off from our provoking sins, and most
seriously break our hearts for our sins, with that godly sorrow which is unto
Repentance never to be repented of: And that we would cordially* and
conscientiously remember and keep our solemn (...) Covenant made with our
God, Remember our Covenant.
and with one another; and with a speedy and pious resolution would pay our
vows, B^^ld Gods House.
especially that, to build up Gods House, to set up a Church Government most
substantially; that is, as near as may be in a Scripturall Model, Love our
Brethren of Scotland.
and therein lovingly to join with our most loving Brethren of Scotland, most
worthy perpetually to be embraced by us, with all due expressions of most
cordial love and endless amity; Our Brethren of Scotland were the main mean;
of procuring this present Parliament. Exodus 19. 5.
as having been (under God) the maine means, if not, only instruments of
purchasing and procuring for us this present precious Parliament; and so
consequently, of all our had and hoped happiness: and let us for shame, oh for
foul shame let us leave off our unchristian, our ungrateful, our ungracious
biting of them, and snarling at one another; thankfully and religiously
laboring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace and pure Love;
for then, oh then, and not till then the Lord will certainly make us a peculiar
Treasure to himself, above all the people of the world. To this, say Amen, O
Lord, I pray thee, by the work of thy Spirit of Grace in Christ Jesus; and let
All that read and hear it together with Me, from the bottom and root of their
hearts and souls, say unto it, Amen, and Amen.

A Convenient Corollarie pertinent to the Premises; OR, Angliae Menses
Mirabiles, Englands Marveilous Months.
ANd, now, that the Reader may, (for his yet more clear light and delight, as
it were, Uno oculo et intuitu) See and admire the resplendent luster of our
late most Marveilous Months, and therein, the admirable goings and doings of
our Wonder-working God, in the latter end of the last Summer and this last
Winter, 1645. I have here, I say, for Gods greater glory and the Reader more
full content and Satisfaction, collected and set down together, an on
ocular-Summarie and breife Map, as it were, all the Towns, Castles, Garrisons
or Strong Holds taken from the Enemy: And all the field fights and famous
Victories obtained, since the happy setting forth of the greatly despised and
vilipended New-Modell'd-Armie under the victorious Conduct and Command of ever
to be renowned Sir Thomas Fairefax, his Excellency, the most Successful
Captain General of all the Parliaments forces over the whole kingdom. All
atcheived within the space of 8. or 9. Months, or a very little more beginning
from Midd-June. 1645.

Taken from the Enemy since Nasbies most famous Uictorie. 1645.
1. LEicester Town and Castle. p. 171. 2. Ilchester Garrison. p. 175. 3.
Stoksey-Castle. p. 177. 4. Caus-Castle. p. 177. 5. Heighworth-Garrison. p. 180
6. Carleisle Town and Castle p. 186 7. Sharward^n-Castle. p. 187 8.
Langport-Garrisons. p. 190 9. Burrough-Garrison. p. 194 10. Bridgewater Town
and Castle. p. 197 11. Cannon-Froom-Garrison. p. 230. 12. Pontifract-Castle. p.
201 13 Scarborough Castle p. 202 14 Rabbi Castle. p. 203 15 Bath Town and
Castle. p. 203 16 Chadwick Garrison. p. 203 17 Sherburn Town and Castle. p. 255
18 Port-shed strong Fort at Bristoll. p. 260 19 Nunnie Castle. p. 260 20
Bristoll Town and Castle. p. 265 21 Cardiffe Town and Castle. p. 276 22
Devizes Town and Castle. p. 276 23 Lacock Garrison, p. 277 24 Almost all
Pembrook-shire reduced to the Parliament. p. 277 25 Barkley Castle. p. 283 26
Farleigh Castle. p. 286 27 Sandall Castle. p. 286 28 Winchester Town and
Castle. p. 287 29 Basing strong Garrison. p. 287 30 Langford Garrison. p. 296
31 Chepstow Town and Castle. p. 292 32 Dawley Castle. 33 Moorton-Corbet House,
a strong Garrison. p. 34 Rooton Castle. 35 Linsill Manor Garrison. 36
Apley-house Garrison. p. 115 37 Tiverton Town and Castle. p. 300 38 Carmarthen
Town and Castle. p. 302 39 Monmouth Town and Castle. p. 302 40 Shelford
Garrison p. 313 41 Picton Castle. 42 Abarashwait Garrison. p. 315 43 Worton
Garrison. p. 316 44 Wiverton Garrison. p. 316 45 Welbeck Garrison: p. 316 46
Boulton Castle. p. 318 47 Beiston Castle. p. 48 Haverford West. p. 255 49
Latham house a strong Garrison. p. 329 50 Fulford Garrison. p. 329 51 Hereford
Town and Castle. p. 330 52 Callantine Garrison. p. 337 53 The happy releife of
Taunton a third time equivalent to the taking of a Town. p. 187 54 Carew
Castle. p. 95 55 Skipton Castle. p. 337 56 Embleden Castle p. 57 Cannon Tean, a
strong Fort p. 336 58 Canterbury Fort. p. 340 59 St Budeaux Church. p. 341 60
Bovie-Tracie. p. 341 61 Ilminster. p. 341 62 Ashburton. p. 341 63 Totnes. p.
342 64 Okehampton. p. 342 65 Plymouth totally releeved. p. 348 66 Sir Francis
Drakes house a strong Hold. p. 348 67 Dartmouth Town and Castle. p. 353 68
Pouldram Castle. p. 358 69 Westchester Town and Castle, p 361 70 Holt-Church
Garrison. 71 Belvoir Castle. p. 361 72 Torrington Garrison. p, 366 73 Cardiff
Town retaken and the Castle preserved. 74 Corfe Castle. p. 372 75 Lanceston
Garrison. p. 374 76 Abington again admirably preserved. p. 375 77 Ashbie De La
Zouch. p. 378 78 Bodman a strong Garrison. p* 379 79 Listithiel a Garrison. p.
379 80 Ware Bridge a Garrison. p 379 81 Mount Edgecombe a Garrison. p. 383 82
Castle-Dennis a Garrison. 83 Salt-Ash a Garrison. p. 84 Saint Cullumb a
Garrison. p. 388 85 Truro a Garrison. p. 400 86 Maus Castle. p. 395 87 Penrin a
Garrison. p. 88 St. Ellens a Garrison. p. 89 Flamouth. p. 395 90 Foy a strong
Garrison. p. 391 91 Shruardon Castle. p. 296 92 Gooderich Castle. p. 397 93
Inch-house a Garrison. p. 402 94 Hilford Castle. p. 401 95 Pouldram strong
Fort. p. 402 96 High-Archall a strong Garrison. p. 403 97 Bridgenorth Town. p.
403 98 Portland Castle. p. 404 99 Exmouth Fort. p. 404 100 Dennington Castle.
p. 404 101 Ruthin Castle. p. 408 102 The City of Exeter with all its strong
Forts. p 411 103 Barnstable Town and Castle. p. 412 104 St. Michaels Mount. p.
412 105 Titbury Castle. p. 413 106 Aburisthwait Castle. p. 412 107 Dunster
Castle. p 412 108 Woodstock Garrison. p 413 109 Bridgenort^ Castle. p. 413 110
Newark a strong Garrison. p. 419 111 Banbury Castle. p. 421 112 Hartlebury
Castle. p 422 113 Ludlow Town and Castle. p. 422 114 Muschamp-bridge and Fort.
p. 327 115 All Pembrook-shire reduced. p. 277 116 Padstow in Cornwall. p. 386
117 Bostol Garrison. p. 443 118 Carnarvan Town and Castle. p. 443 119 Dudley
Castle. p 444 Beaumorris Town and Castle. p. 446 120 Oxford. p 446
A Catalogue of all the famous Defeates, or Field-fights, and glorious
Victories obtained by the Parliaments Forces since the midst of June. 1645.
1 THe most famous set Battle, and glorious Victory, by Gods great mercy
obtained at Nasebie. p. 159 2 A brave Defeat given to the Enemy at
Kiddarminster in Worcestershire. p. 3 A brave Defeat given to the enemies on
the Welsh side of the River Dee. p. 4 The famous Victory obtained through fire
and water, over Gorings forces at Langport in the West. p. 190 5 The Western
Clubmen beaten out of the Field upon Hambleton hill, by the Parliaments forces.
p. 253 6 A brave Defeat given to the enemy near Stamford in Lincolnshire. p.
251 7 The brave Victory obtained over our Welsh enemies at Coleby-moore in
Wales, near Haverford west. p. 255 8 A brave Defeat given to the enemy near
Redding. p. 261 9 The great and most famous Victory obtained by our dear
Brethren of Scotland over Montrosse. p. 270 10 A brave Defeat given to the
enemy at Kiddarminster. p. 276 11 The famous Victory obtained against the Kings
Forces (going to relieve Chester) at Houten-Health. p. 278 12 A brave Defeat
given to the enemy near Oxford. p. 286 13 A brave Defeat given to the enemies
at Farringdon, by Abbington forces. p. 294 14 A brave Defeat given to the
enemies forces of Banbury, conducting Rupert and Maurice to Newark. p. 296 15
The famous Victory obtained over the Lord Digby and Sir Mar. Langdale, at
Sherburn in Yorkshire. p. 297 16 A brave Defeat given to the enemy (near
Denbigh Castle) intending to relieve Chester. p. 304 17 A brave Defeat given to
the enemy at Holt-bridge. p. 305 18 Another famous Defeat given to Digby and
Langdale, marching into Scotland to Montrosse. p. 306 19 A third shattering and
spoiling of Digbies scattered Forces, till they were quite brought to nothing.
p. 314 20 A brave Defeat given to the enemy near unto Cannon Froom. p. 318 21
A very brave Defeat given to the Lord Ashton, wherein himself was slain. p.
320 22 A brave Defeat given to the enemy in Gloucestershire, wherein that
French Renegado Major Deuteronomy was slain. p. 324 23 A brave Field-Victory obtained
over the enemy (besides the taking of the Garrison) at Bovie-Tracie p. 341 24 A
brave Defeat given to the enemy at Wallingford Garrison by Abbington forces. p.
352 25 A brave Defeat given to the enemy at Cark, near unto Stafford. p. 358
26 Plymouth releeved, and totally unbesieged and set at liberty, with a brave
Victory. p. 348 27 A brave Defeat given to the enemy at Ashby De la Zouch. p.
104 and 363 28 A brave Victory obtained by our renowned General Sir Thomas
Fairfax, at Torrington, in the West. p. 365 29 A brave Victory obtained by
Major General Laughorne at Cardiffe. p. 370 Abbington most fiercely assaulted,
and bravely defended and preserved. p. 375 A brave Defeat given to the enemy at
Wareham. p. 175 A brave Defeat given to the enemy in Cheshire. p. 175 A brave
Defeat given to the enemy by Colon. Venables, in Cheshire. p. 180 A brave
Defeat given to the enemy near Farrindon. p. 406 30 A brave Defeat given to
the enemy by Colonel Moore. p. 382 31 A brave Defeat given to the enemy at St.
Cullumb in the West. p. 388 32 Sir William Vaughan well beaten by Captain
Ashley, and the Committee of Shrewsburies brave activity. p. 396 33 The famous
Fight and glorious Victory obtained against Sir Jacob Ashley. p. 397 34 A
brave Defeat given to the Kings Horse near Farringdon. p. 294 35 A brave
Defeat given to Denbigh Forces by Colonel Mi^on. p. 409 36 A brave Defeat
given to the Raglanders by Sir Trevor Williams. p. 410
And yet to make the work of the Lord more excellent and admirable unto our
eyes and hearts; I have here also thou^h it very pertinent to the close of this
our most famous History, and Parliamentary Chronicle, to give the Reader
another Ocular Map, and summary sight of all (as near as possible I could) the
Earls, Lords, Knights, Colonells, Lieutenant Colonells, Serjeant-Majors,
Majors, Captains, and Gentlemen of worth and quality (to go no lower, lest we
should run Ad infinitam) slain by the hand of Gods wrath in fight, and cut off
by the hand of Justice for Treason against the State; on the Kings Party, since
this most unhappy and unnatural Civil War began among us, in this our
sinful (and therefore thus distressed) Kingdom; besides, very many such
others as could not, nominatim, be yet made known unto us.

Psalm 58. 10, 11. The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees Gods vengeance on
the wicked, and shall wash his feet in their blood; so that a man shall say,
verily there is a God that Judges the earth.
The Slain on the Kings side.
1 THe Earl of Lindsey, the Lord General of the Kings Army that appeared in
the Field at first against the Parliament. Part 2. Page 197 2 The Lord George
Stuart, being Lord of Aubignie in France. p. 2, p. ibidem 3 The Lord John
Stuart. p. 3 p. 190 4 The Lord Bernhard Stuart, Earl of Litchfield. p. 4. p.
281 All these three brave young Lords, being of the blood Royal, and all three
brothers to the Duke of Lenox. 5 The Earl of Northampton, p. 2. p. 287 6 The
Earl of Denbigh, p. 2. p. 296 7 The Earl of Carnarvan, p. 2. p. 420 8 The
Earl of Sunderland, p. 2. p. ibid 9 The Earl of Kingstone, p. 3 p. 7. 10 The
Earl of Strafford beheaded for Treason on the Tower Hill. p. 1. p. 31 11. The
Lord Grandison. p. 2 p. 420 12 The Lord Faukland. p. 2 p. ibid 13 The Lord
Carey, Son to the Earl of Monmouth. p. 3. p. 277 14 The Lord Ashton. p. 4 p.
320 15 The Marquess of Viville a French Lord. p. 2. p. 415 16 The Arch-Prelate
of Canterbury beheaded for Treason, on Tower Hill. p. 4. p. 86 17 General
Cavendish, p. 3 p. 9 18 General Mynne. p. 4. p. 4 19 Sir Edward Varney. p. 2
p. 195 20 Sir John Harper. p. 2. p. 243 21 Sir Bevill Greenvill, Son to the
Marquess of Hartfort. p. 2 p. 381 22 Sir George Bowls. p. 3. p. 47 23 Sir
William Wentworth, brother to the Earl of Strafford. p. 3. p. 144 24 Sir
Francis Da^res, near kinsman to the Lord Dacres, p. 3 p. ibid 25 Sir William
Lambton. p. ib 26 Sir Marmaduke Loudson, p. ibid 27 Sir Thomas Metton, p. ibid
28 Mounsieur Saint Paul, a French Gentleman. p. ibid 29 Sir Richard Goodhill.
ib. 30 Sir Alexander Carew, beheaded for Treason on the Tower Hill. p. 4. p. 86
31 Sir John Hotham beheaded also for Treason on Tower hill. p. 4. p. 86 32 Sir
Henry Gage. p. 4. p 33 Sir William Crosts. p. 4 p. 178 34 Sir Thomas Not. p.
4. p. 180 35 Sir Owen. p. 4 p. 122 36 Sir Brian Stapleton. p. 4. p 37 Sir
Francis Carnabie. p. 4 p. 38 Sir Richard Hutton. p. 4 p. 39 Colonel Monroe. p.
2. p. 19^ 40 Col. Wane. p. 3. p. 144 41 Col. Ewers. Nephew to the Lord Ewers.
p. ibid 42 Col. Roper, brother to the Lord Balting-glasse. p. ibid 43 Col.
Slingsby, Son to Sir William Slingsby. p. ibid 44 Col. Fenwick, eldest Son to
Sir John Fenwick. p. ibid 45. Col. Prideaux. p. ibid 46 Col. Atkins. p. ibid 47
Col. Marrow. p. 4. p. 11 48 Col. Baynes. p. 4. p. 16 49 Col. Conyers. p. 4. p.
16 50* General Gorings brother. p. 4. p. 59 51. Col. Houghton, Son to Sir
Gilb. Houghton. p. 3. p. 144 52 General Gorings Quartermaster Genesis of horse.
p. 4. p 53 Genesis Gorings Quartermaster of foot. p. 4. p 54 Col. Phillips. p. 4.
p. 123 55 Lieutenant Col. Ward. p. 2 p. 381 56 Lieut. Col. Howard. p. 2 p. ibid
57 Lieut. Col. Bowls. p. 3 p. 97 58 Lieut. Col. Lisle. p. 3 p. 144 59 Lieut.
Col. Stonywood. p. 3 p. 16 60 Seajeant Major Beaumont. p. 2. p. 263 61 Ser.
Major Purvey. p. 2 p. 269 62 Ser. Major Smith. p. 2 p. 3. 10 63 Ser. Maj.
Lower. p. 2. p. 381 64 Ser. Maj. Wells. p. 2. p. 405 65 The Major of Preston,
Mr. Adams. p. 2. p. 269 Major Heskith. p. 4. p. 16 67 Major Trevillian. p. 4. p
68 Major Hatton Farmar. p. 4. p 94 69 Major Pilkington. p. 4 p. 138 70 Major
Duet. p. 4. p. 324 71 Major Heynes. p. 4. p 72 Major Pollard. p. 4. p. 356 73
Captain Wrey. p. 2. p 74 Captain Bins. p. 2. p 1 75 Captain Houghton. p. 2
p. 69 76 Captain He^ham beheaded on the Tower Hill. p. 4. p 77 Captain
Baggot. p. 4. p 78 Captain James p. 2 p. 381 79 Capt. Cornisham. p. 2 p. 110
80 Capt. Plunket. p. 3. p. 110 81 The Kings Standard Bearer at that Fight where
and when the Earl of Northampton was slain. p. 2. p. 288 82 Sir John Smith,
brother to the Lord Carington. p. ibib 83 Dr. Weston a Physician. p. 2. p. 263
84 An Earl, or such like eminent Personage found slain in the field at Nasebie
fight, with a Star and a red Cross upon his Coat, but his name or title not
known. p. 4. p. 163, 164 85 Major Threave. p. 4. p 86 Captain Fry. p. 4. p 87
Col. Billingsly. p. 4 p. 403 88 Capt. Cottingham. p. 4 p. 409 89 Major Caft. p.
291 90 Six Priests slain in Bazing House. p. 291 91 Lieut. Col. Gardener. p. 4
p. 123
Besides many, yea very many more found sla^ne on the places and ground where
they fought, but not named or known who they were; very many buried by the
enemies themselves* in the places where they were slain; and very many thrown
into rivers and secretly conveyed away out of the Feilds, One hundred and forty
Cartloads of dead and wounded at Newbery fight, some at Brainford, at
Dorchester and Causham, at Marston-moore.
where they fought before their flight, and total routs, at least 140.
Cart-loads (as was credibly related) of slain and sorely wounded carried to
Oxford from Newburies first fight; many Cart-loads carried away, and many
buried in Ditches at Brainford fight, many also at Dorchester and Causham
fights near Oxford; many at Marstonmoores famous fight, and very many in many
other places, too tedious here to recite, yea impossible almost to be recited;
besides such as being left behind in the sields where they fought, who being
stripped appeared plainly to be Gentlemen, and men of extraordinary worth and
quality, both by their pure white skins, fine shirts, and very rich clothes,
but could not otherwise be known unto us. And let the intelligent and
judicious Reader take this observation from this short Catalogue of the (thus)
slain on the Kings party, even of those, partly ignorant, and partly malignant
enemies and opposers of God and his most righteous Cause, defended by the
Parliament, viz. To see and take notice of, especially the just revenging hand
of God upon our Kingdoms Nobility and Gentry, who having been the maine
malignant and even Atheistical enemies of Religion, of the power of
godliness, and of a pure and thorough Reformation, all along, even ever since
the first Infant Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days of ever blessed memory;
I say, over the whole Kingdom even to these present deplorable times. God has
therefore now at length mightily met with them thus, by the Sword of War,
whom ('it is more than probable) the Sword of Justice, in a Legal way, would
hardly have, reached (or but sprincklingly and partially, for fear or
affection, or such like (...)-respects, as it is much to be feared) and brought
to severe (yet most just) death and condign punishment; Of which most
righteous and remarkable hand of God, more, (yea most) immediately (and almost
miraculously) cutting off many of these most impious and audacious malignant
and Atheistical enemies of the Parliamentary Cause, even in the very act of
their desperate and devilish malignity against the same; whosoever would see
more, they may be most abudantly satisfied, even to admiration and
astonishment, in my First and Second part of A Looking-glass for Malignants, A
Lookingglasse for Malignants.
so entitled, printed by Mr. John Rothwell Stationer, at the Sign of the Sun
in Paul's Churchyard in London, Anno 1643. and 1645. The like examples
whereunto, both for manner, number, and time, no Age or History (I am
confident) is able to produce, in any part of the world from Adam to this day.

And here also I conceive it cannot be improper to our present History, or
impertinent to the yet further manifestation of Gods due glory in his work of
Justice upon the enemies of his Truth, and the Kingdoms welfare, to give the
Reader a brief Catalogue of all, or the most of those Court-Grandees, and
rottenhearted Royalists, who like so many Rats and Mice, fearing the old house
of their Traitorous Designs, was now ready to fall upon their own heads, to
their own ruin, even that the hand of Justice would now lay hold on them, and
pay them home for all their formerly purposed and practiced mischeifes, for the
ruinating of the true Protestant Religion, and their Mother-Kingdomes precious
proprieties, being now, I say, by Gods Justice on them, made Magor-Missabib (
Ier. 20. 3.) a terror to themselves and their accursed Copesmares, and being
stung with selfe-guilt of Conscience and principally to avoid the avengeing
stroke of Justice, and partly also to practice and perpetrate more mischief
(if possible it might be) against the Kingdom abroad, as they had done at
home; Now therefore I say, like so many viperous Vermin, or naughty Nauseous
obstructions upon the stomach of their Native Nation, as most traiterous
Fugitives, they fled away, being as it were disgorged and spewed out of the
Kingdom, as banefull and burdensome thereunto, and forced to fly into
foreign parts, to prolong a base and most shameful life, and (without
Repentance) to dye a most ignoble and desperate death; the names of whom as
near as I could, I have here I say collected together, and were as follows.

Jeremy 46. 15. Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not because the
Lord did drive them away.
A Catalogue of the names of our Court Fugitives, and most pernicious
Catalines, who fled, and were forceably frighted out of the Kingdom for fear
of the stroke of Justice.
1 QVene Mary her self, the fautresse and fomenter of all the miseries of the
three Kingdoms; next to our sins. 2 The Lord Goring Senior. 3 Sir John
Finch, then Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 4 Sir Francis Windebanke,
principal Secretary to the State 5 The Lord George Digby, who afterward
ventred to come back again, but since that flew into Ireland. 6 The Earl of
Yarmouth, Henry Iermine. 7 The Lord Percie. 8 The Marquess of New Castle. 9
The Lord Widdrington. 10 Sir Hugh Cholmley. 11 The Lord Goring junior, General
of the Kings Forces in the West. 12 General Hinderson, then lately before
Governor of Newarke. 13 Master Wat. Mountag^e, afterward venturing home
disguisedly, apprehended and imprisoned in the Tower. 14 Prince Charles. 15 Sir
John (alias) Lord Culpepper. 16 The Earl of Huntington. 17 The Lord of
Loughborough 18 The Earl of Northampton. 19 Sir Richard (alias Skellum)
Greenvile. 20 Sir Nicholas Crispe. 21 Sir Ralph (alias Lord) Hopton. 22 The
Lord Wentworth. 23 The Lord Capell. 24 Sir Endymion Porter. 25 Major General
Taplane, or Laplane, and very many Officers and Gentry of quality that went
away with him. 26 Sir William Neave of the Heralds of Arms Officers. 27 Master
Ashburnham.
And now also, that the Reader (yea even Malignant Momus himself) may see my
faithful impartiality in this works, and most renowned History, I have here
thought fit by way of Antithests, or Opposition, to set down and show forth to
open view, a most clear demonstration of Gods most gracious and favorable
dealing with the pious Propugnators of his most just Cause, even the precious
Patriots of their Religion and Countries Liberties, in collecting (as truly and
faithfully as I was able) a Catalogue of the most eminent Persons and
Commonders on the Parliaments Party, also (as I have done on the Kings) who (in
this, the Kingdoms Common calamity) have been taken away (out of this world of
wretchedness and valley of tears) by the Sword of the enemy, and so have as
it were passed over by that sharp bridge, to their long looked for, and
heartily hoped for heavenly Cana^n.

The most eminent Persons slain on the Parliaments Party since the beginning
of these unhappy Civil Wars.
1 THe Lord St. John, Part 2 Page 198 2 The Lord Brook, p. 2 p. 272 3 Sir
William Fairfax, brother to the most noble and renowned Lord Fairfax, p. 4. p.
33 4 Sir John Meldrum, p. 4. p 5 Major General Charles Fairfax, Son to the
aforesaid noble Lord Fairfax, and brother to our present most renowned General
Sir Thomas Fairfax, slain at Marston-moore fight. 6 Colonel Essex, p. 2. p.
198 7 Col. Hampden. p. 2. p 8 Col. Tucker, p. 2. p. 418 9 Lieut. Col. Ramsey,
p. 2 10 Sergeant Major Quarles, p. 2. p. 216 11 Major Stawham, a brave Scottish
Gent. p. 2. p. 380 12 Major Fitz-Simons, p. 4. p 13 Major Bradbury, p. 4* p 14
Major Iackson, p. 4. p. 123 15 Captain Lacis, p. 2. p. 216 16 Cap. Lister, p.
2. p. 230 17 Cap. Nuttie, p. 2. p. 309 18 Cap. Massy, p. 2. p. 410 19 Cap.
Hunt, p. 2. p. ibid 20 Cap. Oglesby. p. 2. p. 221 21 Cap. Williams, p. 2. p.
267 22 Cap. Pue, p. 3. p. 278 23 Master Hugh Popham, p. 3 p. 303 24 Major
Haynes. p. 4. p. 341 25 Cap. Dove, p. 4. p. 257 26 Lieut, Col. Ingoldsby. p. 4
p. 401 27 Cap. Allen. p. 295 28 Major Francis Sydenham, p. 119 29 Col. John
Gunter.
Some few more ('it is probable) there might be; but I profess ingeniously, and
most sincerely, not one more as yet come to my knowledge, or spontaneously
pretermitted by me, in my most sedulous search over the whole Four Parts of
this our Parliamentary Chronology, which I have diligently done, as well for
satisfaction to the honest-hearted Readers, touching the slain (I say) on our
side, as those on the enemies side; in which two so vastly discrepant and
largely unequal Catalogues, both for number and quality (though, ours, I
confess, especially considering some of them, as most pious Saints and
precious Patriots, far transcended the very best of the enemies, for
spiritual weight and worth) the udicious and impartial religious Reader may
see, by comparing them both together, how the Lord our most righteous and
gracious God has put a difference between the precious and the vile; and yet
manifesting in some measure (for just Causes best known to his own
unsearchable wisdom; and I am sure, for the best good of his beloved-ones
every way) that as touching the outward stroke of death, I say, in a Common
calamity, it happens to the good as to the bad; and how dies the wise man, but
even as the fool? as wise King Solomon witnesses, Ecclesiastes, 2. 15, 16.

Note also yet once again (good Reader) for the yet more remarkable
manifestation of Gods righteousness and mercy, in putting another most notable
difference between the Army of his enemies, and the Army of his Saints and
Servants, fighting his battles) that as was touched before, and shown in the
Catalogue of the slain on the Kings fide) in the very first set battle, and
field fight that was fought by the enemy against the Parliament, which was at
Keinton, or Edgehill; the Kings first great Lord General of all his Forces,
the Earl of Lindsey, who should have been the great Atlas, and Hercule
in-upholder of the Kings so often pretended and protested just Cause was one of
the first that was slain, in that first famous Fight; whereas, both in that
renowned Victory, and in all the progress of these bloody Broils, and most
uncivil Civil Wars over the whole Kingdom; even I say, from that first
Fight to this day, both our most renowned Generals, I mean his Excellency the
Right Honorable Lord General, Robert Earl of Essex, and the renowned
General, his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, that now is, have both of them
come off hitherto with abundance of honor and renown, not only free from
death, but also (ever blessed be the Lords wonderful mercy in it) not so much
as touched with the least wound or hurt on their bodies, for ought that ever I
yet heard to this present day. The like also we may most happily and faithfully
say of his Excellency renowned General Lesley, Earl of Leven, Lord General
of the Forces of our loving and loyal Brethren of Sc^tland; the virtuous and
Victorious General of the forces of the Associated Counties, North-easterly, I
mean the most noble Earl of Manchester, and the thrice noble and renowned
General of our Northern forces in Yorkshire, the valiant and victorious Lord
Fairfax; in which remarkable mercy, and (me thinks) most excellent and eminent
observation; and for all which so rich, so rare and singularly sweet and free
mercies, and most admirable dispensations of Gods wonder-working wisdom,
mercy, and justice, power, and protection over us, and thus manifested to and
for us (a wicked and worthless Nation, a sinful and provoking people)
Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto Him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever, Revel. 5. 13. Amen, and Amen.

A Table of all the most material Passages mentioned in this Fourth Part of
The Parliamentary Chronicle: And here I desire the Reader to take notice, that
all the Forts, Towns, Castles, and Garrisons taken since Nasebie Fight are to
be found in the particular Catalogue of them before.
A.
ADvance of the Earl of Man^hester from York. p. 6 Our formidable Army coop^
up in the West. p. 18 ^ur Army plotted against in Cornwall. p. 21 Ammunition
safely conveyed to O^westree. p. 22 A Commitiee for the Army appointed. p. 36
An ignoble Act of the Kings in Cornwall. p. 38 Array-men in the North surprised
p. 39 Augmentation of Ministers means. p. 41 Sir' Antheny Ashley-Cooper
storms Sir John Strange-waies house. p. 67 Captain Allen beats the enemy. p.
251 Sudden alteration of things in Scotland. p. 270 Alderman Adams chosen
Lord Mayor of London. p. 282 Abbington Forces beat the enemy. p. 93 Assembly of
Divines at Westminster. p. 319 The Lord Ashton beaten and slain. p. 320 The
Army new Modeled. p. 97 Ashbie Cavaliers soundly beaten at Cole-orton. p. 104
Apsley-house taken. p. 115 Activity of Abbington. p. 126, 352, and 132. Our
Armies prosperous proceedings in the West. p. Assizes of Oyer and Terminer
revived. p. 364 Admiralty of the Sea taken into consideration. p. 143 A brave
defeat given to the enemy at Axminster. p. 70 Our Armies good success in
Cornwall. p. 378 The answer of Sir Thomas Fairfax to Hoptons demands. p. 393
Our Armies march East^^rd out of Cornwall. p. 400 Prosperous Affairs in
Scotland. p. 39 Prosperous Affairs in the North. p. 3^ Abbingtons prosperous
Affairs against their adversaries. p. ^8^ The Marquess of Argyles Speech
concerning Propositions for Peace. p. 4^^
B.
BOulsover Castle taken. p. ^ Sir William Brereton beats the enemy at Tarvin.
p. 11 Sir William Brereton beats the enemy at Malpasse. p. 16 The enemy
bravely beaten at Be^sley Skonce. p. 35 The blessing of him that dwelt in the
Bush seen in the West. p. 39 The enemy beaten at Beechley. p. 42 Dr. Bastwick
releeved in Prison, and released out of Prison. p. 45 Dr. Bastwicks just
praise. p. ibid The enemy bravely beaten at Bever Valo. p. 61 Sir Thomas
Fairfax comes before Bristoll. p. 260 The enemy beaten at Bishops-Castle in
Shropshire. p. 262 The enemy beaten at Bridge-north. p. 268 The enemy bravely
beaten at Banbury. p. 29^ Blood of Germany. p. 322 Brecknock in Wales submits
to the Parliament. p. 328 Sir William Breretons brave Victory near Chester. p.
97 Major Brownes brave services about Oxford. p. 108 Bleching-house surrendered.
p. 141 Major Genesis Brownes brave defeat given to the enemy about Oxford. p. 141
A brave Victory at Brampton-Bush. p. 142 Major General Brown, and Major
General Cronwell compared to David and Jonathan. p. 151
C.
THe Kings cruel Counsel of War resolution against our Forces in Cornwall.
p. 19 Cornish-mens cruelty. p. 20 Tender Consciences regarded in Parliament. p.
29 A Committee to order our Army. p. 36 Colonel Ceeleyes brave exploits. p. 55
Earl of Cleveland taken Prisoner. p. 59 Col. Cook taken Prisoner. p. 74
C^owland taken. p. ^^ Conspiracies of the enemies discovered. p. ^^
Cumhire-Abbey in Wales taken. p. 83 Common Prayer-Booke abolished. p. 86
Cardigan Town and Castle taken. p. 8^ Kings Commissioners taken at Shaftsbury.
p. 252 Sir Alexander Carew beheaded. p. 86 Canterburies Arch-Prelates
Condemnation. p. 86 ^^men routed. p. 353 Col. Cromwells valor. p. 253 Chester
Suburbs won. p. 273 Col. Copleyes brave Victory at Sherburne in Yorkshire. p.
297 Canterburies Arch-Prelate beheaded. p. 92 Col. Crafords good service. p.
98. and p. 116 Compton-house bravely assaulted. p. 99 The happy concurrence of
both Houses of Parliament. p. 127 Cambridge highly privileged. p. 135 The
Clemency of the noble General. p. Collections in Churches for Chester. p. 364
Court of Wards Voted down. p. 369 The enemy beaten at Chester. p. 157
Cornwalls danger. p. 378 Cornwalls Gentry come in to the Parliament. p. 383 The
Kings Cabinet of Letters taken at Nasebie fight, sent to the Parliament, and
read. p. 175 Care taken for choosing good Officers in London. p. 82 Mr. Case
began the monthly Morning Prayers at London. p. 207 Three Commissions
presented to the Parliament from Bridge-water. p. 201 Commissioners sent to
Scotland. p. 190 A Committee for the Scots Army. p. 190 Clubmen in the Well. p.
201 Clubmen come in to the Parliament. p. 196
D.
A Brave Defeat given to the enemy at Walch-poole. p. 5 A brave defeat given to
the enemy by Col. Middleton. p. 9 Col. Doddington takes the Lord Oglesby
prisoner. p. 11 A brave defeat given to the enemy by Sir William Brereton. p.
11 A de^eat given to P. Rupert. p. 11 A brave defeat given to the enemy by Sir
J^hn Meldrum. p. 12 A brave defeat given to the enemy by Col. Rudgely. p. 22 A
brave defeat given to the enemy by Sir Thomas Middleton. p. ^^ A famous defeat
given to the enemies at Mountgomery Castle. p. 30. and ^^ A brave defeat given
to the enemy at Helmsley Castle, p. 6^ A brave defeat given to the enemy in
Lincolnshire. p. 70 A brave defeat given to the enemy at Salisbury. p. 74 A
brave defeat given to the enemy at Sedbury. p. 76 A brave defeat given to the
enemy by Col. Holburne in the West. p. 77 A brave defeat given to the enemy at
Tongue Castle. p. 84 Directions for Worshipestablished. p. 85 A famous defeat
given to the enemy by Major Genesis Laughorne. p. 255 Sir Lewis Dives brought
prisoner to the Parliament. p. 259 A brave defeat given to the enemy near
Reading. p. 261 A brave defeat given to the Kings Horse at Kiddarminster. p.
276 Lord Digbies Letters taken at Sherburne in Yorkshire, read in Par. p. 303
The Demands of Sir Ralph Hopton. p. 392 A Declaration of the Knights, Gentry,
etc. of Glamorgan-shire. p. 317 A brave defeat given to Col. Gerrard before
Cardigan in Wales. p. 104 A brave defeat given to the enemy at Heightly-house.
p. ^08 A brave defeat given to the enemy near Dennington. p. 111 A brave
defeat given to Skellum Greenvile at Plymouth. p. 111 A brave defeat given to
Prince Maurice at Holt-bridge. p. 122 A brave defeat given to the enemy by Sir
William Waller. p. 123 The enemy beaten at the Devizes by Sir William Waller.
p. 125 The danger of Treaties with Malignants. p. 344 The Kings Declaration to
(...) in Ireland. p. 346 A brave defeat given to the enemy a (...). p. 136 A
Ship taken at Dartmouth. p. 359 A brave defeat given to P. Maurice in
Worcestershire. p. 137 Diverse brave defeats given to the enemy about Oxford. p.
140 The danger and deliverance of noble Col. Massy. p. 144 A brave defeat
given to the enemy at Langford-house in Hampshire. p. 153 A brave defeat given
to the enemy at Hougham-house. p. 157 A Dunkirk Frigot taken by our ships. p.
401 The Discipline of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes army. p. 150 Dudley Castle shrewdly
put to it. p. 186 A Declaration of the Scots Commissioners to our Parliament.
p. 439
E.
THe enemy beaten at Ormskirk. p. 12 Eye Salve for Malignants eyes. p. 25 A
brave exploit of Col. Massies. p. 34 The just Enconium of Col. Massy. p. (...)
Englands just cause to love Scotland. p. ^^ A brave exploit of Col. Stones. p.
66 A brave exploit of Col. Sydenhams. p. 72 Diverse exploits against the enemy.
p. 87 His Excellencies brave deportment with the Kings Commissioners in the
West. p. 253 The enemy beaten at Plymouth p. 96 Englands Blood. p. 323 The
noble Earl of Essex, late Lord General, his good Service rewarded. p. 151
Evesham taken. p. 153 A brave exploit against the enemy by Wareham Garrison. p.
175 A brave exploit against (...). p. 30 The godly education of the Kings
Children considered. p. 128 The blessed effects of the monthly Morning
Prayers, and Preaching in London. p. 207 Hopeful effects of the Kings coming
in to the Scots. p. 422.
F.
OUr Forces prosperous success against Prince Rupert in Lancashire. p. 12
Colonel Foxes brave performances. p. 13. and 27 Our Foot-forces in danger in
Cornwall in the West. p. 19 Fidelity of the noble Lord General to the
Parliament. p. 37 The Fight at Newbery. p. 57 Major Fenicks good Service. p.
262 Freeholders of Glamorgan-shire their Declaration. p. 317 Sir Erasmus De La
Fountains House. p. 103 Sir Thomas Fairfax come to London to be Generalissimo
of all the Armies in the Kingdom. p. 109 Sir Thomas Fairfaxes new modeled
army resolved on. p. 127 Sir Thomas Fairfaxes mercy to the enemy. p. 358 Sir
Thomas Fairfax advanced to Oxford. p. 140 Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Forces or
strength before Oxford. p. 142 The King flies from Leicester. p. 172
G.
SIr John Gell takes Winkfield Manor. p. 14 The Lord Generals fidelity. p.
37 General (...) brother shot dead. p. 59 God, a multitude of Parliamentary
mercies. p. 63 Gratitude of the Parliament to well deservers. p. 2^^
Glamorgan-shire turned to the Parliament. p. 317 Germanies Blood. p. 322 Gentry
of Cornwall submit to the Parliament. p. 383 The General Sir Thomas Fairfax
honored by the Parliament with a Jewel. p. 170 Goods of Papists apprehended
in Long Acre. p. 183
H.
TWelve brave Horses surprised from the enemy. p. 6 Helmesley Castle taken. p.
70 Col. Holborn^s good-service in the West. p. 77. and 82. 8. 96 Col. Harsnets
Letter touching Abbington. p. 93 The happy Harmony of both Houses of
Parliament. p. 127. and 131 Hoptons Army totally routed in the West. p. 367 A
Day of Humiliation kept for our Forces in the West. p. 182 Hopton summoned to
come in. p. 387 Hopton expects supplies out of Ireland. p. 391 Col. Hook taken
prisoner. p. 74
I.
LOrd Inchiquins Letter. p. 5 An Irish Ship taken. p. 44 Irish Rebels to have
no quarter. p. 36 Integrity of the Parliament. p. 293 and 325 King James his
sad and bad mention. p. 321 Isle of Rees Blood. p. 323 Irelands Blood. p. 223
Irish Rebels bravely beaten at Sligo. p. 342 An Irish Ship taken. p. 386 Thirty
Irish Rebels put to the sword. p. 386 A Jewel of Five hundred pound sent to
the noble General Sir Thomas Fairfax. p. 170 A Jewel of Five hundred pound
presented to Genesis Leven. p. 203
K.
THe King come to Newbery. p. 56 Knares borough Castle taken. p. 83 The Kings
Plot in the North frustrated. p. 259 The Kings Horse beaten at Kiddarminster.
p. 276 Kent Petitions the Parliament about the selfe-denying Ordinance. p. 98
The Kings own Lifeguard troop of Horse taken. p. 121 Kent rises again in
Rebellion. p. 136 The King flies from Leicester. p. 172 The Kings Cabinet of
Letters taken at Nasebie. p. 175 The King escapes disguisedly out of Oxford. p.
414 The Kings coming into the Scots Army. p. 417
L.
A Letter from the Lord of Inchiquin. p. 5 Our Army in danger by a Plot at
Leistithiel in the West. p. 17 London Ministers Petition against Schisms. p.
28 Col. Lambert takes a brave prize. p. 44 Levon poole in Lancashire
surrendered. p. 62 Line apprehends a rich Ship driven into it. p. 71 Laughorne
Castle in Wales taken. p. 71 Lin-Kegis in danger. p. 79 The Parliaments
gratitude to Major General Laughorne. p. 278 Loyalty of Genesis Poyntz rewarded.
p. 281 A Letter touching Abbington. p. 93 Letters of the Lord Digbies. p. 303
About forty of the King Lifeguard surprised. p. 320 General Lesley made
Commander in chief at Newark. p. 327 Londons providence, and the Parliaments
care for the Cities safety. p. 337 The Kings Letter to the Parliament. p. 345
The Kings Letter for a Treaty of Peace answered. p. 347 London Petitions for
Church Government. p. 349 Cabinet of Letters taken at Nasebie. p. 175 Learning
encouraged at Cambridge by the Parliament. p. 135 Diverse Lords come from Oxford
to the Parliament. p. 137 Londons Petition touching the Kingdoms sad
condition. p. 155 A List of Cornish Gentry come in to the Parliament. p. 395
The Duke of Lenox and others come in to the Parliament. p. 414 A Letter of the
Commissioners of Scotland to the Parliament. p. 416 Londons preservation from
the plague of pestilence a great mercy. p. 315 A Letter from the King to the
Marquess of Ormond in Ireland, p. 437 Letters from Sir Thomas Fairfax touching
Oxford. p. 445 The Kings Letters for yielding up all his Garrisons. p. 444
M.
Colonel Massies Letter to the Parliament. p. 3 Earl of Manchesters advance
from York. p. 6 Col. Middleton beats the enemy. p. 9 Sir John Meldrum beats
the enemy in Lancashire. p. 10. and p. 12. Our Magazine in the West in danger.
p. 17 Sir Thomas Middleton beats the enemy. p. 23 Mountgomery Castle taken. p.
23 Mourton-Corbet Castle taken. p. 25 Macquire and Macmahone, two Irish Rebels
apprehended. p. 27 Ministers Ordained at London. p. 41 Sir John Meldrums noble
act touching Sir William Fairfax. p. 34 The enemy bravely beaten at Mountgomery
Castle. p. 30 Col. Massies brave exploit against the enemy. p. 34 Monmouth
Town and Castle taken. p. 35 Col. Massies just praise. p. 44 Sir Thomas
Middletons performances in Wales p. 46 Malignants mouths stopped. p. 55. and
135. Sir Thomas Middletons brave exploit in Mountgomeryshire, p. 77 Montrosse
prevails in Scotland. p. 269 Montrosse soundly beaten in Scotland. p. 270 Not
a month, week, or day hardly without a mercy. p. 285 Mercy to Malignants
intended by the Parliament. p. 288 Election of Members of Parliament looked
unto. p. 293 Maintenance for the New-Modell'd Army. p. 97 A passage of
providence at Melton-moubury. p. 103 Col. Massies brave Victory at the Forest
of Deane. p. 116 Col. Massy beats the enemy near Bristoll. p. 129 Col.
Massies danger and deliverance. p. 144 Sir John Meldrums good service requited.
p. 152 Col. Mittons Forces good service. p. 167 Monthly continued Morning
Prayers at London. p. 207 The Ministers of two Counties Petition the Parliament
for a Church Government to be established. p. 434 Our mercies Baptized Gad a
Multitude. p. 63 Ministers of Londons and Westminsters most pious meeting at
Sion-Colledge. p. 445
N.
New Castle taken by the Scots. p. 46 Newbery Fight. p. 57 Newcastle Castle
taken. p. 61 Newcastle in free Trading again. p. 69 Our Northern Forces in
good condition. p. 259 The fifth of Novembers Commemoration, a Thankes-giving
Day for the Parliaments continuation. p. 315 Novembers seventeenth, Queen
Elizabeth's just Commemoration noted on a special occasion. p. 323 Newarke
besieged by the Scots, and their brave beginnings there to tame that enemy. p.
327 The prisoners taken at Nasebie-fight brought to London. p. 173 Newarke left
by our Brethren of Scotland. p. 419
O.
LOrd Ogleby taken prisoner. p. 11 The enemy beaten at Orinskirk. p. 11
Ordination of Ministers at London. p. 46 Ordinance against Irish Rebels. p. 57
Ordinance of self-denial. p. 5 Care for chosing good Officers in London. p. 82
Two excellent Ordinances of Parliament. p. 312 An Ordinance for the maintenance
of the New-modell'd Army. p. 97 Oxford Lords come in to the Parliament. p. 137
Oxford besieged by the Genesis Sir Thomas Fairfax. p. 140 Master Occonnelly
rewarded for his discovery of the desperate plot in Ireland. p. 152 Oxford
surrendered, the manner how. p. 446
P.
A Plot upon our Magazine in the West. p. 17 The Parliaments promptitude to the
work of Reformation. p. 29 A Plot against the Parliaments Army in the West. p.
37 Plottings of the Royalists to cosen the Kingdom. p. 37 Plymouth men's
admirable courage. p. 38 A brave prize taken at Poole. p. 44 More Plots of the
enemy discovered. p. 78 The Plot against Lyn-Regis. p. 79 A Plot in the North
frustrated. p. 259 Major Genesis Poyntz his activity and fidelity rewarded. p. 281
The Parliaments piety. p. 293 The Parliaments happy continuation a great mercy.
p. 315 Preservation of London from the plague of pestilence a great mercy. p.
415 Parliaments formerly made staulking-horses to get Subsidies. p. 322 A prize
taken at Plymouth. p. 323 The Parliaments integrity against Protections and
Bribes. p. 325 Sergeant Major Purefoyes brave valor at Compton-house. p. 99 A
brave Passage of providence at Sir Erasmus Fountains house. p. 103 Pretended
peace at Uxbridge. p. 104 The Parliaments care of the City of London. p. 337
Plimouths singular good success against the enemy. p. 340 Partshall Garrison
taken. p. 108 Plymouth totally releeved and freed from Siege. p. 348 Praises
encouraged. p. 365 Sergeant Major Purefoyes good Services about Warwick. p. 146
A Petition to the Parliament about the Kingdoms sad condition. p. 155 A
Petition to the Parliament by the inhabitants of Westminster. p. 188 A Plot of
the Western Clubmen discovered. p. 201 A Petition of the Ministerr of the two
Counties about Church-Governement. p. 434 Propositions for a well-grounded
Peace resolved on. p. 444
Q.
NO Quarter to be granted to Irish Rebels. p. 56 The Queen of Swedens desire
to associate with England. p. 84 Queen Elizabeth's just Commemoration. p. 320
R.
PRince Robert defeated. p. 11, 12, 13. Col. Rudgely bravely beats the enemy.
p. 22 Royalists plot to cosen the Kingdom. p. 37 Rad Castle taken. p. 40
Captain Redmans good service in Northamptonshire. p. 83 The enemy defeated
about Redding. p. 261 Master Rouses Psalms. p. 319 Rochels Blood. p. 323 The
enemy defeated at Rumsey. p. 136 An excellent Remonstrance of our Brethren of
Scotland. p. 183 The City of Londons most excellent and famous Remonstrance. p.
426 Reformation of Religion taken into consideration. p. 257
S.
SHeffild Castle taken. p. 7 Staley-house taken. p. 9 Major Straughans brave
performances in the West. p. 15 Major Skippon bravely encourages his Soldiers.
p. 19 Schisms Petitioned against. p. 28 Reasons of slandering of our Brethren
of Scotland. p. 39 Col. Sydenhams good service. p. 62 Capt. Stone his brave
service. p. 66 Sir John Strange-waies house a strong Garrison stormed. p. 67
Col. Sydenhams brave service. p. 72 Selfe-denying Ordinance. p. 76 The Swedes
desire to associate with England. p. 84 Sir George Strange-waies brought
Prisoner to the Parliament. p. 259 A foul and false slander laid on the
Parliament by Royalists in Wales. p. 263 Major General Skippon made Governor
of Bristoll. p. 268 Our Brethren of Scotlands Victory over Montrosse in
Scotland. p. 270 Scotlands blood. p. 323 Scarborough Town, Church, and Haven
taken. p. 110 Shrewsbury Town and Castle taken. p. 113 A brave victory
obtained at Sligo in Ireland. p. 342 Major Genesis Skippons brave service about
the settlement of the new Modeled Army. p. 132 A Ship taken at Dartmouth with
Letters of importance. p. 359 A spur to quicken the spirit of praises. p. 365
Captain Stones good service against the enemy. p. 152 The Scots advance to
Nottingham. p. 174 A Ship of Ireland taken at Padstow of much concernment. p.
386 Our Brethren of Scotlands excellent Remonstrance to the King. p. 183
Shrewsburies Committees just praise. p. 443 The Scots retreat from Newark to
Newcastle. p. 419 The enemy beaten at Stoke-new-house. p. 107
T.
TInmouth Castle taken. p. 63 Free Trading at Newcastle. p. 69 Taunton-Dean in
the West releeved. p. 81 The enemy beaten at Tongue Castle. p. 84 Mr. Tomlins
made a Baron of the Exchequer. p. 282 Thanksgiving for Londons welfare. p. 315
The Treaty at Uxbridge for peace. p. 104 Major Temple bravely beats the enemy
near Dennington. p. 111 Treaties with Malignants dangerous. p. 344
Thanksgiving for Chester. p. 364 Tauntons most happy relief. p. 174 Tauntons
Soldiers good services rewarded. p. 151 Thanksgiving for Langport, the manner
thereof. p. 197
V.
A Brave Victory obtained near Chester by Sir William Brereton. p. 97 A brave
Victory obtained by Colonel Massies Forces in the Forest of Deane. p. 116
Major Genesis Vrreyes brave Victory against Montrosse in Scotland. p. 134 Uxbridge
Treaty. p. 104 A brave Victory at the Devizes. p. 123
W.
THe enemy beaten at Welch-poole. p. 5 Wareham yielded to the Parliament. p. 5
Welbeck-house taken. p. 7 Winkfield Manor besieged. p. 9 Winkfield Manor
taken. p. 14 Wales in good condition for the Parliament. p. 302 The Governor
of Warwicks brave service in Worcestershire. p. 107 Weymouth bravely regained.
p. 117 Sir William Wallers brave Victory at the Devizes. p. 123 Court of Wards
Voted down. p. 369 Warehams Garrisons good service. p. 175 Inhabitants of
Westminsters Petition. p. 181
Y.
THe Duke of YORK to come from Oxford. to Saint Jameses. p. 445
FINIS.

