THE Last Dying Speech AND BEHAVIOR OF Capt. Thomas Vaughan: Who was Executed
for HIGH TREASON, AT Execution-Dock, on Wednesday, December. the 9th. 1696.
BEing brought on a Hurdle to the Place of Execution, where a Gibbet was
Erected; and before he went up the Ladder, he desired Liberty to Pray; which
being readily granted, he stood by the Ladder, and said, I Bequeath my Soul to
God, and my Body to the Earth; I abandon all Material Good, as mere Vanity. I
repent heartily of my Sins; I pardon, with all my Heart, all my Enemies from
the bottom of my Heart. I believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; God
all-wise, all-good, and hope to be saved by the Merits of the Second Person,
who died on the Cross, to save me: And I believe whatever the Holy Catholic
Roman Church proposes to me to believe; and I hope, through the Merits of my
Savior, to have all my Sins pardoned: I resign my self to him, relying on his
Mercy, for the Pardon of all my Sins, and in that hope am ready to die: And I
beseech the Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints and Angels in Heaven, to receive
my Soul; Jesus Maria, help me to Embrace thee in my Arms; and if my Heart
fails, enable me to do it in my Judgment. I say, with all Humility, Jesu Maria,
have Mercy on me.

There being a great Crowd, he said, Pray let me say my Prayers. Merciful God,
let me not die in any of the Seven deadly Sins. I repent me, from the bottom of
my Heart, that I have sinned in Thought, Word, or Deed. I forgive all the
World; I resign my self into thy Arms; let thy Mercy shelter me, sweet God of
Heaven; Jesu Maria, have Mercy on me. O God, I come unto thee, in Remembrance
of the five Wounds of my Savior; beseeching thee, for the sake of his Wounds,
be pleased to have Mercy on my poor Soul. I repent from the bottom of my Heart,
that I have sinned. God's Will be done, and not mine.

Executioner. If the Gentleman has done, give way.


Capt. Vaughan. No, I have not done yet.


He Prays by himself.

Then the Executioner pulled off his Cravat.

Capt. Vaughan. I am a great Sinner; let me beg of you a little time to repent.


Then he prayed some time by himself: And, when he had done, said, Now, my Lad,
when you please.

Then he went up the Ladder, and had the Rope tied about his Neck. And that
being done, he said, I have something to say publicly.

Capt. Vaughan's Speech.
I Do not value this Death; it is nothing in comparison of the Death our
Savior suffered for me. Whatever I have undergone in my whole Life, that I
offer in Recompense for my past Sins, hoping God will have Mercy on my poor
Soul. I am here to suffer Death; I declare I never bore Arms but for the King
of France, and out of France. I was true to my-Trust. It Is true, I bore King
James my Master's Commission, and I thought I was obliged to do it; and I
thought, that what I did for the King of France, I did for King James. I ask
all Men Pardon, that I have any way wronged; I did not act dishonourably to
those I took, to my Knowledge: Therefore I beg that you would Recommend it to
the Government, not to be hard on that poor Man; and I own I did that, to see
whether I could save my Life, yet they did not prove to me as I thought they
would; I did it clearly to get my self loose out of their Hands: So I beg of
you, that I may have leave to say my Prayers a little.

Mr. Marshall. Pray do, Capt. Vaughan, take your own time.


Capt. Vaughan. O my dear God, I offer my Soul to thee, Jesu Maria, my dear
Lord and Savior, my dear God of Heaven, have Mercy on me. I offer my Soul and
Body to thee, my dear God and Savior; I desire the Prayers of all good
Christians; I forgive, from the bottom of my Heart, all Persons in the World;
and I ask them Forgiveness that I have offended, and I hope they will forgive
me. Mr. Sheriff, I humbly beg, that I may not be put off, till I say my
Prayers; till I put my Cap over my Face.


Mr. Marshall. No, no, take your own time.


Then he continued a considerable time in his Prayers to himself, and
afterward said, Mr. Sheriff, I beg you will desire of the Government, they
will do no harm to the People I was a means of accusing.

Mr. Marshall. I will take Care to represent what you desire.


Capt. Vaughan. O all good Christians, pray for me. O God, into your Arms I
commit my Soul: I am heartily sorry that I have sinned in Thought, Word, or
Deed. Well, I leave my Blessing to you all; I humbly beg your Prayers. I humble
my self to Death for the Love of Christ, freely, from my very Heart; I offer my
self to Death; into thy Hands, my dear God and Savior, I commit my self.


Then he prayed a short time to himself, and pulled the Cap over his Eyes, and
was turned off; and being dead, was quartered according to his Sentance:

ADVERTISEMENT.
NExt Week will be Published the Trials at large of the Pirates of Every's
Crew; and also, the Trial of Capt. Vaughan, for High Treason. Published by
Authority, and Printed for John Everingham, Bookseller, at the Star, in
Ludgate Street.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1696.


