CERTAIN PROPOSALS Humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT, In relation to the
Common Good OF THE PEOPLE OF THIS NATION.

By R. V. Esquire

Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation.

Seneca, De vita beata, page 457. Quaeramus quid optime factum, non quid
usitatissimum.

London, Printed for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at sign of
the three Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the Inner-Temple-gate. 1653.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England
Right Honorable,
DId you but hear the utterings of every private breast that is well-affected
to you (of others I speak not) certainly you would be sensible of much hard and
grating language against some of you at least, if not against most of you; how
just their cry is, your selves are best able to judge, and I most incompetent.
That you, and all your subordinate Magistrates in the Land, might be Peace and
Righteousness to the Nation, is the prayer of them that truly wish your and its
welfare. Among the rest, it is the earnest desire of him that addresses these
Proposals to you, that you might not only be a blessing to this Land, but to
the Nations round about you; yea, Benefactors indeed to the world; not (as one
says) like water-pots, that refresh your own plot of ground; but like showers,
that water and make fruitful the whole earth. The Proposer humbly prays, That
when the intentness of your thoughts is unbent from the consideration of more
public affairs, you would please to consider what is herein proposed to you.
Some things therein (because of long contrary practice and custom) may seem
novel or difficult at best; yet if you please to consider and examine them, you
will find they have more of custom and use, then Reason or Justice, against
them; and it will be your greater honor, to reform early and rooted evils, then
those that are of a late and junior rise; by how much great difficulties are
the more adaequate objects of the graplings and encounters of great spirits,
especially such as are backed with wisdom and strength. I could have labored
more to please then to profit (as too many do now adays) for profits sake; but
I hope to have learned better things, then to follow the Parliament (or own the
cause they have undertaken, which indeed I have) for loaves, but for a good
conscience, which is a continual feast to a plain-dealing man, though (as the
Proverb says) He may dye a beggar. Sed timida probitas non prodest reipub.

Grays Inn, this 16. Nov. 1652. I am yours and the Commonwealths faithful
Servant, R. V.

CERTAIN PROPOSALS Humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT, IN Relation to the
common good of the People of this Nation.
1. PROPOSITION.

THat no Committee or Commissioners whatsoever, deriving power from the
Parliament to give a Final Judgment or Sentence in any case between party and
party, or the State and particular persons, may command the people (that are
Auditors) to withdraw, in any case whatsoever; but that (while sitting in
Court) they debate all cases openly, and give their judgment therein Coram
Populo, as all inferior Courts of Justice in England, and elsewhere do; and as
the Scripture direction and practice was; for there Courts of Justice were kept
in the Zac. 8.16 Deuteronomy. 21.19. Deuteronomy. 16.18. Josh. 20.4. Prove. 24.7. Dan. 2.49.
Amos 5.12.15. Godwins Antiq. l. 2. c. 3.
Gates, and in the Act. 16.19. Job 29 7.
Marketplace or open streets, which were places of the greatest popular
resorts and concourse; and from Scripture we have not one warrantable Precedent
to justify the practice of commanding to withdraw by Committees and
Commissioners at this day; neither can they justify it by the Laws of any
other Nation, or by any colorable pretense of Reason; and it was accounted a
matter of great lamentation in Scripture, for the Lam. 5.14.
Elders (or Judges) to cease from the Gates.

Object. 1. Yet some may Object, That all Committees of Parliament for many
ages heretofore, did usually command withdrawing, when they were to debate.

Answ. 1. It is confessed, that all former Committees of Parliament, without
exception, did always command withdrawing, when they were to debate any case
whatsoever; and not only so, but when they were to give their opinions.

But Secondly, All Committees of Parliament (before this) were empowered only
to debate particular cases and grievances, and to give their opinion thereupon
to the Houses; they were not to give any conclusive and determinate sentence
therein, but that was to be left to the Parliament; upon which account there
was good ground of withdrawing: Because first it was fit the Parliament should
know their Results, before common Auditors: And Secondly, because their
opinions were but preparatory unto Laws that were to be Enacted by the
Parliament.

Object. 2. It may further be objected from Scripture, That the Council of the
Jews in the 4. of the Acts 4.15.
Acts, did command the Apostles Peter and John, to go aside, or withdraw, when
their Preaching and doing Miracles in the name of Jesus were to be considered
of.

It is Answered, Answ. 1.
First, That this council of the Jews was not a Court for execution of civil
justice; as the deciding meum and tuum. This Sanhedrion, for so is the word in
the original (for ought appears) consisted of a Acts 4.5, 6
High Priest, his kindred, who were ex genere pontificio, Rulers (i,) as some
think, Military Officers, Elders, who were Senatores urbis, and Scribes, who
were Disputers and expounders of the Law; all these made up a Consistory, mixed
of Civil and Ecclesistical Judges (the like whereof was in Mat. 26.3. convened
against Christ) which (though at 2 Chro. 5. and 8. and 11. Mat. 10.17. Moses
Contsens. in Sanhedrim. Godwins Antiq. l. 5. c. 1
other times they sat severally, and had several Jurisdictions) did now agree
to meet in a Council together (not a Court of Justice between party and party)
to consider of a matter that they pretended to be of concernment to the peace
of Church and State, as appears by their debates, and what was the result
thereof; for (say they) Acts 4.16, 17.
What shall we do unto these men? for that INDEED a notable miracle has been
done by them, is manifest to all that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny
it; but that it spread no further among the people, let us straightly threaten
them that they speak to no man henceforth in this name.

Secondly, Let it be observed, This Council did confess, it was a notable
miracle, that was done by Paul, and that See v. 14, 15. Because the Jews could
say nothing against Paul and John, therefore they bid them go aside, because
they might contrive something to stop their mouths.
they could not deny it; their own conscience told them the work he had done,
was good, and it was not judged fit by them to declare it publicly; because
then the People (as well as their own consciences) would fly in in their
faces; and indeed such deeds of darkness had need hate the light for fear of
discovery: This is a very ill precedent for our Committees or Commissioners to
warrant withdrawing.

That all Civil employment whatsoever, 2. PROP.
may be disposed to the best and ablest men, and not given to ignorant friends,
relations or seekers; contrary to that excellent Law in 12. R. 2. c. 2
Richard the seconds time; which is in these words; None shall be preferred for
gift or brokage, favor or affection; and none that pursues by himself, or
another privily, or openly, be in any manner of office, or shall be put in the
same, or in any other; but that all Officers shall be of the best, most lawful,
and sufficient men according to estimation and knowledge: Which holds forth
clearly, that all Officers should be pares negotiis, men of truth and knowledge
of what they are called to do; or as the Scripture says, Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy.
1.13.
Able men, fearing God, men of truth, and hating covetousness: And if the time
(we are in) will not, or need not stick to such strict Rules, yet it is fit
that persons that shall be preferred (be they relations or seekers) be of the
fittest, wisest, and best men, knowing the work they are upon; else, as Solomon
Eccle. 10.6
says, Folly may be set up in great dignity; and Wisdom will be so high to
such, that they cannot Prove. 24.7.
open their mouth in the gates* and then a ^hoo-maker may be supposed, without
any experience to be able to make a suit of clothes as well as a Tailor and a
Tailor a pair of shoos as well as a Shoo-maker. It was the judgment of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 1 13. that (...) sapiens peritus.
wise men (i.) skilful and experienced men understanding men, (i.) (...)
eruditus, intelligens.
learned and intelligent men: and men (...) notus fuit.
known among the Tribes, (i.) famous for the aforementioned qualities, and of a
good name with the people, should be Magistrates, Judges, and Officers under
him; and accordingly was his choice; for ver. 15. of the aforesaid Chapter, he
set over the People of the (...) primarij^^, prestantissij(...).
chief among the Tribes, for Magistrates and Heads, (viz.) as the word
signifies; the chiefest and choicest men: And as D^odati in his Comment upon
this place expounds the word, chief men in gifts, in quality, in reputation, in
authority; yea, in all manner of preheminencies and excellencies.

That a gross and irregular byassing for the State, by any person whatsover, 3.
PROP
against any man ill-affected, or otherwise, may he branded for as heinous and
great a crime as it was accounted in the beginning of this Parliament, for a
Courtier to cleave to the interest of the King his master, against right and
justice; else we not only tolerate in our selves what we exclaimed at, and
condemned in others; but we give it a Character of the highest approbation and
countenance that may be, even our practice; and show further, that it is not
the crime, but the person that we were offended withal.

That all great Officers, 4. PROP.
who have great sallaries from the State, as Treasurers at war, Commissioners
of the Customhouse, Commissioners of Excize, If great Officers (who have great
sallaries) be changed frequently, many men that are well-affected, may
comfortably subsist, whereas now one man (in an age) and his posterity, are
lifted up into the seat of pomp and pride, by excessive gain.
etc. be changed every second or third year (if the Parliament think fit) and
that faithfulness, true worth and wisdom, may be accounted better
accomplishments, for such trusts, then wealth, (which sometimes crept into
these Offices) without any of these qualifications; most rich men in most ages
being accounted Sapientes ex crumenis.

That all persons whatsoever, 5. PROP.
which have gotten and do hold several profitable Employments, as some
officious favorites have gotten, and held five or six together at the same
time, may surrender up all but one, which he or they may elect and hold to; and
that the rest be disposed to those that want: And that favorites for the future
may not have six or seven successively one after another (as some have had) to
the withholding of bread from deserving men's mouths.

That no person whatsoever (unless he refuse to appear upon summons) be
sentenced to loose life, limb, or estate, by any Court whatsoever, no not by
Parliament, before he be heard to make his full defense, and before his offense
be clearly, and fully proved, and he thereupon be duly judged, it being
agreeable to the Law of God, that the same should be done.

In John 7.51. Deuteronomy. 13.14. and 17.4.
John we have it urged, that the Jewish Law did not judge any man before it
heard him, and knew what he did: And in Deuteronomy. 13.14. the Judges, before they
judged cases, were to enquire, and make search, and ask diligently, and behold
if it be truth, and the thing certain; And in the 17. Chapter, the very same
words are repeated and inculcated, least they should forget their duties; and
holy Job 29.16.
Job alleges it as a great comfort to him in his affliction, that he searched
out the cause that he knew not: And for proof of any man's offenses, it is not
enough that one Deuteronomy. 17.6. and 19.15, 16, 17, 18. Number. 3580.
witness prove it, much less information or presumptions; for says the
Scripture, one witness shall not rise up against any man for any iniquity or
any sin, in any sin that he sins, but at the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall the matter be established; therefore Jehoshophats charge to the Judges he
set up in Judah, ought to be observed by all other Judges, that they should
take heed what they do; for they judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is
with them in judgment.

That the selling of any Office whatsoever, 7 PROP*
by any person whatsoever, Judges or others, be severely punished.

That the number of persons in all Committees whatsoever (who have power of
giving final and decisive judgments in any case) may be but few; 8. PROP.
the penalties of their non-attendance upon their duties (without good excuse)
severe; and that an Oath be administered to every one of them, whether
Parliament men or others, for the due execution of their trust.

That no person whatsoever (which has part in the Legislative Power) be
trusted (while he remains such) with the executive power; 9. PROP.
for if he offends in the execution of the Law, he may be judge in his own
case, and may contrive his own impunity, and no inferior Court can judge him;
and he will be under the temptation of doing what may seem good in his own
eyes, upon confidence of his being out of the reach of ordinary Courts of
Justice.

That no Law be made relating to the reformation of any profession or calling
whatsoever, 10. PROP.
Cuique in sua art, nemini in suo interresse credendum.
without clear and deliberate consultation had with some of the best and wisest
of such profession or calling which is to be reformed.

That Parliament men (who are Judges of the Treason of offenders against the
State, 11. PROP.
and consent to pass Laws for the confiscation of their estates) may not be
purchasers thereof, either by themselves, or any other, to or for their use.

That no Law, 12. PROP.
that shall be penal, as to life, limb, or estate, do look backward to punish
any person for things done, or omitted to be done many years before, except in
cases where a clear and unquestionable malum in se is committed and not where a
Law makes a thing (formerly dubious, Leges debent prospicere, non respicere.
uncertain, or indifferent) a malum prohibitum afterward.

That no Parliament Man whatsoever, 13. PROP.
may attend to move any Commissioners or Committees, deriving authority from
the Parliament to give final judgment in causes, if he is not a member of the
said Committees, or one of the Commissioners, or has not some personal
concernment of his own before them, wherein he may be prejudiced by his
absence; or be not desired for the benefit of the State to afford his
assistance; it being supposed an unthrifty course, to dedicate time appointed
for public service, beneath its high designation.

That every member of Parliament whatsoever, 14. PROP.
be enjoined to receive the requests and petitions of all distressed persons
within the Circuits of that County or Corporation where he or they were
elected, and heartily to endeavor the redress of their (elsewhere irremediable)
grievances in Parliament, this certainly being one main end of their election.

That Commissions of Bankrupt may be issued forth as well against any other
persons as a Tradesman, 15. PROP.
or one that lives by buying o^ selling, if he fall under any of the marks of a
Bankrupt, within the Statutes of 13 Elik. 7.1. Jac. 15.21 Iac. 19.
Queen Elizabeth, and King James, there being no reason that any Law should be
partial to one man, and impartial and destructive to another, where both are
equally peccant: And that the charges of these Commissions, and cheats in the
execution of them, may be enquired into, which sometimes prove the further
ruin, rather then the relief of the Creditors.

That Tenant by the courtesy, 16. PROP.
do allow one moiety of the estate he holds in the right of his wife, to the
child or children he has by her, toward his, her, or their maintenance;
whereas now the husband may (during his life) choose whether he will allow them
any thing at all toward their subsistence or education, although many such
Tenants by the courtesy, have nothing to support themselves, but what they
have from their wives; and it is by experience found, that many fathers are
very unnatural in this kind.

That no person whatsoever be amerced for not finding Bows and Arrows, 17. PROP.
as now many Stewards of Courts do amerce persons every year for the want
thereof, which the ^.33.8. c. 9* etc.
ancient laws of this Land did direct should be provided; but are now become
obsolete, and would be forgotten, did not some cheating persons disturb their
rest, and revive them.

That no Laws at all (which relate to the people in general) be passed, 18.
PROP.
before first the draughts of them be hung up in a public place, where all
persons of wisdom and knowledge, experience and integrity, may have recourse to
view them, The (...) Tables among the Romans like this. See Live in English. l.
3. p. 110.
and may have liberty to add to them, or give rational exceptions against all
or any part of them, and fix his or their exceptions to the whole or part of
them, or add as cause shall require, to the end the Parliament may approve or
dislike thereof, as it shall see cause* when the Laws shall come to be enacted;
this would prevent many supplemental Acts, which now are necessarily made, and
in a great measure might be spared, if the Parliament could see all future
accidents and events that follow, after the making thereof, or could but see as
much as all other wise men of the Nation do.

That a severe Law may be made against all obscene, lying, and malignant
Diurnals, 19. PROP.
that are now familiarly published to the world, which tend not only to the
keeping unfixed of the peoples minds from a quiet obedience to the Government,
but do fearfully debauch and corrupt their understandings.

That (if the Parliament should think fit) Thirty or Forty of the best and
wisest persons in the Nation, 20. PROP.
may be appointed to sit with them in the House, to consult with them de arduis
reipublicae; and that these may have no voices, but sit as the Judges and
Masters of Chancery sat heretofore in the Lords House, only to advise with
them; for it cannot be supposed that Parliaments are so infallible and
clear-sighted, as to comprehend all cases in every circumstance (as time has
evidently discovered) There sat with the Jewish Judges, men which were called
(...) scholars of the wise. Godwins Anti. l. 5. c. 5.
This also would fit other persons for future Representatives, by knowing the
ways and methods of the present Parliament.

That all Commanders and Officers of the Army, 21. PROP.
and all other persons whatsoever, that shall threaten, or in any way
unlawfully solicit Judges of any Court (who have taken oaths for the right
administration of Justice, and not for fear, favor or affection, to respect
persons in judgment) be punished in such severe manner, as to the Parliament
shall seem just.

That Treasurers at War, 22. PROP.
Commissioners of Excise and Customs, and all other persons whatsoever, that
have great sallaries from the State; and all Officers of the Army in times of
peace and quiet, The Soldiery in Holland do pay excise, and all other public
duties out of their pay, by way of defalcation, before it comes to their hands.
may pay Taxes proportionable to their sallaries and pays, toward the
defraying of the public charge; for no other persons in the Nation are
exempted from it, as Tradesmen, who live by their labor and industry; or other
Persons who have real or personal estates, Offices, or otherwise; whereas now
an ordinary Tradesman, that has but from hand to mouth, pays as much taxes for
his house, as a great man that has 1000 l. per annum from the State, as a
Sallary for his place.

To conclude, It were not amiss, if great Persons, 23. PROP.
whom God has lifted up many cubits above their brethren in the things of this
world, would imitate the spirit of that excellent man Neh. 5.14, 15, 16.
Nehemiah, who since he was Governor in Judah, together with his brethren, did
not eat the bread of the Governors; and because of the fear of the Lord, would
not follow the steps of the former Governors, who before him were chargeable to
the people, by taking of them bread and wine, besides forty shekels of silver;
For charity seeks not her own, 1 Cor. 13.5.

FINIS.

