AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST SORROVV, IN Order to the obtaining of sanctified joy.

An excellent treatise first written in French by N. Vedelius, then translated
into Latin by Gallus Pareus, and now into English,

By Cadwallader Win, M. A.

London, Printed for George Lathum, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the Bishops head in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

The Authors Preface TO The most Noble and Renowned James Micheley, Nicholas
Vedelius wishes Grace and Peace, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Most Noble Sir,
THere is no mortal man but is subject to sorrow, which so disordereth the
sweetness of his life, if it has any, that it turns it altogether into
bitterness, and wearisomnesse. It spares none, neither Kings, nor Princes, nor
such as are placed in higher and more eminent auhority; yea, the higher in
dignity they be, the more violently it sets upon them; like waves, which dash
against the highest rocks in the sea with most vehement motion. The weapons
which this most prevalent mischief uses against us, are as manifold as the
afflictions themselves, whereunto we are exposed in this life, wherein are all
manner of molestations and miseries, some more grievous than others, not unlike
to greater and lesser living Creatures that are found in the vast Ocean, and to
diverse and innumerable creeping things on the earth; for one while one
sorroweth, as feeling some spiritual evil, and assaulted by some grievous and
stinging temptation, which gives him most vehement blows and shakes him,
insomuch, as it hurles him well-nigh into hell, that is desperation; otherwhile
some temporal miseries assault him, in regard whereof he is of a heavy
drooping countenance, his sounder senses disordred, and his whole person
depressed and cast down. And what Christian is there, whom the miserable and
calamitous face of the Church afflicts not? what house holder is there, that is
not afflicted with the afflictions accompanying marriage? Look how holier the
state is, and the more excellent be the blessings thereof, the more grievous
afflictions it sustaines. It happens, that desparity in nature betwixt man and
wife afflicts the mind, as when an Abigail is married to Baball, or a Moses is
conjoined with Zephorah, that is so contrary to him. A barren bed afflicts
others, untoward disposition of children torment others, which at last brings
them to a tragical end: others lament the untimely death of their children,
who for the present were their joy and comfort, and hopeful for the time to
come; and their cutting off by some strange and extraordinary mischace
heightens their grief. Hither may be referred the death of one of the married
persons, and decease of our beneficial kinsfolk and allies. Neither is the
state of single life free, diverse, nay, innumerable molestations attend it, to
wit, perfidiousnesse, crafty wiles of enemies, dishonesty, ignominy, contempt,
poverty, loss of goods, imprisonment, banishment, imperfections both in body
and soul, diseases, and at last after the chain of so many evils death it
self, which either fear preconceived, or present invasion presents to his
view. Moreover, neither does that which is really calamitous only breed in us
sorrow, but even joy it self carries with it this inseparable companion, as
the body the shadow, either in respect those things which thou wishest fall not
out so, as thou desire they should, or because all manner of joy is as it
were a certain forerunner of sorrow, wherein it ends. To say nothing here,
that in that very time that prosperity on the one side cheers up thy spirit,
some sinister thing on the other side is annexed, moving thee to be sorrowful;
and as there is none that is not subject to this passion, so none can be found
that is so bluntish, that wishes not to be discharged therefrom. To which end
diverse use diverse means; for there be some that use means altogether
unlawful to be rid thereof, but are successelesse; and more than that, are
oftentimes worser than the disease; as Ahab did, following his wife Iezabells
counsel, whom when she saw so heavy that he would eat no bread, she came unto
him, and said unto him, why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?
let thy heart be merry, and I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth, 1 K.
21.5.7. for which purpose she subornes false witness against the innocent, and
with the wine and blood of Naboth makes the King merry and joyful; others
think to withstand this evil by other means, which are indeed in themselves
indifferent; the use whereof is not able to drive it away, and the abuse
ignominious and opprobrious unto him that applies them, to wit, when strong
drink is given to him who is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of
heavy hearts, that he may drink and forget his poverty, and remember his
misery no more, Pro. 3.6,7. There are great many drinkers, an unhappy crew,
who would suffocate and drown their sorrows in wine, which will at last bite
like a serpent, and sting like an adder, and cause thee to cry out, woe is me,
woe is me, Prove. 23.29,32. Meat and music are of like nature, being abused
and turned into carnal pleasure, whereby many do endeavor to put far from
them the day of calamity, as the Holy Ghost speaks, Am. 4.5,6,7. Hither may be
referred those speeches and discourses which are framed by humane reason, to
expel it, and to minister comfort to the afflicted, but they cannot do him
any good; for they leave him at last in perplexity of mind: discourses I say,
which are not only able to drive away this evil, but are sometimes frivolous,
idle, foolish, yea, evil and pernicious. Such consolation did Absalon suggest
sometimes to his sister Thamar, who fell into desperation by reason of the
violent incest wherewith Amon deflowred her. Has Amon thy brother, said he,
been with thee, but hold now thy peace, my sister, he is thy brother, regard
not this thing, 2 Samuel 13.19. A fair spoken speech, if credible, and good
comfort forsooth, which was, that she should patiently bear with that
ignominious and execrable infamy, for that she was deflowred not by any other
but by her own brother: But his words wrought nothing upon miserable Thamar;
for the Holy Ghost says, that she remained desolate in her brother Absalons
house. Further, those books which are forced, I know not with what fables;
trifles; toies, or other narratives, whether true or feigned, are of the same
bran, wherewith sorrowful men use to drive away the time and melancholy.
Hither may be referred the exercises of the body, as hunting, and the like
lawful recreations, whereby the sorrowful man strives to rid his mind of
cares, wherein there is not only that defect found common with other
insufficient means, in that when these recreations are finished heaviness
waxes fresh again; but there is also this discommodity therein, that they are
not answerable to the nature of his disease, as being ill applied; these
excercises working directly upon the body, but upon the mind indirectly and
accidentally only; now sorrow is inherent in the mind, and not in the body,
the plaster therefore is to be applied to the part ill affected, and where the
enemy lurkes, there he is to be sought for. He that does otherwise, goes
about with desperate Absalons servants, who pursuing Jonathan and Ahimaaz,
instead of searching for them in the place where they had hid themselves, gave
credence to the lying speech of a certain woman, and returned, not finding
them, to the place whence they came at first. But since sorrow lies hid in the
mind, it is necessary with Joshua to enter into the cave where the enemy lies
hid, to draw him out thence to trample upon him, and cut him off presently.
Thus much of those which use these indifferent means. There are others which
employ themselves in the laudable business of this life, even those which each
man's vocation exacteth of him, that thereby they may dispossess themselves
thereof, and troublesome cogitations; which though they seem more available,
and are more becoming than those which we have before touched, yet though
serious and honest in themselves, are not of any validity to drive away this
evil now in question. All the benefit that one can procure thereby, is, that
for a time they make him forget his misery, but they can in no wise confer
upon him such goodness as will rejoice him. The best and most sovereign
remedy then is that, which will not only chase away the apprehension of the
present evil, but will exhibit that goodness that will produce gladness as
soon as conceived in the mind, whence before it was either through ignorance
or forgetfulness expelled and banished. In a word, the sorrowful man recovers
of his disease, when the peccant humor is driven out by its contrary gladness
of mind, which as it is sought for by few, by reason of men's natural
blindness, so it is very requisite to every one that wishes well to himself;
whosoever will apply this remedy shall by experience find that other remedies
in respect thereof, are but as the Holy Ghost speaks, songs to a heavy heart,
and as vinegar upon Nitre, which remedy we shall handle in this treatise, by
Gods assistance, and as far as our weakness will give us leave, perform
that office given to Saint Paul by the Holy Ghost; we exhort, comfort the
feeble minded, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. And here first of all, I protest, that while I
exhort the faithful man to chase it away, and propose the grounds or reasons
hereof, my intent is not to divest him of all sense of afflictions, and that
he should not be sorrowful at any time; this were to lay aside all humanity
and christianity, there being a kind of sorrow, which is necessary and becomes
every man: but my purpose is to dispose him as far as I am able, so as he may
beware as much as in him lies beforehand of the assaults of it, or if it sets
upon him, not to suffer himself to be foiled, and vanquished, neither so to
possess him, as it does the perverse and wicked man, concerning whom Job
speaks; trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail against
him as a King ready to battle, Job 15.24. In short, my purpose is to afford
him means, if he be affected therewith as he is a man, wherewith he may
subdue it as a Christian, and be sensible that as he is not a man that never
feels the brunt of it, so he is not a Christian, which will not courageously
drive it away when it sets upon him; the spirit of man, says the Holy Ghost,
will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear, Prove. 18.14.
And in another place, if thou faint in the day of adversity thy strength is
small, Pro. 24.10. By which words the spirit of God declares, that that man is
quite undone that is familiar therewith. It stands therefore upon the children
of God in afflictions to be valiantly spirited, and heroical, that not
yielding thereto, they may become victorious and triumph cheerfully, being
laden with rich spoils; this is our drift. Secondly, I protest my scope is not
to drive the faithful man to all manner of joys, not such joys wherewith the
wicked are possessed, who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness
of the wicked, Prove. 2.14. neither levels my discourse a^ wordly mirth,
grounded upon heaps of riches, pleasures, commodities, and honors o^ this
world: Gods children should herein so behave themselves, as to observe
continually that of Saint Paul, that they rejoice as though they rejoiced not,
1 Cor. 7.30. That therefore should not be esteemed for real mirth, which is
attributed to fools. The heart of fools, says Solomon, is in the house of
mirth, Eccl. 7.4. and is nothing else, but the vanity of such as have not their
right wits about them, which is also altogether unprofitable, as he says in
another place; I said in my heart go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, and
therefore enjoy pleasure, and behold this is also vanity: I have said of
laughter, it is mad, and of mirth what does it. And in another place he says,
it is momentany, and soon perishes; for as the crackling of thorns under a
pot, so is the laughter of a fool; this is also vanity. Add hereunto that
sorrow attends that mirth, or follows it close at the heels; even in
laughter the heart is sorrowful and the end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove.
14.13. for these causes the Holy Ghost prefers by many degrees sorrow before
this kind of mirth. It is better to go to the house of mourning, than the house
of feasting, for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to
heart; sorrow is better than laughter; for by the sadness of the countenance
the heart is made better, Eccl. 7.2,3. we exhibit not here then this kind of
mirth, but sanctified joy, whereunto Saint Paul exhorts us, Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say rejoice, Phil. 4.4. that joy, I say, that is
grounded upon Gods grace and benevolence toward us, and is the effect and
testimony of ouradoption; that joy which is a concomitant of Gods children, and
especially when they are most of al smitten with the strokes of afflictions,
and gives us a brighter luster in the hour of death, which is so terrible to
the children of this world; that joy which is begun in this world, and
perfected in that which is to come, and endures for ever; for your joy, says
our Savior Christ, no man takes from you, Ioh. 16.22. That joy, I say,
whereby we sail with a prosperous gale the sea of this life, possessing
tranquillity of mind in the midst of the most grievous calamities wherewith it
is tossed, enjoying these temporal goods, which God has conferred upon us; as
also joyfully finishing the course of our life and spiritual calling, being
not unmindfull of that speech of Solomon; There is no good among men, but for
every man to rejoice, and to do good in his life; as also, that every man
should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of his labor; it is the gift of God,
Eccl. 3.12,13. Thirdly, I have not labored herein for them that live without
the fear of God, persisting in their ungodliness and heart-hardnesse; In so
doing, I should but write upon the sand; yea, I should be set naught by them,
as the Holy Ghost witnesses, he that reproves a scorner gets to himself
shame, he that rebukes a wicked man gets to himself a blot, Prove. 9.7.
wherefore we exhort them in no wise, but summon we them with St. James, to be
afflicted, to mourn and weep, and to turn their laughter to mourning, and
their joy to heaviness, Ia. 4.9. But we labor herein for those souls that
are desolate, and overwhelmed with sorrow, for oppressed consciences; in a
word, for the children of God, that are in afflictions, and temptations.
Fourthly, it is manifest, I give way to Godly sorrow, which works repentance
not to be repented of, as St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 7.10. for since my intent in
this small treatise is to edify Gods children, it is evident that we allow
them that sorrow which is linked with repentance, and has no other original
than it, and cannot be in any progress without it; but being possessed
therewith, we must beware from falling into desperation, and attributing that
efficacy thereunto, which belongs only to Gods mercy. But hereof, by Gods
assistance, in another place, that we may handle all things decently, and in
order, we will propose the grounds or reasons, which should move the faithful
to bid adieu to sorrow, and contrarily to rejoice. The reasons are of two
sorts, whereof some are drawn from the nature thereof, which we exhibit in two
tables, that every man perceiving the nature of his disease may look for a
remedy, and so bruise the scorpion upon his wound, that so he may be healed
and recovered. The first table presents us with the deformity of this Monster;
The second with the hurtful effects thereof. In the second sort, of the
grounds of sanctified mirth, the spiritual goods which God communicates with
the faithful, shall be in the first place declared. In the second place, the
temporal goods which the faithful for the present enjoyes by Gods grace and
goodness shall be treated of. In the third place, we will speak of Gods
providence, and those temporal benefits which the faithful should expect to
receive for the future at his liberality. In the fourth place we will
demonstrate, that not only the benefits, but even the miseries of this life
yield matter of joy. Lastly, we teach that the godly man, in respect of his
condition, as being a traveller in this world, ought to renounce sorrow, and go
on courageously. Behold, most honorable Sir, the matter, end, and order, of
this treatise which I present unto your Honor, in regard I think my self
engaged to offer unto you privately a token, and to erect publicly a monument
of our ancient friendship; which as it has sprouted about thirteen years
since, so it grew together in good studies and learning, the nourishment and
knot of our conversation. Your honor, I persuade my self, has experience of
the virtue and efficacy of the remedies which this little treatise holds forth:
for if there be any living that can use, and apply them when need requires,
Your Honor abounds therewith, for you have received at Gods hands many
excellent benefits, as well temporal as spiritual; the enjoyment whereof
should provoke you to rejoice in God, and arm your self against temptations,
for which every faithful man should prepare himself; for God has, not
without cause, conferred upon you so many benefits, since for the most part the
bountiful grace which God powrs upon his children, is as it were an harbinger
of the subsequent assaults which abide in this life. The great Emperor and
Commander, under whose banner all the faithful war and fight, arms not his
soldiers with weapons, to the end they may lie dormant before their enemies
sight; which weapons are those benefits, which flow from his grace in Christ
Jesus, which he presents us with in his word, instructing us thereby how to
wrestle with all adversities, and giving us means to be made more than
conquerours in all temptations. Blessed is the man that can turn the signs of
Gods grace into weapons, the badges of peace into warlike instruments, the
plowshares into swords, and pruning hooks into spears, Joel 3.10. so that he
may say, when need requires, I am strong. Sir, you have a Magazine of these
weapons, and can with dexterity handle them, and know withal how to manage
them skilfully, against heaviness, and sorrow, wherein you are involved, by
reason of the immature death of Mark Michely your brothers son, some three
days since. Now if this treatise can mitigate your grief, and in due time
abolish it, I shall as heartily rejoice, as I do now condole and grieve; and
always honor his eminent virtue and piety, whereof he gave proof in this
City. I doubt not but you will approve the remedies which I do here propose,
the efficacy whereof I would have you attribute unto me, who am no body but
unto Gods word, whence I have drawn the ingredients of this Antidote. I wish
that you, most Noble Sir, and all your Family, (which had rather forsake the
pleasures of Italy, and treasures of that spiritual Egypt, than escape the
reproach of the cross of Christ Jesus) wherein such splendour of zeal,
constancy and piety derived from the patents to the off spring, does as yet
shine in the eyes of all men, may reap most joyfully the fruit of divine
reverence, which dwells in your hearts as well in this life, as in that which
is to come. This I heartily wish from Geneva, 1630.

N. VEDELIVS

To his honored Father William Win, of Glinne, in the County of Merioneth,
Esquire.
Sir,
HAving translated according to my slender faculty, at the request of a worthy
learned friend of mine, whom I shall not here particularize, as deserving
mention by a Diviner pen, out of Latin into English this ensuing treatise,
being written Originally in French by N. Vedelius Doctor and Professor of
Divinity, I resolved with my self to expose it to the censorious view of the
world, prefixing your name thereunto, though I am not ignorant, that what I do
herein emblazons my imperfections and weakness, which I had rather do in this
nature for this time than set forth some abortive, weak, feeble issue of my own
brain. And though the fashion and habit of this Infant, in this new dress, be
plain and homely, suitable to the place wherein it was contrived; yet I persuade
my self, for I have so much rhetoric, you will vouchsafe it a gracious and
mild aspect. I pass not though such will frown, and look asquint upon it, as
think nothing worthy perusal, but what blusters in high language. Virtue,
assure your self, may lie hid under russet frize, as well as a scarlet cloak.
The attire denominates not a complete Gentleman, no more than the beard the
Philosopher; give it then entertainment, and hug it with your best affections,
as well in respect it may prove, in this mournful age, a Cordial and
restorative, for your declining age, as because it speaks not the language of
the scurrilous, malevolent, abusive brats of the swelling fancies of these last
times, wherein men's minds labor with strange and fearful expectations: times,
I say, which have produced, as Africa, some uncouth misshapen monsters; I had
almost said, every morning bitter invectives, I mean, which are no better than
Libels, which are styled, and not without cause, by a most Noble, learned,
eloquent personage of this land, Sir Fran. Bacon.
Females of sedition, such as were never seen in this temperate region. Zeal
misgoverned has quickened them into a numerous swarm, like so many Egyptian
Locusts, and are compiled perchance by the Adorers of that spiritual Egypt and
Sodom, embracers of that woman spoken of in the Revelation, which is drunken
with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev.
17.6. insomuch, that they have fluttered, and taken their flight into every
corner of this Kingdom, darkning even to consternation and amazement, the
clear air of truth. The Press has groaned is bringing to light such dismal
il-boding spurious brats, who as soon as they are borne, to use the Psalmists
words, go astray and speak lies wiperous brood, which have made it their only
design, enterprise, and work, to burst asunder the bowels of our mother the
Church, and tear in pieces the seamlesse coat of Christ. But Sir, for this
poor Infant I present unto you, it speaks not daggers, it despises not
dominions, nor speaks evil of dignities; it railes not at principalities and
powers; It comes not with a rod, but with the spirit of meekness; It exhorts
lovingly the sorrowful afflicted man to take courage, and rejoice in the Lord;
It shows sorrow to be good for nothing but sin; It admonishes the
faithful man to be of the Sirens disposition, whom they report to be most
joyful, when most of all oppressed, and compassed about with storms and
tempest. It teaches him to be of that Godly man's temper, mentioned by one of
the Ancients, who though he had lost all his goods and substance, was so far
from being sorrowful, that this was his prayer, Lord, thou know where all
my goods are laid up in store, he meant in the Kingdom of Heaven, where
neither moth does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal,
Matt. 6.19. a Kingdom incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, 1 Pet.
1.4. a Kingdom, where there is an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. Where God
shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, where shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, Rev, 21.4. but spiritual joy surpassing man's
understanding, and that for ever, wherewith the God of all comfort and
consolation crown your hoary hairs after fullness of happiness, and days in
this world, which shall be some part of the prayers, early and late, of your
most observant, obedient, and dutiful son,

Cadwallader Win.

The Contents of the Chapters following.
CHAP. I. The first ground or reason why the faithful man should renounce
worldly sorrow is drawn from its filthiness and deformity. CHAP. II. The
second ground or reason is drawn from the pernicious effects thereof. CHAP.
III. The third ground or reason why the faithful man should abandon it, and be
joyful, is drawn from Gods spiritual grace in Jesus Christ. CHAP. IV. The
fourth ground or reason consists in the corporal benefits conferred by God.
CHAP. V. The fifth ground or reason is drawn from Gods providence, and that the
faithful man should for the future hope to receive corporal benefits. CHAP.
VI. The sixth ground or reason is, that afflictions themselves yield matter of
joy. CHAP. VII. The seventh and last ground or reason is drawn from the
condition of the faithful man in this world, which consists herein, that he
is a traveller journeying into his country.
AN Antidote against sorrow.
CHAP. I. The first ground or reason why the faithful man should renounce
worldly sorrow is drawn from its filthiness and deformity.
WOrldly sorrow wherewith thou art now possessed winds it self into thy heart,
under the specious color of lawful care, under the pretense of decorum or
comeliness, natural honesty, and of pitying thee, as also under the vizard
of doing thee good and friendship, and of procuring thee refreshment. But I
would have thee know, that there lies in it nothing but treachery and deceit,
which thou shall most manifestly perceive, the vizard thereof being pulled off,
by visibly discerning the face of this chymera: for then thou shall find it a
monster exceeding deformed, impure, and abominable, most cruel, furious, and
pernicious.

In this Chapter it shall suffice us to unfold in some proportionits deformity,
and more fully in the following. We affirm therefore sorrow being predominant
in man's heart to be a filthy passion, and altogether infamous, as burdening
him with reproach and ignominy, which will more clearly appear considering it
in relation to God, his Neighbor, and lastly him in whom it freely domineeres.
In relation to God it is manifest, that it is contrary unto him diverse manner
of ways; for it sets light by, and contemnes his commandment, often enjoining
us heartily to rejoice; Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice, Phil.
4.4. Consonant hereunto is the counsel of the wise man, Give not over thy mind
to heaviness, and afflict not thy self in thine own counsel, love thy own
soul and comfort thy heart, and remove sorrow far from thee, Eccles.
30.21,24. And again, take not heaviness at heart, drive it away and remember
thy last end, Eccles. 38.20. Neither does it less thwart Gods providence, for
it causes one to think that the hand of God has not wrought his afflictions;
neither fastneth he his eyes upon divine providence, howsoever in words
acknowledging it: But if he would firmly believe afflictions to be the work
of his providence, he should find therein more matter of joy than sorrow, the
afflictions of the godly being badges of Gods love, tending to the good and
salvation of his faithful ones. And though he be constrained to think upon
God, and to acknowledge his visitation upon him with this or that affliction,
he presently offends him another manner of way; for he is impatient, and by
his frequent murmuring accuses God himself. That displeases him which is
acceptable to God, and complains of his will, saying, Thou art a bloody husband
to me, Exodus 4.26. And with that wicked servant, I knew thou were a hard man,
Mat. 25.24. and hating that which is a token of Gods love, and being in extreme
danger of the loss of his spiritual life, he spills that medicine which
should have been so necessary for him, yea, blames the Physician himself for
stretching a healing helping hand: It causes him to be pagan like, distrustful
of Gods goodness, and the verity of his promise. It robs God of his fatherly
care he has of us infringing that hope which should be reposed in him: Hence
the Apostle joins it with diffidence, saying, That ye sorrow not as others
which have no hope, 1 These. 4,13. It makes him ungrateful blotting out his
remembrance so many corporal and spiritual blessings whereof he has had
experience by Gods goodness, which if he would think upon, he would not
suffer himself to be carried headlong thereby. And because his mind is fixed
upon evil, his affliction also being either real or imaginary, he makes little
or no reckoning of Gods benefits, but buries them in oblivion, not without an
execrable brand of ingratitude. It makes him not to employ all the faculties
both of his body and soul in Gods service with such a measure of zeal as is
meet; Serve the Lord, says the Prophet David, with gladness, and come before
his presence with a song, Psalm. 100.2. Thou shall rejoice in thy feast etc.
Seven days shall thou keep a solemn feast unto thy Lord thy God, and
therefore shall thou surely rejoice, Deuteronomy. 16.14,15. This alacrity in serving
God cannot even in the least degree be performed by him; nay he is as remiss
in all the actions of his life, as he is negligent in Gods service. And thus
thou see how hainously he offends God. In relation to his neighbor, he is
suspicious, unaffable, unmannerly, testy, contentious, whereby he renders
himself vitiously deformed, hateful, and odious. In relation to himself, it
makes him to incur no less reproach and ignominy than filthiness; for
generally it argues the weakness of his understanding, joined with
foolishness, yea, beastliness, and declares him to be besides himself,
whereby it happens that he judges foolishly of the cause of his sorrow, and
embraces falsehood instead of truth: Hence the Apostle joins it with false
opinion, saying, No sorrow for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous,
Heb. 12.11. where wrong judgment is taxed which accompanies it, particularly
it makes him ignorant of his own condition, and to take, at least for a time,
no consideration of himself: for being called hereunto, to wit, to be a
joyful heir of the Kingdom of Heaven by the right of Adoption, coheire with
Jesus Christ, and Lord of all the Creatures, he ought not to make his firm
abode in this world, neither to place his happiness therein, but as a
sojourner to travel to his heavenly Country. Wherefore he should always go
forward, not stand still, much less retreat back, but despising the world,
and all the concupiscences thereof, courageously to remove all obstacles
hindering him thither, and to place his happiness in God, of whose love
whosoever is once persuaded, doubts not but he will lead him by his fatherly
providence in this desert and pilgrimage. Wherefore he should carry with him a
high, generous, and undaunted spirit, which is altogether becoming the sons
of the King of Kings. This he should have continually before his eyes, and
diligently and seriously consider thereupon; how wisely then would he order
his life and conversation? with what happiness would he live in this world?
But sorrow as a deadly phrensy buries all these things in oblivion, so that it
makes one forget his original, and estate, his own name, nay, himself; It
makes him wholly bent upon this world, miserably torturing himself for the
loss which he either sustaines, or fears to be, of honors, riches,
pleasures, or the like, as may be seen in that young man, who when he had
heard he should sustain the loss of his riches, went away sorrowful, leaving
Jesus, Mat. 9.22. which discovered him to be desperately enamoured of this
world, and to seek his abode and solace therein, whereas he should seek for
tranquillity in Heaven, and felicity in God. It comes to pass that he is
pensive upon any occasion, disordering, afflicting, macerating, and suffering
himself to be easily missed out of the way to his heavenly country. In a
word, he is like a foolish traveller, who being given over to commit
innumerable fooleries can never attain to his journeyes end. And there is
another sort of foolishness discernable in him; for after he has once wandered
out of the King of heavens highway, he so misgoverns himself, as that
without any circumspection he takes hold of every thing, which even at the
first blush offers it self to his view. He is not contented to be exercised
with more weighty occasions, and afflictions; but as if his life were not
miserable enough of it self, he fabricates to himself daily new miseries, so
that he will be sorrowful upon any ridiculous, vile, and slight matter,
whereof if he be questioned by a certain Jonadab a faithful friend, Thou
being the Kings son, why art thou lean from day to day, 2 Samuel 13.4.
Certainly he will not be less ashamed to confess the cause of his sorrow,
than Amon was of the intended detestable incest. He is vexed at one small
word, though well spoken, yet taken by him in ill part; or if one speak amiss,
he will interpret it to be worser: He will be so far moved by an oblique
aspect, by a vain and counterfeit Messenger, by a slight fault of his
Maidservant, and manservant, as to forget all the benefits he possesses in
heaven and earth, which is a thing unbefitting him, who is the son of the
King of Kings, and heir of the Kingdom of heaven. Besides, sorrow discovers
in him another kind of foolishness, in that he reduces thereby the soul in
subjection to the body, which should govern the body, and it only be ruled by
a diviner spirit: And wereas he should rather oftentimes suffer, set light by,
and in some measure concoct it, he out of a kind of brutish self-love had
rather be miserable than happy, of a crazed than found mind. Moreover, it
shows him to be abject, and destitute of a generous and heroical spirit,
which resides in the hearts of the children of God; neither endeavors he with
such a courage as is fit to remove the obstacles, which in this life hinder him
from the attainment of the kingdom of heaven, but stoopeth to the difficulties
that withstand him; he is of a vile abject spirit, and as much as in him lies,
renounceth his own right thereunto. Further, the deformity thereof shows it
self by external symptoms; It makes him to be of a heavy countenance, poring
upon the earth, oftentimes to weep, not unlike a silly fool or soft woman;
otherwhile his speech fails him, or his tongue faultereth; yea, by his silence
he speaks his infamy. He abandons the society of men, hiding himself in
corners, even as the malefactor to escape the sight of the magistrate. It
impaires his good name or reputation, and especially when the cause inducing
him thereunto is unknown, or of no reckoning; thereupon he renders himself
suspicious that he has committed, or is about to perpetrate some heinous
sin, but this suspicion is oftentimes false, as may appear by Ely the
Priest, who thought Anna Elkanahs wife being in bitterness of soul to be
drunk, grounding his conjecture upon some signs he had observed in her,
misperswading himself. This conjecture notwithstanding is sometimes true,
whereof Amon is an example, who when he had an intention to commit incest with
his sister, was vexed, insomuch that he fell sick by reason of anguish of
heart. How Ahab was overwhelmed with sorrow, when he could not enjoy another
man's goods, Naboths vineyard! How heavy was Antiochus the Tyrant, when his
sacrilegious will could not put into execution the devastation of Jerusalem?
And was not Herod sorry, because of the rash oath he made to that infamous
Herodias which beheaded John Baptist? It is a symptom oftentimes of
hypocrisy, which our Savior intimates, when he says, Be not as the
Hypocrites with a sad countenance, Mat. 9.16. Further, experience teaches,
that those that are more naturally prone thereunto are proud, and cruel. What
has been said does manifest its deformity, and show that it out-strips in
filthiness and ugliness even those cruel beasts which superstitions Egypt
did adore; and now seeing thou art one of the number of Gods children, beware
thou give it an habitation in thy soul, the temple of the Holy Ghost, but
rather let thy mind abound in all godly mirth, which is as befitting thy
eminent condition, as sorrow is unbeseeming. He that rejoices according to
Gods commandment receives adversity at his hands, as thankfully, as prosperity;
He patiently submits his neck to the yoke; He knows the cross to be the
cognizance of Gods love, and a most sovereign cure for his spiritual disease,
the end of his conflict victory, the crown of the lamb, and eternal glory;
He confides in God, and rests upon his promises, committing his care unto him
to provide all necessaries; He pays his vows, he offers daily the sacrifice
of prosperity, and with the calves of his lips his morning and evening
oblation; he serves God cheerfully, and with fervent zeal; he is at peace with
his neighbor, and meekly covers his failings; he knows this world to be a
place of pilgrimage, heaven to be his country whither he steeres with
cheerfulness, not suffering himself to be misled out of the way thither by
any occasion, though seeming weighty to flesh and blood. He places his
happiness in God; he makes a difference betwixt such grievous afflictions as
come of their own accord, and those whereinto he plunges himhimselfe: The
former as being unavoidable he patiently endures, the latter he warily
eschews. He knows that his soul is not a slave or vassal to his body, but
Gods servant. He resists adversity with an unconquerable courage; he is of
such an heroical mind as beseemes him who is the Prince of the creatures; his
countenance void of hypocrisy and pride speaks the happiness and majesty
appropriated only to Gods children, yea, his countenance and all his gestures
intimate his mirth and integrity, which rests in his bosom, and evidently
show he is in no wise given to this world. And howsoever his body being his
viler and ignobler part is here upon earth, yet his soul being the nobler and
diviner has its conversation in heaven; like Jacobs ladder, whose lower part
was set upon the earth, the top reaching to heaven. He obeyes the advice of the
wise man, who says, A cheerful and good heart will have care of his meat and
diet, Eccl. 30.27. that is, will rid it self of impieties and sorrow, which as
they are exceeding unbecomming, so they are, as hereafter shall be declared,
pernicious and hurtful. Here thou see a brief character of such a one as
rejoices in the Lord; judge then whether thou do not amiss in preferring
vice before virtue, filthiness before honesty, monstrous deformity before
heavenly beauty, the representation or Idaea of hell, where there is nothing
but weeping and gnashing of teeth, before the resembance of God and heavenly
felicity.

CHAP. II. The second ground or reason is drawn from the pernicious effects
thereof.
HItherto thou have seen one only table, now thou shall behold another more
deformed than the former; for the vitiosity of sorrow consists not only in
filthiness and deformity, but in a greater measure of evil, it being not
only monstrous to be looked upon, but very dangerous and pernicious, which is
so much the more difficult to be discerned, by how much it shrowds it self
under hypocritical love, and while it beguiles us under the mask of
friendship, promising I know not what comfort and profit. But if thou will pry
more narrowly into it, thou shall discover it to be no less traitorous unto
thee, than was Joab unto Amasa, who under the vizard of friendship sheathed his
sword in his bowels. Thou shall perceive it to be thy malicious enemy, and so
much the more to be feared, by how much it be more familiar with thee. Thou
shall discover it to be a serpent that thou nourishest in thy bosom, and a
viper that thou engendrest for thy own destruction. And I beseech thee what
profit and comfort can thou purchase thereby, seeing it is but vanity? Hear
the spirit of God, saying, What has a man of all his labors, and of the
vexation of his heart wherein he has labored under the sun? For all his
days are sorrows, and his travel grief; yea, his heart takes not rest in
the night time. This is also vanity. Eccles. 2.22,23. Hear the wife man also,
who says, that therein there is no profit, Eccl. 30.25. It is conducible then
neither to thy soul nor body, neither furthereth it thy affairs, unless thou
enjoyest some peculiar privilege not afforded any one living. Will it restore
unto thee thy country which is now in the power of thy enemies? will it rid
thee of thy miseries? will it deliver thee from injuries and molestations? will
it perform thy business? will it provide or care for thy family? will it pay
thy debts? will it prosperously discharge thee from thy law suits? will it
extol thee to honors and dignities? shall thou thereby obtain more health,
more strength, more knowledge, more esteem, more love? No verily, for future
things are not within thy power, and what is past cannot be recalled. Go to
then thou little miserable caytiffe, hide thy self in some corner or other,
labor with might and maine, search out all the means and occasions to
diminish it. Weigh a thousand and a thousand times with thy self the high
stature of Goliath, afflict thy self as being of a little stature, thou will
never attain to his.

In short, all worldly sorrow is vain and unprofitable, and would it were
only so; thou shall find it grievous and most pernicious, unless with speed
thou dischargest thy self there from. Know this, it draws after it a numerous
swarm of evils, as well corporal as spiritual; as touching temporal evils,
it makes man's life altogether miserable, infinitely increasing the miseries that
are the ordinary concomitants thereof, whether thou considerest his businesses,
and counsels, the calamities themselves, or at last his whole person. As
touching his businesses, it is certain it disturbs, yea, overthrowes his best
and most profitable and necessary endeavors; It obscures his mind with
innumerable sad thoughts, which as darksome vapors ascend to the
understanding, and darkon the cleernesse thereof, whence arise so many erratas
or faults disordering his endeavors and employments, and involving him in new
difficulties, as we shall presently make it appear.

For misery and afflictions, it augmenteth them five manner of ways.

First, it represents not calamities in their native colors, but aggravates
them by what is evil therein increasing, and what is good depressing; so that
it displaies the former which should be concealed, and conceales the latter
which should be discovered; further, it is the cause of many grievous
calamities which but for it would never happen; for while one by the suggestion
thereof erres manifoldly, it cannot be but evil and misfortune should befall
him.

Secondly, it makes him suspicious, froward, unastable in his conversation, and
intolerable to his neighbor, whereby not seldom he incurres some great
calamity, whereof King David affords us a notable example, 2 Samuel
19.23,4,5,9,7. who having obtained victory over his son Absalon, by whom he
was put off his Kingdom, yet by reason of his death he became exceeding sorry,
which ushered him into a notable error; for by giving himself to sorrow, he
neglected his faithful constant and obedient subjects, by whose magnanimity
he obtained that notable victory, and recovered his Kingdom, and was wellnigh
entangled in new troubles, and like to fall into greater afflictions then
befell him all his life long, even as Joab did most wisely warn him, for he was
well-nigh forsaken of all his people, and like to lose his Kingdom, which not
long before he recoverd. In brief, sorrow is like a spider, which if it
begins to spin his own bowels will not cease till it has woven a whole web of
mischief.

Thirdly, it heaps not upon him only present calamities, but draws upon him
future miseries, which otherwise would never have fallen out, so that he stays
not for such evils as come of their own accord, but runs to meet them, and
curiously and ingeniously invents them, for fear whereof he is so sad and
pensive, being ignorant that sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, Mat.
6.34.

Fourthly, as though those evils, and grievous, real, and vehement
discommodities which come of their own accord, and that by intervall of years
lodge with us, to wit, loss of goods, honors, children, and such as are dear
unto us, as also banishment and imprisonment, did not sufficiently torment him,
he miserably vexes himself (as has been said) for small, slight, and
ridiculous occasions, which at every moment well-nigh and ordinarily fall out,
and are taken hold of the miserable man with great grief of mind. Hence it
happens, that all his life long well-nigh he becomes his own executioner,
being vexed with sorrow and grief; whereas if he would set light by such
occasions he might joyfully pass away his life.

Fifthly, it increases the discommodities of this life, in that it abuses those
blessings which God has conferred upon him, making of them that use whereunto
they were not designed, and causes him to set light by all such things as
should exhilarate him, or to forget, or extenuate Gods benefits conferred upon
him, and to take a surfeit of them, changing all their sweetness into gall and
wormwood; so that it may be compared to that little venomous creature, which
turns the juice of the sweetest flowers into poison, or a bad stomach by
whose ill constitution the choicest and best food is turned into phlegmatic
and hurtful humors. In respect of his whole person, it brings him into a most
miserable condition; for heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, and by
sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken, Prove. 12.25. Prove. 15.13. for it
corrupts his understanding and senses, deprives him of wisdom, whereby he is
disabled from attending his businesses. It makes him to be a vile abject
spirit; it so blunts the vigor of his mind, as it cannot even in the least
degree resist evil; it takes away the inclination of the will to perform any
good or noble act redounding to his own or neighbors good, and renders him
incapable of putting in ure good and profitable employments. In a word, it
dissolves him like pearlin vinegar, neither does it less weaken the body: for
heaviness of heart breaks strength, and a broken spirit dries the bones,
Eccles. 38.19. whereupon he cannot sleep, or take his rest in the night time;
as may be seen in Antiochus in whom grief was more and more, and he made
account that he should die; wherefore he called for all his friends, and said
unto them, the sleep is gone from mine eyes, and my heart fails for very
care: in what tribulation am I come, and how great a flood of misery is it
wherein now I am? 1 Macch. 6.10.11. It breeds deadly diseases, as is manifest
in the same Antiochus, who laid him down upon his bed, and fell sick for
grief, 1 Macch. 6,8. hereof comes horiness and untimely old age. Envy and
wrath shortens the life, and carfulness brings age before the time, Eccl.
30.24. as also death, for sorrow has killed many, and there is no profit
therein, Eccl. 30.23. says the wise man. And again, of heaviness comes
death, Eccles. 38.19. and Saint Paul says, the sorrow of the world works
death, 2 Cor. 7.10. Hereof was the patriarch Jacob afraid, as the rest of his
sons were conveying his son Benjamin down to Egypt, ye shall, says he,
bring down my gray hairs to the grave with sorrow, if mischief befall him,
Genesis 44.29. Now of all the effects it produces, death is the best, it being
better to die than undergo the continual torments thereof; death is better
than a bitter life, says the wise man, Eccl. 30.17. and by destroying him, it
gives a deadly blow to it self. The vessel being broken, the liquor must
needs run to waste and perish, so that by his ruin, it being far more
pernicious falls to destruction. Thus much of the temporal miseries which
attend it; as for spiritual evils which are far more grievous than the
former, it is evident, that one through sorrow does grievously offend God,
provoking him to anger through disobedience, impatience, distrust, ingratitude,
and brutish stupidity, which moves God to forsake and leave him wholly to his
cares and anxieties, and to speak to him as it were thus, what? do thou
endeavor through thy carfulness to rob me of the honor, whereby I care for
all things; Be it so, torment thy self as long as it pleases thee, thou shall
see what it will avail thee. Being then left to himself, he runs into most
grievous enormities wherein he is altogether involved by Gods judgment, and
by means whereof falls into more grievous calamities. It deprives him of the
testimony of adoption, and the certainty of the right of Gods children; for
whosoever is borne of God overcommeth the world, Joh. 5.4. But what is it to
overcome it? It is not for one to make himself a slave thereunto, neither to
stoop to adversities on the one side, nor to place his felicity therein on the
other. He that does this may assuredly persuade himself to be borne of God,
and to enjoy Gods benevolence and grace, whereby the world is vanquished.
Contrarily one by being sorrowful, plainly testifies, that he is desperately
in love with this world. Moreover, it opens a gap to the devil to assault
him with diverse temptations, and bring him into thousand evils and heinous
sins. The murderer Cain may serve for an example, whose anger was not only
kindled, but his countenance fell as soon as God disrespected his sacrifice,
which moved him to kill his brother. It induces him to become an Apostate, or
revolter from the true Religion, subscribing and consenting to the lies of
Satan, when calamity is set before his view, as Poverty, banishment,
imprisonment, and death which he is bound to suffer for the confession of
truth. It makes him despair, and to lay violent hands upon himself, and
ministers an opportunity to the devil to set aside his proper shape, and
appear unto such as give themselves thereunto visibly, as it happened to the
Egyptians in times past, which were, as the wise man witnesses, scattered
under a dark veil of forgetfulness, being horribly astonished and troubled
with strange apparitions, Wisd. 7.3. It gives way to the envious man the devil
to persuade him to make a covenant with him, and renounce his baptism, as
witches are wont to do; which being done, he possesses, vexes, and
tormenteth him after a wonderful manner. Behold the mischiefs thereof, behold
the offspring the sorrowful man breeds in his bosom! who sees not, that
the grievousest plague is that of the heart, Eecl. 25.13. And it cannot be, but
it should produce the greatest mi^fortune and misery, it being the grievousest
punishment and curse which God threatens to the transgressors of his Law. The
Lord shall give thee a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of
mind, Deuteronomy. 28.65. I will distress Jerusalem, and there shall be heaviness
and sorrow; it shall be unto me as Ariel, Esaias. 29.2. Thus, says the Lord, of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of Israel, they shall eat their
bread with carfulness, Ez. 12.19. Remove far from thee this most dangerous
disease, and embrace Godly mirth, which, as has been said, does not only
become Gods children, but affords excellent commodities. It represents to the
joyful man's view the happy success of future things, causing him to bear all
things patiently, and to follow his businesses or employments, or forgo them,
having regard to time and other circumstances. And howsoever all things fall
not out according to his mind, yet he is contented with his condition. He
handles worldly things, as they are in their own nature fading and
indifferent; and being not clogged by them, he goes on lustily in the way of
life, till he has prosperously finished his journey. He leads his life as
quietly as he can in this world, neither aggravates it with new miseries,
being burdensome enough of it self. His understanding is sound and perfect,
in that he judges not according to his affection, but as reason directs
him; his body is recreated and refreshed thereby. He knows experimentally
what Solomon speaks of, a merry heart does good like a medicine, Prove. 17.22.
A merry heart has a continual feast, Prove. 15.15. and again, The gladness
of the heart is the life of man, and the joyfulnesse of a man prolongeth his
days, Eccl. 30.22. Moreover, one endued with this sanctified joy is most
assured of Gods love, and thoroughly furnished against Satan, so as he cannot
exercise his power and force upon him. In brief, the blessing of the heavenly
father rests upon him, and in that he rejoices, it is the work of grace,
and because he rejoices in God, it is an infallible sign that God has
pleasure in him. Wherefore, be not sorry for the joy of the Lord is our
strength, Neh. 8.11. and say, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall
be joyful in my God, Esaias 61.10.

CHAP. III. The third ground or reason why the faithful man should abandon it,
and be joyful, is drawn from Gods spiritual grace in Jesus Christ.
THere is nothing which should beget a greater measure of joy in the faithful
man, than the contemplation and enjoyment of spiritual benefits which God has
conferred upon him; for thereby he is freed from the grievousnesse of his
misery, and translated into a most happy condition, which thou faithful soul
being in misery and sorrow which now boils within thee, and is fixed in thy
breast, should especially take into consideration. That thou may clearly
perceive, as thou ought, Gods grace, and judge more rightly of the
excellency of his benefits, Consider with me, I beseech thee, these three
things, to wit, thy state past, present, and to come. What is man in respect of
his past estate, but naturally the child of wrath and eternal condemnation?
for whereas he was originally created after the image of God, now he is
deprived thereof by his incredulity and rebellion, which is the cause, that by
the most just sentence of God he is adjudged to death, that is, to all manner
of miseries, spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal, wherein he
involved all his posterity. Hence it is that man is conceived and borne in sin,
and so being deprived of righteousness, he inclines to all vice; his
understanding darkened, his will maliciously bent, all his affections depraved
and out of order. Out of this corrupt fountain it cannot be, but an infectious
and corrupt stream should flow, to wit, perverse and abominable thoughts and
words, answerable to the abundance and depravation of his heart, actions
altogether unsavory to Gods will. Briefly, he is dead in sins, and so cursed
in the sight of God; unto whom that speech of Martha may be applied: Lord, by
this time he stinketh; for he has been dead four days, Jo. 11.39. for
whereas once he was the temple of God, how he is become a noisome den and
sink, whereinto that infernal soul disburthens his filth. Nay, he rebels
against God, and enters into acts of hostility; the wrath of God is thereupon
revealed from heaven against all his unrighteousness and ungodliness, Romans
1.17. Being left then to himself by Gods judgment he follows his own ways,
he is given to a reprobate sense, whereupon he feels diverse curses inflicted
by God, who either punishes him in his goods, in his body, in his honors, or
in such as are dear unto him; one while he arms the heaven to be his enemy,
otherwhile the Elements, otherwhile beasts, otherwhile he makes men to fall out
amongst themselves; At length he cuts him off from the land of the living, whom
vengeance dogs no less than before: for his soul no sooner forsakes the
body, but it endures infernal pains until the resurrection; at what time
the body shall be reunited to the soul, and the whole man tormented with the
devil, with horrible, unspeakable, and eternal torments. The state of that
man for misery surpasses infinitely the condition of dogs, swine, and serpents;
for these beasts are reduced to nothing, affoon as they expire; Whereas when he
is dead his torments begin to act their parts, so that what he suffered, or
could endure in this world, is only a forerunner, or taste of those torments he
must undergo after this life. Behold thy first genuine natural state wherein
God verily might have left thee, and then thou should most miserably and
eternally perish; but he would not deal so severely, but according to the
multitude of his mercies had compassion upon thee, translating thee into a
far happier condition wherein now thou art. Consider with me what will afford
thee joy and comfort; how happy is thy condition, that whereas God passed by
many myriads of men who miserably perish for ever, he has chosen thee out of
his free grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, for which purpose it was his
pleasure, that God should be made man, that the word should be clothed with an
infants nature, and that that heavenly bread, as one of the fathers styles him,
should be made grass; for all flesh is grass. He would have him first to be
conceived, and enclosed within the womb of a woman, ere his virtue and power
should be dispersed throughout the whole universe by the preaching of the
Gospel; like Gideons fleece which was first bedewed, ere the dew came down to
the plains. And that through his holiness and innocence he might cover
before Gods face our impurity and uncleanness, he would be borne of a
virgin, and that great with child, not by man but by the Holy Ghost: for the
Arc was overlayed with pure gold within and without, Exodus 25.11. And the high
priest was not to defile himself for his father or for his mother, Levit.
21.11. Further, it behoved him not only to be borne, but live and die for
thee, that thou mightedst obtain everlasting life, remission of sins, and
righteousness. And that this might not be fruitless unto thee, he is risen
from the dead, ascended into the heavens, and sits on the right of God his
heavenly father. And that this also might tend to thy good and salvation, he
has called thee unto his Church, and made thee a denison of that city, that
is set upon the hill, and says unto thee, as he did once unto Soul, arise and
go to the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do, Act. 9.6. He
found thee in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness, he made thee
ride on the high places of the earth, Deuteronomy. 30.10.13. and placed thee in the
land of uprighteousnesse, Esaias. 26.10. he has given for food and sustenance
his word, that angelical bread, when others are fed but with the chasse and
straw of that darkesome Egypt whereunto they are most miserably enslaved; and
that thou might assuredly be persuaded, that what Christ did and suffered
concerned thee, he ordained sacraments as certain assurances or pledges of
his grace. Further, he has communicated with thee his spirit which sanctifies
thy heart with faith, opens the eyes of thy understanding, whereby thou may
not only with Adam behold thy nakedness, but contemplate his grace; changes
thy will, purifieth thy affections, so that not without a miracle thou art
renewed into his image, much like that King of Israel, who was changed into
another man; restrains thee from committing such sins as the unregenerate
perpretate, and consequently preserves thee from horrible judgments and
punishments due unto the same. There redounds unto thee being in the state of
grace, honor, felicity, and profit; for what great honor is it to thee to
have God for thyfather? what advancement is it for thee to be partaker of the
divine nature in Christ, and therein superior to the Angels themselves. He
took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.13. And
that heavenly Joseph had in such esteem the worme-eaten sack of our flesh,
that he vouchsafed to put into it the inestimable treasure of our salvation. On
the other side, Angels are but ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. and consequently for thee in
particular. Moreover, what honor is it to be a Prophet, Priest, and Prince
over all the creatures, which sovereignty thou have purchased by Christ? so
that all things are thine, 1 Cor. 3.22. and appertain unto thee, which in due
time thou shall enjoy, after thou have fought in this world the good fight, a
plenary possession of. The commodities accrewing unto thee in the state of
grace are innumerable, for thereby thou art shot free from the thunderbolt of
the Law, there being no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.1. And howsoever there be some remainder of infirmities in thee, which the
flesh sinfully puts in practife, yet they are covered with the robe of thy
eldest brother, the righteousness of Jesus Christ; yea, thine own sins
conduce to thy salvation, thine own experience and the sense of the deformity
thereof provoking thee to hate them, working in thee sincere humility, and
inducing thee to behave thy self for the future more wisely and warily. Being
in the state of grace thou have freer access unto the throne of grace in all
thy necessities, so as thou may plentifully pour tears into his bosom; he
persuades thee with precepts, and allures thee with promises. His providence
leads and preserves thee as a cloud by day, and the shining of a flaming fire
by night, Esaias. 4.5. He provides thee all necessaries that relate to this life,
and that which is to come; his Angels are a brazen wall to defend thee. Add
hereunto, that the afflictions themselves are not signs of his wrath, but
pledges of his grace and marks of his fatherly care to thy trial and
spiritual exercise, yielding the peaceable fruit of righteousness, Heb.
12.38. He is present with thee in all temptations and conflicts, strengthening
thee by the power of his spirit, by whom he ascertaines thee of thy eternal
salvation; persuading thee, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, not things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate thee from the love
of God in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.37,38. Whereupon he plants in thy heart such a
firm hope of eternal happiness, as if thou had already a plenary
possession thereof; for hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us, Romans 5.5. These
spiritual benefits are of that nature, that they will never diminish nor
fail. Nay, look how much the faithful man affects them, so much the more they
increase; like to the nurses milk, which the more it is sucked, the more it
abounds. And therefore who sees not, that these honors and spiritual riches
infinitely surpass all the riches and glory of this world. This is thy present
condition as long as thou art in this world; as for thy future, thou art
indeed, as all men are, subject to death, whereby thou obtainest, more
excellent things than thou could enjoy in thy life time; so that, not without
cause, it is said, precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints, Psalm. 116.15. for death will put a period unto all thy adversities, and
will be the beginning or rather the fulfilling of all good things. By death
thou ceasest to sin, and provoke God thy father to anger, and to commit such
things, as are unworthy thy eminent condition; as long as thou art clothed with
the mantle of flesh the concupiscence thereof will vex and solicit thee with
that unchaste woman, saying, lie with me; But when thy mantle, as that of Elias
when he ascended into heaven, shall fall from thee, it shall never trouble nor
molest thee. By death thy last enemy, all the rest of thy enemies shall be put
to flight; They shall be never able to hurt and entrap thee. Thou shall be
freed from the fear of all dangers which in this life abide thee. It will rid
thee from all molestations, milteries, afflictions, cares, and griefs. Thy
foul being severed from thy body will escape, as a bird out of the snare of
the fouler; the snare is broken and we are escaped, Psalm. 124.7. Being then
freed from innumerable torments, and troubles, she shall enter into rest;
insomuch, that when the last hour shall make the nearest approach, thou may
say unto her, Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116.7. Departing this world, she shall enter into
heaven to enjoy eternal happiness, and rejoice at the beatificall vision of
her heavenly bridegoome. Then she goes forth to behold King Solomon with the
Crown, wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart, Cant. 3.11. As for thy body, it shall
return into dust, but it shall not long remain in that state. It is sown
verily in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is sown in dishonor, it
is raised in power, it is a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, 1
Cor. 15.42,43,44. so that the death of the body is nothing else, but as feed
cast into the earth, producing in its time most plentiful fruit: Then being
reunited to the soul shall be brought into the Kings chambers, where it will
be glad, and rejoice for ever, and enjoy plenary possession of ineffable
happiness, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1
Cor. 2.9. Go to then, if thy condition has been so miserable, and will be
so happy, have not thou sufficient cause to rejoice? Now thou art sorrowful,
and despairest, and suffer molestations which thou can not repel or drive
away from thee, repeating these words to thy self, Alas! when will that day
appear wherein I shall have cause of rejoicing, and rendering thanks to God.
Know this, that the meditation of spiritual benefits were there no other
occasion moving thee to rejoice should be a most weighty motive inducing thee
thereunto, and even without intermission to praise God amidst the most grievous
calamities. How would that wretched Captive rejoice, being set at liberty from
the dark and noisome dungeon? with what exultation did that lame man, restored
to his feet by Peter, praise God, Act. 3.8. The guilty person being certified
of his Princes pardon, even at the very nick he is to suffer, for joy is as it
were wrapped out of himself. Judge thou whether all the miseries of this world
may be compared to that, out of which God has rid thee. Can thou be so
senseless and dull, as not to rejoice from the bottom of thy heart, in that
he has delivered thee from those infinite calamities, those everlasting
burnings and darkness where is weeping and gnashing of teeth? Thou art really
possessed thou have a most just cause to be sorrowful, and conclude thy
condition to be miserable and unhappy. Then verily thou should have cause to
complain of thy miseries, if God had left thee in the state of corruption and
misery. Alas! how many miserable Infants are there, and will be in hell, who
have known neither good nor evil? And how many are damned, who though they
lived in this world without the fear of God, yet committed not such grievous
sins as thou did, and thought they worshipped God aright? But since they
lived without faith, neither made Gods will revealed in his word a rule to
square their actions by, were sons of perdition. And could not God leave thee
in the very same misery he left them in by his just judgment? Consider then
how much happier thou art then so many Miriads of men who are eternally damned.
Consider further, how far happier thou art than innumerable wicked men, who
whilst they lived in this world were seemingly blessed, in regard of honors,
riches, pleasures, powers, estimation, and authority. How infinitely, and
without comparison is thy condition happier than their state in that they
persisting in their sins are reserved to horrible punishments and unutterable
torments? God forbid then thou should envy their varnishing happiness and
deceitful prosperity, and that thou will not consider how much happier thou
art than those as being not liable to the same condemnation. And if thou can
not find in thy heart to be joyful, in that he has not left thee in that
miserable plight; Behold, thou have a more weighty motive thereunto, in that
he has translated thee into a most happy condition, vouchsafing to receive
thee into the number of his children; for he is not only satisfied to deliver
thee from so many evils, but he sends thee as many benefits. That speech of
Christ unto his Disciples concerns thee; Rejoice, that your names are written
in heaven, Luke 10.20. Thou would really rejoice, if thou were now in the
state of innocence, wherein Adam was in that earthly paradise; but assure thy
self, there is greater than paradise here. For thou receivest more blessings
and honors in Christ, than thou have lost in Adam: Then man was Gods creature,
now thou art his son in Christ. The first man was formed out of earthly
matter, thou art borne of heavenly and incorruptible seed, Gods word. In thy
former state thou could sin, as that doleful experience witnesses: In this,
thou can not sin. In that thou were subject to die, whereas the life
prepared for thee in Christ has neither end nor consummation. Lastly, does not
the consideration of thy future condition move thee to rejoice? The time will
shortly appear wherein all thy adversities and miseries shall be brought to a
period, and thou shall possess all those things which God has prepared for
thee, and enter into that joy which cannot be taken from thee. The
consideration I say of thy present, past, and future condition should induce
thee to be contented with that state and station which God has allotted thee.
Let others rejoice, that they are rid and recovered from some dangerous
disease, poverty, or some other adversity wherewith thou art now possessed.
Thou have through Gods grace escaped thousand dangers, and miseries, which
without comparison surpass all the calamities of this world. Let others boast
in the multitude of their riches, others wax proud of their gay apparel and
dignities; what are all these things compared with the Majesty of the child of
God, and coheire with Jesus Christ? Let others feed themselves with vain
hopes, that of glory and future happiness will never give thee the lurch;
wherefore take heed of murmuring against God, beware thou say at any time,
that he deals severely with thee. Does he deal severely with thee, who has
conferred upon thee such honors, who heapeth upon thee so many benefits? does
he deal roughly with thee, who reserves for thee for the time to come such
ample felicity? Let that speech therefore of our Savior to Saint Paul sound
continually in thy ears, or rather in thy heart, my grace is sufficient for
thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. and in all adversities which daily happen in this world,
seek ease, refreshment, and comfort, by contemplating Gods grace; for a Kings
favor, I say, the King of Kings favor is as dew upon the ground, Prove. 19.12.

CHAP. IV. The fourth ground or reason consists in the corporal benefits
conferred by God.
THe ineffable dignity of spiritual grace, as has been said, should be just
cause to remove from thee sorrow, wherewith thou art possessed. But we have
not as yet mentioned all Gods benefits bestowed upon thee, his grace and
goodness resting not in the abovementioned benefits, but tending and extending
themselves further; for with his right hand of spiritual benefits he imbraceth
thee, his left of temporal being under thy head; so that thou have experience
of what the spouse of Christ wishes to her self, saying, His left hand should
be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me, Cant. 8.3. Neither is
he satisfied to quicken thee with spiritual life, and provide thee food and
raiment, as also communicate with thee unspeakable benefits and honors, but
he goes further; he deals with thee as a loving earthly father does with his
children in their minority, suffering them to play, and use all manner of
ratles that they may with more pleasure pass away their infancy. Thy heavenly
father deals no otherwise with thee, for he bestows upon thee so many
temporal benefits, the sweetness whereof should exhilarate thee and overcome
that bitterness of spirit which now pines thee away. The benefits that thou
enjoyest are of two sorts: some particular, strictly so called, which howsoever
many do enjoy, yet they are not conferred upon each singular person, and some
common which concern all that can read this little book; so that none has
cause to complain, or cast an envious eye upon his brother. Has God, I beseech
thee, more especially honored thee than an infinite multitude of men? Art thou
perchance through his grace sprouted out of a royal, illustrious; famous,
noble stock, or at least of an honest family, or nearly allied thereunto? As
for thy calling and state, God perchance has singled thee out to be a leader
and King over his people, and subjected to thy empire and power nations, and
chosen thee to be his vicegerent and assistant here on earth; or art in the
number of the Gods? that is to say, a magistrate, to distribute judgment and
justice to those that are committed to thy charge, to protect the innocent,
defend the widow, orphan, and stranger, to condemn the guilty and punish the
evil doer. In brief, or perchance he has given thee that honor whereby
many are become subject unto thee. But if thy function be not political, God
perchance has constituted thee to be Christ's steward in his house, the Church,
to distribute to his family heavenly food, to preach his word, to be an
overseer of his flock, a very eminent honor and good work, as the Apostle
speaks; or art perhaps of some other honest calling? as employed in
merchandise, factorship, or some other lawful occupation; or art of good odor
through Gods favor not only amongst thy own Contrymen, but amongst
forreiners, in respect of magnanimity, strength, virtue, wisdom, or learning?
for a good report makes the bones fat, Prove. 15.30. Because he that is in good
esteem reapeth pleasure and profit. And therefore a good name is father to be
chosen than great riches, Prove. 21.1. Or has he over and above these things
bestowed upon thee the goods of this world, commonly so called? to wit, riches,
commodities, lands, possessions, vineyards, fields, houses, or the like
blessings which continually he poures upon thee. And if thy yearly revenues be
not answerable to thy will, God like that good Caleb deals with thee; for
after he has given thee barren land, he gives thee the upper, and nether
springs, Judge. 1.15. he blesses thy labors and employments; for thou shall
eat the labors of thy hands, O well is thee, and happy shall thou be, Psalm.
128.2. And he fills thee with the finest wheat, Psalm. 147.14. He gives thee
not only so much as sufficed the Apostle, to wit, food and raiment, which will
nourish thee, and thy family, but he bestows upon thee more than thy
necessities require, yea, oftentimes in abundance; so that he deals graciously
with thee, so as thou may not only live without penury and want, but
succor thy poor brethren with alms proportionable to thy power, as well to
the advancement of Gods glory, as to the good of thy country. He communicates
with thee riches and means, whereby thou may not only bring up thy
children in good and honest discipline and sciences, but especially in the
fear of God, advancing them to be thy equals in dignity, or to a higher
pitch of honor, leaving them after thy decease in such sort, as they be not
constrained to depend upon other men's mercies, or compelled by poverty to want
education, and so become miserable men. Or has he blessed thee in a happy
matrimony, by joining thee to a meet help, I mean thy bedfellow, no less
fruitful than honorable, enriched with diverse endowments of the body, but
especially those of the soul, virtue, wisdom, stayednesse, and modesty? Or
has he made thee a father or mother to a family, so that thy wife is as a
fruitful vine by the sides of thine house, thy children like olive plants
round about thy table. Psalm. 128.3. Or are they strong in body and sound in
understanding? increasing in stature daily before thy eyes, but especially in
the fear of God, as tender plants of Gods garden; And do they profit by thy
instructions, chastisements, and corrections, yielding thee comfortable hope
for the future? Or are they advane'd to some degree of preferment, to be
pillars of thy old age? Or see thou thy childrens children? or to speak in a
word, art partaker of that divine blessing, whereof the spirit of God speaks,
who so finds a good wife, finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the
Lord, Prove. 18.22. Or art one of those whom the Holy Ghost styles blessed, in
the Psalm abovementioned? I pass over in silence the external delights thou
have of thy children, especially during their minority. I will only touch one,
and a singular one too, whereby they represent the lively image of Gods true
children, even as may be seen in such actions as thou performest toward thy
children, the lively representation of Gods government in ordering his; for
know this, there is no action, inclination, humor, defect, vice, or perfection
which thou find in thy children, but express a faithful man to the life,
either in goodness or vice; so that thou can not observe even the least
appearance of them in thy children, but thou art constrained to acknowledge
that Gods children behave themselves no otherwise to their heavenly father, and
neighbors. And contrarily, thou can not ascribe any thing thing to a wise
prudent father, but must confess that God observes the same order and
government toward his children, which is certainly an excellent prerogative
which married persons, and such as God has blessed with children, enjoy; a
prerogative, I say, whereof such as want issue, and especially those that forbid
others to marry, and keep themselves unmarried, are devoyd, and thereby are
destitute of wholesome knowledge, instruction, comfort, which married persons
enjoy in regard of the fruitfulness of marriage divinely blessed, and infants
unto whose school our Savior sends us. Verily I say unto you (says he)
except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.3. Thus much of the benefits, which
concern thy whole person: Now let us view the parts, whereof man is composed.
And in the first place the soul, What a gracious benefit is it, that God has
endued thee with a good wit, a quick penetrating understanding, strong
judgment, excellent memory, prudence and dexterity in performing thy
employments, and foreseeing good and bad events, whereby thou take heed from
innumerable errors, whereinto such as are inprovident, and those that are
careless in their affairs run, and so become miserable men? Or has God
perchance imparted unto thee knowledge and sciences, or such a faculty whereby
thou can discharge thy mind with sit expressions? or has he endued thee
with a noble generous spirit, so as thou art magnanimous in all distresses, and
undanted in all dangers? Add hereunto a merry heart, and quiet contented mind,
which according to the Proverb is better than riches; and by the testimony of
the Holy Ghost, godliness with contentment is great gain. As touching the
body, what a gracious benefit is it, that he has clothed thee with perfect
members without default; neither lame nor maimed, but strong, endued with good
temper, disposition, proportion, and decent beauty? What a precious treasure is
health, which he either preserves or restores unto thee. All which benefits
certainly are excellent, and whereof some are inestimable, which evidently
appears by such evils as are opposite to those benefits that thou enjoyest:
for what a heart-burning would possess thee, I beseech thee, if thou were
accursed of all men, or a reproach and laughingstocke? what misery is there in
poverty, and especially in beggary? what anguish of heart would torment thee,
if all things in thy family were turned topsie turvie; if thy marriage bed were
defiled, or if thou should find therein naught save sterility and
barrenness? if thy children were deformed in body, void of reason, and common
sense, and of untoward disposition, throwing themselves headlong into
mischiefs, and consequently thee to the grave? what unhappiness would it be
if thou were stupid, senseless, foolish, light, impetuous, brutish, impudent,
heady, vile, abject, whereby so many men and families are quite undone? And was
it not in his power to create thee so, and in the beginning form thee
imperfect, maimed, monstrous, blind, deaf, dumb, filthy, or otherwise
defective? And could he not make some noisome disease to be thy individual
associate? yea, cannot he at this instant fasten thee to thy bed, and so
deprive thee of health, which thou have so many manner of ways abused? By
confidering these evils (to pass by other calamities, my purpose being to
touch those that be contrary to the abovementioned benefits) thou can not
sufficiently esteem the value of such benefits as God has bestowed upon thee.
Who can number all the good things received at his hands? The earth is full of
the riches of the Lord, Psalm. 104.24. and his mercies are new every morning,
La. 3.23. which is more, thou have not received as yet perchance all the
temporal benefits which God reserves for thee in his treasure, which as far
as thy salvation requires thou shall enjoy in due time. But thou will say
perchance, some or many of those benefits we have mentioned are denied thee,
yea, clean contrary, thou art afflicted with some of the miseries
abovementioned, and which is more, all manner of adversities have made a
conspiration against thee; thou art so far off from obteining those divine
benefits, that thou art in contempt and driven to poverty, yea, to beggary,
that thou have not a wife correspondent to thy will, that thou art unhappy in
thy children, that thou art void of wit, rude, ignorant, fearful; In brief,
that od has not given thee any of his temporal benefits, and therefore have
no reason to rejoice, but perpetually to be sorrowful. I answer, first it
never or seldom falls out, that any man is generally divested of all benefits;
but mostly if this or that be wanting, he is supplied in some other benefit.
If thou have not abundance of riches, God has enriched thee with a contented
mind, with knowledge of the most excellent things; thou art in good estimation,
and God has given thee beautiful children, health, wisdom, and strength;
what will a wise man do in this case, certainly he will not respect what he
is destitute of, but what he possesses, and so putting sorrow to flight he
will rejoice in the Lord. Secondly, put case God has not bestowed upon thee
any of the abovementioned benefits, but laden thee with the repugnant evils;
yet this is most certain, that he has conferred upon thee no less evident
and excellent benefits, I mean those which (as has been said) in the
beginning of this Chapter are common to all, and thou can not deny, but thou
have received, and do yet enjoy. But it is a lamentable thing to see, that
common benefits are not valued but slighted by fools, which derogates nothing
from their excellency; since it is usual, that the most precious and excel ent
things, as being daily obvious, are despised or at least not regarded. What is
there, I beseech thee, more beautiful than the Sun? What is more wonderful
than its motion? What more useful than the light thereof? yet notwithstanding
how few there be that have the excellency thereof in a deserved esteem,
considering not the end whereunto it was designed, to wit, the knowledge and
glory of God. What is more necessary to nourish and sustain us than bread? yet
because God gives it us daily, we make not of it such esteem as we ought; so
there be many things we begin then to value, when we are deprived thereof,
and understand we can in no wise stand in need of them. The reason is the same
of such benefits as God conferres upon all men, whereof if they were destitute,
would be of all the creatures most miserable; but they that enjoy them, in the
fear of God, may think themselves happy, though particular benefits be
wanting, as it pleases God. For I beseech thee, how gracious is God herein,
that he has not created thee a serpent, toad, or the like creature, but after
his own image, communicating with thee his nature, which with the divine and
angelical is solely capable of eternal happiness? He composed thee of a
soul and body, whose conjunction is divine, a very excellent miracle, yea, one
of the greatest that thou can conceive in thy mind. He has fashioned thee
in thy mothers womb, so as thou may say with David, I will praise thee, O
God, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Marvelous are thy works, and
that my soul knows right well. My substance was not hid from thee, when I
was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth:
Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect, Psalm. 139.14,15,16. He
has endued thee with reason, and common sense, whereby thou may est discern
good from bad, and therefore he ranked thee not in the number of fools, as
he might, who are spectacles to all men, being comedies to some, but tragedies
to good and wise men. What a pleasant spectacle is it for thee to act thy part
upon the brave Theater of this world, wherein thou see so many Characters of
Gods power that may ravish thy mind? For if the sight of a piece of work
curiously wrought does so ravish the beholders, have thou not cause, I beseech
thee, to contemplate with more astonishment, and delight, this wonderful
universe, this round ball, that azurd heaven bespangled with so many glittering
stars? What is more wonderful and pleasant to the sight than the Sun,
which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong
man to run his course? His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his
circuits unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof,
Psalm. 29 5,6. What a pleasant sight does the nocturnall inequall motion of the
Moon exhibit, which by wonderful mutation is one while seen under this or
that form, and sometimes not at all? Add hereunto the spacious firmament
under heaven, which serves for our respiration or breathing; the vast sea, and
the earth poised with its own weight, hanging not without a stupendio^s miracle
in the midst of the air, where no prop supports it, but only the powerful hand
of the Almighty; and so many sorts of riches within the bowels of the earth,
and on the flourishing furface thereof; so many kinds of living creatures in
the air, water, and on the earth, whereof some are pleasant to the eye, some
deformed, some for pleasure and profit, and some for bravery. If a tragedy or
comedy, being but man's invention, acted upon the stage does so ravish the eyes
and mind of the spectators, questionless the innumerable spectacles thou see
in this world, I mean Gods judgment, which one while speaks his goodness and
patience, and otherwhile his wrath, should excite thee to praise his goodness
and divine justice. In brief, wheresoever thou will cast thine eyes shall have
reason to cry out with the Prophet, Lord thou have made me glad through thy
works, and thy thoughts are very deep; an unwise man does not consider this,
and a fool does not understand it, Psalm. 92.5,6,7. How bountiful is God
herein, that he has given thee nourishment all thy life long, and especially
in thy mothers womb, whereas thou have not knowledge of the same, so for the
procurement thereof did not care? And no sooner thou came into this world,
but the same nourishment was ready at hand for thee in thy mothers paps, which
as thou did ignorantly seek for, so did readily find out. All this is so
strange and wonderful that thou could not scarce believe the beginning of
thy life to be such, unless infants were thy daily teachers, so as thou
may say, and not unworthily, Lord, out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings
thou have ordained strength, Psalm. 8.2. Moreover, the very same God has
preserved thee from that time till this present, strengthening thy staff of
life, blessing thy portion. To which end he gave thee not only the herbs of
the earth, but the beasts of the fields, the souls of the air, and the fishes
of the sea. He provides for thee being oftentimes driven to such extremity, as
thou have not food sufficient for a day, especially in the time of searsuy and
famine, even in an unexpected time; yea, sometimes after a wonderful manner,
so that thou have personal experience that God feeds the hungry, Psalm.
146.7. Is this a slender benefit, that he has preserved thee from the samine,
which is the most raging evil, and more grievous than any punishment
whatsoever? And how gracious is God herein, that he does not only nourish
thee, but cloth thee also with raiment, whereby thou may not only cover
thy nakedness, but protect thy self against the injuries of the air, and
discommodities, molestations, pains, which the least fly were able to do
thee. But if this does seem a small benefit, behold a poor naked wretch who
has not wherewith to cover his nakedness, and consider the miseries whereunto
he is exposed. Consider further, what singular care he took of thee all thy
life long, for as soon as he brought thee into this world he forsook thee
not, as Architects are wont to do; who as soon as they finish their work, have
not from that time forward the least care of the same. But when thy father and
mother forsakes thee the Lord takes thee up, as the Psalmist speaks, by day
his cloud protects thee, and by night his pillar of fire defends thee. In all
manner of adversities, dangers, and difficulties he helps thee, when thou art
asleep exposed to thousand dangers, which thou can not even in the least
degree withstand, thy senses locked up, thy body being as it were dead, when
thou take thus thy ease and repose he watches over thee, and his Angels
keep a ward about thee. He kept thee as the apple of his eye, as an Eagle
stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings,
takes them, bears them on her wings; so the Lord alone did lead thee, and
there was no strange god with him, Deuteronomy. 32.10,11,12. And does this seem a
small benefit, that he has ruled and directed thy thoughts, words, and
actions, from thy beginning till this present time? Has he not oftentimes
suggested unto thee most excellent thoughts, infused in thee good
considerations, put in thy mouth good words, and given thee wholesome counsels,
and moved thee to perform such actions as have been profitable to thy self,
neighbor, and oftentimes to the whole state and Church of Christ; and
oftentimes he has stirred up in thee good motions and inspirations, even
besides thy intention and purpose, whereby thou have spoken and acted many
things, which if thou were now to re-iterate could at no hand perform; so
that thou have experience of that of David, O Lord, thou have searched me, and
known me, thou know, etc. Thou compasest my path, and my lying down, and
art acquainted with all my ways, for there is not a word in my tongue, but lo
thou know it altogether. Thou have set me behind and before and laid thine
hand upon me, Psalm. 136.1,2,3,4,5. Consider, that he says there is not a word
in my tongue, etc. whereby thou may know, that those good things that ever
befell thee proceeded not at all from thine own counsel and prudence. And as
often as thou have purposed to commit any thing, that might endanger thy
salvation, and blemish thy reputation, he restrains thee from putting the
same in practice, as he withheld King Gerar from touching Abraham's wife, and
sinning against him, Genesis 20.6. And thus he permits thee not to commit such
a crime, as deserves to be expiated with a reproachful punishment in the
sight of the Sun. Or if thou art guilty thereof; O! how wonderful is his
goodness and long suffering, in that he has delivered thee from punishment
due unto the same; whereas others, which are not such great delinquents are
hanged or drowned, or end their miserable infamous life in some other
punishment. And to whom do al those gracious benefits appertain, whereof thou
complainest art deprived, and which God distributes unto others, to wit,
riches, honors pleasures, dignities, prosperity, and the goods of the mind and
the body? art not thou partaker thereof by the benefit of the communion of the
Saints? for what things soever thou see others to enjoy, are common to thee
we, being all members of the same body, whereby we become partakers of the
benefits as well as of the miseries of others. It behooves thee therefore to
rejoice for the prosperity of thy neighbor, and with him to thank the father
of lights from whom comes every good gift, whereunto Saint Paul admonishes
thee, when he says, Rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15. Besides all
these benefits which God has conferred upon thee, Consider, I beseech thee,
from what evils and misfortunes he has preserved thee: There is no calamity
whereunto thou art not exposed, for thy body is a seminary of all diseases,
from without all manner of adversities lie in wait for thee, the devil never
leaves off his treacheries, the whole world, all the elements, nay all the
creatures conspire against thee by reason of sin. What treacheries do the
wicked always, thine enemies, and especially Gods, imagine against thee? How
often have they gone about to rob thee of thy honor, goods, and life it self?
wheresoever thou art death pursues thee at thy heels, all things are every
where malicious and to be feared of thee. In brief, all the evils and perils
under the cope of heaven level at thy destruction, so that thou should not
think it strange if being in danger of so many weapons and blows thou now and
then feel some smart, but count it no small favor, that many fell in vain,
and that all manner of adversities have not rushed upon thee with one assault,
and say with the Prophet, It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not, Lam. 3.22. for his mercy is evident herein,
that he has not, nor will never suffer all manner of evils to make a sport of
thee, for he is so merciful, that he will not suffer thee to be tempted
above thy strength: And when he sends some adversity, he visits thee
only with one or two evils, and that not daily, but sometimes, and by
intervals, that it may not be perpetual, but continue for a time, which will
not last at the furthest longer than this life, but shall have the same period
therewith, which in comparison of eternity deserves not to be styled a moment.
Moreover, if thou considerest the nature and quality of those afflictions that
God sends upon thee, he spares and deals mildly, nay fatherly with thee; for
he permits thee not to be as miserable as many, who though they are men
created after his own image, as well as thou, yet lie grovelling in stews, upon
the highways, and by the doors of Churches, whose faces and noses are eaten
up, and whose eyes are wanting, and other members consumed by some foul,
horrible, disease, or are otherwise most miserably afflicted with some
extraordinary calamity, whom thou can not pass by for very horror, but wilt
turn away thy countenance from them. Not to mention other evils, besides those
most grievous calamities they endure in this life, and perchance eternal
punishment of hellfire hereafter. Could not God deal with thee after the same
manner? for thou deservest not lighter, but more grievous punishments than
those unhappy men. I say nothing of the tragical ends of so many men, who
perchance were less blameable than thou, or some notable thief, or an unclean
adulterer, unto whom God out of his long suffering and patience, grants a
longer term of life, either thereby to invite him to repentance, or draw him
thereunto, as being one of his chosen vessels; when as others, guilty perchance
of lesser crimes, are miserably cut off from the Land of the living. Moreover,
he preserves thee not only from those miseries whereunto others are subject,
whereof thou may doubt whether they be of the rank of Gods children; but
he deals more mildly with thee, than with thousands, whom thou know to be
his dearest children, to wit, so many Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and a grand
cloud both of ancient and modern witnesses, which were subject to most sharp,
and even horrible trials, and burnt, and exposed to the jaws and claws of
wild beasts, and to other most exquisite torments; so that what now grieves
thee is little or nothing compared to what they suffered: they, I say, who for
goodness and excellency went infinitely beyond thee. Add hereunto the
calamities which so many of the faithful suffered, during these last wars,
wherein so many thousands, yea, miriads of godly men, perished in a miserable
manner, and are as yet consumed without regard of age, sex, and condition.
That I say nothing now that God has preferved thee from those and such like
epidemicall evils, to wit, the plague and famine, which have made a sore
slaughter amongst the faithful. But what do I say? he freed thee not only
from such calamities as many of the faithful endured, but his goodness and
mercy extends further: for if thou come to the mountain of Myrrh shall
see Christ Jesus the well-beloved and only begotten son of his father, who
has suffered infinite times more than thou or any mortal man could endure. He
drank up even the whole cup of Gods wrath, which no man living could do. I
have spoken enough of Gods unspeakable bountifulness and grace, whereby he
protected thee from an innumerable troop of miseries, that they could not set
upon thee. His goodness rests not here, for he has preserved thee not only
from such a flood of miseries which would overwhelme thee, but he rids thee
out of infinite adversities that have assaulted thee. What evils, molestations,
distresses and afflictions have thou been subject unto, since thou came from
thy mothers womb? How often have thou fallen one while through thine own
fault, imprudence, foolishness, and another while through other men's
wickedness and inconsideration, into most grievous perils? Can thou, I
beseech thee, call to mind how many afflictions thou have escaped? Which of
these conditions would thou choose, to return again to thy infancy, and so
undergo the same, or at this instant give up the Ghost? who would not, if in
his right mind, embrace the latter, rather than the former. The number of those
evils being so many, their diversity so wonderful, and their weight so
intolerable. But behold, thou art by Gods grace rid of them all. Thou have
shot the gulf of afflictions; thou returnest a conqueror from those
conflicts, so that thou have personal experience of that which God promises
by the Prophet, When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the
fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Esaias,
43.2. Take into consideration thy life past, and thou shall have cause to say
with joy, he has brought me out of the horrible pit, and set my feet upon the
rocks, and ordered my goings, Psalm. 40.2. Thus much of those benefits which thy
heavenly father has graciously conferred upon thee and can not deny but have
received. Thou seeft here, as in a little table, Gods infinite benefits and
blessings bestowed upon thee; a table not fleightly to be viewd, I say, but
that thou may feed thine eyes in beholding it, and tickle thine ears in
hearing the contents thereof, and apply it, as thou ought, to thine own
self. And whilst thy mind is contemplating these things, first of all, have
thou not cause to render thanks unto the Lord for so many temporal benefits,
and to be grateful in all thy thoughts, words, and actions, and to say with
Jacob, O God of my fathers, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies,
and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant? and with the
Prophet David, What shall I render unto the Lord? I will take up the cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord now in the presence of all his
people, Psalm. 116.13,14. Further, seeing that thou have received through Gods
grace and ample bountifulness so many benefits, and do yet enjoy, have thou
not cause to take them all into consideration, thereby to oppose them unto
sorrow, and rejoice in the Lord? As often therefore as calamity, grief,
sorrow, shall seize upon thee, call to mind forthwith those benefits, and say,
I am at this present afflicted with adversity, discommodities oppress me, I
feel affliction and grief, but on the other side I rejoice in the manifold
benefits he has hitherto bestowed upon me, and say withal, is it fit and
meet, that this present affliction should so torment me with sorrow, and that
so many blessings, being so many pledges of Gods favor, which I have, and
daily do enjoy, should not move me to be joyful? God forbid; if there be any
one thing that might move me to be sorrowful, there be more things should
exhilarate me, unless I would by being unthankful play the traitor against
divine Majesty. As for the grief and molestations which oppress me, what are
they compared to so many benefits, that I have, and daily do enjoy? Why should
it grieve me to take them as sauce, to temper the sweetness of benefits which
else would be distasteful, and draw me to a surfeit? It is our nature, that
unless God temper his benefits with afflictions, we cannot away with them;
and unless he visits us with adversities, we would procure them to our
selves, and that to our utter ruin and destruction.

CHAP. V. The fist ground or reason is drawn from Gods providence, and that
the faithful man should for the future hope to receive corporal benefits.
GOds grace rests not here, but goes further; for it suffices not him only
to bestow upon thee till this present hour so many temporal benefits, being
so many pledges of his goodness, but he wills his favor should continue
toward thee for the future, and that through his fatherly providence,
wisdom, goodness, presence, and help, whereby he overseeth all thy
employments, and has continual care in providing thee all necessaries. It is
fit thou should lay hold upon the divine providence, opposing it to thy
present affliction; and that thou may prevent the fear of future evil,
drive away sorrow, and say unto thy soul, why art thou heavy, O my soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me, Psalm. 42.6. Behold, the great God who has
hitherto laden me with so many benefits, and is not as yet weary to do me
good, he promises to help me for the future, and to be loving and careful
of me, so that he will never forsake me. That thou may taste the
goodness of the most high, and perceive how sweet the Lord is, and firmly
believe that he is careful of thee in thy present affliction, thou must lay
this in the first place as a foundation, That God is thy heavenly father, not
only for that he created and brought thee into this world, but chiefly for
the benefit of redemption purchased unto thee through his son Jesus Christ,
with whom thou art joined by faith; so as thou art one with him, and a member
of his body, and consequently one of those to whom he gave power to become the
sons of God, even those that believe in his name, Joh. 1.12. and are borne of
God, wherefore he will not be ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 11.16.
Seeing therefore thou art one of the number of Gods children, God being thy
father, thou will not doubt that he is not fatherly affected toward thee, and
that he will not nourish, cherish, cloth, conserve, deliver; and be present
with thee in all places, unless perchance thou art fallen into wickedness
even so far, as to believe God to be a degenerate father, and destitute of
fatherly affection, and so more base and worser than earthly fathers. God
forbid, for even as he is more infinitely perfect than those, so for goodness
and bountifulness toward his children he infinitely surpasses them. Our
Savior terms our earthly fathers evil, for that sometimes they forsake
their children, make them mischievous, and bring them to destruction: but there
is not this, nor any such vitiosity in God, he being goodness, mercy, and love
it self; so that howsoever a woman may forget her sucking infant, yet God
cannot his children, whom he has graven upon the palms of his hands. The
greatness of his paternall affection is herein evident, that he so loved the
world, the world, I say, which had so many manner of ways offended him, that
he gave his only begotten son, Joh. 3.16. He that spared not his own
son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not give us all things,
Romans 8.32. Moreover, he is not only a father of that goodness, whereby
willingly he has care of thee, but his will is conjoined with power; so that
he can provide necessaries for his children. Neither may he be resembled to
those earthly fathers, who oftentimes verily are altogether willing to succor
the necessity and misery of their children, but being destitute of means,
cannot bring their will to effect, whereupon oftentimes a most loving father is
constrained to behold his child expiring and perishing, but cannot help him; or
being certified of the misery of his child, living elsewhere from him, cannot
succor him; or which is more, he is oftentimes ignorant of the state of his
child, he is so far off from relieving him. The case is far otherwise with
our heavenly father, for he is God, and therefore most wise, who is acquainted
with all our necssities, takes notice of all our banishments, and puts our
tears into his bottles; your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all
these things, Matthew. 6.8. If the devil and world imagine any thing against
thee, he knows long before their machinations; for he penetrateth the deepest
thoughts. He is acquainted with such means as tend to thy comfort,
conservation, and deliverance; he overseeth and ordaines things, or ever they
exist; he can extract good from evil, and of darkness create light; he is
omnipotent, for by the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the
host of them by the breath of his mouth: for he speaks, and whatsoever is, is
done, he commands, and it stands fast, Psalm. 33.6.9. he preserves and
orders all the creatures, insomuch that they cannot move without his
permission and will. The sea, earth, and all that therein is depend upon his
beck; he heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds; he tells
the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names. Great is our
Lord, and of great power, his understanding is infinite. The Lord lifts up
the meek, he casts the wicked down to the ground. Sing unto the Lord with
thanksgiving, sing praise upon the Harp unto our God, who covers the heavens
with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth: he sends forth his
commandments upon the earth, his word runs very swiftly, he gives snow
like wool, he scatters his hoare frost like ashes, he casts forth his
ice like morsels, who can stand before his cold? he sends forth his word and
melts them, he causes the wind to blow, and the waters flow, Psalm.
147.3,4,5,6,7,8,15,16,17,18. Wherefore seeing thou have such a gracious
powerful father, will thou doubt he will not be careful of thee, and will
not, and cannot, further thy employments? In the second place, I would have
thee consider what great care he took of thee hitherto, how he has till this
present hour governed thee by his providence; nourished, cherished, conserved,
preserved thee from innumerable evils, and rid thee out of a great many
dangers and afflictions; how often, and how many manner of ways have thou had
experience of his benevolence, as we have declared, especially in the preceding
chapter? say then to thy self, he that hitherto has been careful of me,
yea, before I came into this world, even he will care for me for the future;
and as hitherto he has not forsaken me, so hereafter he will not be wanting
unto me. I would have thee consider further, what manifold benefits he has
bestowed upon thee even before thy conversion, when thou were under the
dominion of sin, a sworn enemy unto God, and child of wrath; so that thou
could hope for no other than punishment instead of benefits, and curses
instead of blessings; yet notwithstanding he has really testified unto thee,
how gracious his goodness is, and that he makes his sun to rise on the
evil, and on the good, Matthew. 5.45. How much more careful will he be of thee
in providing thee all necessaries, since thou art received into his grace, and
made partaker of that honor, whereby thou art one of the number of his sons,
and consequently a brother and friend of Jesus Christ? and since thou walk
in his fear, and indevourest in thine infirmities to be conformable to his
will, hating thy sins, and addicting thy self to his service. And verily. Gods
children are continually tried in their adversities, strengthening themselves in
the hope of future things by such things as are past, whereof the kingly
Prophet David affords us a notable example, to wit, in the 27. Psalm. for
considering with himself, in times past, how that God had delivered him from
the hands of all his enemies, he is confident, and fully persuades himself,
that God will continue for the future, and always, his favor and succor
toward him; When the wicked, even mine enemies, and my foes, came upon me to
eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell; Though an host of men were laid
against me, yet I will put my trust in him, Psalm. 27.3. But if thou should
endure some unheard of miseries, which experience could not parallel, thou
should then have some reason of doubting and diffidence, in that which
concerns thee, but since thy own experience can prove this to be otherwise,
thou should in no wise doubt of his divine providence for the future, and of
his fatherly care of thee for the present. But what do I multiply words
touching his providence, which is clearly seen in thy behalf? the great
husbandman extends his care even to the least creatures to their profit,
good, and conservation, and provideth them all necessaries; he gives fodder
unto the cattle, and feeds the young ravens that call upon him, Psalm. 147.9.
O Lord, thou savest man and beast, Psalm. 36.7. all these wait upon thee, that
thou may give them meat in due season. Thou give it them, they gather it,
and when thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good, Psalm. 104.27.28. How
much more careful will he be of thee? Thus the Lord himself teaches us to
reason; behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barnes, yet your heavenly father feeds them; Are ye not much
better than they? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow, they toil
not, nor do they spinne; And yet I say unto you, Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these; wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the
field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much
more cloth you, O ye of little faith? Matthew. 6.26,28,29,30. And again, are
not two sparrowes sold for a fathing, and one of them shall not fall to the
ground without your father? but the very hairs of your head are all numbered,
fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrowes, Mat.
10.29,30,31. Thou can in no wise doubt then of his gracious providence,
unless perhaps thou art fallen into wickedness and blasphemy, as to think God
to be more unjust, worser, and more unwise, than earthly fathers, who verily
take care of their cattle, much more of their children. Hither may be referred
the promises of Gods fatherly care toward his children, whom he always
honors, and never purposes to withdraw his helping hand from them: so that
he enjoynes the faithful man wholly to rely upon his providence. Commit thy
way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass, Psalm.
37.5. call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me, Psalm. 50.15. because he has set his heart upon me, and I will
answer him, and I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and with
length of days will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation, Psalm.
91.14,15,16. be conrent with such things as ye have, for he said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. whence it follows, that not
only benefits and prosperity happen, according to Gods providence, to his
children, but miseries and adversities proceed from the same fountain. Now
since God continually watches over his children, his eyes being with singular
care fixed upon them; it is certain, that adversities cannot escape the sight
(as I may so say) of his wildome, but are laid upon the godly, according to his
will and providence and seeing they happen unto us, according to the will of
our heavenly father, it cannot be but that he lays them upon us to our good
and profit, and the rather for that they proceed from his love toward us; so
that not to rely upon Gods providence is incredulity, disobedience, to deny
his wisdom, goodness, justice, truth, and providence, it is ingratitude
toward him, contempt, detracting of his divine honor, and in effect not to
account him for thy father, nor thy self for his son. But thou will say, it
is true, I confess and acknowledge God has singular care of his godly
children; but as for me I have too grievously offended, and provoked him to
anger by my sins, and therefore far be it from me, to think I have cause to
confide in his providence; nay, clean contrary, I have reason to expect rather
his wrath, and indignation, and horrible judgment: Whereunto I answer, that
God notwithstanding thy demerits is thy heavenly father, not as thou art in thy
self, but as thou art his adopted son in Christ Jesus, who has done thee
good in this life, and in that which is to come. Isaac blessed not Jacob in his
own person, but in his elder brothers, in whose garments he was invested, and
whose name he borrowed, renouncing his own. Be most assured then of Gods love
notwithstanding thy iniquities, whereby thou drawest upon thy self his
chastisements, but to thy profit and salvation. And herein he resembles a
father that devesteth not himself of his fatherly affection, neither cease
to benefit his child, though he be angry with him; and chastises him in
regard of his foolishness and lewdness: wherefore seeing thou art reconciled
unto God, thou may not represent him to thy self, as a judge punishing the
guilty, but as a father chastising his son, thereby testifying what great
care he has of him, and how dearly he loves him; for by correcting him he
prevents his ruin and destruction. And the answer is easy, to what thou
say further, if the Lord loves me why does he visit me with this or that
affliction? and with Gideon, who being as yet well catechized, said unto the
Angel, hear O my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why is all this befallen us?
Jud. 6.13. which is the genuine language of a son feeling the rod, and
thereupon concludes that his father sets aside his nature and affection toward
him, which is all one as if one should complain of his father for giving him
bread, which is so necessary for him; or if a patient should tax the Physician
of inhumanity and hatred, for ministering him a potion: he that deemeth that
God loves him not, and that his fatherly care is alienated, because he
chastises him, does no otherwise than if he should say, God loves me not,
because he does me good: for chastisement wherewith his children are
exercised is a most needful and necessary benefit during the nonage of their
life: but hereof in the following chapter, It now being sufficient to declare,
that he will always take care of thee, seeing thou art his son, in the
whole course of thy life, by his providence and meet help he will be really
careful of thee so far, that thou may possess thy mind in tranquillity,
for the present and time to come. Certainly, if thy state and condition did not
depend upon the providence of thy good and best father, but blind fortune as
Atheists deem, verily thou should have always just cause of sorrow,
terror, disquiet, fear, and anguish: But now seeing there is nothing befalls
thee, but according to Gods will and providence, thou may say by right with
and to thy self, Return O my soul into thy rest, Psalm. 116.7. And hence it
is manifest how much happier thou art than the Ethnicks, and other infidels who
are altogether ignorant of Gods providence, or know it not to be of that
nature, as thou art taught by his word: And therefore it cannot be, but these
wretches should be exposed to horrible perturbations of mind among so many
turmoises and troubles of this life. But thou that art brought up in Gods
school, and art not ignorant, that all things are ruled and ordered by the
providence of God thy heavenly father, may enjoy a quiet calm mind no
otherwise than the heaven, which is clear and serene, though the air be
covered with thick clouds, and tossed up and down with wind and tempest; so
that by right thou may cry with the best of the fathers, O thou omnipotent
good, who carest for every one of us so, as if thou did only for us and of
us all, as of each of us in particular, Aug. confess. l. 3. c. 11. Away then
with all sorrow, since God will be careful of thee for the future; and as for
the present adversity that thou feel, it has no other original, than the
best and wisest will of thy heavenly father, who always aymeth at thy good and
profit. Further, seeing he is indefatigably careful of thee, submit thy self
altogether to his will and providence with an holy and filial obedience in thy
present and future condition; Imitate Jesus Christ, who said, O my father, not
as I will but as thou will, Matthew. 26.39, follow his guidance without
tergiversation, and with David be ready at all points to perform the commands
of thy heavenly King. Be prepared for all things, and compose thy self to
undergo any condition, whether prosperous, or miserable, being assured that
whatsoever befalls thee tends to thy profit. Humble thy self under the mighty
hand of God, that he may exalt thee in due time; cast all thy care upon him,
for he cares for thee, 1 Pet. 5.6,7. and why startest thou aside, withdrawing
thy lelfe from receiving his counsel and will, seeing he works all things
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. and the counsel of
the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations, Psalm.
33.11. so that all things happen so as he has decreed. Thy resistance then,
anguish of heart, impatience, will stand thee in no stead, neither will hinder
what is decreed to come to pass. Consider the work of the Lord, for who can
make that straight which he has crooked? Eccl. 7.11. seeing then that God
takes care of thee, away with that carfulness, which so tormenteth the
children of this world. I speak not of the lawful care of the affairs of our
public and private vocation, neither of the circumspection, wisdom,
industry, labor, and the use of such means as are ordained of God; but I
understand that carfulness which proceeds from diffidence toward Gods
providence, and incredulity toward his promises, from the love of this world,
covetousness, ambition; I understand that carfulness, which as it proceeds
from this Original, so it has for its concomitants an ambitious mind, sorrow
even appearing in its rough attire, illiberality toward the neighbor, which
draws after it at last not only unprofitablenesse, but all manner of
calamities, and oftentime desperation it self. As for thee, do thy duty as
becomes a wise man endued with virtue, fearing God; Commit the events of
future, and such things as are not within thy power to God. And herein imitate
Joab, who said to his brother, be of good courage, and let us play the men,
for out people, and for the city of our God, the Lord do that seems him
good, 2 Samuel 10.12. Now since he takes care of thee, and all thy actions,
certainly thou would most grievously injure him, if thou should thrust in
thy sickle, as they use to speak, and reap his harvest. Or perchance thou
think that God can have no consideration of thy affairs, since thou art a
miserable terrestrial worm, God I say, who governs the heavens, sea, and
all that therein is. How foolish would that traveller be deemed, which would
vex and torment himself, where to go on in his way, even then when directed by
a faithful skillful guide? How greater therefore is thy foolishness by being
thy own executioner, through anxietie, and carfulness, since he is now
present with thee, who takes care of thee? Gracious children commit themselves
to the care of their parents, but a prodigal and wicked son must order
himself, and things; whereupon he casts him headlong into most grievous
errors, and extreme misery. Further, if God be careful of thee, away with all
fear, unless that of God, away with all pusillanimity; for since he takes
care of thee, who contains all things in his powerful hand, and bends all
the Creatures to his beck, why art thou afraid of them? do not fear Satan,
for he has not power even over swine, what can he have over Gods child? Be
like afraid of men, who though they are powerful and cruel, yet their breath
is in their nosthrills, and they are naught but tails of smoking firebrands,
Esaias 7.4. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters,
he turns it whether soever he will, Prove. 21.1. He turns their minds
contrary to their nature, to favor Gods children, as he gave his people
favor in the sight of the Egyptians, Exodus 3.21. And howsoever he loose the
bridle to their perverse will against his children, yet he blinds and
deprives them of understanding, insomuch that they know not what to do, and,
or attend not what is to be done. But if perchance they begin to go about
some ill counsel, he takes away their power or courage that they cannot bring
it to pass, or if they have means and will to put the same in execution, he
makes their endeavors of none effect, scatters their counsels, and reduces
by his power their devices to nothing; for he brings the counsel of the
heathen to naught, and makes the devices of the people of none effect, Psalm.
33.10. Insomuch that thou may confidently say, The Lord is my helper, and I
will not fear what man shall do unto me, Heb. 13.6. The last and worst enemy
is death; but why should thou be afraid thereof, being the end and period of
all evils, and an entrance into blessedness? Therefore though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me,
Psalm. 23.4. Lastly, since God by his providence takes care of thee, be
courageous, and of firm hope for the (...), which should so much the more fill
thy mind, by how much thou have hitherto had experience, and tasted how sweet
the Lord is. Let the time past ^e unto thee an assurance of the time to come,
let the experience of those benefits which thou have hitherto received, bring
forth in thee hope that makes not ashamed, when grounded and established in
God. And take heed, thou say, I see not how such or such a thing may be
brought to pass, there being no apparent means; for God knows perfectly the
means, and can work even without means, yea, above means, and against all
appearance thereof. Let his promise suffice thee. The tribe of Joseph cashiered
hope of possessing the land of Canaan, and that because of their own weakness
and want of power, and the might and power of their enemies, whereof they were
not ignorant; the hill is not enough for us, say they, and all the Canaanites
that dwell in the land of the valley have Chariots of iron. Hear Ioshuah's
answer, The mountain shall be thine, thou shall drive out the Canaanites,
though they have iron chariots, and though they be strong, Ios. 17.18. The
reason is grounded upon Gods promise, whose word is more powerful than all
things: wait for the Lord, and thou shall see his helping hand; stand still,
and see the salvation of the Lord, which he shall show to thee to day, Exodus
14.13. Where to stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, are joined
together; Why art thou therefore cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I will yet praise him, who is the help
of my countenance, and my God, Psalm. 42.12.

CHAP. VI. The sixth ground or reason is, that afflictions themselves yield
matter of joy.
BUt what do I say? not only the benefits, but the evils of this life
commonly so called, that is to say, adversities which thou endurest as long as
thou dwell in these tents of Kedar, yield matter of joy, which is a riddle,
which the Philistines of this world cannot resolve. The Nazarites and children
of God are only sensible, that there is honey in the Lion, and sweetness in
affliction. This lesson is very necessary to every one, and in it self most
excellent; for thereby we are taught to look upon afflictions undauntedly, and
entertain them not only with contempt, as the Philosophers teach, but with a
merry countenance, with pleasure and gladness, which without comparison is
far more laudable and excellent than stoicall contempt, and prond disdain,
which cannot long endure the brunt of greater evils, but will in short space be
foiled, and put to flight with shame. Now man's understanding is not capable of
this doctrine, unless it has first knowledge of the goodness lying hid under
the deformed vizard of afflictions, which con^sts herein, that the affictions
which God lays upon his elect, are the means whereby they obtain the
possession of eternal happiness, and those unspeakable good things which are
prepared for them; so that their end is most excellent, of inestimable value,
even heavenly life, and glory, which neither eye saw, nor ear heard, nor the
heart of man can conceive. That thou may perfectly understand this doctrine,
it is necessary that thou consider the diverse sorts of afflictions, which God
sends to his children, whereof commonly they make two; one sort is of those
afflictions which are common to the godly, with the children of this world, as
diseases, poverty, or the like: The other sort is of those afflictions that are
proper unto such as undergo the cross of Jesus Christ, or persecution, where
with the faithful, for the profession of the Gospel, are assaulted by their
enemies: but to speak properly, if we look upon afflictions, as they out wardly
appear unto us, there is not any affliction proper, all are common; but if we
consider their intrinsecall form, which gives them their being and essence,
there is not any common, but all are particular and proper: for their
extrinsecall form consists in that which is grievous, and carries with it
anguish of heart, as poverty (as has been said) diseases, banishment,
imprisonment, all which are common to the godly with the children of this
world, insomuch that there is not any affliction which may not as equally
befall them both; for what have we not common, says one of the Fathers, as
long as we are in this world, with the children thereof; and as long as we are
here below, we are joined with other men by the bonds of this corruptible
flesh, but in spirit we are separated from them; so that till this corruptible
shall be clothed with incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality,
and we ascend to God the father, all the discommodities of the flesh are common
to us with them. If the earth be barren, famine makes no distinction between
any; if a City or Town be surprised by the enemy, all are brought into
captivity; and when the clouds withold their rain, all are compelled to
endure this drought; and when the rocks split the ship asunder, all without
exception endure the same wrack; failing of eyes, burning agues, and the
perfect health of all the members are common to us with them, as long as we are
clothed with the same common flesh in this world. As touching that which gives
essence to the afflictions of Gods children, it is opinion according to
Philosophy: But Gods word corrects this opinion, teaching us that it cannot
give, unless an imaginary and putative essence thereunto. Their true essence
then is that which God himself gives them, who wills that some serve for to
chastise his elect, correct their vices, some serve for to try their faith and
other virtues, and others tend to this end, that they may bear witness to his
heavenly truth. Now as there is not any affliction of Gods children, but has
reference to one of these, so they are of that nature, that they never befall
the wicked, since he is not their father; neither tries he them in that
whereof they are destitute, neither honors them so fair, as to make them
witnesses of his truth, which they are ignorant of, or cannot away with. To
speak properly then, the faithful man has not any affliction common with the
unregenerate, if we respect as we ought its true being; neither any
particular affliction, if we consider its outward form and species. And this
we must observe by reason of the fruit and consolation, which redound thereby
to God's children, as shall be seen hereafter. There are three sorts of
afflictions, wherewith God exercises his children, chastisement, trial, and
Martyrdom: of all and each of which we say, that they procure to the godly
inestimable good things, glory especially, and eternal life. That the verity
hereof may the better be perceived, let us first, as to what concern
chastisement, compare prosperity and adversity. Who knows not, that whereas
prosperity should be a spur to excite and hasten us with more alacrity to the
mark of our high calling, and to render thanks unto God in such sort as is
meet, that is, to worship and love him with more affection, and to glorify him
in all our thoughts, words, and actions; who knows not, I say, what it does
instead of all this. It corrupts us, the blame is ours, and brings forth such
effects as it ought not to produce. It is true, the godly man offends God in
his adversity through murmurings, diffidence, and other sins; but he
recollects and returns unto himself, as soon as with David he enters the
sanctuary: but this is little or nothing to that he does in the time of
prosperity; for if adversity has killed her thousand, certainly prosperity
has killed her ten thousand. It is prosperity that breeds carnal security,
forgetfulness of God, confidence in humane affairs, pride, profanation, love
to this world, contempt of Gods word and sacraments. It suffocates godly zeal,
and extinguisheth fervency of prayers; it burieth and hides the fire of faith
under the ashes of carnal concupiscences, and affections. In a word, the
summer of prosperity engenders a numerous swarm of flies, that is to say,
vices which waste, and make desolate the garden of the Lord: This point needs
no proof, the Scripture being plentiful herein, and every man's experience
witnessing it to be the way to eternal condemnation, and not to life; wherefore
that God may bring into the right way one that is as a miserable wandering
sheep, he takes him his pastoral staff, not smiting him on this side,
otherwhile on that side. He especially sends upon him such chastisements as are
correspondent to his faults and crimes, that so he may earnestly be moved,
return to himself, and amend his life; for if he has been unmercifull, and
hard hearted to his neighbor, God so disposes it, that he shall also feel
iron hearts which will not be moved with compassion toward him; who so
stops his ear at the cry of the poor, he shall cry himself, and shall not
be heard, Prove. 21.13. and God says by the Prophet Jeremy, ye have not
hearkened unto me, in proclaming liberty every one to his neighbor; behold, I
proclaim a liberty for you to the sword, to the pestilence, to the famine, Jer.
34.17. or if he has committed adultery, murder, he is oftentimes punished
after the same manner, either in his own person, or in such as belong unto
him; witness herein King David; if for the fear of men he is ashamed of
Christ Jesus, and forsakes the profession of the Gospel to addict himself to
Idolatry, God will send his punishment upon him in this world, for ye shall be
ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the
gardens that ye have chosen; for ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fades, and
as a garden that has no water, Esaias, 9.29,30. Briefly, if he has walked
perversely with God, and as the Scripture speaks, followed his own ways, God
knows how to recompense him in like manner. If ye walk contrary unto me,
says God, then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury, and I even I will
chastise you seven times for your sins, Levit, 29.30. and again, they have
chosen their own ways, and their soul delighted in their abominations: I
will also choose their delusions, and bring their fears upon them, Esaias. 66.34.
not that God has pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way and live, Ezech. 33.11. for we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. When God
therefore chastises his elect, they reap profit thereby; for they return unto
themselves, bethink what they have hitherto done, heartily detesting their
evil deeds, no otherwise than Joseph's brethren, whom when they could not
persuade, being as yet unknown unto them, with entreaties, we are verily
guilty, say they, concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this
distress come upon us, Genesis 42.21. They sue unto God for the pardon of the
sins, they fly unto his mercy, renounce sin for the future, keep
themselves warily from falling again into the like sins; they shake off
spiritual drowsinesse, bid adien to pride, renounce the love of this world,
and daily strive more and more to divest themselves of that coat of skin, I
mean sin, which Adam left them as a legacy. In the time of adversity, the
lamp of faith is kindled, and shines with brighter rays, and shoots them
further; as also trust in God which raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. Then does
patience and hope increase, because tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, experience hope, that makes not ashamed, Romans 5.3,4. thence
proceed fervent prayers, serious loathing of this world, and longing for
eternal life; so that the faithful cries out with David, my soul cries out
for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? Psah. 42.3. Hence
also it follows, that the afflictions of this nature are so necessary, that
none can be saved without them; God's children being like good corn, which is
not put in the garner ere it be threshed. Man's heart is naturally so stony,
that it cannot be fitted to make up the eternal temple of our heavenly
Solomon, unless it be hewed and polished with the strokes of afflictions,
which I confess are irksome to flesh and blood, yet exceeding necessary
thereunto; no otherwise than the Sun and fire, which is very necessary for
us, though sometimes intolerable: we conclude therefore, as to what
especially concerns chastisements, and say that they contain in them
inestimable good things, fince they are singular and very necessary means to
the attainment of eternal happiness. If the ends of chastisements be so
glorious and happy, much more the end of trials which are incident only to
such as are converted unto God by chastisements, preaching of the word, and the
efficacy of the Holy Ghost, do live diligently in the fear of God, and are
heedfull as far forth as the impersection of grace in this life gives them
scope not to offend him. They are called trials, not that God by them would be
certified of the faith and sincerity of his children, which he most perfectly
knows; neither chiefly thereby, because he would make known unto them their
own weakness or infirmities, which they themselves know to be in the highest
degree; but they are so called, because such a thing happens therein, as falls
out, when one tries or makes proof of the ability or strength of another;
for he not only that makes proof, but he that is tried and set upon
labors with might and maine, that he be not foiled or vanquished. The case
is no otherwise in these trials, which God lays upon his children, which live
in his fear, and conform themselves to his holy will: for God on his part
makes a vehement assault upon them by, some notable calamity, but they on the
other side by the efficacy of the Holy Ghost dwelling in them resist valiantly
through faith, patience, perseverance, till they obtain the victory; so that
they will not yield unto temptation, nor commit any sin, or wickedness,
wherein Satan, the world, and the flesh, shall strive to entangle them by
means of that affliction, and that for the most part under this pretense, that
there is no way for them to escape, and to be rid thereof, but by committing
this or that heinous sin. In adversity all the Christian virtues do most
wonderfully increase, and without comparison more clearly appear, than in the
time of prosperity, not unlike the stars which are not visible at noon day,
yet appear in the night time with wonderful rays, or Gideons firebrarnds,
which were in his soldiers pitchers, not appearing, or giving any light til
their pitchers were broken. Then other faithful men are edified, and God
glorified, insomuch, that afflictions resemble that precious ointment powered
upon Christ's head, which filled the house with its odor: but all this comes
wholly from Gods grace, whose strength is perfected in weakness, so that the
faithful may say with Paul, when I am weak then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12.10.
salvation and everlasting glory of necessity follows this conflict and
victory: for the trial of your faith, says Saint Peter, being much more
precious than gold that perishes, though it be tried by fire, might be found
unto praise, glory and honor, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. as
we find a notable example, to wit, Job, worthy our observation, of all these
afflictions; so we have a lively representation of the faithful man's trial
in the wrestling of Jacob the patriarch, who after he had valiantly strove all
night, and obtained the victory, and his soul delivered, I have seen God,
says he, face to face, and my life is preserved, Genesis 32.20. O most
wonderful combat, where the assailant and defendant is the very same, where
the conqueror and the party conquered is the very same; and where the
conqueror gives the glory to the party conquered, which is also given to the
conqueror; where the party conquered is as a King, ruling and commanding, and
the conqueror is as an humble servant obeying him. The third and last sort of
the afflictions of the godly is martyrdom, which comprehends all such
afflictions as the faithful man suffers and sustaineth, for the constant
profession of celestial truth, as banishment, imprisonment, stripes, torments,
loss of goods, and especially death it self. And this sort of afflictions
contains in it more good things and commodities than the former; for besides
the joyful end that it has common with chastisements, and trials, by the
promise of Christ, who says, blessed are they which are persecuted for
righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.10. Besides
this, I say, God honors the faithful witnesses of his truth with more
prerogative, in that he promises them above others a greater measure of
reward in his heavenly kingdom; and therefore he says, not only such as
endure persecutions have a reward in heaven, but he adds also this, Great is
your reward in heaven, whereby he implies some singular glory which the Martyrs
enjoy in heaven. Hither that of S. Paul is to be referred, our light which is
but for a moment, works for us far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.18. for albeit this sentence may be applied to the two former
sorts of afflictions, which procure also eternal life; yet the Apostle, here
especially, speaks of those afflictions, which he and the rest of his faithful
associats suffered for the word of truth. Moreover, these sufferings have Gods
notable promise of the benefits of this life also. Verily I say unto you, says
Christ, there is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the
Gospells, but he shall receive a hundred told, now in this time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands with persecution,
and in the world to come eternal life, Mar. 10.29,30. This promise in some of
the faithful is literally fulfilled. God oftentimes bestowing upon them far
more good things, honors, and commodities, than they were deprived of, for the
acknowledgement of his truth, whereas in others it takes effect by equivalence;
for it is most manifest, that all the particles thereof are not literally to be
fulfilled; As for example sake, if one instead of his father, or mother, or
son, should obtain thousand fathers, mothers, etc. they reap then the fruit
and verity of this promise, when they receive things of equivalent or better
value to the things promised, and that with persecution; that is to say, though
they want, and are deprived of these earthly commodities, which happens, when
the faithful man is most assured of his adoption, and consequently of heavenly
inheritance, which is far more excellent and better than all riches and
rewards, and indeed is the only reward worthy to be given of God, and received
of the faithful. Hence it is that he is capable to know, that all the riches
of the world are his by the right of adoption, as being the child of God, and
designed to Lord it over all the creatures, howsoever they be conferred upon
him according to mean and measure, even as his tutour and physician; yea, his
heavenly father knows it to be expedient, and conducible. He is assured also
of Gods providence, and most fully persuaded in himself, that he has therein
an unexhausted fountain, and oil that will never fail; for he believes his
word to be most true: seek ye first the Kingdom of heaven, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6.33. He
that spares not his own son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him freely give us all things? Romans 8.31. Such joy attends this
certainty of salvation in him, as surpasses all the riches of this world; for
godliness with contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. which virtuous
contentment gives cleerer and brighter luster, by comparing it with its
contrary in them, which willingly would suffer not any thing for Gods truth,
but turn their backs thereunto, renouncing Christ; for in the midst of their
abundance of the goods and honors of this world, by the just judgment of God,
they are not contented with their own condition, but are tossed with most
grievous perturbations, by reason of the torments of their conscience, which
will sooner, or later awake. Add hereunto this benefit, to wit, the honor
which God imparteth unto such as have constantly suffered for his heavenly
truth; for what great honor is it, I beseech thee, that the King of Kings
vouchsafes to call a miserable terrestrial worm to be a witness against his
enemies, that accuse him of falsehood, to plead his cause and defend his
honor? what great honor is it to be received and enrolled into the College
and society of the Prophets, Apostles, and that grand cloud of Martyrs that
have suffered for his heavenly truth? yea, what great honor is it to be a
companion of Jesus Christ, the Prince of our salvation, who was consecrated
through afflictions, to be clothed with the same raiment, and wear the crown
of thorns with him, and so to be conformable unto him, and always to bear
about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus
might be made manifest in our body, 2 Cor. 4.10. What great honor does Christ
vouchsafe us also, in taking our afflictions to be his, when as he says, that
our persecutions and sufferings are the residues and relics of his
afflictions and marks? what honor is it to be chosen of God, as a great
Emperor, or warlike Commander, to besiege with a strong Army a certain City;
for which purpose he electeth not dastards or cowards, but most generous and
valiant men: so that these sufferings are public testimonies of our valiancy,
and royal charters, whereof we may glory with the Apostle, who says, most
gladly will I glory in my infirmities, that the power of God may rest upon me?
2 Cor. 12.9. what great honor is it to fight in the sight of the King of
Kings, who is president and overseer of the combat, and distributes crowns?
what great honor is it to be such a wonderful instrument as God uses to
increase his Church, the blood and afflictions of the Martyrs being the seed of
the Church, which without persecutions would never have been so much amplified,
and increased? Again, what honor is it to be Gods instrument, to cast down
and overthrow all infernal and worldly powers, to destroy principalities and
powers that rebel against him? And I beseech thee, know thou not what is
the cause of the ruin of Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths? it is because
they make insurrection against Gods children, persecuting them, otherwise they
might have subsisted longer: for Jerusalem is a cup of trembling unto the
people round about, Zach. 12.2. The Church is like unto mount Sinah, whereunto
if a man or beast draws near is thrust through, and killed with darts from
heaven, or an anvill whereupon all the hammers that strike or beat are broken
into shivers; so that the enemies of Gods truth cannot commit a greater measure
of foolishness, and prove more prejudicial unto themselves, then when they
fight against Gods Church: they undo themselves thereby, turning upside down
their thrones, losing their Crowns, and casting headlong their children and
posterity into a miserable condition. And thus much of the inestimable good
things of the third sort of afflictions. Seeing these things are so, who sees
not, that all the afflictions mentioned, are not signs of Gods wrath and
indignation, but of his love, forasmuch as they obtain such a glorious end.
And thus the Holy Ghost himself gives his verdict of chastisements in
particular; whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom
he receives. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with sons;
for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? and if ye be without
chastisements, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards, not sons,
Heb. 12.6,7,8. Now if chastisements and punishments inflicted for sins, are
not signs of Gods wrath, we are to esteem no otherwise of the other sorts of
afflictions. When Satan therefore shall suggest unto thee what the Jews said
once to Christ; if thou be the Son of God come down from the cross, Mat.
27.40. Answer him clean contrary, because I am the child of God I will mount
the cross, and through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Acts 14.22. Moreover, since the afflictions of Gods children carry with them
such good things, and are signs of Gods fatherly love, they are causelessely,
as they are commonly called, evils, but contrarily, deserve to be styled good
things. To this purpole, the Prophet David speaks, It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, Psalm. 119.71. and Jeremy, it is good for a man that he
bear his yoke in his youth, Lam. 3.27. Certainly he that says it is good to
be afflicted, declares likewise that afflictions are good and profitable, which
must not be understood, as though they were good in their own nature; for if
thou considerest all calamities in their first Original, they are the brood
and offspring of death, whereunto all men were adjudged by God's sentence; but
now they became good things in regard of the metamorphosis, or transmutation of
their nature, when incident to Gods children, which are no otherwise then the
Prophet Jeremy made a defenced City, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls. Jer.
1.18 against which the darts lose their heads, and are not able to do any
hurt. That they do change their nature, Saint Paul inintimateth, when he
says, we know that all things work together for good to them that love God,
who are called according to his purpose, Romans 8 28. Of this change the cross
of Jesus Christ is the cause through whom God is our father. This is the tree
that takes away the bitterness of the waters of Marah, whereinto we fall in
the wilderness of this world. This is that brazen Serpent, whereupon if we
look, afflictions invading us, and as it were a Serpent biting our heels, our
heart shall live, and her head shall be bruised. He that was present with the
three children in the midst of the fiery furnace, will be present with us also,
when we suffer-persecution for his name sake. The tree of the cross bears
excellent fruit, especially those of righteousness, whereof the Apostle
speaks: Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous;
nevertheless, it yields the peace of righteousness unto them which are
exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. so that to style the afflictions of Gods
children then, when their genuine nature is explicated, evils, infelicities,
calamities, is nothing else, then to imitate the negligence of a certain
undiscreet Apothecary, that leaves the inscription of Arsenick upon his box,
when as there is nothing else in it, but Rubarb or Manna; yea, it is an
adulterous false mark, proper unto those with whom Christ has no communion,
and unto whom punishments are not available, but are tastes and harbingers of
those everlasting torments, which abide them after this life. Hence it is
manifest, that the condition of Gods children is to be preferred to the state
of the children of this world: we have declared in the beginning of this
Chapter, that all afflictions are promiscuously common, as concerning their
outward form; so that there is not any adversity, which may not as equally
befall an obstinate sinner as a godly man. The difference then consists
herein, that the wicked persevering in their sins, can have no true
consolation, because they can gather no good thing out of their calamity,
whereas the case is far otherwise with the afflictions of Gods children; for
they procure them inestimable good things, and by the virtue of the cross of
Christ do become a new kind of goodness, whereupon they find therein true,
firm consolation; so that certainly the apprehension and consideration of
afflictions, were there no other cause for a sinner to return unto God, go on
in the way of salvation, and live in the fear of God, should sufficiently move
him to be at rest in the day of adversity. Lastly, if there be such good and
excellent things in afflictions: If their ends be so glorious and happy, why
art thou therefore devout soul dejected and sorrowful in affliction, which
does now possess thee? Thou will say, because it is grievous to flesh and
blood; that is true, but the case is of like nature in a Medicine, the taste
whereof does not argue it to be wholesome, but its virtue and operation
otherwise, thou may take Poison instead of Medecin, and embrace death for
life: that thou may not injure and deceive thy self in the consideration of
afflictions, set before thy view their fruit and end, which is very excellent,
and of greater value than one is able to conceive: This is it which thou
should think upon in thy present affliction. Now, since thy contain and
procure thee such good things as we have demonstrated, it behooves thee to be
of a joyful mind, which St. James requires of thee; My brethren, count it all
joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations, Ja. 1.2. and especially when thou
suffer for the testimony of Gods truth, and constant profession of the
Orthodox Religion: rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
Heaven, Mat. 5.12. but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy: if ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for
the spirit of glory and God rests upon you; on their part he is evil spoken
of, but on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.13,14. show thy self to be a
Disciple of the Apostles, who being for the confession of Jesus Christ beaten
with rods, went away rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for his name, Act. 5.13,14. and by Saint Paul's testimony, did glory in
tribulations, Romans 5.3. Imitate the Saints among the Hebrews, who did take
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves they had in heaven
a better and more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. Neither does it only become
thee in afflictions to be joyful, but thankful unto God, who by this means
offers thee many good things, and acts the part of a Physician or Benefactor.
Say therefore with Job, who had exactly learned this lesson, and wherefore he
gave God thanks in the midst of his afflictions, when thou art deprived of some
earthly commodity; The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name
of the Lord, Job 1.21. To the end thou may be joyful and thankful unto thy
heavenly father, consider forthwith those most excellent and unspeakable good
things that are in afflictions, and thereby redound unto thee; view their
consummation and glorious end, and say to thy self, O what gracious benefits,
through afflictions I have obtained, which God sends upon me, by means whereof
ones outward man perishes, yet the inward is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16.
Say therefore for example, God deprives me of my child, thereby to make me
tread more constantly the path of Gods children; he has taken away my father
or mother, that instead of him he may be my father for ever, and be more
careful of me than awoman can be of the fruit of her womb; he is willing I
should have experience of the perfidiousnesse of my friends, that I may enjoy
his eternal love. It is his pleasure I should be deprived of authorities,
dignities, and honors, that I may obtain the honor to Lord it over all the
creatures. I am driven to poverty, that I may possess that heavenly
inheritance; I am detained in prison, that I may obtain that freedom that the
son of God has purchased for me; I am banished, that I come to my heavenly
country; I am deformed and maimed in body, that I may grow to a perfect man,
according to the stature of Christ, and that this corruptible body may be
clothed with incorruption; I die now, to live eternally. And what are all the
afflictions that thou suffer or could endure, if either thou considerest
their quality or duration compared with those inestimable good things which
they carry with them. Consider and meditate diligently thou devout soul upon
these things, being in affliction, which now affects thee with sorrow; in so
doing thy water shall be turned into nuptial wine, thy sorrow into mirth and
joy; so thou shall taste how sweet the Lord is, though he seems to thee at
the first blush or appearance rigid, yet thou shall discern the rod of our
heavenly Jonathan, who wrought so great salvation in Israel to be dipped at
the end thereof in an honey comb, which will enlighten our eyes, refresh our
hearts, teach our hands to war, and make us more than Conquerours; so that
thou shall find that Saint Paul said, not without cause, Rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. forasmuch as not only the time of prosperity, but of adversity,
yields matter of rejoicing.

CHAP. VII. The seventh and last ground or reason is drawn from the condition
of the faithful man in this world, which consists herein, that he is a
traveller journeying into his country.
IT is manifest by the third reason abovementioned, that even as sin
expelled thee out of Paradise, and banished thee from heaven, thy country, and
first place of abode, so thou art solely by Gods grace called back from
banishment, and invited to return to thy Country. Hence it follows, that
during this life thou art in a continual pilgrimage, whose limit or end is
heaven, and eternal happiness. This world then is not thy dwelling place, and
country, but a place of pilgrimage and banishment; so that thou may say
with David, I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my fathers were,
Psalm. 39.12. And again, I am a stranger in the earth, Psalm. 119.19. why art
thou then so sorely troubled, and of a dejected mind, whenever thou art
smitten with adversity? it grieves thee that all things fall not out according
to thy mind: but art thou ignorant thou art a traveling, so that it cannot be,
that all things should happen as thy heart could wish? for either thou must
endure the discommodities of the way, or not enter into it, and consequently
never come to thy country. One of these conditions thou must choose, there is
not a third; I say again, thou must endure them, or obstain wholly from
traveling. If thou be a traveller, as verily thou art, be of a courageous
spirit in afflictions; for that which thou now endurest shall not be
perpetual, nor shall last longer than thy journey: What traveller is there
which will not endure the discommodities of his way, and assuage them with
these or the like meditations, that upon the accomplishment of his journey,
they shall cease, and he be freed of them, as soon as he comes home.
Consider further, that howsoever thy journey be grievous, it is but short. If
the days of thy pilgrimage will be as many as the days of Jacob's the
Patriarch, to wit, a 130 years; yet nevertheless thou may say with him, The
days of the years of my pilgrimage are few and evil, and have not attained
unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their
pilgrimage, Genesis 47.9. And when thou have finished thy course, which will
shortly come to pass; all afflictions, and the matter of all sorrow shall
cease, thou hunger no more, neither shall the Sun light on thee, nor any heat,
for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed thee, and shall
lead thee unto living foun^aines of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears
from thine eyes, Romans 7.16,17. Since thou ^rt a traveller in this world, and
that thy country is not here be^ow, there is no place therefore in ^his world;
whence if thou be ^riven, thou may say thou art in ^anishment. Neither
do thy ri^hes by the same reason consist in ^ome earthly glebe in houses,
fields, ^r some other possession how small or ample soever it be; yea, if a
Kingdom or Kingdoms happen unto thee. Neither does thy honor likewise
consist in the dignities and preferments of this world, nor in that smoke
wherewith empty brains do so much feed themselves. Nor do thy delights
consist in the brutish pleasures of the flesh, nor is thy life enclosed within
that space thou live in this world: for as heaven is thy country, so are thy
riches of the Kingdom of heaven, the inheritance of the Saints prepared for
thee. Thy honor and dignity consists herein, that thou art the child of God,
and have sovereignty over all the creatures; Thy delights and pleasures are
(...) God; thy joy is in his presence, where is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand there is pleasure for ever more, Psalm. 16.12. Thy life is that of
eternity, into which upon the accomplishment of thy pilgrimage thou entrest, so
that when thou art dead thou beginnest really to live. For the honors, goods,
and commodities of this world, what are they but accidents, which befall thee
in thy pilgrimage? no otherwise than adversities, but with this difference;
that whereas those mostly bring the traveller from the right way into by-ways,
these above all imagination cause the children of God with more alacrity to
accomplish their journey. It follows likewise, that thy miseries consist not
in the want or loss of the goods of this world, then indeed thou should be
miserable, if thou should not attain to thy country, nor obtain that
happiness whereunto thou bendest thy course. Seeing thy life and country is
in heaven, and art most assured of the goods, honors, and delights of the
same, thou can in no wise think thy self to be unhappy, if thou have
righteous judgment. Let not the loss or want of that that is not thine
afflict thee, and turn not the interest into the principal, the way into thy
journeyes end, thy Inn into thy home and country. Rest not upon that good
which is not thine own, place not thy happiness therein, neglecting the true
felicity: It is a fools trick, to weep at the loss of his cap, and to laugh
when he sees his own house set on fire. Moreover, forasmuch as thou art a
traveller, sojourning toward heaven, be of a courageous spirit in all thy
afflictions, when they would discourage and possess thee with sorrow, opposing
unto them the scope of thy journey, and high calling. Rejoice in a most assured
hope of obtaining thy heavenly country, the kingdom of glory, life without
end, goods, honor, and unspeakable pleasures. Know this, there is nothing
worthy thy person but heaven, and that all the happiness of this world is
unworthy thy thoughts and desires; the earth too base, and all things therein
too vile and abject to be given thee, for thou art Gods child, and in a way to
possess a Kingdom. Away then with every abject thought, which affects the
vulgar contemptible sort; away with all heaviness and sorrow, let thy face
import, and thy eyes and outward gestures testify, that thou bear in thy
bosom such a high generous spirit, as beseems the majesty of him, who after a
short time ended is to exercise dominion over all the creatures. Furthermore,
since thou art a traveller, as often as sorrow shall strive to invade thee, say
within thy self, shall I vex and macerate my self, as if I had no other
business, God forbid, God forbid. I am a traveller, and I have other
businesses than stand still in the way, play the idle-bee, and indulge my self
to weep and torment my self; for I have a long way to go with Eliah, yea,
longer than I am able of my self to perform: I must seriously consider of
this way, how I may make a prosperous end of it, and overcome the
discommodities obvious therein. To this end all necessary means art to be used,
faith, hope, patience, constancy, prayers, and all good works, which God
before ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. Moreover, very many
deadly dangers offer themselves to my view, and most potent enemies, to wit,
the world, and that horrible mighty infernal Goliath, and my own flesh
especially, which is my most dangerous enemy. These enemies lie in wait for me
continually, assaulting me one while on the right hand, otherwhile on the
left: while they set upon me, and make at me, shall I be so unhappy and
foolish, as to suffer them to assault me uncontrolled? shall I hide my hands
in my bosom? shall I busy my self in things of no moment or worth? No, at no
hand, I may not prove a dastard, but most valiantly withstand them, I am undone
else, and must perish upon the way, and my carcass shall be thrown into the
infernal valley; wherein are more grievous discommodities, in respect whereof
all evils which are commonly so called, dangers, and molestations, are but
trifles and toys; so here thou should have cause to be sorrowful, to grieve
and macerate thy self: six thy mind upon this, instead of grieving so much for
these worldly things. Think, says a certain father, upon the misery of thy
pilgrimage, call to mind thy years past in the bitterness of thy soul, think
upon the dangers of humane life, and thy own frailty; and if thou perseverest
in the consideration hereof, I tell thee thou will scarce be sensible of
outward molestations, even whilst thy heart is possessed of inward sorrow.
Think diligently upon all these things, thou faithful soul, so thou shall
easily discharge thy self of all manner of sorrow, and shall be a wise, happy
traveller. He that otherwise does perform what the children of this world are
wont to do, whereof each is like a foolish traveller, who being in exile, and
permitted by his Princes grace to come home, sets forth, being desirous to come
to his country, but he is entangled in difficulties, and thousand fopperies;
for as he applies himself to his journey, he makes a grievous complaint, that
he has not provision enough, being not contented to have so much as will
suffice him during his journey, but what will last a long time after, though
he has all manner of dainties in his own country; he is angry he is not
clothed with a winter suit, though he travelleth in the summer time; and it
grieves him, that he has not more toys than he is able to carry about him.
When he is satisfied herein, and so driven to his journey, then perhaps, if one
of his fellow exiles takes not his leave of him in courteous and very gracious
words, he takes time to expostulate with him, neither will he go forward, till
the Judge put a period to this brangle; which being done, he again applies
himself to his journey; but behold, a Hare crossing his way, being thereupon
frighted, as by an ill augury, he returns to the place of his banishment,
where being taught by a certain friend of his, that the Hares crossing his way
was but a casual thing, portending no evil. And so again he addresseth
himself to his journey, wherein he spends his time and labor marvellously in
vain, and disquiets himself with many businesses; for as he passes through
the wood, he numbers the trees very carefully, and rubs the moss therefrom,
to see whether that which Bernard speaks of, according to the vulgar opinion,
be true; that there be so many branches upon a tree as there be roots; and look
with how many boughs it is beautified and adorned, with so many roots it is
fastened in the earth. And after he has for a long time bestowed his labor in
vain upon this experiment, he applies himself to his journey again; and by
chance there is a greater noise of the leaves than wonted, thereupon supposing
a knot of thieves to be at hand, he takes him his heels and runs away,
leaving all his things behind him; and for this turn forgets his journey,
and returns to the place whence he came at first: and howsoever he be
dispossessed of that fear, yet he cease not to be childish; for seeing a
stone in the midst of the way, which he might pass by, he turns not aside,
but endeavors to break it into shivers, and thereupon falls headlong to the
ground. Being in this posture he makes a piteous moan, and yet striveth not
to get up; and if perchance one pass by, moved with compassion, endeavors to
lift him up, he is froward, testy, and complains of him, who reaches a
helping hand, yea, reviles him with reproaches. And if it happens he be wet
with rain, he steeres his course to a place distant thence ten days journey,
only upon this design, to dry his clothes. And when he comes to the Inn,
if all the rooms, besides that which is allotted him, be not handsome, richly
adorned, and furnished with hangings; or if the beds be not soft enough, and he
be not entertained with an over-delicate feast, being unmindfull of his
journey, he stays there to rail with his host, menacing to bring him before
the Judge: But being in some sort reconciled with him, he bestows much cost
and pains in repairing that Inn, that he may the next time that he comes
thither, which will be at latter Lammas, be better entertained: but if the
structure and building corresponds not with his mind, with a broken and
despairing spirit, he goes even the same way back again, and returns to the
place whence he came at first. In fine, he disquiets himself in a thousand
turmoiles and troubles, and all to no purpose, whereof he might have been
dispossessed, had he not applied his mind unto such things as were obvious in
his way, and been not unmindfull of his duty. Country, and condition. The
condition of the child of this world is of the same strain; he forgets his
journey, and spiritual course, which he is bound to perform; he interrupts
and breaks off in the midst of his pilgrimage, beginning it again and again;
so that in the latter end of his life, he is a strange guest to true
Christianity, as he was at the beginning. The sinner being an hundred years
old shall be accused, Esaias 65.20. he is so foolish, that though he has now
and then purposed with himself to renounce the world, yet never brings his
intention to perfection, but beginning in the spirit, he ends in the flesh,
Gal. 3.3. The reason whereof is, because he instead of meditating upon his
heavenly country, involves himself in the things of this world; whereupon his
affection is so fixed, that nothing besides most grievous miseries can reconcile
him unto God, and bring him into the right way to his heavenly Country. Thou
devout soul behave thy self otherwise, and be like a wise traveller; go from
strength to strength, till thou appear before God in Sion, Psalm. 84.8. so that
thou may have this testimony and consolation with the Apostle St. Paul in
thy self, and may say; But this one thing I do, forgetting those things
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I
press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Jesus
Christ. Amen Phil. 3.13,14.

FINIS.

