THE Good of Peace AND ILL of WAR, Set forth in a Sermon preached in the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul, the last day of July, 1642.

By EPHRAIM VDALL, Rector of S. Austins, LONDON.

IAM. 3.17. The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy, and the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace, of them that make peace. Quaedam remedia sunt triftiora ipso morbo, ut
satius sit oppetere mortem, quam his aucupari salutem: ita quandoque satius est
far injuriam, quam majore incommodo ulcisci, far pacem etiamsi parum
commodam aut aequam, quam bellum cum immensis malis suscipere. Erasm. in Simil.
LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for Ph. Stephens and C. Meridith, and are to be
sold at the gilded Lion and the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.XLII.

Venerabili admodum Viro D. ANTHONIO VINCENT Militi and Baronetto, de Stoke
Dawbernon in Comitatu Surriae, salutem in Authore salutis.
ORnatissime Vir and omnibus mihi numeris colende, concionem postremo die Julii
in Cathedrali Ecclesia Divi Pauli ad Londinates nostros habui: quam jam
impressam omniuminspiciendam oculis emitto. Quas ob rations, ad Lectorem tibi
demonstrabit Epistola, ob quas tuo nomini inscribo facillime ascribo. Nosti
probe me primam Curam Pastoralem per advocationem Patris tui Patroni mei
(memoriae mihi charae ac venerandae) accepisse, qui (tantus amor fuit) me
subinde Beneficio reditus amplioris decoravit. Antiquus amor Avi tui, (piae
memoriae) in me, per Patrem tuum, ad me descendebat, and quasi scaturigine
haereditaria in te diffusus est. Tu enim ipse, affectibus eisdem (and vivis
ipsis, and jam demortuis, aerumnis hujus vitae levatis, in sinu Abrahae
requiescentibus, and suavi refrigerio coram facie Domini donatis) me complexus
es jugiter. Tantis ideo me tui teneri vinculis existimavi, ut quamprimum ansam
mihi praeberet tempus, grati animi mei aliquod tibi testimonium exhiberem.
Quapropter, simulac mecum hanc concionem imprimendam statuissem, sub tui
nominis tutela illam, qualem qualem, in apricum mittere decrevi. Dic quaeso
incultae huic opellae, vade (per me licet) in Urbem, and Orbem. Indignam illam
esse fateor auspiciis tuis, observantiae meae dignissimum est quod potis sum
proferre signum. Munuscula Scholaria sunt (Sicut far nostrum modicum, and curta
supellex) modica and curta. Grato precor oculo perlustres. Vnam forsan pejus
possis collocare horam. Temeritati dedicatoriae ignoscas, Hominis, scilicet,
nolentis unquam immemorem, antiquae domus, suorum amicorumse praebere: volentis
semper, parato animo, devinctam gratitudinem familiae Vincentum toti
praedicare, nocteque, dieque preces effundere bono Deo nostro, ut te cum clara
tua Conjuge, Progenieque vestra, vita pia, sana, honoranda; morte matura,
tranquilla, placida, coelesti gratia in terris, and tandem supercoelesti gloria
in coelis dignetur coronare, in cujus divini favoris ulnis, teneraeque
misericordiae complexibus te per vota recondens, ulteriorem tibi molestiam
creare nolo.

Dominationis tuae observantissimus, Antiqui amoris tui studiosissimus EPHRAIM
VDALL.

TO THE READER.
THE good opinion some men had of this Sermon that heard it, who do deplore
the sad condition of our distracted Nation at this time, moved them
importunately to press me to commit it to the Press; against which J was
resolved, had not some other reasons overswayed me, of which I give this
brief account.

First, I was informed by some, that it would be printed, and by others that it
was in the Press, by the imperfect and broken notes of short Writers; who what
ever their excellency be in the speed of their pen, yet seldom have they the
wit or judgment, or faithfulness to put forth any thing they take in writing,
without gross corruptions and deprevations; whereof we have diverse instances
of late in Sermons, both of the living and the dead.

Secondly, it fell out at the hearing of it, as it did with our Savior, John
7.12. Some said he was a good man, others said nay, but he deceives the
people: so some said it was a good Sermon, others said nay, but it was
malignant, and answerab^y it has still its accusers to them that heard it not,
to whom it is now able to give its own account, wanting only that of Jerome,
nescio quid (...) viva vox habet.

Thirdly and lastly, I was informed by more than one, that there were diverse
Writers, some that came of their own accord, others sent thither, by some of
no mean account for profession of Religion, to catch upon something they
expected would fall from me, for which they might call me in question, and
bring me into trouble. A most wicked and godless practice (if it be true)
both in the employed, and them that did employ them, and no ways suitable with
that exactness of Religion they make profession of, but proceeding from a
malignant influence of Satan, the accuser of the brethren, upon their hearts,
in which it seems he has too great a share; for either they be but
Hypocrites, and wholely in his power, or else true Christians (which is
possible) and then corruption is too predominant in them. It is an easy thing
to find a staff to beat a Dog, but to desire the Dog would commit a fault,
that we might cudgel him, is cruelty, not beseeming a righteous man, who is
merciful to a beast, Prove. 12.10. but to wish a fault in a man, a Minister, in
whom we know none, (especially in times wherein we complain of so much
scandal in our Ministers, that we should rather praise God for any one that is
not scandalous) and to that end, to watch for his halting, and to catch at his
words in his preaching, against whom we have nothing more to say than this, we
do not love thee, why? Mat. 1. ult.
we know not, only we know we do not love thee, this is so far from
Religion, that sure the Devil has a strong possession in such men's hearts,
and they seem to me (rather than to be true and good Christians) to be the
brethren of those cursed Babylonians, who when they could find no other fault
in Daniel, would catch him in his prayers, and lay a snare for him in the Law
of his God, Dan. 6.5. This is such a sin, as that for which God threatens to
cover them with shame, Esaias. 29.31. who made a man an offender for a word, and
laid a snare for him that reproved in the gate, and turned the just aside for a
thing of naught. What is this but to mise-use that excellent gift of writing
and hearing of sermons? what, but a profanation of the Lords day, by abusing
that holy time to such malicious and wicked services, base, and unworthy any
man, whose face but seems to look toward Heaven, and argues graceless
hearts, and destitute of the fear of God, put they on what vizour of
Hypocrisy and form of godliness soever is pleasing to them? Certain it is
that wrath, fury, malice, slandering, are not the way to Heaven, neither let
men think that these distempers be religious zeal, or zeal for Religion, or
the power of godliness, as many it seems do think, but do deceive their
own souls, it being but the efficacy of Satan, and of the remaining
corruptions of our depraved nature, The wrath of man does not accomplish that
which is righteous in the eyes of God, Iam. 1.20. Neither does his Majesty
stand in need of the unmortified distempers of our hearts to advance his cause
or glory, which we may blast by actions unsuitable to Religion, but cannot
beautify nor adorn thereby. These things considered, I determined to deliver
mine own sense in mine own words, thereby to stop the mouths of all
Diabolists, and to stand, or to fall of mine own self to my Reader. I have,
as near as my memory would serve me, in things delivered in the birth of this
Sermon, over and above the first conceptions of it committed to writing, kept
to the words I then spoke, if there be any variation, it is but small, and in
nothing material; only I have added some small matter in a place or two, not
differing from, but enlarging the same things, but have defaulked nothing. In
thesi I know I shall have the concurring consent of all men, except such as
love or live by fighting. In hypothesi commonly falls the ods, if any be between
a Preacher and his hearers; because the applications some time brings home the
doctrine, with a kind of salt and vinegar, that troubles and vexes a galled and
a guilty heart: For when it comes to Thou art the man, there be few hearers
found like David, 2 Samuel 12.5.7.13. The case of Ploudens hogs suits well with
many hearers, that touched in their consciences come grunting with open mouth
upon the Preacher, as they would all to rend him, in recompense for the pearls
he has cast unto them. I have only applied my self in a gener all way,
leaving every man to his own heart, to feel his own pulse, and excited to that
which ought to be the study and practice of every Christian, in respect of the
present perilous days it has pleased God to cast us into, that we may be
helpful to the Peace of our distressed Nation, or provide for our own Peace and
safety, that we miscarry not in the extremity of the confusions that we may
live to see. I comend it to thy reading, accept it as thou please. I commend
it and thee to Gods blessissing, who is he alone that teaches us to profit by
any thing, and rest

In my affections thy well wisher, in thy affections what thou will, Ephraim
Vdall.

The Good of Peace and Ill of War, Set forth in a Sermon preached in the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul, the last day of July, 1642.
PSALM. 29.11. The Lord will bless his people with Peace.
THis Psalm is Hortatory, stirring up to the praises of God.

And it is Laudatory, setting forth and celebrating the power and greatness of
God, for which he is to be praised.

And lastly it is Consolatory, in regard of two benefits or blessings, which
are promised in it for Gods people.

The first is Strength, which he will furnish them withal for War against
their enemies: in the former part of this verse.

The second is Peace, the choycest of all blessings: which is promised in these
words, The Lord will bless his people with Peace.

Peace is the happy end of all accursed and unhappy contentions, and that that
is the desire of all men, after they have been well schooled in the worth of it
by the calamities of War.

But miserable it is to see, men will not know, nor acknowledge the benefit of
it so much Fruendo, by enjoying it, as Carendo, by wanting it.

Gods choycest favors are least set by by them that possess them, without the
least taint or stain of their contrary evils, and the fullness of blessings
gives men such saciety, that by enjoying they grow unto a loathing of that that
did they want, they would think themselves happy if they might enjoy.

The comeliest Lady in the world by time and age grows wrinkled; and then she
that was the inamouret of all, becomes undesired of many, and some time the
goodlyest beauty in the world is quite disdained, and an ugly and deformed
creature substituted in those affectionate embraces that are due to that beauty.

Which comes to pass through some untoward lust, or impotent and disordered
passion, and to men's admiration, that a man should contemn a creature that
might content the best of men, for the stolen waters and muddy puddles of a
deformed hag and harlot.

Just so it fares with many men and peace: That goodly Lady whose beauty has
been wooed and desired, sometime by men of all conditions, and bought sometime
upon dishonorable terms, by great and noble Captains and famous Commanders,
weakened, wearied and wasted by War.

This Lady Peace of whom it was said anciently, Pacem te poscimus omnes, all of
us are in love with Peace, is now by age and long continuance with us become so
writhen and wrinkled in the eyes of some, that they begin to loath her company,
and seem to turn after, and dote upon that ugly hag of strife, contention,
war, that as all other harlots in the end, will bring her lovers to a morsel
of bread.

But all this comes from some distempered and noisome passion, which we shall
seek to cure and heal by discoursing of this beautiful daughter of God, for
Peace is (...), the daughter of God, the (...), the Peace of God, who may say
of his favors, as Juro did to Aeolus of her Nymphs, Sunt mihi bis septem
praestanti corpore Nymphae,
Quarum quae forma pulcherrima Deiopeiam
Connubio jungam stabili, propriamque dicabo,
Omnes ut tecum -- annos
Exigat, and pulchra faciat te prole parenteno.
I have fourteen Nymphs, the fairest whereof is Deiopeia which I will give in
marriage to thee, that she may live all her days with thee, and make thee the
father of a numerous offspring: So God has many favors, but the chiefest of
them is Peace, the fairest often thousand; and such has been his love and
goodness to this Nation that he has married us to Peace in a most stable and
long continued contract, and to impropriate her unto us in respect of other
Nations, and if by our distempers we do not put her away, or by our sins
procure a divorce, he will continue this his choycest Jewel still among us, as
it is here promised, The Lord will bless his people with Peace.

In the Text we have three things.

First, the Blessing, Peace.

Secondly, the Author of that blessing, the Lord.

Thirdly, those that be blessed of him with it, his people.

And answerably there be three observations.

First, Peace is a blessing upon Gods people.

Secondly, God is the author of it, and gives it to his people.

Thirdly, those that may expect it and have the promise of it, are his people.

But I will contract and bind up all the Doctrinal part in this one bundle, as
the Spouse in the Canticles said of her Beloved, He was like a bundle of
Mirrhe, he should lodge between her breasts:

So I shall lodge that bundle in your breasts, desiring the aromatic savor of
it may as a bundle of the choycest flowers, or a most delightful pomander, be
always fragrant and redolent in the nostrils of your hearts, and that is this,

Peace is a blessing, a rare and precious favor and mercy of God unto his
people, Esaias 54.13. Esaias 66.12. and in infinite places of the Scripture.

There is a threefold peace, Externa, Interna, Aeterna; Temporal, Spiritual,
Celestial Peace; there is outward peace, the Blessing: inward peace, the
Grace: and everlasting peace of Glory.

And as in a stately Palace there is a lodge or court that leads into the
inmost goodly rooms, so external Peace is the entrance or introduction to the
inward lodgings of the sweet Peace of conscience, and of that eternal rest in
which our peace in Heaven shall be happy, inasmuch as external peace affords
us many accommodations and helps to the gaining and obtaining both of the one
and other.

Now this External Peace I shall discourse of only at this time. The outward
Peace in this world, which falls under a double notion, according to a double
state of men in the world.

First, there is a Civil Peace, in regard of the civil state of men, as they
be men only, and are knit together in civil society in one Kingdom or
Commonwealth, under one King, Governor or government, and bound in the bond
of the same Laws, the sinews of their Peace and welfare.

Secondly, there is an Ecclesiastical Peace, as men fall under the notion of
Christian men, and are knit together in an Ecclesiastical state, and in the
bond of Religion, and the same profession of Faith and manner of Worship in one
body or Church, whereof Christ is the head, and the Magistrate his vicegerent,
and the Scriptures the sinews of their peace, by precept for things necessary,
by permission for things of decency not commanded or determined in Scripture,
but left to the discretion of the Magistrate, whose Laws in these things are
the Bonds of outward peace.

But of this Ecclesiastical Peace, although I have had many thoughts, at this
time I will make no words: the many things I have to speak concerning the
peace of the common wealth so overcumbring me, that time will be too niggardly
and close-handed to me for the other purpose, inopem me copia fecit.

I shall therefore at this time only discourse of civil peace of men, as men
living together in one Commonwealth under one King and governor, bound up in
the same Laws, the bonds and sinews of peace.

To this peace are opposite all civil dissentions and contentions in the
outward state of things, which usually break forth into, and end in the
troubles and confusions of war, the greatest and extremest opposite of peace.

The excellency of this civil peace the Psalmist sets forth excellently in two
words, Psalm. 133. 1. How good and pleasant a thing it is brethren to dwell
together in Unity, that is, in Peace!

Quam bonum, says he, and quam jucundum, how good and pleasant!

Some things are good, but they are not pleasant, as the afflictions of this
life laid on us by God, by way of chastisement and correction, which though
they prove profitable being sanctified to men by God, and bring forth in the
end the peaceable fruit of righteousness to them that be exercised therein; yet
for the present they are not joyous but grievous, Heb. 12.11.

Some things are pleasant but they are not good, as the delights and
contentments of our sensual appetite, so far as it is carried after the loose
and licencious swinge of our corrupted and depraved nature: for though
Epicurus, and Aristippus may place their felicity in the pleasure of the sense,
and although God has given us many things contentive thereunto, yet unless
the delights thereof be regulated, and the contentments thereof moderated, and
the raynes of our licencious appetite restrained, though there be pleasure in
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, yet there is no goodness therein; nor
differs a reasonable man any thing therein from the brute beast that perishes:
which made the Poet say

Compedibus ventrem, vinclis constringe lienem: and the Apostle, Romans 13.14.
Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Some things are neither good nor pleasant, as envy, hatred, malice, the maine
virtues and ingredients at this time of some men's zeal that would be thought
religious.

Some things are both good and pleasant, as all kind of virtue, honesty,
charity, mercy, and of this nature is peace: which made Henry the second of
that name King of England, though he were a valiant and courageous Prince, and
always fortunate and successful in his wars, yet to prefer peace before
war, because he found it more full of pleasure and of profit, than the Wars.

The excellency of civil peace I shall endeavor to set before you in two
things.

First, in the many commodities it brings with it, for it never comes alone,
but as that stately Queen of Carthage came forth to entertain her Trojan
Guest Aeneas, -- Magna stipante caterva, A numerous company of glistering
Courtiers waiting on her: so peace is always accompanied and attended by a
goodly train of blessings, and as Juno's Deiopeia, if thou enjoy her she will
fill thee with many other blessings and contentments, as an offspring begotten
on her; pulchra faciet te prole parentem.

In peace husbandry flourishes, for the comfortable provision of things
needful for humane life, Pax Cererem nutrit, pacis alumna Ceres, Says Ovid:
and another Poet, -- Pax arva colit, pax candida primum
Duxit aratores sub juga curva boves,
Peace nourishes Ceres, whom the Heathens honored as a Goddess, because she
first devised the sowing of corn; and Ceres is the daughter of Peace, in which
the plowing Oxen were first taught to submit their necks unto the crooked
yoke; in which respect although the peace of the sovereignty and rule of Christ
be inward and spiritual in the heart and conscience, yet it was prophesied by
Micah 4.3.4. that when he should judge among the people, i. e. reign and rule
by the Gospel, he should rebuke strong Nations a far off, and they shall
break their swords into Plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hookes:
Nation shall not rise up against Nation, neither shall they learn war any
more, but they shall sit every man under his vine, and every man under his
fig tree, and Esaias 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. 9. They
shall not hurt or destroy in all mine holy mountain, for the Earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord; For Christ's Kingdom is a Kingdom of peace,
and his Gospel and Scepter a Gospel and Scepter of peace.

Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. In time of peace all Trades, and Arts, and
honest Occupations are exercised without molestation, whereby men are increased
into abundance, possessing the same with content and comfort, concordia res
parvae crescunt, by peace small things become great, men's pence are increased
into shillings, and shillings into pounds, and he that came naked into the
world and a poor lad to London, by his trade in times of peace multiplies his
few pounds into hundreds, and his hundreds into thousands.

In peace we enjoy our own propriety without violent sharers with us, and can
call that we have our own, eating our grapes under our own vines, and our figs
under our own fig trees, giving good education to our children, sending them
forth in the dance, and breeding them up to the similitude of the polished
corners of a Palace, when there is no going out nor coming in, Psalm. 144.

In peace we enjoy such honor as is conferred on us for wealth or merit, by
God and by the King, whereby the Noble are held in due esteem and
distinguished from the base.

In peace as wholesome Laws are inacted, so are they put in execution, and
maintained in their strength and vigor, and civil Magistrates that bear the
sword, bear it not in vain, but as God has stamped upon them his image, so
are they obeyed, and had in honor according to his will.

In peace Learning flourishes, the Universities and Schools of the Prophets
are erected, augmented, frequented, maintained, cherished and honored to the
advancing of good literature, (not the smallest honor of a Nation) in which
respect the Ancients Hieroglyphically represented peace and learning by the
Gown, Pier. Hierog.
as they did war by the soldiers cassock, and gave this sentence for the
excellency of the one above the other, cedant arma togae, let arms give place
to Arts, and war to peace.

In peace the houses of God are open in season and out of season, that the
Tribes may quietly and safely go up thither to worship, even the Tribes of the
Lord, and men may tread the ways of Sion, and frequent her solemn feasts, to
be fed with the fatness of Gods house, and the plenty of his dwelling place,
and may attend the means of their salvation in the ways that lead to grace
and glory.

And in one word, all worldly desirable blessings are in this one blessing,
peace, and do acccompany and attend upon her; which made the Psalmist say,
Psalm. 133.3. where men do dwell together in unity, there the Lord has
appointed blessing and life for evermore.

Secondly, the excellency of peace will appear by the vileness and deformity
of war, which is her contrary, contraria juxta se posita, etc. contraries set
one by the other are the more clearly discerned.

What mischief does not accompany war? for it never comes alone, but is
attended upon by all the imaginable evils that be in the world, which like
those Eumenides, the hags and furies of Hell do agitate and (...) men to their
destruction, as the horse fly does the cattle, when the Dog-starre reigns in
Summer.

War is a thing of mighty hazard to all kinds of persons, and things that be
in the world, the issues, and changes, and chances of it are most uncertain,
therefore the anci^n^ Romans (that knew as much of the slippery tricks of
war as ever any people under heaven) called the event of it, alea Martis,
because when the battle is joined, the issue of it is as uncertain, as when
the Die is thrown what chance shall turn upward.

Which made the King of Israel check the insolent boasting of proud Benhadad
with this speech, let not him that puts on his Armor boast as he that puts
it off, 1 King. 20.11. The horse is prepared for the battle, but safety is of
the Lord, says the Wise man Solomon, Prove. 21.31.

In war there is hazard of all particular persons, be they who they will be,
the sword neither regarding the honorable nor the base, the learned nor
unlearned, the wealthy nor the poor, the wise man nor the Ideor, the innocent
nor the wicked; there is no respect of persons, but it kills one as well as
another, as David said in his letter to Joab upon the slaughtor of Uriah, 2 Samuel 11.25.

We read, 1 King 22.34. when Ahab warred at Ramoth Cilead, a certain man
drew a bow at adventure and smo^e the King of Israel between the joints of his
brigandine, being in his Chariot: here is every thing emphaticall to set forth
the miserable chance of war: first, a certain man, an obscure fellow, God
knows who, not worth the naming, drew a bow at adventure, light where it will
light, he shootes at random and aims at no man, but smites the King of
Israel, the basest coward or villain peradventure in the Army of the Syrians
smites the noblest on the adverse party; a bow-man hits the King in his
Chariot, and between the joints of his brigandine, the only place to wound
him, had he been near and searched at leisure for a place to pierce him.

Here therefore in war the Lords anointed, that is better than ten thousands,
may fall as soon as the basest and most useless creature, to the great hazard
of a state, and to the great sin of those that shall expose his Royal Person
to that danger: which made the loyal people of David to say, when Ishabenob
the Giant, in a battle wherein David was weak, had like to have slain David,
but that some of his Worthies rescued him from that danger, thou shall no more
go forth with us to battle, lest thou quench the light of Israel, 2 Samuel
21.17. for thou art better than ten thousands of us, 2 Samuel 18.3. nay not only
the people of David, but the Prophet of the Lord. Lam. 4.20. speaking of a
King, and none of the best neither, among other things he laments, makes this
one maine part of his sorrow and mourning, the breath of our nostrills the
Lords anointed, under whose shadow we had rest, was taken in their pit, that
is, by the hands of the Babylonians in their war against Jerusalem.

Mark here the phrases concerning the King, better than ten thousands of us,
the light of Israel, in the mouths of loyal people set forth in the Scripture
for their commendation, and our imitation; the breath of our nostrills, under
whose shadow we had rest, so is the language of the Prophet inspired by the
Spirit of God, though men have mouths at present, that like black mouthed
Cerberus, breathe and bark from Hell another language.

In war is hazard of whole Armies, and of Kingdoms that depend upon their
Armies success. Victory bestows not her selfalwayes to one side and party;
The battle is not always to the most righteous, it is not always to the
strongest, Eccle. 9.11. But as Noah's dove lay hovering over the waters, not
knowing where to rest her foot, so when a battle is joined, victory hovers
sometimes long, inclining one while to the one, another to the other,
uncertain where to light, and settles sometimes on the one, sometimes on the
others sword.

A gag that by his conquering sword had made many women childlesse, was taken
prisoner at the last by Saul, and hewn in pieces by the sword of Samuel, and
his mother made childlesse among women, 1 Samuel 15.33. A doni-bezeck that had
overcome threescore and ten Kings, and cut off their thumbs from their hands
and feet, and made them eat bread like dogs under his table, was taken captive
himself by the tribe of Judah, and retaliated by them, Judge. 1.7.

The five Kings that warred against the King of Sodom and his confederates,
discomfited them and carried away the spoil of Sodom and Lot Abraham's Nephew
also, but Abraham arming three hundred and eighteen of his household servants,
pursued these five Kings, and overthrew them in battle, and recovered Lot,
with all the spoil they had carried away as a booty, Genesis 14.11.15.

The Amalekites invaded Ziklag, spoiled the City, and carried away David's
Wives and all the substance of his people; but David and his people pursuing
them, defeated them, and recovered back all they had carried away from Ziklag,
1 Samuel 30.1.17.

In the wars between France and England upon our pretensions to that Crown,
wonderful were the different chances of war, the one sometimes gaining on
the other glorious victories, and put at other times to shameful flight and
loss: that noble and victorious Prince Henry the fifth so put that Kingdom to
distress by his victorious conquests, and forced the King to such extre^ity,
that marrying his daughter, besides those provinces that he enjoyed in present
possession, it as agreed upon, that after the French Kings death, he should
inherit the Crown of France, by Oath of all the Nobles and chief Cities of
the Kingdom, and so it was proclaimed in England and in France

But Henry the sixth his son lost all his Father had obtained; which Henry the
Father, by what spirit I know not did fore-prophesie; for when news was
brought him of the birth of his son Henry borne at Windsor, he presently
said, I Henry borne at Mounmouth shall reign a short time and gain much; but
Henry horn at Windsor shall reign long and lose all, which fell out very true
by the differing chance of war.

Henry the third in the Barons wars, at the battle of Lewis in Sussex was
overthrown by them: but in the battle of Eversham in Worcestershire be
defeated his Barons, because the Conqueror, and rid his neck from the yoke of
the twelve Peers, that had been put upon him, and had a long time been
grievous to him.

Thus in the long and tedious wars between the two houses of York and
Lancaster, the differing changes of the war were many; sometimes one, sometimes
the other faction prevailing in the field; and sometimes one, sometimes the
other wearing the Imperial Crown, till all on either side were as weary of
the war, as many wanton men are now of peace.

All the great Monarchies of the world, as they rose, so they fell and were
ruined by war; as the Prophet, Iere. 50.23. instanceth in that great one,
Babylon, saying, how is the hammer of the whole earth out asunder and brohen?
how is Babylon become a desolation among the Nations? In war sometime where
strength, and policy, and shill, and courage, and all things needful for the
war concur, yet these prevail not, but the weakest, the unskilfulest, the
femest and most unfurnished of military accommodations go away with the
victory; and sometimes might overcomes right, and the most wicked win the
field, when God will chasten a people (for other sins) that have a righteous
cause.

There is no greater evil and affliction in the world than War, for it is
attended upon by all the evils of punishment that God inflicts upon men for
their iniquities. And therefore in Scripture, when God is so offended that he
purposes the utter mine and desolation of a family, City or Nation, this is
the judgment that he sets on foot to that purpose.

By the Wars of the Philistims upon Saul, he put an end to Saul's life and
Kingdom.

By the Wars of Jehu upon Ahab, he swept away the house of Ahab as dung from
the face of the earth.

By the Wars of the Syrians upon Samaria, that City was brought to that
calamity, that women did eat their children by course, to satisfy their hungry
souls, and fed and sustained their dying lives with the dung of Doves, a thing
that nature loathes.

By the Wars of Nabuchadnezzar upon Jerusalem, that City was brought to that
extremity, that the beautiful women (the sole of whose foot might not touch
the earth) such was their nicety and tenderness, did make their own Bowels the
sepulcher, for their children of a span long, the fruits of their own bodies.

And when it had been reedified by Zerobabel and the rest of the reduct of the
captivity, by the wars of the Romans, under the conduct of Titus and Vespasian,
it was brought unto as great misery, and after taken and rased to the ground,
and the people sold by the poll for slaves, and to this day remain miserably
dispersed upon the face of the earth.

Troy, the most famous City of the World, the subject of the song of Homer, the
oldest writer in the world, except Moses that wrote 500 years before him, by
the wars of the Greeks was ruined and turned into a tilled field, Jamseges est
ubi Troja fait. -- And now corn grows where Troy Town stood.

The Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Hiuites and Peresites, the
Gigasites, great and mighty Nations, who had walled Cities, and Chariots of
Iron, and the sons of Anack, mighty men among them, were spewed out of their
land by the war of the Israelites upon them, Josh. 12.

War brings the Screech Owl and the Dragon into the most beautiful and goodly
Palaces, laying them as desolate wildernesses, full of briars and thorns, and
makes them habitations for Satyrs, the wild beasts of the Islands and other
the most doleful creatures, Esaias 13.21.

Yea, when war enters into the Congregation of God, the very Temples of God are
broken down with axes and hammers, Psa. 74.4. Even that very Temple that was
the beauty and glory of the world, was burned by Nabuchadnezzar with fire, 2
King. 25.9. which made the Prophet Esaias thus complain, Esaias 64.11. Our holy
and beautiful house, wherein our Fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire
and all our pleasant things laid wast. And the Daughters ran the same fortune
with their Mother, Psa. 74.7. They have cast fire into thy Sanctuary, and
defiled the dwelling place of thy Name to the ground, they have burnt up all
the Synagogues of God in the Land: Thus by War the holy Cities of Jury became a
wilderness, and Zion a desolation, Esaias 64.10.

And no marveile, for when great Armies are got on foot, wherein are men for
the greater part of them most impious and licentious in their violent lust,
what can be imagined, but outrage and villainy?

Here is nothing but robbery and spoil, all is fish that comes to net, per fas
per nefas, by hook or crook, all is one.

In war there is a continual squeezing of the Spungt that sucked up abundance
in the time of Peace, treasures are exhausted, plate^* turned into earthen
dishes, and people mightily inpoverished by the expensive oppression of war.

In War trading decays, lands lie untilled, and briars grow up instead of
corn, Merchandise by exportation and Importation cease, Cities are
unfrequented, like the ways in Juels time, and are made desolate and waste, Et
discordiares magnae dilabuntur, by war and discord great things are brought to
nothing.

In war Wives are made Widows, Children Fatherless, Parents childlesse,
Friends friendlesse, And in civil Wars, the most uncivil and barbarous of all
other, the father often fights against the son, and the son against the father,
and a man's enemies are those of his own house and blood, so that one brother
becomes the butcher of another, and the slaughters are most unkindly and
unnatural, all bonds of affinity, consanguinity and humanity being violently
broken and cut asunder: as in those civil wars between the houses of Saul and
David, betwixt Israel and Judah, betwixt York and Lancaster, in which the
brother has sought against the brother, and the Kings own friends have been
forced into the field against him, and have died in that fight, in which they
have been but faint enemies to him, and to which they were altogether unwilling.

In these uncivil civil Wars, most woeful are the desolations, none being
more destructive and pernicious enemies than enraged friends, countrymen,
kindred.

For when love is turned into hatred, that hatred is most deadly: Corruption
optimi pessima: as it is with any other thing, the better it was in its native,
Goodness, the worse it is in its Corruption.

I exemplify this in those bloody Wars between the two houses of York and
Lancaster, in which let that only reign of Edward the fourth be made our Map,
to descry the desolations of civil War: in which were fought nine civil
Battles in England; insomuch that in his time most of the flower of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, either died by the Sword valiantly fighting
in the field, or by the Axe of the Executioner, being taken prisoners for
partaking.

The Civil wars between Marius and Sylla bad almost unpeopled Rome, which made
Quintus Catulus, a noble Roman, cry out one day in the Senate, with whom shall
we live at last, Si in bello armatos, in Pace inermes occidimus, If in War we
slay the armed, and in Peace the unarmed?

In that Civil War mentioned, Judge. 21.2. Between the tribe of Judah and
Benjamin, when the fury was over, the conquering Tribe wept sore for the
destruction of Benjamin, whom they had slain down to the small number of 600
men that fled and hid themselves in the rock of Rimmon.

In War, what loss is there of Limbs, of Eyes, of Arms, of Legs? What living
sorrows of such as coming off maimed from the Battle do live in misery and
want for ever after? So that for all their Marks of Honor, the dead are
better than they.

And what dying groans, and moanes of men ready to gasp out their souls, to
whom all pity and compassion is prevented by Fifes, and Drums, and Trumpets,
which are used in War, not only to encourage the Soldier to make havocke of
mankind, but, as in the valley of Hinnom, that the parents might not hear the
screeking of their Infants sacrificed to Moloch, lest their ear should affect
their heart: So are these loud Instruments used in War, that men may not hear
the woeful complainings of their wounded friends, lest pity should enfeeble
that Hellish fury, they call courage and valor, in killing and destroying.

In War all privileges and immunities cease, for here is no Law, but power and
lust, no Justice, but spoil and rapine.

Men had led, says Seneca, a most quiet life, if they had taken away these two
words, Meum and tuum, out of the nature of things; which made Licurgus set up a
community in Lacedaemon, that his Citizens might have no contention for any
private interest: But in War these pronounes, meum and tuum, mine and thine,
are not known, but what the stronger can lay hold on, and carry away by might,
that is his own; and it is here according to that proverb, That that is thine,
is mine, and that that is mine, is mine own.

Here is no Charter nor Freedom of the City, here is no distinction between
the Magistrate and people, but Cade, and Straw, and Tyler will beard the King,
and give all Judgments out of their lawless lips, and the most noble here are
made a scorn unto the basest villain.

Here is no assurance of one penny to morrow, to him that this day is full and
has abundance. Jocus and l^^us sunt in militia, domos diripere, fana spoliare,
virgins rap^re, solida: urbes atque oppida incendere, Eras. in Adag.

In War the goodliest Cities are set on a Flaming fire, and laid in their dust
and rubbish.

Here the chaste Wife and Virgin are ravished before the face of the miserable
Husband and Parent, unable to relieve or rescue them from villainy.

Here the little Infants are tossed on the pikes, or taken by the heels, and
their brains dashed out against the stones, or slain in the arms, or on the
knees, or in the bosom of their dear mother that bare them, and ripped
sometimes out of their mothers belly.

In war there are a thousand indignities and barbarous cruelties, and nothing
to be heard or seen, but weeping, and wayling, and wringing of hands, nothing
but mourning, and lamentation and woe, heu miseri qui bella gerunt.

Indeed War is the last and soarest of all Gods Judgments, sent out among men
for their sins; the famine and pestilence not to be compared with it.

For men that be wolves and insatiable in their cruelties, yea devils one to
another, be the executioners of Gods sore vengeance brought on a people for
their transgressions, when famine, pestilence, and other more gentle
corrections have done no good upon them to reclaim them from their sins;
against which, if God being angry, but a little, shall put this rod into the
hands of men, they will help forward and increase the fury, Zecha. 1.15.

Nay more than this, in War the fury reaches out only to living men, but to
the reasonlesse creatures that are appointed for their comfort.

And more than that, to the very senseless creatures, the trees of fruit, the
Gardens and Orchards for delight, and fields of corn for the necessary
maintenance of humane life, are cut down to the ground, or burned up and
consumed, to the detriment of the posterity that are yet unborne: Et nulla
salus Bello.

When Craesus was overcome and taken prisoner by Cyrus, he preferred Peace
before War, by this Argument; that in time of Peace the sons did bury their
fathers dying before them, in the ordinary course of Nature; whereas in War the
fathers bury their children slain violently by the sword.

But in War sometimes both fathers and children are exposed naked above ground
to the shame of their nature, and contempt of their person, and to the violence
of wild beasts, wanting all decency of burial, Psa. 79.2. The dead bodies of
thy Saints have they given to be meat to the fowls of the heavens, and the
flesh of thy servants to the beasts of the earth; their blond have they shed
like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them.

And more than that, they are sometime dug and dragged out of their graves,
in which they were formerly laid at rest, and abused with contempt and
villainy, Amos 2.1. This was one great sin, for which God would not turn away
the punishment of the King of Moab, because he burnt the bones of the King of
Edom into lime, that is, dug them up out of the grave, when he had lain so
long, that his flesh was consumed, and burned his bones to ashes.

The Duke of Bedford the Regent of France, that was victorious in Normandy in
War, and governed it with renowned Justice in Peace, dying in that Province,
was buried under a stately Monument in Rean, but when by change and chance of
War, all Normandy became French, and cast off the English yoke, the people
would have pulled down his Monument, and have taken up his carcass, and thrown
it into the open field, but that the humanity of the French King would not
permit that barbarous outrage to his honorable enemy.

This mischievous indignity to humane nature was the reason why the Romans in
their funerals burnt their dead to ashes, and put their ashes in an Vrne, or
earthen Pitcher, that if their enemies should at any time sack and take their
City, the bodies of their deceased Citizens might not be dug out of their
graves, and thus inhumanely abused.

If I could reckon up all the mischiefs that ever were of shall be among men
in the world, they might all sufficiently be expressed in this one word, War,
Si bellum dixeris, omnia dixeris. And therefore the contrary blessing, Pence,
cannot but be acknowledged a rare and special favor, and a blessing of God to
his people, who will bless his people with Peace.

From all that has been said by way of Explication, I draw these useful
directions by way of Application.

First, when we do see this blessing of Peace withheld, or shaken and
threatened, we should be persuaded to renew our Covenants of Peace with God, and
enter into a consideration of our sins, by which we have provoked him to anger,
that we may be humbled for them and reform them: For be we well assured, when
we behold the Lord gathering his forces together, and preparing to battle
against us, we have broken our conventions, and the Articles and Covenants of
Peace that we have made with him; For because they have cast away the Law of
the Lord, and despised the holy one of Israel, therefore is his anger kindled,
and his hand stretched out against his people, Esaias 5.25. and thus he
threatens them; If ye will walk contrary to me, I will walk contrary to you,
and I will bring a sword that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant, Lev.
26.24, 25. And therefore let us enter into consideration, how unworthy of, and
unanswerable to the Covenant of the Gospel our Nation has behaved it self,
for whereas we should have adorned the Doctrine of God our Savior, by
holiness and righteousness, as it does teach us, Tit. 2.11. On the contrary,
we have lived in all impiety and unrighteousness, being full of envy, hatred,
malice, fraud, deceit, hypocrisy, by lying, and killing, and stealing, and
whoring, and swearing, we break forth; for which God has a controversy with
the Land, Hos. 4.1. And seems now to say, awake thou sword of the Lord, and
take vengeance on the breaches of my Covenant of Peace. Now therefore upon the
alarm given to us by God, we should be careful and studious to renew our
Covenants of Peace with him, as one advised, Job 23.21. Acquaint thy self with
him, and be at peace, by Repentance and Faith in Jesus Christ the Mediator of
Peace, entering anew into Terms and Articles of amity with God; and as the men
of Tire and Sydon, when Herod was fallen out with them, procured Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain to bring them into favor, Acts 12.20. So should we, by
renewing our Faith in Christ that sits at Gods right hand, advance our
pacification with God.

Secondly, now we see the confusions of War a brewing, and the sto^me begin to
arise, because we do not know but the date of the Peace of the Nation may be
out, and the time come to us to drink the heavy and bitter Cup of trembling,
that has been put into the hand of all the Nations round about us, and have
small cause to think we shall go free, our care should be to provide against
the mischief of War, which can reach to the great damage of the soul that
has not made its Peace with God in Christ; Therefore we should be persuaded
very studiously to provide for the safety and security of our souls, laying
them up by Faith in Christ in the hands of God, as in the hand of a faithful
Creator, and a reconciled God in him, that if we fall in the common calamity
and destructions of the sword, and be deprived of that outward Peace which is
in the World, yet keeping Faith and a good Conscience, the sword shall but let
our souls out of the body, as out of a prison, to enjoy eternal Peace and
rest in Heaven, the consummation of the blessed quiet begun in Peace of
Conscience in this Life; and we shall by death be delivered from all the evils
that shall come upon the World, Esaias 57.2. For the righteous is but taken from
evils here below, and Peace does come to them in death, and the grave is but a
bed of rest to them; and that fulfilled that our Savior spoke, Ioh. 16.33. In
the world ye shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have Peace, the way
whereunto is Faith and a good Conscience, Uprightness and Integrity of heart,
for the end of the upright and perfect man is Peace, Ps. 37.37. therefore says
the Psalmist, Keep innocence, and do the thing that is right, for that will
give a man peace at the last; and though the Heavens fall, the ruins thereof
shall not make him afraid, his heart being supported by a better hope and
expectation than the best things in the World can afford unto him, having laid
his soul up in the safest hand.

Thirdly, seeing War is so full of mischief, and such a destroyer of all the
blessings of Peace, make it your daily request to God, that he would be pleased
to deliver us from it, to keep it from entering in among us, and to scatter that
cloud that hangs over our heads and threatens us. I heard a Preacher once in
the pulpit exhort men to pray against the compounding our distractions that be
broken forth upon us, as a thing that would undo us, And he said, Though War
were a sad way, yet it was the safest way. Dulce bellum inexpertis. Surely
David a valiant warrior, and learned in the miseries of it, by long trial and
experience, when God (purposing to chasten his pride in the multitude of his
people by cutting short the numbers of them) put him by Gad to the choice of
pestilence, famine or war; David that knew full well the calamities that
accompany this judgment, utterly declined it, leaving himself to God to send
which of the other two it was his pleasure, 2 Samuel 24.14. Let me fall into the
bands of God, says he, for his mercy is great, and not into the hands of man
(for we may thus supply it) with man in war there is no mercy: from whose
example let us learn to pray which way soever he pleases to chasten us for
our sins, yet to preserve us from this dreadful mischief and calamity of
war, if he have any pleasure in us.

Fourthly, we should be excited to great thankfulness for our blessed peace
that has been so long continued among us, and for all those blessings that
have accompanied it unto our comfort, God having made us all our days to dwell
in the multitude of peace, under nourcing Fathers and Mothers, Princes that
have delighted in, and under God procured and maintained us in peace, whereby
we have been increased into all affluence and abundance of people, riches, and
all kind of things needful and convenient for this natural life, in learning
and knowledge, and all helps to further the health and happiness of our
souls, if now we do not ruin (propria mole) by our own abundance; And as
fat cattle that came lean and scragged into a rich pasture, being grown
wanton with their fullness of feed, turn the heels on the pasture that has
fed them, leaping over the hedge, through desire of change, and to run at
random in the vast Common, where their pasture is too short to fill their
bellies, and the briars and thorns do plentifully tear and rend their smooth
and sleeke backs, and send them home with desire to the place from which they
brake in wantonness, where they stand as it were bemoaning their folly, but
unable to get into the place which they wantonly forsook, till helped in by
their Master.

Fifthly, it should beget in every one of us an averse disposition to war, and
an inward dislike and loathing of it, and should frame in us delights and
desires of this great blessing of peace, with all answearable endeavors as
much as in us lies to advance and preserve it among us: to be in our selves of
a peaceable disposition, to love and live in peace, it is a fruit of true
Religion and an argument thereof, James 3.17. The wisdom that is from above
is peaceable, full of mercy, gentle and easy to be entreated, it is not full
of malice, and hatred and fury, like them that breath nothing but swords and
pistolls, and speak nothing but halters and axes, and persuade nothing but
war and fighting up to the knees in blood, uttering nothing but threatenings,
and ruin, and confusion to all that differ from them in the least syllable of
opinion; surely if any man seem to be religious and refraineth not his tongue
his Religion, that is, his profession of religion is in vain, Jam: 1.26. and
therefore let your speeches breath peace out of a peaceable heart, desire,
labor for and study peace, and as a thing helpful thereunto, follow your own
plough, and meddle not in things that belong not to your calling: study to be
quiet, says the Apostle, and as a thing helpful thereunto he adds, meddle
with your own business. 1. These. 4.11.

There be men that have an Oar in every man's boat, matters of State, and the
Ministry, and Government, and Reformation is his business that never yet
reformed his heart or life; they will not allow a Bishop in his own Diocese
and yet will be (...) Bishops in every man's Diocese, from whence grows
strife, and contentions, and great and hateful thoughts of heart that prepare
men unto civil war, and withal if that evil come upon us, to increase the
mischiefs of the judgment, and to make it the more bitter and destructive.

Sixthly and lastly, pray for the continuance of our peace so long continued to
the happiness of our Nation, but now grievously shaken and threatened, pray
that it may be dear and precious in Gods eyes, and that which he denounced
against his people never befall us, Jer. 16.5. I have taken away my peace from
this people. It has been a great blessing hitherto, that in our time there
has been no going out, nor coming in, nor complaining in our streets, through
foreign or domestical war, happy are the people that be in such a case,
Psalm. 144.15.

It was the happiness of Solomon's time, 1 Chro. 22.9. That he was a man of
peace, and God did give him rest from all his enemies round about, and
therefore he called his name Solomon, that signifies peaceable, for I will
give peace and rest in his days, says God to David. It was a great blessing
upon Jehoshaphat and his Kingdom, that the fear of God fell upon all the
Kingdoms that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against
Iehosh^phat. 2. Chro. 17.10. And our duty is to be thankful that it has been
so with us of a long time, and to pray that this our happy peace may be
continued, and seeing we have no coming in by invasion, that there may be no
crying in our streets by the miseries of civil war in the bowels of our
Nation through the distempers of any ill affected persons that do desire or
delight in such a war.

For did we know so much of civil war as a few months have discovered to
them in Ireland, we would think our selves an happy people, and a little of
their vinegar would cure the itch of their fingers that would feign be fighting.

There be some unquiet spirits always among men, of whom it may be spoken that
Agamemnon said of Achilles, (...) Strifes, and wars, and fightings are
always pleasant to thee.

Angry natures, iracundia lites concitat, concordiam dissipat, anger stirs up
strife, and scatters peace.

There are a people it seems weary of peace, and desirous of war in the
bowels of the Nation, not considering that such a war is with their own
brethren and Country men in the flesh, and will be most fatal to the whole
Nation, and begin when it will begin, it will be bitterness in the latter end,
as Abner said to Ioab: and come it when it will come, it will bring repentance
enough with it when it is too late, both to the vanquished, and to the victor.

Benhadad despising terms of peace, and wilfully and proudly making war upon
the King of Israel, was taught repentance by an utter discomfiture of his
numerous forces wherein he trusted and whereof so much he boasted, 1 Kings
20.20. and was forced when he was half drunken to fly for his life, and after
basely to send his Courtiers with ropes about their necks, to say to the King
of Israel whom he so much despised and provoked to battle, Thy brother
Benhadad says, I pray thee let me live; Indeed the proudest and most
quarrelling Spirits in prosperity are usually the basest, and most ignoble in
adversity.

The Trojans after the many fearful miseries and dreadful calamities of ten
years wars of the Grecians upon them, provoked by the rape of Helena whom
Paris had stolen out of Greece from Menelaus her husband, began to think of
sending Helena home, which had they done at first as they were bound in
justice, and not perversely gone about to maintain that wicked act with war,
they had escaped the misery they suffered, and the ruin of their City: whose
late repentance came into a proverb, Sero sapiunt Phryges, the Trojans are wise
when it is too late, which will be fit to all that stubbornly betake themselves
to war.

But of all wars the civil war is most unkindly and disconsolate, though
too too many wretched spirits wish it were a foot: and whereas all good men
would sacrifice themselves for the peace and safety of their Country, these
would feign be fishing in troubled waters, and therefore trouble the waters
that they might be fishing.

Otho the Emperor being but three and thirty years of age, seeing he must
either lay down his Empire, or maintain it with the slaughter of his
Citizens, and being exhorted by his soldiers not to despair of the success
of that war, made them this answer, sibi suam vitam tanti non esse, ut hac de
causa bellum civil nasceretur, my life is not so dear to me, that for it a
civil war should be raised in my Country.

But many are of such pestilent and destructive spirits, so malignant and ill
affected to the public, and so full of love unto their own particular, that
they wish a civil war, some for spoil and booty, and some to enjoy their
licencious liberty, and some to advance only their peevish humor, and to
maintain or set up things that cannot in all eternity recompense the slaughter
of one battle.

Macedonius the Heremite hearing Theedosius the Emperor had determinined to
make war upon the Antiochians, Theod. l. 5.20.
and to destroy them by the sword, because they in a discontented tumult
occasioned by the imposition of an extraordinary tribute, had broken down a
brazen image of Placilla the Queen, reproved the Emperor by a message, and
charged him to desist from his intended enterprise, and to consider that he
was but a man, and depended upon the will of God, and not to destroy the Image
of God by war for a brazen Image, seeing many other brazen Images might be
made, at ne pilum quidem Jmperator interfecto homine restituere posset, but a
hair of a man slain could not be repaired by the Emperor, and the Emperor
obeyed the Eremite and forgave the Antiochians.

The cause of war had need be very great and urgent, and the benefits of it
apparent, for the destructions of it are of things inestimable: and therefore
peace has always been and is a blessed thing, and an esteemed Jewel, and
war most wretched and abhorred of every man, unless of such as be crazed in
their breins or fortunes, that haveeaten hemlock and are fitter for the dark
and close lodgings of Bedlem, than to see the light and open air, and live in
humane society to which they are infestive that desire or delight in war.

When a Pyrate was brought before Alexander, and accused for robbing on the
Sea, Alexander asked him why he infested men upon the Sea? to whom the Pyrate
boldly gave this answer, Why do thou infest them on the Land? but because I
do that I do parvulo navigio in a small bottom, therefore I am called a
theife, and because thou do that thou do magno exercitu with a great
Army, therefore thou art called an Emperor. Certainly they were both of them
mischeifes to mankind by the bad effects of violence, and of the sword, which
are the loss of goods, Estates, Liberties, Lands, and all other comfortable
things that wait on peace.

For in peace there is freedom from all those sad and black calamities, which
the dismal clowd of war rains down among the sons of men to their
destruction. They are therefore like Alexander and his Pyrate, the very pests
among men that do delight in war, and do desire to break off and chase
away the great blessing of peace.

For in peace men enjoy themselves and the fruit of their labors, trade in the
City, husbandry in the Country, pleasure in their recreations, traffic with
strangers, the Gospel preached, Gods Ordinances duly administered, his Sabboths
comfortably observed, communion with their friends and kindred, education of
their children, and plenty of all blessings that be dear unto the living, and
decent and comely burial of the dead, all which they are deprived of by war,
as they be blessed with them by peace.

Peace, why it is the desire of Angels for us, Luke 2.10. Glory be to God on
high and on earth peace, was the song of the heavenly quire that celebrated the
birth of Christ the King of peace.

Peace, why it is a blessing promised to the Church in all the ages of the
world upon their obedience to God, Levit. 26.6. If ye walk in my Statutes and
keep my Commandments, I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down,
and none shall make you afraid, neither shall the sword go through your land.

Peace, why it is the request of the Prophet, and that he stirs us up to pray
for, Psalm 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love
thee, peace be within thy walls and plenty within thy Palaces, for my brethren
and companions sake I will now say, peace be within thee, because of the house
of the Lord our God, I will wish thee good. First, here is prosperity to them
that love the peace of Jerusalem; Secondly, here is peace first, and then
plenty after; Thirdly, here is peace prayed for for humanities sake: and
fourthly, for Religion and the Churches sake.

And the taking away of peace is reckoned in Scripture a grievous judgment,
and so threatened, Ier. 16.5. Thus says the Lord (to the Prophet) enter not
into the house of mourning, neither go to lament or bemoan them, for I have
taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord, even loving kindness and
mercy: for if peace be gone, farewell all other blessings of the Lord, and
therefore threatening the captivity, he thus expresses it, ^er. 30.5. we have
heard a voice of trembling, of fear and not of peace, for the voice of peace
is sweet, as the voice of war is dreadful.

And this judgment God seems now to threaten us withal, our peace seems to
be shaken, crazed and almost broken in pieces, and war to be entered into
our gates, we hear the beating of the Drum, the clangor of the Trumpet, the
report of the Musket; and the horse prepared for the battle trots in our
streets, and his neighings are entered into our ears, and the destructions will
be of the same Countrymen, and of many of the same profession for the
substance of Religion, and of the subjects of the same King.

Oh, ye therefore that be the friends of peace, the servants of the God of
peace, the saved of the Prince of peace, and joined together in the same
covenant of peace, who have one God the Father of all, one Lord the Redeemer of
all, one faith, one baptism and one hope of Heaven, pray for peace: pray that
some Mediator may stand up in the gap to divert this threatened storm of
destruction: pray that that God, who when there was such a distance made
betwixt God and man by sin, that no creature in heaven or earth could
reconcile them, conceiving in the bowels of his mercy thoughts of peace toward
man, did send the Son of his love and delight in the flesh, to make peace, to
procure peace, to preach peace and purchase peace for us with our God, would
stir up in the hearts of Prince and Parliament the studious desire and
endeavor of pacification, that these water-breaches that be broken in upon us,
may not be given way unto, lest they prove an inundation and deluge of
destruction.

It would be a work of glory for every man in place fit to that purpose to
labor this way, and blessed should he be, blessed are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God, Mat. 5.9.

Titus Flaminius when he had composed the divisions and quieted the seditions
of Greece, Plut. Flam.
and settled the divided and distracted estate of the Country, triumphed for it
with as great joy as if he had conquered the Macedonians and all Greece.

So glorious would it be to be a worker in this work of pacification for any
man that has a calling giving him a capacity thereunto, that he should be
registered in the Chronicles of Fame to his immortal glory, wherein the
wilful raisers up of war shall bear eternally the black mark of Infamy.

And for us all of an inferior Orb and Sphaere, lets be excited to pray
labor, and study in our way for peace, not blowing the Trumpet nor stirring up
the coals and fire of war, by factious oppositions, by siding names and
Titles that tend only to sedition, and to soment and nourish hatred and
malice, there by to prepare us to the greater cruelty one against another, if
that judgment should be begun amongst us; let us avoyde lying and slandering,
especially blaspheming and standering the footsteps of the Lords anointed; let
not the voice of war be named by you, unless in detestation, si pacem
diligis belli mentionem ne feceris.

He was no fool but a wise Statesman that said, S^^t^. de Been.
iniquissimam pacem justissimo bello antefero. I prefer the most unjust peace
before the justest war, and omnis pax bello civils praestantior, Cicero.
any peace is better than a civil war. Most true it is that peace is better
with many disadvantages, than War with all the conditions that be desirable to
it.

Certainly therefore they be men of mad and disjoynted brains, and desperate
spirits, that are all for War, especially for a Civil Wary, in the bowels
of their own Country and Nation, Cicer. in Phil.
Of such a man says Cicero, Nec privatos Focos, nec publicas Leges, nec
Libertatis Jura chara habere potest, etc. He neither esteems men's private
interest, nor the public Laws, nor the rights of Liberty dear unto him, whom
discord, whom the slaughter of his Citizens, whom Civil War delights; and
I think him fit to be cast out of the number of men, and to be exterminated
the confines of humane Nature; and therefore whether it be Sylla or Marius, or
whosoever else that wishes for a Civil War, I judge him to be borne a
detestable Citizen to the Commonwealth.

Neither is any thing more horrible than such a Citizen, than such a man, if at
least he be to be esteemed a Citizen, or a man that desires a Civil War.

The Turks in detestation of the bloody contentious humor of Selimus their
Emperor, who was never quiet, never well, unless he were fighting, though it
were with his own father, made this a piece of his Epitaph, Licet ossa jacent,
animus tamen bella quaerit; Though his bones be at rest, his ghost is hunting
after war.

Oh, let us that be Christians then, the sons of peace, and called unto peace,
in and by the Gospel of Peace, abhor those bloody slaughters of mankind that
do accompany War.

Think often on the miseries that do wait on War, and go along inseparably
with it.

Set woeful Germany before your eyes, so wasted and consumed by war, that in
the Palatinate, the goodlyest and most fruitful Garden of that Country, men
have been found dead with grass in their mouths, which they have gathered and
gnawed up like beasts, to keep alive their starven souls, ready to dye of
hunger.

Set lamenting Ireland before your eyes, with all those villainies and outrages
committed on men, women, children, rich, poor, priest and people, without
respect of age, or sex, or calling.

Do we desire to be made desolate as they be?

Would we see our Towns and Cities on a flaming fire?

Would it be pleasing to us to behold our wives, the pleasure of our eyes
ravished before our faces?

Would it be a delight unto us to see our little Infants, that be so dear and
tender to us, that the wind may ^ot be suffered to blow on them, tossed on the
Pikes in sport, by the barbarous and remorselesse Soldier, or taken by the
heels, and their brains dashed out against ^he pavement?

Would we behold all we have labored for all our life ^ong, carried away in a
moment by a stranger; and all our pleasant places that be dear unto us, made a
desolate heap of rubbish; even our Churches, which our fathers with great and
expensive costs have builded, and our selves have at our own charges repaired
and beautified, that we may with the more lightsome comlines, and decent
delight assemble together in them to Gods service and the welfare of our souls,
and into which in some places already the Soldier is entered to be trained and
marshalled: Would we see them laid waste, or made shambles, or marketplaces,
or stables, or Pigion houses, the things that some desire and speak concerning
them already?

Or do we desire to enjoy Gods blessings, and our selves and wives and children
in honesty and in honor, our trades and riches in the City with safety, our
pleasure and possessions in the Country with comfort and contentment?

Oh then let us desire, and pray, and labor for the continuance of Peace,
(...), Oh fool, fool, all these desirable things are in this one thing, Peace.

And if notwithstanding all that has been said, or may be thought concerning
the blessing of Peace, and the mischief of War, we will yet desire to be
fighting; Remember that imprecation of the Prophet, Psalm. 68.30. Thou shall
scatter the people that delight in War. Consider neither side can be assured of
victory: nor can any man imagine the sad issues of a discomfiture to the
discomfited.

Let therefore (I beseech you) the ear that has heard these things, affect
the heart against that fearful judgment of War, and beget in us all a desire
and love of Peace, in which we may enjoy all desirable blessings, and the
blessed Gospel of Peace, to build us up in that Peace of God that passes all
understanding, and bring us after the troubles of this life to that rest and
Peace that shall be glorious and happy in Heaven for ever.

FINIS.

