A JUST CORRECTION and ENLARGEMENT OF A Scandalous Bill of the Mortality of the
Malignant Clergy of London, and other parts of the Kingdom, which have been
justly sequestered from their Pastorall-charges, and since that (some of them)
defunct, by reason of the contageous infection of the Prelaticall pride and
Malignancie of their own Spirits; Since the year 1641. to this present year
1647.

Together with the several pernicious Casualties of the same.

OR, A Succinct Traiterologie, in Answer to a lying Martyrologie, and Catalogue
of the graceless, and Godless, lazy Levites, and proud Prelaticall Priests
of the City of London, and beyond the Liberties thereof, who have been justly
imprisoned and deprived of their Estates (as they, heretofore, and their
tyrannical Masters, the Bishops, barbarously abused the truly pious and
painful Pastors of London, and other parts of the Kingdom, only, for
non-Subscription to their Popish Ceremonies;) for their malignancie against the
Parliament, and the True-reformed Religion and power of godliness now
endeavored throughout the Kingdom, and for other odious enormities against
God, and palpable disloyalties to their Native Country.

Serving for London, especially, and the Liberties thereof, with the
Out-Parishes; Together with most parts of the whole Kingdom, both City and
Country.

By J: V.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1647.

A Most just Correction and Enlargement of a most lying and scandalous Bill of
the Mortality of the Malignant Clergy of LONDON.
A.
THE Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, (whom the shameless and namelesse Author of
that scandalous Bill of Mortality, left out) a most abominable, and almost
incredible hypocrite in all his life, Dead with malignancie.
and especially at his death; most justly beheaded on the Tower Hill, for a
most notorious convicted Traitor, and principal incendiary to all the late
bloody broils over the whole Kingdom, and a most pernicious pest and plague
of Church and State.

Master Adams, of Bennets Pauls-wharfe London, sequestered for being a known
profane pot-companion, both day and night, and otherwise a loose-liver, a
temporizing Ceremony-monger, and malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Aims, of L^wis in Kent, sequestered for being a common drunkard, a common
swearer, and desperate Malignant against the Parliament.

Doctor Andrews, Parson of Guilford, and Vicar of Godlamine, sequestered for
being a pluralist, a hater of frequent preaching, a notorious Ceremony-monger,
a familiar tipler in Tavernes, and a desperate Malignant.

Mr. Alston, Parson of Pentloe in Essex, sequestered for being a most odiously
lascivious and lustful Priest, a notorious innovator of popish-ceremonies, and
a desperate Malignant against the Parliament.

Doctor Anherst, of Horsmauden in Kent, sequestered for being a notorious popish
innovator of Ceremonies, a common drunkard and swearer, and a desperate
Malignant.

Mr. Alsope, of Acton in Suffolk, sequestered for being a most incontinent
assaulter of the chastity of married wives, and actually committer of
fornication with a Maidservant, and a most desperate Malignant.

Mr. Allen of Tolsbury in Essex, sequestered for living most incontinently with
several women, whom he got with child, for being a most lazy Priest, by
seldom preaching, and a desperate malignant.

B.
MR. Brown, of Bridewell-Precinct, London, sequestered for being a notable
innovator of popish ceremonies, and a desperate Malignant against the
Parliament.

Mr. Booth of Buttolphs Aldersgate, London, sequestered for being a most lazy
Levite, a Ceremony-monger, an enemy to Gods people, and a desperate Malignant.

Dead with ma^^^nancie.
Dr. Bray, of Martins in the Fields, London, sequestered for being a most
notorious innovator of popish Ceremonies, a hater of Gods people, and a most
desperate Malignant against the Parliament.

Dr. Belcanquell, Master of the Savoy, London, sequestered for being a notorious
innovator, a mischievous enemy to the amity of Scotland and England, and a
desperate Malignant.

Dr. Baker of Mary-hill, London, etc. sequestered for being a most proud
pluralist, a notorious innovator of popish ceremonies, a singular friend to
Papists, but persecutor of godly men, under his dearly beloved Master the
Arch-prelate of Canterbury, and a most desperate Malignant.

Dead with malignancie.
Dr. Brough, of Michaels Cornhill, London, sequestered for being such another
notorious popish innovator, as his foresaid brother in iniquity, and a most
desperate Malignant.

Dead with malignancie.
Dr. Brown of Faiths in London, sequestered for being just such another notorious
popish ceremony monger as his two foresaid brethren, and a most desperate
Malignant.

Dead with malignancie.
Mr. Battie of Fosters in London, sequestered for being a perverse enemy to
frequent Preaching, a ceremony-monger, and obstinate Malignant.

Mr. Bloxam, of Great-Waldingham, in Suff. sequestered for being a common
drunkard, a desperate common swearer by fearful oaths, a most lazy priest,
and pestilent Malig.

Mr. Baiky, of Brasteed in Kent, sequestered for being a most notable popish
innovator, and preacher of false Doctrines, and a desperate Malig.

C.
DR. Couzens, Mr. of Peter-house in Cambridge, most worthily outed of all,
forced to fly away, for being a most intolerable popish, rotten hearted proud
Priest, an insufferable Ceremony-monger, a most wicked hater of all goodness,
and good men, a pestilent enemy to preaching and most desperate incendiary and
Malig.

Mr. Clark, of Etherborough, within Bishopsgate, London, sequestered for being a
frequent pot-companion in Taverns and Alehouses, a notable popish-hearted
Priest, and a pestilent Malig: against the Parliament.

Dr. Chambers of Andrew Hubbard, London, sequestered for being a notorious
Ceremonie-monger and desperate Malig.

Dr. Clewet, of Anne Aldersgate, London, sequestered for being a Pontifician
pluralist, a notorious temporizing ceremony-monger, and a desperate Malig:

Mr. Chestlin, of Matthew Friday-street, London, sequestered and justly
imprisoned, for his profane life, popishly-affected spirit, and perverse and
impious Malignancy against the Parliament.

Mr. Cooper of Thomas Apostle, London, sequestered for his wicked and perverse
popish spirit, and intolerable pride and malignancy.

Mr. Clay, of Chelsworth in Suffolk, sequestered for being a common swearer, a
frequent haunter of Taverns and Alehouses, and often very drunk in them, who
for his misdemeanors had been set in the stocks, and was also a most desperate
Malig:

Mr. Clapham, of Far^ham in Surrey, sequestered for being a pluralist, a
lascivious and lustful Priest, living in adultery with several women and had
diverse bastards, and a desperate Cavalerian Malig.

Dr. Cotesford of Hadleigh and Munks-Ely in Suff: sequ: for being a proud
pluralist, a pestilent popish innovator, a lustful priest and drunkard, and a
desperate Malig: against the Parliament.

D.
DR. Dukeson, of Clement-Danes, London, sequestered for being a great gamester
and swearer, a notorious superstitious proud Priest, and a pestilent Cavalerian
Malig: against the Parliament.

Mr. Davies, Hospitler of Thomas Hospital in Southwark, sequestered for being a
vile common drunkard, and swearer, and a desperate Malig:

Mr. Danson, of Camberwell in Surrey, sequestered for being a common drunkard,
and that in a base and beastly manner, a common swearer, a harbourer of a known
Romish-Priest, in his house, not having preached once in twelve years space,
yet upheld in his benefice, and a desperate Malig:

Mr. Denn of Dartford in Kent, sequestered for being a common drunkard, an enemy
to preaching and a most desperate Malig.

Mr. Dale, of Kettleborough in Suff. sequestered for being a notorious innovator
of Popish ceremonies, a common swearer and curser of his people, a frequent
drunkard and haunter of Alehouses, and Taverns, a proud and wicked spirited
man, and a desperate malig: against the Parliament.

E.
MR. Edlin, of John Zachary, London, sequestered for being a proud prelaticall
ceremony monger, and a pernicious malig: against the Parliament.

Mr. Eccop, of Pan^ros-Soperlane, Land. sequestered for being a notorious Popish
ceremony-monger, an enemy to frequent preaching, and a desperate Malig:

Mr. Evans of Sandcroft in Suff: sequestered for being a notorious common
drunkard, a constant contemner and hinderer of the word preached, and a
desperate Malig:

F.
DR. Fairfaix of Peter's in Cornhill, Land: and of East Ham in Essex, sequestered
for being a proud prelaticall pluralist, and profane in his life and
conversation, a drunken frequenter of tipling-houses, a frequent profaner of
the Lords days, by carding, an impious enemy to preaching of the word; a
notorious incontinent and lustful Priest, and desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

Dr. Fuller of Gyles-Crepl-gate, Lon: most justly sequestered for being a most
proud, Prelaticall, Popish Ceremony-monger, an enemy to frequent Preaching, and
a most desperate Malig.

Mr. Finch Dead with malignancie.
of Christ-Church, Lon: sequestered for being a most abominable and odious
whore-master, a drunkard, swearer, and every way a most loose and profane
person, an enemy to all goodness and good men, a notorious Popish
Ceremony-monger and a most desperate Malig.

Mr. Fothersby of Clements in Sandwich, and of Lingsteed in Kent, sequestered
for being a proud pluralist, a common drunkard, curser and swearer, and a
desperate Malig.

G
Dr. Giff^rd of Michael-Basishaw, Lon: most worthily sequestered for being a
pernicious rotten-hearted Popish Ceremony-monger, an enemy to true goodness
and good men, and frequent preaching, and a desperate Malig.

Dr. Griffith, of Maudlins-Oldfishstreet, Lon: most justly sequestered for being
a most Pestilent Popish rotten-hearted innovator, a treacherous Priest in
Bazing-House, and every way a most intolerable desperate Malignant.

Dr. Gorsuch of Walker in Hertfordshire, sequ. for being a notorious Alehouse
and Tavern hunter, a drunkard and gamester in them whole nights together;
seldom preaching to his people, hardly once a quarter, and a most desperate
Malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Gearie of Beddingfield in Suff. sequ. for being a most wicked Curser and
Swearer of most fearful and bloody oaths; a common vomiting drunkard, a most
pernicious Popish innovator, and a most desperate Malignant against the
Parliament.

H
Dr. Heywood, of Gyles in the field, sequ. for being a most notorious
rotten-hearted Popish Ceremonie-monger, one of the Arch-Prelate of Canterburies
treacherous favorites, and a most pestilent and intolerable Malignant against
the Parliament.

Dr. Howell of Stephens Walbrooke, London, sequestered for being a most
pernicious pluralist, a proud prelaticall innovating Priest, an enemy to
frequent preaching, and a most intolerable desperate malignant.

Dr. Haley of Alphage, Dead with malignancie.
Lon: sequestered for being a most pestilent popish innovating Priest, and a
desperate malignant.

Dr. Hacket, of Andrews Holborne, Lon: sequestered for being a pernicious bird
of the foresaid brood, and a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Hugget, of Cliff in Suss. sequestered for being a most profane loose liver,
a popish innovator, having the french pox, for the cure whereof he gave 10 li.
kicked his wife on the belly in his rage, being very great with child;
whereupon she was, presently, with great danger, delivered of a dead child,
yet past unpunisht, and was a desperate Cavalierian malignant.

Mr. Heart, of Hargrave in Suff. sequestered for being an odious common drunkard,
familiarly casting dice for drinking of most cups, making his neighbors drink
drunk under the tables; and being in the night times with their wives, private
in their chambers, and a desperate malignant.

Mr. Humes of Charleton in Kent, sequestered for being a common drunkard, and
that on the Lords days, a wicked incontinent and lustful Priest, frequently
assaulting women's chastity, a popish innovator, and desperate malignant against
the Parliament.

I
Dr. Isaacson, of Andrews-Wardrobe, Lon: sequestered for being a popish
innovator, a hater of frequent preaching, and a desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

Dr. Jermine, of Martins-Ludgate, Lon. sequestered for being a popish innovator,
and desperate malignant.

Dr. Johnson, of Mary-Whitechappell, Lon: sequestered for being a notorioas
ceremony-monger, and desperate malignant.

Dr. Jeofferies, of Feversham and Ticehurst in Kent, sequestered for being a
proud prelatical pluralist, an enemy to frequent preaching, and a desperate
malignant.

Mr. Jenkinson of Panfield in Ess. sequestered for being a most intolerable
popish innovator, a pernicious enemy to frequent preaching, a notorious
profaner of the Lords days with sports, and a desperate malignant.

K
Mr. King of Buttolph-Billingsgate, Lon. sequestered for being a most
superstitious innovator, and desperate malignant.

Mr. Kibbuts, of Katherine-Coleman, Lon. sequestered for being a popish
innovator, and a desperate malignant.

Mr. King, of Chesill-magna, in Ess. sequestered for being a common drunkard;
and that on the fast days and Lords days, a notorious popish Ceremony-monger,
and a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

L
Dr. Lafield, of Barking, Lon. sequestered for being a notorious popish-hearted
Ceremony monger, a proud pernicious hater of preaching the word; one of the
Arch-Prelate of Canterburies white Boys, and a desperate malignant.

Mr. Leech, D(...)lig(...)
of Mary Le-Bow, Lon. sequestered for his peevish and perverse malignancie
against the Parliament.

Mr. Laud, of Little-Tey in Ess. sequestered for being a common drunkard even on
the Lords days, and especially on Saturday-nights, and thereby often disabled
to preach on the next Lords day, even to the shutting up of the Church doors,
a notorious Ceremony-monger, and desperate malignant.

M
Dr. Marsh, Dea(...)lign(...)
of Dunstones-West, Lon. sequestered for being a proud pontifician pluralist, a
notable innovator, and pernicious malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Marbury, of Peter's Pauls-Wharfe, Lon. sequestered for being a proud
prelaticall innovator of popish-Ceremonies, and a desperate malignant.

Mr. Mason, of Andrews-Vndershaft, Lon. forced from his cure, for popish
innovation and desperate malignancy.

Mr. Muffet, of Edmonton, in Middles. sequestered for being a most odious common
drunkard, a curser, swearer and blasphemer, quareller and fighter with any, and
desperate Malignant.

Dr. Martin, of Houghton in Bedfordshire, and Dunnington in Cambridge-shire,
sequestered for being a proud pernicious pluralist, a wicked hater of preaching,
a notorious rotten hearted popish innovator, and desperate malignant against
the Parliament.

N
Mr. Nicholson, of Stapleford-Tawny, in Ess. sequestered for being a common
drunkard and swearer, a popish innovator, and a desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

Mr. Noveltie, alias, Notly, of Joseph-Plum, in Ess. sequestered for being a
superstitious Ceremony-monger, a drunkard, and desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

O
Dr. Osbalstone, of Much-Parudon, in Ess. sequestered for being a most wicked
hater of frequent preaching, a popish innovator, a prophaner of the Lords days
by sports, and a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Owen, of Swithins, Lon. sequestered for being a notable innovator of
popish-Ceremonies, and a desperate malig.

P
Dr. Pierce, Dead with malignancie.
of Martins Outwich, Lon. sequestered for being a notorious Ceremony-monger and
desperate malignant.

Dr. Paske, of Magdalen Bermondsey, in Southwarke, sequestered for being a proud
pontifician Ceremony-monger, and desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Piggot, of Sepulchers, Lon. outed thence for being a notorious
pot-companion, drinking healths, by casting dice for most cups a notorious
Ceremony monger, and desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Peckham, of Hosteed-parva, in Suss. sequestered for being a lazy Levite,
seldom preaching, a notorious popish innovator, a common drunkard, and most
unclean adulterer, using most obscene and filthy carriages with women, not fit
to be named; and a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Q
Mr. Quelch, of Bennet Grace Church, Lon. sequestered for being a popish
innovator, and a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

R
Dr. Rives, of Martines Vintry, Lon. sequestered for being a pestilent popish
innovator, a proud and profane pontifician, and desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

Mr. Rannew, of Kettlebastone, in Suff. sequestered for being a common Alehouse
haunter and drunkard, a hater of frequent preaching, a notorious innovator, and
a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

S
DR. Styles, of George Buttolph-lane, and of Gregory's by Paul's, Lon. out of
them both for being a proud and pernicious pontifician pluralist, a notorious
innovator of popish Ceremonies, and a desperate malignant.

Dr. Stamp, of Stepney, near Lon. sequestered for being a proud prelaticall
innovator of Romish-Ceremonies, and a desperate malignant.

Mr. Stone of Clement Eastcheap, Lon. sequestered for being a notorious
stoney-hearted proud pontifician Ceremony-monger, an enemy to all goodness,
and a pestilent and desperate malignant.

Mr. Squire, of Shorditch, Midales. sequestered for being a notorious proud and
rotten-hearted pontifician Ceremony-monger, a Popish apostate, of a general
infamous life, and desperate malignant.

Mr. Sydall, of Kensworth, in Hertfordshire, sequestered for being a common
drunkard, a lazy Levite, a notorious dunsicall Ceremony-monger, and a
desperate malignant.

T
Dr. Turner, of Olives, in Southwarke, sequestered for being a notorious Popish
Ceremony-monger, an enemy to frequent preaching, and an intolerable desperate
malignant.

Mr. Taber, of Margaret Lothbury, Lon. sequ: for being a most Popishly-affected
ceremony-monger, a proud pontifician enemy to frequent preaching, and a most
desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Thrall, of Mary Mounthaw, Lon. sequestered for being a notorious
Ceremony-monger, a profaner of the Lords days with sports, a common drunkard,
curser and swearer, an enemy to frequent preaching, and a desperate malig:
against the Parliament.

Mr. Tutivall of Suttons Hospital, near Lon. sequestered for being a common
drunkard, and that on the Lords days, much suspected of incontinency, a
notorious popish ceremony-monger, a contemner of frequent preaching, and a most
desperate malig:

Mr. Thurman, of Hallingbury, in Essex, sequestered for being a common drunkard,
a persecuter of his people for going to hear the word abroad, when they had no
preaching (and that very often) at home, a hater of good men and godliness,
familiarly called the mad Priest, and a desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

U
DR. Vty of Chigwell in Essex, sequestered for being a most egregiously infamous
rotten-hearted papist, publicly professing he loved the Pope with all his
heart, denying the Kings Supremacy, blasphemously avouched, that the
Arch-prelate of Canterburies commands ought equally to be obeyed with Gods
word, and a desperate Malig.

Mr. Vdall of Aultins Lon. sequestered for making and maintaining most proudly
and presumptuously a wicked book, entitled Noli me tangere, wherein he
aspersed the Parliament with many notorious scandalls, and impious false
accusations, and for being otherwise also a most desperate malignant.

W.
DR. Watts, of Allhallows-Woodstreet, Lon. sequestered for being a profane,
ruffianly, loose, and most proud Pontifician ceremony monger, a hater of
frequent preaching of the word, and of true godliness and good men, and a
desperate malig. against the Parliament.

Dr. Walton, of Martin-Orgars, in Lon. sequestered for being a notorious proud
innovator of Popish-Ceremonies, and a desperate malignant against the
Parliament.

Mr. Weston, of Allhallows Lumberstreet, Lon. sequestered for being a notorious
innovator of Popish-Ceremonies, and desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Ward, Dead with malignancie.
of Leonards Fosterlane, Lon. sequestered for being a notorious innovator of
Popish-Ceremonies, a profane and fantastical proud Priest, an enemy to
frequent preaching, and a desperate malig.

Mr. Wilson, of Arlington, in Suss. sequestered for being a most odious
committer of Buggery with many men, upon his own confession; yea, attempted to
commit this odious sin with a Mare, blasphemously said, that Christ after the
flesh, was a bastard, and for being a notorious Popish Ceremony-monger, a
mighty drinker, and desperate malig.

Mr. Woodcock, of Elham, in Kent, sequestered for being a notorious common
drunkard, a most wicked curser and swearer, by most fearful and bloody oaths,
and a desperate malignant against the Parliament.

Mr. Wright, of Withan, in Ess. sequestered for being a common drunkard, a most
filthy and letcherous Priest, a common swearer and obscene speaker, and a
desperate malig.

Mr. Woolhouse, of West-mersea, in Ess. sequestered for being a common drunkard,
a great gamester for money, a filthy lascivious Priest, a great curser and
swearer, and desperate malignant.

Mr. Westrop, of Much-Totham, in Ess. sequestered for most familiar filthy and
profane abusing of the holy ordinance of preaching, by most obscene meddling and
dilating on the secrets of women in the Pulpit; abusively and familiarly
comparing women to sowes, to make the people laugh; calling such women Whores,
who refused to hear him thus speak in the Pulpit, together with abundance of
suchlike most filthy trash, constantly thus delivered by him, and for being a
desperate malignant against the Parliament.

And though last, yet not least (as the Arch-Prelate of Cant. was, as it were,
captain general of this irreligious Regiment; so he now, as major general
follows bringing up the rear.) I mean Bishop Wren, the said Arch-Prelates
brother in iniquity, a most intolerable firebrand in the Church of God, a
traitorous spirited pontifician, a Popish hearted and most proud and letcherous
Priest, a notorious hater of all goodness and good men, and of the frequent
preaching of Gods word: Now, and long time chained and muzled-up in his
kennell, in the Tower of London, for his most abominable insolences, and
notorious wickednesses, and his most desperate malignancy against the
Parliament,

Besides, the happy cleansing of those foul Popish-Augean stalls of fat fed
lazy Abbi-Lubbers in the Cathedral-Churches of Paul, in London, and Westmin. I
mean the driving out of the drone-like Deanes, Archdeacons, Sub-Deans,
Residenciaries, proud Prebends, Canons, Pettie-Canons, Cardinals, forsooth,
profane and drunken Choristers, and Playhouse Musicians, to sing and toote in
their Quires, together with all the rest of that rabble of those burthen-some
and unprofitable croaking frogs, of all the rest of the Cathedralls in the
whole Kingdom, hunted out of their holes, by the just sequestrations of the
Parliament, enforcing them to get their living (if they have so much grace) by
some other more honest and holy employments, according to the word and will of
God.

Sequestered and most justly expelled out of their Livings, for their abominable
misdemeanors, as above is declared, in brief, (and may be more fully seen in
pious Mr. Whites first Century) according to this our Bill, thus briefly
collected, but might have been mightily enlarged. Besides the Cathedrals of
Paul's, and Westminster, and the rest -- 98 Whereof malignant Doctors of
Divinity -- 40 Dead with rancourous malice and malignity (in prisons and
elsewhere) on the sight and sense of Gods just hand upon them, according to
the computation and account of the namelesse Malignant-Authours other Bill of
their happy Mortality, in respect of the case of Gods Church, to which they
were a great burden, and the comfort of Gods people, to whom they were a daily
vexation, and grief of heart. -- 20 Dead according to our Bill -- 11 Parishes
and places infected with the contageous corruption and spiritual plague of the
wicked lives and filthy manners of these Popishly-affected Pontificians, and
desperately malignant, loose, and lazy Priests, and sons of Belial. Almost all
in the whole kingdom. Parishes clear of them -- Very few.
And thus (good Reader) thou having seen what kind of learned, grave,
religious, and painful Ministers, that namelesse and shameless lying
Malignant Author of the other Bill of Mortality had culled and collected
together (yet being conscious to himself of his gross deceit, was ashamed to
name Mr. Edward Finch of Christ-Church (he was so notorious a wicked man but
left it out with a blank) may I not now, in requital of his false quoted
Scriptures, most justly repay him with these Scriptures?

Isaiah 5. 20. 23. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness: that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter, Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from him.

Jerem. 23. 1. 11. and 21. Woe unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the
sheep of my pasture, says the Lord; For, both Prophet and Priest are profane;
yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, says the Lord. I have not
sent these Prophets, yet they ran, I have not spoken to them, or by them, yet
they have prophesied lies in my name, v. 25

Jerem. 20. 3, 4. Then said Jeremiah to Pashur, the Lord has not called thy
name Pashur, but Magor-Missabib; for, thus says the Lord, I will make thee a
terror (and a shame) to thy self and to all thy friends, and they shall fall by
the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it, (and thine ears
shall hear of it, as, now wicked Wrens does in the Tower) And thou Pashur,
(ver. 6.) and all that dwell within thy house shall go into captivity.

See (then, thou lying Author of that false Bill) the just decree of the Lord,
in imprisoning the persons, sequestring and seizing on the estates and goods
(which thou falsely call plundering) and casting out and bringing into misery
the wives and children of such wicked and lying false Prophets and profane
Priests, as here thou have seen truly described unto thee by a fervent hater of
prelaticall lies, and a zealous lover of Presbyterian Truths.

FINIS.

