To the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of Samuel Vassal Esquire
SHOWS,
THat for his opposing the illegal Taxes laid by the late King as the Royal
Loan Kinghthood money, Coat and Conduct money and Costomes; your Petitioner
endured several Imprisonments and commitments into Custody of many Messengers,
and to the Marshal seys, Fleet, and Gatehouse for about 16 years: Until the
Parliament was to be called, your Petitioner could not be freed out of the
Gatehouse, and your Petitioners goods being taken away from him, were never
restored to this day. All which losses and sufferings he endured for the
Liberty of the Subject, still living in hope of a Parliament wherein your
Petitioner should be relieved, and accordingly the Parliament referred the
consideration of his losses to a Committee, upon whose report this Honorable
House was pleased to Vote him 10445 l. 12 s. 2 d. for his damages; and also
Voted they would take him into their further consideration for his Imprisonment
and Charges in Suits of Law; of all which your Petitioner has never had one
penny. Besides there is due to your Petitioner 2591 l. 17 s. 6 d. for moneys
lent the Parliament in Ireland in their great straights (as by the Votes of
Parliament appears) placed upon the Excise with Interest, which has been
stopped without any cause known to your Petitioner. There is also due for one
of his Ships service called the May Flower, 3328 l. 2 s. 7 d. as appears by the
Books of the Treasurers of the Navy. Also he has part of three Ships which
were in the Service, and are yet unpaid.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, That this Honorable Parliament will
appoint him the money already placed on the Excise, as also his money due for
the service of his Ship May Flower, that he and his Posterity be not ruinated
by their hands, for whose sakes, and in obedience to whose Commands he ventured
his life, and utter ruin of his Posterity; and for that the Parliament was
pleased to Vote him, That your Honors will be pleased to give him leave to
bring in so many French wines as the Custom and Excise may pay him, or any
other way that your Honors shall think fit.

Die Lunae 28. January 1646.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
That Mr. Samuel Vassal shall have the sum of 10445 l. 12 s. 2 d. paid him
for his losses sustained for denying to pay Tonnage and Poundage, not granted
by Act of Parliament, in pursuance and obedience to a Declaration of this
Honorable House.

Resolved upon the Question, That this House does declare, that they will in
due time take Mr. Vassal into their further consideration for his Imprisonment
and personal sufferings.

Die Jovis 6. May 1647.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
That the sum of 2591 l. 17 s. 6 d. due to Mr. Vassal for moneys and
Commodities taken in Ireland for the service of the Parliaments forces, there
be charged upon the Excise in course with interest for the same, from this day
payable every six months, and that the Acquittance of the said Mr. Vassal or
his Assignees for the said sum of 2591 l. 17 s. 6 d. shall be a sufficient
discharge to the Commissioners of Excise.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parlmen. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parliam. D. Com.

Your Petitioner hops, That this Honorable House will take him into their
further consideration for his great charges and expenses in Suits in Law and
Imprisonments, besides his personal sufferings, and loss of Trade, which to
him was at least 2000 l. per annum; which has been utterly lost to your
Petitioner and this Commonwealth ever since for at least 25. years.

l. s. d. Due from the Excise, and lent the Lord Inchiqueen in Ireland 2591 17
06 For interest of the same 2552 l. received for one years interest 207 l. Rest
1345 10 00 Due for the service of the May Flower 3328 00 00 For interest of the
same 1600 00 00 For that the Parliament was pleased to Vote him for his losses
10445 12 02 Besides a good sum due for the service of two other Ships 700 00
00 20010 19 08

Note that the 2591 l. 17 s. 6 d. abovesaid, was ready money and Victuals
furnished out of my Ships to supply the Soldiers under command of the Lord
Inchiqueen, when they were ready to mutiny, which your Petitioner was forced to
supply from this place to his great loss.

Also his Ship May Flower was taken from him when she was ready to set sail
from Blackwall on a Merchants Voyage, being Laden, Victualled and Manned with
60 men for the Straights, by order of the Committee of the safety, was
presently carried away to intercept some Vessels bound for Ireland with
provisions to the Rebels, which she performed, but to the overthrow of his
Voyage, to his great damage.

And after she was returned she was fitted for another Merchants Voyage, and
ready to set sail as before, she was again taken from him to prevent some
design of the enemy, to the overthrow of his Voyage, and his great loss.


