Die Mercurij 28. December, 1642:
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, that Mr. Valentine shall have
thanks returned him from this House, for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he preached this day, at St. Margarets in the City of Westminster, at the
entreaty of this House. And that he be desired to Print his Sermon. And it is
Ordered that no man shall presume to Print it, but he whom the said M.
Valentine shall authorize under his handwriting. And it is further Ordered,
that Sir William Massam, a Member of this House, shall return the thanks to
Mr. Valentine.

H. Elsinge. Cler. Parl. D: Com.

I appoint Samuel Man to Print my Sermon.

Tho: Valentine.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE LATE FAST Before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
ZEPH. 3.8. Wait upon me, says the Lord, until the day that I rise up to the
prey, for my determination is to gather the Nations that I may assemble the
kingdoms, to power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger, for
all the earth shall be filled with the fire of my jealousy.


IT appears by the next verse, that a full Reformation was promised. For God
tells them, he will give them a pure language, or a pure lip. They should have,
and speak of nothing but pure and holy ordinances, the names of Idols, and
idolatrous worship, should be banished and quite forgotten: It is also as clear
by the latter part of this text, that a great desolation was coming upon the
enemies of the Church: till both these be done, we must wait. A duty of much
difficulty, for when we have strong desires, usually they are unrulie: and if
we have enemies, naturally we are desirous of their speedy downfall. We take
up Jeremies expression, but few have his spirit, Jer. 11.20. Let me see thy
vengeance upon my enemies: and are too like him in Plutarch, who said to his
adversary, I doubt not but thou shall pay for it, but I am afraid I shall not
see it. Lest we should be transported with these desires, and grow impatient,
God gives a charge to wait his leisure. There is a day set, a time prefixed,
beyond which Gods patience to evil men shall not extend it self. I will in due
time (says God) arise like a Lion to the prey, I will spoil them, that spoil
you, I will tear them in pieces, and they shall never recover their strength
any more.

When this prophecy took effect, and what age it pointed at, is not determined
by Interpreters, some think it was fulfilled in Josiah his time, because this
Prophet lived in the time of his reign; so Ribera, and Drusius conjecture, and
it might be so, because Josiah did not begin his Reformation till the twelfth
year of his reign, 2. Chron. 24.3. Others think it was meant of the
restoration of the Church after the captivity, because in Josiah his time
though there was a Reformation, yet no destruction to the enemies thereof.

Others refer it to the times of the Gospel, because the calling of the
Gentiles is mentioned, and also that consent of serving God with one shoulder,
was verified in Act. 2.46. They served the Lord (...), with one accord.

Others refer it to the end of the world, and they make this Scripture and that
of Joel 3.16. to be meant of the last judgment: because fire, and indignation,
and all Gods fierce anger shall then be powered out to the full: And the phrases
used in Matthew. 24.29. of the latter end of the world, do agree to this, and
that of Joel and the multitude here and there mentioned, have made them think
it could be no other. The notation of the name Jehosaphat, Haiah and saphat,
sit indicium, the Papists believe that the vallie of Jehosaphat, should be the
place of judgment.

But let wise men consider, whether to make a valley so capacious, as to hold
all the people, that have lived from the beginning of the world to the end, be
not an opinion so improbable, as needs no confutation. All that which can be
inferred, is that the last judgment, and great temporal judgments, hold a
sutablenesse, and correspondencie one with another. For the time of this
prophecy I shall not meddle with in this exercise.

In the text observe, 1 A duty which is commanded. 2 A motive whereby it is
enforced.


In the former observe, 1 The duty it self, Wait, 2 The object, upon me, says
the Lord. 3 The time, how long? until the day that I rise to the prey.


In the second (which is a commination against the enemies) observe: 1 The
generality of it, nations, kingdoms, and the whole earth. 2 The certainty of
it, I am determined to do it, says God. 3 The terriblenesse of it, set out, in
Gods indignation, all his fierce anger, and the fire of his jealousy.


If you look upon the beginning of this Chapter, from the first verse to this
text, you may see that the Church and Commonwealth were exceedingly corrupted.
For ver. 3. it is said, that the Princes were as roaring Lions, the Judges were
as the evening wolves, they know not the bones till the morning: such as should
protect and defend them, did spoil and devour them. The Priests and Prophets
that should offer sacrifice for them, and instruct them, were vain light
persons, and did pollute the sanctuatie, and wrest the Law. These that were
enemies, bred and born in their own kingdom, as well as those abroad, are
threatened, and it is evident that the Churches Reformation, and her enemies
desolation, must come together: and till both these be done, we are commanded
to wait. So that you see what is to be the subject of our ensuing discourse;
and if you will have it in an observation, it is this:

Though wicked men be not punished and pulled down, and though the Church be
not reformed, so soon as we could desire, yet we must wait upon God till he do
it.

To wait, is cheerfully to expect the fulfilling of all the promises wherein
lies the Churches good: and the accomplishment of all the threatenings, that
respect the enemies: And if to this, we add the manner, then to wait is so
attend upon God, as that the want of any blessing desired, become no hindrance,
either to our affections or religious actions; For if either be, it is not the
waiting God accepts.

In waiting 3. things,

1 There is a want of a blessing, else there were no need of waiting; It is the
service of a defective state, when all shall be complete in heaven, there will
be no need of waiting, we shall see God, and enjoy him, and in him all things.
We shall have all our desires granted, but in this world we are under many
pressures, and want many blessings, and must wait.

2 In this time of our want, yet we must not cool in our affections, but must
love God, and rejoice in him, else we are mercenarie, it we should be deprived
of all that is dear unto us, If the fig tree should not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vines: the labor of the olive should fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there should
be no heard in the stalls yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation. Habba. 3.17, 18.

3. We must not leave work, nor give over our service, but wait for a blessing:
if success follow not, yet we must go on; we have principles that will carry
us through all discouragements. Such as wait, second what they have done, they
pray over their prayers again: but such as will not wait, they relinquish their
work, and desert the cause, they recant and recall what they have done. It
seems to me to be the present duty that God requires of us in this Land, it is
the lesson of the time, we have an expectation of evil men's just punishment,
and the reformation of our kingdom: both of them, and all things else seem to
be at a stand, the people both in City and Country, are troubled. Their eager
desires after both have made them impatient: and as Naaman in the peevishness
of his spirit, spoke of the manner and means of the cure of his leprosy (being
discontented with the way that God had prescribed) so the people say, we
thought before this time our peace and Religion would have been settled, we
thought upon such a day, and in such a place so great things would have been
done, that our troubles would have been ended. The minds of most men are like
the troubled waters, and which is worse, the mud is stirred, and if men give
way to their passions, they will be like the raging Sea, and cast up dirt.
Therefore my text is a message to them, God says, have patience a while, and
wait: I will in due time arise to the prey, I will destroy your enemies, and
reform your Kingdom. And though the vapors and mists are below, do not reach
to the highest Region of the air: yet men of highest rank, are but men, and
are subject to passions as well as others: therefore you (the Worthies of our
Land) may possibly be a little weary, and faint in your minds, I am sure that
as your pains and trials are greater; so your temptations, and discouragements
are answerable: therefore my text is a message to you, wait upon God till he
second your pious endeavors with happy success; consult and wait, work and
wait, pray and wait, abate not in your zeal, desist not in your work: but to
what ever you do, add this duty of waiting, and God will make you the happy
instruments of the kingdoms good.

If any man should fall off (which God forbid) from his former zeal, or
purpose, or protestation, let him with this text, read that in Hebr. 10.38. He
that draws back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Lord.

There is a double work for every waiter; 1. To want the good he is in
expectation of. 2. To bear that evil that befalls him in the mean space; and
our waiting consists in our patience, for that bears evil: and in our hope,
for that expects good. And Junius in his short annotations upon this text, sums
up briefly what others speak more largely, patiently bear your captivity
(namely, in Babylon) and cheerfully expect your deliverance, and then ye wait
upon God.

The Hebrew word is (...) c^cu, rendered by Pagine and Buxtorf. Expectate me
prestolamini me, expect me, or attend me. The same is used, Job 32.4. Elibu
expectavit Jobum: Expected when Job would make an end. Psalm. 62.1. Truly my
soul waits upon God. The word is (...) ^umijah, of (...) duum siluit: My
soul keeps silence to God. And the word is used in Ps. 37.7. rest in God. He
that waits, rests; and he that is impatient is restless. And in Psalm. 40 1. I
waited patiently; David bears the fruits of Saul's malice, and yet he looks
after the Kingdom; if our desires and hopes be deaded, and dulled: we wait not,
though we patiently bear evil, and if we have strong desires, and are
impatient under crosses, we are wanting in this duty, and therefore we must
speak to them severally.

Patiently to bear evil,

The Church her patience.
Is a quiet silent temper of soul, whereby we submit to God in all our crosses.
There was never more need of patience then in our days, the whole Kingdom
speaks in that language; Jer. 14. We looked for healing, and behold trouble: we
expected Reformation, and behold desolation. We must patiently bear one, and
yet cheerfully expect the other. Many say, This evil is of the Lord, and why
should I wait any longer? but good hearts resolve still with them in Isa. 8.17.
I will wait upon the Lord who has hid his face from the house of Jacob, and I
will yet look for him. There is a passive perfection, as well as an active in a
Christian; God disposes of our employment, sometimes we must be doing,
sometimes we must suffer: some are excellently active, but not so commendably
passive: they are quick and nimble in action, but when crosses come they are
weak, and cannot wait. The Greek word (...), and the Latin patientia, tells us
we must suffer. And it may be we shall have sickness, and sore diseases in our
bodies, great losses in our estates, we may be banished into a far Country,
or imprisoned in some dark dungeon, we may be blemished in our reputation, by
soul slanders, we may be betrayed by false friends, and pursued by cruel
enemies: we may have calamities in our life, and torments in our death, there
is no affliction for kind, or continuance, or degree, that the servants of God
are exempted from, and therefore they had need to be fitted to suffer. And the
word used Galat. 5.22. (...), is long suffering, we cannot tell how long we
shall suffer; It is not fit we should know it beforehand: for if it were very
long, we should be out of heart, and out of hope to hold out; If it were short,
that were not praise worthy. Therefore God keeps us in suspense, and speaks
indefinitely of the time, wait upon me until I rise to the prey. We must bring
forth fruit, (...) in patience, Luke 8.15. the word in the notation of it
signifies to abide; we must abide in our work, and in a religious temper of
spirit, and not be beaten out by afflictions: or delay of blessings. If we do
well, and suffer well, if patience have her perfect work, we are entire and
lack nothing: Jam. 1.4. Our blessed Savior was sometimes in action, and
sometimes in his passion: his active and passive obedience made him a complete
Mediator. And thy active and passive graces will make thee a complete
Christian. There is no cross can endanger him that has a quiet spirit, for he
stands firm like a mountain, Psalm. 125.1. the storms may arise, and the winds
blow, the mountain stands firm for all this. But if there be an earthquake,
that will shake it: Enemies may traduce thee, and oppress thee, and calamities
like a storm may fall upon thy head: and these may be born; but if thy spirit
be impatient, and unquiet, that is an earthquake in thy soul, and will do thee
more hurt then the malice of thy worst adversary. There is no comfortable
living in this world without patience, for the least trouble puts us out of
frame, but the grace of patience does recover us, and if it can prevail, keeps
the mind quiet. Aquinas makes it the root of all graces: but his explication
must be taken in, Non causando or conservando, sed removendo prohibens: It is
the let removing cause. For trouble comes, and would hinder us in our love, and
joy, and hope, and confidence in God; patience bears all, and quiets the soul,
and in so doing removes the evil of the trouble, that it becomes no impediment
to our graces. It was a pretty conceit of the Poet, Aqui. 1^. secundae, q. 56.
art. 2.
that made every virtue without patience to be as a widow, for as she wants
half of her strength, and wisdom and counsel: so thy faith, and love, and
hope, are but weak, and patience guards them. Therefore in Hebr. 6.12. Faith
and patience are coupled together: and Romans 15. Hope, and patience, and comfort
are united. We are said to run the race that is set before us with patience.
Heb. 12.1. It seems a kind of contradiction to run with patience; for running
is active, and patience is passive, and therefore one is distinct from the
other, if not opposite; but he that runs, and wants patience, will never get to
the end of the race. For in the race of Gods Commandments, men have soul play:
one comes and rails on him for his zeal, for running so fast, when he thinks
himself too slow; another gives him a blow and strikes him down, and up he
gets and runs again. And whereas every man will make room, and give way to
him that is in a race: he that runs to heavenward, many will stand in his way
and stop him, in all which he had need of patience: And we may put it among the
cardinal graces, which are so called a Cardine, for as Janua sine cardine, as
a door without hinges cannot be beneficial to shut out the cold, or any thing
else that will offend him: so is a man without patience, every thing will
offend him; what is a wise man, a zealous man without patience? he will bear
nothing, suffer nothing, and then he will do no great good I have often
marvelled, why so little is written on this subject: we are beholding to
Augustine and Tertullian for two short Tractates of patience, others both
ancient and modern, speak of it for the most part as other theames that come in
their way; we have need to preach it, and practice it, there is a daily use of
it.

2 Patience is a silent temper of spirit; in opposition to impatience, which is
either secretly murmuring and repining, or else openly clamorous: sometimes
causing wrangling disputes not only with men, but God himself; as we see in
Jonah, cap. 4.1.4. sometimes unjust complaints in a higher degree, as we see in
the Israelites, who did chide with Moses, when they wanted water or any thing
else: Numb. 20.3.4. Would God we had died when our brethren died. They died in
their sin, for they lusted, and while the meat was between their teeth, the
wrath of God was kindled against them, and he smote the people with a great
plague, Number. 11.33.
a fearful death was inflicted, and yet they are so far from being
restrained thereby, that they break out again into intemperate language, that
heaven and earth rings again, and they fill the ears of God and man with their
clamours; when they were in Egypt they groaned, when they were come out they
wished themselves there again: when they want necessaries they murmr, and
cannot wait. They had the miraculous manifestation of Gods power and goodness
in the daily supply of their wants: and yet they will not trust him, but in the
perverseness of their impatient spirit, wish that either they had stayed in
Egypt, or died with their brethren. I would the like did not appear in our Land
at this day; many are ready to say, would God we had not looked after a
Reformation, that we had never thought of any alteration, then we had not known
these troubles, and dangers, and this great expense of money. It may be these
will do, as they did with Moses and Aaron, Exodus 5.21.23. lay the blame on them
whom God used as instruments of their good, and say, You have made our savor
to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and his servants. And if you will know
the cause of these distempers, one among the rest is, they like not that way,
nor those Ordinances which others pray for, and wait for: It is with them as
with the people that were to come out of Babylon, Though liberty to return was
granted by Cyrus: yet many stayed behind, of whom there is mention made, in 1.
Chron. 4.23. these were potters, and those that dwelt amongst plants and
hedges, there they dwelt with the king for his work. They dwelt with the King
of Babylon, their employment was mean, they made pots, they were potters,
their habitation was answerable: they dwelt under hedges, they were poor
spirited men, the base brood of their degenerated forefathers: for they made
brick in Egypt, and would have been contented with that bondage, and drudgerie;
so these would rather make pots in Babylon, and dwell under hedges, then go
after their freedom in Sion. They are branded in the words before, for though
the latter end of verse 22. be translated, these are ancient things, yet Junius
renders it, these are res obsoletae, things worn out and forgotten; and indeed
they deserve to be forgotten. But let us remember them, as these worthy Jews
did, whose spirit God had touched to go on to build the Temple at Jerusalem,
they pray for them in Psalm. 126.4. Turn our captivity, as the streams in the
South. It was penned upon this Occasion, and that prayer on purpose made in
behalf of these Jews that stayed behind in Babylon. They take them to be their
captives, being but obliged unto them by a national bond. So let us pray for
those of our Nation, that are loath to come out of Babylon. But let us not
wonder at the stirs, and divisions in our Land, the same causes have produced
the like effects in former ages; nor let the backwardness of those that keep
off, discourage you (the worthy Instruments of God) from going on to build the
Temple, and reform the Kingdom; but let your forwardness, bring them on by the
example of those noble Jews already mentioned. If the grace of patience did
prevail, and we were willing to wait upon God, these distempers would be
quieted, and put to silence. Lam. 3.28. He sits alone, and keeps silence,
because he has born it upon him. He puts his mouth in the dust if there may
be hope. There is the positure of a patient man, he sits alone, and retires
himself, till God will look on him, and grant him his desires, in the mean
time he will not charge God foolishly, he keeps silence, he will bend himself
to bear his affliction, and if after much waiting, God would give him hope to
be delivered, he in his family would kiss the dust.

David had many enemies, that spoke mischievous things against him, and laid
snares for him, Psalm. 38.12.13. but he was as a deaf man that hard not, and as
a dumb man that opens not his mouth. He wanted neither courage, nor wisdom,
he had a stirring spirit, a working head, he was sencible of their wrongs, he
knew himself innocent, his adversaries malicious: his thoughts must needs be
troubled, and yet he breaks not out, but is silent, and it was because he had
the use, and exercise of his patience. This shows the power and efficacy of
his grace, it rules when all is in an uprore in the soul, when unrulie passions
fall into a kind of mutiny, then patience makes them hold their peace; and be
silent. We may suppose patience in the soul, to be as the Town Clark in
Ephesus, Acts 19 35. The City was in a confusion, and there was a cry for two
hours together. He comes and appeaseth the multitude: Verse. 36.
by alleagiance, 1. ver. 36. Ye ought to do nothing rashly; 2. If Dimetrius and
the Craftsmen have any thing to say, Verse. 38. Ver. 40.
the Law is open, and there are disputes. 3. We are in danger of this days
sedition. Just so comes in patience, when wrongs and injuries are offered;
blessings are delayed, the spirit is put out of frame, and ready to break out;
then it moderates, and says, you should do nothing rashly. Passion is rash,
but patience is advised, and discreet. And next, the Law is open, the ears of
God are open to receive your complaints if they be tendered to him in a
religious way, and he will right you; for he is the God, to whom vengeance
belongs. Lastly, it says thou art in danger of Gods displeasure, by this
days impatience: and so it sends away these mutinous thoughts, as he did the
multitude: and makes the heart to yield to God, and it causes a man to lay his
hand upon his mouth, and become dumb. And so patience makes a dumb show: but
it is a very good one, for it makes him like our blessed Savior, Who was
dumb before the shearer, and opened not his mouth.

And seeing patience, is a passive, quiet, silent temper of soul: it may be
demanded, and a case may be put; whether all expressions of our sorrow, in time
of afflictions, be fruits of Impatience? And opposite to the duty of waiting?
And what we may think of those places in Jsa. 59.11. We roar like Bears,
and mourn like Doves. And also, Jsa. 52.5. They that rule over them, make them
to howl?

Ox lowes, the Sheep bleats, the Ravens cry: And man, if he be hurt, and
wounded, or wronged, and oppressed, he has sense and reason, and should be
sensible of the Evils that befall: For, he is no Stock, nor must degenerate
from his kind: And therefore expressions of sorrow, unless they be unseemly,
and unfit, cannot be blamed.

Jude, verse 9.

Nehem. 9 32. They make a long Narration of their troubles, and desire God, not
to let it seem a small thing to him. They would have him to think of their
Calamities, as they themselves thought of them. Lam. 1.20. Behold Oh Lord how I
am troubled; my bowels swell, my heart is turned within me, I am full of
heaviness. An ignorant man would think this is Impatience, for they are
troubled; nay, their bowels swell: But if it were no more then;

First, a deep apprehension of their Captivity.

Secondly, a sorrowful acknowledgement of their sins, which were the Cause.

Thirdly, an expression of natural affections, and supernatural graces. Then
they are not to be blamed; to loose so many blessings of all sorts: The
presence of God in the Temple at Jerusalem: The opportunity of sacrificing,
and doing other services: To be banished their Country, and remain 70. years
in a strange Land; and not to have been much affected with it: had been gross
stupiditie, and not the grace of Patience.

The quiet, silent temper of soul, in a Patient man, formerly mentioned: Is
meant in regard of Passions, not graces, those must be put to silence, but not
these. And because it is a hard matter, to master our unrulie Passions, and not
to speak unadvisedly with our lips: Therefore when private injuries, or
public occasions, stir your spirits; take along with you, these cooling and
calming Meditations; which may allay the heat of your distempers.

Job, 5.6. Affliction springs not out of the dust. The meaning is:

First, It comes not from beneath, for Earth and Heaven are opposite: and all
things come either from one, or other. And what is said of the Dust, may be
applied to every Creature: run through all particulars; the Sea, the Clouds,
the Earth; they would in effect say to thee; thy affliction came not from us,
nor any other Creature; but it came from God above: Jer. 51.53. From me shall
spoylers come unto her, says the Lord, and verse 55. The Lord has spoiled
Babylon.

Secondly, Things that come out of the Dust of the Earth, do arise after a
hidden, and unknown manner, for we do not see what is in the Earth: and in
this respect, afflictions come not out of the Dust; for men instructed in the
ways of God, and works of his providence: know God to be the author of all
their Crosses; Psalm. 39.9, 10, 11. J am consumed by the blow of thine hand,
Thou with rebukes do correct man, and this makes him submit, for verse 9. J
was dumb, and opened not my mouth, for thou did it. In all Evils, whether
they come mediately, or immediately from God: a good heart says to him, thou
did it. Faith believes the doctrine of Gods special providence, which
extends to the least matters, much more to the calamities of the Church: And
then comes in Patience to do her work; and says, I will not open my mouth
against it. Faith goes before, and Patience comes after; and they strengthen
one another. If Faith be wanting in her Office, Patience cannot make a man hold
his peace. Isa. 8.21.
It is no wonder to hear blinded Athests, and profane Persons; cursing their
King, and their God, when evil comes upon them, and they know not whence it
arises, Jsa. 47.11.

That it may not be so with us; Reason, and argue the point a little further:
Either God is the author of thine affliction, or some else: If any other, Then
it is either with the knowledge of God, or without it, either with his Will, or
against it: To say that any Creature, can bring Evil on the servants of God,
without his knowledge, or against his Will: Is to affirm God to be ignorant,
or impotent; both which are blasphemies: And if it be with his knowledge; and
his Will? Then that is granted, that we contend for. It cannot stand with the
Wisdom, and Love of God; to have his Church punished, otherwise then he
himself appoints. So that when this is premised, God does whatsoever is done
unto thee: rage, and rail, and be impatient; if thou can, if thou dare,
say rather with David, thou did it: and therefore I held my tongue.

Job was brought upon the stage, to see how well he could act his part, and
prove himself a man of integrity: and also confute the Devil, who had told
God that he would not hold out, if he were thoroughly tried with sharp
afflictions. And in these plundering days, wherein very many have great cause
of complaint, but none for their Impatience: It may be useful some what more
largely to insist:

First, upon Jobs Losses.

Secondly, his Carriage in them.

Thirdly, to consider how far he may be commended for his Patience, or blamed
for his Impatience.

First, Touching his Losses; we find them to be in his Goods, then in his
Children, and next in his own Person. The Devil had full power over him, and
dealt maliciously, and cunningly; like an Enemy that besieges a City, and
takes the outworks, then approaches nearer, he deals at a further distance,
then comes to handie blows, and grapples with him.

The first loss that Job sustained, was his five hundred yoke of oxen, and
five hundred she-asses: which all were at once taken away by the Sabeans. Job
1.15. a great loss indeed, yet less then the rest in some respect; for after
a great evil, a less affects not so much: therefore the devil proceeds by
degrees, yet this was very great: like the first blow that strikes a man down,
and astonisheth him.

But the second seems greater, for fire from heaven, consumes his seven
thousand sheep; Such a great number of innocent, and profitable creatures, to
be burnt by fire from heaven, is more then the former; and Job might think that
God himself did fight against him. The first was common among the
Lacedaemonians, and heretofore in England for borderers, and now for plunderers,
to come and in a night to bereave a man of his cattle, and if Job think the
first loss by the Sabeans to be but such: the second is by fire from heaven,
and is of another nature.

The third is by the Chaldeans, who came in three bands and took away his three
thousand camels; which was the last part of his substance, and was like the
last blow of a wicked murderer: who finding life in a groaning man, strikes
again and dispatcheth him quite: And every one of these three evils, have their
several aggravations. The first was great, because it was the first: it was
strange to him that had lived in plenty, and was increased in goods, and had
power to defend himself: ( for he was the greatest man in the East) but this
man unacquainted with crosses, is robbed and spoiled by the Sabeans. And no
doubt it did much trouble him, the second was terrible: for it was by fire, a
merciless creature. The third is very grievous, both because it fell upon him
already wounded, and sore with other blows: and also because it left him
nothing at all, and now Job is made as poor as may be: he has just nothing.
But his troubles are not near an end, for all his children are suddenly struck
dead, in the house where they were feasting. And still comes a greater
affliction: children part of our selves are dearer then our substance, and
goods: and they are all taken away, possibly not well prepared for death, The
messenger tells David all the Kings sons are not slain: but here the sons and
daughters of Job are killed.
it may be they had blasphemed God in their hearts. But now Job cannot offer
any more burnt offerings for them, for neither has he wherewith to sacrifice:
nor are any of his children alive, for whose sake he did offer in former times.
His servants, who might have rescued goods, are dead: his sons and daughters,
who might have raised their decayed father, at least might have pitied and
comforted him, they are likewise dead, and Job is left alone, mourning more
pitifully then Rachel, having greater cause then she: and needs not refuse
comfort, for none goes about to give it him.

And let us see how it fares with Job: in his own person, for if that be well,
he will be the better able to bear his crosses. But you shall find his body
full of botches and byles: in stead of health, and comeliness, he is filled
with loathsome diseases: that none can tell how to come near him, and wanting
help from others, he is fain to scrape himself. It seems his wife did not
afford him any aid, nor did he find so much relief as Lazarus, for the dogs
lickt his sores: but they did not Jobs. His friends come to mourn with him, but
they in stead of mitigating his grief, increase it. For they come and wonder,
and sit silent, and say nothing to him, for the space of seven days together.
They that could say so much against him, Job 2.13.
might at their coming, have uttered some words of comfort to him: but by their
silence, they do not only give way to his thoughts, to work upon the object of
his own griefs: but they confirm him in the apprehension of his own calamity.
And that which is usually said of sorrows, that Ingentes stupent leves
loquuntur, is made good by the thoughts of Job himself: but by the silence, and
astonishment of his friends, as we see in the sequel. For immediately he
breaks out into passion, that before their coming took all patiently. And it is
probable that in the time of their silence, Job was in a sore conflict, and
under a strong temptation: both because he was so much altered from that sweet
temper in which he was before: and also the word in Job 3.2 which is translated
[ and Job spake] may bear this signification: Vaiagnan of (...) Pagin. renders
it, and respondit Job. It is the same word, Cap. 6. ver. 1. Cap. 9.1. where it
is translated, And Job answered.
and Job answered, namely, to some dispute, which he had in his own mind, or
rather with the devil, for he having power, and commission from God to assault
Job, would not defer any time, but set upon him, and the fittest time, was at
the coming of his friends, and their silence gave him full scope. So that we
may conceive the devil to have had a single combat with Job: when he began to
speak, Chap. 3. and before we say any more of Jobs trouble, let us now come to
his carriage in his affliction. And here in the entrance, we must know, that it
is our part to construe things, as favorably as we can: because God himself
commends Job for his patience. And know that Job in his first bearing of his
cross, did as admirably well, as was possible for any man to do. And that
speech uttered, Job 1.21. The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord, is as full as could be expressed. Many a one
would have insisted on the one part, the Lord has taken, and we should have
heard quickly what God had taken: and he would have numbered his oxen, and
asses, and sheep, and camels, and children, and health, and have aggravated
all, and many a bitter complaint would have been that never man was so spoiled,
so ruined, so dealt withal as he: Job, he only says the Lord has taken, and
acknowledges God in his crosses. Besides whereas nature would have thought of
nothing but losses, and we can hardly speak of any thing else, Job does
acknowledge God in his former gifts, the Lord gave: and not only so, but he
blesses God; a rare thing for a man so punished, so suddenly bereaved of all
that was dear to him in this world: formerly so great, and rich; and suddenly
so poor, and in his poverty, to bless God. And to speak of his crosses, with
such a calm spirit, it is such a measure of patience, as no mere man ever
attained unto more. And what an honor is it, that Job made by the malice of
Satan, proverbially poor (we say as poor as Job) yet he is made a pattern of
patience; and we have the other proverb, As patient as Job: So that when he was
most poor in estate, he was rich in grace. And the holy Ghost says of him, in
all this he sinned not, nor charged God foolishly: this was in the beginning.
And for the latter end, upon the sight of God, he humbled himself in dust and
ashes; and God highly commends him again: Job. 40.4, 5.
and restores him as full an estate as he had before; so that first, and last,
Job is highly to be honored. But we find that in the middle space, Job uttered
diverse speeches which show some distemper, and disturbance of spirit. As Chap.
3.1. He cursed the day of his birth, and he wished that he had gone from the
womb to the grave: and complains that life is given to him that is in misery.

He also expostulates the matter with God, Am I a whale? Job 7.12.
or a sea that thou set a watch over me? Thou turnest thy self cruelly
against me: and art enemy to me with the strength of thine hand. Job 30 21.
He makes me a mark for his arrow, Job 6.4.
and the arrows of the Almighty are within me, and the venom thereof does
drink up my spirit: and the terrors of God do fight against me.

Touching these and the like passages that we meet with, we may give a
threefold answer.

1 Jobs case was a peculiar one, and his sorrow was greater then any man's that
ever we read of, (Christ's only excepted) for never man lost more then he did;
and for manner none like him. It was very sudden, nothing left him but what
might the more vex him, one servant escapes in all the slaughters: only to
tell him, lest if it had not been known, he had not been grieved enough. His
wife, she disdains and scorns him, his friends they speak very much against
him, and their spirits were bent against him, as appears by the first words
they utter. Eliphaz he begins, Job 4.3.4. Thou have instructed many, and thy
words have upholden him that was falling: but now it is come upon thee, and
thou faintest, it touches thee and thou art troubled: is this thy fear, thy
confidence, the uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope? In stead of cordials,
to revive his spirit, they censure and vex him more. Bildad, he is of the same
strain, Job 8.4. and instead of comforting him, upon the death of his children,
tells him they were taken away for their iniquity. And Zophar, Job 11.2, 3. he
is more harsh and rugged in his language: and lets him know peremptorily, that
he being a man of much talk, must not be justified, and his lies should not
make them hold their peace.

These were the only friends that Job had, and they were miserable comforters;
so that put all together, God makes his anger to fall upon Job: and he had
terrible apprehensions of his indignation, Job 6.4. The devil he assaults him
in his estate, and he is undone: his wife, and friends, they oppose, and wound
him more, Psalm. 69 20.
then if the same speeches had been from enemies or strangers; so that poor
distressed Job stands alone, and none pities him; and had he but health of
body, or if it were a disease that took away the spirit, that he might not go
so far in his cogitations, nor think so much of his misery, it were
something: but in the extremity of his grief, he might say, Lam. 1.12. Have ye
no regard, all ye that pass by? see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow,
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his
fierce wrath. And if any object, that those in the captivity, had greater
sorrows then Job: for those words were spoken of them, and not him, and
therefore they were true only of them. I answer, that they were spoken of the
whole nation of the Jews, and it is very true, that no kingdom, or people, were
more punished then they: for as God blessed them more, so when they sinned, he
punished them more then any nation under heaven. Dan. 6.12. under the whole
heaven has not been the like as has been brought upon Jerusalem. And if any
reply, that the King of Judah being taken captive: he left more then Job, and
therefore his sorrow was greater. I answer again, that Job in those times, must
needs be supposed to be as a King, for he was the greatest man of the East; but
in the captivity, the King had some to pity him, some to attend him, he had
not such temptations in his soul; not such sores on his body: there was some
society, somewhat to assuage his grief; and he pulled that sorrow upon
himself, by rebelling against the King of Babylon, he was foretold and might
have been armed: nay by subjection, he might have procured a quiet condition.
So that we may conclude, Jobs sorrow, to be the greatest of any man's that ever
lived. And then it is no wonder, Christ the Son of God, his sorrow must always
be excepted.
if it work very much upon him; and if you compare the carriage of another man
with Jobs, unless you find his affliction to be as great, you speak not to the
purpose. And when you read, that Jonah was angry to the death, and Jeremiah to
curse the day of his birth: these not having near the like cause, you cannot
but wonder, Ier. 20.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
that Job uttered no more passion then he did.

2 And secondly, every expression of our grief is not impatience, unless it be
more then the affliction amounts unto. To speak much of small crosses, is not
fit: but Job had more then he could utter, and nothing but sorrow, could have
made him so pathetically, and eloquently to utter, and set out his own case; to
say that God made him a mark for his arrow, was true, and was not impatiencie:
unless he should charge God of injustice, if he had murmured against God as
the Jews in the wilderness; this had been blame worthy.

3 But thirdly, we cannot clear Job altogether of being impatient: for humane
frailty breaks out, and he having somewhat more boldly pleaded, and
expostulated with God, Job 40.4.
does in the conclusion humble himself before him. And it is no wonder, if
patience in Job be foiled sometimes, by the opposite corruption. Faith in
David, and Abraham, was sometimes mastered by unbelief: and so was patience in
Job: but grace in the Saints will at length prevail, and be conqueror. And it
is apparent, that Job did set his heart to bear his sorrows, and his frailties
God did wink at.

And to draw toward a Conclusion of this second Meditation.

Consider; That in this Instance of Job, all objections that can be framed,
against the point in hand, may be answered.

As, some will object: If my sorrows were not so very great, I could bear
them: But mine are extraordinary, and who can be able, to undergo such a
burden as I am under?

Again, others object against that particular trouble, which is upon them. If
it were immediately from God, I could take it patiently: But I am wronged with
unreasonable men; It were better to fall into the hands of God, then to be at
the will of malicious men.

Another comes in with a Complaint, that it is in his body, and particularly
instanceth in long and tedious sicknesses; of this, or that kind: And because
he wants health, he cannot but droop, and be dejected.

And a fourth makes his Moan; that it is in his soul, and he has often prayed
unto God, and his desires (which are good and religious) are not satisfied: And
how then can he rest contented? And if way were given to all Complaints, there
would be no end.

But in a word to answer all:

Job had not one, but all these upon him at once: He was afflicted in his
soul, in his body, in his goods, in his Children, in his Wife, in his friends:
He was tried by God, by men, by Satan; and the greater the Cross is, the
greater honor has thy Patience. For Faith most shines in believing things
that seem incredible. And Hope, in expecting things improbable: so Patience in
bearing Crosses, that appear intolerable. And if thou fear thou can not be
able to bear, then consider; that if thy heart be willing, God will take
notice of that which is good in thee; and not charge thee with thy failings.
For you shall find, Job not challenged for Impatience, but contrarily he is
crowned, and chronicled, and many times mentioned in Scripture, for an example
of Patience, both in the old and new Testament: You hear of Job, and God
boasts as it were of Job, and it is evident, that what we do, or suffer for
God: he will make a fair, and favorable construction of it, and not upbraid
us with our faylings.

Adam, but is borne to sorrow, and calamity. And if all have their Crosses,
why should any repine, and murmr? Job 5.7. Man is borne to trouble, as the
sparks to fly upward. As thou art a man, thou must be content to bear what is
common to man: As thou art a sinful man, thou have brought troubles on thy
self, and thou have cause to bear the wrath of the Lord, for thou have sinned
against him. Micha. 7. As thou art a good man, thou have peculiar troubles, and
thou must show thy goodness in bearing thy crosses; so that in what relation
soever thou art, there is cause of patience. And here let us reason the case,
why art thou discontented, and troubled above the rest? why may not all men as
well as thou complain? It is as if a great company of travelers should in
their journey meet with foul way, and weather, and all being wet and weary,
one among the rest should complain, and cry, and keep a stir, that his
clothes were spoiled, and he is wet through, as if he had wrong, that God had
not special care of him above the rest. It is true, that if this man had more
weighty and urgent business then others, and was hindered more then ordinary;
or sustained more loss then others; or were singled out alone from others, as
Job was, then there might be more said to move pity to such a one, but no
reason for his impatience: for God is the sovereign Lord of all, and may
dispose of every one as he will, and none can justly find fault. Unless man
did suffer more then he deserves (which he never does) for his sin might have
procured more sorrow then he endures; and if God will spare others, what is
that to thee? But if he be spared in one kind, he is exercised in another: and
this is one fruit of impatience; to think our own crosses heavier, and other
men's lighter then they are.

Damus agrotanti servo quod non damus filio sano.
if Joseph, or Benjamin were sick, what could Jacob deny them? therefore much
more God. And this was a comfort to David in his trouble, Psalm. 40 17. I am
poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me. And he thinks as friends think
of such as are dear to them: Thoughts of peace and not of trouble, to give his
servants an end and their hope, Jer. 29.11. But God thinks of evil men, to
observe and watch them, and to pour more plagues and judgments on them, for
their obstinacy and rebellion: to do to them as he did to Pharaoh and his
host. In all afflictions it has been the extremity of grief to the servants
of God, to be forgotten of God, and in temptation they have sometimetimes
thought they have been forgotten. It was the greatest part of Jonah his sorrow,
that he apprehended himself cast out of Gods sight, Jonah 2.4. so did the
Church, Isa. 49.14.
but her thoughts so judging of her estate are there gently reproved and
refuted, for God can no more forget his children afflicted, then a woman can
forget her sucking child, ver. 13.15. so that from hence we see what reason we
have to be patient, God thinks of thee, either to deliver thee when the fit
time is come; or else to uphold thee while the burden lies upon thee.

Joseph's brethren) entend no good but evil: the good that God purposes,
Faelix nec^ssitas quae ad meltora compellit, multi enim qui^u securitate and
prosperitate mundo vivunt instante adversitate and periculo ad Deum fugiunt.
cannot be hindered, the evil they imagined cannot be effected. Good men are
assured, that all their afflictions shall work their good: evil men have no
cause so to think; and we must conceive they will work some new good, and
therefore it shall be better with them then if they were not in affliction. For
which purpose, see Ier. 24.5. Like these good figs so will I acknowledge those
that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have sent into the land of the
Chaldeans for their good. If that affliction which was pulled upon them by
their disobedience, and rebellion, in which they suffered not only loss of
their temporal estates; but were deprived of Gods ordinances, and wanted the
special presence of God, which was annexed to the Temple, and wanted
opportunity to offer sacrifice to God, and lived a long time among Idolaters:
if that affliction be for their good (which is there affirmed to be) then it is
easy to conclude that all things work together for good to them that love God.
Romans 8.28. So that the case stands with every good man, as with one that is
sick; and if he have a Physician, upon whose skill and fidelity he depends,
for what is needful to be taken for his recoverie, there needs no arguments to
persuade him to be patient: for he readily submits to his directions. So God
sends crosses, which are his physic to purge out those lusts, and corruptions
which like ill humors, abound in a peaceable and plentiful estate; and we
have reason to be patient, because he is faithful, and careful for our good,
and he does more then any man can do, he gives the physic himself, he prepares
the ingredients, he stands by, and sees the working; that it lie not as dead
drugges in the body, but he orders, that it work in a fit proportion: neither
too much, nor too little, it shall not be as Satan will, nor yet as we will,
but as God will, our enemies would lay too much upon us, and we (if it were in
our power) would have too little; therefore God has wisely ordered our
afflictions, which is best of all, and therefore let us be patient. But let no
evil man, that is not reconciled to God, take this to himself; for you read in
the same Chapter of the same calamity, that it was sent for the hurt of the
obstinate Jews, Jer. 24.9. which are there compared to the evil figs. From
both these grounds the Christian may speak confidently to his adversaries, as
once Socrates to Anytus and Melitus: Plut de tranq. any.
Interficere me possunt, nocere mihi non possunt. They may kill me but cannot
hurt me; they may take away my head, but not my crown; my life, but not my hope.

Romans 15 4.
which yet may be sufficient to revive thy heart, but even in this life, Iam.
5.8.
for we have promise enough to assure, that the rod of the wicked shall not
always rest on the lot of the righteous: and that the darkest night shall have a
fair morning. And therefore in all our tribulations, when friends come to
visit us, if the heart be in a right temper, when they ask how we do, we may
answer, Well for the present, and it will be better hereafter: and that is the
word and motto of a patient man. And it is a sentence worthy to be written in
letters of gold, which whosoever can speak it and assent to it, is a happy
man, and shall never be hurt by any crosses that befall him. We may upon this
ground challenge the stoutest and strongest spirit, as once Iehu did the rulers
of Samaria, to choose the best of Ahabs sons, and to bring out their chariots
and horses, and come out against him, 2. King. 10. so let the wisest and most
learned man, the bravest spirit, be asked the question in his sickness, or in
his trouble, when the world frowns upon him, whether from any true ground or
experience, he is able to say that which every poor Christian that is
furnished with patience can utter, viz. that it is well for the present, and
shall be better hereafter. No every one that has not interest in God, nor the
power of grace in his heart, does or may know, that it is ill for the present,
and will be worse hereafter. And that this is a strong motive to patience,
consider it in a familiar instance: suppose a poor man, ready to be turned
out of his cottage, and left to the wide world, imagine some Nobleman his
friend, undertake and presently begin to build him not only a better house,
but a strong stately Castle; and because it requires time to finish it, if he
should fret and be impatient, he deserves to be reproved and cast off: Just so
it is with the Church, there were never so great blessings preparing, as when
great afflictions were laid upon Gods people. Israel groaning under the
Egyptian bondage, is but in a way of preparation, to go out with jewels, and
gold, and great riches. And the like was made good in Isaiahs prophecy, Isa.
54.11. O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest, that have no comfort, behold I
will lay thy stones with the Carbuncle, and lay thy foundation with Saphires, I
will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates shining stones, and thy borders
of pleasant stones. The Church was then afflicted, and like a poor man in a
cold cottage; and if they could have patience till God had done that which he
was about, he would make their condition better. Seeing then that though in
affliction the Church be as a woman forsaken, Isa. 54.6.
yet seeing she shall be as a royal diadem in the hand of her God, she has
great reason to be patient, Isa. 62.3.

And in the present troubles of our Land, when it is demanded of us, how things
go in the Kingdom? We may answer: It is well for the present; and will be
better hereafter. We do not mean it is simply well, but in comparison of what
was heretofore: The bondage we were in was far greater, and it was a
Spiritual servitude that did inslave the souls of men. And if we consider the
liberty of the Gospel now more fully enjoyed then in former times: And do
esteem that above our Wealth; we shall be easily persuaded to think it better
then heretofore: I am sure, we, the Preachers of the Gospel have cause so to
think. And when they object their great Losses, their Sheep, and Oxen are
driven away by Hundreds: we grant they do exceedingly try their Patience. But
if they please to remember, that the like, nay greater numbers of men, were
monethlie fetched into the Ecclesiastical Courts, and with troublesome
Journeys, tedious Attendance, and unjust vexatious suites: spent more money
then these Losses amount unto, they may be brought to believe, it is now better
then heretofore: And we have cause to render thanks to God, and You his
worthy Instruments, for this freedom.

Such as have been whipped with their Scourges, can easily assent to this which
we affirm: And our forefathers did rejoice in the Hope of that we do in part
enjoy, and would have parted with great sums of Money for the enjoyment
thereof. It was with some in former times, as with Josephus the Jew, who was
persuaded that Vespatian the Emperor should set him free out of Prison: when
yet there was no great probability that he should obtain the Empire: being a
man in the Army, not so well known, or so much honored, as (if opportunity
were offered) to be able to carry it: but so it fell out that he obtained his
desire. And diverse had a private persuasion that this Parliament should set
them free, and it has prooved answerable to their desire: And the like hope,
they conceive for the future: that Your zeal will earnestly endeavor to
finish, and perfect the work which God has called You unto: And they daily
pray, that God would crown Your labors with happy success.

viz. the loss of some things that may be spared, and which God will make up
in some thing else as good. If thieves come and take away some earthen pots, or
pewter, and brass, and such like things, and yet carry away none of your gold
and silver, no man would cry out that he were undone; because though he loose
some of his goods, yet his treasure remains. Heathens accounted their riches to
lie in the virtues of the mind, which made the Philosopher in the taking of the
City, when his house was ransackt among the rest, and he lost all that was
found therein; yet he comes out mertily among them that lamented their losses,
Non est tuum quod fortuna facit tuum. Vincent. spec. moral. Vbi fortuna reliqua
depraedatur omnia atque adimit habemus aliquid in nobis me ipsis tale quod
far aut agere invitis non possit achivus. Pl^t. de tranquil. any.
and said he had lost nothing. And he gave this for a reason, those things are
not mine to be numbered among my goods, which are casual and subject to
fortune; and if a Heathen, much more a Christian man may rejoice, because his
faith and hope of heaven cannot be taken away: his riches lie in Christ, his
treasure is laid up in heaven, and no malice can reach that. Nay troubles
further our faith and interest in Christ, for it befalls them that are going to
heavenward, as it happens to children, who being sent of an arrand, if they
meet with nuts, or flowers by the way, they loyter, and make no haste homeward,
but if any thing fright them, then they run as fast as may be. So men in
peaceable and quiet conditions, they make not such haste to heavenward, but if
adversity or persecution befall them, then they mend their pace, and come and
relate all to God their heavenly Father; and in this or somewhat else he will
make up their loss, for so he has promised, Zach. 10.6. I will have mercy
upon the house of Judah and Joseph, and they shall be as though I had not cast
them off, and I will hear them. It is peculiar to men that fear God, to be so
in affliction as if they were not afflicted; both because they are not
overcome, or forsaken in their trouble. 2. Cor. 4.8, 9. And also to make up
their losses in the world, God shows himself more present with them at that
time, which makes them joyful; and it is no more, then if a man were in a fair
dyning room, with much company, and there is some special friend, whom he
loves dearly, that calls him aside, to speak in private of business that
nearly concerns him: and though he go into a worse room yet he is well enough
pleased. So God calls men out of much company of friends, out of their houses
and estates, and if they loose that way, yet if he will speak with them, and
confer with them about their peace, and comfort, and salvation in another
world; this will make them sing in prison, and sing in the dust, and they will
be as if they had not been cast off; and when God restores them the blessings
again, they are fitter to use them. So that consider what thou loosest, and
then withal consider what the Churches enemies shall suffer, and that will
make thee patient: they shall endure not any light afflictions, it will fall
heavy upon them; they shall not be bereaved of some lesser benefits, which
they can spare: but God will utterly undo them. So he threatens, Zeph. 3.19. in
which place the Lord comforts his people, and promises to gather them that
were sorrowful for the solemn assemblies. ver. 18. And to save her that
halted, and gather them that were driven out, and to get them praise, in every
land where they had been put to shame. And for their enemies, this comes in,
and is inserted, I will undo all that afflict thee. He will not only
impoverish them, or weaken their power; and in part pull them down that were so
proud and lofty, but he will undo them: utterly ruin them, that they shall
never be able to recover their strength and glory again; they shall never be
able to molest his people again. And because a man may be undone in this world,
and be brought down and yet not miserable: for God may pity him, and comfort
him, therefore evil men shall be hated of God, and not only punished openly
before men; but a secret curse and plague shall consume them, and that in a
fearful manner, as you have it in Zach. 14.12. This shall be the plague of all
them that fought against Jerusalem, the Lord will smite them that their flesh
shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall
consume away in their holes; and their tongue shall consume away in their much.

If the proud insolent adversaries of Religion would think of it, it would make
them more mild and moderate: as the story wrought upon a rough natured King,
so it might much more on meaner persons: Sesostris King of Egypt, did ride in
a golden chariot drawn by four Kings which he had overcome and taken
prisoners, one of them as he was drawing in the chariot, often looked back, the
King of Egypt asked him the reason why he looked back; He answered that he
looked on the wheel, how quickly that part is below and at the bottom, which
before was at the top, Intuens inquit Rotae volubilitatem in qua cito ca quae
summa suerant fiunt una; cogito de nostra fortuna.
which resembles our condition: we were Kings that ruled men, and now we are
forced to draw like horses: which did so daunt the pride of Sesostris, thinking
it might be his own case, that he freed them from that servile work. If our
Egyptian taskmasters had been as wise as this Egyptian Tyrant, they would
(upon the like hints given them) have desisted from their cruelty, before they
were enforced: but God reserved them for their deserved punishment.



1 That exceeds our desert, men that are punished more then their faults come
too, that is injurious, and they have cause to complain: but in this respect,
who can open his mouth to God? but rather let him acknowledge as it is, Ezra
9.13. Thou have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and this may
stop the mouth of impatience, that it clamor not against God.

2 It shall not be too much in regard of our strength, for though God lay
burdens on us, yet not beyond our strength, for it would not suit to his own
ends; that burden which is above our strength is impossible to be born, that
which requires a man's full strength, is very difficult, and will lie heavy,
and that which is under our power is easy: now God will so proportion all our
afflictions, that they shall not break our backs, and therefore he will correct
us in measure, Isa. 27.7. And let us see why men correct servants, Isa* 64 9.12.
or children, or punish enemies above measure, and we shall find that no such
thing can fall upon God.

1 Sometimes passion so far prevails, that men exceed in their corrections,
and go so far that their fury brings lamenesse, and they have cause to
repent all their days of the hurt they have done to others. And it is given as
a direction to men to do nothing in anger, Plut. de ira cohibenda.
because they are sure to offend: say to thy servant, If I were not angry I
would correct thee.

But God by reason of the simplicity of his essence, and purity of his
nature, Isa. 27.4.
cannot be troubled with passions: And fury is not in me, says the Lord: and
therefore he is never angry without a cause, or does his anger exceed the
offense; and therefore the punishment is never excessive.

2 Ignorance of the fault not judging aright, or self love aggravating the
offense done to our selves, makes men unreasonable in their punishments: but
none of these fall upon God, and therefore he cannot err, in any of his
actions.

Object. But has not God afflicted his servants exceedingly, even more then
they could undergo, passing their strength and ability to bear? 1 Cor. 1.8.
Paul's trouble in Asia was above his strength, and he was pressed out of
measure.

Ans. To which I answer, that he met with unreasonable men who knew no measure,
and his afflictions were above his strength, as he was a man considered by
himself; but God did more then ordinarily assist him, and he was able to do all
things through Christ that strengthened him, Phil. 4.13. And in the words
before he speaks of being abased, and being in want: so that by his own
strength he could not, but by a derived power from God, he could bear his
crosses. And God has vouchsafed to a Christian man, more strength then a
natural man, and one can do more then another. And to some that are religious,
he gives not so much strength as to others: but when they are designed to
extraordinary labors, and also to suffer more then ordinary, then God
increases their power. Isa. 40.29. 31. He gives strength unto him that
faints, and unto him that has none, he increases might; they that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their strength: they shall run and not be weary, they
shall walk and not be faint. It is much to walk and to run the race of Gods
commands, it is more to be able to do that, and carry a heavy burden; and
most of all, to do both the former, and not be faint and weary; and though we
can do none of these of our selves, yet God has engaged himself to enable us
to all. So that it is all one, whether our burden be lighter, or our patience
stronger; and so long as God proportions our calamities, to our strength, we
may say he afflicts not too much.

Neither will he afflict too long, we are apt to cry, how long? and a little
time seems long: but God that intends our good, must take a time answerable to
his own intentions. Great corruptions, and dangerous diseases, that have long
settled upon us are not suddenly removed; and though the Physician finds the
disease weakened, and wasted, yet he will not suffer his Patient to return to
his former diet, and employment; but will still keep him under his directions,
to confirm his health, till the humors be settled, and his strength fully
recovered. And so does God by his servants, which makes him to take a longer
time for the work; but if nothing else hinder, ordinarily the time of sorrow
and affliction is but short: sometimes called a day, the evil day, sometimes a
piece of a day, a night, Ephesians. 6.13.
for in the morning comes joy.

Nay but a piece of a night, as Isa. 17.14. At eventyde trouble, and before the
morning he is not: sometimes but a moment, Isa. 54.8. it is there said to be a
little while, a moment, and a little season; For a moment in mine anger, I hid
my face from thee: and ve. 7. it is called a small moment. And if it be
demanded, how this can be true, seeing the time of affliction is many times
much longer? I answer.

1. In all the time there is much intermission, and many calm and quiet times,
even during the calamity: partly by ease from the pain and grief that
oppresses, and partly because of the joy and sweet communion with God, so that
though the cross be not removed, but lies many months, and years, as an Ague
that holds a man very long: yet compare the well days with the days on which
he has his fits, and subduct all that time in which he sleeps, and eats, and
is at quiet, there remains but a little behind: And so is the case with Gods
people in affliction, whereby it appears to be but a little time, a moment.

And every one may in their own experience, assent to this truth, when the
affliction is past: for when we look back, and see what good comes by it, how
lusts were purged, or else prevented; graces cherished and increased, blessings
(which were for a time taken away) being restored again are thereby sweetened,
when we look back we can easily say the affliction was not too long, and it was
but want of patience that made us complain.

But if we consider eternity in which we shall reap the fruit of our
sufferings, we may easily conclude, it is not too long. Shall God vouchsafe
eternity of perfect joy which shall not be mixed with the least sorrow, and
shall we think much to endure for his sake a little sorrow, which is
accompanied and sweetened with unspeakable joy? God forbid. And therefore if
thou find thy impatient heart to murmr at afflictions, or at delays, cry
down all such thoughts, and shame thy self for entertaining them.

And that we may see the peculiar comforts of Gods people the more clearly, let
us consider what can be said of evil men, and it is true also of them, that
their sorrow shall neither be too much, nor too long, but it is in a different
sense, only in regard of their desert; for God will do them no wrong to lay
more in measure or continuance then they have deserved. But he has no regard
to proportion their calamities to their strength and ability, nor does he
intend their good, but the glory of his justice; and therefore to them there
are not the same grounds of patience; and if you should visit one, if he were
known to be hated of God, you could hardly bid him be patient and speak good
sense. For what good could ye oppose against the evil he endures, for he
neither in a good cause, nor in a good manner, does suffer what is befallen
him; nor can he look for comfort, nor expect an end, nor can ye speak to him,
as men use to do to friends when they are sick, and bid him be of good cheer,
and that there is hope that he shall shortly come out of trouble, and though it
be sharp, yet it is like it will be short; none of these are true if spoken to
an evil man. For the sorrows of this world, are but as the leaves in
comparison of the trees, that will fall upon him hereafter, and the great
aggravation of his trouble is that God is his enemy, and will show him no
favor, It is a cutting speech, and f^r worse then their captivity.
Jer. 16.13. to some of the Jews that went into captivity God showed much
favor, but others had none at all. Let me go into the darkest dungeon, nay
into hell it self if God promise to show me favor, rather then be sent to the
easiest prison, or fall into the hands of the mildest keeper without his
favor. Joseph found favor in prison, so did Daniel in the Lions den, and the
three young men in the fiery furnace, and it was easy to persuade them all to
be patient, for God did not only honor them, but assist them in a special
manner; that they received much good by their afflictions, and came out with
much honor, and God himself was gloriously made known to many, by the
manifestation of his mercy to them. But evil men find no favor at all, if
they be afflicted it is in anger; if the judgment be removed, it is not in
mercy and favor to them, and in what condition soever they are in, they have
no ground of contentment and patience.

But while I am discoursing of patience, lest by being too long I put you out
of patience, therefore I will now turn my self to application.

Aqui. 22. q. 136.
whether a man can have patience sive auxilio gratiae, but Christians that are
instructed out of the Scriptures, have learned that it is a fruit of the
Spirit, Gal. 5.22.

That we may see this more fully, that patience which is natural arises from
the constitution and well tempered humors in the body, Differences between
natural patience and the grace of patience.
whereby the heat not abounding over much, a man is not proan to choler and
passion, but has a command over himself, and uses his reason in ordering of
himself under his crosses, and having a stout and hardy spirit, bears what he
cannot decline. But the grace of patience, is from God as well as faith, and
requires the power of God to frame the heart to bear adversity; and natural
meekness is not sufficient to enable him to suffer in a fit manner; yet all
natural abilities may afford matter of thanksgiving, and that in a two fold
respect.

1. Though they breed not, nor beget grace, yet where a good disposition is,
the soul is a plain smooth board, whereon a Painter may more easily draw a
picture: and a harsh crabbed nature, is as a board full of knots, and rugged,
whereon the Artificer cannot so well show his workmanship; and though the power
of God will show it self wheresoever he intends to make a vessel of mercy, yet
it is with more ado, and will cost a man the more sorrow.

2. Good dispositions sanctified become more useful, and better instruments
then ordinary, in that they are more pleasing, and amiable to others, and so
do win more respect to Religion, and become more graceful, and gain more
credit to the Gospel; whereas froward, and hasty, and passionate persons, are
distasteful to others, and many times they are shunned even for their passions,
men being too apt to look upon the blemishes of others, rather then their
graces.

2. That patience which is natural will bear some evils, but not all that God
lays upon him; it may be he can converse quietly and calmly with friends, with
wife and children, and in case he be provoked he can bear a great deal, and if
any difference be, he will desire and embrace reconciliation; but disgrace and
injuries for Religion he cannot endure, and greater troubles he will decline,
by yielding to evil men in evil and unlawful things, and his good nature
will not suffer him to contend no not for the faith, but that patience which is
supernatural, resolves to bear not one, but all crosses, and abides firm and
constant in his Religion unto the death, and chiefly desires to be armed, to
undergo those trials that fall upon him for Religion.

Jer. 10.19. Woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous; but I said it is my
grief, and I must bear it. Plaga quae mihi debetur, as some translate it: It
is grievous, but I must bear it. He concludes out of former reasonings; that
he must bear it: God lays a necessity upon him, and he lays a necessity
upon himself: his heart goes along with God, and he says not only, I must
bear it, but I will bear it: Mich. 7.9. and both cleares God, and condemns
himself, saying; I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him.

Multa in laboribus and doloribus sustinent bomines propter ca quae vitiose
diligunt. August. de patien.
in sinful courses, and then his inordinate lusts put him upon sorrows, and
disgraces, and troubles which he willingly undergoes: many men have suffered so
much trouble for their lusts, which had it been for Religion, they had been
Martyrs.



First; In the great Evil which he shuns by suffering afflictions, he
apprehends Gods displeasure the terrors of an accusing Conscience, and the
torments of Hell: If he to shun afflictions should yield to do any Evil, or
should betray the Truth, therefore to make himself the more willing, he sets
before his eyes the fearful case of Judas betraying his Master, and of
Francis Spira, that to hold his Preferments, sinned against the known Truth in
his recantation, and never had good day all his life; and to shun these great
Evils, he willingly suffers less: he thinks a Prison is not so bad as Hell,
the threatenings of men, nothing to the frowns of an angry God: the loss of
all his dignities on earth not to be compared to the loss of heaven, and being
put to it, that he must suffer the loss of one, he willingly chooses to part
with the less, Far minora volo ne graviora feram. So that if ye consider
what he shuns, and what he hopes to gain, it is no wonder if he be not only
patient, Nemo nisi pro eo quod delectat sponre suscipit quo^i cruciat. Biel. ex
Augustino.
but joyful in tribulation. This made Martyrs to run to the stake and embrace
the flames, and would not accept deliverance; and if men did well consider,
they would neither condemn them that are in trouble, nor say as Peter to
Christ, Pity thy self: and yield rather then run such a hazard.

4. The patience of a natural man never brings true comfort to his soul, he
never tastes of those joys which God affords to them that suffer in a good
cause. Paul and Silas are as merry in prison as ever they were; and John in
Patmos knows more ravishing joy then those that lived in the Emperors Palace;
but such as suffer either for their offenses, unless their patience did spring
from a true root, it is impossible the fruit should be good. Faith and patience
are coupled together, Hebr. 6.12. and therefore comfort and patience are joined
together, Romans 15.4. That we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope. And then follows, the God of patience and consolation which
concludes the point in hand, that no man, not the mildest man, has by nature
the grace of patience: God is the author of it as well as any other grace, and
therefore that every one should endeavor after it, in the use of the same
means by which he looks for every grace.

Tertullian, who being to write of this subject, intimates that he was ashamed
to speak, Ne dicta factis erubescant, lest his actions should contradict his
speeches; and he be ashamed of his sayings. Let us all be humbled for our
intemperate language, our unseemly gestures, our unfit carriage: we fall short
of that quiet, silent temper of soul before mentioned; our spirits are full of
bitterness, our mouths are full of complaints: what a shame is it to sea
Christian like Hercules furens? or like Solomon's fool. And if men do not break
out so inordinately, yet it is too common to hear some with David crying out,
Oh my sun Absolon, 2 Samuel 18.33.
would God I had died for the^ O^ Absolon my son. Or with Jonah, Oh my gourd,
Iona 4.8.
I am not able to endure this heat, seeing my gourd it taken away, take away my
life also. Oh these daughters in law, says Rebecca, Genesis 26.35. Cap. 27.46.
I am weari^ of my life because of them. Others in our days say these are
pitiful times; trading is decayed, the treasure of the Kingdom is exhausted,
all things are out of frame. In these and the like expressions, where
corruption appears, I am now to speak to it by way of reproof.

The causes of Impatience are,

Four causes of impatience.
and self-love may be the cause of this impatience; Rachel mourns and will not
be comforted for her children: Jacob is impatient of Benjamins going out of his
sight; and the reason is, he loved him more then was meet. An when once we are
lost in our affections to any thing, the cross proves heavy, and we pull it
upon our selves. It is just with God to punish us in that thing we idolize. And
if we cannot moderate our affections, we pull a double evil upon our selves.
1. To be bereaved of that which is dear unto us. 2. We shall not be able to
bear the loss of it. If we joy too much in any thing, when we loose it we
shall mourn too much: and then in stead of pity from friends, we should have a
reproof. Impatience discovers men, for you shall find that in some things they
can bear it better then in others, and if they be most tachie, and peevish,
when crossed in matter of profit or pleasure, or name and reputation: a Heathen
concluded, that then they are covetous, or ambitious, or luxurious. An
impatient man is guilty of a double fault, one past in his irregular
affections, an other present in his ill carriage to God, or man, in the loss
of that which is taken from him.

2. Anoth^r cause of Impatience is ignorance of God, when we see God in a
cross we submit; but if not, we are perverse. We see a great deal of
difference in David toward Shimei, and Nabal, both of them give him ill
language, and Shimei was worse then the other, yet he is more patient toward
him then Nabal, and the reason is, he saw God more in his reproachful terms
then the other: God has bidden him curse, says he, and therefore he will bear
it. If a man meet the King, and know him not, he will not give him due
reverence: And if we acknowledge not God in our crosses, no wonder if we be
impatient. It is in this case, as with the owners of the Asses colt, if you say
the Lord has need of him, they will let him go, says our Savior: so when we
part with our estates, if the Lord have need of them, let them go. Let us offer
as Araunah did, our barnes, and all that is on the barn-floore, our oxen, or
any thing we have: but unless we know it is the Lord that requires them, we
shall hardly submit, and scarce then, unless nature be subdued by a higher and
more powerful principle.

3. A third cause of impatience, is the distemper of the constitution of the
body, for it comes from passion, and that is from the passive principle in
man, where choler abounds, there the soul works distemperedly: for all actions
taste, and have a ta^g of the humor that is predominant; and though passions
and passionate expressions are to be ascribed to the mind, yet all actions
elicited, and acted by the body, partake of the natural temper: It is inbred,
and settled, and hardly overcome, and so it is both a sin, and a great
affliction to them that are sensible of it. Passions are the feet of the soul,
they are in the sensitive appetite, and when they grow inordinate, they are the
diseases of the mind, the depravers of reason, the disturbers of the
understanding, whereby wise men speak nothing, do nothing, like themselves. It
is a weakness to have passions, a greater weakness to be conquered by them.
Therefore when the people gave too much to the Apostles, to take down that
opinion, Act. 14.15.
they allege they were men subject to like passions as themselves: intimating
that it is a weakness, and below a wise man to have passions in him. And for
conclusion, consider that when we are commanded, Luke 21.19.
to possess our souls in patience, it appears that by passion, and impatience,
we are dispossessed of our souls, of our understanding, of our joy, and
comfort, and peace, for that time that passion bears sway. A patient man does
quietly enjoy himself, his comforts, his friends: but if passion possess thy
impatient soul, it will play the tyrant, and turn thee out of all: Mark 5.2, 3.
thou art like him that was possessed by an evil spirit; and we find that he
did tear himself, so impatient persons wound, and cut, and vex themselves: and
it is said that none could bind him, ver. 3.4. rage will break out, and will
not be restrained. I would kill a man in mine anger, says Lamech, Genesis 42.28.
I will go mourning to my grave, if ought but good befall Benjamin by the way,
says Jacob. When men give way, and let the rains go, their passions run like
wild horses: in which case men are burdensome to themselves and others; he
that was possessed of the evil spirit was among the tombs; but these are
among the living, and molest and grieve most those that are nearest to them.

4. A fourth cause of Impatience is, the cross comes suddenly, and takes us
unawares. We break out before we consider of it; passion surprizeth a man, as a
thief that robs him before he could make any resistance. It were good we did
think beforehand of the evils of the day, of the cross occurrents that may
fall out in our callings, and families, and occasions. Collect thy spirits, and
consider there may be, and it is like there will be some untowardnesse in
servants, some undutifulnesse in children, some unkindnesse in husband, wife,
or friends, arm thy self against all, and be prepared. Think with thy self,
God could have matched all good husbands and good wives together, and could
have given to all good parents, good children; and faithful servants to the
masters that fear him; he could have put all sweet dispositions to have laid
together, and enjoyed a happy neighborhood: but divine providence has
disposed otherwise to try our patience.

Having gone through the first part of the duty of waiting upon God: I now
come to the second, The Church her hope.
which is a cheerful expectation of good. If we were never so patient in
bearing evil, and yet did not keep up our desires and affections, we failed in
our waiting; for there ought to be a certain and a cheerful expectation of
such future good things as God has promised.

1. It must be a future good we hope for, not present, which we do enjoy
already; and it must be promised, else we build without a foundation.
Presumption roves abroad at large, but hope looks for a promise. Objectum spei.
1 Proximum. 2 Principale.
There is a double object for our hope, one is principal, and that is God
himself, I hope in God as well as I do believe in God: the other is the next
object, and that is the promise of God. But because the three divine graces
(whereof hope is one) are immediately fixed upon God himself, therefore we hope
in God promising eternal life and all good things in the mean time: hope gives
God the honor of his bounty, for it expects the blessing included in the
promise, and faith gives him the honor of his truth; for it credits God in all
things spoken by him: and love gives him the honor of his goodness. Hope is
not mercenarie and yet waits for a blessing, 2 Pet. 1.4.
for when God vouchsafes to give us great and precious promises, it were ill
in us not to expect the performance of them.

They that hope and wait, have strong and well ordered desires, strong graces,
and strong affections: else delay would beat them off, for many of the promises
of God bear a long date.

But in hope there is a certain expectation of promised blessings, and that
bears up the spirit: hope in God can no more be disappointed then faith can be
deceived, for hope is the expectation of things believed, and faith is the
substance or ground of things hoped for: Heb. 11.1.
both of them are in God immediately, and both of them are fixed upon promises,
both begin and end together; and both mutually strengthen one another.

R^m 8.19. the earnest expectation of the creature waits. That which is there
said of the creature or creation in general, is true of a godly man, nay it is
a lively description of him, for he waits, and he expects, and he is earnest in
his expectation. The word signifies such an earnestness, (...).
as make a man to thrust out his head and neck to look toward that place,
whence he expects a messenger to come with good tidings, Judge. 5.28.
as the mother of Sisera looked out of her window, and said, why do the wheels
of his chariot tarry so long? So he that hopes, looks up to heaven, and looks
out to all means that may further his desire, and watches and waits till God
answer him. Presumption and despair are both of them contrary to hope, one
hopes inordinately, and the other not at all; indeed neither of them hopes, but
presumption seems to do it, and looks like the grace, and yet is far enough
from it: both are bad, but the very name of despair seems more horrid.
Presumption is more common, and kills ten to the others one: Both of them lead
to one end, but not by the same way. Presumption goes about, despair directly
to condemnation. Presumption lifts men up as high as heaven, Ascendunt ad
^oelos per presumptionem descendunt ad inferos per desperationem.
and then lets them fall as low as may be: Despair throws them directly down
to hell; in neither of them is the earnest desire or certain expectation of a
hoping man. And as before you had the difference between the grace of patience
and natural mildness, so here again take notice of the grace of hope,
differing from presumption.

1. True hope is accompanied with humility; passion, and presumption, and
pride go together: and patience, and hope, Lam. 3.28.
and humility are united; he will lie low, and kiss the dust if there may be
hope. God first casts a man down, and then lists him up, and so we come to
hope. But a presuming man is first lifted up, and then cast down, and his hope
vanishes.

2. True hope is industrious, but presumption is lazy; a presumptuous man
thinks it an easy matter to be religious, and to get to heaven: despair
judges it impossible, 1. John.
hope conceives it difficult, and therefore labors with all diligence to
obtain what he looks after: he that has this hope purges himself.

3. True hope is a solid quickening grace, that bears up the spirit in evil
times: It is a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.
such as the world wonders at; for whereas nothing but the possession of good
things will satisfy, hope of heaven comforts the heart, and he lives upon it,
and esteems it a large portion, Romans 5.3.5.
He rejoices under the hope of the glory of God, for he knows he shall not be
ashamed of his hope.

But evil men that hope after heaven, though God never made them any promise
of it, nor are prepared and qualified by the work of regeneration; this hope is
compared to a spiders web.

1. She make a web out of her own bowels, Job 8.14.
so this hope is from their own imagination, it is of their own begetting, it
is the fruit of their own brain.

2. And though the spiders web be curiously framed, yet it only catches
flies: so hypocrites look after ceremonies not substance, and such have the
greatest care of the least matters, Hypocritae curam habent maximum de minimis
minimam de maximis. Vincent. spe. moral.
and least regard to the greatest.

3. The spider is full of poison, and remains in a dustie, nasty hole, though
she work never so curiously.

4. She gets to the top of the window as high as she can; and then when she
falls, she falls to the bottom, for nothing stays her.

5. When the besome comes, she and her web are swept away, and she is trodden
under foot: so are all presumptuous hypocrites, in whom there is no work of
saving grace, they resemble the spider in all these particulars. But where a
well grounded hope is wrought by the Spirit of God, they are firm, and their
expectation shall not be cut off: Prove. 23.18.
when the world shall be in a confusion, when earth and heaven shall be shaken,
when evil men shall be hopeless, Joel 3.16.
and helpless, the Lord will be the hope of his people.

The third and last case propounded and resolved.
And seeing there is in every one that waits upon God both a patient bearing of
evil, and an expectation of good: if these be severally considered, it may be
demanded, which of these two do most try us? whether the present evil that is
upon us, or the absence of the good desired? whether the want of the
Reformation promised in the ninth verse, or the evils that fall upon us, till
God punish and pull down his enemies, mentioned in the text? whether the want
of the presence of Christ, or the encumbrances of this world can best be born?

For answer hereto we will state it, and then determine it: laying down the
effects of both, and compare them together, and hereout will arise the
conclusion.

1. Evils cause pain of body, and sorrow of mind, and they may be so violent,
as to disturb the whole man, in such manner as he has no joy in any thing:
but may be weary of himself, weary of living, weary of the world, and none
can tell the weight of such burdens as many do bear, and have been long
exercised with in this kind; but you shall find the want of things desired
cause fainting of the spirits, Prove. 13.12. It must not be understood 1. Of
natural men. 2. Not of good men under humiliation. 3. Not of such as have not
strong affections



The deferring of the hope makes the heart sick. In every sickness and pain
the heart is not sick, for it comes to the heart but a little before death, and
then it is more dangerous; for then men faint, and go away: and this being
worse then the other, it is more grievous to bear it. But when we speak of
heavenly things, you must not apply it to natural men, for they have but weak
desires that way, nor must we understand it of men under the burden of their
sins, in the time of humiliation, for a wounded spirit who can bear? but if you
speak of men that have strong desires to some good, and have some pressures by
reason of some evil, or if you understand it of religious men, having passed
through the work of humiliation, it is more easy to bear evil, then to wait
till the promised good be enjoyed; but yet you must suppose affections to
abound in them, or else their desires are not so strong. And the Apostle in
that text, you have need of patience, Hebr. 10.36.
that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the promise: seems
plainly to determine the point in hand, that it is more to wait till we receive
the promise, Verse. 34
for when he spoke of spoiling of goods and those afflictions he said nothing,
but when he comes to this, then he tells them they had need of patience, no
doubt the other did require patience, but this more then ordinary.

2. Evils that fall upon us, or are coming toward us, we flee from them, there
is fuga mali, and after good things we make haste; there is prosecutio boni,
now from the manner of flying from evil, and following after good, we may
determine the question, if a man flee from a Bear, or any dangerous beast, he
makes haste, till he be gotten a good distance from him, and then he goes
softly. In pursuit of good things we grow more eager and earnest, for at first
we do not fully understand and perceive the excellency of them, till we are
well acquainted with the ways of God, we know not the sweetness and worth of
his love. Therefore distinguish of the time, at first evils coming on us with
their full power, do much affect us, and require all the patience we have, but
afterward some troubles become more easy, as the prison to him that suffers
in a good cause, becomes as his own house, and does not so much perplexe. Good
things upon more full knowledge, are more earnestly longed for, and the desires
increase; and therefore such as are bent upon heaven, and the assurance of Gods
love, and pardon of sins by Christ, they are compared to hungry and thirsty
persons, which must have somewhat to satisfy them, and that presently, or else
they die: therefore as at first some evils do much try our patience, so good
things at last do more put us to it, and it is harder to wait.

3. Heaven has more force by an attractive power, to draw our desires, then
Hell has operation by way of terror; for faith, and love, and other habits of
grace are effectual in their kind, and have objects to elicite their power, as
well as any natural affections. Heaven upon a heavenly mind, has such an
influence, that it draws up desires more strongly then the Sun the moisture of
the earth, and when desires are strongly set, and are in their motion, it is a
painful thing to have them stayed. A traveller that minds home, and is drawing
homeward in his journey, and is detained against his will, counts it an
uncomfortable condition, and wishes often that he were in his house, Psalm.
42.1, 2.
and so did David, My soul pants after thee, O God: when shall I come and
appear before God? The hatred of Saul was a great calamity, but the desire of
Gods presence in the Sanctuary and having the Kingdom, did work more upon him.
The fear of hell troubles not near so much, as the want of heaven.

4. For the bearing of evil, there are more grounds of patience then for the
enduring of the want of good desired: for the evil that is upon us, Si
injuriam de posueris ultor est, si damnum restitutor est, si dolorem medious si
mortem resuscitator est. Tertul.
may be made up in somewhat else as good: if a man be sick, or impoverished, or
imprisoned for Religion, there is sufficient cause to rest contented, and bear
it patiently, both because he honors God, and therein he is to rejoice, and
also he may have somewhat that may be as good as health, or liberty, or
wealth, and he may be in better state; but when the soul desires heaven, or the
assurance of it, and desires the sense of Gods love in Christ, if he attain not
to it, there is nothing can be had equal or near as good; and offer what you
will in stead of it, it is despised. If Jacob desiring Rachel, cannot be
satisfied with Leah, much less can the heart be satisfied till it have the
graces it desires, and all the good things that are contained in the promises,
and at last the glorious presence of God in heaven. And it is no sense to say
to a man, be patient though God love thee not, and although thy sins be not
forgiven, yet thou may do well enough, this would be odious even to every man;
because reason and natural conscience will tell him, that the want of these
will make him miserable. All that could be said is, that though he have not
these blessings as yet, he may in time obtain them, if he wait on God in the
use of his ordinances.

And from the forenamed particulars, the heart that is set on heavenly things,
is ready to break out, and say, I am not able to wait and be patient till I
receive the promise, my heart is ready to break, and many times I think it
belongs not unto me, what shall I do?

The Church sick of Love.
assuage the grief, and then (if we can) heal the wound. To assuage the pain
of this impatient heart, that cannot wait till it receive the promise:
consider, this Impatience is not sinful, nor dangerous, but it arises from
the most heavenly temper of the soul, strongly bent to have as soon as may
be, a large portion of the favor of God in Christ, and it is the ardencie of
love, that makes the soul restless, and if there were not much love, there
could not be these desires.

Cant. 2.5. And as Christ spoke in another case; so I may speak in this: This
sickness is not unto death, nay it is the beginning, and a good measure of
eternal life. Oh! if I knew it were no worse, it would abate my grief. For
thy satisfaction, I will briefly describe what it is to be sick of Love; that
thereby thou may judge of that impatience that comes from Love.

The soul that has a more full apprehension, and a clearer light, to see the
admirable excellencies of Jesus Christ, is rapt, and ravished with love toward
him, and love being the commanding affection of the soul, is carried toward
him in an unresistable manner; for Love is strong as death, and will not endure
any thing to come between it and the object; Love carries the soul out of a
man's self, Amor pont^ amantem extra se. Aqui^
and places it upon the party loved, it makes it to be in two bodies.

It is pleased, and delighted in the object; it feeds it self with present
contentment, Amor est sui pabulum.
and hope of future enjoyment; it thinks often of the divine perfections that
are in Christ; it beholds him in all his works with admiration, especially in
that which was his Master-peice, our Redemption; It viewes his rare properties
of goodness, holiness, purity, meekness, humility, etc. And all set in the
sweetest and most amiable disopsition that ever was; it observes with what a
Heavenly disposition he conversed among men, how willingly he instructed them
in the mysteries of salvation, how readily he condescended to the ignorant and
weak, how gracious he was to great offenders when once he saw them penitent,
how wisely he answered the questions of his cavilling adversaries, and put them
all to silence: Matthew. 22.46. Whereupon it concludes, not only in point of
affection, but Judgment, that he is the chiefest among ten thousand: Cant.
5.10.

And if God should show us his glory, and make all his good to pass before us
as once he did to Moses: Exodus 33.19. yet we could not think well enough of
him, for our thoughts could not comprehend his excellency, nor could we love
him according to his worth, and therefore we cannot err in our Love: It is no
blind doting affection, as for the most part is among friends. The Church may
give full scope to her affections, and she is so far from longing too much,
she can never love enough, but her love being well grounded, she is constant,
and firmly settled, and if she think any thing should separate it would be as
death, and delays is very irksome, she longs for her Savior, and knows reason
for her longing, (which women men with child do not) and yet if they be not
satisfied, they will miscarrie: so the Church in her longing agrees in the
peril, but differs in the cause. And the Church is sick, partly because the
object of her desires is so glorious, that it overcomes the spirit, as the very
smell of strong water will overcome the brain, and the glorious beams of the
sun will dazzle the eye. So Christ the King of glory, offering himself to his
Church, does amaze and overwhelme the soul more then Saul did David, by
offering him his daughter to wife, and to make him son in law to a King. And
also the want of Christ works in the soul as a disease in the body. The fears
and cares in the Church (which are in every believing heart) lest she should
not enjoy Christ, are as the cold fits in an Ague, and by such faintings, such
pantings, and short breathing, you may easily conclude there is sickness; and
every soul in such a case discovers love, for it cannot long lie hid, and such
as are sick of love, are sick for Christ, and long after him, and languish for
him, and will never be cured till they enjoy him; and it is no wonder if they
be impatient, nay it were not well if it were not so. If any that have enjoyed
God in his ordinances, and found the sweetness of them, should be debarred for
a year or more from the Word and Sacraments, love would make the soul impatient
of that time, and account it very long, and cry out with David, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
When shall I come and appear before God in Sion? And if in the less, then it
holds in the greater, that the time seems long till we enjoy Christ. And as the
former, so this comes from love, and they are sick of love that find it in
themselves. And it will further appear:

1. In the ordinary times of meeting, love will not suffer us to stay away,
unless in case of urgent necessity, for as the persons that are in love,
cannot but go to meet each other, so the believer cannot stay at home when
occasions of meeting are offered: where Christ is, there she would be, and
therefore according to his own direction, she goes to the Shepherds tents.
Cant. 1.7. where she is not satisfied with the place, nor the duty, nor the
ordinance, but she must enjoy Christ himself, she must see him, and hear his
voice, and her heart is therewith contented, and burns within her, if either he
be silent, and will not speak, or if he hide himself, and will not be seen; or
do appear frowning, then she is down in her spirit, and much dejected, she
mourns secretly, and is sick at heart: she presently apprehends his anger, and
would do any thing to appease him; she would humble her soul as low as may be,
and kiss the dust, if there be hope that he will look kindly again upon her,
Lam. 3.29. and till she see the light of his countenance, and behold his power
and glory in the sanctuary, as in former times. Psalm. 63.2. and till she find
the joyful sense and feeling of his loving kindness in her heart, she mourns
as a woman forsaken or divorced, takes joy in nothing, is very impatient of his
absence, but never blames her Savior, but imputes the cause of her sorrow to
her own ill carriage and misdemeanour; and thereupon she takes up new
lamentations, over her old corruptions, and gives not over her confessions and
prayers, till he again return to her in mercy; which when he pleases to do,
she is the more joyful, by the driving away of her former fears and griefs:
and as friends meet more lovingly, and greet more heartily after a time of
absence, so do Christ and his Church, the Father and his prodigal son, make
not more merry, the Bridegroom and the Bride rejoice not more, then Christ
and his Spouse do upon their renewed amity, and agreement.

2. In times and occasions extraordinary, if she sees her Savior in any
mercy, in any joys of the spirit, or in any deliverance, or in the granting
of her requests, especially in such things as respects her soul and salvation:
she is moved, her blood stirs within her, and all the powers of her soul are
quickened and revived, if she hear him speak, not only in the sound of words,
Cant. 2.14.
but the efficacy of his spirit, she cannot sit still, but rises and cries it
is the voice of my well-beloved, Cant. 2.8. And if these two senses, which let
in, and let out love, were not exercised in seeing and hearing Christ, she
could not with any patience wait for him; Cap 5.16.
Let me see thy countenance, and hear thy voice, for it is sweet and comely.
But these stay her heart, and therefore we from hence conclude what she is sick
of. A Physician knows the disease, and by the operation of his medicines, he
still is confirmed in his knowledge; for if hot things do good, then he knows
the disease comes of cold causes: so if we would know whether we be sick of
love, observe what allayes thy grief, and what increases it, if nothing but
the fruition of Christ himself will cure thee: and secondly, nothing but that
which is next to fruition, namely, seeing and hearing of Christ will assuage
thy distressed heart, then know thou art sick of love.

Ob. But then it may be thou will reply and say, this is poor comfort to tell
me that I am sick, I knew that before, and my griefs plainly show it.

Ans. I answer: that to know thy particular disease is more then to know in
general thou art sick, and it is a skillful Physician that can discover the
disease; and if before or now thou know this, thou may for ever rejoice: for
whereas many are sick for the satisfaction of their lusts, as Ammon for Tamar,
thou art sick for Christ, and shall undoubtedly be cured. This disease shows
not weakness, but the excellency of the temper of the soul, and being so
noble a disposition of an heavenly heart, is not properly a disease, but only
by way of resemblance, as sick persons longing for somewhat, so is the soul for
Christ. But as the fruition of the Bridegroom can cure the love sick Bride, so
Christ only must do it; the Preachers of the Word are but the friends of the
Bridegroom, and cannot do it: but let me do a friendly office, I will bring
thee before him whom thou love, and put a few words into thy mouth which thou
must utter, I will frame thee a short Petition which thou must thy self deliver.

O my Savior, my Joy, my Crown, The love sick soul breaths out some such
ejaculations.
the top and height of all my hopes, thou have ravished my soul with thy divine
perfections, and raised my poor low spirit to an higher pitch then ever by
the power of nature it could have attained unto. I did affect such things as
pleased my eye, and ear, and should have doted to this day upon sencible
objects, but now I see that all things under the Sun are mere vanities, fading
flowers, and perishing delights, thou have revealed better things unto me, and
I see by a new light the things that concern my happiness; thou have set before
me the joys of heaven, and have showed me the excellency of that estate,
wherein the soul enjoyes communion with thee, and now I do condemn all my
former sinful delights, and being grown to years of understanding I admire how
simple I was when I was a child: but much more do I wonder at the foolish
delights of my unregeneracie, I find all things that then did possess my mind,
to be in comparison of thee, no better then childish toys, I now relinquish
and renounce them, but my heart is stirred with restless desires after thee,
and oh how am I pained till I come unto thee? and how am I more unquiet in my
thoughts, then when I slept securely in my sins, how is my spirit reaching
after that which I cannot compass, nothing but thy self, O my Savior, will
satisfy, and while I am absent in the body, how shall I do to live without
thee? especially seeing I am in the midst of so many adversaries, that daily
grieve my soul, sometimes I hear men blaspheming thy blessed name, others are
breaking out into odious and disgraceful speeches against thy truth, and the
ways of Religion other fall upon thy people, and offer them all the hardship
and ill usage that wit and malice can devise, and thy poor Church is as a ship
upon the Sea in a storm, as a traveller in the wilderness in a mistie dark
day, as all creatures in Winter that are half dead for want of the heat of the
Sun, thy turtle Dove is frighted by every ravening bird, thy flock is exposed
to the rage of each devouring woolfe; and what with fears that do fall upon my
trembling heart, and the want of good that my spirit is set upon, I am
restless, and know not what to do; tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, how I
can be patient and wait till thou come unto me, though thou should be as a
young Heart, and a Roe upon the mountains, Cant. 2.17.

Christ by his Spirit will return some such answer.
O my Spouse, my welbeloved, how am I troubled for thee, how do I grieve with
thee, how willingly would I ease thee of thy fears and griefs, if I had not
other works in hand that must not be hindered, I would soon deliver thee out of
thine enemies hands, but that I purpose by thine afflictions to raise thee to
greater honor, and to bring them to greater shame; I will in due time come and
wipe away all thy tears, and remove all thy fears, and put thee in possession
of glory. And for the quieting of thy longing desires, and settling of thy
impatient heart, remember, it was honor enough unto thee, that I espoused thee
unto me, that I entered into covenant with thee, and am become thine, and thou
art mine, I loved thee when thou wast naked, deformed, and in thy blood, I
found thee poor, and have enriched thee; a miserable captive, and have
ransomed thee; I laid down my life for thee, and let out my own blood to cure
thee, thou art dear unto me, and precious in mine eye, thou shall be unto me as
the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, and I will delight in thy love continually,
and that our joy may be full, I will a while defer our marriage, that thou may
be made more beautiful and more pleasing to me, I will remove every spot and
wrinkle, all thy sins and the fruits of them both from soul and body, and
think not the mean space too long; but consider, that there will be time
enough for our embracings in another world, eternity will give thee thy full
content. And till then, if enemies defame thee, I will clear thy innocence, if
they do thee wrong, I will right thee; if thou loose any thing for my sake, I
will abundantly recompense thee, I will be better unto thee then friends,
children, pleasures, preferments, I will stay thee with flagons of wine, and
comfort thee with apples; I will refresh thee with the best dainties that
heaven can afford, I will not estrange my love from thee, and though thou can
not enjoy me fully, yet we will see one another, and daily speak one to
another; thou shall be as near me as is possible, I will set thee as a seal
upon my heart, We may with Cynicke light a candle at noon day and search for a
man that is sick of love, and impatient for want of heaven.
and a signet upon my hand, I will look upon thee and love thee, all the
promises contained in the Bible, I make over to thee, and because they are thy
portion, I have given thee a heart to study them and peruse them, and all the
good contained in them at my coming I will bestow on thee: and whereas
malefactors never long for the coming of the Judge, but the innocent who hope
to be absolved, therefore I have put it into thy heart to cry, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly.



1. It is a service wherein all the servants of God in all ages are put
together, they must all draw in this yoke: the Jews waited long for the
promised Land; and longer for their Messiah Old Jacob upon his deathbed uttered
this sentence, Luke 2.25.
O Lord I have waited for thy salvation: Simeon, and many others waited for the
consolation in Israel. Some have waited long for health, for employment, for
preferment, others have waited for knowledge for pardon, and assurance of Gods
love; all wait for heaven, and the fruition of God: therefore let none object
against it, seeing it is a duty in which all are engaged.

2. It is a duty highly commended, and shall be liberally rewarded. God is the
bestower of blessings, and his wisdom can find the fittest time to give them
in; and he that quietly waits, honors God and shall not loose by it: Isa.
31.18.
Blessed is the man that waits on God. Every man that prays and seeks cannot
wait. We must learn self-denial, else the want of blessings will make us
impatient; the longer we wait, the greater will be our reward. Isa. 64.4, 5.
It has not been perceived by the eye, or ear, what things God will give to
them that wait for him: and then it follows, Thou meetest him that rejoices.
God will do great things for such as wait for him, and he will meet them in the
mid way: when they think God is not mindful of them, he is coming upon the way
with a blessing in his hand. He that waits, is best prepared for deliverance
when he mentions it not. A hasty suitor moves the King for a reward of his
service, but he sped nere the better; for Euripides standing by, and saying
nothing for himself, did by his silence obtain that which the other moved for;
Tu dignus es ad accipiendum etiam non po^ens.
and when the King gave it, he gave this testimony of him, Thou art worthy to
receive it, even because thou do not ask it. Such as are afflicted, should
pray to be bettered before they be delivered: every one now would be glad of
quiet times, because of trading and their temporal estates, pray to receive
good from God by these troubles, and wait for thy deliverance.

3. If we wait not patiently, we run upon our own danger, the husbandman after
he has sown his ground, yet waits till his corn be come up, Lun. 5.7, 8.
till it be full ripe, and will not reap before the harvest. A woman with child
desires to go her full time, though she came her burden, and treads many a
weary step: yet she would not come before her time, for she knows it would be
dangerous to her self and her child. The Church of England is now great, and we
hope ere long will be delivered of the goodliest and fairest Child that ever
she brought forth: and we have need to be put into a positure of patience to
wait Gods leisure, Isa. 37.3.
till he gives strength to bring forth the Child of Reformation which lies
struggling in the womb.

Errata.
Page 5. lin. 6. for mists are below, read mists blow. p. 11. for is this, r.
this is impatience.

FINIS.

