A LETTER FROM Admiral Vantrump TO The Lords and Burgamasters of Amsterdam,
touching his late Engagement with the English, and the account he renders to
them thereof: With the States Orders for the building of 60 new Frigots; and
the levying of the Two hundredth penny throughout all Holland, for the
maintaining of the War with England.

Also, Their new Orders and Instructions to Admiral De Wit, and the
Admiralties, requiring them to put out to Sea all the ships that are in their
Harbors.

Likewise, The proceedings of the King of Denmark with the English Resident;
And a List of the ships of War set out to Sea by him: With his Orders for
unlading the English ships detained there, and his Design therein.

Together with a Narrative of the proceedings of the English at Legorn; A fight
betwixt them and the Dutch near that place, and the event and success thereof.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by E. Alsop. 1653.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF The King of Denmark, touching the Resident of the
Parliament of England, and his Orders for unlading the English ships detained
there.
SIR,
THe Resident of the Parliament of England, Mr. Bradshaw, after many hazards in
Denmark, and in his way out of it, at length arrived here in safety. The K. of
the Danes notwithstanding his promise to the Merchants and Sea men, that they
should have liberty to charge and dispose of their goods, was pleased to put
guards upon all the detained ships, not permitting the English to have any
further power of any thing: he has also ordered the speedy unlading of them,
under pretense they have ammunition aboard, but really (it is thought) to make
men of war for his own use, of 5 or 6 of the best of them.

The Kings officers pretended all done, only to secure the Goods from being
imbezelled by the Sea men, and with intent they said, to deal with them, as the
State of England should deal with theirs.

As concerning the Resident himself, he hap a very hazardous time of it, from
his first coming to Copenhagen. Much was discovered of designings against his
life, and the lives of his company, by wicked men; insomuch that he was
necessitated to demand a guard of the King of Denmark to go along with him
through his Country toward Hamburgh. The King seemed much discontent that he
should demand a guard, but yet did grant it at the Residents own Charge,
sending eight of his own Lifeguard to him, with warrant under the Kings own
hand and seal, to convoy him and his company safe to Hamburgh.

With this protection the Resident set forth from Copenhagen the tenth of
February, and the next day he passed over the first Belt or Water, and
afterward crossing the Belt again, he came into the Duke of Holsteins Country.

He had with him in Company above twenty Masters and English Seamen; and having
put himself into the Kings more special protection, all means was used that
could be for safety, from the hands of bloody men.

The poor English Masters and Seamen being turned out of all, came with a
pitiful cry to the Resident to relieve them some way, that they might get
home, lest after the loss of their estates they should starve in that country,
or be forced to serve against their own. Whereupon, he took order to relieve 60
of them with food at Copenhagen, till they can get away hither by sea to
Lubeck. About twenty of them he brought along with him over land.

It is supposed, that the ships detained at Copenhagen, are al by this time
unladen, and those made use of, that are fit to serve against England.

What preparations are made by the King of Denmark, you may see by this
enclosed Catalogue of his shipping.

Lubeck, Febr. 25. Twenty sail of the King of Denmarks ships.
Ports Guns Men. 94 80 425 100 86 425 90 74 330 48 48 300 50 42 230 52 44 230
60 44 280 52 40 195 42 36 234 48 44 280 36 30 150 54 40 226 44 34 82 50 34 150
36 30 92 34 30 150 42 34 82 36 30 80 36 32 84 38 30 84 The number of Guns is
868. Men 4109



A Letter from Amsterdam.
SIR,
GReat joy has been here for the safe return of the sixty fail of Merchat men,
which came from the parts about Rohan, and gave the English Fleet the slip at
their first coming out. They had 10 men of War for their Convoy, the absence
of which rendered Admiral Trump so much the weaker; and this is made a fault by
many, that those men of War should be dismissed for a convoy, it being against
Orders. Nevertheless the joy conceived for the return of the 60 Merchants, is
some allay to that displeasure. The work of building ships goes on apace, an
agreement being made for 60 Frigots, to be ready in 4 months. And the Province
of Holland has moved the other Provinces to furnish out their respective
shares in ready money, for the making up of that sum which was agreed on for
the setting forth the ships. Holland it self has, for this ensuing year,
Ordered a Levy of the Two hundredth penny toward defraying the charge of their
Sea undertakings. The East Indie company of this Town are to make ready and set
out for the States service, 6 men of War well appointed.

Van Trump has sent a Letter to the Lords and Burgamasters of this Town,
giving them an account of the late Fight, alleging that he misseth only nine
men of war, but that all their Merchant men are in safety, and how that he lay
betwixt Calis and Dunkirk to attend the motion of the English Fleet, if they
came that way. It is boasted here, that they have taken from you the ship
called the Prosperous, of 50 guns; and the general cry here, is, that the
English have had the worst; and yet some are at a stand, because they see but
few Merchantmen yet appearing.

The States had news out of Zealand, that diverse Merchant men were come in
there from Trumps fleet, which affirms that there had been a notable engagement
for 2 days time. At length news was brought from Scheveling that they espied
about 60 sail making toward the Texel, which they supposed to be Merchantmen
returned; but not one word of any ship of war as yet returned; which is
interpreted as an ill Omen by their Lordships, who thereupon have issued out
orders for the sending forth with all speed those 40 ships under he Wit, which
were designed for an union with Trump, and the Admiralties are required
immediately to put out to sea all the ships that are in their harbors. Which
gives great cause of suspicion, all is not so well as was given out among the
people.

Upon the earnest request of the Merchant-strangers who were interessed in
those Merchantmen laden with Pitch, Tar, Hemp, etc. which had been seized in
the Sound, and brought in hither by the men of war of this State, it has been
ordered by the States General, that those ships be released, upon condition,
that hereafter those ships which shall be laden with contreband goods, do not
presume to put to sea without it be with a general convoy; by which way they
will be able to see that none of them be transported to England. The Colleges
of the admiralty are charged likewise to take order that search be made in all
fisher boats; information being given that they steal out with contreband
goods, and other prohibited commodities, which its said they carry over into
England. Six men of War, and 2 small Frigots, are to be sent to Brasil, for
relief of the West Indy company.

It has been moved to the States by the Resident of the K. of France, that all
Merchants of this State may be prohibited strictly from sending any Corn, or
contreband commodities to Bourdeaux which city his master intends to distress
both by sea and land, wherein it is conceived they will gratify the French K.
having endeavored so far already to oblige him, that order is given to Lieut.
Admiral Trump, to use his utmost endeavor to seiz the ships of war belonging
to the Pr. of Conde and his adherents; and to deliver up the same to the D. of
Vendosm Admiral of France.

Amsterdam March 8. stilo novo. 1652.
The news from our ships at Legorn and Portolongone, is, That there lately came
into the Road one that brought word, that our Frigots have been in fight with
six Flemish ships, who had a hot andd sharp dispute, which continued a good
space; but in fine, our Frigots together with the Harry Bonaventure, took one
of their Merchant ships, and carried her into Messina; she is a ship of about
400 tuns, and 26 or 28 Guns, but we know not yet what ^er lading was. The 30 of
Jan. the Admiral of the Hollanders and one man of war more (there being then
but 7 in the Road) set sail thence, and stood toward the Southward, and in the
night the said ships ran ashore a ledge of rocks, lying 6 leagues to Southward
of the road, so that the Admiral is castaway, but the other is got off again.
Febr. 1. our men made have to get Ballast aboard, thinkto have gone out the
second, and to have fought the Hollanders, but that night there came 5 men of
war more, so that then there were eleven men of war in the Road. The next day
Admiral Badiley came from Longone to Legorn, in hope to have gained an
opportunity, but too late. The Thomas Bonaventure, Mary-rose, William, and
Thomas are at Port Ferray to get out their goods, and to make ready again, but
the Paragon, Capt. Badileys ship, is at Longone again, the Deputy-purser
whereof, and the Chyrurgian of the Bonaventure are dead.

Aboard the Leopard in Legorn-mole, Febr. 4.
FINIS.

