POEMS, WITH The tenth SATYR of IUVENAL ENGLISHED.

By Henry Vaughan, Gent.

-- Tam nil, nulla tibi vendo
Illiade --
LONDON, Printed for G. Badger, and are to be sold at his shop under Saint
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1646.

To all Ingenious Lovers OF POESY.
Gentlemen,
TO you alone, whose more refined Spirits out-wing these dull Times, and soar
above the drudgerie of durty Intelligence, have I made sacred these Fancies: I
know the years, and what course entertainment they afford Poetry. If any
shall question that Courage that durst send me abroad so late, and revell it
thus in the Dregs of an Age, they have my silence: only,

Languescente seculo, liceat aegrotari; My more calm Ambition, amidst the
common noise, has thus exposed me to the World: You have here a Flame, bright
only in its own Innocence, that kindles nothing but a generous Thought; which
though it may warm the Blood, the fire at highest is but Platonic, and the
Commotion, within these limits, excludes Danger: For the Satyr, it was of
purpose borrowed, to feather some slower Hours; And what you see here, is but
the Interest: It is one of his, whose Roman Pen had as much true Passion, for
the infirmities of that state, as we should have Pity, to the distractions of
our own: Honest (I am sure) it is, and offensive cannot be, except it meet
with such Spirits that will quarrel with Antiquity, or purposely Arraigne
themselves; These indeed may think, that they have slept out so many Centuries
in this Satyr, and are now awaked; which, had it been still Latin, perhaps
their Nap had been Everlasting: But enough of these, -- It is for you only that
I have adventured thus far, and invaded the Press with Verse; to whose more
noble Indulgence, I shall now leave it; and so am gone. --

H. V.

To my Ingenuous Friend, R. W.
WHen we are dead, and now, no more
Our harmles mirth, our wit, and score
Distracts the Town; when all is spent
That the base niggard world has lent
Thy purse, or mine; when the loathed noise
Of Drawers, Prentises, and boys
Has left us, and the clamorous bar
Items no pints in the Moon, or Star;
When no calm whisp'rers wait the doors,
To fright us with forgotten scores;
And such aged, long bills carry,
As might start an Antiquary;
When the sad tumults of the Maze,
Arrests, suites, and the dreadful face
Of Seargeants are not seen, and we
No Lawyers Ruffes, or Gowns must fee:
When all these Mulcts are paid, and I
From thee, dear wit, must part, and dye;
We Will beg the world would be so kind,
To give's one grave, as wee'de one mind;
There (as the wiser few suspect,
That spirits after death affect)
Our souls shall meet, and thence will they
(Freed from the tyranny of clay)
With equal wings, and ancient love
Into the Elysian fields remove,
Where in those blessed walks they will find,
More of thy Genius, and my mind:
First, in the shade of his own bays,
Great BEN they will see, whose sacred Lays,
The learned Ghosts admire, and throng,
To catch the subject of his Song.
Then Randolph in those holy Meades,
His Looers, and Amyntas reads,
Whilst his Nightingall close by,
Sings his, and her own Elegy;
From thence dismissed by subtle roades,
Through airie paths, and sad aboads;
They Will come into the drowsy fields
Of Lethe, which such virtue yields,
That (if what Poets sing be true)
The streams all sorrow can subdue.
Here on a silent, shady green;
The souls of Lovers often are seen,
Who in their life's unhappy space,
Were murdered by some perjured face.
All these th'inchanted streams frequent,
To drown their Cares, and discontent,
That the inconstant, cruel sex
Might not in death their spirits vex:
And here our souls big with delight
Of their new state will cease their flight:
And now the last thoughts will appear,
They Will have of us, or any here;
But on those flowery banks will stay,
And drink all sense, and cares away.
So they that did of these discuss,
Shall find their fables true in us.
Les Amors.
TYrant farewell: This heart, the prize
And triumph of thy scornful eyes,
I sacrifice to Heaven, and give
To quit my sins, that durst believe
A Woman's easy faith, and place
True joys in a changing face.
Yet e're I go; by all those tears,
And sighs I spent 'twixt hopes, and fears;
By thy own glories, and that hour
Which first enslaved me to thy power;
I beg, fair One, by this last breath,
This tribute from thee after death.
If when I Am gone, you chance to see
That cold bed where I lodged be:
Let not your hate in death appear,
But bless my ashes with a tear:
This influxe from that quickening eye,
By secret power, which none can spy,
The cold dust shall inform, and make
Those flames (though dead) new life partake.
Whose warmth helped by your tears shall bring,
Over all the tomb a sudden spring:
If Crimson flowers, whose drooping heads
Shall curtain over their mournful heads:
And on each leaf by Heavens command,
These Emblemes to the life shall stand:
Two Hearts, the first a shaft withstood;
The second, shot, and washed in blood;
And on this heart a dew shall stay,
Which no heat can court away;
But fixed for ever witness bears,
That hearty sorrow feeds on tears.
Thus Heaven can make it known, and true,
That you killed me, 'cause I loved you.
To Amoret, The Sigh.
NImble Sigh on thy warm wings,
Take this Message, and depart,
Tell Amoret, that smiles, and sings.
At what thy airie voyage brings,
That thon came lately from my heart.
Tell my lovely foe, that I
Have no more such spies to send,
But one or two that I intend
Some few minutes ere I dye,
To her white bosom to commend.
Then whisper by that holy Spring
Where for her sake I would have dyed,
Whilst those water Nymphs did bring
Flowers to cure what she had tried;
And of my faith, and love did sing.
That if my Amoret, if she
In aftertimes would have it read,
How her beauty murdered me,
With all my heart I will agree,
If she will but love me, being dead.
To his Friend Being in Love.
Ask Lover, ere thou dyest; let one poor breath
Steal from thy lips, to tell her of thy Death;
Doting Idolater! can silence bring
Thy Saint propitious? or will Cupid fling
One arrow for thy palenes? leave to try
This silent Courtship of a sickly eye;
Witty to tyranny: She too well knows
This but the incense of thy private vows,
That breaks forth at thine eyes, and does betray
The sacrifice thy wounded heart would pay;
Ask her, fool, ask her, if words cannot move,
The language of thy tears may make her love:
Flow nimbly from me then; and when you fall
On her breasts warmer snow, O may you all,
By some strange Fate fixed there, distinctly lie
The much loved Volume of my Tragedy.
Where if you win her not, may this be read,
The cold that freez'd you so, did strike me dead.
Song.
AMyntas go, thou art undone,
Thy faithful heart is crossed by fate;
That Love is better not begun,
Where Love is come to lvoe too late;
Had she professed hidden fires,
Or showed one knot that tied her heart:
I could have quenched my first desires,
And we had only met to part;
But Tyrant, thus to murder men,
And shed a Lovers harmles blood,
And burn him in those flames again,
Which he at first might have with stood*
Yet, who that saw fair Chloris weep
Such sacred dew, with such pure grace;
Durst think them fained tears, or seek
For Treason in an Angels face:
This is her Art, though this be true,
Men's joys are killed with griefs and fears;
Yet she like flowers oppr'est with dew,
Does thrive and flourish in her tears:
This Cruel thou have done, and thus,
That Face has many servants slain.
Though the end be not to ruin us,
But to seek glory by our pain.
To Amoret, Walking in a Starry EVENING.
IF Amoret, that glorious Eye,
In the first birth of light,
And death of Night,
Had with those elder fires you spy
Scattered so high
Received form, and sight;
We might suspect in the vast Ring,
Amidst these golden glories,
And fiery stories;
Whether the Sun had been the King,
And guide of Day,
Or your brighter eye should sway;
But, Amoret, such is my fate,
That if thy face a Star
Had shined from far,
Iam persuaded in that state
'Twixt thee, and me,
Of some predestined sympathy.
For sure such two conspiring minds,
Which no accident, or sight,
Did thus unite;
Whom no distance can confine,
Start, or decline,
One, for another, were designed.
To Amoret GONE FROM HIM.
FAncy, and I, last Evening walked,
And, Amoret, of thee we talked;
The West just then had stolen the Sun,
And his last blushes were begun:
We sat, and marked how every thing
Did mourn his absence; How the Spring
That smiled, and curled about his beams,
Whilst he was here, now checked her streams
The wanton Eddies of her face
Were taught less noise, and smoother grace;
And in a slow, sad channel went,
Whispering the banks their discontent:
The careless ranks of flowers that spread
Their perfumed bosoms to his head,
And with an open, free Embrace,
Did entertain his beamy face;
Like absent friends point to the West,
And on that weak reflection feast.
If Creatures then that have no sense,
But the loose tie of influence,
(Though fate, and time each day remove
Those things that element their love)
At such vast distance can agree,
Why, Amoret, why should not we.
A Song to Amoret.
IF I were dead, and in my place,
Some fresher youth designed,
To warm thee with new fires, and grace
Those Arms I left behind;
Were he as faithful as the Sun,
That Is wedded to the Sphere;
His blood as chaste, and temperate run,
As Aprils mildest tear;
Or were he rich, and with his heaps,
And spacious share of Earth,
Could make divine affection cheap,
And court his golden birth:
For all these Arts I Would not believe,
(No though he should be thine)
The mighty Amorist could give
So rich a heart as mine.
Fortune and beauty thou might find,
And greater men then I:
But my true resolved mind,
They never shall come nigh.
For I not for an hour did love,
Or for a day desire,
But with my soul had from above,
This endless holy fire.
An Elegy.
It Is true, I am undone; Yet e're I dye,
I Will leave these sighs, and tears a legacye
To after-Lovers; that remembering me,
Those sickly flames which now benighted be,
Fanned by their warmer sighs may love; and prove
In them the Metempsuchosis of Love.
'Twas I (when others scorned) vowed you were fair,
And swear that breath enriched the courser air,
Lent Roses to your cheeks, made Flora bring
Her Nymphs with all the glories of the Spring
To wait upon thy face, and gave my heart
A pledge to Cupid for a quicker dart,
To arm those eyes against my self; to me
Thou owe that tongues bewitching harmonye:
I courted Angels from those upper joys,
And made them leave their spheres to hear thy voice:
I made the Indian curse the hours he spent
To seek his pearls, and wisely to repent
His former folly, and confess a sin
Charmed by the brighter luster of thy skin.
I borrowed from the winds, the gentler wing
Of Zephirus, and soft souls of the Spring:
And made (to air those cheeks with fresher grace)
The warm Inspirers dwell upon thy face.
Oh! jam satis --
A Rhapsodis.
Occasionally written upon a meeting with some of his friends at the Globe
Tavern, in a Chamber painted over head with a Cloudy Sky, and some few
dispersed Stars, and on the sides with Land scapes, Hills, Shepherds, and
Sheep.
Darkness, and Stars in the mid day! they invite
Our active fancies to believe it night:
For Tavernes need no Sun, but for a Sign,
Where rich Tobacco, and quick tapers shine;
And royal, witty Sack, the Poets soul,
With brighter Suns then he does guild the bowl;
As though the Pot, and Poet did agree,
Sack should to both Illuminator be.
That artificial Cloud with it is curled brow,
Tells us it is late; and that blew space below
Is fired with many Stars; Mark, how they break
In silent glaunces over the hills, and speak
The Evening to the Plains; where shot from far,
They meet in dumb salutes, as one great Star.
The room (me thinks) grows darker; and the air
Contracts a sadder color, and less fair:
Or is it the Drawers skill, has he no Arts
To blind us so, we cannot know pints from quarts?
No, no, it is night; look where the jolly Clown
Musters his bleating heard, and quits the Down.
Hark! how his rude pipe frets the quiet air,
Whilst every Hill proclaims Lycoris fair.
Rich, happy man! that can thus watch, and sleep,
Free from all cares; but thy wench, pipe and sheep.
But see the Moon is up; view where she stands
Centinell over the door, drawn by the hands
Of some base Painter, that for gain has made
Her face the Landmarke to the tippling trade.
This Cup to her, that to Endymion give;
'Twas wit at first, and wine that made them live:
Choke may the Painter! and his Box disclose
No other Colors then his fiery Nose;
And may we no more of his pencill see,
Then two Churchwardens, and Mortality.
Should we go now a wandering, we should meet
With Catchpoles, whores, and Carts in every street:
Now when each narrow lane, each nooke and Cave,
Signe-posts, and shop-doors, pimp for every knave,
When riotous sinful plush, and tell-tale spurs
Walk Fleetstreet, and the Strand, when the soft stirs
Of bawdy, ruffled Silks, turn night to day;
And the loud whip, and Coach scolds all the way;
When lust of all sorts, and each itchie blood
From the Tower-wharse to Cymberlyne, and Lud,
Hunts for a Mate, and the tired footman reeles
'Twixt chaire-men, torches, and the hackny wheels:
Come, take the other dish; it is to him
That made his horse a Senator: Each brim
Look big as mine; The gallant, jolly Beast
Of all the Herd (you will say) was not the least.
Now crown the second bowl, rich as his worth,
I Will drink it to he! that like fire broke forth
Into the Senates face, crossed Rubicon,
And the States pillars, with their Laws thereon:
And made the dull gray beards, and furred gowns fly
Into Brundusium to consult; and lie:
This to brave Sylla! why should it be sed,
We drink more to the living, then the dead?
Flatt'rers, and fools do use it: Let us laugh
At our own honest mirth; for they that quaffe
To honor others, do like those that sent
Their gold and plate to strangers to be spent:
Drink deep; this Cup be pregnant; and the wine
Spirit of wit, to make us all divine,
That big with Sack, and mirth we may retire
Possessours of more souls, and nobler fire;
And by the influxe of this painted Sky,
And labored forms, to higher matters fly;
So, if a Nap shall take us, we shall all,
After full Cups have dreams Poetical.
LEts laugh now, and the pressed grape drink,
Till the drowsy Day Star wink;
And in our merry, mad mirth run
Faster, and further then the Sun;
And let none his Cup forsake,
Till that Star again does wake;
So we men below shall move
Equally with the gods above.
To Amoret, of the difference 'twixt him, and other Lovers, and what true Love
is.
Mark, when the Evenings cooler wings
Fan the afflicted air, how the faint Sun,
Leaving undone,
What he begun,
Those spurious flames sucked up from slime, and earth
To their first, low birth,
Resignes, and brings.
They shoot their tinsill beams, and vanities,
Thredding with those false fires their way;
But as you stay
And see them stray,
You loose the flaming track, and subt'ly they
Languish away,
And cheat your Eyes.
Just so base, Sublunarie Lovers hearts
Fed on loose profane desires,
May for an Eye,
Or face comply:
But those removed, they will as soon depart,
And show their Art,
And painted fires.
Whilst I by powerful Love, so much refined,
That my absent soul the same is,
Careless to miss,
A glaunce, or kiss,
Can with those Elements of lust and sense,
Freely dispense,
And court the mind.
Thus to the North the Loadstones move,
And thus to them th'enamour'd steel aspires:
Thus, Amoret,
I do affect;
And thus by winged beams, and mutual fire,
Spirits and Stars conspire,
And this is LOVE.
To Amoret WEEPING.
Leave, Amoret, melt not away so fast
Thy Eyes fair treasure, Fortunes wealthiest Cast
Deserves not one such pearl; for these well spent,
Can purchase Stars, and buy a Tenement
For us in Heaven; though here the pious streams
Avail us not; who from that Clue of Sunbeams
Could ever steal one thread? or with a kind
Persuasive Accent charm the wild, loud wind?
Fate cuts us all in Marble, and the Book
Forestalls our glass of minutes; we may look,
But seldom meet a change; think you a tear
Can blot the flinty Volume? shall our fear,
Or grief add to their triumphs? and must we
Give an advantage to adversity?
Dear, idle Prodigal! is it not just
We bear our Stars? What though I had not dust
Enough to cabinett a worm? nor stand
Enslaved unto a little dirt, or sand?
I boast a better purchase, and can show
The glories of a soul that is simply true.
But grant some richer Planet at my birth
Had spyed me out, and measured so much earth
Or gold unto my share; I should have been
Slave to these lower Elements, and seen
My high borne soul flagge with their dross, and lie
A prisoner to base mud, and Alchymie;
I should perhaps eat Orphans, and suck up
A dozen distressed widows in one Cup;
Nay further, I should by that lawful stealth,
(Damned Usurie) undo the Commonwealth;
Or Patent it in Soape, and Coals, and so
Have the Smiths curse me, and my Laundres too;
Geld wine, or his friend Tobacco; and so bring
The incensed subject Rebel to his King;
And after all (as those first sinners fell)
Sink lower then my gold; and lie in Hell.
Thanks then for this deliverance! blessed powers,
You that dispense man's fortune, and his hours,
How am I to you all engaged! that thus
By such strange means, almost miraculous,
You should preserve me; you have gone the way
To make me rich by taking all away.
For I (had I been rich as sure as fate,
Would have bin meddling with the King, or State,
Or something to undo me; and it is fit
(We know) that who has wealth, should have no wit.
But above all, thanks to that providence,
That armed me with a gallant soul, and sense
Against all misfortunes; that has breathed so much
Of Heaven into me, that I scorn the touch
Of these low things; and can with courage dare
What ever fate, or malice can prepare:
I envy no man's purse, or mines; I know,
That loosing them, I Have lost their curses too;
And, Amoret, (although our share in these
Is not contemptible, nor does much please)
Yet whilst Content, and Love we jointly vye,
We have a blessing which no gold can buy.
UPON THE PRIORIE GROVE, His usual Retyrement.
Hail sacred shades! cool, leavie House!
Chaste Treasurer of all my vows,
And wealth! on whose soft bosom laid
My loves fair steps I first betrayed:
Henceforth no melancholy flight,
No sad wing, or hoarse bird of Night,
Disturb this Air, no fatal throat
Of Raven, or Owl, awake the Note
Of our laid Echo, no voice dwell
Within these leaves, but Philomel.
The poisonous Ivy here no more
His false twists on the Oak shall score,
Only the Woodbine here may twine,
As th'Embleme of her Love, and mine;
The Amorous Sun shall here convey
His best beams, in thy shades to play;
The active air, the gentlest showers,
Shall from his wings rain on thy flowers;
And the Moon from her dewie locks
Shall deck thee with her brightest drops:
What ever can a fancy move,
Or feed the eye; Be on this Grove;
And when at last the Winds, and Tears
Of Heaven, with the consuming years,
Shall these green curles bring to decay,
And cloathe thee in an aged Gray:
(If ought a Lover can foresee;
Or if we Poets, Prophets be)
From hence transplanted, thou shall stand
A fresh Grove in th'Elysian Land;
Where (most blessed pair!) as here on Earth
Thou first did eye our growth, and birth;
So there again, thou 'lt see us move
In our first Innocence, and Love:
And in thy shades, as now, so then,
We Will kiss, and smile, and walk again.
FINIS.
IVVENALS TENTH SATYR TRANSLATED.

Nec verbum verbo curabit reddere fidus
Interpres --
LONDON, Printed for G. B. and are to be sold at his Shop under Saint Dunstans
Church. 1646.

IVVENALS tenth Satyr TRANSLATED.
IN all the parts of Earth, from farthest West,
And the Atlanticke Isles, unto the East
And famous Ganges; Few there be that know
What Is truly good, and what is good in show
Without mistake: For what is it we desire,
Or fear discreetly? to what e're aspire,
So thoroughly blessed; but ever as we speed,
Repentance seals the very Act, and deed.
The easy gods moved by no other Fate,
Then our own prayers whole Kingdoms ruinate,
And undo Families, thus strife, and war
Are the swords prize, and a litigious bar
The Gowns prime wish; vain confidence to share
In empty honors, and a bloody care,
To be the first in mischief, makes him dye
Fooled 'twixt ambition, and credulity;
An oilie tongue with fatal, cunning sense,
And that sad virtue ever, Eloquence,
Are the others ruin; but the common curse,
And each days ill waits on the rich man's purse:
He, whose large acres, and imprisoned gold
So far exceeds his Fathers store of old,
As British Whales the Dolphins do surpass.
In sadder times therefore, and when the Laws
Of Nero's fiat reigned; an armed band
Ceased on Longinus, and the spacious Land
Of wealthy Seneca, besieged the gates
Of Lateranus, and his fair estate
Divided as a spoil; In such sad Feasts,
Soldiers (though not invited) are the guests.
Though thou small pieces of the blessed Mine
Have lodged about thee; traveling in the shine
Of a pale Moon, if but a Reed does shake,
Moved by the wind, the shadow makes thee quake.
Wealth has its cares, and want has this relief,
It neither fears the Soldier, nor the Thief;
Thy first choice vows, and to the Gods best known,
Are for thy stores increase, that in all town
Thy stock be greatest, but no poison lies
In The poor man's dish, he tastes of no such spice:
Be that thy care, when with a Kingly gust,
Thou suck'st whole Bowls clad in the gilded dust
Of some rich mineral; whilst the false Wine
Sparkles aloft, and makes the draught Divine.
Blam'st thou the Sages then? because the one
Would still be laughing, when he would be gone
From his own door, the other cried to see
His times addicted to such vanity?
Smiles are an easy purchase, but to weep
Is a hard act, for tears are fetched more deep;
Democritus his nimble Lungs would tire
With constant laughter, and yet keep entire
His stock of mirth, for every object was
Addition to his store; though then (Alas!)
Sedans, and Litters, and our Senate Gowns,
With Robes of honor, fasces, and the frowns
Of unbrib'd Tribunes were not seen; but had
He lived to see our Roman Praetor clad
In Jove's own mantle, seated on his high
Embroidered Chariot 'midst the dust and Cry
Of the large Theater, laden with a Crown
Which scarce he could support, for it would down,
But that his servant props it) and close by
His page a witness to his vanity:
To these his Scepter, and his Eagle add
His Trumpets, Officers, and servants clad
In white, and purple; with the rest that day,
He hired to triumph for his bread, and pay;
Had he these studied, sumptuous follies seen,
It Is thought his wanton, and effusive spleen
Had killed the Abderite, though in that age
(When pride and greatness had not swelled the stage
So high as ours) his harmles, and just mirth
From every object had a sudden birth;
Nor wast alone their avarice, or pride,
Their triumphs, or their cares he did deride;
Their vain contentions, or ridiculous fears;
But even their very poverty, and tears.
He would at fortunes threats as freely smile
As others mourn; nor was it to beguile
His crafty passions; but this habit he
By nature had, and grave Philosophy.
He knew their idle and superfluous vows,
And sacrifice, which such wrong zeal bestows,
Were mere Incendiaries; and that the gods
Not pleased therewith, would ever be at ods;
Yet to no other air, nor better place
Owed he his birth, then the cold, homely Thrace;
Which shows a man may be both wise, and good,
Without the brags of fortune, or his blood.
But envy ruins all: What mighty names
Of fortune, spirit, action, blood, and fame,
Has this destroyed? yea, for no other cause
Then being such; their honor, worth, and place,
Was crime enough; their statues, arms and crowns;
Their ornaments of Triumph, Chariots, Gowns,
And what the Herald with a learned care,
Had long preserved, this madness will not spare.
So once Sejanus Statue Rome allowed
Her Demi-god, and every Roman bowed
To pay his safeties vows; but when that face
Had lost Tyberius once, it is former grace
Was soon eclipsed; no difference made (Alas!)
Betwixt his Statute then, and common Brass;
They melt alike, and in the Workmans hand
For equal, servile use, like others stand.
Go now fetch home fresh Bays, and pay new vows
To thy dumb Capitol gods! thy life, thy house,
And state are now secured; Sejanus lies
I'th'Lictors hands; ye gods! what hearts, and eyes
Can one days fortune change? the solemn cry
Of all the world is, Let Sejanus dye:
They never loved the man they swear, they know
Nothing of all the matter; when, or how,
By what accuser, for what cause, or why,
By whose command, or sentence he must dye.
But what needs this? the least pretense will hit,
When Princes fear, or hate a Favorite.
A large Epistle stuffed with idle fear,
Vain dreams, and jealousies, directed here
From Caprea does it; And thus ever dye
Subjects, when once they grow prodigious high.
It Is well, I seek no more; but tell me how
This took his friends? no private murmurs now?
No tears? no solemn mourner seen? must all
His Glory perish in one funeral?
O still true Romans! State-wit bids them praise
The Moon by night; but court the warmer rays
Of The Sun by day; they follow fortune still,
And hate, or love discreetly, as their will
And the time leads them; This tumultuous fate
Puts all their painted favors out of date:
And yet this people that now spurn, and tread
This mighty Favorites once honored head,
Had but the Tuscaine goddess, or his Stars
Destined him for an Empire, or had wars,
Treason, or policy, or some higher power
Oppressed secure Tyberius; that same hour
That he received the sad Gemonian doom,
Had crowned him Emp'ror of the world, and Rome.
But Rome is now grown wise, and since that she
Her Suffrages, and ancient Liberty,
Lost in a Monarchs name; she takes no care
For Favorite, or Prince; nor will she share
Their fickle glories, though in Cato's days
She ruled whole States, and Armies with her voice,
Of all the honors now within her walls,
She only doats on Plays, and Festivalls:
Nor is it strange; for when these Meteors fall,
They draw an ample ruin with them; All
Share in the storm; each beam sets with the Sun,
And equal hazard friends, and flatt'rers run.
This makes, that circled with distractive fear
The livelesse, pale Sejanus limbs they tear,
And least the action might a witness need,
They bring their servants to confirm the deed,
Nor is it done for any other end,
Then to avoid the title of his friend.
So falls ambitious man, and such are still
All floating States built on the peoples will:
Hearken all you! whom this bewitching lust
Of an hours glory, and a little dust
Swells to such dear repentance! you that can
Measure whole kingdoms with a thought or span
Would you be as Sejanus? would you have
So you might sway as he did, such a grave?
Would you be rich as he? command, dispose,
All Acts, and Offices? All friends, and foes?
Be Generals of Armies, and Colleague
Unto an Emperor? break, or make a league?
No doubt you would; for both the good, and bad,
An eqnall itch of honor ever had:
But O what State can be so great, or good,
As to be bought with so much shame, and blood!
Alas! Sejanus will too late confess
'Twas only pride, and greatness made him less:
For he that moves with the lofty wind
Of Fortune, and ambition, unconfined
In act, or thought; does but increase his height,
That he may loose it with more force, and weight;
Scorning a base, low ruin, as if he
Would of misfortune, make a Prodigy.
Tell mighty Pompey, Crassus, and O thou
That made Rome kneel to thy victorious brow,
What but the weight of honors, and large fame
After your worthy Acts, and height of name,
Destroyed you in the end? the envious Fates
Easy to further your aspiring States,
Used them to quell you too; pride, and excess
In every Act did make you thrive the less:
Few Kings are guilty of gray hairs, or dye
Without a stab, a draught, or treachery:
And yet to see him, that but yesterday
Saw letters first, how he will scrape, and pray;
And all her Feast-time tire Minervaes ears
For Fame, for Eloquence, and store of years
To thrive and live in; and then lest he doates,
His boy assists him with his box, and notes;
Fool that thou art! not to discern the ill
These vows include; what, did Rom's Consul kill
Her Cicero? what, him whose very dust
Greece celebrates as yet; whose cause though just,
Scarce banishment could end; nor poison save
His free borne person from a foreign grave:
All this from Eloquence! both head, and hand,
The tongue does forfeit; petty wits may stand
Secure from danger, but the nobler vein,
With loss of blood the bar does often stain.
O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam. Carmen Ciceronianum.

Had all been thus, thou might have scorned the sword
Of fierce Antonius, here is not one word
Does pinch, I like such stuff; it is safer far
Then thy Philippicks, or Pharsalia's war:
What sadder end then his, whom Athens saw
At once her Patriot, Oracle, and Law?
Unhappy then is he, and cursed in Stars,
Whom his poor Father, blind with soot, and scars
Sends from the Anviles harmles chine, to wear
The factious gown, and tire his Clients ear,
And purse with endless noise; Trophies of war
Old rusty armor, with an honored scar;
And wheels of captived Chariots, with a piece
Of some torn British Galley, and to these
The Ensign too, and last of all the train
The pensive prisoner laden with his Chain,
Are thought true Roman honors; these the Greek
And rude Barbarians equally do seek
Thus air, and empty fame, are held a prize
Beyond fair virtue; for all virtue dies
Without reward; And yet by this fierce lust
Of Fame, and titles to ovtlive our dust,
And Monuments; (though all these things must dye
And perish like our selves) whole Kingdoms lie
Ruined, and spoiled: Put Hannibal in the scale,
What weight affords the mighty General?
This is the man, whom Africks spacious Land
Bounded by the Indian Sea, and Niles hot sand,
Could not contain; (Ye gods! that give to men
Such boundles appetites, why state you them
So short a time? either the one deny,
Or give their acts, and them Eternity)
All Aethiopia, to the utmost bound
Of Titans course, (then which no Land is found
Less distant from the Sun) with him that ploughs
That fertile soil where framed Iberus flows,
Are not enough to conquer; past now over
The Pyrene hills, The Alps with all its store
Of Ice, and Rocks clad in eternal snow
(As if that Nature meant to give the blow)
Denies him passage; straight on every side
He wounds the Hill, and by strong hand divides
The monstrous pile, naught can ambition stay
The world, and nature yield to give him way:
And now past over the Alps, that mighty bar
'Twixt France, and Rome, fear of the future war
Strikes Italy; success, and hope does fire
His lofty spirits with a fresh desire.
All is undone as yet (says he) unless
Our Paenish forces we advance, and press
Upon Rome's self; break down her gates, and wall,
And plant our Colors in Suburra's Vale.
O the rare slight! if this great soldier we
Armed on his Getick Elephant might see!
But what is the event? O glory! how the itch
Of thy short wonders does mankind bewitch!
He that but now all Italy, and Spain,
Had conquered over, is beaten out again;
And in the heart of Africa, and the sight
Of his own Carthage, forced to open flight.
Banished from thence, a fugitive he posts
To Syria first, then to Bythinia's Coasts;
Both places by his sword secured; though he
In this distress must not acknowledged be;
Where once a General he triumphed, now
To show what Fortune can, he begs as low.
And thus that soul, which through all nations hurled
Conquest, and war, and did amaze the world;
Of all those glories robbed at his last breath,
Fortune would not vouchsafe a soldiers death,
For all that blood the field of Cannae boasts,
And sad Apulia filled with Roman ghoasts:
No other end (freed from the pile, and sword)
Then a poor Ring would Fortune him afford.
Go now ambitious man! new plots design,
March over the snowie Alps, and Apennine;
That after all, at best thou may but be
A pleasing story to posterity!
The Macedon one world could not contain,
We hear him of the narrow Earth complain,
And sweat for room, as if Seryphus I Will,
Or Gyara had held him in Exile:
But Babylon this madness can allay,
And give the great man but his length of clay;
The highest thoughts, and actions under Heaven,
Death only with the lowest dust lays even.
It is believed (if what Greece writes be true)
That Xerxes with his Persian Fleet did hew
Their ways through mountains, that their sails full blown,
Like clouds hung over Athos, and did drown
The spacious Continent, and by plain force
Betwixt the Mount, and it made a divorce;
That Seas exhausted were, and made firm land,
And Sestos joined unto Abidos Strand;
That on their march, his Meades but passing by,
Drank thee Scamander, and Melenus dry;
With what soever incredible design
Sostratus sings inspired with pregnant Wine:
But what is the end? He that the other day
Divided Hellespont, and forced his way
Through all her angry billows; that assigned
New punishments unto the waves, and wind:
No sooner saw the Salaminian Seas,
But he was driven out by Themistocles,
And of that Fleet (supposed to be so great,
That all mankind shared in the sad defeat)
Not one Sail saved in a poor Fishers boat,
Chased over the working surge, was glad to float,
Cutting his desperate course through the tired flood,
And fought again with Carcasses, and blood.
O foolish mad ambition! these are still
The famous dangers that attend thy will.
Give store of days, good Jove, give length of years,
Are the next vows; these with religious fears,
And Constancy we pay; but what is so bad,
As a long, sinful age? what cross more sad
Then misery of years? how great an Ill
Is that, which does but nurse more sorrow still?
It blacks the face, corrupts, and duls the blood,
Benights the quickest eye, distasts the food,
And such deep furrows cuts in the Checkered skin
As in the old Oaks of Tabraca are seen.
Youth varies in most things; strength, beauty, wit,
Are several graces; but where age does hit,
It makes no difference; the same weak voice,
And trembling ague in each member lies:
A general, batefull baldnes, with a cursed
Perpetual pettishnes; and which is worst,
A foul, strong flux of humors, and more pain
To feed, then if he were to nurse again.
So tedious to himself, his wife, and friends,
That his own sons, and servants, wish his end,
His taste, and feeling dies; and of that fire
The amorous Lover burns in, no desire:
Or if there were, what pleasure could it be,
Where lust does reign without ability?
Nor is this all, what matters it, where he
Sits in the spacious Stage? who can nor see,
Nor hear what is acted, whom the stiller voice
Of spirited, wanton airs, or the loud noise
Of Trumpets cannot pierce; whom thunder can
But scarce inform who enters, or what man
He personates, what it is they act, or say?
How many Scaenes are done? what time of day?
Besides that little blood, his carcass holds,
Has low its native warmth, and fraught with colds,
Catarrhs, and rheumes, to thick, black jelly turns,
And never but in fits, and fevers burns;
Such vast infirmities, so huge a stock
Of sickness, and diseases to him flock,
That Hyppia never so many Lovers knew,
Nor wanton Maura; Physic never slew
So many Patients, nor rich Lawyers spoil
More Wards, and Widows; it were lesser toil
To number out what Manors, and Demaines,
Licinius razer purchased: One complains
Of weakness in the back, another pants
For lack of breath, the third his eyesight wants;
Nay some so feeble are, and full of pain,
That Infant like they must be fed again.
These faint too at their meals; their wine they spill,
And like young birds, that wait the Mothers Bill
They gape for meat; but sadder far then this
Their senseless ignorance, and dotage is;
For neither they, their friends, nor servants know,
Nay those themselves begot, and bred up too
No longer now they will own; for madly they
Proscribe them all, and what on the last day,
The Misers cannot carry to the Grave
For their past sins, their prostitutes must have.
But grant age lacked these plagues; yet must they see
As great, as many: Frail Mortality
In such a length of years, has many falls,
And deads a life with frequent funerals.
The nimblest hour in all the span, can steal
A friend, or brother from's; there is no Repeal
In death, or time; this day a wife we mourn,
To morrowes tears a son, and the next Urne
A Sister fills; Long-livers have assigned
These curses still: That with a restles mind,
An age of fresh renewing cares they buy,
And in a tide of tears grow old and dye.
Nestor, (if we great Homer may believe)
In his full strength three hundred years did live:
Happy (thou wilt say) that for so long a time
Enjoyed free nature with the grape, and Wine
Of many Autumnes; but I prithee, hear
What Nestor says himself, when he his dear
Antilochus had lost, how he complains
Of life's too large Extent, and copious pains?
Of all he meets, he asks what is the cause
He lived thus long; for what breach of their Laws
The gods thus punished him? what sin had he
Done worthy of a long life's misery?
Thus Peleus his Achilles mourned, and he
Thus wept that his Ulysses lost at Sea.
Had Priam dyed, before Phereclus Fleet
Was built, or Paris stole the fatal Greek,
Troy had yet stood, and he perhaps had gone
In peace unto the lower shades; His son
Saved with his plenteous offspring, and the rest
In solemn pomp bearing his fun'rall Chest;
But long life hindered this: Unhappy he,
Kept for a public ruin; lived to see
All Asia lost, and e're he could expire,
In his own house saw both the sword, and fire;
All white with age, and cares, his feeble arm
Had now forgot the war; but this Alarm
Gathers his dying spirits; and as we
An aged Ox worn out with labor, see,
By his ungrateful Master, after all
His years of toil, a thankles victime fall:
So he by Jove's own Altar; which shows, we
Are no where safe from Heaven, and destiny:
Yet dyed a man; but his surviving Queen,
Freed from the Greekish sword was barking seen.
I haste to Rome, and Pontus King let pass,
With Lydian Craesus, whom in vain (Alas!)
Just Solons grave advice bad to attend,
That happiness came not before the end.
What man more blessed in any age to come
Or past, could Nature show the world, or Rome,
Then Marius was? if 'midst the pomp of war,
And triumphs fetched with Roman blood from far
His soul had fled; Exile, and fetters then,
He never had seen, nor known Mynturna's fenne;
Nor had it, after Carthage got, been sed,
A Roman General had begged his bread.
Thus Pompey the envious gods, and Romes ill stars
(Freed from Campania's fevers, and the Wars)
Doomed to Achilles sword: Our public vows
Made Caesar guiltles; but sent him to loose
His head at Nile; This curse Cethegus mist;
This Lentulus, and this made him resist
That mangled by no Lictors axe, fell dead
Entirely Catiline, and saved his head.
The anxious Matrons, with their foolish zeal,
Are the last Votaries, and their Appeal
Is all for beauty; with soft speech, and slow,
They pray for sons, but with a louder vow
Commend a female feature: All that can
Make woman pleasing now they shift, and scan:
And why reproved they say, Latona's pair
The Mother never thinks can be too fair.
But sad Lucretia warnes to wish no face
Like hers; Virginia would bequeath her grace
To Crooke-backe Rutila in exchange; for still
The fairest children do their Parents fill
With greatest cares; so seldom Chastity
Is found with beauty; though some few there be
That with a strict, religious care contend
The old, modest, Sabine Customs to defend:
Besides, wise nature to some faces grants
An easy blush, and where she freely plants,
A less Instruction serves; but both these joined,
At Rome would both be forced or else purloyn'd.
So steeled a forehead vice has, that dares win,
And bribe the Father to the Childrens sin;
But whom have gifts defiled not? what good face
Did ever want these tempters? pleasing grace
Betraies it self; what time did Nero mind
A course, maimed shape? what blemished youth confined
His goatish Pathick? whence then slow these joies
Of a fair issue? whom these sad annoies
Wait, and grow up with; whom perhaps thou wilt see
Public Adulterers, and must be
Subject to all the Curses, Plagues, and awe
Of jealous mad men, and the Julian Law;
Nor can thou hope they will find a milder Star,
Or more escapes then did the God of War;
But worse then all, a jealous brain confines:
His fury to no Law; what rage assigns;
Is present justice: Thus the rash Sword spils
This Lechers blood, the scourge another kills.
But thy spruce boy must touch no other face
Then a Patrician? Is of any race
So they be rich; Servilia is as good
With wealth, as she that boasts Iulus blood:
To please a servant all is cheap; what thing
In all their stock to the last suite, and King
But lust exacts? the poorest whore in this,
As generous as the Patrician is.
But thou will say what hurt's a beauteous skin
With a chaste soul? ask Theseus son, and him
That Stenobaea murdered; for both these
Can tell how fatal 'twas in them to please;
A woman's spleen then carries most of fate,
When shame and sorrow aggravate her hate:
Resolve me now, had Silius been thy son,
In such a hazard what should he have done?
Of all Romes youth, this was the only best,
In whom alone beauty, and worth did rest:
This Messalina saw, and needs he must
Be ruined by the Emperor, or her lust,
All in the face of Rome, and the worlds eye,
Though Cesars wife, a public Bigamie
She dares attempt; and that the act might bear
More prodigy, the notaries appear,
And Augures to it; and to complete the sin
In solemn form, a dowry is brought in;
All this (thou wilt say) in private might have past,
But she will not have it so; what course at last?
What should he do? If Messaline be crossed
Without redress thy Silius will be lost;
If not, some two days length is all he can
Keep from the grave; just so much as will span
This news to Hostia, to whose fate he owes
That Claudius last his own dishonor knows.
But he obeyes, and for a few hours lust,
Forfeits that glory should outlive his dust,
Nor was it much a fault; for, whether he
Obeyed, or not; 'twas equal destiny:
So fatal beauty is, and full of wast,
That neither wanton can be safe, nor chaste.
What then should man pray for? what is it that he
Can beg of Heaven, without Impiety?
Take my advice: first to the Gods commit
All cares; for they things competent, and fit
For us foresee; besides man is more dear
To them, then to himself: we blindly here
Led by the world, and lust, in vain assay
To get us portions, wives, and sons; but they
Already know all that we can intend,
And of our Childrens Children see the end.
Yet that thou may have something to commend
With thanks unto the Gods for what they send;
Pray for a wise, and knowing soul; a sad
Discreet, true valor, that will scorn to add
A needless horror to thy death; that knows
It Is but a debt which man to nature owes;
That starts not at misfortunes, that can sway,
And keep all passions under lock and key;
That couets nothing, wrongs none, and preferres
An honest want before rich injurers;
All this thou have within thy self, and may
Be made thy own, if thou will take the way;
What boots the worlds wild, loose applause? what
Frail, perilous honors add unto a man?
What length of years, wealth, or a rich fair wife?
Virtue alone can make a happy life.
To a wise man naught comes amiss: but we
Fortune adore, and make our Deity.
FINIS.

