A Caveat for Covenant-Contemners and Covenant-Breakers.
The Sacred and Solemn League and Covenant mutually made and entered into by the
three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, for the Religious
advancement of the glorious work of Reformation, in the said three Kingdoms in
Life, Doctrine, and Church Government.
The Preface or Preamble to the Covenant.
WE, Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdom of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes, the glory of God and the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor
and happiness of the Kings Majesty and his posterity, and the true public
Liberty, Safety and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private
condition is included; And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots,
conspiracies, attempts and practices of the enemies of God against the true
Religion, and professors thereof in all places, especially in these three
Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion; and how their rage, power,
and presumption are of late, and at this time, increased and exercised, whereof
the deplorable estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed
estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public testimonies. We have
now, at last (after other means of supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations,
and sufferings) for the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter
ruin and destruction; according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms
in former times, and the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual League and
Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us with our hands lifted up
to the most high God, do swear;

The Covenant.
1. THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several Places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion, in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion, in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God and the example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformitie in Religion, confession
of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directorie for Worship and Catechizing;
That We and our posterity after us, may as brethren live in faith and love and
the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2 That we shall in like manner without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profanness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be One in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several
vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliament and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; and to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our Loyalty; and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
greatness.

4. We shall also, withal faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all such
as shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering the
Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any faction, or parties among the people,
contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to public
trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall
require or deserve, or the supreme judicatures of both kingdoms respectively,
or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient.

5. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our progenitors, is by the good providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments;
We shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that
they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity, and that
justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the present Articles.

6. We shall also according to our places and callings, in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or give our selves to a detestable indifferency, or Neutrality in this cause
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms and honor
of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and constantly
continue therein against all opposition; and promote the same according to our
power against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome we shall reveal and make known, that it may be
timely prevented or removed. All which we shall do as in the sight of God.

7. And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations
against God, and his Son Jesus Christ; as is too manifest by our present
distresses and dangers, the fruits thereof, We profess and declare before God
and the world, our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the
sins of this Kingdom; Especially that we have not as we ought, valued the
inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and
power thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ into our
hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our lives, and each one to go before
another in the Example of a real Reformation; That the Lord may turn away his
wrath and heavy indignation, and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in
truth and peace. And, this Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the
searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall
answer at that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed;
Most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this
end, and to bless our desires and proceedings with such success as may be
deliverance and safety to his people, and encouragement to other Christian
Churches, groaning under or in danger of the yoke of Antichristian tyranny, to
join in the same or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of
Christian Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

Scripture Commands and Encouragements to Covenant makers and Keepers.
EXODUS 19. 5. If ye will obey my voice, indeed, (says the Lord God) and keep
my Covenant; then, ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me, above al people.
NUMB. 30. 21. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth. DEUTERONOMY. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it; For, the Lord thy God will
(surely) require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee. 2 CHRONICLES: 15. 12, 13,
14, 15. And they entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers,
with all their heart, and with all their soul. And, that, whosoever would not
seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether great or small,
whether man or woman. And they swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with
shouting and with trumpets and with Cornets. And all Judah rejoiced at the
oath; for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought the Lord with their
whole desire, and he was found of them; and the Lord gave them rest, round
about them. 2 CHON. 29. 10. Now it is in my heart, to make a Covenant with the
Lord God of Israel, that his feirce wrath may turn away from us. 2 CHRONICLES. 34.
31, 32. And the King stood in his place and made a Covenat before the Lord, to
walk after the Lord, and to keep his Commandments and his testimonies, and his
Statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul to perform the words of the
Covenant, which are written in Gods book. And he caused all that were present,
in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did
according to the Covenant of God, their Father. PSALM. 25. 10. All the paths of
God are mercy and truth, to them which keep their Covenant. PSALM. 50. 14. Offer
to God praise and thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high. PSALM.
103. 17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon
them that fear him, and his righteousness to childrens children, to such as
keep his (or their) Covenant. ISAIAH 56. 4, 5, 6, 7. Thus says the Lord unto
the Eunuchs, and to all that keep my Sabboths, and choose the things that please
me, and that embrace and keep my Covenant: Even unto them all will I give, in
mine house and within my walls, a place and a name better than of sons and of
daughters; I will give an everlasting name that shall not be cut off; even unto
every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and that takes hold of
my Covenant to keep and do it. Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer; and al their burnt offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted by me. JEREM. 50. 4, 5. In those days, and in that
time (says the Lord) the Children of Israel shall come, they and the children
of Judah together (just as Scotland and England have done) going and weeping;
They shall go and seek the Lord their God. And they shall ask the way to Sion,
with their faces thither-ward, saying; Come and let us join our selves to the
Lord, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be broken nor forgotten. Scripture
Terrors and Threatenings, to Covenant-Breakers and Despisers.
LEVIT. 26. 25. I will bring a sword upon you, which shall avenge the quarrel of
my Covenant. 2 CHRONICLES. 26. 25. Whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel
(by entering into and keeping Covenant with God) was to be put to death, whether
great or small, whether man or woman. NEHEM. 9. 29. They entered into a curse,
and into an oath to walk in the Laws of God. Therefore to enter into a Covenant
with God and not to keep it, or perform it, is to be accursed. ESAIAS. 24. 5. The
earth is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed
the Laws, changed the Ordinances, and broken the everlasting Covenant. PSALM.
78. 37, Their heart was not right with God, neither were they steadfast in their
Covenant. ESAIAS. CHAP. 33. 8. The highwayes lie waste, the wayfaring man
cease, he has broken the Covenant. JEREM. 11. v. 10. 11. The house of
Israel, and the house of Judah have broken my Covenant, which I made with their
fathers. Therefore, thus says the Lord, behold, I will bring evil upon them,
which they shall not be able to escape, and though they shall cry unto me, I will
not hearken unto them. JEREM. CHAP. 11. v. 10. 11. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, cursed be the man that obeys not the words of the Covenant. JEREM.
34. 18. 19. 20. I will give the men that have transgressed my Covenant, and
which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they made before me,
into the hands of their enemies, and into the hands of them that seek their
life. EZEKIEL. 16. 59. Thus says the Lord God, I will even deal with thee, as thou
have done, which have despised the Oath, in breaking the Covenant. EZEKIEL. 17.
15. 16. 18. 19. Shall he prosper, shall he escape that does such things? Or, shall
he break the Covenant and be delivered? As I live says the Lord God, surely,
in the place where the King dwells, that made him King, whose Oath he has
despised, and whose Covenant he has broken, even with him, in the midst of
Babylon he shall dye. Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant
(where as, lo, he had given his hand) and has done all these things.
Therefore, thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely, mine Oath which he has
despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head. HOSEA. 1. 9. They have spoken words, swearing falsely, in making a
Covenant; Thus judgment springs up like hemlock, in the furrows of the field.
AMOS. 1. 9. Thus says the Lord, for 3. transgressions of Tyrus, and for 4, I
will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they delivered up the whole
Captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly Covenant. MALA. 2. 10. Have
we not one Father? Has not one God created us? Why do we (then) deal
treacherously, every man against his brother, by profaning the Covenant of our
Fathers. MAT. 5. 33. Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine
oaths and vows unto the Lord. ROMANS 1. 31. Covenant-Breakers, are reckoned in
the number of the worst of Sinners. The names of all the Knights and Burgesses
in the House of Commons, in Parliament, that, at first, took the Covenant.
Will. Lenthal, Speaker. Benchamp St. John. Gilbert Gerard. Walter Earl. James
Cambel. Thomas Cheek. Robert Nicholas. Benjamin Rudyard. John Gurdon. Robert
Harley. Francis Knollys. Edward Master. John White. Anthony Stapley. Dennis
Bond. Laurence Whitaker. Michael Noble. Peregrine Hoby. William Cawley. John
Moyl. John Pyne. George Searl. Hen. Vane, Senior. Nevil Pool. John Young. Henry
Herbert. Thomas Sandis. William Jesson Philip Lord Herbert. Tho. Barrington.
Martin Lumley. John Trevor. Fran. Godolphin. Thomas Arundel. Edward Stephens.
Gilbert Pickering. John Greve. Oliver Cromwell. Henry Vane, Junior. William
Cage. Richard Erisey. Philip Lord Lisle. Will. Heveningham. Isaac Pennington.
Rich. Cresheld. Thomas Pelham. Thomas Parker. John Leigh. John Harris. Walter
Young. Augustine Skinner. John Ven. Will. Strickland. John Francklin. Samuel
Brown. Robert Seawen. Roger Hill. John Button. John Meyrick. Ambrose Brown.
Richard Win. Edward Owner. Charles Pim. Cha. Lo. Cranborn. Benja. Weston. John
Nutt. John Corbet. Roger Burgoyn. Peter Temple. Benja. Valentine. Tho.
Walsingham. Oliver Luke. William Alenson. Humph. Salwey. Richard Moore. William
Ashurst. Thomas Moore. Thomas Fountain. William Else. Henry Shelley. Rich.
Shutleworth. George Gallop. Henry Ludlow. Robert Wallop. Arthur Hasilrig.
Oliver St. John. Thomas Grantham. Fran. Barnham. Will. L. Fitzwilliams Edmund
Dunch. Hen Mildmay. Hugh Rogers. Thomas Hatcher. John Wray: Simon D' Ewes.
Antho. Benningfield John Ash. Will. Lord Munsun. Martin Lister. Robert Goodwin.
Edward Thomas. Henry Lucas. Miles Corbet. Philip Smith. Cornelious Holland Will.
Spurstow. John Lowrey. Peter Wentworth. Henry Cholmley. Phil. Stapleton. Will.
Berrepoint. Roger North. Alexan. Popham. Thomas Hodges. John Maynard. Sam.
Vassal. Anthony Irby. John Clotworthy. John Broxolme. Rich. Iervoise. John
Blackistone. Walter Long. John Roll. Robert Iennor. John Waddon. Will. Masham:
John Lisle. Edm. Fowel. Edw. Ash. Thomas Pury. Rich. Whitehead. Richard
Iennings. Humph. Tufton. Thomas Dacres. Toomas Earl. John Downs. John Goodwin.
Francis Drake. Will. Waller. Samuel Luke. Francis Buller. Richard Harman. George
Buller. Arthur Onslow. Richard Winwood. Robert Pie. He. L. Gray of Ruthen
Richard Knightley. John Pim. Christo. Yelverton. Anthony Nicoll. Peter Wroth.
Robert Reynolds. Nath. Barnardiston. Henry Heyman. Will Purefoy. Valen. Walton.
Micha. Oldsworth. Will. Wheeler. Hall Ravenscroft. Tho. L. Gray of Groby Tho.
Midleton. Edw. Hungerford. Christo. Wray. Richard See. Harbert Morley. Thomas
Lane. Robert Cecill. William Bell. Thomas Soam. Harbot. Grimstone. Simon Snow.
John Nash. Ralph Ashton. John Wild. John Trenchard. Tho. Iervoise. Rich.
Brown. Will. Playters. Not. Stephens. Richard Rose. Francis Rous. Gilb.
Millington. John Brown. John H^ppissey. Edward Pool. Henry Pelham. William Hay.
John Driden. Not. Fienes. William Lewis. Gyles Green. William Litton. John
Harvey. Edward Douce. William Stroad. Edm. Prideaux. Tho. Hoyl. Edw. Exton.
Fran. Popham. Zouch Tate. John Curson. Alexan. Bence. John Glyn. Rich. Onslow.
John Cook. Tho. Lo. Wenman. Bolstrode Whitlock. Go. Mountague. Edw. Partriche.
Henry Campion. Will. Whitaker. Denzil Hollis. Edw. Wingate. James Fenys.
Poynings Moore. Edw. Biss, Junior. Will. Iephson Edw. Mountague. Walt.
Knatchboll. Thomas Eden.
Two most remarkable and visible Examples of Gods wrath against Covenant
Breakers and Despisers; The One Divine, the Other Humane; both Observable.
1. Josuah having made a League and Covenant with the Gibeonites,
(notwithstanding they had craftily circumvented and deceived Josua therein)
which remained inviolable among the children of Israel, till the days of King
Saul who, in his foolish Zeal, had (it seems) slain some of the Gibeonites, and
endeavored to have destroyed them all from among the Israelites: Hereupon the
wrath of the Lord was greatly incensed against Israel, which brake not out til
King David's days, who was sorely vexed with a fearful famine over the whole
Land, for at least 3, years together incessantly: which so greatly grieved and
troubled David, that he enquired of the Lord what might be the cause thereof;
And the Lord answered him, that it was for Saul's sake, and for his
bloudy-house, because he had broken the Covenant, and slain the Gibeonites, and
his wrath would not be appeazed, till holy David, in just revenge of this
breach of Covenant, had delivered up unto the Gibeonites (as they, by Gods will,
had demanded) 7 of Saul's Sons, or nearest Kindred to be hanged by them, as they
were, and then (and not till then) was God pacified, and the famine immediately
ceased. Josua 9. and 2. Sam. 21.

2. Vladislaus King of Hungary, and Amurath the great Emperor of Turkey, after
fierce wars between them, having concluded a happy and Honorable peace for the
said King of Hungary, and they having entered into a solemn League and Truce,
by interchangeable writings, sealed and delivered each to other; not long
after, Julian, a Cardinal of Rome, having persuaded him to renounce and violate
this Covenant and Peace; the King of Hungary secretly prepared mighty forces
suddenly to invade and set upon the Turks Territories, and Amurath the great
Turk, at last hearing of this unexpected invasion by Vladislaus, made mighty
preparation (presently) to oppose him; entered into a pitched field against him,
in brief, Amurath, observing a mighty slaughter of his men, and himself, and
his whole Army in great danger to be utterly discomfitted, and beholding also
in the Hungarian-displayed-baners, the picture of a Crucifix, he presently
plucked forth the writing out of his bosom, wherein the late League or Covenant
was comprised, and holding it up in his hand, with his eyes cast up to heaven,
he said these words. Behold, thou crucified Christ, this is the League thy
Christians, in thy name, made with me, which they have without cause violated.
Now, if thou be a God, as they say thou art, revenge the wrong now done unto
thy name, and unto me, and show thy power upon thy pernicious people, who in
their deeds deny thee their God; presently after this, the fight was fiercely
followed on both sides, but it pleased the Lord, that Vladislaus was put to the
worst, and in the fight, slain by one of the Turks Janissaries, and his head cut
off, and presented to Amurath, in the midst of the battle, who commanded it to
be set on the top of a lance, and carried up and down in the field, to the
terror of the Christians, who presently fled and left Amurath, total victor,
with a most mighty and lamentable slaughter of the Christians. From both which
most pregnant and eminent examples, we may profitably make this pertinent use
and applycation. That if the Lord God has so tender a respect to the exact
performance of Leagues and Covenants, made not only 'twixt Man and Man,
Christian and Christian, but even between Christians and Turks, or Infidels
(such as the Gibeonites and this Amurath were) O how much more tenderly
affected, and severely exasperated, will he be for the breach of Covenants, made
betwixt his own glorious Holiness, (who is a Consuming fire) and Wormling-Man
(who is but as Combustible-Stubble in his presence) O consider this, and lay it
timely and sadly to heart, O all ye Malignants and Schismatics, who (now
adays) dare so Audaciously and Maliciously scorn and contemn, and so
Hypocritically, to violate and break This so Rational and Religious, so holy
and honest, yea, I say, so pious and precious a Covenant, most duly and
deliberately taken heretofore) by very many of you. O, whoever ye be, and
wheresoever ye sit and shroud your selves, tremble, yea tremble I say, and be
astonished and confounded, at your so treacherous, and most audacious dealing
with the most high God and us: And for the same, expect (for certain, Gods Word
is my warrant, you see, for what I say, and these 2, examples ratify it)
expect (I say) the curse of God like a flying Roll, even some sudden and sore
plague or punishment, inevitably to fall upon you or yours (if not upon you and
yours) if ye timely and truly repent not; which the Lord give unto you (as
space, so) grace, to perform and do it. Amen.

By JOHN VICARS.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock for John Rothwel and Edward Husbands. 1648.


