A Sight of ye Trans-actions of these latter years Emblemized with engraven
plats which men may read with out spectacles.

Are to be sold, by Thomas Ienner in his shop at the old Exhange

TIME

In a little wrath I hid my face from the for a moment; but with everlasting
kindn^es will i have mercy on thee says the Lord thy redeemer. Isaiah* 54. ^.
TRVTH

I will mention the Loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord,
according to all that the Lord has bestoued on us, and the great goodness
toward the house of Israel which he has bestowed on them according to his
(...)* and according to the multitude of his Loving kindnesses.

And the fifth Angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the (...), and his
kingdom was full of darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain. and
blasphemed the God of (...) (...)

To the READER.
THou have here (friendly Reader) a resolution to that riddle, which has so
puzzelled and amazed the whole Kingdom, between the main parties thereof,
Parliamentarians and Royalists; namely, who has been the cause, or what has
been the main spur or spring, of all the late and lamentable destractions and
distresses of the three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland, these five
or six years past; even the very same efficient and isntrumental cause that
was of Isreal's sore plague and punishment, 2 Samuel 24. Israel had sinned and
provoked the Lord to anger, and God suffered Satan to provoke their King to sin
grievously against God. So, England had grievously sinned, and Gods wrath was
thereby kindled, and therefore God suffered their King, and his prelaticall,
papisticall, and malignant Subjects, soundly to whip and scourge, England, even
to the fetching of blood out of its ^oynes and sides; And here is I say, the
riddle clearly resolved; All this Truth being in this little Emblematicall
Treatise lively set forth, and illustrated with neat and pertinent pictures and
figures, for the better affecting of the sight and sense of the Readers thereof,
and especially for the full making out of the truth of what is therein
delivered; viz, That the King, and his unhappy and unholy atheistical
instruments, have been the main moving cause (next, I say, to our sins) of all
the mischieves and miseries which we have all felt and found in this distressed
Kingdom, only, or mainly, I say, for the driving on of that cruel and
accursed design of bringing in an Arbitrary-Government upon this Freeborn
Nation, to the utter ruin and overthrow of their most precious Religion, and
Liberties; as thou shall easily and clearly see and discover, in this
following Treatise and Relation.

A Sight of the Trans-actions of these latter years, Emblemized with Engraven
Plates, which men may Read without Spectacles.
1 Parliament.
1. IN the first year of King Charles his Reign, a Parliament being called at
Oxford, two subsidies were granted, no grievances removed, but the said
Parliament soon dissolved.

2. The sad effects which the dissolution of this Parliament produced, were the
loss of Rochell, by the unhappy help of Englands Ships.

3. The diversion of a most facile and hopeful war from the West Indies, to
a most expensive and successelesse attempt on Cales.

4. The bloody and unblessed attempt on the Isle of Ree, and thereby a
precipitate breach of peace with France, to our great loss.

5. A peace concluded with Spain, without consent of a Parliament, contrary to
a promise formerly made to the Kingdom by King James, a little before his
death; whereby the Cause of the Palatinate was altogether most shamefully
deserted by us.

6. The Kingdom suddenly billetted with Soldiers, and a concomitant project
set on foot for Germane Horses to enforce men, by fear, to fall before
arbitrary and tyrannical taxations, continually to be laid upon them.

2. Parliament.
7. The dissolution of a second Parliament at Westminster, in the second year
after a declarative grant of no less than five Subsidies, and the said issues
that flowed on the Kingdom thereupon.

8. As first, the violent exacting from the people of that mighty sum of the
five Subsidies, or a sum, equal to it by a Commission for a Royall-Loan, as
it was called.

9. Many worthy Gentlemen imprisoned and vexed, that refused to pay it.

10. Great sums of money extorted from Subjects by Privy Seals and Excises.

11. The most hopeful Petition of Right, blasted in the very blossom of it.

3 Parliament.
12. A third Parliament called, and quickly broken in the fourteenth year of
the King, and therein Parliamentary privileges extremely violated by after
ill-usage of some of the best and worthiest Members thereof, who were clapped up
close prisoners, denied all ordinary and extraordinary comforts of life, and
preservation of health, which might have proved perpetual to them, had not a
fourth Parliament (which afterward happened) necessitated their relief and
release.

13. And this third Parliament thus dissolved, O the miserable effects that
followed thereon also.

14. Scandalous and opprobrious Declarations published to asperse and besmear
the proceedings of this last Parliament, and some of the best Members thereof;
yea, Proclamations set out to those effects, thereby extremely to dis-hearten
the Subjects, yea, and plainly forbidding them once to name a Parliament, or to
desire them any more.

15. Whence, immediately gushed out (this damme of Parliaments thus being
broken down) the violent inundations (even to a deluge of miseries) of mighty
sums of money, got by that strange and straining project of Knighthood; yet,
under a fair color and pretense of Law for it, and for all the rest that
followed.

16. As, the most burthensom Book of Rates; the most heavy and unheard of (till
then) taxation of Ship Money; the enlargement of Forests, contrary to Magna
Charta; the injurious exaction of Coat and Conduct money; the forcible taking
away of the Train'd-Bands Arms; the desperate design of engrosing Gunpowder
into their hands, and keeping it fast from the Subject in the Tower of London,
not to be had thence, but at most excessive rates.

17. The destruction of the Forest of Dean, that most famous Magazine, and
Timber-store-house of the whole Kingdom, which was sold to Papists.

18. The monstrous Monopolies of Soap, Salt, Wine, Leather, and Seacoal* yea
almost of all things in the Kingdom of most necessary and common use.

19. Restraint of Subjects Liberties in their Trades and Habitations; for
refusal of which foresaid heavy pressures, many were vexed with long and
languishing suites, some fined and confined to prisons, to the loss of health
in many, of life in some; Some having their houses broke open, their goods
seized on, their studies or closets searched for writings, books and papers to
undo them; Some interrupted also in their Sea-Voyages, and their ships taken
from them, in an hostile manner, by projectors, as by pirates, or common
Enemies.

20. The crushing cruelties of the Star Chamber-Court, and Council Table, in
those days, chiefly, for the fomenting and increasing of most exorbitant
taxations, pressures, and unjust suites against the Subject.

21. Thus far for the miseries of the Commonwealth; now also for the
Churches danger, and distress. The amazing miseries of the Subjects
Consciences also, by the intolerable burden of Popish Ceremonies, Romish
Innovations, and such like other outrages of the Arch-Prelate of Canterbury,
and his Prelaticall Agents and instruments, over the whole Kingdom, in matters
of religion, Divine worship, and spiritual cases of Conscience.

22. The most palpable and abominable Romish Ceremonies used at the Kings
Coronation, and insolent and impious, false and destructive additions in the
Oath administered to the King, at his said first Inauguration to the Crown, by
that most arrogant Archbishop.

23. And the manifold other impious impositions in matters of religion, divine
worship, and spiritual cases of Conscience; for refusing and opposing of
which, how was the honest-hearted and tender-conscienced subject, grievously
oppressed by fines, imprisonments, stigmatizings, mutilations, whippings,
pillories, gagges, consinements and banishments; yea, and that, into perpetual
close imprisonments in the most desolate, remote, and (as they hoped and
intended) remorslesse parts of the Kingdom.

24. The putting down, yea, utterly ruinating of that most famous and
honorable work, that ever this Kingdom saw, in a private way, for the
advancement of Gods glory in the propagation of the Gospel, I mean, the
Feoff^es for buying in of Impropriations; Noy, the (then) Atturney-Generall,
openly in Court, accusing that blessed work to be a worse plot against the
Church (he meant the Prelaticall Church sure,) than the Papists Powder plot.

25. The advancing (for the most part) none, to Ecclesiastical Dignities and
Livings, but Arminians; yea, Popish-hearted Pontificians; Suspending and
silencing with deprivations, degradations, and excommunications, almost all the
most pious, painful and Orthodox-learned Pastors over the kingdom, whom they
could catch in their snares, and all this under a pretense of peace, unity and
conformity; in which foresaid cases, the High Commission (like the
Spanish-Inquisition) with its most pragmaticall pranks, was, all along, most
intolerable and abominable.

26. Printing-Presses, set open for the printing and publishing of all sorts of
Popish and Arminian tenets; but, shut up and restrained from Printing, sound
and Orthodox Doctrines.

27. Nay, not only thus lamentably molesting us at home in England; but
attempting the like on our Brethren of Scotland, indevouring to impose upon
their consciences also, a New Liturgye, and a book of Canons, upon the first
introducing whereof into their Church, they not enduring them, threw stones and
stools at the Archbishop of St Andrews head, and beat him out of the Church,
crying out, a Pape, a Pape, and so rid themselves of them.

28. Upon which refusal of theirs, O what foul calumnies and scoffs were
immediately cast upon them, and they called and counted rebels and Traitors;
yea, so proclaimed in all Churches in England.

29. An Army was also raised to oppress and suppress them, for thus resisting
the Arch-prelates most injurious impositions on them.

A mighty and tumultuous rising of Apprentices and young men in Southwarke and
Lambeth side, with clubs and other weapons especially at the A^ch-bishops
house, which put him into such a fright, as made him fly to Croyden, to convey
himself to some more private and remote place, and although Pharoahs magisians
were so honest, that at the sight of the dust of the earth turned into lice,
they cried out it was the finger of God, but he grew more and more outrageous,
and caused one to be hanged and quartered, and his head set on London Bridge.

30. Our Brethren of Scotland likewise raising an Army in their own just
defense, and by force of arms, enforcing their own peace.

31. A first pacification being then made by the King, and some of his
Nobility, and ratified under hand and Seal twixt them and the Scots; yet was it
shortly after shamefully violated, and broken quite off by the Arch-prelate of
Canterbury, and the Earl of Straford.

4. Parliament.
32. A fourth Parliament was thereupon shortly after called again, by those
complotters means, but to a very ill intent, and another Parliament summoned
also at the same time by the Earl of Straford in Ireland, both of them only
to levy and procure moneys to raise another Army, and wage a new War against
the Scots;

33. The Ships and goods of our Brethren of Scotland, were, in all parts and
ports of this kingdom, and of Ireland, also surprised and seized on for the
King; their Commissioners denied audience to make their just defense to the
King, and the whole kingdom of Scotland and England too, hereupon much
distracted and distempered with leavying of moneys, and imprisoning all among
us that refused the same.

34. This Parliament also refusing to comply with the King, Cant, and Straf^rd
in this Episcopal war against the Scots, was soon dissolved and broken up by
them and thereupon they returned to their former ways of waste and confusion,
and the very next day after the dissolution thereof some eminent members of
both Houses, had their Chambers, and studies, yea their cabinets and very
pockets of their wearing clothes (betimes in the morning before they were out
of their beds) searched for letters and writings, and some of them also
imprisoned, and a false and most scandalous declaration was published against
the House of Commons in the Kings name.

35. A forced Loan of money was attempted in the City of London, to be made a
president (if it prevailed there) for the whole kingdom, but some Aldermen
refusing, were fo^ely threatened and imprisoned.

36. In which interim, the Clergies Convocation continuing (notwithstanding the
dissolution of the Parliament) new conscience oppressing Canons were forged,
and a strange Oath, with a monstrous etc* in it, was framed for the
establishing of the Bishops Hierarchy, with severe punishments on the refusers
to take it.

37. In this Convocation ^ore taxations were also imposed upon the whole
Clergy, even no less than six Subsidies, besides a bountiful contribution to
forward that intended war against our brethren of Scotland.

The Arch-Prelate of St Andrews in Scotland reading the new Service-booke in
his pontificalibus assaulted by men and Women, with Crickets stools Sticks
and Stones.



The rising of Prentises and Seamen on Southwark side to assault the
Archbishops of Canterburys House at Lambeth.



38. For the advancing of which said sums for this war, the popish
pontifician party, and their scandalous priests were most free and forward;
yea, and a solemn prayer was composed and imposed by the Bishops on their
Ministers every where to be used and read in all Churches against the Scots, as
rebels and traitors.

39. The papists also in a high measure enjoyed even almost a total
toleration; and a Popes Nuncio suffered among us to act and govern all Romish
affairs, yea a kind of a private popish-parliament kept in the kingdom, and
popish jurisdictions erected among them.

40. Commissions were also (secretly) issued out for some great and eminent
papists, for martial Commands, for levying of Soldiers, and strengthening
their party with Arms and Ammunition of all sorts, and in great plenty.

41. His Majesty's treasure was by these means so extremely exhausted and his
revenues so anticipated, that he was enforced to compel (as it were) his own
Servants, Judges, and Officers of all sorts, to lend him great sums of money,
and prisons filled with refusers of these and the other illegal payments; yea,
many High-Sheriffes summoned into the Star Chamber, and to the
Councill-Board, and some of them imprisoned for not being quick enough in
levying Ship Money, and such like intolerable taxations.

42. In sum, the whole kingdom was now brought into a lamentable and
languishing condition of being most miserably bought and sold to any that could
give and contribute most of might and malice against us, and no hope of humane
help, but dolor, desperation and destruction, to be the portion of all.

43. In which interim, our Brethren of Scotland being entered into our kingdom,
for their own just defense, the King had advanced his Royall-Standard at York,
where the cream of the kingdom, Nobles, and Gentry, being assembled, and a
treaty twixt the prime of both Armies had at Rippon, for a fair and peaceable
accommodation, the King was, at last, enforced to take his Nobles Counsel, and
in the first place, a cessation of Arms agreed on; and then this fifth present
Parliament, (the Parliament of Parliaments,) was necessitously resolved on to
begin, November 3. 1640.

5 Parliament, Anno 1640. November. 3.
44. But, behold, a desperate plot and design was herein also, immediately, set
on f^ot, to ^poyle or poison it in the very Embrio and constitution of it, in
the first choice of the Members thereof, by Letters from the King, Queen,
malignant and popish Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentry, posted into all parts
of the kingdom, to make a str^ng party for them; But, by admirable divine
providence, this their plot was ^ounterplotted, and wonderfully frustrated, and
the Parliament most (...) and (...).

45. Shortly after, a very formidable Spanish-Fleet, or Armad^, appeared on our
English ^^^row Seas, in fight of Dover, and was coming in (as was, on very
st^ong grounds, more than probably conjectured) as a third party, to help to
destroy (...) Spani^rds hoping* that by this time, we and the Scots were
together by the ^ar^* but they were by Gods mercy, beaten of^ from us by our
Neighbors of Holland. And so in fighting against them, we fought against our
friends.

The Soldiers in their passage to York turn reformers, pull dow^ popish
pictures, break down rayles, turn alters into tables, and those popish
Commanders, that were to command them, they forced to eat flesh on Fridayes,
thrusting it down their throats, and some they slew.

46 In the time of ours and the Scots Armies residing in the North, which was
in June 1641. the Popish and malignant Lords and Prelates, fearing the effects
of this present Parliament, complotted together to disaffect that our English
Army against the Parliament, and indevoured to bring it out of the North,
Southward, and so to London, to compel the Parliament to such limits and rules
at they thought fit.

The Soldiers in their passage to York turn unto reformers pull down Popish
pictures, break down rayles, turn altars into Tables*



the English and Scotts Armies at first ready to fight, lovingly embrace each
other, and part kind friends,



July 1641.
At the beginning of the Parliament there was a diligent inquisition after
oppressions, and oppress^rs, and first upon the petition of Mistress Bastwick
and Mistress Bur^on, two widdowed wives, and a petition exhibited in the behalf
of Mr. Prynn, Dr. Laighton, Mr. Smar^, Mr. Walker, Mr. Foxley, Mr. Lilborn, and
many others, set at liberty, some being banished, and all close prisoners,
others fast fettered in irons, and their wives debarred from coming to them.

The Protestation.
We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parliament,
finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests
and Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of l^te been more
boldly and frequently put in practice than formerly, to the undermining and
danger of the ruin of the true reformed Protest^nt religion, in his M^jesti^s
Dominions established: And finding also that there have been, and having just
cause to susp^^^ that there still (...), even during this sitting in
parliament, indevours to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland,
and to introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by
most pernicious and wicked Councels, practices, plo^^, and conspiracies: And
that the long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments, has occasioned
many illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and
grieved* And that diverse ^nnovations and Superstition^ have been brought into
the Church; multitudes driven ^ut of his Majesty's Dominions, jealousies raised
and f^^ented betwixt the King and his people a popish Army levied in Ireland,
and two* ^rmies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his
Majesty's royal person, the consump^ion of the Revenues of the Crown, and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of jealousy, that
indevours have been, and a^cused to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force
to bring to pass those wicked Councels, Have therefore thought good to join
our selves in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions, and to
make this ensuing Protestation.

^ A. B. do^ in the presence of Almighty God, promise, Vow, and protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and esta^e,
the true reformed protestant Religion, ^^^ressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all popery* and popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same ^octrine, and (...) duty of my Allegiance, his Majesty's
royal Person, Ho^our, (...) also the power and privileges of Parliament*
(...) the Subject, and every person that makes this Protestation, ^n (...) he
shall do, in the lawful (...) of the sa^^. (...) to my power, and (...) as
lawfully I (...), I will (...), and by all good way^^ (...) to bring (...)
punishment, all such as shall either by (...)* practice, Councels, pio^^,
conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present protestation contained. And further, that I shall (...) all just and
Honorable ways endeavor to preserve the (...) and peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; and neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this promise, Vow, and protestation.

The Earl of Straffords Speech on the Scaffold.
MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords, and the rest of these Gentlemen) it
is a very great comfort to me, to have your Lordship by me this day, in regard
I have been known to you a long time, I should be very glad to obtain so much
silence, as to be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not; my Lord, I come
The Ministers and people solemnly take the Protestation in all Churches over
the Kingdom,

Mr. Burton, Dr. Bastwick and Mr: Prinne* triumphantly from perpetual
captivity* those 3 famous Witnesses of Truth, return home to London, attended
with thousands of horse and foot,

hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay that last debt I
owe to sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again
through the merits of Christ Jesus to eternal glory; I with I had been
private, that I might have been heard; My Lord, if I might be so much beholding
to you, that I might use a few words, I should take it for a very great
courtesy; My Lord, I come hither to submit to that judgment which has past
against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I do freely
forgive all the world, a forgiveness that is not spoken from teeth outward (as
they say) but from the heart; I speak it in the presence of Almighty God,
before whom I stand, that there is not so much as a displeasing thought in me,
arising to any creature; I thank God, I may say truly, and my Conscience bears
me witness, that in all my services since I have had the honor to serve his
Majesty in any employment, I never had any thing in my heart, but the joint and
individual prosperity of King and people; if it have been my ^^p to be
misconstr^ed, it is the common portion of us all while we are in this life, the
righteous judgment is hereafter, here we are subject to error, and apt to be
mis-judged one of another; there is one thing I desire to clear my self of,
and I am very confident, I speak it with so much clearness, that I hope I
shall have your Christian charity in the belief of it, I did always ever
think the Parliaments of England, were the happiest Constitutions that any
kingdom, or any Nation lived under, and under God the means of m^king King and
people happy, so far have I been from being against Parliaments; for my death,
I here acquit all the world, and pray God heartily to forgive them; and in
particular, my Lord Primate, I am very glad that his Majesty is pleased to
conceive me not meriting so severe, and heavy a punishment as the utmost
execution of this sentence; I am very glad, and infinitely rejoice in this
mercy of his, and beseech God to turn it to him, and that he may find mercy
when he has most need of it;. I wish this kingdom all the prosperity and
happiness in the world; I did it living, and now dying it is my wish, I do
now profess it from my heart, and do most humbly recommend it unto every man
here, and wish every man to lay his hand upon his heart, and consider seriously
whether the beginning of the happiness of a people should be written in letters
of blood, I fear you are in a wrong way, and I desire Almighty God that no one
drop of my blood may rise up in judgment against you.

(My Lord) I profess my self a true and obedient Son to the Church of England,
to that Church wherein I was born, and wherein I was bred; prosperity and
happiness, be ever to it: and whereas it has been said that I have inclined
to popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let me say truly, that from
the time since I was one and twenty years of age, till this hour, now going
upon 49. I never had thought in my heart, to doubt of the truth of my religion
in England: and never any had the boldness to suggest to me the contrary, to
the best of my remembrance; and so being reconciled to the mercies of Christ
Jesus my Savior, into whole bosom I hope shortly to be gathered, to those
eternal happinesses that shall never have end. I desire heartily the
forgiveness of every man, both for any rash or unadvised word, or deed, and
desire your prayers: And so my Lords farewell, farewell all the things of this
world: Lord strengthen my faith, give me confidence and assurance in the merits
of Christ Jesus. I desire you that you would be s^lent and join in prayers
with me; and I tr^st in God that we shall all meet, and live eternally in
heaven, there to receive the accomplishment of all happiness, where every
tear shall be wiped from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts: And
so God bless this kingdom, and Jesus have mercy upon my Soul. Amen.

47. For the advancing of which design, the Earl of Straford, then prisoner
in the Tower, attempted an escape, with Sir William Belfore, then Leivtenant of
the Tower, promising and assuring him twenty thousand pound, and the marriage
of The Earl of Strafford for treasonable practices beheaded on the Tower Hill*

Sr. Francis Windebank, Sr. John Finch, the Lord Digbie, Iermin etc: fly for
their lives beyond sea,

his daughter to Sir Williams Son, if he would but consent unto and assist his
escape; bu^ Sir William hated such bribes, and so the neck of all that plot was
broken.

48. Then, they attempted by foul and false scandals on the Parliament, to
entice the Army of the Scots, (then, still in the North) to a newtral^ty, and
to sit still whiles our English army acted the farther designs hatched and
hammered still in their heads and hearts, but this plot prevailed not neither.

Anno 1641. October. 23.
49. About this time, that most horrid and inhumane bloody rebellion and
monstrous massacring of almost 200000 innocent English Protestants, men, women,
and children, b^ake out in Ireland, namely, about October 23. 1641. (This also
being a main branch of this most mischievous design against this Parliament, by
Gods wonderful power) and providence, so firmly fixed and settled, that they
knew not how to ruinate it) those accursed Rebels having had their principal
encouragements and Commissions to authorize them in that horrid and hideous
rebellion from the Court of England, and of purpose to have made England the
chief seat of the war, and of all the papists, prelates, and malignants
utmost wrath and rage.

50. For the still effecting, and underhand working on, of this wicked design,
the malignant party in private, much prevailing still; the design now went on,
chiefly against the City of London, for which purpose, the Leivtenant of the
Tower, Sir William Belf^re, was (for his loyalty) displaced by the King from
his Leivtenantship, and popish Lord Cott^^g^on, made Constable of the Tower;
but his dangerous designs being soon discovered, he was as soon displaced; and
Colon^ll Lunsford, was made Leivtenant of the Tower; But, he also by the
Parliaments petition and importunity to the King, was displaced; and Sir John
Byron, a desperate malignant (who afterward proved the most bloody Lord ^yr^n
in (...)) was made Leivtenant of the Tower, in Lunsfords stead, but he also, on
many just jealousies being petitioned against, was at length, with much ado
removed and put out thence, and Sir John Conyers, by the power of the
Parliament, was put in his place.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now assembled in
Parliament.
The humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates now (...)
by His Majesty's Writs to attend the Parliament, and present about London and
Westminster for that Service.
THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs,
and under great penalties to attend the Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitable right to vo^e in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debatable in
parliament, by the ancient customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and
ought to be protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that
great Service. They humbly remonstrate and prot^st before God, your (...), and
the Noble Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament, that as they have an
indubita^e right to sit and Vote in the House of Lords; so are they, if they
may be protected from force and violence, most ready and willing to perform
their duties accordingly. And that they do abhominate all actions or opinions
tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also all propension and
inclination to any malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to
the which their own reasons and conscience shall not move them to adhere. But,
whereas they have been at

The High Commission-Court and Starr-Chamber voted down, and pluralities and
non residencies damned by Parliament.

The Queen Mother sent away by Sea, and the Capuchine Friars and Priests
expelled from Somersett House* beyond Sea.



several times violently menaced, affronted and assaulted by multitudes of
people, in their coming to perform their services in that honorable House,
and lately chased away, and put in danger of their lives, and can find no
redress or protection, upon sundry complaints made to both Houses in these
particulars. They likewise humbly protest before your Majesty, and the Noble
House of Peers, that saving unto themselves all their rights and interests of
sitting and voting in that House at other times, they dare not sit or vote in
the House of Peers, until your Majesty shall further secure them from all
affronts, indignities and dangers in the premises. Lastly, whereas their fears
are not built upon fantasies and conceits, but upon such grounds and objects
as may well terrify men of good resolutions, and much constancy. They do in
all duty and humility protest before your Majesty, and the Peers of that most
honorable House of parliament, against all Laws, Orders, Votes, resolutions,
and determinations, as in themselves null, and of none effect, which in their
absence, since the 27 of this instant month of December 1641. have already
passed; as likewise against all such as shall hereafter pass in that most
honorable House, during the time of this their forced and violent absence from
the said most honorable House; not denying, but if their absenting of
themselves were wilful and voluntary, that most honorable House might proceed
in all their premises, their absence, or this protestation notwithstanding. And
humbly beseeching your most excellent Majesty to command the Clerk of that
House of Peers to enter this their petition and protestation among their
Records.

They will ever pray to God to bless, etc. Jo. Eborac. Tho. Duresme, Rob. Co.
Li^h. Jos. Norw. Jo. Asa. Guli. Ba. and Wells Geo. Heref. Rob. Owon. Ma. Ely.
Godfr. G lonc. Jo. Peterburg. Morris Landaff.

51. None of all these plots, yet, prevailing against the Parliament, neither
in generals nor particulars, they yet, persist to plot and attempt against it;
and about this time found occasions, craftily and causelessly (in secret) to
foment many jealousies and jarres, to dis-joynt both Houses of Parliament,
within themselves; thereby at least, to obstruct and retard their (then) most
weighty, and great affairs in Church and State.

52. The Bishops also themselves had a pestilent plot about this time, to
subvert and overthrow the Parliament, by endeavoring to get the King to protest
against their proceedings in it; But twelve of them were thereupon presently
impeached of high treason, and ^en of them imprisoned in the Tower of London,
and, afterward, they were all disabled from ever ^itting again in the
Parliament.

Bishops Voted down root and branch: Nullo contradiscente, insomuch that the
Citizens of London the same night, made bonfires, and had ringing of bells. And
for the better securing the City within, as well as without, the Parliament
published an Ordinance, thereby injoyning all Popish Recusants, inhabiting in
and about the City, all dis affected persons, and such as being able men, would
not lend any money for the defense of the Commonwealth, should forthwith
con^ine themselves to their own houses, and not to go (...) without special
license, as they would answer it at their (...), to the Parliament.

Another Ordinance was sent to the Lord mayor, by which the Trained Bands were
authorized to apprehend many of the prime and richest malignants, dis^affected
persons in the City, whereof were four Aldermen put in safe custody, in Crosby
house, and some in Gressan College.

The Bishops imprisoned in the Tower of London for protesting against the
Parliament,



Popish Recusants disarmed, for the great security of the kingdom,



53. About which time, a most wicked fellow sent to Mr. John Py^^ (a most pious
Patriot of his Country, and then a most eminent member of the House of Commons)
a most reviling Letter, therein calling him traitor, and in the said Letter
enclosed a plague sore plaster, thinking thereby to have destroyed him, But,
God mightily preserved him from the infection of it.

54. After this, the King himself (being guarded with about 500 armed,
ruffi^nly desperate Cavaliers or Soldiers) violently rushed into the House of
Commons, accused five of their most eminent and pious members of treason,
demanded their persons to be delivered up unto him, intending to destroy all
that resisted him therein; but this plot was blessedly crossed, by the happy
absence of the Gentlemen; this plot was attempted, Jan. 4. 1641.

Anno 1642.
55. After this, one Binion, a Silkman of London; and the Kentish Malignants,
wherein Sir Edward Deering, had a principal hand, framed dangerous and
destructive petitions against the proceedings of the Parliament; but were both
most justly rejected, and themselves fined and imprisoned for them.

56. Immediately after this, things grew still, worse and worse among the
malignants, the King himself in unjust discontent (by the desperate and wicked
counsel of that pernicious Cataline, the young Lord Digby) forsakes the
Parliament, and getting the Prince to him, leaves London and presently posts
into the North, and there attempts to get Hull into his hands, but was happily
prevented and bravely opposed by Sir John Hotham, then, in that time of his
outward and seeming fidelity.

57. The King being^ at York, interdicts the Militia, then, set on foot, by the
Parliament, for their just safety and defense; endeavoring to remove the Term
from the City of London, but in both is opposed by the Parliament.

58. The Lords and Gentry of Ireland, and of Scotland too, petition the King,
to return to his Parliament, yea and the Gentry and Commons of Yorkshire do
the like, but are all rejected.

59. The King set on foot a most illegal Commission of Array, to clash against
the Parliaments Militia, which occasioned much mischief and misery over the
whole kingdom, but the Parliaments Militia prevailed in most places and parts
of the land.

60. Three letters were intercepted, discovering a most desperate plot against
the Parliament by the Ro^^lists, Commissary Wilmot, Digbie, Jermine, ^rofts,
and others, which by Gods mercy failed them and came to nothing, but we in
taking some of their ships were advantaged thereby.

61. Sir Richard Gurney, then Lord May^r of the City of London, proving a
desperate malignant and Array man, was crossed in his desires, and clapped up
prisoner in the Tower of London, by the power of the Parliament.

62. (...) and Decla^^^^^^ against the Parliaments proceedings were Printed and
published and commanded to be read in all the Churches and Chapels over the
whole kingdom, within the Kings power.

63. Sir John Penington, a brave Seaman, but a desperate malignant, was
constituted Admiral of the Seas, for the Kings service, but displaced and
dispossessed thereof by the Parliament; and the most noble and loyal Earl of
Warwick (notwithstanding the Kings Letter and command to interdict him therein,
and to give way to Penington) being put in by the power and authority of the
Parliament, and possessed of the Ships, most happily and honorably kept and
continued in the place and office for the Parliaments service.

64. Hull having been long besieged by that most mischeivous and atheistical
Marquess of Newcastle, for the King; and in that interim, one Beckwith a known
Papist, plotting to have betrayed it, by firing it in four several places and
then assaulting a Letter sent to Mr Pym, Mr. Pym, do not think that a guard of
men can protect you if you persist in your traitorous Courses and wiked
designs, I have sent a Paper-m^ssenger to you, and if this does not touch your
heart, a dagger shall so soon as I am recovered of my plague sore. In the mean
time you may be forborne* because no better man may be endan^gered for you*
Repent, Traitor

Colonel Lunfford assaulting the Londonens at Westminster Hall, with a great
rout of ruffinly Cavaleires

it; yet Hull, by Gods mighty providence was preserved, and the King after much
loss of men and money, enforced to leave and forsake it.

The Citizens ^f London voluntarily prof^ered their service to attend and guard
the Parliament by Lan to Westminster, to secure them from danger.

By Water also the stout Shipmasters and mariners, likewise made ready a great
number of long^Boats, furnished with Ordnance, muskets, and other Sea-like
warlike instruments, their vessels also gallantly adorned with flagges and
S^r^mers, together with martial music, Drums and Trumpets, so as it was a
rare sight, and when they came to White Hall, and understood that the
Parliament Wor^hies were safely arrived, the Trained Bands by Land, and the
valiament Seamen by Water, let fly their thundering shot both small and great,
their Trumpets sounding, and their Drums beating, in a triumphing and
congratulating manner, a singular testimony of their cordial affections.

The very same day, a numerous company of Buckinghamshire men, both Gentlemen,
Ministers, and others of that Country on horseback, with their Protestations in
their hats, partly in behalf of their Knight of the shire, but especially to
petition the Parliament, for Reformation of evils in Church and State, and to
assure their best services and assistance to the Parliament, on all just
occasions, and out of Essex, Hartford, Barkeshire, Surrey, and other Counties
of the Kingdom came, one after another.

65. The most noble and right honorable Earl of Essex was ordained Lord
General over all the Parliaments Forces, for the preservation of the kingdom,
which he famously and faithfully managed and marshalled, as especially
Edgehill and Newbery, and other places can abundantly witness.

66. A plot to have blown up all the Lord Generals Magazine of powder; and
another at Beverley in Yorkshire, to have slain Sir John Hotham both intended
by one David Alexander, and hired thereunto, but both, by Gods providence
timely prevented.

67. Commissions granted to popish Recusants to levy men and arms against the
Parliament; but the Parlia: published a Declaration or Protestation to the
whole world, of their just proceedings therein.

68. The King received the most bloody Irish rebels petition, and permitted
their persons with great favor and allowance about him; calling, and counting
them good Catholic Subjects; but utterly rejecting the Parliaments petition,
(exhibited by the Lord General) desiring peace and reconciliation with him.

69. A Treaty of peace was really intended by the Parliament, but merely
pretended and fraudulently for a while, transacted by the Royalists; in which
interim, that most bloody bickering at ^rainf^^d, was most treacherously
committed by the Kings party, and a most wicked piece of villainy c^^yed on
therein, but (though with much loss on both sides, but especially on theirs)
by Gods great mercy the mischief prevented, and the City of London mightily
preserved.

70. A dangerous plot against the kingdom, ^n new High-Sheriffes, for the
better collecting of the 400000 (...). Subsidies, intended to have been
confirmed to the King in a former Parliament; but, that plot (...) by the
Parliament providence, and an Ordinance of Parliament set on foot for the
successful Association of Counties for mutual defense one of another,
against regal injurious taxations and oppressions on them.

71. A wicked design of the Royalists at Oxford and elsewhere, to proceed
against the Parliaments prisoners, as traitors, and so to put them to death; by
which Dr. Bastwick, and Captain Lilburn, were to have been tried for their
lives; but prevented by an Ordinance of Parliament for execution of a Le^
Ta^^onis, and so of executing the Royal prisoners among us.

The City Trained Bands, and the brave Seamen with Barges and Long-boates
adorned with streamers drums and trumpets, and furnished with Ship-guns, and
other Warrlike instruments, guard the Lords and Commons safely to Parl: by land
and Water.



The County of Buckingham Comes to London the very same day of the Lords and
Com^ons so guarded* with their Petition to the Parl: Carrying the Protestation
on their slaves on horseback, and the Counties of Essex, Hertford, Barkshire,
Surrey, and others* followed them* in like manner, shortly after.



Anno 1643.
72. A notable plot against the City of London, immediately upon the Cities
prefe^^ing a petition to the King, by the hands of two trusty Aldermen, and
four Commoners of the said City, in reply to which petition, the King sending
as his messenger, one Captain Hern to the City, and the whole body of the City
assembling at a Common Hall, this Hern desires Faire-play above-board of them;
But the business being found to be a notable design of the malignant-Citizens
against the Parliament and the (then) Lord Mayor of London, and the Government
of their City, the honest, and far major party, cry out in the hearing of
Hern, they would live and dye with the Parliament, and so sent Hern away with a
flea in his care.

73. Another plot immediately after, contrivedat Oxford, by a Letter sent to
all the Freemen, Journeymen and Apprentices, of the said City to assemble at
their several Halls; and there the Masters and Wardens of all Companies to
read the Kings Letter to them, and to persuade them to yield to all the Kings
comemands against the Parliament and City; but this letter was nipt and crossed
also in the neck and nick of it, and voted by the Parliament to be evil and
scandalous.

74. A plot also to betray Bristol into the Royalists hands by one Yeomans and
Bowch^r, and diverse other their associates; but by Gods mercy the plot being
timely discovered, and the danger avoided, those two principal conspirators
were by Martial Law condemned, and hanged, and so the plot utterly frustrated.

75. Cheapeside cross, Charing-crosse, and all other crosses, in and about
London, utterly demolished and pulled down, and that abominable and blasphemous
book of tolerating sports and pastimes on the Lords days, voted to be burnt,
and shortly after accordingly burnt, together with many crucifixes and popish
trinckets and trurnperies, in the very same place where Cheapeside-crosse stood.

76. M. Prynne sent by the Parliament to the Tower of London, to search the
Arch prelate of Canterburies* chamber and Study there, where he was prisoner,
who accordingly searching his Study, and his pockets of his wearing clothes (a
just requital of his dealing with Mr. Prynne and others) found the original
Scotch Service Book, with the Arch^Bishops own hand-writings in it, the cause
of all the Scots wars; and his Diary, Devotions, and discoveries under his
own hands of matters of high concernment.

77. The City of London to have been betrayed into the hands of the Royalists,
under a pretense of a petition for peace, plotted by Mr. Waller, a member of
the House of Commons, M. Tompkins, Mr. Challenor, and others; and this wicked
plot, te^med by King Charles in his letter to the Queen, one of his Fine
Designs; But God manifested th^^ to be wicked and accursed Designs; and
Waller on^ of the prime complotters, was by the sentence of the Parliament
fined 10000 li. in his estate, and sent out of the kingdom into perpetual
banishment, and Tompkins and Challenor hanged in London.

78. The breaking out of Sir John Hothams rotten-heart and infidelity to the
Parliament, in his intended and (...) pl^t* for the betraying of that mighty
strong Town of Hull into the Queens hands, which treachery was plotted and
contrived between Sir John the father, Captain Hotham his son, and Sir Edward
Roades, and began to be suspected, by Sir John Hothams deserting of the most
noble Lord Fairfax, by an intercepeed letter of the Queens to the King, and
diverse other sumptomes of it, but especially by Captain Moyers letter to Mr.
Ripley, and Mr. Ripley's faithful acquainting the Mayor of Hull therewith, and
their first seizing on the Block-houses, Castles, and Commanders of them, and
at length their apprehending of the persons of Sir John Hotham, and Sir Edward
Roads, for which treachery Sir John Hotham and Captain Hotham his Son was also
apprehended, and both of the^^ beheaded at the Tower of London.

The 2 of May* 1643. ye Cross in Cheapeside was pulled down* a Troop of
Horse and 2 Companies of foot waited to guard it and at ye fall of ye tope
Cross drum^es beat tru^pets blew and multitudes of Capes wayre thrown in ye
Air* and a great Shoute of People with joy, ye 2 of May the Almanake says,
was ye invention of the Cross, and 6 day at night was the Leaden Popes burnt*
in the place where it stood with ringinge of Bells, and a great Acclamation
and no hurt done in all these actions.

10 of May the Boocke of Sportes upon the Lords day was burnt by the Kingman in
the place where the Cross s^^ode, and at exhange*



Die Merturii; May 10. 1643.
By virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, and agreeable to a Bill passed
by both Houses of Parliament, for suppressing of diverse innovations in Churches
and Chapels, this Committee does require you, and every of you, to take away
and demollish every Altar or Table of Stone within your Church or Chapel, and
to remove the Communion Table from the East end of the said Church or Chapel,
and to place the same in some other convenient place of the body of the said
Church or Chapel, and to remove and take away all Tapers, Candlesticks, and
Basins from the Communion Table, and to take away and demolish all crucifixes,
Crosses, and all Images and Pictures of any one or more persons of the Trinity,
or of the Virgin Mary, and this Committee does further require you to demollish
all crucifixes, Crosses, Images or Pictures of any one or more persons of the
Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, upon the outside of your said Church or
Chapel, or in any open place within your Parish. Whereof you are to give an
account to this Committee, before the 20 day of this present month.

To the Churchwardens of the Parish of, etc. and to every of them.
79. A desperate plot for the betraying of the City or Town of Lincoln, by the
two Purfries, two Captains of Hull, who let in 60 Cavaliers by night in
disguised habits, and who issuing out about 12 of the clock that night, to act
their design, where a plain fellow of the Town discharging a piece of Canon
upon them, slew 10 of them at one shot the rest slain and taken by the
sentinels and Soldiers of the town, and so by Gods mercy the City preserved.

80. The Queen wrote a dangerous letter to the King, to come with all his
forces to surprise London; but by Gods over-powring wisdom and good
providence, the King refusing that counsel resolved to take Gloucester first,
which he fiercely assaulted, but was as bravely repulsed, and by Gods blessing
on Major General Mas^ies fidelity, and magnanimity of spirit, timely aid
coming to relieve the Town, it was admirably freed, and by the Lord Generals
Army, and the City of Londons Regiments, delivered.

81. A desperate rebellion raised by the Ke^tish malignants, but by Gods mercy
timely suppressed about Tunbridge, by the valor of Colonel Brown, and the
well-affected Gentry of the County of Kent.

82. A Ship bound from Denmark to the King, of about 300 t^n, richly laden with
arms and (...); another Ship bound from Newcastle to Holland, laden with
(...), but in the midst thereof (...) between 3 and 4000 li. hid in the (...)
to buy arms for the King; and a third great ship called the Fellowship, (...)
least 400 tun, carrying 24 pieces of Ordnance, all these 3 ships taken by the
Parliaments ships, and made prize of.

83. The coming in of our brethren of Scotland with an army of at least 20000
horse and foot, invited thereunto by the Parl: in the bitter depth of winter,
when they marched up to the middle in snow, and were forced to bring their
Artillery over the ice of the frozen river of Tyne, and the Citizens of London
lent the Parliament a 100000 li. for the Scots first pay, to encourage their
advance to help us against the Kings forces.

On Tuesday the 23 of May, 1643.
The House of Commons diving into the depth and searching to the root of the
kingdoms great and grievous distractions, and deep distempers, and finding
that all Papists in the kingdom, have (for the most part) been main and most
eminent; 23. May. 1643. Voted that ye Queen Pawning the Jewels of ye Crown
in Holland and there with buying Arms to assist the War against ye Par^a^^
and her own actual performances with her popish army in the North was high
Treason and transmited to the Lords* images. Crucifixes papist^call books in
Somerset and ^am^^^s ^are burnt and Capuchin friars sent away

May: 1643. an ordinance for the making of Fortes, Trenches, and Bull works,
about the City, July. 1: 43. the Assembly of Divines m^tt, Dr. ^^iss
Prolocutor. 120: the total May. ^3. Challenor and Tomkins were hanged for
seekeing to betray the City.

ye^, and most virulent actors, and abetters, of this present most unnatural
war against the Parliament, and that therefore they should be proceeded against
as traitors to the State and kingdom, and thereupon also having just cause to
search and see into the prime and principal head or leader of that perfideous
faction, fell necessarily into a long and serious debate, touching the
proceedings of the Queen, in her late being in Holland, and since her coming
back into the North of England, not only in her countenancing and encouraging,
her aiding and assisting the present Civil war, but in her actual performance
in the same to foment and advance it to the utmost ruin (as much as in her
was) of our Religion and whole Realm, for all which, and many other such like
misdemenours, it was debated, and at last fully agreed, that she was as liable
to the censure of the Law, as any Subject in the kingdom, whereupon it was put
to the question, whether the Queens pawning the Jewels of the Crown in
Holland, and therewith buying Arms and Ammunition, to be sent into England, to
assist the said war against the Parliament, and her own actual performances,
with her popish Army in the North, were not high Treason, and it was resolved
most unanimously by the whole house for the affirmative, afterward it being
also put to the question, whether they should forthwith declare their
intentions to proceed against her by impeachment of high Treason, this also was
immediately resolved for the affirmative, and Voted that Articles of
impeachment should be speedily drawn up against her, which Votes the House of
Commons transmitted to the Lords for their assent.

The Bishop of Canterburies first prayer on the Scaffold, 10 Janua. 1644.
O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all thy mercies, look upon me, but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the cross of Christ, look upon me; but not till thou have hathed me in
the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ, that
so the punishment that is due to my sins may pass away and go over me and
since thou art pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee, give
me now in this great instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, a heart
ready to dye for thine honor, and the Kings happiness, and this Churches
preservation, and my zeal to these, far from arrogance be it spoken, is all
the sin, humane frailty excepted, and all incidents thereunto, which is yet
known of me in this particular, for which I now come to suffer, I say in this
particular of Treason, but otherwise my sins are many and great, Lord pardon
them all, and those especially whatsoever they b^ which (...) this present
judgment upon me, and when thou have given me strength (...) it, then do with
me as seems best in thine own eyes and ca^^y me through death, that I may look
upon it in what visage soever it shall appear (...) and that there may be a
step of this issue of blood in this more then miserable (...)* I shall desire
that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self* (...) thee give
grace of repentance to all people that h^ve a thirst for b^^^^, but if they
will not (...) it device^ so, and such as are or shall be contrary to the glory
of thy great (...), the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of
the King, and his posterity after him, in their just rights and privileges,
the honor and conservation of Parliaments, in their ancient and just power,
the preservation of this poor Church, in her truth, peace, and patrimony, and
the settlement of this distracted, and distressed people, under the ancient
laws, and in their native liberties, and when thou have done all this in mercy
for them, O Lord, fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with religious
dutiful obedience to thee and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord
Jesus, and I beseech thee receive my soul to mercy. Our Father, etc.

Sr Alexander Caro^^. Sr. John Hotham, Capt^n Hotham and the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, beheaded on To^erhill for Treason against ye Parliament 1645.

The Great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons on Tusday the 11. August
1646



The Bishop of Canterburies last Prayer on the Scaffold.
Lord, I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death, before I can come to see thee, but it is but um^ra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature, but thou by thy merits and passion
have broke through the jaws of death; so, Lord, receive my soul and have mercy
upon me, and bless this kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly
love and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood
amongst them, for Jesus Christ his sale, if it be thy will. And when he said,
Lord receive my soul, which was his sign, the Executioner did his office.

84. A desperate plot of the Royalists to starve up the City of London, by
breaking into Surrey, Sussex, Kent, and the other associated Counties, but
disappointed by the Parliaments Victories at Ault^n and Als^^rd, fought by Sir
Will: Waller, with the help of the City of Londons regiments; and the Royalists
plots to hinder our brethren of Scot^^ coming in to our help, by letters and
Ambassadors sent from France, and messengers from King Charles to inveagle them
to keep from us; but all in vain by Gods good providence and mercy to us.

85. The King gran^^d a cessation of arms with the bloody rebels of Ireland,
and afterward justified it by a Declaration of his, printed and published at
Oxford; but it was remarkably observed, that he never prospered in any of his
great designs after that.

86. A Solemn League and Covenant taken by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
and by the City of London, and all parts of the kingdom, in the Parliaments
power, for a pure reformation of Religion and Church Government, and a mutual
defense betwixt us and our brethren of Scotland.

87. A notable plot by the Royalists to have Nottingham town and Castle,
betrayed unto them, the Officers therein being proffered above 10000 li. to
consent to it; but prevented by Gods mercy in the fidelity of Colonel
Hutchinsou, who was then the Governor thereof.

88. A General plot against the Protestant Religion over all Christendom, and
the Danes and Holl^nde^^ also, but God wrought a mighty overture therein by the
sudden breaking out of the Danes plot against the Swedes, and their
overrunning almost all D^nmark thereupon.

89. A desperate plot against the City of London, under a pretense of
petitioning for peace, acted by Sir (...) Brook, Colonel Read, and one Mr.
Riley, and Vilet, 2 Citizens of London (...), but by Gods providence discovered
and prevented.

1645.
90. Two (...) the betraying of Milsbury into the Royalists hands; and another
against (...) all then by Gods mercy timely discovered also and prevented.

91. One Mr. Edward S^^nford, a Papist, plotted with Captain Backhouse a Capt.
of Horse, under Colonel Mass^e* for the be^ ^aying of the City of Gloucester
into the Enemies hands, and pr^ffered 5000 li. for a reward thereof, 200 li.
whereof was paid in hand to the said Captain, but by Gods providence the plot
frustrated, and Gloucester safely preserved.

92. Englands great wonder to Gods glory, there being (about May 30. 1644.) six
brave armies in the kingdom, on the Parliaments side, and other forces for
defense of the City of London, besides.

93. A plot to have betrayed our whole Army in Cornwall in the West, but by
Gods blessing most of the Soldiers lives were preserved, though with the loss
of our Artillery.

94. Sir Alexander Carew, Sir John Hotham, Captain Hotham, and the Arch-prelate
of Canterbury beheaded on Tower Hill for treason against the Parliament.

95. A peace only pretended by the royalists at Uxbridge, and a treacherous
petition framed by the malignants of Buckingham shire, wherein one Sir John
Lawrence of that County was a great stickler, but the mischief of both was
frustrated.

96. A desperate assault on Melcomb-Regis, to have betrayed it into the
royalists hands, wherein diverse of the malignant Townsmen had a principal
hand, and Colonel Goring, and Sir Lewis Dives, were agents therein, but by
Gods blessing the plot was frustrated, the Town and Forts recovered, and two
ships with rich prize from Rhoan in France, were seized on to make amends for
their trouble.

1645.
97. Diverse Earls and Lords forsook Oxford, and came in and submitted
themselves to the Parliament.

98. A desperate plot in the West against the Parliament, by the Clubmen, but
by Gods providence turned to the Enemies greatest hurt in the issue.

99. A devilish sudden plot upon Scotland, which was almost over run, by
traitorous Montrosse; but as suddenly recovered again, by Gods blessing on
General David Lesley, and Montrosse discomfitted and beaten away into the
mountains.

1646.
100. A Discovery of gross impiety in the Oxonians, pretending a desired
treaty with the Parliament, for a wel-grounded peace, and yet at that time the
Earl of Glamorgan, had a Commission to the ruin of all the protestants in
Ireland, and so consequently of us in England also.

101. The great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons, on Tuesday the 11,
of August, 1646.

The Speech of the Lord Louthe^, Chancellor of Scotland, to the King at
Newcastle, July, 1646.
YOur Majesty was pleased on Monday last to call the Lords of Your Council and
Committee, to acquaint them with the Propositions, and told them before you
would deliver Your Answer, You would make the same known to them: The time
assigned to the Commissioners stay is so short, and the consequence of your
Majesty's Answer of so great importance, either for the perservation or ruin
of Your Crown, and Kingdoms, as we could not be answerable to God, nor to
that Trust reposed in us, unless we represent to your Majesty how necessary it
is that your Majesty assent to the Propositions as the condition of affairs
now standin so great extremity, and that the danger and loss of your refusal
will be remediless, and bring on a sudden ruin and destruction.

I shall begin first with the last, which is the danger and shall next speak a
word of the remedy.

The differences betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament (which no man knows
better than your Majesty's self,) are grown to such a height, that after
many, bloody battles, the Parliament having your Majesty, all the Forts,
Garr^^o^s, and strong holds in their hands, having your Majesty's Revenue,
Excise, Assessements, Sequestrations, and the Authority to raise all the men
and money in the Kingdom, and having, after many victories and great
successes, a strong Army on Foot, are now in such a posture for strength and
power: they are in a capacity to do what they will, both in Church and State.
And some are so afraid, and others so unwilling to submit themselves to your
Majesty's Government, that they desire not you, nor any of your Race, longer to
reign over them: But the people are so weary of the War, and great burdens
they do groan under, are so loath to have Monarchical Government destroyed,
that they are not attempt to cast it totally off, till once they send
Propositions of Peace to your Majesty, least the people (without whose
concurrence they are not able to carry on their design) should fall from them;
but after so great War and trouble, that they may have a perfect security
from opposition and Arbitrary power, they have resolved upon the Propositions,
which are tendered to your Majesty, as that without which the Kingdom and your
people cannot be in safety, and that there cannot be a firm peace upon any
other terms.

Your Majesty's friends in the Houses, and the Commissioners from Scotland,
(after much wrasling) did consent to the sending of those Propositions, or to
be ^ated the hunderers of peace, or otherwise to send no Propositions at all.

And now Sir, if your Majesty (as God forbid) shall refuse to assent to the
Propositions, You will lose all Your friends in the Houses, lose the City, and
all the Country. And all England will join against you as one man; they will
process and depose you, and set up another Government; they will charge us to
deliver your Majesty to them, and to tender their Garrisons, and remove our
Armies out of England, and upon your Majesty's refusal of the propositions,
both Kingdoms will be constrained for their mutual safety, to agree and
settle Religion and peace without You, which (to our unspeakable grief) will
ruin your Majesty and your posterity, and if your Majesty refuse our faithful
advice (who desire nothing on Earth more than the preservation of your
Majesty's Royal Throne.) And if your Majesty lose England by your wilfulness,
You will not be permitted to come and reign in Scotland.

Sir, we have laid our hands upon our hearts, we have asked Counsel and
direction from God, and have had our most serious thoughts upon the remedy, but
can find no other to save your Crown and Kingdoms, than your Majesty's
assenting to the propositions, and dare not say but they are higher in some
things, (if it were in our power and option to remedy) than we approved of, but
when we see no other means for curing the distempers of the Kingdoms, and
closing the breach between your Majesty and your Parliament, our most humble
and safe advise is, your Majesty will be graciously pleased to assent to them
as the only way to establish your Throne; because your Majesty shall be
thereby received again in your Parliament, with the applause and acclamations
of your people, by your Royal presence all friends will be strengthened, and
all Enemies, (who fear nothing so much as the granting the propositions) will
be weakened; your Majesty will have a fit opportunity hereafter, to offer such
propositions as You and your Parliament in wisdom shall think fit, for your
Crown and Kingdom, the Armies will be disbanded, and your people finding the
sweet fruit of a peaceable Government: you will gain their hearts and
affections, and that will be your Majesty's strength and glory, and will
recover all that you have lost in this time of tempest of trouble.

And if it please God to incline your Royal heart to this advise of your
humble, and faithful servants, who next to the honor and service of God,
esteem nothing more precious, than the safety of your person, and Crown: our
actions shall make it appear, that we esteem no hazard too great for your
Majesty's safety, and that we are willing to sacrifice our lives and fortunes
for establishing your Throne and just Right.

Die Sabbathi 5. April. 1645.
Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That all and
every person of what degree or quality soever, that has lived or shall live
within the Kings Quarters, or been aiding, assisting, or adhering unto the
Forces raised against the Parliament, and has or shall come to inhabit or
reside under the power and protection of the Parliament, shall swear upon the
holy Evangelist in manner following.

The Negative Oath.
I A. B. do swear from my heart, that I will not directly nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause
against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two
Houses of Parliament, in this Cause or War. And I do likewise swear that my
coming and submitting my self under the power and protection of the
Parliament, is without any manner of design whatsoever, to the prejudice of
the proceedings of the two Houses of this present Parliament, and without the
direction, privity, and advice of the King, or any of his Council, or
Officers, other then what I have now made known. So help me God, and the
Contents of this Book.

And it is further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners
for keeping of the Great Seal of England, for the time being, shall have
power, and are hereby authorized to tender and administer the said Oath unto
any Peer, or Wife, or Widow of any Peer, so coming to inhabit as abovesaid.
And it shall be lawful to and for the Committee of the House of Commons for
Examinations, the Committee for the Militia in London, and all Committees of
Parliament in the several Counties and Cities of the Kingdom, to tender and
administer the said Oath unto every other person so coming to inhabit as
abovesaid. And if any person (not being a member of, or Assistant unto either
of the Houses of Parliament) shall refuse or neglect to take the said Oath, so
duly tendered unto him or her, as abovesaid, the said Commissioners and
Committees respectively, shall, and may commit the same person to some prison,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, until he shall conform thereunto.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Collected by John Vicars.
FINIS.

