THE WAY TO TRUE HAPPINESS, Or, the WAY TO HEAVEN Opened.

In a SERMON before the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the
CITY of LONDON, Jan. 28. 1654/5

By RALPH VENNING.

GAL. 6.15, 16. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a new Creature; and as many as walk according to this
rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwel, at the Fountain and Bear
in Goldsmiths Row, in Cheap Side. 1655.

PACK Mayor. Tuesday, Jan. 30. 1654.
ORdered that Master Venning be desired from this Court to print, as fully as
he can, his SERMON at Paul's on the last Lords day.

SADLER.

To the Right Honorable CHRISTOPHER PACK LORD MAYOR, And the Right Worshipful
the ALDERMEN of the CITY OF London.
Honorable and Honored,
THat I print this Sermon, and that I print it more largely then I preached it,
is in obedience to your Order, which (having resolved a former scruple of
mine,) will warrant me for so doing, without making any further Apology;
though I hope that the Readers advantage also will be the more. That my
preaching then was not, and that my speech now is not, with the enticing words
of man's wisdom, but I hope in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and
Power. The reason is, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of words,
but in the words of wisdom, or, as the Apostle phraseth it, not in the wisdom
of men, but in the Power of God: and that the heavenly treasure might not taste
of the earthen vessel.

Certainly there was never more need then in our days of preaching and
pressing that of our blessed Savior, Labor not, or work not for the meat
which perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life and if any say
to me as they to him, What shall we do that we may work the Work of God? I
refer them to the ensuing Discourse for their Answer. Concerning which I only
desire that the Scriptures may be searched which do abundantly witness
thereunto: To the Law and to the Testimony, if it speak not according to that
rule, there is no light in it; but if it appear, (as I believe it will) to be
the voice of God, and not of man; I hope none will quarrel with it, lest they
be found fighters against God, and why should we provoke the Lord to jealousy?
unless we were stronger then he.

Solomon tells us that of making and reading many books there is no end, and
when we have read, if at least we could read, all that are made, this will be
the Conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for
this is the whole (we read it duty, the meaning is the whole) content and
Happiness of man, this is all that is profitable to man, it being opposed to
all the rest under the Sun, which is but vanity and vexation of spirit; and
verily, we may as well find ease in hell, as find Happiness any other way;
and that we shall know, (however we judge now) when (as he says) God shall
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good,
or whether it be evil.

How much then does it concern us to look about us, and to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling here, lest then we fear and tremble,
because we had not done it? Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we
persuade men; as they love their salvation, and as they will answer it at the
great and terrible day of the righteous judgment of God, that they abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against their souls; that they lean not to
their own understanding, nor walk in the ways of their heart, and in the
desire of their eyes, but that they consider to know and do, what is the good
and acceptable Will of God, that they may be found without blame, and that when
he shall appear, ye may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his
coming.

Watch therefore, for you know not what hour your Lord does come; but if any
servant say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall beat the
servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, the Lord of that servant will
come in a day when he looks not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware,
and will cut him in sunder, he will cut him off, and appoint him his portion
with unbelievers; and that servant which knew his Lords Will, and prepared not,
neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many stripes.

I hope none will say as he that had a book brought him, which treated of
Happiness, I am not at leisure; What? not at leisure to mind thy soul and
thy Happiness? are the world and sin such excellent pieces? are they so lovely
that thou should set thine heart upon them? Oh why will thou set thine eyes
upon that which is not? it is not what it seems to be, it is not that which thou
lackest, nay, it is not that which thou think it is; 'twill prove the greatest
cheat that can be, and though thou gain the whole world, what will it profit if
thou lose thy soul?

Well, you see the world tottering and tumbling about your ears, the fashion
of it, the luster thereof does,) And Oh that therefore the lust thereof did
pass away! We are also making haste to our grave; if they be not taken from
us, yet we shall be taken from them, and who knows, only God knows how soon;
To day then let us hear and obey the voice of God, that when the Lord comes,
he may find us so doing, as to say unto us, Well done, good and faithful
servants, enter ye into your Masters joy; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom.

That this may be your portion, and the portion of them that heard it, and of
them that read it, is the hearty Prayer of him, who is

12th. Month, or Febr. 20. 1654. Honorable and Honored, Engaged and willing,
as he is able, to serve you, RALPH VENNING.

THE WAY TO TRUE HAPPINESS Discovered. From the words of our Blessed SAVIOVR,
MAT. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.


THough there is nothing more natural to man, then to seek after happiness,
yet there is nothing that the nature of man is less able to find out then his
happiness. Man's hungring desire to attain happiness is not abated, though his
ability for the attainment thereof ( as of and by himself) be quite lost,
Since he did eat the forbidden fruit, that is, since he sinned, ever since he
was banished from the well-watered Garden of God; he (poor man!) has wandered
up and down like a fugitiye and a vagabond in the land of Nod, seeking rest, in
dry places, but finds none. Alas, how is poor silly man bewildred in the
pursuit of his chiefest good! he walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, he stumbles and falls, yea, in seeking to save, he loses himself. It is
with him, as it was with the blind Sodomites, who groping to find the door,
went further from it, then they were at first: Or like the Dove, when it left
the Ark, always upon the wing, ever flying and fluttering up and down, but
never found where to fix the sole of her foot; just thus it is with man since he
left God, he knows not where to rest the foot of his soul; Nunc hic, nunc
vertitur illic, he goet forward and then back again, to the right hand and to
the left, (as Job in another, and Solomon in thi^ case) to see if he can find
out what is that good for the souls of the sons of men, which they should do
under the Heaven all the days of their life, that after this life of days is
ended, they may enjoy life eternal with God in Heaven. But alas! I must say it
again, Man is still at a loss.

Now man being in this pitifully sad and miserable condition it pleased God, (
who is a lover of the souls, and the Preserver of men) in tender mercy to
mankind, to speak Heb. 1.1
at undry times, ( or by peece-meal,) and in diverse manners unto the Fathers by
the Prophets, but in the fullness of time to send, and in these last days to
speak to us by his Son; he has discovered his Will fully and wholly by him, so
that we may not look for another; there being no name under heaven but him by
which we can be saved, whither then should we go for the discovery ( seeing he
only has the words,) of eternal life? him I say has God sent to guide our
feet into the way of peace, yea, that he might be the way, and the truth, and
the life unto us. He sent Christ from Heaven to earth, that Christ might send
men from earth to Heaven.

Accordingly Christ has acquitted himself like a faithful Steward; he has
finished the work which his Father gave him to do; He has done and suffered
all that was commanded him for the good of men; so that he is pure from the
blood of all men, having declared unto them the whole counsel of God, and
chalked out the way wherein they are to walk, that they may be happy. The sum
whereof he has given us in the text, and that is the doing of his Fathers Will.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

Christ Jesus, having (in the thirteenth verse,) exhorted them to enter in
(that is, as Luke expounds it, chap. 13. verse 24. to strive to enter in) at
the strait gate, with forcible arguments to provoke thereunto; he does in the
fifteenth verse advise them to beware of false Prophets, that they might not be
misled and miscarry in a business of so great importance to them: and
therefore tells them, verse 16. ( which is again repeated, verse 20.) how they
may know them; viz. by their fruits; by their works, not by their words:
happily they may speak as others, so that they may not be known by their words,
but, says he, by their fruits ye shall know them. Having done this, he lays
down this position in the text, as of greatest concernment, not only to them,
but to all: Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, etc.

I shall a little open the expressions, and then draw the Point which I intend
to handle.

Not every one, that is, not any one; Non omnis est ne unus; not every one, is
as much as if he had said, no not one; it is a universal negative, without
exception; Not any one that says and does not, that says, I go Sir, but goes
not, that says and but says, Lord, Lord. Lord, Lord, admits of a threefold
explication. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, 1. By way of Profession. 2.
By way of Prayer. 3. By way of Appeal.


1. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, by way of Profession, that professes
me to be his Lord, as Joh. 13.13. Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye do well,
that is, so far ye do well; for so I am: but if I am your Lord and Master,
where is mine honor? or, as he says. Luke 6.46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord,
and do not the things which I say? Why? that is, to what end and purpose, viz.
to none; in vain do ye profess me to be your Lord, unless you practice
obedience to me your Lord. It Is not Profession, but practice, at least not
Profession without practice. It will not do any man any good to be but a
Pretender to Religion. He that in words confesses Christ, and in works denies
him, has but a form of Godliness without the power, and such a man will not
be justified by his good words, but condemned by his bad works. What will it
avail to have the name to live, and to be dead while we live? to have the name
of a Christian and not to be as our name is? Many a ship has had the name of
Safeguard and Good speed, that yet has miscarried and been cast away. Many a
man has had a good name, and yet (alas!) has made a bad end, a very bad end,
whose end has been to be punished with everlasting destruction, from the
presence of him, whom they have called, Lord, Lord; for not every one that
says, etc.

2. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, by way of prayer; as they, Matthew.
25.11. Lord, Lord, open to us; and they, Luke 13.25. Lord, Lord, open to us.
Though it be, and be truly said, that every one that calls on the Name of the
Lord shall be saved, yet you see that a man may call upon the Name of the Lord,
I, and that again and again, he may call Lord, Lord, and yet be damned. His
repetitions will be in vain, because they are vain repetitions. A man may add
prayers to his Profession, and yet notwithstanding all his Professions and his
Prayers, may go to hell: for, Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, either by
way of Profession, or Prayer, or both, shall enter, etc.

3. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, by way of Appeal, as in verse 22.
Many shall say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? have we not? we make our appeal to thee, we call thee to witness, and
make thee our Judge. Thus the Name of the Lord is often called, too too often
called upon, as by them in Jerem. 42.5. The Lord, (say they) be witness
between thee and us. But Appeals made for Justification do not always
justify, nor are they justified; For, says Jeremiah to them, Ye did at that
time, at that very time, when you appealed to God, ye did dissemble in your
hearts. And, says Christ, at this time, though you say unto me, Lord, Lord, by
way of appeal, yet I profess unto you, I never knew you, I never approved of
you, ( I know the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall
perish,) Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. So that it is not Profession,
nor Prayer, nor Appeal, that will give a man entrance into the Kingdom of
Heaven: Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, etc.

By the Kingdom of Heaven, is to be understood, that state of blessedness
after this life, called elsewhere salvation, glory and eternal life. Which
indeed is begun in this life; for, Joh. 17.3
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent; and therefore the dispensation of grace by Jesus Christ, is
often called the Kingdom of Heaven; Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand; but I think the future state to be here principally, if not only
intended. For, Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father, Matthew. 13.43.

But I purposing to speak to the latter clause, shall wave this first, having
given you two or three Observations from the text and context.

1. From the connection of this text with the foregoing verse, I shall observe,
That men are better known by what they do, then by what they say. Even a
child, says Solomon, Prove. 20.11. Even a child is known by his doings,
whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. So says Christ, By their
fruits ye shall know them; Not every one that says, etc. Men are better known
by their doings then by their sayings; If a man speak well and do ill, Charity
it self cannot speak well of that man: as to men God indeed judges of their
words and their works by their hearts; God judges the outside by the inside,
but man judges the inside by the outside.
but men cannot judge of men but by their works. By their fruits ye shall know
them; Not by their Profession, for they may profess like Saints; nor by their
Prayers, for they may pray like Saints; nor by their Appeals, for they may
appeal like Saints; they may say, Lord, Lord; but by their fruits ye shall know
them. It Is not the words, but the works of men that tell us what they are.
Indeed (says he) they come to you in sheep clothing, but they are ravening
wolves. They have ( as one says on the place) Jacobs smooth tongue, but Esaus
rough hand. Audi, nemo melius; specta, nemo pejus. They speak like Angels of
light, but they act like Angels of darkness. They defy the devil in words,
but deifie the devil in works; they deifie Christ in words, but defy him in
works. God likes not this Court-holywater of fair Professions, and deep
Protestations, when men's hearts are not with him, when there is not the power
of Religion, and the practice of Godliness. By their fruits ye shall know
them; Not every one that faith, etc.

2. Good words without good works will never turn to a good account; holy
sayings without holy doings will never admit into the holy place. Not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, etc. there will little come of that.

3. God is a very curious observer of what men say, and of what men do in the
world. Jesus Christ here observes, that they say, Lord, Lord; but withal he
observes that they do not the Will of his Father, but are workers of iniquity.
Men indeed may, but God will not, God cannot be put off with complements. Shall
not he that made the eye, see? shall not he that made the ear, hear? shall
not he that made the heart, know what is therein? Surely, says David, Psalm.
139. thou understandest my thoughts, and there is not a word in my tongue, but
lo, thou know it altogether. And as for the works, as he says to the Church
of Ephesus, I know thy works. But

I proceed to the second clause. He that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven. Whence I lay down this Conclusion,

That they, and none but they, who do the Will of God, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

For the clearing of this, there is this Querie to be made as to the terms,
What are we to understand by the Will, and by the doing of the Will of God?
which being answered, we may more safely proceed to prove the truth of the
Proposition.

But before I can do this it is requisite to premise these two things.

1. That the Will of God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ are one. The
Father and he are one, and agree in one; and indeed it is in him and by him that
we know the Will of God. No man (says John, chap. 1.18.) has seen God at any
time; the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him; And as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2.16. Who has known the mind
of God? but we have the mind of Christ, wherein and whereby we have the mind
of God. The Father says of the Son as Pharaoh did of Joseph, Gen 41.55. Go
unto Joseph, what he says unto you, do. And as his Mother said to the servants
at the wedding, John 2.5. Whatsoever he says unto you, do it: Just so his
Father says, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.
So that whatever Christ says unto you, is his Fathers Will; and therefore,
verse 24. he calls them his sayings, and pronounces them blessed that hear
and do them: for they are his Fathers Will.

2. As to the terms I premise this also, That these phrases, the Will of God,
the Word of God, the Work of God, the Commands of God, etc. are all equivalent,
and signify the same thing. So then,

I answer, that by the Will of God, we are to understand

1. The Credenda, Faith.

2. The Agenda, Holiness. Good works, or the Romans 16 26.
obedience of faith; not either, but each of them; not one or the other, but
both one and the other; the doctrine of faith or things to be believed, and the
doctrine of holiness or things to be done and practiced. As faith excludes not
doing ( with respect to salvation,) so doing excludes not faith; for as faith
without works is dead, so works without faith are dead also; as it is impossible
that faith without works can please God, so no less impossible for works
without faith to please God: and therefore what God has joined together, man
should not put asunder. Yea, you shall find that believing is expressly
called the Will of God, John 6.27, etc. Labor not (says Christ) for the meat
which perishes, but for that which endures unto everlasting life, which the
Son of man gives you. Whence by the way observe, that Gods giving and man's
laboring are not inconsistent: free grace and full duty may join hearts and
hands. But, say they, ver. 28. What shall we do, that we may work the works of
God? Jesus answered, v. 29. and said unto them, This is the work, (that is, the
Will of God) that ye believe on him whom he has sent. Accordingly in the 40.
verse. This is the Will of him that sent me, that every one that believes on
the Son, should have everlasting life. Now if this be his Will, that believing
on him we have everlasting life, then it is his Will that we believe on him in
relation thereunto: so that as well believing on him for everlasting life, as
everlasting life to believing on him, is the Will of God. Yea, you have it in
express terms, 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment that we should believe on
the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; so that you see, it is not barely that which
we call good works, that is to be understood by the doing of the Will of God.
but believing in or on the Lord Jesus Christ also; this is the Work, this is
the Will, this is the Command of God.

And, beloved, I ground it further on this rule, which is an undeniable one,
and for not attending whereunto we have had so many needless, groundless and
unprofitable disputes in the world. The rule is this, that the Scripture does
often, yea, very usually put particular duties for all Religion, and therefore
annexeth salvation to distinct graces. Sometime it is, He that believes shall
be saved; Elsewhere, He that calls upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved;
Here it is, He that does the Will of God. Now all these and the like are complex
and comprehensive Propositions, and contain more in them then they make show of
( for God spcaks much in a little,) acts and duties of Religion, being (as
Moralists speak of their virtues, inter se connexae) linked together in a
golden chain. Religion is not this or that piece, but the whole, which is
usually expressed in a word, or sometime two, The Apostle comprehends the whole
counsel of God under repentance and faith, Acts 20.20, 21, 27. versescompared.
as in that of Solomon, Fear God, and keap his Commandments; for this is the
whole of man, Eccl. 12.13. So that if you could suppose a man to be a believer,
and to be a believer alone, it would not save him, as the Apostle James says,
chapter 2.14. What does it profit my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and
have not works? Can faith save him? No, no more then saying, Be ye warmed will
warm any; or, Be ye filled will fill any; for faith without works is dead. And
what is said of this may be said of the rest, so that when the Scripture speaks
of salvation, as annexed to any one thing, it supposes that to contain the
rest. The reason is evident, for the graces of God as saving are not parted.
There is no believing to salvation without repentance, nor no repentance to
salvation without believing; there is no calling upon the Name of the Lord will
save, without departing from iniquity; nor can they savingly depart from
iniquity, that call not on the Name of the Lord. It Is not any one thing, but
things that pertain to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. It Is not thing, but
things that accompany, ( or, as it may be better read, contain) salvation,
Heb. 6.9. and he that takes one for all without all, will find it nothing at
all. A part is no portion. The great fallacy with which Satan deludes many men,
is that which Logicians call a been compositis ad male divisa; when he gets
them to take Religion into pieces, and then takes one piece for Religion. One
cries up God, another cries up Christ, another faith, another love, another
good works; but what is God without Christ, or Christ without faith, or faith
without love, or love without works? but now take God in Christ, by faith which
works by love to the keeping of the Commandments of God, and this is pure
Religion. It Is the whole, that is, the whole of man.

Yet again, though I have spoken thus much to it, let me make it clearer then a
demonstration, that one is put for all, and as containing all, by comparing
these places of Scripture; in 1 Cor. 7.19. you read that Circumcision is
nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but keeping the Commandments of God.
What Is that? why that is all in all; in Gal. 5.6. It Is neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by love: that is
that which avails, or is all in all. Yet in Gal. 6.15. he says, Neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; that is
all in all: and yet for all this, as if all this were nothing, he tells us in,
Col. 3.11. that Christ is all and in all, cashiering both Circumcision and
uncircumcision, as formerly. Now, my beloved, if you should take any one of
these, though each be said to be availing, I say, if you should take any one,
and lay the stresse of your salvation upon it, you were undone. It Is not
keeping the Commandments of God, nor faith working by love, nor the new
creature, no, nor Christ himself, considered alone and apart that avails any
thing, but these in conjunction. He names one only, because wherever one is,
it is not only one, there is more then one; wherever one is savingly, there
are all in their respective places, as far as they are to be in relation to
salvation. Thus you see. that faith as well as works, and works as well as
faith ( every one in their own order) are to be taken in, or we shall not be
taken into the Kingdom of Heaven. And this may suffice for the ( quid sit, as
ye call it, or the) opening of the Point.

As to the quod sit, or proof of the Point, that it is so (that they, and none
but they who do the Will of God, ( in the sense explained) shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven,) though I might say, Ipse dixit, Christ himself has said
it, what need we any further witness? seeing we know and are assured that his
witness is true; yet we shall give you a whole cloud of witnesses; the harmony
and consent of Scriptures, to clear up this point, to evince and evidence the
truth thereof, to be past a contradiction, and without controversy.

To say nothing of the connection between the two petitions in the Lords Prayer,
Matthew. 6.10. Thy Kingdom come, and thy Will be done. Nor of that in Heb. 10.36.
For ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might
receive the Promise, viz. of the Kingdom of Heaven, or eternal life; for this
is the Promise which he has made, 1 John 2.25. and but to mention that in 1
John 2.17. He that does the Will of God abides for ever. I say not to insist
on these, I shall proceed to prove the Point.

1. From the testimony that God has given of the persons already gone to
Heaven; viz. that they were such; I shall instance only in two. The first is
Enoch, of whom its said, Genesis 5.24. that he walked with God, ( which is all
one, as if it had been said, he did the Will of God) and was not, was no more
on earth, for God took him up to Heaven: This is all that is said of Enoch in
the Old Testament, and not one word mentioned of faith; but that his believing
was therein comprehended is clear from Hebr. 11.5. where we are told the former
story more at large; By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death, and was not found because God had translated him; for before his
Translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God, or as it is in Genesis,
that he walked with God; now that he could not walk with, or please God but by
faith is fully asserted, v. 6. for without faith it is impossible to please
him; and that that faith there spoken of relates to Christ is clear, because
none can so seek him as to find the reward, but by Christ; For none comes to
the Father, but by him. Yea, that Enochs had special respect to Christ, may be
gathered from his own Prophecy, Jude 14. where he says, Behold, the Lord, (
viz. the Lord Christ, as appears by comparing this with 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, etc.)
the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints; so that Euoch was a believing
walker, or a walking believer, and as such translated.

The second instance is David, of him its said, Acts 13.22. that God raised him
up, and gave testimony to him, saying, I have found David the son of Jesse, a
man after mine own heart, who shall fulfill all my Wills; and, v. 26. it is said
of him, that after he had served his own generation by the Will of God, or ( as
it may be more properly read) after he had served the Will of God in his
generation, he ( as to his body) fell asleep. Many men serve their generations
by the Will of God, that serve not the Will of God in their generations; but
David served the Will of God. Now that David also in serving the Will of God,
acted as a believer, is evident from Hebr. 11.32, 33. What shall I ( what need
is there that I should) say more? for the time would fail me, to speak of
Gideon, etc. and of David also, who by faith wrought righteousness, etc. so
that David also, as a believer doing the Will of God, went to Heaven.

2. As it appears by the testimony that God has borne to the persons gone to
Heaven, so also by the testimony God bears against the persons that are gone,
and are to go to hell; as in the verse following the text, Depart from me ye
Workers of iniquity. And so again, Luke 13.27. Depart from me all ye that work
iniquity; yea, yet again, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire; Why? For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, etc. that is, ye did
not mine or my Fathers Will. Now how comes this to pass that men are Workers
of iniquity? but from unbelief, as by comparing a few texts will eafily
appear, Ephesians. 2.2. You were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein ye walked,
according to the Prince of the power of the air, that is, according to his
Will, who still works in the children of disobedience, the word is of
unbelief; As good works spring from says, so bad works spring from unbelief.
their disobedience was of unbelief; and indeed unbeliever is as comprehensive
a word, as workers of iniquity, therefore its said of them that do not Gods
Will, Luke 12.46. He will appoint them their portion with unbelievers; and who
were they that entered not into rest, but them that believed not? so we see that
they could not enter in because of unbelief, Heb. 3.18, 19. by reason of which
unbelief, they were workers of iniquity. Hence we have these solemn cautions
given us, Hebr. 3.12. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God; and again, Heb. 4.1, 2. let
us therefore fear, lest a promise being left of entering in, any of you should
come short, viz. through unbelief, as it is, ver. 11. Let us labor therefore
to enter into rest, lest any man fall, after the same example of unbelief. So
then you see, beloved, that they that were admitted, did believingly do the
Will of God and they that are to be shut out, are such as do from unbelief work
iniquity, or not do the Will of God.

3. It further appears by this, that there can be no acts of grace proved
powerful and saving, but by doing the Will of God. For of knowledge its said, 1
John 2.4. He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments is a liar,
and the truth is not in him: viz. the truth of that knowledge which he pretends
to for the saving of his soul. And as for love, the Apostle is no less
express, in 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God, that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. The like might be said of
the rest, as of faith, etc. above mentioned in the opening of the Point.

Well then, you see that no man has any ground to expect entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven, that does not do the Will of God, that does not walk with
God in faith and obedience, or in the obedience of faith. If therefore any
should suppose that they may marry the Rachel of Heaven, without their serving
the Will of the Father, and before they have married the Leah of obedience, let
them know, for God will tell them, as Laban did Jacob, Non est mos loci, It Is
not the custom of the country to marry the younger before the elder. But if
this that has been said should not be thought sufficient, but you will needs
yet have further witness, proof and evidence of this truth, I will give you
six Scripture-demonstrations of it.

1. No man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he for whom it is
prepared; Now its prepared for none but them that do the Will of God: Therefore
none but they can enter. Both these Propositions are asserted by Christ
himself. The major is laid down in Mat. 20.23. says he, To sit at my right
hand, and on my left hand, ( in the Kingdom, as she prayed before) is not mine
to give ( to any,) but for whom it is prepared of my Father. The Kingdom of
Heaven is no common Inn, it is not a receptacle for all, but a peculiar place
for a peculiar people; and who they are, the minor or second Proposition tells
us, none but they that do the Will of God, and this Christ himself tells us
also, Matthew. 25.34. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, viz. you, who did
my Fathers Will, who fed me when I was hungry, clothed me when I was naked,
etc. which ( as the Apostle James says, James 1.27.) is pure Religion, and
undefiled before God the Father.

2. A second demonstration is this. None can enter the Kingdom of Heaven, but
they who are prepared for it; and none are such but they that do the Will of
God, (in the sense explained). Heaven is not only prepared for them, but they
also are prepared for Heaven; and the truth of it is, This world is but a
Purgatory for men, that they may here be purified and refined, and thereby put
into a capacity, ( as Hester was in another case,) to enter into the Kingdom of
God, for no unclean thing can enter there. And that we must be made meet to be
Partakers before we partake, is clear from Col. 1.12. where the Apostle exhorts
them, ( having prayed) that they might give thanks to the Father, who had made
them meet to be Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, who had
fitted them for the Kingdom of Heaven, for that is the inheritance of the
Saints in light; and, how that was done, he tells us in v. 13. by delivering us
from the power of darkness, into the Kingdom of his dear Son; a man must be in
the Kingdom of the Son, which is the Kingdom of Heaven on Earth, and be
thereby fitted for, before he can be admitted into the Kingdom of God, and
this translation is no other, but the fitting us by enabling us to do the Will
of God; for being in the Kingdom of Christ, is opposed to being under the
power of Satan, and therefore must carry in it a sense contrary to it. Now when
we were under that power, we wereled by him at his Will, as Ephesians. 2.2, 3. We
were at his beck and bidding, his Will was our Law, therefore to be translated
from thence into the Kingdom of Christ, can denote no less then our obedience
to him, or our doing his Will, whereby we are made meet to be Partakers, etc.

3. A third demonstration is this. None can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
but they to whom its promised; They that have no promise can expect no
performance; Now it is promised to none but such as do the Will of God. Has
not ( says the Apostle,) James 25. God chosen the poor of the world, rich in
faith, and heirs of the (or as the margin has it, of that) Kingdom, which he
has promised to them that love him? Love is the fulfilling of the Law.
and who they are we were told before, such as keep his Commandments, and to
whom the keeping of his Commandments, or the doing of his Will is not grievous.

4. A fourth demonstration is this. None but the friends of God shall inherit
the Kingdom of God, as for his enemies that would not that be should Their
enmity is seen in a non-subjection to the Law of God. Rom 8 7.
reign over them, they shall never reign with him; No, says he, bring them
forth and slay them before my face; Christ will see execution done upon his
enemies, but his friends, they and none but they shall inherit the Kingdom.
Abraham was Gods friend, and Paradise it self is called Abraham's bosom, and
the state of our glory in one part of it is this, we shall sit down with
Abraham the friend of God, (with Isaac and Jacob, and the rest of the friends
of God,) in his Kingdom. But who are his friends then? that Christ will tell
us, Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father, which is in Heaven,
or (as Mark rendens it) the Will of God; or (as Luke has it) who hear the Word
of God and do it, (which are all parallel expressions) the same is my brother,
and sister, and mother, my nearest and dearest friends. Yet a more (if a more)
pregnant place may be produced, John 15.14. where Christ says to his
disciples, Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. So then, none
but friends can enter, and none are friends but such as do his Will.

5. A fifth demonstration is this. None shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but them that are If a man be not newborn, it had been good for him,
he had not been born.
borne again, and none are borne again, but such as the text mentions, the
Scripture is express in both these. The Proposition is laid down by Christ
himself, John 3.3. with a double Verily; Verily, verily, of most certain and
undoubted truth, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, or from above, or
(as elsewhere) of God, he cannot see (which is expounded, v. 5. unless he be
borne of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into) the Kingdom of God; Now
there are none borne of God, but this is their character, 1 John 2.29. Ye know
that every one that is borne of him does righteousness, and again, 1 John 3.
Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin, because he is borne of God; that
is, he does not live in sin, is not under the dominion or command of sin, sin
does not reign in him, that he should obey it in the lusts or wills thereof.

6. The sixth and last demonstration is this. None can enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but holy ones; for says the text, Hebr. 12.14. Without holiness no
man shall see God; now what is holiness, but doing the Will of God? This is
the Will of God, even our sanctification; and, He that has this hope, viz. of
glory or the Kingdom of Heaven, purifies himself as God is pure.

Thus (I think) I have fully proved and demonstrated this to be the truth of
God according to the Scriptures, that they and none but they shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, who do the Will of God. That is, that do believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and bring forth the obedience of faith.

But happily there may be this question moved, if it be thus, Who then can be
saved? when Christ had said that it was hard, (and it is no less hard to this
day) for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, They have so much bag and
baggage, as the camel has his buneh on his back; they said, Who then can be
saved? the Answer was given, and is now, That which is impossible with men, is
possible, yea, very feasible with God. But to this let me more distinctly lay
down these few Positions.

1. That all satisfying and all meriting work is done; it is all already done to
our hands by the Lord Jesus Christ, who offered up himself once for all, and
needs not again to be offered up. In burnt-offering and sacrifices for sin,
which are offered by the Law, thou had no pleasure, no content nor
satisfaction; therefore thou would not have them any longer, says Christ to
the Father; but a body have thou prepared me; then said I, Lo, I come to do thy
Will; by which Will, viz. done and accomplished by him, we are Freed from sin,
and consecrated to the service of God.
sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10.
Now its great consolation to us, we are not to make a purchase by our doing the
Will of God, we are not to obey, as paying a price for our inheritance, that is
done already, and by faith we do but receive, and by obedience walk worthy of
(or answerable to) the Kingdom and glory, whereunto we are called by our Lord
Jesus Christ in the Gospel.

2. Doing the Will of God here, if you take it for works only, is not that
whereby we are justified, but that which does justify that we are justified,
and by which our faith is made perfect, as the Apostle says concerning
Abraham, James 2.22. It Is not that which does give us our title to Heaven, but
does prove, that we have a title given us.

3. As to such things as we would do, but cannot, God will accept the will for
the deed, provided, we be as willing to do as to will the deed. Thus Abraham is
said to have offered up his Son, because he was willing to do it. And this is
the consolation the Apostle had, when to will was present with him, but to do
he had no power; that with his mind he did serve the Law or the Will of God,
Romans 7. The Saints cannot do the things that they would, because the flesh
lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. and in such a case Christ does excuse
his disciples with this, The spirit indeed, (mark that, the spirit indeed) is
willing, but the flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41. and upon this account it is, that
Christ tells his Father, John 17.6. that his disciples had kept his Word,
though they failed very often, because their heart was to it.

4. By doing the Will of God, here is not to be understood such an exactness as
will not dispense with any failings, that if a man fall short in any thing he
should perish and be undone, according to that of the Law, cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Or as the
Apostle quotes it, Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one that continues not in all
things, which are written in the book of the Law to do them. For from this
rigor and curse we are free by Christ Jesus, he being made a curse for us,
Gal. 3.13. but that which is required of us hereby, is a continual care of
doing, and making it our business to do the Will of God; as I make appear
thus; Mat. 7.13. says Christ, Enter in at the strait gate; I, its soon said,
enter in; but what is the meaning? why, Luke (as I said before) expounds it
thus, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, so that Striving is put for
entering, because such shall enter; and the Apostle Peter with respect to this
Kingdom, expresses the duty by giving all diligence, 2 Pet. 1.11. Wherefore
the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure:
for if ye do these things ye shall never fall, but an entrance shall be
ministered to you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

5. I add this, that to such God has promised assistance, so that though the
work be too hard for us, yet through Christ strengthening us, we may be able to
do all these things; and therefore, Phil. 2.12, 13. when the Apostle had said,
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, He presently adds by way of
encouragement, God works in you both to will and to do. God will not be
wanting to us, if we be not wanting to our selves, God will bless the diligent
hand. And this shall suffice for the doctrinal part.

I come now to the Application; and here there are three words or heads that I
have to speak to; and by the way having spoken of three words, let me take off
an unjust blame often laid on Ministers, for saying they have but a word, or a
word or two more; one word in Scripture Phrase is put for one head. The ten
Commandments are called but ten words. God spoke these ten words, saying, etc.
they are more then ten words, but no more in this sense, they are ten heads of
things; therefore let none show their folly hereafter in laughing at the
Ministers saying, but a word more, though he speak many.

These then are the three words or heads, which I have to speak unto, 1.
Information. 2. Examination. 3. Exhortation.


The first is Information, and that of these several truths. The first
Corollary, Inference or Deduction, (call it what you will) from hence is this,
That very few will go to Heaven. This very Doctrine which I have handled, was
preached by Christ upon this Querie; there was that said unto him Luke 13.23.
Are there few that shall be saved? and he said by way of answer, Strive to
enter; for many shall seek, and shall not be able: and it is not every one that
says, Lord, Lord, that shall enter Heaven, but he that does the Will of my
Father; whence I infer (what Christ grants) that there are but few, a very few.
that will go to Heaven. I beseech you, beloved, look about you, and lay it to
heart; it is no such common thing to be saved as the world thinks for. Read
but a few Scriptures and judge you whether many or few will be saved, Only one
ground of four brought forth fruit to salvation. And how few of the old world,
when the floodcame, how few of Sodom, when hell came from Heaven.
I mean in comparison of them that will be damned; in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. says he
Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? the
unrighteous, that is a large word, who are they? why, Be not deceived, neither
fornicatours, and are none of you such? nor idolaters, nor adulterers, and are
none of you such? nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, and are none of you such? no, nor drunkards, says he,
and are none of you such? nor revilers, nor extortioners, and are none of you
such? be not deceived, none of these no, not a man of these, thus living and
thus dying shall inherit the Kingdom of God: sad! Lord, what will become of
this sinful world! If we should go throughout this City, and separate the
forenamed sinners; alas! how few would remain to be saved! See another place,
Gal. 5.19, etc. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred,
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like; Does not the whole world almost i^ in
some or other of these? is not this the fruit it brings forth? Well, what will
become of them? The Apostle tells us, v. 21. Of the which I tell you, as I have
told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not, no, they shall
not, enter into the Kingdom of God. Beloved, what do we think will become of
us? are these things to us but as a tale that is told? how dare we say that we
believe these Scriptures and yet walk in these sins? If men did believe that
sin were a soul-damning thing, would men be so prodigal to sin away their souls
to hell? Do men love themselves no better then to damn themselves? be not
deceived, the Scripture is true, and will be found true in the day of
judgment, and what will poor sinners do in that day? See yet again, Ephesians. 5.5.
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous (what,
mark I beseech you, what bouts the Scripture has at the covetous man, he is
always reckoned up among the worst of sinners, even such as shall have no
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ or of God; Let no man then deceive you
with vain words, for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the
children of disobedience or unbelief. But now to leave the rabble and common
sort of sinners in the world, and look a little into the more refined sort of
men, Ye that say, Lord, Lord.
the professing world, and how little is that? and among Professors separate
them that have but a form of Godliness, and deny the power of it, holding the
truth of God in unrighteousness, and them that do in words confess him, and
in works deny him; separate the formalists and the hypocrites, and then judge,
if there be not few that shall be saved. Methinks, beloved, it might make our
hearts to ache within us, and it is strange that our countenances are not
changed, that our faces do not gather palenesse, that our thoughts are not
troubled, (like Belshazzars) so that the joints of our loins were loosed, and
our knees smote one against another, when we hear how few are like to go to
Heaven; None but they that do the Will of God. And Lord, good Lord; how few are
they? But

2. If it be so, then certainly it is men's great concernment to do the Will of
God, to believe and live the Gospeltruthes: unless men think it an indifferent
thing, whether they go to Heaven or hell, whether their souls be saved or
damned. Let us up and be doing, lest we be undone. And if we have hitherto but
complemented with God, and said, I go Sir, but have not gone, Let us undo what
evil we have done, and do what duty we have neglected, by We need such an
after-wisdom as repentance is, who have brought our selves so much behindhand
by former folly.
repenting of both; for he that repents that he had not done, is said to do his
Fathers Will, Matthew. 21.31. that is, when the repentance is such, as is not
only for, but from dead works, and brings forth fruit, viz. amendment of life,
serving God out of choice, and doing his Will with pleasure: If Gods Will be
not done, we shall be undone. Christ tells us plainly, that unless our
righteousness, (our practical righteousness) exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no case, (mark that) in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.20. And yet these men had beautiful outsides,
they did outwardly appear righteous unto men, yea, so righteous, that it was an
ordinary saying among the Jews, that if but two men went to Heaven, the one
would be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee. Paul was a Pharisee, and touching the
Law blameless, yet would not be found in that righteousness for all the
world, 'twas but dung to him; his whole soul went after this, to be found in
Christ Jesus, and to have that righteousness which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. And mark, what
influence this had upon his practice; such, as that he could propose it to all
men for an example; for, says he, Our conversation is in Heaven, v. 20. He
lived in this world as a man of another world: and therefore when he was ready
to be offered, and the time of his departure was at hand, he could triumph in
this, that he had fought a good fight, finished his course, kept the faith; And
(says he) henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous Judge will give me at that day. Oh the joy, and peace,
and hope that arises hence! Of what concernment is it then to men's present and
future peace and happiness to do the Will of God? But I may not enlarge too
much; I will proceed to

A third Inference, which is this, that if it be so, that they and none but
they, etc. Then certainly it is another guess matter and business to be a
Christian, then men do usually think of. It Is not he that talks of God, but he
that walks with God, that is the Christian. Alas, my Beloved, it is an easy a
thing to take up a name, and make a Profession, to be of this or that opinion,
to unite ^nes self to this or that, or the other way of worship and
discipline, to be of this or that form, (as ye call it) this is easy; but
where is the Christian all this while? Our blessed Savior tells us plainly,
that it will cost a man something more then all this to be a Christian, it is
not enough to say, Lord, Lord; the whole frame and constitution of man must be
altered; there is self to be denied, world to be crucified, flesh to be
mortified, sin to be subdued, the Will of God to be obeyed, And is all this a
small matter? Religion is no idle speculation, nor a bare Profession, a form
of Godliness, a round of duties, but the life of Religion lies in living it,
in bringing the whole (inward and outward) man to the obedience of God;
Godliness is God-likenesse. And certainly there cannot be a greater derogation
to God and the Gospel, nothing can more reflect upon God, then for men to take
his Name in vain, as they do when they take his Name into their mouth, and
depart not from iniquity. The Christian is a new creature, the putting off the
old man which is corrupt, according to deceitful lusts, the being renewed in
the spirit of a man's mind, and putting on the new man, which according to God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. External Reformation, without
internal Renovation, will never partake of salvation.

4. If this be so, what need then do we stand in of Jesus Christ, 1. That we
may do. 2. After we have done, (as we can) the Will of God.

1. What need do we stand in of Jesus Christ, that we may do the Will of God?
In him is our strength, and from him.
For without him we can do nothing, as he himself tells us, John 15.5. To be a
sinner, and to be without strength are phrases of one and the same
signification, as appears by comparing Romans 5. v. 6. with v. 8. The same
Apostle that told us he could by Christ strengthening him do all things, Phil.
4.^3. tells us also in 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves,
(and he doubles it) as of our selves to think (much less to do) any thing, but
our sufficiency is of God. Oh what need is there then of Christ Jesus, to
enlighten and enliven, to quicken and strengthen us, that we be able to do his
Will! When the Apostle had prayed, Col. 1.10. that they might walk worthy of
God to all well-pleasing, he prays, v. 11. in relation thereunto, that they
might be strengthened with all might according to his glorious power, We are
made willing in the day of his power; we cannot pray, unless the Spirit help
our infitmities.
viz. that whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, and that
whereby he raised Christ from the dead; as the prayer is, Heb. 13.20, 21. Now
the God of Peace, that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, make you
perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight. It Is a good rule that of Luther, We must always
observe God commanding us, with an eye to Christ; Serva mandata, scil. in
Christo, Keep the Commands or do my Will, viz. in Christ, or by Christ, for
without him we can do nothing.

2. We do not only need Christ that we may do, but we need Christ also when we
have done the Will of God; We have need not only of patience, but of Christ,
that after we have done the Will of God, we may inherit the Promise; for, my
beloved, we are but unprofitable servants, when we have done our duty, because
we have done but our duty; but alas, how much more then are we unprofitable?
seeing we have not done our duty! and if we sin, what think you? have we not
need of an Advocate with the Father, and such an one as, yea, the very Jesus
Christ the righteous? who is the propitiation for our sins. I think and am
confident, (let men talk at what rate they please) that when the best in the
world come to die, they will say with the great Cardinal, Tutius est, It Is
safer to ground our hopes upon what Christ has done and suffered, then upon
what we have done; for alas, our all is too little, our best is too bad, our
most perfect obedience is too imperfect to rely upon! yea, I add, that it is
the Will of God we should do so, as is evident from 1 John 2.1, 2. Yet

5. I infer this, without derogation from, or contradiction to the former, that
Christ's doing the Will of God does not exclude our (or exempt us from) doing
the Will of God. Though he have done the Will of God, yet we also are to do the
Will of God, though not to the same ends. To all the same ends.
Far be it from me to undervalue what Christ has done and suffered; I must
live by it, if I live for ever, but yet (beloved) I say this, God forbid, far
be it from us, let it not, it must not by any means be, that any of us should
think, that the obedience of Christ does free us from obedience; nay, it
strongly engages us thereunto. I come to do thy Will, says he, and by that
Will we are sanctified, of which he speaks, John 17.19. after this manner. For
their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also may be truly sanctified, (...)
being as much as (...), sanctified in truth, or as we read it by the truth.

Shall we then live in sin, because Christ has died for sin? because Christ
has fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, and delivered us from, by putting
an end to righteousness by the works of the Law, shall we neglect to do
righteous works? did Christ do his Fathers Will, that we might do our own? that
we might live as we list? God forbid; be not deceived, notwithstanding what
Christ has done, we may go to hell if we be found Workers of iniquity. Are not
we his Workmanship created (that is, new created) unto good works? Is not he
that is of God made to us righteousness, made sanctification and redemption
from all iniquity? Can we think that he will take our sins from us, and not
take us from our sins? Beloved, let me tell you, Christ died as much to
sanctify as he did to save you, yea, to sanctify that he might save you.
Christ does not only deliver his people from eternal condemnation, but he
delivers them also from a sinful conversation, and to this end that he may
deliver them from eternal condemnation. This is the blessing with which he is
sent to bless you, to turn you away from your iniquity. The same grace that
has appeared bringing salvation, does also teach us, Titus 2. to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live godlily, righteously and soberly in
this present world; and where graces teaching is not learned, graces salvation
will not be bestowed. Why not? why, because he gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity. and purify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. These things has the Apostle in the Name of our Lord
and Savior charged me, as I will answer it at his appearing to speak, exhort
and rebuke with all authority; and if any man despise it, at his peril be it;
He will one day find that it did concern him. Let me then tell you again, that
he is become the Author of eternal salvation to them, and only to them that
obey him, Hebr. 5.9. Though he be the Savior of all, yet the special salvation
is to them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. And these things (says he) command and
teach. In a word, to make short of it. Though Christ's satisfaction, not our
sanctification, be the ground of our justification, yet wherever he is
justification, he is sanctification also, or else there could be no salvation,
for as I told you before, I tell you still, Without holiness no man shall see
God. I beseech you to consider it.

6. A sixth Information is this, (which I should have put in before,) if Gods
Will must, then our will must not be done, the doing of Gods Will implies the
denying of our own; Christ came to do not his own Will, but his Fathers, i. e.
not only his own; but we must not at all do ours, but all as Gods. Man should
not lean to his own understanding, but in all his ways acknowledge him; in
the things of this life we may not confer with flesh and blood, not with our
own Wills; nor do any thing because it is our, but because it is the Will of God.
Whatever you do, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.31. from the highest duty of
grace to the lowest of nature, whether you hear, pray, buy, sell, eat or drink,
do all, not only one or two things, or one or two kinds of things, but all to
the glory of God, that is, to please God, which is, when his Will is done. Go
to now then, ye that say, as James 4.13, etc. To day, or to motrow we will go
into such a City, whereas ye should say, for ye ought to say, If the Lord will,
we shall live and do this or that. Woe to them that say, as Psalm. 12. With our
tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Alas, poor
souls! you are not your own, your souls are not yours, your bodies are not
yours, they are bought with a price, and therefore it is not self-will, but Gods
Will that you and they are to obey, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Man must not make his own
will, but Gods Will his Counselor and his Rule. Do nothing but by leave and
approbation; when therefore they stand in competition, we should tell
temptations and corruptions, It Is Gods will that I should not do mine own Will.
The great strife between God and man is about the Will, and men are enemies to
God because they cannot have their wills; but alas! we see, that if our will be
done, Gods will not, and then woe unto us, for we reward evil to our own souls.

7. If it be so, that they and none but they which do the Will of God shall
inher it the Kingdom of Heaven; How sad then will it be then with them that die
in their sin, that go out of the world, as having done nothing in it but
wrought iniquity? Oh the doleful, dismal condition of sinners at the last day!
when they shall hear their doom, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. Oh that the hearing of it now, may
prevent the hearing of it hereafter! Will it not be sad to be turned into hell
with loads of wrath and vengeance on your backs? for what have you, you workers
of iniquity, treasured up, but wrath against the day of wrath? you shall have
your portion with hypocrites, and be torn in pieces, and none to deliver, have
your dwelling with everlasting burnings, where there will be nothing but
weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth. Consider this, ye workers of
iniquity, and kiss the Son, lest his wrath be kindled, and ye perish
everlastingly. Oh that sinners would but lend their ear, and listen at the
hole, the mouth of the bottomless pit. They might hear sinners crying like
Cardinal Woolsey, Oh, if we had but taken as much care to please God, as we did
to please our own and other men's lusts, he would not have left us to this, both
shame and endless misery.
there they might hear Dives crying out, I am tormented in this flame, and have
not so much as one little drop of water to cool my tongue, there they may hear
poor damned souls, cursing themselves for their madness, that for the
pleasures of sin, (which are but for a moment) they should lose the pleasures
of Heaven, and be under the torments of hell, which are for evermore. Alas!
it is not for expressions to express the unspeakable, the unconceivable
miseries, which the fearful and unbelieving, which the workers of iniquity will
be in, when they shall be cast into, and have their part in the lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone, where they shall be tormented day and night
for ever and ever. This is the second death, Rev. 20.10. with 21.8. Oh that men
would hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly!

8. And lastly, if it be so, how happy shall they be, who when their Lord
comes, shall be found doing the Will of God. Well doing will meet with a
Well-done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Saints are called to Gods Kingdom and Glory here, and called upon to walk
worthy of, answerable to, or becoming that Kingdom; and when they have thus
walked with God, they shall be called into the Kingdom and glory; they shall
hear the joyful sound, saying, Their Masters joy enters into them here, and
they into their Masters joy hereafter.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, they
shall then sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, at the wedding dinner, which
is yet to be kept in Heaven, when all the Saints come together. Oh, what a
glorious and blessed time will that be, when they that are now laugh't at, and
scorned for being so precise, for doing the Will of God, shall then be crowned
with everlasting glory? Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous
and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not; now
indeed too too many say in works and in their hearts, if not in words, It Is in
vain to serve God, what profit is there that we keep his Ordinances? the proud
are happy, etc. But behold, the day comes that shall burn like an Oven, and
all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble; but a book of
remembrance is written before him for them that fear the Lord, and think on his
Name, and to them shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his
wings, and they shall be mine in that day, when I make up my Jewels, says the
Lord. Yea, the beloved of their souls, and he that loves their souls will
speak and say, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away, for lo, the
Winter is past, and the rain is over and gone, the flowers appear on the
earth, the time of singing is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land, the fig tree puts forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender
grapes give a good smell, Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. Oh, my
Dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs,
let me see thy countenance, and hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance comely. Though ye have lain among the pots, yet shall ye be as the
wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. This,
and much more then this shall be their glory. Indeed, eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive the things which
God has laid up for them that do love him.

The second word or head is for examination and self-trial, (and I could wish
that this sort of catechizing were more in use;) hereby we may know whose we
are, and what will become of us to all eternity, whose we are while we live,
and whose we shall be, and whither we shall go when we die. This methinks
should take up men's thoughts, and possess their reins day and night till they
were in some measure assured thereof; And oh, that men would often ask their
souls, whose work, whose Will they do? for hereby they may conclude what will
be their eternal state. Look as men sow in the seed-time of their lives, they
shall reap in the harvest of eternity. Can men expect to gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? Oh no; Gal. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived, mistake not
your selves. God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that he shall
reap; he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, And says
the Apostle, Romans 6.16. Know ye not? that is strange! Know assuredly, that to
whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye
obey, whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness, that is,
unto life. He that is now thy Lord and Master, he that is now thy Sovereign and
King, will then pay thy wages. It Is a short question, Whose Will do you do? if
the will of men, verily you have your reward; if the will of sin, you shall
have sins wages, which is (you may hear it, but how will you bear?) eternal
death. Surely, men that like sins work, will never like sins wages. But if thou
do the Will of God, thy wages shall be (his gift) eternal life. Well then, try
(for Gods sake and your souls sake) try your selves, for you may know whose
you are and shall be.

The third word or head is for exhortation, let every one then that names and
calls upon the Name of the Lord, as he loves his soul, depart from iniquity;
alas, if you will not depart from iniquity for Gods sake, you must, there is no
remedy, you must depart from God for iniquities sake; and shall iniquity be
dearer to you then God and your souls? Why call you me Lord, Lord? Lets either
lay aside the Name of the Lord, or our iniquity; for what have thou to do, thou
bold, impudent, daring sinner, to take Gods Name into thy mouth, and hate to
be reformed? do thou think that he will hold thee guiltless that take his
Name in vain? Oh no, he will require his Name and glory at thy hands. Because
God keeps silence, do thou think he gives consent? think thou that he
is such an one as thy self? No, no, he will reprove thee, and set thy sins in
order before thy face, and ask thee, how thou durst say, Lord, Lord, by way of
Profession, Prayer and Appeal, and yet would not depart from iniquity? what
will thou answer when he rises up? thou will then stand speechless, as being
self-condemned.

Oh, let me then beseech you to do the Will of God; be not hearers of the Word,
but doers also, lest you deceive your selves. What is it to make a good
Profession, and not to make good the Profession? what is it to be a Christian
as far as, if it be no further then, a few good words will go? what is it to
speak Christ fair, to say Hail Master, and kiss him, if thou kick with the
heel against him? Trust not in lying words, which cannot profit you; will ye
steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, and walk
after other gods, your belly and your covetousness? and come and stand before
me in this house, and say, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these? Is this house which is called by my Name, become
a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, says God, even I have seen it, and will
require it. Good words will never engage God to be a Patron to bad works. Think
ye to lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? behold, thou art
called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of God, and know
his Will; Behold all this, what will it come to? if thou through breaking the
Law dishonourest God, and causest his Name to be blasphemed? what will thou do
in that day, when God shall judge thee according to this Gospel?

My beloved, let me beg you for your precious and immortal souls sake, not to
dally with God, not to trifle away these few moments of yours, on which
eternity depends, but up and be doing the Will of God, that it may go well with
you for ever. It Is said of some, 2 Kings 17.33. That they feared the Lord, but
served their own gods; but, says the text, v. 34. They feared not God, for
they do not after the Commandments which God commanded Jacob. Alas, my beloved,
how often must I say it, it is not a form of Godliness, it is not saying, Lord,
Lord; it is not quaint civility, nor specious morality, much less painted
hypocrisy that will bear you out; opinions will not pass for Religion in the
day of judgment: nay, do not think, (as I may say) to make Christ a
pack-horse, to lay thy sins on his shoulders, and thou in the mean time to keep
them in thy bosom, to say he has done the Will of God, and thou carest not to
do his Will? Alas! the loss will be your own, God will lose nothing; as he
that is wise, is wise for himself, so he that sins wrongeth his own soul. Be
exhorted then, and suffer the word of exhortation, which speaks on this wise,
Do the Will of God, surrender, resign your selves to him, as ever you expect to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

There are these two provoking Arguments from the text. 1 It is for no less
then a Kingdom, yea, for no less then the Kingdom of Heaven, and is that
worth nothing? The Gospel is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, Matthew. 4.23. And
the Word of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.19. For by it we are called to his Kingdom
and glory. Shall not a Kingdom? shall not of all Kingdoms this Kingdom be
glorious in our eyes, which is the Kingdom of glory? The devil offered Christ
(as his greatest argument of hope to prevail by,) the Kingdoms of this world
and their glory; but what is that to this? what is time to eternity? what is earth
to Heaven? what are visibles to invisibles? what the things of sense to things
of says? what this glory to that which is to be revealed?

We all naturally love greatness and glory, and can there be greater glory, or
more glorious greatness then this? to be Kings to God here, Kings with God
hereafter, and to reign with him more then a thousand years? You see what a do
there is in the world (and I wish there be no evil done in the world) for
Crowns, Scepters and Kingdoms; do all the Kingdoms of the earth suffer
violence, and do the violent take them by force, and shall not the Kingdom of
Heaven suffer, (seeing it is willing to suffer) violence? Oh that the violent
would take it by force! The nature of this Kingdom is to keep thee from evil,
the Kingdoms of the earth are not, (I fear they are not) had without much
evil. Well, will you consider this to engage you to do the Will of God? It Is
for a Kingdom.

2. Consider this argument too; if you neglect to day, it may be too late to
morrow. Now or never, now or never; for what is your life? but as a vapor that
passes away. Do not you die daily? Know ye not that this night you may sleep
the sleep of death: And truly, my beloved, if you hear not God in this, God
will not hear you in that day. Many shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, but it is
too late. See how Luke enlarges this, chapter 13.24, etc. Strive, do your utmost
to enter in at the strait gate, for many will (lasily with wouldings and
wishings) seek to enter, but shall not be able; which he enforces by the
argument now in hand, When once the Master of the house is risen up, and has
shut to the door, and ye standing without begin to knock, saying, Lord, Lord,
open to us; but he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you
are. It Is too late, says he, there was a door of hope open, but now it is
shut; then you would not, now you shall not enter in. Though you cry and shout,
he will shut out your cries; yea, though you cry, Lord, Lord, your answer will
be, I know you not.

And if you begin to plead, and say, How, Lord, not know us? that is strange!
not know us! why, who are you that I should know you? as he says in Matthew, I
never knew you. No, Lord? we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, we have
heard thee preach in our streets, we were the greatest frequenters of Sermons
in all the town or country; and do thou not know us? No, I profess (says
Christ) I know you not. Well, in Matthew they have something more to say for
themselves; we have prophesied in thy Name, yea, we have fought thy battles,
and cast out devils, and in thy Name have done many wonderful works; Is not
this enough to be known by? surely thou can not but have taken notice, how
forward we were in and for thy cause. But alas, the answer is, I never knew
you; Depart, depart, I know you not.

Oh beloved we think that now (it may be) we are known, eminently known; but if
we be found workers of iniquity, 'twill be in vain to say, when we knock, and
God fayes, Who is there? why, here are they that have sat at the upper end of
the world, here are famous Citizens, Common Counsel men, yea, it may be
Aldermen of the City of London. Alas, we shall never be known under these
notions, upon these terms, it is not riches, nor titles of honor, (by which
men are known in the world,) that will make a man known of God, when he comes
to stand before the bar of his Tribunal. God will invalidate all the pleas
that can be made. If you say, Whenever saw we him an hungered, or a thirst, or
stranger, or naked, or in prison, or sick, and did not minister to him? He will
answer, Depart, ye cursed; for in as much as ye did it not to one of the least
of these, ye did it not to me. If you say, Open to us, for we are Virgins, we
took our lamps, and went out to meet the Bridegroom, the rest slept as well as
we, we trimmed our lamps, and because we could not borrow, we went to buy;
Lord, Lord, open to us: No, veri^y, says he, I know you not.

The day of judgment will be a dreadful day upon this account, that 'twill be
dies deceptionis, a day of deceit, not that it will deceive any, but many will
find themselves deceived; Oh how will men be frustrated of their expectation!
'twill be to them, as that day was to Esau, wherein Jacob was blessed, he came
in merrily from his hunting, and said (without doubting of it) bless me, my
father; but 'twas too late, he sought it, yea, carefully sought it, and that
with tears, but found no place for repentance; his father would not recall the
blessing. If men will not he are when God calls, there is a time coming, when
men shall call, and God will not hear. How does Christ mourn over Jerusalem,
who so long neglected her peace, that at last it was hid from her eyes? Its too
late, its too late, Jerusalem. Oh therefore, in this day, in this your day, in
this the day of your visitation; to day, while it is called to day, before the
night of death come, and that may be this night, I say, in this day hear his
voice, or else in that day he will not hear your voice, though you cry, Lord,
Lord, open unto us.

For a conclusion, there are but three things which I would briefly commend to
you in relation to this great work. If they and none but they shall enter into
heaven, who do the Will of God on earth, let me entreat you to study 1. The
What 2. The How 3. The Why
of Gods Will.

1. Study what the Will of God is, for the matters to be believed and done; Do
not rest contented in general terms, but study (from the Scriptures) what the
Will of God is in particular. There is notable advice given, and as notable a
promise made, Prove. 2. My son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my
Commandments with thee, so that thou incline thine care unto wisdom, and apply
thine heart to understanding, yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest
up thy voice for understanding, if thou seek her as silver, and searchest
for her as for hid treasures; what then? why then shall thou understand the
fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God; and that not only in the
general, but as v. 9. then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment,
and equity, yea Observe that, every good path.
every good path.

Can there be a business of greater concernment to us then the saving of our
souls? can we take too much pains for that end? is it not a shame that men
should be more industrious to be wise for this world, then to be wise for
heaven? Surely God requires diligence and delight in this work. Every verse
has a double charge, v. 1. receive and hide, v. 2. incline thine ear, and
apply thine heart, v. 3. cry and lift up the voice, v. 4. seek her, and search
for her, and that as for silver and gold. Ah, how do we look after silver and
gold! certainly if we did but look after the Will of God, as we do after silver
and gold, how rich should we be in knowledge? what treasures of wisdom would
our souls be possessed of? We need not doubt it, for our Savior has said it,
John 7.17. If any man will do his Will, he shall know the doctrine, whether it
be of God: wherefore be not unwise, Ephesians. 5.17. but understanding what the Will
of the Lord is.

2. Study the How of the Will of God, not only what is to be done, but how it
is to be done; it is not enough that we do what is good, but the good we do must
be well done; his Will according to his Will. The Apostle in relation to
walking worthy of God to all well-pleasing, Col. 1.9, 10. prays, that they
might be filled with the knowledge of his Will, and that in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding, that they might know not only what to do, but how and
when to do it. The Hebrews have a saying, that Deus magis delectatur adverbiis
quam nominibus; God is more delighted in adverbs then in nounes. It Is not so
much the thing done, as the manner of doing it, its several requisite
qualifications that God minds. Not how much, but how well. It Is not barely a
good act, that God requires of us, but that this act be well done, lest our
good be turned into evil, and our holy things into iniquity.

Thirdly and lastly, let me beseech you to study the Why of the Will of God,
the end of all our actions. Why should we do the Will of God? to please him,
not barely to pleasure our selves, but to please him; we should not so seek our
own good and salvation in seeking God, as to serve him, merely that we may
serve our selves of him; but the great thing in our eye should be that which
was in Christ's, not only to do the things that please him, or only to do them
so that they may be pleasing, but to do them To that very end.
to please him. This says Paul, 2 Cor. 5.9. is our ambition, (so we may read
it,) that whether absent or present, i. e. whether we live or die, we may be
(we read it accepted of him, I would rather read it actively) acceptable to
him, which is as Paul elsewhere expresses it, Romans 14.8. Whether we live we
live to him, or whether we die we die to him; whether it be life or death, all
I aim at is that he may be magnified or glorified.

I shall conclude all with what Christ concludes this very discourse, v. 24.
Therefore, whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken
him to a wise man, who built his house upon a rock; the rain descended, the
floods came, the winds blew, and they (they all) beat upon that house, fell
upon it with all their force and violence, but it fell not, for it was founded
upon a rock, even that against which the gates of hell shall not prevail; But
every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand; the rain
descended, the floods came, the winds blew, and (we read it as before,) beat
upon that house, but the word is not the same, nor of the like force in
signification with the (former) it stumbled on that house, or only kick't at
that house, and down it fell without much ado, but great was the fall thereof.
I wish you better.

And that is, that now you have heard, you may do the Word and Will of God;
which that you may do and be blessed, The God of peace that brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the
blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do
his Will, working in you that vhich is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen, Heb. 13.20, 21.

FINIS.
These BOOKS are printed by J. Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in
Cheap Side.
Mr. Venuing has these other Pieces extant.
Orthodox Paradoxes. 8o. New Command renewed. 8o. Mysteries and Revelations.
8o. Milk and Honey in Divine Sentences. 8o. Second Part of Sentences. 8o. The
Warning to Back-sliders in a Sermon. 8o. Mr. Bohemus. 100. Script. opened and
applied. Mr. Carter of Baptism. 4o. Mr. How and Dr. Kendall against Mr.
Goodwins, Pagans Debt and Dowry. 4o. Dr. Tuckney None but Christ, with an
enquiry what hopes to be had of Heathens, Jews and Idiots. 12o. The Saints
Security drawn from these two Questions, 1. Whether a man has rightly received
Christ? 2. How a man may be safe in a case of danger?
By that excellent Text-man, Mr. Jeremy Dyke, Minister of Epping.

