Against William LI-LIE (alias) Lilly, that MOST AUDACIOUS ATHEISTICAL
Railing RABSHECA, that Impious WITCH or WIZZARD, and most Abominable SORCERER,
or STAR-GAZER of LONDON, and all his Odious ALMANACKS, and Others.
Written by John Viccars Schoolmaster of Christ Hospital, few days before
his death, which he had prepared for the Black Monday, turned white since his
dissolution.
Isaiah 47. 12, 13, 14. Stand, now with thine Enchantments, and with the
multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth: if so be
thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail: Thou art wearied
in the multitude of thy Counsels; Let now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the
Monthly Prognosticators stand up and save thee, from those things that shall
come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as Stuble, the fire shall burn them, they
shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame.


Acts 13. 8, 9, 10. But, Elymas this Sorcerer, with-stood Paul and Barnabas,
(just, as the Sorcerer Lilly, does all the Blessed, Reverend, and Religious
Disciples and Presbyterian Minnisters of Jesus Christ;) Whereupon, Paul filled
with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him and said, O, full of all Subtilty, and
all Mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness! will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?


EPIGRAMMA: In Lillium, bardum Astrologastrum:
LIllius est quid vis, est bardus; perditus, audax,
Est mendax, asinus, Li-lius Astrologus.
Demon strat nomen, Te, mendacissime Li-li,
Nomine, bis Mendax dicere, reque magis.
Istis, Quid levius, quibus est pro numine nomen
Mendacis, magis est qui levitate, levis.
Candida, mi Li-li non sunt Tibi Lilia nomen;
Vix, inter vepres nomen habere potes.
HOw vain, how light, how foolish, and how naught,
Are all that praise Thee? and thy books have bought?
To call you Lille, more, it were a scorn,
Your Name's a Netile, Thistle, Bryer, or Thorn;
Your head, your Pen, your Tongue, do pinch and sting
More than does Nettle, Bryer, or anything.
To Li-lie now, all men may well say, fie,
Because your Name says, twice, to you, you lie.
But, if you say, you have an L. in it more,
Then add you fiftie-lyes to two, before;
Thus, Lies, for weeks make-up a just New-year;
O brave! what Almanaker have we here?
Finis.
Aliud, in Eundem OR, The foresaid Latin Epigram Englished and Enlarged.
Lilly is ought that is naught, Dunce, Wretch, past shame,
Li-lie's an Ass, Star-gazer. Lies does frame.
Li-lie, thy Name shows thee a monstrous Liar,
In Name, a double-one, in Deed, much higher.
What Is Idler, than to idolize his Name,
Whose lying-self's more flashie than a flame?
White Lilie's no fit name for Li-lies base,
Scarce among Thorns may we such Henbane place.
Yet, thus it ever was, and is so still,
Fair names, often, given to things and Men, most ill.
Thus, Jeroboams Calves called worship fair,
Thus, that notorious hypocritick-pair;
Both Ananias and Saphira had
Two gracious names, themselves exceeding bad.
Thus diverse Popes, as Clement, Cnnocent,
Had specious names, natures most turbulent
Thus in our days, that devellish Doctor Lamb,
Favorite to the Duke of Buckingham,
And this our filthy Li-lies elder Brother
For wicked Witcherie, just such another;
Thus Sr. John Lamb a persecutor base
Of Gods dear Saints; and, little Lauds less Grace
Of Canterbury; and his chirping Wren
Had, all, fine names; but monsters were of Men,
For Craft and cruelty, and wickedness,
All haters of the power of Godliness.
And, so, this filthy Lilly, Athiest vile,
Seems, with a pretty name, to gull, beguile
Credulous fools, with his devellish false Praedictions
Stigian Enchantments, figure-casting fictions.
Thus, with fair vailes, O how this wretch does wrong,
The best of Gods dear Saints, whom, all along,
In all his wicked works, He does besweare,
With devellish Lies (whose very shoes to bear
This Atheist is unworthie) And, with fell
And furious rage (like * Cerberus of Hell
That stigian Tripple-Headed Hel-Hound base)
Our precious morning-Sermons does disgrace,
Calls them, jejune, rebellious, vile, and vain,
And, Presbyterian-Bag-pipes. O profane,
Accursed Atheist! O incarnate Devil!
Foe to all goodness, friend to infernal evil.
But, certainly, our just and righteous God,
In time, will make him feel with wrathful Rod
Of just revenge, for all his devellish spite,
Against his Saints; As, once, he made it light
On * Doctor Lamb, his brother; If, the Lord
Grace of repentance does not him afford.
But, say, besides; what reason has this Wretch,
Toad-like, with Pride and Rage, to strut and stretch
Himself, in admiration of his skill
Of star-gazing-Astrologie, most ill,
As he it uses? Since (as Linguists know)
From the * Ebrew-root, Astrologus do grow
The Latin Sterens, Sterquilinium,
Which genuinely, do unto thusmuch come;
Astrology is but a Dun-hill vile,
And Astrologians, Dung, base Knaves; with guile,
And lying Divinations fravght most full,
The mad-head Multitude to cheat and gull.
And as the Devil whom Endors Witch did call,
Instead of Samuel, to appear to Saul,
Did deal with him, mixed seeming-piety
To check and chide Saul's said impiety
In coming to the Devil, when God had left him,
And of his Grace and help had quite bereft him:
Even so, this filthy dreamer, Li-lie vile,
Credit to gain, and slylier to beguile,
With his false Dreams, does scripture intermix*
And thus, still personates the Prince of Stix,
Satan, his Master, All his pamphlets ore,
And, with these Cheates, This witch does rage and roar;
Triumphing, if his Delphick-Divinations
But once hit right, for manifold frustrations.
Let, therefore, Zim, Jim, all Alectoe's train,
The Satyr, Shrich-owl, vulture flock, a main,
To lying Li-lie, in a chorus round,
And dance and sing, with hideous yelping sound,
Let vagrant Jipsies, fortune tellers base,
Come to him, likewise, and with brazen face,
Chaunt-out their lousie joy, and stygian gladness
In this their lying Almanakers madness
And when the dance is done, their sport is ended,
Bring him to's place; Thus, Earth shall be befriended.
Finis
Exodus 22. 18. Levit. 20. 27. Thou shall not suffer a Man or Woman that is a
Witch Wizzard, Necromancer, or one that deals with Familliar Spirits to live
among you.


Printed in the Year when the Astrologers and Mountebanks lost their
Judgments, 29 March, 1652.


