THE SUPREME POWER OF Christian States VINDICATED AGAINST The Insolent
pretenses of Guillielmus Apollonii, OR A Translation of a Book Entitled,
Grallae, seu vere Puerilis Cothurnus Sapientiae, etc.

OR, The Stilts, or most childish Chapin of Knowledge upon which William
Apollonius of Trever, and Minister of the Church of Middleburgh boasts, among
such as are ignorant, in his patcht Rhapsodies, which he set forth concerning
Supreme Power and Jurisdiction in matters of RELIGION.

Against the Book of the most famous Dr. Nicholaus Vedelius, Entitled Of the
Episcopacy of Constantine the Great.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for George Whittington at the Blew Anchor in ^

TO THE Most High and most illustrious Princes of the Reformed STATES.
AS ALSO To all peaceable Ministers of CHRIST'S Church, Grace and Peace.
Most illustrious Lords, and godly Ministers of Christ's Church.
HE was not a fool who first affirmed, that there was nothing more prevalent
than superstition to rule the multitude: for Christ most divinely foretold us,
that the children of darkness were wiser then the sons of light, so that
oftentimes not only the force of deceivers is great, but also the
perverseness of the multitude is such, that they will rather be deluded, than
listen to the Truth. Though God has recommended his true worship to us, yet
Satan has prevailed more by superstition, then the Spirit of God by true
Religion. All Ages can bear witness to this truth. When God employed the
divine Prophet Moses in a message to Pharaoh he armed him with the power of
Miracles, but Jannes and Jambres resisted him, and that with such eagerness,
that for a while, they prevailed more with their false exorcismes, than he did
with his true Miracles. Solomon built and dedicated the T^mple, as it were to
the perpetual preservation of the true worship: scarce were forty years
expired, when Jeroboam a private man set up his Idols in Dan and Bethel, with
such success, that he withdrew ten Tribes to his Idolatry. How violent was
Jezabel, Ahabs wife, in the superstitious maintaining of Paal, that not only
did she extinguish both the people and worship of God, but also so terrified
Elijah, who could procure fire from heaven, that he was forced to leave his
station, and in his exile to wish for death, whom notwithstanding God had
purposed to honor, by carrying him up to heaven in a fiery chariot. There is
nothing more plain, then that they who wickedly in ice men to superstition,
are for the most part, more active and successful then those who are the
builders up of true Religion.

This bad success in Religion proceeds from the multitude themselves, whose
property it is to be led rather by opinion, then by knowledge, and to give
their assent before they make trial, although envious men dia not sow tares in
the night, yet the earth would produce thorns by reason of the ancient curse:
although there were no inventers or teachers of superstition, yet the vain
multitude would devise to it self some superstitious worship. This calamity
proceeds not from the want of truth, but from Gods just judgments: For as
Adams sin has made the earth more apt to produce of its own accord tares,
then all the industry of man can, to bring forth good fruit: Even so the old
Serpent is more prevalent in bewitching men's minds with superstition, then the
fellow laborers of the Holy Ghost, in propagating the true Religion.

There was never any Age or Country of the world, which has not had some time
experience of this. Yet this was never more plainly seen then under the great
Antichrist whom Paul foretold should be armed with all deceiveablenesse, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that he might entice such to believe lies, that were careless to believe the
truth. Never was there any since the creation more guilty of this then the
Bishop of Rome, who whilst he obtrudes upon the people a hodge-podge of
superstition, prevails more with them then the Prophets and Apostles, by their
true Religion, and Miracles. For these (even Peter himself And the rest of the
Apostles.
) could do no more but undergo torments and ignominy, and at last lay down
their tortured lives, but he on the other side, being armed with superstition,
and pretending Peter's name and chair, mounted up to such a height, that being
honored with three Crowns, two swords, and the spoils of all Princes, he
exalts himself above all worldly Potentates, and all such as are called Gods,
sitting in the Temple of God, and pretending the Church, does so bewitch men,
that he whom they see, call, and cry out, to be wicked, a liar, a falsifyer,
do notwithstanding believe him to he the patron and judge of Religion. Such
is the force of persuasion, arising from superstition, that men see not what
they see, and believe they see what they see not, as if they were enchanted.
Hence it is not to be wondered at that the whole company of such cheaters, arm
themselves with their own superstition, when they have a mind to deceive;
which like poison as easily invades men's minds, and taints them, as a tauny
color does those who remain a while in the Sun, which insensibly and
suddenly comes upon them, before they knew it came.

This corruption is not to be found, only in popery, but among Protestants
also, whose minds being puffed up with the desire of ruling, and counting the
simplicity of the Apostolical Church sordid, they will rather rule then obey:
So that they place the sanctity of Religion not in Gods Word, not in Faith, nor
in the profession thereof, nor in any other real worship, but in the right and
ministry of handling these things, so that not only in their Theses, but in
full Volumnes they declaime for the sanctity of government, persuading the
people with all the might they can, that the whole dressing of Church
government at this day, is of such spiritualitie, that the political
Magistrate, as being carnal, must be totally separated from it. Hence may
Ministers with ease hereafter withdraw their necks in Church-affaires from the
power of the Magistrate, and then indirectly insult over, and prescribe Laws to
the secular powers.

This new guise of Popery our famous Vaedelius foreseeing, did publish a Book
concerning The Episcopacy of Constantine the Great, in which he has written
of the right of Magistrates in Church-affaires at this day, but with such
circumspection, that no moderate man can be moved, much less angered thereat,
for he feared (as he intimated in his Preface) lest the restless minds of
contentious Churchmen should be incensed, and now it was supposed that he had
incurred their displeasure, but the book being in every man's hand, and approved
by the testimony of D. Macovius and Rivet, it seemed to be out of all danger
of malice.

But the case was suddenly altered; and our Vedelius was molested, not by
neighbors, but by transmarin strangers from Zeland. For one William Apollonius
did not only spit in his face, but also piss in his ashes. This man being led
by the Genius of that wicked Destroyer, (...).
has offered violence to the Ghost of our Vedelius not without indangering the
peace both of Church and State, for not only does he rage against Vedelius,
but also against all Christian Magistrates, in a large Book, and that so
lavishly, that he seems to challenge to himself alone, not only the
Dictatorship of ruling, but of railing too: he does in general speak evil of
Magistrates, but (as it is thought) tacitly flings all his darts against the
Magistrates of Midleburgh, but he has so cunningly contrived the matter, as
if he had first casually found out the Errors and blasphemies of Vedelius,
which afterward be presented to the Consistory of Midleburgh, and then to the
Classes of Walachria, by whose entreaty, he undertook this task, forsooth,
unwillingly.

He has adorned his work with a specious title, to wit, The Right of
Magistrates in holy things: as if he were about to fight for the honor of
Magistrates, whereas he upbraides them every where in^uricusly with carnal
violence, with nullity, and servility in Church-affaires. So that oftentimes
he makes secular powers, guilty of sacrilege, and of trampling upon the blood
of Christ, if they offer to meddle with Ecclesiastic affairs, besides what
he has prescribed. Now least this Walachrian should without control write
what he pleases, Philarchiae pruriginem.
against our famous Vedelius, and all godly Magistrates: I thought good to
scratch with my pen, his itching desire of ruling: It is the part of your
Highness to suppress by your Authority this scab, that it may not spread too
far. I confess I have in some places pulled him by the ears, somewhat
roughly, but yet more modestly then he deserved; being no ways desirous to
wrestle with the shadow of learning, but as they are wont to do, who have the
keeping of Lions, they beat a Dog, that the Lion may be afraid; so I thought
good to beat this curre, that I might keep the Lions whelps within their dens,
or grates. Who would roar aloud other ways, but now whisper only in corners.
As sure as the Sun shines, this Walachrian device is borrowed from Popery, and
Printed to this intent, that in Walachria, or at least in Midleburgh,
Apollonius alone, with a few Classick Elders and assistants, might rule the
roast. I speak not hear out of partiality; for this William Apollonius is not
known to me, either by benefits or injuries, let every man believe or not
believe as he pleases; my purpose is no other, then to make the device of
this Apollonian Church sanctity, absurd and ridiculous, for it is not only as
like Popery as a Doves egg is like a Hens egg, but also it intends the same
end, so that what the Pope does openly and directly in challenging power over
all secular Princes, this man by an indirect way, and cunning circuition, does
obtain over his Magistrates, and would make trial of it, if occasion served;
the truth of both which, if I should in a short abridgement set down, I hope it
shall not trouble you to run over, though perhaps your more serious employments
may deny you leisure to read the rest.

That old leven of Popery concerning the wonderful sanctity and spirituality
of the external Ministry of the visible Church, has been trampled upon by
all Orthodox men. This the Pope, the fatal enemy of Christ, and the very
Antichrist has so dressed and polished, that he has persuaded the world to
believe, that all Clergie-imployment is sacred and spiritual, and that the
Clergy themselves, are all spiritual and holy, Whence men were possessed with
a superstitious conceit, that it was neither lawful nor possible for Laymen
to intermeddle with Eccles^astick affairs, that this charge belonged by divine
and inviolable right, to the Clergy, or spiritual men only: That this was
the fruit or effect of their Vocation, and confirmation (which imprints a
spiritual and indelible character, upon the soul and body of Clergy men) by
the privilege of which, they are preferred in holiness to all other
Christians, as being but Laymen. That this game was borrowed from the
ceremonies of the Jewish Synagogue, and Gentilisme, is apparent even to Papists
themselves, if they are not blind, but whosoever are conversant among the
Romish Clergy, will find that this (spiritual character) is of such
efficacy, that for it a certain honor of holiness is ascribed, not only to
the persons themselves, though never so loud, but even to their vestments, and
I doubt me, to their very excrements. Ordination.
Which privilege because it arises from their Calling and Confirmation, hence
it is, that from the first original of Antichristianisme, sharp disputations
have been had concerning the right of Vocation, and its dignity, so that every
one studied how to snatch from each other the right and prerogative of
conferring this sanctity. This is most clearly seen in the election and
calling of the Popes. For not without divine appointment, did the Pope prefer
himself to all Monarchs by this pretext of spirituality. Hence arose the
fatal pride Typhus.
of that seat and Bishop, in preferring himself, and his chair in holiness
before all others, and chiefly in substracting from the Civil Magistrate, and
arrogating to himself the right of his Vocation, as it were by an uncontrouled
and divine privilege. This arrogance was foreseen by those excellent
Emperors, Justinian, Mauritius, Lodovicus Pius, the Otho's, See Plati a in the
lives of the Popes.
and chiefly by Henry the third, who curbed it by diverse Laws, and Penalties,
reserving to themselves the right of election of Popes, until Pope Hildebrand
thrust Henry the fourth from this right asserting it to the Church, as her
sacred property; and so having undergone this Apotelesma.
perfect work of Antichrist, and willing to show his universal dominion, he
compelled this Emperor to come in an humble manner to him, (being then at
Carnossa) through ice and snow, these are Platina's own words. The
superstitious persuasion then of spirituality wherewith men were seasoned, was
the first rise of Antichristian pride; In vita Greg. 7
from this proceeded afterward the separation of Churchmen from other
Christians as Laics, which exempted them at first from the power and command
of the Civil Magistrate, in Ecclesiastical business. Hence proceeded
Ecclesiastic Courts of Justice, which being one Empire within another; and a
Kingdom within a Kingdom, it could not be avoided, but that these two powers
and jurisdictions must needs dash one against the other, to wit, the
Ecclesiastic and Civil, and this fell out many times with such eager
contention, that the Christian world trembled at it, but by Antichrists fatal
obstinacy, the Ecclesiastic Government in this struggling, obtained the
Victory. That now the Pope being advanced by his two swords, and three Crowns,
he sleights the Scepters of all Emperors and Kings.

This is the type of Popery, to which as an antitype answers Apollonius his
Walachrian government, for with him nothing is more ancient, then to extol the
outward business of the Ecclesiastic Ministry, for holy, spiritual, and
divine among men. Part 1, p. 116 and p. 119.
So that every where he cries out, these affairs do belong to heaven, not to
earth, and that the external things of the Church, reach unto the soul; and
lastly, to be of such a sublime nature, that it is impossible the art of
Ecclesiastic jurisdiction should be exercised by the authority of the
Magistrate) so that as often as mention is made of the Choragium. Ampullantur
dressing of Church matters, they in proud and haughty words affirm, that
sacred things are not to be touched: Of which notwithstanding there is nothing
so high and difficult, which is not easy enough to him, that is but
indifferently exercised. For these are preaching, and public Prayer, the
outward administration of the Sacraments, the making of Laws, for the outward
order of the Church; the greater and lesser censure, whereof this is, by
suspending from the Lords Supper, that by separation from the whole body of the
Church, by the uttering of certain words: Lastly, Election, and confirmation to
Ecclesiastic Offices.

All which affairs at this day are known, to be performed by ordinary gifts,
oftentimes in a humane and perverse way, even by such who being void of all
Christian virtues, are laden with nothing else, but wickedness: that
Apollonius may obtrude superstition after a Popish manner, when he searches
after such abstruce mysteries of spirituality, in the outward works of
Ecclesiastic dressing, that he might make men think that what is performed by
the Ministerial function of the Church, is of a higher nature then man's
capacity can reach unto, Whereas the whole dignity of these things (as they are
performed at this day) depends from Christ's general institution, and from the
common Law of Order.

Out of these lurking places, being driven after the Popish manner he flies to
Ecclesiastic Vocation, and chiefly to confirmation by imposing of hands, which
though at this day it be defiled and variously spotted, showing no effects of
spirituallity in those on whom it is conferred. Yet he would feign persuade us
that it is of wonderful efficacy, for conferring of spiritual right, and
spiritual prerogative, to perform the sacred Offices of the Church, that it
has such a special prerogative, so that he accounts him Part 1. p. 87. and
p. 71.
sacrilegious, whosoever being destitute of the rights of Vocation, and
Ecclesiastic Confirmation, will offer to put his hand to those internally
external, affairs of the Church; which he illustrates by the example of King
Uzziah struck with Leprosy.

Out of which principles at last springs up the special Church Government,
which though every man may see it to be in the world, and to be exercised by
too worldly means, and that by them who after confirmation, are oftentimes
more carnal, than any Laymen, yet he will have us believe, that this
Government is not o^ this world; not earthly, but heavenly, spiritual, holy,
independent from any worldly power, in it self absolute, and as it were, of
its own (...).
power, by reason of the inseparable subjection of Churchmen to Christ, as his
Legates: Whence belongs to them this right to he Governors, Captains,
Pastors, Fathers; under which titles it is lawful only for them to proceed,
to Govern, to feed, to give laws, to punish, and that imperiously with power,
and authority, Part. 2. p 323.
in the formalities of the Church. Whence he makes a rupture irreparable
between the power or government of Magistrates, and of the Church, Part. 1. p.
91. 93. and p. 9^.
Because they are so different in the subject, end, and means, that he thinks
heaven and earth will be confounded if the Magistrate should offer to touch the
internal things of the Church, For he will not allow the secular power to be
in, but only about the Church, which medleth with the circumstantialls, of the
Church, only as a separable accident, which the Church may easily want, and
did want under the Apostles, and time of the first Reformation. So that as he
assevers, the Christian and godly Magistrate, has no more to do with
Church-affaires, then the wicked has, in respect of right, except in cases
extraordinary, when the whole Clergy wants reformation, but yet on this
condition too, that the judgment of this matter be left to the Churchmen:
But if the Magistrate should meddle with any thing which he calls formally
Ecclesiastic, besides these cases, he cries out openly, that sacrilege and
robbery is committed; that the rights of Christ's Spouse are violated, for which
Christ shed his blood; yea that the state of the Church was happier under the
cross, because of her free jurisdiction which then she used, then now if the
Magistrate offer to intermeddle with the Church-affaires, so that indeed he
counts, no better then Gibeonites, the religious Magistrates, who were not to
serve in, but about the Sanctuary, and were not to meddle with, or touch any
holy thing, but being tide to servile obedience in furnishing necessaries, were
bound perpetually to acknowledge their fraud and profaneness.

Out of so many naughty roots of Popery, it is no wonder if in Apollonius, and
some of his followers; this fruit proceed, not only in speaking evil of
secular Rulers, as often as they seem to Clergymen, to stumble upon the
rights of the Church, but contrarily, they dare in secular affairs, prescribe
to, and command the Magistrate, by their Pastoral authority; so that no
Catechism seems to them more holy, than that they assure one another, that
the secular Magistrate, is simply to be debarred from all things which they
account Ecclesiastical, and that they are not to be admitted into the meanest
part of their modern Ecclesiastic spirituality, (so fair as they perform the
Office of a Magistrate) the top of which spirituallity, if elsewhere they seem
to touch, that they must be resisted with might and maine, as profane men,
either directly, or, if strength be wanting, indirectly, and cunningly, Per
cuniculos.
in their private or public declamations to the people. Sure Apollonius seems
in this work to sound the Alarm, and by his example to stir up turbulent
Ministers, to be bold upon the Magistrate, when opportunity serves, and to
shake off one time or other, their vile and violent, yoke. I doubt not but such
kind of vermin lurk elsewhere, but dull, and as it were sticking fast in
their shell, of which notwithstanding none does cherish such dastardly spirits,
Puliatus.
but that if this Black coat, and rude Wallachrian, shall find good success,
in a short time great store of such Zelots will every where appear.

I will no more prophecy, but now will produce the acts of Apollonius, and his
fellow Walachrians, set out not a few years since; which will teach us, that
long ago they were resolved, and purposed first to prescribe a Law to the
Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastic business, and then afterward in secular,
and to leave no stone unmoved for weakening and shaking of their authority.

Not long since, 1 Example.
when the King of England and his Parliament were warring, the Vicinity of
places, and the Commerce of Religion, from that disturbed State, spread
complaints among the people, which indirectly (as usually) seemed to require
pity and help.

Apollonius with his fellows now a long time desirous of innovation, and
whilst other Churches were quiet, did study to interpose himself in these
troubles, that he might be known to the English, and prevailed so much by his
accustomed Arts with the Walachrians, that among others he obtained the charge
of comforting the Church there by Letters, and offering to them verbal
consolation.

This being known, the States of Zeland thinking with themselves, how dangerous
it might be, if the Ministers of Zeland, should intermeddle with the affairs
of England without their advice, considering that not only the differences
waxed hot between the King and Parliament, but between the Parliament Men
themselves, so that some affected this, others, that kind of
Church Government. The States Ordered, that the Letter which was conceived and
written by the Classick Ministers, should not be sent to England, till first
they had read and examined it. But when (which is worth the noting) the
Ministers were warned in the name of the States, to deliver the Copy of their
Letters, that they might peruse them, they presently and boldly refused,
affirming, that in this matter they could not obey the State, until first they
had acquainted their Principalls, or Classiaries, by which answer they did
plainly intimate that they acknowledged in Zeland other Principalls, besides
the States, as not long after they made it really appear. For whereas their
minds now did swell with the Orgasm^.
eager desire of ruling, which not long since they had contracted, out of
Apollonius his writings, concerning the Right of Majesty: Having examined the
States Mandat, they resolved not to obey it, but tacitly upbraiding them with
hard-heartednesse, and pusillanimity, they involved themselves in the
differences of England, having written Letters, in the Churches name to the
Britains, and against the States will, conveyed them thither, which that they
might not seem to have done underhand, the same Apollonius by the Orgasm^.
eager desire of ruling, which not long since they had contracted, out of
Apollonius his writings, concerning the Right of Majesty: Having examined the
States Mandat, they resolved not to obey it, but tacitly upbraiding them with
hard-heartednesse, and pusillanimity, they involved themselves in the
differences of England, having written Letters, in the Churches name to the
Britains, and against the States will, conveyed them thither, which that they
might not seem to have done underhand, the same Apollonius by the command of
the Walachrians, Printed afterward a Book of Considerations to the English,
plainly intimating that by the right of their Hierarchy, they had so much
resolution and power, that they might despise and reject the Orders and
Counsels of the Supreme Magistrate, not only in Ecclesiastical, but also in
Secular Affairs, which concerned the state of the Commonwealth.

Upon this Trial which they made of their Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, 2
Example.
there fell out another not unlike this: The continuance of the unhappy War
caused a great famine amongst the Irish, that not only by report, but also by
intimation from the Parliament, it was divulged that thousands of Irish were
like to be starved, if they were not releeved the sooner, this matter being
first brought to the States General in the name of the Parliament, and by them
recommended to their Provinces: by the States of Zeland, Order was also taken
in their public meetings, that relief should be raised in all the Towns and
Villages, within their precincts; adding an express command, that the money
should be brought to the Table of Middleburgh, as to the common Exchequer,
that with more certainty and expedition, aid might be sent from the States
Commissioners, to those miserable and panting people. Here Apollonius with his
Accomplices, perceiving that by this means the distribution of the Money should
be taken away from the Churches jurisdiction and his power, they did not now
tacitly whisper, but openly cry out, that they would not obey the States Order,
but the Magistrates of Middleburgh being unwilling to give way to this
disobedience and rebellion of Apollonius, and being also mindful of the
quarrel raised before by him and his fellows, about the collection and
distribution of the money of Sweibrugh, where they challenged all that right as
sacred, and proper only to the Church: Fearing also lest by these and such
like Remora's, the ready and needful benevolence that was raised, should be
retarded; they no less piously then prudently, ordered to gather from house to
house, neither was this a thing unusual in that City; where four times in the
year, certain deputed Magistrates together with the Deacons, use to gather
men's benevolence from house to house, for the relief of the poor. Here
Apollonius with his Churchmen made opposition, plainly threatening, that be
would not recommend the distressed: state of the Irish for any relief from the
members of the Church, as the custom was: whispering that it were better,
there never were any Alms gathered, than that so holy a work of mercy should
in such an unlawful way be profained by the Magistrate. Willing also to show
his boldness in maintaining the sanctity of his jurisdiction, the matter being
agitate in the Consistory, he drew it to the Walachrian Classis, by whose
suffrages being assisted, by a large writing, he signified to the Magistrates
of Middleburgh, they should do against the Scriptures, the custom of the
Apostles, the modern right of the Church, against the confessions, and as it
were the very National Oath, and consequently to the prejudice of the whole
Religion. If they presumed to touch with their secular and profane hands, so
sacred a business, as the collecting and distributing of Alms. Affirming that
this holy work was enjoined by holy men, that is, by the Church, for holy men,
and therefore could not be lawfully exercised but by holy Churchmen.

Which childish songs, though elsewhere. I did slight with laughter, yet
Apollonius made such account of them, that he plainly affirmed in the fourth
Article of his paper, which he exhibited, that the ordering and disposing of
collections or alms, appertain to the Church, and that they depend upon no
power out of the Church, if this be so, then the secular Magistrate has now
no more right to appoint Collections, among his subjects, whereof the greatest
part are the Churches within their jurisdictions. For because the power of the
Magistrate is not in, but (about) the Church (as Apollonius finely sings
elsewhere) by this supposition, the Magistrate has no power to impose any tax
upon the holy people of the Church, for an holy use, for this were
profanation: but this right belongs to the Church only, that is, to the
Ministers, and Presbytery. And so if Apollonius by his divinity can make this
good, it will follow that no member of the Church can be sure what is his own,
and that the Prince has no more power over his Subjects, then the Ministers of
the Church, over the Members of Christ: the chief power of the Civil
Magistrate consists in imposing of Taxes on his Subjects; but if Preachers
may in the Church have such Arbitrary power, as has no dependence on the
Civil Magistate; who does not see a gate opened for Church Governors not
only of absolute Ruling, but also of enriching themselves, after the manner of
the Popes; for whatsoever they by means of long gentleness of Princes, have
scraped together, by their indulgences, donations, reservations, annates, and
such like inventions, all these at this day must the Ministers obtain, under
pretense of spiritual alms. Apollonius was not content to declare this in
words, but he must also in the trial thereof in deeds, For the Walachrian
Classes, confiding to Apollonius his seeming reasons, did signify to the
Deacons according to their Authority, that they should not afford their help to
the Magistrate, nor any way serve them in these kinds of collections) neither
did they this in private, but openly by their Letters, they signified so much
to the Magistrates of Middleburgh, 24 of December. 1643. which were subscribed in
the name of the Consistory, by Jacob Anselaer, William Apollonius, Peter Velde,
Anthony Bakelier. The room of the Classes was filled up by S. Van Denyse,
Isaac Horenbek, J. Vanden Brande, Minister of Ulyssing, who by this alone did
show, that he had yielded blind obedience to Apollonius; because he made no
scruple to give this Law to the Magistrate of Middleburgh (and that in Christ's
right) from which he knew the Magistrates of his own Town were free, the
Magistrates of Ulyssing collected from door to door, the Ministers of his own
Town being neither consulted with, nor making resistance, so it appears that
by the sole instigation of Apollonius, Cusa est faba.
because of his hatred against the Magistrates, this trouble was laid upon the
Governors of Middleburgh: The event of this sedition was, that the prudent
Magistrates of Middleburgh willing to yield to those times, suppressing their
anger, gave way that the Ministers should make their Collections in the Church:
but first swearing that all the money collected, should according to the States
order, be brought to the Table. Howsoever this was done by Apollonius, yet it
is most certain, that multitudes of Irish, were undone and perished, by reason
of the hinderance caused by this contention. For although it was in every man's
mouth, and oftentimes inculcated by the Ministers themselves, that many Irish
would be ruined and starved, if they were not the sooner supplied, yet with
Apollonius and the new Zelots, a needless strife about a small point of
Ecclesiastic Right, did more prevail, then the ruin and death of so many
good men for want of necessaries.

Out of this fruitful Garden of contentions about Apollonius his
spirituality, 3 Example.
much such like fruit of peevish and stubborn disobedience did grow up.

Now for a long time the Magistrate had permitted the use of Organs in the
Church, to regulate the incomposed and confused singing of Psalms; being an
ancient institution, and never disliked by the Ministers that were Apollonius
his predecessors.

The secular Magistrates at that time did waver, for diverse causes, namely the
close plottings of Apollonius, and his accomplices, striving what they could to
remove from the helm of Government, all such as did not flatter Apollonius in
his pride; and that they only should sit at the stern, whom either near
acquaintance, or their secret favor to Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, had
indeered to Apollonius but this combination and specious conspiracy was happily
and prudently broke, by those who were then the chief Governors, in removing
from public employment some, upon just grounds, and placeing others in their
room; yet doing nothing that might infringe their Privileges.

The Magistrates being then wholly taken up with suites, agitate in the Courts
of Justice, and not able to put an end to so many suites in Law. They according
to their own desire, and of those who had suites depending, taking a pattern
from Amsterdam, and other Towns, that they might be eased of the trouble of
small suites, appointed a Court of small business, as they call it, where
every man may plead in his own case, without the help of Lawyers. When the
Consulls did oftentimes in private consult (as the custom is there) about
these matters, and not calling into their consultations those prime men of the
Town, whom Apollonus favored, be being incensed, that Civil affairs were not
carried, as he would have them, did utter invectives daily out of his Pulpit
against the Town Governors: whose violent carriage, when he saw was stoutly
slighted by them, he drew all his colleagues to join with him in his
boldness, these having got opportunity to speak with the Town Governors, he
did to their face grievously reprove them, objecting diverse things, and sawcily
carping at them, that the points of their accusation increased to the number of
foureteen, some of which are these:

1. That being so often warned of removing the Organs out of the Church, they
had not hitherto obeyed.

2. That they used private Conventicles in their consultations.

3, That they had removed from the Helm of Government, able men, placing unfit
men in their toome.

4. That they had erected New Tribunalls to the end that having found out ways
of profit, by their new Offices, they should ingratiate to them some Townsmen,
to the violation of their Oath.

Lastly, That they were enemies to the Church, and by their actions showed,
they favored Papists.

Of which fault, I think the Magistrates of that Town, are as free as any
elsewhere. For it is known that not once, the Consulls themselves mistrusting
the gentleness of the Sheriff, or Chief Justice, have entered into Popish
assemblies, and carried away all their Mass furniture, or trumpery: teaching
by their example, all other Magistrates, to suppress these superstitious kind
of people. These and other things, which the Ministers by Apollonius, his
instigation upbraided the Magistrates with, to their faces, were by them born
with, as was fitting, gravely and wisely. Yet having taken notes of the chief
heads of their accusation, by their pensionary, they exhorted the Ministers to
peace and moderation, using then only verbal reproof, although they knew
Apollonius and some others to be bold incendiaries. But they reserved sharper
reprehensions till occasion should serve: Many things might be said of this
nature: but Apollonius never left off to hunt after some high preferment in
Holland or England, which at home amongst the Middleburgians he could not
procure that might give him content, by reason the Magistrates did so cross
him: to whom when he knew that all his mischievous plots were manifest, and
despairing of Victory, yet he gave not off with old dying Priamus, to fling
weak darts that could not hurt, catching at every opportunity, which he
thought might either directly or indirectly hinder the Churches Peace, or the
Magistrates esteem, and that not privately but openly, entertaining and hugging
such occasions, as I will show by one example more.

Leonard Cepesteyn, one of the dregs of Lawyers, 5 Example.
did for a long time gape at the Government of that Commonwealth; but being
still frustrated, and irritated with vain and long expectation, he was
observed for a great while, to bear no good will to the Magistrates, it fell
out that one Lumirius a Knave was found guilty of Treason, who having
counterfeit himself a fool, did first escape the rack, and afterward chains,
and death.

Leonard undertook (as they say) the defense of this fellow, partly in hope of
booty, partly, out of desire to rail; which he did so impudently, that in
open Court he upbraided the Magistrate with ignorance and injustice, so
boldly, as if he would have stirred up the multitude (which then had filled
the Town Hall, to hear this new pleading) against the Magistrate. The Senate
of Middleburgh being moved at this bold and impudent act, did a long time
resolve to banish this seditious man. Yet their revenge went not farther then
this; to wit, that by their Order this Leonard was forbid to meddle with
pleading of any more Causes, either by word or writ; being desirous rather to
give, then to cut off an occasion of repentance. Yet notwithstanding he being
helped by the cunning of Apollonius his spirituality, ceased not to search out
all the occasions he could to be revenged on the Magistrates, at last he
found out a notable one, by Apollonius his help, who was able to shake it out
of his private Divinity budgets, to wit, that this turbulent man, being
debarred from public pleading, or sitting among the Lawyers, in open Courts,
for his sedition, and wrongs offered by him to the Magistrate, from which
public scandal he was not cleared, might be admitted among the Elders. And
truly so far did this Cepesteyn prevail by Apollonius his tricks, and
favor, that he was chosen an Elder of the Church; He was so bad that he was
not fit to be employed in the State, yet good enough to be employed in the
Church, etc.
not that he might by any goodness in him, be useful to the Church, but that
Apollonius his Presbytery might upbraid the Magistrate with injustice, for
stopping his mouth from pleading, whom they thought fit should be an Elder.

But chiefly that the Lawyer might take an occasion to revenge himself, and
wrong all secular Magistrates, at least indirectly, from the Ecclesiastic
tribunal.

I confess, I write this only by relation, but I doubt not the truth of it.
For he that will search the States Ordinances there, and the Records or
Register of the Magistrates of Middleburgh, will find, that I am not further
off from Truth, then from Reason, which does manifestly show, that Apollonius
for a long time with his Walachrians, have been striving, in thought, word, and
deed, by their example, to teach other spiritual men of the like stamp, to
resist Magistrates and Princes; and that Pope-like under pretense of the
Church-Hierarchie, they would dissolve, and subject to themselves, the carnal
authority of secular powers. So that now I may seem to perform funeral
obsequies both to the Ghosts of Vedelius, as also to keep off, the death and
burial both of the ^ivill Government, and of the whole Church. For experience
of all Ages have taught, that no sooner has your authority been rejected, but
presently these Church-Prelates have ruined and destroyed one another; (...).
whence nothing can be expected but miserable Anarchy, except there should
arise another Pope and Antichrist in the Reformed Church.

This Apollonius is very lavish in railing against you; and takes no small
delight in presaging, that you will prove secular Popes, and consequently
Antichrists, if you but offer formally to meddle with, or touch the Modern
Church-affaires (which he challenges to him and his alone) with that supreme
authority which is given you from God. But sure he was never more mistaken
then in this: For the Pope is in this very regard the Antichrist, because he
challenges to himself, the Supreme and Monarchical power, which is proper
alone to You; and which against the command of Christ, he abuses to the
destruction of the Kingdom of Christ. If Apollonius had weighed S. Paul's
prophecy of Antichrist, he might have seen, that it is impossible for a
secular Prince to be Pope, or Antichrist; for he most divinely foretold that
he should sit in the Temple, but You Princes sit not in the Temple, You alone
sit by Gods appointment in the chief Throne of the World: from whence if you
dart the beams of Your Majesty upon the Church of Christ, You do but what by
daily experience we find in the Sun, whose beams, though placed in Heaven,
yet make the Earth fruitful.

He also tells us, that this will be his property, to elevate and extol
himself above all worldly powers, (...)
which is the Popes work, and Apollonius his desire, but when You come to
handle Church Matters, You do not exalt Your authority, but submit both Your
selves to Christ, and Your authority also, with which God has solely entrusted
You.

Lastly, He sitting in the Church of God, must extol himself above all that
is called God, or Monarch; but You Your selves are called Gods and Monarchs;
You must needs be exalted above Your selves, if You be Popes and Antichrists.
However then You may swell with unseemely pride, yet if You meddle with
Church Matters, (which Apollonius fears) You shall not be like Antichrist,
to whom it is essential, to be proud, and to exalt himself, but rather
despising the pride and glory of the world; You will kiss the Sun, and submit
your Scepters to him: yet not basely and contemptibly, as the Pope does require
of Monarchs, and Apollonius would feign procure in Middleburgh: Which Plague,
that God may deliver us from, I thought fit to write what You see, upon his
patcht pieces, the sum of which I have set out by this Preface, so that now I
should end this Proem with a wish.

Fear not the superstitious paintings of Church-holinesse: as if some worldly
carnality, had made you unfit to manage the modern businesses of the Church,
as our new Papists prate. To you God has given the spirit of Adoption, that
You may believe, and consecrate your bodies, and all yours for a holy sacrifice
to him; to You by special warrant has God given His word, that it might never
depart from your mouth. To you God has given chief power, to propagate
honesty, the Worship of God, and Piety; cannot You then direct or perform holy
things appointed by God, without sacrilege of which at this day there is
nothing of such consequence which may not be performed by some profane
impostor, or young Scholar, scarce yet free from the lash of the rod.

They commonly answer that these things may be done by you, but must not,
because you are not called thereto. Biotica.
Whereas you are to meddle only with the things of this life, and such as may
be committed to the basest members of the Church: Yea, if you will believe
Apollonius, you are but separable accidents of the Church, having for the end
or final cause of your Office, only the peace of your people; but Religion,
honesty, and piety, only remotely and improperly; which are so many
blasphemies, by which they speak evil of the Rulers of the people. For you are
the Keepers of the Church, Fathers, Governors, Captains, and Heads of the
People. God himself styles You Gods. Who sees not that these Apollonian
whirle-windes resist the Ordinance of God? who prescribe bounds to Your
knowledge, and because of some petty worldly circumstances, would exclude Your
care about Church Matters. God himself bids You Kiss the Son: Isaiah
foretells that You shall be Nursing Fathers to the Church; the Apostle tells us,
that the end and effect of your function, is the preservation, as well of
Religion and Honesty, as of public tranquillity, without any difference:
Believe not therefore Apollonius and his followers; for if once they cheat you
with these Canvase wares, Saccaria.
that you may commit the whole business of Religion to them, they will leave
off to take care of the Church, and will care for the things that belong to
You; They will leap from the Pulpit to the Throne: This the Pope has done a
great while; whom John Becholtius of Munster did imitate: This does Apollonius
with his fellows, carnestly hunt after in Middleburgh. Despise the vain
buzzings of contentious men, they are Aesops Wolves, who desire that they alone
may keep the sheep, that the dogs may be removed from the flock. Imitate
rather godly Kings and Princes, who by their examples have shined before You;
and chiefly Moses, who being set over Aaron, and the whole Priesthood, not as
a Priest, or Prophet, but as God, or a Prince: he had no less care of Aarons
Priesthood, and of Religion, then Aaron himself; not that he did execute that
by himself, which by divine and special privilege was assigned to Aaron and
his Priests, but he directed the whole worship as it was instituted by God; and
did moderate it by that eminent power, by which alone be excelled Aaron and
his Priests, as their God and Prince. Whose footsteps afterward Joshuah
followed, who was Prince over the Israelites, and Moses his juccessour. So
likewise David, Solomon, and other pious Kings, of whom Solomon by virtue of
his regal authority alone, deposed Abiathar the High Priest, that he might
inflict upon him an Ecclesiastical punishment, that is, that he might not be
any longer the Lords Priest, by which right, he placed Sadoc in his stead.
Godly Jehosaphat, who was neither Priest nor Prophet, appointed Ecclesiastic
Judicatures, as well as Civil, and in them, Judges and Presidents, no Priest
gainsaying him. Yea, in the third year of his Reign, he sent from Town to
Town, not only Priests, but Civil Princes also with the Book of the Law, to
teach and Preach, who truly (although the worship of God was then decayed) had
been notwithstanding guilty of Sacrilege, if he had attempted either to offer
Sacrifice, or carry the Arc, or enter into the Sanctuary, or execute any of
those things which God by special privilege had granted to the Priests, and
denied to all others. Therefore slight the Impostures of Apollonius, and such
as he, who allege to you the exemples of King Uzziah, and Uzzah. These are
childrens rattles, which hitherto wicked Antichrist has used to affright
fearful superstitious people. (...).
These are empty tryes, which experience and reason may teach you to despise.
For if to Pray publicly, to Preach Gods Word, to send Preachers, to choose
Ecclesiastic Judges, to remove a Priest from his Ministry, to place another
in his stead, are matters of such special right, as the going into the
Sanctuary, the burning of Incense and other things, which God specially
allotted to the Levites, Uzzah alone had not fallen down dead, nor Uzziah been
struck with Lepros^e, nor the Philistimes troubled with the Hemorrods, but
innumerable pious Kings and Princes had been liable to Gods wrath. For although
by the Law they abstained carefully from all Leviticall employments: Yet if the
Levites under this pretense had debarred them from every work of Divine
Worship, they had been laughed at as gross Impostors. They contained
themselves within the prescript of the Law, nor could these things be thrust
upon them as sacred, and not to be touched, which God had not by an express
Law separated. The old Leviticall and templar separation is now abolished, and
yet this new Walachrian Levite, perversely imitating the Jews, challenges in
his Church-dressings, that for holy and untangible, which the old Levites
themselves, if they were alive, would not debar you from. For it had been a
most unworthy act to keep off the High Priest from meddling elsewhere with
holy things, who might lawfully enter into the Holy of Holies; this privilege
being granted, there could be nothing so sacred, which be might not touch:
How great then is the wrong which these new Priests offer to you, under
pretense of holiness, when they would affright You from meddling with the
Modern outward affairs of the Church, Who have received from God a special
power to enter every day into the now Christian Holy of Holyes, There is now
nothing in the Church, nor in the whole world, so sacred and infallible as the
holy Scripture. This is our Holy of Holies, this is our Propitiatory, Arc, and
Cherubim; this is our Breast Plate, shining with far more brighter jewels,
then that of the Jews; This is our Vrim and Thummim: and whatsoever of old was
venerable amongst the Jews, but now lost, comes far short of this which
shall never perish, though Heaven it self should fall. In this concerning
matter of salvation, God does answer You as well as the Priests, whose answer
is still certain and infallible: Now whereas God himself by special warrant
permits, nay commands You to enter into this; what madness is it, that from
the petty sacred things of this Church-furniture, You should be kept off, from
touching them, under pretense of sanctity: This is our Christian Liberty and
felicity, that we are all now under Christ, Kings, Priests, and Prophets. That
the general privilege of Christians is so large, that no man is excluded from
the administration of sacred things at this day, if he be gifted.

I confess it stands not with decency and Order, that any man without calling
should put his hand to the Modern Ministry, yet the holiness of the function
is not hereby violated, the Calling is at this day humane, and oftentimes
corrupted, it serves for Order, but conferres nothing to special sanctity. Our
Modern imposition of hands, does imitate the fact, not the effect of the
Apostles: so that he who is ordained and confirmed, is the same after, that he
was before imposition of hands.

But the Apollonians brag, that they are Christ's Ambassadors. This is an
arrogant untruth, for they have not obtained the gift of teaching in the
Church, after that divine and spiritual manner, that Christ's Legates did of
old; but by humane gifts, and humane calling, which according to Gods and
Christ's general institution, serve the now decayed Church, that wants these
gifts in which she excelled under the Apostles.

You are Gods Ambassadors, and the Churches Patrons, to whom for ever by
special command the care of the Church under Christ is committed. Which not to
undertake is heinous impiety, and to take it from you is sacrilege, and now
what I have said to the secular Nobility, I also say to you that are Religious
Ministers. Contemn the boldness of Apollonius and his fellows; for they are
seditious and desire innovation. They go about to raise among themselves the
Papal Hierarchy, to the overthrow of your Honor: they hunt after worldly
glory, and would have you lose the true honor of Christ: All honor is due
properly to Gods Word, not to you. Your Calling should put you in mind of your
Ministry and burden, not of command and ruling. Which of you will be so
proud with Apollonius, as to brag of an inseparable subjection under Christ,
so that he truly hears Christ, that hears you? Let Apollonius be ashamed,
to be so often convicted of falsehood, that he is so infabibly subordinate to
Christ, as if his authority with Christ's were the same.

Lisien rather to Christ the Lord of the whole Church, who by command and
examples has taught you not to seek after the Kingdoms of this world, much
less by the Church. Apollonius seeks both, to wit, dominion in the Church, and
by the Church, over Magistrates and the world too.

Christ said that Kings and Lords were to bear rule, but not you. Yet he has
not driven out of the Church the higher power which is exercised with
authority, but has forbid you to meddle with that, which God has granted to
Magistrates. The Pope has so corrupted this command of Christ, that by
wresting of it, he first stripped Princes of their authority in the Church, and
then from their temporal Dominions, and so procured to himself the dominion of
the Church, then of the whole World: This is it which Apollonius borrows of
him. He debarres Princes from having any authority in the Church, from which
Christ never debarred them. On the contrary, he affects dominion and power
over the Church and State, which Christ never gave him; but plainly forbid him;
Be not therefore followers of Apollonius and his Disciples.

Christ and his Apostles were endued with supreme authority, and what the
Magistrate does now by the Sword, that could they do by words and threatening,
that is to say, kill and punish corporally. They had power and aptitude to
command all in the Church, but not to obey, notwithstanding, they so ruled the
Church, that they both governed, and were governed, they taught, and were
taught; they ordered, and were ordered; they sent, and were sent. Finally,
there was none of these things they did much affect, for which these proud and
contentious spirits strive, as it were for Religion it self: Stephanas and her
family served the Church with their goods, these were but vulgar people, and
(as they called them) Laics, yet Paul wills the whole Church, which excelled
in so many spiritual gifts, to be subject to them, and such as they were, for
that work: How far was that government from this of Apollonius? on whom the
Christian Magistrate had beaped all sorts of benefits, yet teaches that he
must not be subject to them, but they to him, that he must not honor but
contemn them; ^ar. 1. p. 30.31.
for be accounts him wicked, and a Simonaick out of his Calderwood, that shall
adscribe any power over the Church to any man, for his bounty and charges on
the Church. Which is a manifest blasphemy both against the Apostle and the
Magistrate: which nevertheless these Walachrians esteem as a fine and choice
sentence. But they say that Christ's Kingdom is not of this World: Luke 17.21.
I grant it, if they mean his internal Kingdom, which Christ says, is within
us. But for external things which serve for the building up of that Kingdom,
Christ never taught they were not of this world, and surely he had done that
which was far from the nature of his Kingdom, when making a whip of coards,
he vindicated the purity of Divine worship. Yea, that Counsel which is given
to Kings and Princes of the New Testament to Kiss the Son, had been in vain,
but that I may not use my own words longer, In comment. Deuteronomy. 13.5.
Let Calvin speak, who thus writes: God can be without the help of the Sword,
for the defense of Religion: he wills it not: but what wonder is it if God
commands the Magistrate to be the revenger of his glory, who will not have
thefts, whoredoms, drunkenness, exempted from punishment, nor suffer them? In
lesser faults, it shall not be lawful for the Judge to cease: when the
worship of God is overthrown, and all Religion; shall so great a sin be
cherished by connivence, etc? Besides, what can be more prodigeous? but its in
vain to contend by reasoning, when God has once pronounced what he will have
done: We must necessarily yield to his inviolable decree. Yet it is questioned
whether or not this Law belongs to Christ's Kingdom, which is spiritual and
far different from earthly Empires: And indeed there be some, otherwise good
men, who think that our condition under the Gospel, is not like that of the
ancients under the Law: Not only because the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, but also because Christ would not have his Church in the beginning to
be established by the Sword, but whilst Kings in promoting of Christ's
Kingdom, do consecrate their own work; I deny that therefore the nature of
it is changed. And although maugre all worldly power, Christ would have his
Gospel to be proclaimed by his Disciples, whem he exposed as sheep among
Wolves, having no other Armor but his Word: yet he did not tie himself to an
eternal Law, but that he might force even Kings to his obedience, and tame
their violence, and of bloody persecutors, make them Patrons and Guardians of
his Church. In the beginning Magistrates exercised their tyranny against the
Church, because the time was not yet come, that they should Kiss the Son,
and laying aside their violence, should become Nursing Fathers to that same
Church which they persecutediaccording to Isaiahs Prophecy: which doubtless
has reference to Christ's com^ing. Nor is it to no purpose that Paul bids us
pray for Kings, and all that be in authority, he gives a cause, to wit, That
under them we may live quietly, in all godliness and honesty. As Christ is
meek, so he will have his Disciples to follow him in meekness; but this is no
hinderance to Magistrates, why they may not have care of the Churches safety
and tranquillity, in the defense of religion: for to neglect this duty, were
extreme perfidiousnesse, and cruelty. These things had that great man learned
to be most dangerous by his own example, namely, not to give due honor to the
Magistrate, with whom he had eager contentions in Geneva, at first, about the
circumstance of using leavened bread in the Supper, so that he suffered himself
and his colleagues to be thrust cut of the City, before he would submit to
them in a thing Adiaphorus or indifferent: yet afterward he plainly confessed
his error, when he adverti^ed the Genevians and others by his Letters, that
hereafter he would not contend about such small circumstances as this was,
There was nothing pleased him better, then to be constant even to death, in
things that were truly holy and necessary: as for things not necessary, he
yielded himself an easy Judge. But Apollonius breaths quite contrary: he
corrupts and neglects as bare accidents, these things of Religion that are
truly formal, and essential, but extolls for matters substantial, petty
circumstances and slight accidents of Church Government, which he esteems as
the very form of Religion: I have exploded his fictions in the progress of
this book, and have laid open his disposition and intentions, and my study
shall be (if God prolong my life) to discourse hereafter more largely, of the
best kind of Church Government. I desire no other reward for my pains, but
that you will think well of my good intentions, give ear to my wholesome
admonitions, and afford your favor to me as the enemy of all superstition,
and the friend of true Religion.

Farewell.
TO THE BENEVOLENT READER.
BEING lately in a Stationers shop, I lighted upon a Book with this
Inscription: [The Right of Majesty in Holy Things:] the argument of which came
somewhat near that excellent Treatise of our famous Vedelius, which he
published concerning The Episcopacy of Constantine. When I greedily read over
some Pages as I stood, hoping to find some commendation of our Vedelius, and
of the Magistrate, I found presently that the Author of this work was a mocker
and dissembler, Who had a smooth face, but a hairy breast, and a cunning Fox in
his heart, pretending that he would write for the Dignity and Honor of
Magistrates, when as he seems chiefly to have aimed at the disgrace and obliquy
of Princes, and of our famous Vedelius. I was much moved that such an
unskilful man should exonerate full carts, and unlade the ballast of so many
railing speeches against Princes, and this worthy man without punishment, so
that like another Incendiary of Diana's Temple, he seemed to hunt for glory
out of his evil actions. That of the Poet came into my mind, Many men commit
the same fault, but with diverse success, The one obtaines a rope for his
wickedness, the other a Crown. Neither was I ignorant of the reason why no
man opposed himself to this mad man, Bacchae baecchan^.
for who will pursue the wind, who will seek for a permanent color in the
Chamelion?

This Author resembles the Quicksands of Leptis, which Salust says, are
changed with the winds, so that I not without just cause, resolved to let the
man laugh at himself, supposing that he would become ridiculous enough by
shaming himself.

Not long after falling into the company of a Wallachrian, among other things,
I asked what kind of man this Guillielmus Apollonii was; He according to his
natural ingenuity, brake out into an exorbitant commendation of the man,
saying, That he was the most learned of all the Ministers of M^dd^ehurgh, that
his same was such, that neither among the Wallachrians, nor Zelanders, was
there any to be found ^q all to him in acuteness, eloquence, and memory, That
he was borne at Trevere, a small Sea Town, whose Father was Consul there,
and at last he was chosen to be chief Minister of Middleburgh. There being
possessed with emulation of his native Town, he first did underhand endeavor
to entrap the Counsell-Table of Middleburgh; then stomaching that his hopes
failed him, he raged, declaiming invectively in his daily Sermons against
those who at that time were chief Governors of the Town, condemning their
life, manners, actions, and speeches; at last he became so bold, that asking
leave to speak, he did upbraid them to their faces, that they had forsaken the
Church, and had secretly gone about to betray Her.

The Magistrates of Middleburgh being no whit moved hereat, for they knew that
out of pride and madness he spewed out this venom against Vedelius. And not
being contented to rely on this Engine, he sent over to the English a proof of
his Learning and Studies, hoping by spreading his fame every where abroad, to
obtain at length a glorious name, which he had long eagerly desired; or, if
this hope failed him, he should at least satisfy his own mind, whilst
upbraiding all Civil Governors in general, with slavery, he should tacitly
speak evil of his own Magistrates: Concerning the private condition of his
life, This Wallachrian said, that he was a Citizen, a Husband, a Father, a
Minister, much after the rate of other men, That some peevish people did carpe
and maunder, that he was so taken up with State-matters, as that he could not
attend to lesser business; That he did altogether neglect the poor, and the
sick, these things he left to his meaner sort of Brethres, reserving for
himself the care of Rich men, and their Tables, and their Counsels about
worldly business, with the Guardianship of Puples and Schools; nor was he
unfit to make a Courtier of, if ecclesiastique and Civil Offices could be
exchanged for a reasonable gain.

Lastly, That he was a man for all times and occasions, but that he weighed
every thing in his golden weights, being greedy of the world, so that they mock
him with Euchion in Plautus, For tying a Bellow^.
bag to his throat in the night, least perhaps he should loose some of his
breath whilst he slept: But these are the blasts of fame, which no man so
Seraphicall as he can avoid; I having learned these things by chance, and
considering that when men are most apt to believe, they are most apt to be
deceived: I thought it a thing intolerable that this Apollonius, whatever he
were, should without punishment spit and piss into the face, and ashes of so
eminent a man and our special friend; If he can relish nothing but what is
salt, so that he can put no difference between sweet and bitter, (...).
being bred to eat Lobsters, or Sea Locusts, and accustomed to puddle water,
or to Sea mudde: Shall it therefore be lawful for him to prescribe bounds for
such high matters, and impudently to bray like an Elephant against the labors
of such great men; whilst I was thus musing, at last the Majesty of our States,
the dignity of our University and Place, and the honor of our worthy Vedelius
did so far prevail with me, as that I should briefly vindicate him, not
that I think it any credit for me to lay hands upon Apollonius, what honor can
I have to struggle with impudency it self? and to seek for sound brains in
him, from whose pen and lips, not only Wisdom, but also Truth it self, being
affrighted, is fled. My intention only was, good Reader, that thou might
see those things to be most false, with which Apollonius does belie our Worthy
Vedelius, and his own Spirituallity, and that Apolionius is not the man, whom
by his vapouring speeches he braggs himself to be amongst the English, and
Belgicks.

Farewell.
WILLIAM APOLLONIVS HIS. STILTS.
CHAP. I.
THE Poet elegantly plays upon Thraso: He that has the wit which is in thee,
will by words ascribe to himself that honor which another man obtaines with
great pains: So, Apollonius Vapors not only amongst the Walachrians, but
amongst the Hollanders also; and our Frislanders; and likewise amongst the
Britans; so that now Leyden must not trust with Church affairs any more such
as Salmasious, Tryglandius, Polyander, Spanhemius: nor must our Freezlanders,
trust such as Sybrandus, Amesius, Macovius, nor Vtricht, such as Voetius, and
Matius: neither must the English trust such as Whittaker, Reynolds, Morton, Fox
and Jewel, (for whom they have already mourned) except Apollonius the great
inspectator and arbitrator of Church business, rule the roast, and like a Sun
beam, shine over all.

Truly you are one that have few fellows; whom not only the Parliament, but
the King also does highly honor, who trusts you with all his councels, and I
warrant you, delights only to eat and drink with you. Our Netherlands would
become mouldie, our justice-seats ruinous; and all the strength of Christ's
Spouse, would pine away, if Apollonius did not puff up his own cheeks, and
croak every where. Physignathus.


Truly Apollonius, your enthymemes may be easily slighted, and the smoke of
your folies dissipated: nor is their any thing in your papers so valid, which
may not of its own accord tumble down; yet because you cease not to play the
Crow, by your impertinent chatting, and impudently to insult. Cornicari. Ex hoc
mustaceo laureolam.
I will do my best to make it known what a brave fellow you are, so that you
may securely expect, for this your trifling piece a crown of Bays at least, or
a triumph: but be not angry I pray that Anonimus pulls you by the ears: there
are sometimes just causes of concealment: It was some honor and encouragement,
for those five weak Kings to dye by the hands of warlike Joshuah: Josh. 5.
It Is mere glorious oftentimes to strike privately at him, whom we place
beneath our arger; therefore be not curious to know who speaks, but what is
spoken and to that priek up your ears.

First, let the reader observe, that the hills of Haemon are not fuller of
Snow, then this hodg-podge of Apollonius is of railing, against all good men;
so that it were both an endless, and an unprofitable labor in me, to use
retaliation, seeing he is so luxuriant in this rank kind of corn. I purpose
not to prosecute his foo^eries in all places; I were as good dig through
Isthmus as to number up all his dissemblings, impudencies, impertinancies,
tautologies, railings, improprieties, and I may say, (...).
childish solocismes; neither will I interrupt the true stating of the question
with such trifling chantings: I will first briefly touch his facetious conceits
wherein he takes no small pleasure.

And first, for his simplicity and modesty, never any Davus acted his part
better, when he would have himself be every where accounted Oedepus: Behold
his fine beginning. He wrote a Book entitled The right of Majesty in holy
things. As if he were to yield some kind of power and dignity to the Magistrate
in modern Church business; whereas on the contrary, he aims at nothing eise
but to upbraid Magistrates with nullity, carnal inability, and base slavery in
Church-go-vernment, and that in a tempest of railing speeches.

See the Preface.
He confesses presently in the beginning (that being unaccustomed, he has put
pen to paper; I might be truly (says he) accused of temerity, that I will
meddle with that cause which deserves a better patronage then my abilities will
afford,) and under this vizard of modesty, he tells us a story as if he had
undertaken this task to write against his will, he says that casually Vedelius
his book was brought and read to him and that a certain learned man; meaning
doubtless himself: for who is worthy of this honor but Haman? did note and
read to the Wallachran Classes, many false passages, and if his report be true,
then the Wallachran Classiaries, did with as great ease applaud his trifles, as
one Mule bites another: for they all condemned his Book as hurtful, injuryous
to Christ, and too inconsiderately published by the Author, and that the
privileges and sacred rites of the Church, were unworthily trampled on by
Vedelius: therefore the Classes resolved, least the poison should spread any
further; that presently it should be answered, and so this growing evil
suppressed: who sees not now what it is this fable aims at? there was no
stage player fitter to act this Comedy, then Apollonius, who like another
Sosia, in Plautus was trying the weight of his fists against Vedelius,
therefore he adds, that the Classiares, whom he was bound in conscience to
obey, had imposed on him this task, that he should publsh this dainty patched
stuff; nor does he leave any thing that may color this fiction of his
fidility and modesty: The Wallachran Classis Deputy (says he) very
attentively I warrant you; read over both the Tomes and did fully approve them,
for they subscribed their names Jodocus Larenus; Isacus Horenbequius, etc.
: by whose Patronage, Apollonius growing insolent, in his pamphlet of
considerations endeavored to thrust such monsters on the English, using the
subscription of the same Patrons; to which also were added here the names of
Jacob D'herde president of the Classis, and Maximilian Ieeling Minister of
Midleburgh, so that now, we need not doubt, but that Apollonius is begot of
Jupiters Brain, who may, not without cause, say to himself, it is too great a
misery to be too learned, they importune me, they woo me, they send for me,
that they may but see me truly he knows not against what a brave man he speaks;
who will offer to say that Davus of Trever did faigne all these things? The
Orator of old, spoke elegantly against Rullus the Caviller. Who pleaded the
cause? Rullus: who made the Law? Rullus: who was the moderator of the Assembly?
the same Rullus.

If Apollonius brings not out his fictions, the handful of the Wallachran
Classiaries have betrayed their supine carelessness. I Will warrant you, other
Classis were quiet, Provinces were silent, Universites were a sleep, learned
men commended; this one Apollonius was found out, one Wallachran Classis, which
was well pleased with restless sloth, Idle employment, slothful business;
yet Apollonius ^ould not trust his business with a sinall Wallachran target,
he defends himself with the large sheeld of the whole Synod and States of
Zeland; For this he prefixed to his fables: this tract was published according
to the forty sixth article of the Church polity, established by the authority
of the States of Ze: land as if this rapsodie had been published by order of
the whole Sinod and of the States also. I warrant you, before Apollonius was
known, Vitilitigator.
and borne, the Synod pre-ordained, that this makebate or slandeter
Apollonius, injurious to all good men, chiefly to his own Magistrates, should
without punishment cast abroad his fooleries, and swelling words: This cannot
be true, though Apollonius were the Phoenix, and fairest of all birds, which
Heredotus writes does appear every seventy year: we will rather believe that
he expresses the nature of Aetna; which they say burns and vomiteth every
70th. year bals of fire.

Truly no man has escaped the burning chalk of his most railing tongue,
Naphtam.
sometimes for fashion s^ke he honors our famous Vedelius with the Title of
Master Professor, Master Doctor, our worthy Brother, and sometimes he calls him
sacrilegious, full of naughty tares, a Parisite, a Liar, a Wanton, who
trampleth on the Churches labors, and rites, and on the blood of Christ, who
spreads abroad his poison; and many more such as these, to which the Apostle
seems long ago to have answered, shall curssing and blessing proceed out of
the same mouth? and shall a fountain send out of the same place, both bitter
and sweet water? This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly carnal,
and devilish.

To these Apollonius adds further: we think it neither safe nor lawful for a
few small questions about Church Government, to raise troubles: but now
Vedelius was dissipating the holy rites of the Church and the liberties, which
Christ has purchased with his own blood, he had subjected to the yoke of
foreign power: he means of the godly Magistrate: secretly spreading his
poison: he gave occasion to Princes not very religious; he seems to tax the
Magistrates of Middleburgh, that they should in their tyrannical lust, fly
upon the the rites of the Church.

It may be asked why all other Churches, and Classes sat down, when the Church
was in such danger? he preferring himself to all others, answers boldly: Truly
I like not that any of our side, in whom the zeal of Gods House is grown cold,
in a cause of this moment should be lukewarm, sit down and say nothing: as
though he alone, of all the notable zelots, should be consumed, by the fervent
heat of Gods house, whom the unbridled lust of railing, and custom of lying,
has driven to write: which hereafter I will show by diverse examples, and will
prove it by a famous one in this place.

He feines that the Magistrate of Deventrie suppressed this tract of Vedelius.
Anno. 1638. which afterward Vedelius published in our University being but
twice boiled coleworts. That this is a mere fiction, is clear by Dr. Rivers
letters concerning this tract which he wrote at the Hague, the 28 of February
1638. so that this Davus has not well distinguished his times: for how in the
beginning of this year, could Dr. Rivet, at the Hague, see and allow this
tract of Vedelius, if at that time it was suppressed by the Magistrate at
Deventre. For either Vedelius published it without the knowledge and consent of
the Magistrate which is absurd, or else the Magistrate did quickly retract his
purpose of suppressing it, which had been no less temerarious and absurd, or
else it is false what Apollonius says, to wit, that either they did, or were
willing to suppress it, as may be seen by all the circumstances.

For if Vedelius was such a raverious woolfe against the Church of Christ, that
then the Magistrate did suppress his virulent writings, what boldness was it
according to the principles of Apollonius his Hierarchy for the Magistrate to
fall upon a business of this consequence without the Clergies advice? what
supine negligence was it that all Divines, in all Universities, should be
silent like dumb dogs, until this Lobster-eating-curre, Hylax, should first
bark from the remote Walachran isle against Church-robbing; so that not only
does he accuse our University professors, for too much stupidity, and want of
prudence, in that they did not observe Vedelius his poison, but preferred such
a sacriledgious blasphemer to be divinity professor; but also accuses
Macovius, and Rivet of perverseness, who by their letters openly approved and
commended Vedelius his tract and opinion, but if Apollonius had not maliciously
winked with one of his eyes, he would have been more tender of the honor of
such worthy men.

But one were as good seek for food in the fire, as for modesty in
Apollonius. Vedelius prefixed to his book, the letters of Macovius and Rivet,
which Apollonius would not see. But that every good man may see them, and he
too against his will, I Will set down a few passages out of them.

Worthy Sir, your disputation concerning the civil Magistrate against
Bellarmine, I have read with so much the more diligence by how much the more
exactness it was written etc. I doubt not but you will do on acceptable work to
those, that desires to know these things more exactly, etc. I confess that by
this your learned tract, I am resolved of those things I doubted before, and am
instructed in diverse passages which I knew not etc. thus far Macovius.

Rivets judgment is more large, which is this. I have read and weighed the
theological disputation concerning the Magistrate against Bellarmine, which
that famous and learned man N. Vedelius published, etc. I testify, that I have
observed nothing in his answers and resolutions, which in my judgment does not
agree with the doctrine of all reformed Churches, concerning the same argument,
but especially that in those passages which he has alleged out of my
Comentaries upon the Decalogue, he has not wronged me, but has fully
expressed my meaning, and I adjudge his opinion to be very true, etc.
Therefore by this my handwriting I would testify to all men, that he has
deserved well of the Church, and who by his most learned lucubrations has
sufficiently proved how far he is from the ways of Innovators, etc. He
asserts the truth without prejudicing those things which belong to the
Ministers of Gods word; and the Church Governors according to Canonical
Scripture, and the Ecclesiastic Canons deduced from thence; neither can I see
any reason why Orthodox men should in this business trouble him. Thus Rivet.

Now let the Reader judge whether these men or Apollonius be made Sure they are
diametrically opposite: for he commends Vedelius for an Orthodox man; but
Apollonius for an Heterodox condemns him. He clears him from innovation; this
cries out that he spreads abroad new Tares and poison. He says that he
asserts the truth; but this, that he defends sacrilegious falsehoods. He
witnesses by his handwriting, that Vedelius has deserved well of the Church;
but this by many subscriptions shows, that he is a betrayer of the Churches
rites and a trampler upon the blood of Christ. Lastly, he says, that no
Orthodox man should trouble him: but this on the contrary, by an Order of the
Walachran Classis, and of the whole Synod, accuses him as a destroyer of, and
a most bloody wolf to the Church. Has not then Apollonius in this somewhat of
that lying spirit which deceived Kings? so that he has writ more of his
Classiary brethren, then they knew themselves, which is ordinary among the
Apollonian spiritual men. One of these must be true; to wit, that either the
Apollonians are convicted of ignorance, negligence, and false tenets: or else
that Vedelius, Macovius, and Rivet, were widely mistaken: for my own part I had
rather be sick with these men in divinity, then to enjoy the best health with
the Walachran Apollonius: for he slights and despises all men, weighing them
in the balance of his judgment, as if he alone were the man that could hold
the scales, or were only skillful to note vice, and to discern right from
wrong.

He acknowledges that he owes much to Waleus, and Thysius, his Masters, and
yet he does with Junius, plainly reject them: he contemns Musculus: he says,
That Pareus and Gualter do germanize it ^o much, and that this cause is made
so intricate by the Germans and Helvesians, that you cannot find any Idaea of
exact divinity, and that the English judgments are for the most part enslaved
to great men: and of our Di^mes you shall find few, that have handled this
matter without admitting confusion and collateral combination of both Powers.

In another place thus, this troubles us that so worthy a man, he understands
Vedelius, should esteem of the Reformed-Church-doctrine, according to the
testimony of some learned men, etc. Amesius, Martyr Sybrand, this honor he
gives only to Confessions, Catechismes, and forms of concord, and yet he
slights the Decrees of the Synod of Dort, as humane, and extorted from
Ministers against their wills, so that like a Snake feeding on naughty grass,
he hisses at every thing as he pleases; therefore the ghost of our famous
Vedelius, against which Apollonius pisseth, has no great cause to be angry,
since he is not ashamed to spit in the face of all learned men.

There is nothing that both sacred and profane Laws do more detest and punish
then the contempt of Princes, and superior powers; of which this Night-bird was
not ignorant; who presently in the preface, desires the Magistrates good will:
for he says that he carries a free spirit in the maintenance of their
Magistracy, and as it were calling God to patronize his dissimulation, that
with most fervent prayers he honors God for them, when as notwithstanding with
full cheeks he blows out contumelious speeches against Princes and Magistrates:
and as if he were another Rhadamanthus he assumes power to appoint what limits
Magistrates must cont^ine themse^ves within, beyond which if they offer to go,
he calls them Symoniacks, and wicked; and like irreligious Princes: that they
break in upon the rights and prerogatives of the Church, with tyrannical lust
and violence; for which prerogatives, he says, Christ did shed his Hood, and
such Princes he calls civil Popes. But whilst he divides this booty and power,
he acts the Lion in Aesop, who dividing the Veneson with the Ass, and the Fox
he killed the Ass, and affrighted the Fox; and so took all the booty to
himself. Apollonius here plays the Jugler, and with counterfeit superstition
deterres the Magistrate from touching any of the modern Ecclesiastic affairs.

For he teaches that the power of the Magistrate is not in, but about the
Church; and that the internalls of the Church does not belong to him, either
formally, or eminently, or totally, or partially, that his power extends only
to the externalls, and not all these neither, but only the externals
externally, but not the externals internally: for in these distinctions he is
very exact and seemingly careful of the conscience of Magistrates. He warnes
them that they believe not the judgments of the learned, nor the authority of
man, in exercising of their power, earnestly urging his decisions as consonant
to Scripture: among which these are some.

The power of the Civil sword is without the Sphere of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. The Godly Magistrate is not the prime member of the Church, but
of the baser sort, yea, of the basest. That it is dangerous to call the
Magistrate the Keeper, or nursing Father of the Church; because it is
impossible for him to nourish the Church with true milk, which is only proper
for Churchmen; That the Magistrate is only a separable accident of the
Church, which may be present or absent without destroying the subject; That the
end and intent of the Magistrate was not the saving of souls, but properly and
only the temporal things of this life; That the office of the Magistrate was
only of earthly, not of heavenly things; That the Magistrate, as a Magistrate,
cannot execute any spiritual or Ecclesiastical work; because it is
impossible that he should be elevated above his own nature which is
altogether worldly, carnal, and corporal. Or if he seem to do any
Ecclesiastical business, that this he does only objectively not formally;
imperatively, not elicitively; in respect of worldly circumstances, and not in
regard of the substantials of the Church; And that they who will attribute more
than this to the Magistrate, incline to Pelagianisme.

Lastly, he speaks every where of the Magistrate, as of a natural and carnal
man, of whom Paul says, That he is not subject to the Law of God; nor can be;
nor does he comprehend the things of Gods Spirit. He cites often Gersom
Bucerus, who was to cunning in these trifles, and withal insenced King James
against him, so that he was like to suffer had not the States protected him.
But this our Apollonius unwilling to yield to any man (so bold is ignorance)
he leapes over all the terms of Bucerus, and railes against his own
Magistrates and States, subscribing to no man's opinion except Calderwoods; the
sum of which he elsewhere cites out of him.

Kingly authority (says he) is only measured according to the Churches
benefit; yet he does warn Churchmen that they should not trust too much
Magistrates: for he compares them to a crafty servant, but Churchmen to a
generous Horse; openly warning his fellow-Ministers, that they suffer not the
Magistrates to ride them any more, and that their main aim was to bring them
under subjection: But if once they get the Mastery, that Ministers shall never
be able hereafter to shake off the civil yoke. So then, Apollonius thinks it
a main piece of sanctity, to sow perpetual strife, and make a breach between
the Magistrates and Ministers, as if it were a holy duty in Ministers to demand
and take from godly Magistrates all the benefits they can; but still to beware
of their deceipts and treacheries: the Reader cannot be so stupid, as not to
smell out the mockes and reproaches of Apolonius through his whole work,
against religious Magistrates; some of which I will now set down, that every
one may see, what kind of vermin this Apolonius is, who like a Wasp, or Hornet,
goes about to sting not only our famous Vedelius, but Macovius also, Rivet,
his own Masters; the best Divines of Christendom; the National Synod; and the
High and Mighty States themselves; yet notwithstanding this giddy head, who
pretends a maiden-like modesty, in the end of his Preface thus writes:

I seriously affirm, that concerning this cause, I have almost brought nothing
of my own; but have robbed the Lucubrations and Coffers of other men; and have
collected whatsoevr Divines have scatteringly said of this subject. Thus like
Proteus, sometimes he looks like a Lion, and sometimes like a Buck: He is a
shrill Trumpeter of his own virtues every where; but chiefly in this place,
where he subjects himself to all learned men, when as indeed he exalts
himself above them all: So that he slights almost every man in comparison of
himself: how ever I will not envy this Locust the honor which he affects,
to wit, that he has skipped over many men's Gardens, and gnawed their Flowers;
this I Will say freely, that he has taken more pains to turn over negligently
humane writings, then diligently the holy Scriptures; as I will hereafter make
it appear. I confess indeed, that he like a Hog, or like Aesops Cock, has
laboriously turned over the Dung-hills of Popes, Schoolmen, Jesuits,
Apostates and Sophisters; perhaps that he might find out the Jewel of Truth,
which if he thought in-glorious to find, in the neighboring and pure Meadows
of holy Scriptures, as being less spiritual (which I suspect) he deserves
to be defiled with their stench and filth, and to be laughed at by all learned
and godly men. It is enough for me, that I have made Apolonius his dissembled
modesty and shamefastness appear; but withal, his Dogs face, and impudency
toward all. The man's mad pride might be tolerated, if he could any where else
show us his skill in Grammar or Logic: but he who has either a mind, or
leisure (which I confess are wanting to me) to turn over all his patched
Pieces, shall find that he harps an hundred times on one string, like a
ridiculous Fiddler, so that one would nauseat to hear him: He is so little
versed in Latin phrases, that he deserves to be whipped by Priscian for his many
solicismes: for he uses frequently the word coerciva for coercitiva: A great
deal he has of such barbarous stuff, which the English cannot bear, etc.

Now for his Logic, although with a wide mouth he promise great matters, yet
he plays but a Canvasse Merchant, imitating every where that Parasite in
Plautus: I sell ridiculous sayings, go too, come and cheapen cavils,
flatteries, and fantastical perjuries. I purpose not to run through all his
labyrinths, he cannot follow the guide of his own thread, I will briefly
contract his foolish circumlocutions thus: The Church of Christ is holy and
spiritual, Therefore all her affairs, and chiefly her government, is holy and
spiritual. From hence he gathers this consequence, Ergo, the government and
business of the Church (which he calls Churchdressing) belongs only to the
Saints, or spiritual men, that is, Ministers, because they by special
privilege of their vocation, are sanctified and consecrated. From hence also
he draws out another confectary, thus: Ergo, These Church-affaires belong not
to Godly civil Magistrates; because they were not sanctified to this work, but
are altogether unfit, as being but mean members of the Church, worldly, whose
power is dispoticall, or Lordly, Architectonicall and corporal, earthly, not
heavenly, which can produce no spiritual effect, or touch the soul. These are
the Coleworts which he so often in his madness sets down to us. I will handle
each of them in order: But first, let the Reader be forewarned, that this
whole Apolonian Fable for Church Government, which he begins, is so like the
Popish Scheme, that almost they differ in nothing, save one^y that with the
Pope this is an old Comedy, and a thing in possession; but among the Apolonian
Walachrans, there are new Actors, and a thing only in expectation. Surely,
such is the affinity every where of their principles, assertions, and
argumentations, that whosoever will but compare the Fictions of old Papists
with these new ones, will easily find, that the same Romish Church was mother
to them both. I confess Apolonius is not so unskilful of cheating or
juggling, but for fashions sake he hisses at Popery, and by this trick he
cleares himself from Arminianisme, but brands our famous Vedelius with it.
This is the old trick of Heretics, and of all Novalists, and as it were
whorish paintings, wherewith they paint their deformed scabs. There is nothing
wherein the Papists have more deluded the world, then under the name of
Church-holinesse and spirituality; by which superstitious pretenses the Pope
has gotten to himself the government of the whole world: which web this our
Apolonius has begun again, and has made up the whole wooffe of the same
threads; so that almost in every page he casts abroad the lofty words of
Church-holinesse and modern-spirituality. Ampullas
Therefore I hope my pains will not be lost, if briefly I delineate the
acceptions of these words, lest the yoyson which lurketh under these gilded
Mushromes, Beletis.
may strangle the unwary.

CHAP. II. Of the diverse acceptions of the CHURCH.
THe word Church in Scripture sometime signifies every Congregation, or
Assembly of men gathered together, whatsoever be the manner or end of their
meeting. So that seditious concourse of men at Ephesus against Paul, is by Luke
called the Church; Ecceesia, Acts 29.38, 38.
twice in that place is this word used for that tumultuous Assembly of
seditious men. But more specially it notes the Assemblies of men gathered
together for the public worship of God, whether this Assembly be great or
small. So Paul honors private meetings at home, by the name of Ecclesia, or
Church, as those private meetings in the houses of Stephana, and others, for
private devotion. Now the form of these Churches does not properly consist in
the mystical and internal union with Christ; but only in the external union
which these men have among themselves, when they meet to worship Christ, and to
make profession of their faith: the chief heads of which consist in the
preaching, reading, expounding, or any ways meditating in the word of God, in
administering the Sacraments upon occasion; lastly, in exercising the works of
charity among themselves, as Christ's Disciples did, living according to the
prescript of Christ's laws. But most specially the word Church signifies the
Congregation of all that have been, or shall be saved from the beginning to the
end of the world; which is the heavenly Jerusalem that John saw, Rev. 21. to
which appertain many Jews, and innumerable Gentiles.

Concerning this Church, so did many Fathers write, Austine thus: De Catechud.
de C. 20.
The Citizens of heavenly Jerusalem are all sanctified men, who have been, are,
or shall be. The form of this Church consists in a true union with Christ by
Faith, being spiritual, mystical and indissoluble; which the holy Ghost
expresses diverse ways, chiefly when he calls her Christ's mystical body, of
which he is the head, and every true beelever a member, and as it were flesh of
his flesh. Oftentimes also this Church is called, The Spouse and Wife of
Christ, to signify the true and inseparable conjunction, and most fervent love
of Christ to those that truly believe.

To this last Church properly belong these famous Encomiums, that she is One,
Catholic, Holy, Spiritual, Clean without spot or wrinkle, that she is not of
this world, but heavenly, that Christ for her has shed his blood, and prayed
for her; not for the world; that she cannot err, or fall away, because the
gates of hell cannot prevail against her. The ancient Papists and Jesuits,
that they might advance the dignity of the Romish Church among ignorant people,
Bell. de Eccles. Milit. l. 3. c. 21.
use to confound these acceptions, acknowledging no other Church but the
external and visible; the form of which they place in outward profession and
government, but specially in this, That they are united in government under one
head, the Bishop of Rome, which indeed is a mere fiction or Chymera, long
since exploded by Divines: Nor is it to no purpose that the Popes creatures
have found out this device; fet by this trick they draw men superstitiously to
admire and honor their Church, in that they cry out every where, that she is
the Body, Spouse, House, and Kingdom of Christ, which cannot fail, or err;
out of which there is no salvation, and infinite such passages, which are true
only of the Invisible, Catholic, and true Church, but not of any external
and visible: nay, not of all the visible together, if it were possible they
could be all united.

For outward and visible Churches do no less many times differ from the true
and invisible, then a Swines-stigh does from a pure Flock of Sheep, or a
chaste Spouse from an impudent Whore. For all times have taught us, that the
external Congregations of men worshipping God under the old and new Testament,
are subject to many vices and errors; which was not only manifest in the
Churches of Corinth, Rev. 2. c. 2.
and of the Galatians in the Apostles time, but also in those Asiatick Churches
to whom John in the Revelation writes, who were not then only ballasted with
vice and errors, but also shortly after fell away totally. The small
Congregation of the Apostles gathered by Christ, was not so pure, but had one
amongst them who at last was known to be a Devil, the child of perdition.

Truly, if external and visible Churches either each one, or all, be the Body
and Spouse of Christ, will not they bestow on Christ a very impure and deformed
Spouse, which is burdened with so many rotten members of the Devil. Bellarmine
that he might avoid this absurdity, feignes that those wicked men are not
properly true members of the Church, but are to be esteemed as nails and
hairs. (I wonder he does not tell us of lice also running among the hairs of
Christ's Spouse.) Indeed the Jesuits Fables concerning the Church, and Spouse of
Christ, are improper, when they give her such an ugly head of hair, entangled
and made up of wicked men, and sons of hell; much like the disease among the
Polonians, called Plica. For if the wicked be the hairs of Christ's Spouse, it
must follow that the hairs of Christ's Spouse must be burned with everlasting
fire, which indeed were monstrous and abominable, that Christ's Spouse should
have a head like Mednsa's, whose hairs were infolded with snakes: for it is
plain, that in the visible Church oftentimes are found, not only Laymen, but
Clergymen also, that are the very generation of Vipers; if all these are in
the Church of Christ, as hairs, the Spouse of Christ should not be pure and
fair, but deformed and laden with an ugly head of hair, consisting of the
sons of Satan.

Other Jesuits say, that these wicked men are in the Church, Body and Spouse of
Christ, not as members and parts, but as corrupted humors, and imposthumes;
but the same absurdity will arise: For this is known, that visible Churches
for the most part, do consist of hypocrites, and wicked men; but how absurd is
this that Christ should have such a Body, such a Spouse, which continually has
putrid soars running; which has every day filthy imposthumes growing; and
sordid ulcers still increasing, which will hardly be healed up into a skarre.

I confess that sometimes the title of Holiness, and other notable Elogies
are given to the external congregations of Christians; but this is spoken
either improperly, or because of Gods worship exercised among them; or else out
of the judgment of charity, because of the elect and true believers found in
these Congregations. So we call that a ^eap of corn where some good corn is
found, though the most part be chafe, tares and filth: But he who will brag
that there is as much purity and worth in such a heap, as in a heap of clean
corn purged from chafe and filth, is an Impostor, and deserves to be laughed
at.

This is the first faliacy which the Jesuits admit in the word Church, that
they might draw men into a superstitious reverence of the visible Romish Church.

This new Popish Walachran, with his fellows, harp altogether upon the same
string, that they may induce men to admire their visible Church: he
distinguishes indeed exactly between the Church visible and invisible; and he
shows in many pages, that those notable privileges do properly and only
belong to the invisible, not to the visible Church. But this he seems to have
done cunningly, to deceive the English, as if he dissented from the Papists,
whereas he is indeed every where the Popes Champion, fighting with his weapons:
for he transferres all the praises and privileges of the invisible Church upon
the visible: for through all his hodge-podge against Vedelius, he speaks of the
right government in the visible Church, of the power and offices of the visible
Church; as public preaching and praying, administration of the Sacraments,
calling to the Ministry, censure and public excommunication, the giving of
laws, and finally, the whole furniture of the outward Ministry, which every
one knows to be the external and visible business of the visible Church; yet
he every where commends this Church, calling her the House, Body, and Spouse of
Christ, spiritual and holy, whom Christ bought with his own blood. Also, when
he speaks of the outward Ministry of his Church, he says, That she being the
Spouse and body of Christ, has certain privileges and sacred rights. And
sometimes he is so lavish in extolling the outward affairs of the visible
Church, that he affirms Christ to have shed his blood for those privileges
and rights; just like a Jugler he goes about to persuade the Magistrate, that
when he offers to meddle with the business of this Apolonian and visible
Church, without her order, that he commits sacrilege against the true and
invisible Church, which is the Body and Spouse of Christ. So that with no less
immodesty does he keep them off from all outward Church-businesse, then if
they were Bawds or Pandors, offering to deflower Christ's holy Spouse, if they
go beyond the bounds prescribed by him: So that not only does he contradict
himself, but by a Popish trick endeavors to set forth his Ecclesiastic
jurisdiction, persuading men, that his Church which is indeed vislble, is to
be accounted for the Spouse of Christ, and therefore the Ministry of this
Spouse to belong only to him and his Clergy, as if they were the brides
Spiritual Paranymphs.

The other error of the ancient Papists, is, that the honor and holiness of
the visible Church, which is so largely extended, is contracted by them to
government and Governors of the Church, for those they call properly the
representative Church, to wit, their Bishops and Clergy: So that if you ask
them, who are Churchmen? And, which is properly the Catholic Church, Where
this spiritual dignity shines? They will not understand the whole body of the
Church, and all that are called holy, 1 Cor. 1.1, ando.
who adore the name of Christ, as the Apostles speak: For from this honor they
debar all Christians, as Secular and Laymen: only for their Clergy, as if
they were consecrated by the Character of holy vocation, they reserve the
honor of Ecclesiastical spirituality: he then that will seek for the
Catholic Church among Papists, shall find her no where but in the Clergy, that
is, in their Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, and lastly in the Pope;
to whose government and command, if any refuse to be subject, though he be
never so strict an observer of Christ's commands, yet shall not be reputed a
member of Christ's Church: For Bellarmine in the place above cited, referres the
Church government under Pastors and the Pope, to the essence or formality of
the Church.

Our Walachran Stilt-walker, with his fellows, are not much unlike the
Jefuites, he is st^^erying out, that he strives for the privileges and holy
rights of Christ's Spouse the Church, the form of which he places in outward
profession: But because he perceived this dignity to be common to the whole
body of the Church, of which the godly Magistrate is a part, lest the mystical
privilege of Church-holinesse be communicated to worldly, carnal, and secular
Magistrates, whose charge is of earthly, not of heavenly things: he does
accuratly distinguish after the Popish manner, between the Church Represented,
which he makes the body of the Church abstracted from the Governors thereof,
and Representative, which he makes the Governors separate from the other
members of the Church. For whilst he gives to each of them incommunicable
properties, he does fully distinguish them: For these, because of their
ministration and dignity of ruling, he makes the Eyes, Ears, Hanas; and if he
durst, with Papists he would call them, Heads, Princes, and Kings of the
Church, whose office is to go before, to oversee, to rule with command
domineeringly, to compel, and with authority to punish; and no ways to be
subject, to be ruled, to beled, yea, not to be subordinate to civil
Magistrates in Church matters, but immediately to depend on Christ, and to be
inseparably subject to him.

As for the body of the Church Represented, like sheep and subjects, even
Magistrates themselves, as being the basest members (which he is still
upbraiding them with) must modestly submit themselves, and be content to be
ruled and taught, and to acknowledge the spiritual power of the Church, to
which they and theirs must be subject. So that in truth the Ministers are the
Heads and Monarchs in Church-affaires; as for Magistrates, and all other
Church Members, they are only the tail and mere vassals. Every man may see
how much different this is from the government of the Apostolical Church, if
they will but attentively read the Acts of the Apostles. For if ever the
Church Government were glorious, and holy, it was under the Apostles: for they
were then the most holy Governors, who knew very well the rights and
privileges of their government: but yet they so ruled the Church, that the
whole Assembly was of one heart, and one soul. Acts 4.32.
And they were so far from contending about the privilege of jurisdiction,
or from debarring the body of the Church, from meddling with Ministerial
businesses, that they permitted every man to exercise them, if so be he were
fitted, without the solemnity of outward calling, and gave way to the whole
Body of the Church, that is, to all Christians, to debate about, and determine
the most sacred affairs of the Church: Nor was it held absurd (though this
Nightbird think it so now) by these great lights of the Church; for the same to
call and to be called; to send and to be sent; to teach and to be taught; to be
above and to be under, to rule and to be ruled; to help and to be helped: So
that this Stilt-walker has not borrowed from the Apostles that exact right of
Church Government, and the prerogative of power in the Church Representing,
upon the Church Represented, (that is, upon the body and members of the
Church,) but from the Pope, the Roman Antichrist. For he by a fatal Energie
and efficacy of deceiving, did first season Christians with an immoderate
superstition of the visible Church, and outward worship; so that they
attributed more to her then was fit: the care of which afterward he transferred
upon the Clergy alone, as being consecrated for this work, and withal, deduced
all that reverence to Churchmen, and the governors thereof, as though they
alone had right in Church-affaires, from which other Christians, as being
Laymen, were debarred: but afterward by degrees he transferred to himself the
whole dignity of the Clergy, and so at length became the Epitome of all
Ecclesiastic dignity and sanctity, so that now for many years he is reputed
and called, the head of the Church; yea, the very Church representative, by
which he plainly shows himself to be Antichrist.

That Roman Basilisk did not suddenly, but by degrees peep out of small
mysteries: on whose eggs, because of late this Treverian does sit, if pious
Princes do not in time foresee the cunning, there will in stead of one, arise
many Antichrists.

For if the sanctity of the Catholic Church be in the visible Church; if the
sanctity of the visible Church be in the representing Church, that is, in the
governors, suppose in the Consistory, or Classis, etc. if the dignity of the
Consistory be restrained to Ministers as the eyes, and worthy of double honor
in the Church (for the Elders are for the most part, but the Ministers
foot-stools) if the dignity of many Pastors reside at last in some one chief
Pastor, to whose dreams all other Pastors must subscribe, either out of
ignorance or negligence (as you may see in the Walachran Classis) who does not
now see that all the holiness and jurisdiction of the whole Church, flows
into this chief Pastor, as into a sink-hole? To whose impudency and madness
if no Minister dare or will make resistance; if no Magistrate must under pain
of sacrilege; shall not he in the end be Pope of that Island, or Province?

The third error borrowed from the Papists, is this, they use to obtrude to us
their visible Roman Church in stead of the Catholic, and for the whole Church,
that part only which governs; and in lieu of the Church, they recommend to us
the government thereof. Lastly, under the title of government and the
Apostolical Church, they thrust upon us all the fictions and dreams of their
brainsick Popes: so that among them, the Church Government is no more like
that of the Apostles, then a vizard is like a true face, or a picture like a
man. Though this Stilt-walker be not as yet so impudent, yet because he is
continually brawling with the Magistrates, as with worldly men, about the right
of making laws in Church matters; he does plainly show, that he is of the
Popes mind in imposing upon Christians this yoke, and upon Magistrates
themselves, under pretense of Ecclesiastic dignity: so that whatsoever the
Apolonian College in Walachran shall judge to be holy, and to be fit or
necessary for the Church, Christ's Spouse, must be received with obedience,
under pain of excommunication. Which licentiousness of Ecclesiastic
Conventicles, if the godly Magistrate cannot suppress, without sacrilege (as
he still cries out.) who sees not, but that Centaures, and other ugly M^nsters
of Antichrist, will quickly break out of these Dedalaean labyrinths? Such
births have come to light at Middleburgh already, as I have showed in the
Preface.

Hence it is apparent, that Apolonius plays the Pope in many respects, under
the name of the Church. For in stead of the Catholic Church, the true Spouse
of Christ, holy and invisible, he obtrudes the visible Church, defiled with
many spots: then promising that he will maintain the digni^y of the whole
Church, he fails upon the commendation of the Government, and Governors
thereof, he slights and contemnes the body of the Church. Lastly, under
pretense of a holy and Apostolical government he endeavors to obtrude a
human, corrupt, and Popelike tyrannical Discipline, as I will show hereafter.
Which Jesuiticall canvasse wares of Apolonius, I would have the Reader
diligently to mark: For he deludes us no otherwise then if an Impostor should
brag that he brings us Gold, which proves but Tin; and this Tin, but
Quicksilver, and at last mere dross, or poysonable Arsenick.

CHAP. III. Of the diverse acceptions of Sanctity.
AS the word Church, so the word Sanctity is ambiguous. There is no man so
irreligious, but highly accounts of the name of Sanctity. Hence, for a person
or thing to be Sacred, or Holy, is among fearful superstitious people, of no
small weight; so that not only Papists of old, but also this new upstart, as
often as he speaks of the Church, and Churchmen, he still vapors, having the
name of Sacred and Holy in his mouth; under this veil he deceives ignorant
people, whilst he aims at worldly authority, which I will briefly make appear.

The word Sanctity signifies properly the inward and perfect integrity of a
thing, such as is in God eminently; hence in Isaiah he is called, Holy, Holy,
Holy: to whose nature, because the blessed Angels and Souls in heaven come
nearest, they also are called Holy. And although in regard of corporiety,
Christ's humane nature is distant from the divine; yet in respect of the
incomprehensible privilege of the Hypostaticall union, by which it is
personally united to the divine Nature, it is not to be doubted, but that the
Majesty and dignity of Christ's glorious body, sitting at Gods right hand in
heaven, is ineffable; so that this body may be justly called Most holy: Such
are the bodies of Henoch and Elijah, but in a lower degree: inferior to which
is the heaven, and place of the blessed; all which notwithstanding are truly,
inherently, and after their manner, perfectly holy, and free from all pollution.

This word is also transferred to many other things, chiefly to the worship of
God; because this tends to the glory of the most holy God, and is the mean by
which men are brought into the possession of that true and perfect holiness
which we shall enjoy in heaven: hence the worship of God, and the manner or
means of this worship; lastly, the persons conversant about this worship, are
called, and are so, in some measure, Holy. But we must be cautious in using
this distinction: for the confusion of these things will easily beget pride in
the presumptuous, and Idolatry in the superstitious.

There is nothing more sure, then that this deserves best the name of
Holiness, which has in it self a perpetual and inherent perfection and
ordination for promoting Gods worship and man's salvation: For God is so holy,
that whatsoever has him for its Author, and is ordained to his holiness, is
to be accounted holy.

Such are the virtues which by the holy Ghost are infused into us; as wisdom,
hope, love, and chiefly true justifying faith, which therefore in Scripture is
called Most holy; because not only is it holy, and most divine in it self;
but whosoever also is endowed with it, though he had been never so profane
before, and most unworthy in the eyes of the world, yet with God he is holy and
elect, because he is inseparably united to Christ; but mystically by faith: For
though Faith does not presently change a man, as to be endowed with inherent
sanctity, yet he is brought to have a firm hope of attaining perfect holiness
in heaven, the beginning of which he obtaines here by sanctification, after the
infusion of true faith; so that the name of Sanctity does very well belong to
justifying Faith, as having God alone, who is most holy, for its Author; and
wherever it is infused, it causes an inseparable holiness in that man:
which is the reason that every where in Scripture true beleelvers are called
the holy Elect.

To these virtues succeeds Gods Word, which having the most holy God for its
Author, is in it self perfectly holy. For how can any profane thing be found
in that word, which is known to be uttered and written by the instinct and
motion of the holy Ghost: So that our most holy Faith is begot of this, as of
an immortal seed; but here is the difference, that justifying faith, in
whomsoever it is, makes that man holy; but so does not Gods word all them to
whom it is given, because God commits the knowledge and preaching thereof to
most profane and wicked men; so that the whole worship of God is not more holy
then true Faith and God word: For it is wholly appointed to beget faith, and
the Word is the original and only measure of the whole worship.

Outward works and means of worship for begetting of faith in men, have a
lesser degree of sancti^y: these are conversant about things, persons time and
place, and other circumstances, neither do they consist in a perpetual, or any
inherent Perfection, or internal dignity, but only in Gods setting them a
part and ordination for his worship, according to time and place.

The Bush out of which God first spoke to Moses, is called holy ground, Exodus
3.5.
not as if the nature of that Bush was changed or that there was any inherent
or permanent perfection in it; but consisted only in this outward manner;
whereby God had manifested his presence there; which afterward ceasing, no
doubt but the whole sanctity of that place ceased also: This continued longer
in mount Sinai where Moses was so many days in Gods presence, but longest of
all in the Tabernacle, and in the Temple of Solomon, which he had in a manner
for ever set apart for his worship: for there was the Ark, the Mercy-seat, the
Cherubims, the Breast Plate, Vrim and Thummim; where God gave his Oracles, and
manifested his presence by signs so evident, that he would not suffer the
order prescribed by him, to be perverted, as we see in Miriam, Corah, Dathan,
and Abiron: in the Philistines when they received the Arc: in Vzza, whom he
struck with death for touching the Ark: lastly, in Vzzia, who^ he struck with
leprosy, when he offered to sacrifice. How-ever, this sanctity of the whole
Temple, was extraordinary, and of long continuance, yet it did not change the
nature of those things: for they were made up of gold, silver, precious stones,
and other natural things; and doubtless they were at last fuel for the
fire, and booties for wicked Plunderers: For Josephus writes, that when Titus
triumphed, amongst other spoils was carried the Law of the two Tables; which
with such veneration was hid in the Ark within the Holy of Holies: So then,
this sanctity was neither inherent, nor permanent, but relative only, and
temporal: which I cannot better express, then by comparing it to a house with
its Utensils, where a Prince sojournes for a while: So long as he remains
there, because of his Majesty, and pomp, there is nothing in the house which
derives not thence some dignity and splendour, which notwithstanding is neither
in the house nor utensils properly: For presently it cease when the Majesty
of the Prince is removed from thence.

The same must be affirmed of personal sanctity, when God admits some to the
charge of his worship: For if there be no inherent and perpetual dignity in
the place and things appointed for divine worship, how much less can this be
in the persons which are ordained for handling of the things belonging to his
worship? This may be seen in the Levits, whose whole stock God had chosen and
consecrated out of all the Jews for his worship; who therefore were called,
and were so indeed a Holy people; yet from thence there was not in them any
inherent perfection or integrity, as may be seen in Eli his sons, who were
wicked persons; and even Samuels sons for their vices were removed from
succession in the Priesthood: So that from hence it is evident, that there is
no inherent and perpetual holiness in persons appointed for divine worship,
but only of relation and ordination; so much as was fit for executing of their
function.

I grant that sometimes God is so bountiful, that he has with the holy
Office, conferred also gifts and virtues; as when he bestowed upon Saul with
the Crown, the good spirit of government, especially when he furnished the
Prophets and Apostles with the inherent gifts of Faith, Piety, and Miracles:
But this is sure, that God never so tied himself to man, as always to
sanctisie those inwardly whom he calls to a holy function outwardly: for he
made use of an Ass to teach, of Balaam the Sorcerer to prophecy, and of Judas
the Traitor to the honor of Apostleship.

The like reason is of times: for as God has consecrated things, persons and
places, so he has done days, such as the Sabbath, and other Festi^all days
among the Jews, of which none was in it self more holy, but by Gods ordination
only more eminent, as it was appointed for holy worship; which condition
ceasing, the day became vulgar.

I have been somewhat large in explaining this external and relative sanctity,
that the unwary may not be deceived by them, who speak so proudly of this
privilege of Sanctity, that wheresoever this word Sanctity is used, they will
have us believe, that there is meant a perpetual and permanent firmness of
dignity and integrity.

Experience has taught us this among the Papists: for Bellarmine plainly
confesses, that the worship of Images, dead men, and relics in the Church of
Rome, proceeded from the persuasion of holiness in those men, and of Gods
assistance; which because they had whilst they lived, therefore they think the
same to be perpetually fastened to their Karkasses, graves, relics, and very
Images, so that they suppose they are bound to honor them, or God being in
that place. I will not say how often these deceivers abuse and delude
superstitious people, by presenting oftentimes the relics of Knaves, Thieves,
Dogs, and Apes in stead of Saints; only this I Will say, that they are deceived
in subjecting Gods presence to their pleasures, whilst they feign his power to
be tied to these things and persons in all places, in which it has been
sometimes: for so in all things and persons there must be an inherent and
perpetual virtue and perfection, as often as he consecrates them once for some
holy use. The falsehood of which appears in the overthrow of the Jewish Temple,
and spoil of all its utensils: for who but a superstitious man will now search
for holiness in that place where God first spoke with Moses? or in the top of
Mount Sinai? where he proclaimed the Law with such a miracle; Who will seek for
holiness in the rubbish of the Jewish Temple, which Christ so cursed, that
when to his dishonor Julian endeavored to re-build it, he was forced to desist
from his work, Mat. 24.
because of flames breaking out of the earth, and the element it self making
resistance, if the Arc or Propitiatory, if the Cherubim and Tables of the
Law, if the holy Breast Plate, and what else was venerable in the Jews
Sanctuary, were now present, there were no more holiness to be placed in them,
then in any other ordinary utensils, which we know have yielded to the fire or
the Plunderer.

I confess this new Popish Walachran is not so lavish in extolling of
Sanctity, as to give worship and veneration to dead men and relics; but yet
he agrees with the Jesuits his Schoolmasters, in this, that in external
things and persons belonging to divine worship, he still places such a high
mystery of dignity and perfection, that not only does he extol the sanctity of
his Church Discipline; above all worldly business, but also he does so
wonderfully dignifie Ministers, by reason of their vocation, that he openly
cries out, that worldly Magistrates, though they be the members of Christ's
Church, cannot attain to that mystical dignity, though never so willing.

These are the figments of Delphick Impostors, and such as are drunk with
Idolatry, to bear men always in hand, that the external matters of Religion,
are always secret, and mysteries not to be touched, that so they might draw
ignorant people to superstition, and an admiration of them; this is the trick
of old Papists, to persuade men to believe wonders of the holiness of their
Church Discipline, that they might place a mystical sanctity there, where none
is. For although in multiplicity of Ceremonies, which Clergymen affect in
Church-businesses, there wants not toil and labor, yet there is no Layman so
foolish, but he can easily imitate that confused Mass of Histrionicall trifles
which they use. The Papists have borrowed a great deal of their
Church-dressings and sanctities, from the ceremonial Leviticall Priesthood;
and the Walachran Night-bird borrowes from both: For although it be clear by
Christ's own prediction, John 4.
and the Epistle to the Hebrews throughout, that the whole outward pomp of
that worship, with its costlinesse and distinction of Functions, have fallen
with the fall of the Temple; notwithstanding by the Priesthood he measures
every where the right of the modern Ministry, and upon the prerogatives of the
old Levites, he builds his privileges of sanctity and pre-eminence over all
civil Magistrates. And although we know that in this he childishly does
Judaise, (which all Orthodox men reject) yet it will be no difficulty even out
of the prescript of Jewish worship, to convince these turbulent Walachrians of
novelty and boldness.

For if Christians must measure their worship, according to the institution and
ceremonies of the Jews, it is needful that either they imitate them in all
things, or else that some Oedipus resolve us this Riddle, hitherto not
resolved, to wit, what is Moral and Imitable in those ceremonies, what not?
The Bishop of Rome by right and wrong, by the sole privilege, in that he is
Antichrist, takes upon him the liberty to make use of such Jewish and Gentile
ceremonies, as may be most conducing for the pomp and coveniencie of his
holiness. Amongst the Divines of the reformed Church, some have more painfully
labored then others, in rolling this stone of Sisiphus, the Walachrian
Stilt-walker, swelling with ignorant pride more then others, defines and
appoints many things, as it were from Apollos Tripos, among other matters, that
the Magistrates of Middleburgh do shamefully Judaise, for suffering the
Musical consent of Organs in the Church, to keep people in tune, whilst they
sing Psalms, and diverse other things, of which more hereafter.

On the other side, that he may procure reverence to his Churchworship, and
the prerogative of mystical sanctity to himself and fellows, against and
over all godly Princes and Magistrates, he thinks this to be (perpetual and
moral,) that there be a precise separation and distinction of Ecclesiastic
Offices, and of Churchmen and Magistrates; so that these upon no terms must
meddle with any spiritual business, which may any way concern the salvation of
souls; but the others are to take upon them the whole charge and care of
spirituality, and saving of souls; so that if the Magistrate offer to meddle
with these businesses, he offends no less then of old he that would sacrifice
being no Levit, as Vzziah did; whose example is always in his mouth, and whose
punishment he threatens against the Magistrate, if they meddle with
Church Discipline, or hinder Ministers from executing all things freely with
Apolonian zeal. His frivolous heap of reasons, by which he would persuade us
to this, we will refute as we proceed.

But I will now refell his prime triumphing reason, in which he every where
glories, that under the Leviticall worship of the old Law, there was so exact a
separation of these Offices and Functions, whence he concludes; If it was thus
under the carnal Jews, much more should this difference now be observed among
the spiritual people of Christ. But that I know how familiar it is with this
Pratler, to presuppose every where falsehoods, I would answer that the
consequence of his Argument is childish. For this reason is no better, then if
he should argue thus: The carnal Jews had but one Temple, one City, to which
they must repair every year to worship God, where they had the Holy of
Holies, out of which God delivered his undoubted Oracles; therefore much more
now does this belong to the Christians, a more spiritual people.

Again, among the carnal Jews none did sacrifice in the Temple, but the
posterity of Levi, to whom this sanctity was peculiar, that all were born to
this privilege, which none but of this Tribe could enjoy: Therefore now
amongst spiritual Christians, it is much more convenient, that the
Ministerial sanctity be not common to all, but be restrained likewise to one
stock.

Which affertion not only will ingenious men deny, but even Papists also, and
Apolonius himself. For among them it were too bad to tie the Ecclesiastical
dignity to one Stock; because Clergy-sanctity at Rome, for the most part, is
the sanctuary of Beggary and Knavery; so that it skills not whence, or out of
what Stock one is born, so he be skillful in the Art of Symonie: for then he
shall easily attain this holiness. And if all worldly hopes fail him, his
Progeny will not hinder him: For Desperation makes a Monk, as you may see in
Peter's Chair, which is the top of highest Helinesse: Which Chair, though it
be so holy and powerful, that the most wicked Pope in the world by it is
always Made or found holy, as they speak; yet it was never so Leviticall, but
that it has admitted Monsters of all Nations, Stocks, and Sexes, as if it
were a common Stews; so they know the Art of wooing that Lais. Platina tells
us, that French, Dutch, Asiatickes, Greeks, Africans, and not only Men, but a
Woman also, Joan, a whore, about the year 998, sat in this Chair.

Now if this fiction of Apolonius were true, all those Monsters of the Sea of
Rome had been quite frustrated, to wit, if the government of Christ's Church
should be derived from the Leviticall, and tied to one Stock. So that this
Stilt-walker is neither favorable to himself, nor fellows, if he will have
all his Ministerial Rites according to the Levitical manner. Whereas not only
he himself has crept out of a Lay consular Family, into the sacred
Ecclesiastic Chair: but some also have leapt out of the Bakers, Weavers, and
Shoo-makers shops, into the Pulpit; and some of Mechanical Tylers, or
Brick-layers, have become grave Ministers.

I confess that this is no other thing then what Christ did show in the
Aposties, when he chose Disciples out of Fishermen, Publicans, Tentmakers, and
all sort of Mechanickes; only this I say, that if the Modern Church Discipline
be ordered according to the Leviticall, as Apolonius prates, then Christ showed
a bad example and the Walach ian Novalist has preposterously followed, in
excluding other stocks, does not tie the hope of Ministerial Church-sanctity
to one stock alone.

But now I will deal bountifully with the Walachrans, and will permit them to
defend their cause with the old peculiar Levitical Rites. But by what Art can
they evince that to be of special right and sanctity in the Christian Church,
which among the Levites was not of peculiar, but of common right with the
Magistrates and people? Indeed all Levites were born with this privilege, to
handle and touch the things of the Temple, to offer Sacrifice, to put on holy
Vestiments, to eat the holy Bread, and other things, which God expressly
declared in his Law. The High Priest had a peculiar privilege to enter into
the Holy of Holies, to put on the holy Miter, and Breast Plate, which not only
was unlawful for the people to do; but even for the Prophets themselves,
except in some extraordinary case: but which of the high Priests upon this
pretense, durst exclude out of the whole Temple, all other Priests; which not
only of the Magistrates, but even of the people themselves, would have endured
this? If under pretext of Templebusinesse^, and sacrificing, these Levits durst
have excluded all other Tribes, and the whole people of Israel, as unclean and
profane, from all other business of divine worship; they had done no less
absurdly, then if they had cast out of their Tents, and separated from all holy
men, the whole people as leprous: Therefore the Levits were to contain
themselves within the prescript of Gods Laws; nor were they to extend the
pretext of Sanctity further then God had commanded. I will not for certainty
affirm, that they have not been sometimes so immoderate in enlarging the
prerogatives of their holiness, as that they have not challenged somewhat,
never expressly granted by God (for ambition seems to be an innate evil in
Churchmen;) yet this I dare say, that the old Levits were never so bold, as to
deny to Kings, and the whole people, many things which belonged to the worship
and exercise of Religion, such were; in the Temple, private and public
preaching and praying, celebrating of the Sacraments, making Laws and Statutes
of Ecclesiastic business, judging and determining of Ecclesiastic causes,
curbing and punishing Priests, even the high Priests, when they failed in their
Functions: Lastly, bestowing power upon Clergymen to exercise their holy
Function, and taking the same away again (...) all which I will make clear
hereafter by examples.

If this Wallachrian Iugler had weighed this well, he had not so boldly
obtruded upon the unwary, the example of the ancient Leviticall worship, for
maintenance of his Church Discipline: For he deals no otherwise, then if some
contentious Fellow should break into ones House, and should by certain Deeds
show, that his Parents and Ancestors had right to some Benches or Stools in
that House, by covenant or bargain: whereas by the same Deeds it appears,
that either the Benches were worn or demolished, or else that the right of
possessing them, was long since lost. He notwithstanding violently seizes not
only on the Benches, but likewise driving out the inhabitants upon the whole
House. Surely, whatsoever by special right heretofore belonged to the Levits,
and Clergy in the old Law, is now known to be abolished; and whatsoever holy
Functions at this day remain, are not now peculiar to the Levits, but common
to all, So that if now the Stilt-walker would plead his cause among the Levits,
they would shut him out of their Synagogue. But because I am to speak more at
large of this hereafter, I will say no more at present of the acceptions and
conditions of Sanctity, till after I have touched one error.

Lastly, we must observe that the right of ordination of holy things, belongs
only to God: If we go beyond his prescript, with what specious pretext soever
things or rites be honored, they are not to be accounted truly sacred, or
holy. For as all inherent sanctity and perfection is in God, and flows from
him: so likewise by his sole ordination, things are called Relatively sacred,
or holy, in divine worship.

From this Rule the Pope has much deviated, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
who by his sole privilege, by which he is lawless, and Paul's Antichrist,
extolling himself, etc. takes upon him liberty to sanctify, or as they call
it, Canonize as he pleases, Men, Places, Days and things; so that his
subjects verily believe, that what he declares to be holy, is holy indeed.
Hence it is, that not being content with Jewish Rites, and Ceremonies of the
ancient Church, does daily devise new ones, which he thinks may conduce to
his honor and profit: so that for a long time he has opppressed Christians
with the insupportable yoke of Ceremonies: neither does he this without some
pretext of equity. Bellarmine in some places stoutly affirms, that the Pope
never yet introduced any Rite, or sacred Ceremony into the Church, which is not
contained in holy Scripture. But here he uses a threefold caution: First,
that whatsoever frivolous interpretation the Pope gives, must be held
consonant to Scripture: which custom Philip Marnixius deriding, in his
Bee-hive, shows out of Lindanus (whom he calls Blind^sinus) that there is no
Rite so ridiculous in the Popes Histrionical Church-dressing, for which they
shall not find out some place of Scripture, out of which it is coined, when the
Popes Alchimisticall power of interpretation is added, which can convert the
frivolous dross of his trifles into the pure gold of Sanctity.

But when he finds this way troublesome, he uses this as a general Maxim in
the second place, That that must be counted a holy Rite and ceremony which is
done with a good intention, and for a holy use: And as if this were not
sufficient to refute Lutherans, he adds in the third place, That these things
may be held for sacred Rites and Ceremonies, which the Church judges to
depend, and in a manner to flow from those prime mysteries contained in
Scripture; by which trick the Pope does wonderfully cheat the whole world, that
whenever he produces any Novelty to oppress Christian Liberty, which cannot
be found in Scripture, he will have it to flow thence by way of consequence,
or by some connection to depend from it. Now because the Scripture defines no
where how this dependency may be deduced from it; hence it came to pass, that
there was no end of sacred dependences. For each Pope took upon him this
liberty, to add new Ceremonies to the old Rites: so this has been the old
Popish sport multiplying new Church-sanctities.

The new Walachrian Papists walk the same way: For if you ask Apolonius, What
he calls the sacred Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, he will not be content
with those which are directly in Gods Word, (for then there would be no use of
legislative power in the Church:) but he will have those things accounted for
Ecclesiastic Rites, that are instituted out of a religious desire or affection.

For howsoever according to his wonted giddiness he defines elsewhere this
matter more precisely, Part. 1. p. 2, 3, etc.
and withal contradicts himself; yet in the beginning of his work thus he
describes a Ceremony, or sacred Rite, That it is an action, the goodness and
praise whereof consists only in the worship of God: For because it is
applied to divine worship, in order to that religious will, it has sufficient
honesty, in which the Ceremony, or holy Rite may lay its Foundation. This
exactly agrees with the Popish intentionall Sanctity. He adds indeed. The
Church must diligently search, that according to Gods word she appoint Rites
and Ceremonies. But this is to be understood according to the Jesuiticall
phrase and Diasect, that Churchmen only must be Judges, whether such or such
things be consonant to Gods word, or not. It is too well known that the Romish
Church is full of errors, and that the whole dressing of Papal worship is
Apostaticall, not Apostolical; yet the Jesuits cry out, that the Lutherans
are liers: in that the Church of Rome neither has failed, nor can fail; and
this they are ready to prove, if the Pope may be Judge in his own cause, so
that the Church of Rome can never be convinced of error, except she will
confess her errors, which is impossible.

Apolonius plays the Cretian not much otherwise. He confesses that the Church
cannot make Laws in holy things, or proclaim Geremonies, but according to the
Rule of Scripture: which he does so interpret, that the absolute power of
judging what is consonant to Scripture, is in the Church and Churchmen. For if
any Lay Magistrate by his Authority enquire into Ecclesiastic Statutes, or
define Ecclesiastic matters, or hinder Churchmen from defining or making such
things at their pleasure, he cries out, that this is Tyrannical, Simonaicall,
and Sacrilegious: And that Lay-Magistrates, like sheep, ought modestly to
submit themselves, except the Clergy will not be reformed. And of this also
the Clergy must be Judges. For this will never agree with Apolonius his
Divinity, that the Civil Magistrate should be Judge in Church Matters. Which
if true, then who sees not a way opened to these new Papists, for filling the
reformed Churches with Rites and Ceremonies. Neither is there any thing more
easy, then that these Bats should still dream, and find out new Rites: at
which if the Magistrates wink, there will be nothing so repugnant to
Scripture, but will find assent and entertainment among the clergy; nor any
Monster so deformed, which they will not thrust upon Gods people. Witness the
Walachran Classes, where a giddy-headed Baawler has cast out such profane and
seditious stuff against worthy Vedelius, and pious Princes. And yet if he lie
not, not only the Consistory of Middleburgh, but the whole Classis of
Wala^rhria, has weighed, proved, and approved every thing.

The other thing wherein he resembles Papists, is this: When he speaks of the
Church sacred affairs, he distinguishes them into Primary, and Secundary, or
dependents; where surkes the old mystery of Popery. For though Churchmen have
no liberty to institute primary sacred things, yet they have power to impose
upon Christians, under pain of excommunication, what by consequence flow from
the former, or seem to depend on them.

If this be once yielded to Apolonius, and the Apolonian Church-Rulers,
nothing will be so absurd and profane, which may not put on the show and Title
of holiness, as often as it shall be taught that this is an Apendix of the
prime sacred things. The matter will be clear by an example.

The prime sacred thing in the Church, is, the preaching of the Gospel. Hence
if it be gathered, that these things are sacred also, which necessarily depend
from the former, doubtless there will swarm abroad an innumerable brood of
sacred things. For there can be no preaching, except there be some Preachers:
Whence this necessary consequence will follow, That all Preachers, even to
Apolonius, are sacred; which I know he will not deny: For there is nothing he
labors for more in all this work, then to challenge to himself the prerogative
of sanctity above profane Civil Magistrates. But I will weave out this Web a
little more.

It is impossible for a Minister to preach without a tongue, lips, and teeth:
Therefore it must follow, that the tongue, lips, and teeth of the Minister are
holy.

Now the tongue, lips, and teeth can frame no conception without the brain,
Ergo, (except Apolinius want brains) his brains must be also holy.

The brain can perform no function if the heart quicken it not by vital
spirits: Therefore his heart and vital spirits also, must be sacred.

The brain, heart, and tongue cannot operate, except they be nourished by the
Liver, Veins, and Intistines, etc. Ergo, these also in the Preacher must be
sacred. I will not descend to the excrements of the body, and make them also
sacred by way of dependency, only this I Will add.

Apolonius can go no where, or stand to preach, without feet, whence it will
follow, that his feet are also sacred.

Now, whereas it were immodest that he should come to Sermon barefooted,
therefore he ought to be covered with a Cloak, Breeches, Stockins, and Shoes
for the better decorum: will it not then follow, that these also are sacred.

But what if the ways be foul, through which he walked, and goes up to the
Pulpit with dirty shoes? will not the Walachrian Divines be troubled with this
quotlibeticall knot? to wit, whether the dirt and filth be not sacred?

I will not vilify such things as are truly sacred, I purpose only to explode
Apolonius his idle Appendices, and sacred consequences, by this one example: He
that will laugh at him, may make trial in other things, I will affirm this,
That no such liberty must be granted, to any man, much less to a giddy-headed
Stilt-walker, to authorize for sacred and holy, whatsoever he dreams has
dependence from the primarie and true sacred Rites. What mischief this
produced among the old Papists, may be seen by the infatuation of the people
with this ridiculous and impious superstition. For not only are Monks holy
amongst them; but also by this consequentiall enchantment, their Hands, Feet,
Gowns, Hoods, are kissed with strange veneration: so that it is accounted a
matter of no small sanctity and merit, if one dye in a Monks Gown, or lousie
Wast-coat; or if a superstitious Woman wrap about her head the holy Breeches of
some Preacher, to wit, that she might feel, or at least worship the
dependencies of that primary holiness. How-ever the matter is, I think this to
be undoubtedly true, That outward Church-rites are not therefore to be held
sacred, because of their order or reference to Religion and Worship.

CHAP. IV. Of SPIRITUALITY.
IT remains, that we examine the word of SPIRITUALITIE: For although both old
and new Papists do too much betray their own fleshly lusts, yet they
proclaim with full Cheeks every where, their SPIRITUALITY, and make it in a
manner all one with SANCTITY, which notwithstanding differ in this, That what
is truly holy, is always good; but that which is spiritual, is sometime
evil: for Paul speaks of spiritual wickedness in the air.

I here take it in a good sense, and in these three I make the form of
Spirituality to consist: First, it must have God for its Author. Secondly, the
end of it must be Gods worship, and the salvation of souls. Thirdly, it must
be done after a spiritual manner.

The Stilt-walker is large in exagerating this, and scrapes together so many
things out of Parker, that he who will give credit to what he prates there of
Church Matters, may doubt whether Apolonius has any flesh yet left about him;
or whether he and his Walachrians be not transformed into pure spirits long a
go. For nothing is to be found in their Church Matters, whether they be words
or things, but they must be accounted spiritual: For who is so meanly learned,
as will suspect any carnality to be left there, where so many Spiritualities
meet together, by special virtue of their Function and vocation. What I speak
is true, as is plain by the old Papists, where not only by virtue of
Ecclesiastic Calling and Office, wonderful spirituality is ascribed to the
Clergy; but especially when they come to the Pope, the head of their
spirituality, such is their superstition, that they think him to be, and so
they call him a GOD, and in a manner a Mere Spirit; so that if he swear,
forswear, drink, whore; and if this Roman Locust leap from one adulterous bed
to another, yet scarce will any be induced to believe otherwise, but that he
is holy and spiritual still: For because they think by reason of the dignity of
his Function, that he is altogether sanctified and Deified, they will not be
easily induced to believe that he can lose his spirituality. This madness by
degrees, in Gods just judgments, possessed men's minds; which lest Apolonius
should renew among the Protestants, I will more largely explain every
particular of what I have said.

First, this is most certain, that what has not God, or the holy Spirit for
its Author, deserves not the Title of Spirituality; and the more immediately
and clearly any thing proceeds from Gods Spirit, so much the more properly is
that to be called Spiritual. For as that is called Kingly which the King
immediately does, speaks with his own mouth, and writes with his own hand: so
these things are to be esteemed divine, holy, and spiritual properly, which
are immediately done by God. So Christ's vocation and inauguration is most
spiritual: For to him only he spoke from heaven, Thou art my Son: so God
himself pronounced the Law on Sinai: Such was the Apostles immediate vocation
from Christ: so the word of God in Scripture, and true faith begot of that
seed, are chiefly to be accounted spiritual. And although in things concerning
faith, God uses the work of man, yet the effect God properly reserveth for
himself, and produces it: 1 Cor. 3.
Yet this must not be taken so precisely, but that these things also are to be
reckoned spiritual, which God works by instruments; if so be they are such
instruments as are known to be Gods Penmen, and Ambassadors, such as the
Prophets and Apostles were: who as they were truly Gods Ambassadors; so the
things were divine, holy and spiritual, which God by them did speak, write,
and do. Hence not only was it usual to the Prophets in teaching to say, Thus
says the Lord: but of such Messengers that is true which Christ said to the
Apostles, He that hears you hears me. For as that is called Princely which
the Princes Ambassador does in his name, and by his command: even so
whatsoever the Prophets and Apostles, Gods immediate Ambassadors, did or
taught, is no otherwise to be accounted, then if God himself had spoken from
heaven: so that in them was true spiritually. But where the gifts required for
such an Embassy cease, it is certain that there also cease the dignity and
spirituality of that Embassy, or else becomes much inferior.

Now the honor of a Divine message consists in two things: First, that he
have a Patent, or Letters of Credence: for though one should perform the Kings
command, yet if he has not this command to show for his employment, he is not
to be accounted the Kings Agent, but (which sometimes has been done) ought to
be punished as a Cheater.

Secondly, this is required in a Divine Message, that the Messenger or Agent
have full instructions of all things that concern his employment, and that he
go not beyond the bounds of his Embassy: he that wants either of these
conditions, deserves not the title of a Divine Ambassador.

These conditions were fully in the Prophets and Apostles; and therefore were
truly Gods Ambassadors and spiritual.

All the Doctors of the Church at this day, come far short of this dignity,
because they want both these privileges, as I will afterward show. Hence
appears the Popes falsehood, who though he has no Letters of Credence to show
for his employment, by reason of the vitiosity of his Calling, who almost like
a Thief, creeps in at the back door, and though he does so perform his
Embassy, that he goes beyond his Commission, and tramples on it, yet he
bragges with such boldness, that he is Christ's Ambassador, that not content
with this Title, will be called Universal Bishop, and Head of the Church: yea,
Christ's Vicar upon Earth: by which he shows his Impudency and
Antichristianisme.

Our new Walachrian Papist no less boldly calls himself familiarly Christ's
Ambassador, whereas he knows, and should acknowledge, that in performing his
Masters Embassy, he violates oftentimes his commands. We see also in his book
much railing, many absurdities, and plain falsehoods, which he thrusts upon his
Readers; these he cannot have from his Master CHRIST, but rather from his
predecessor the Pope; from whom also he borrowes his pride, in puffing himself
up with the Title of Spirituality; so that not only does he equal, but in
many things prefer himself to the Apostles: For he says that the
Spirituality of his Church-businesse is such, that the Magistrate cannot attain
to it; making his power over the Church so absolute, that he will have it to be
Regal, and other things of which the Apostles never dreamed, as I will more
fully show hereafter.

And this is the first condition of Spirituality from the Author; yet every
thing is not to be called Spiritual what the Holy Spirit does, or commands
either by himself, or mediatly: For so the works of Creation, and all
natural things should be called Spiritual; and so must all man's civil and
natural actions be called.

There is then another condition required to make a thing spiritual; namely,
that it tend to the worship of God, and salvation of souls: These are Hope,
Charity, but chiefly Faith, and its seed, Gods word; then the reading and
preaching thereof, prayers, Sacraments, and their use; and whatsoever God has
appointed for his worship, and for begetting and strengthening of Faith.

And here again I will show how Apolonius rages with hatred, as Papists do,
against Magistrates.

The old Papists have persuaded Christians long since, that matters of
salvation, and of holy worship, belong not to Princes, as being laymen,
because they cannot attain to that end; but that these only belong to
Churchmen, as being spiritual: by which cunning they first exempted
themselves from the Civil power, and then subjected Laymen and Princes to
their Church, as all know.

This new Walachrian Papist walks upon the same Stilts: For he says plainly:

We think that the Civil power can never be drawn out of its own kind, and
elivated to another end to be produced by it self, Part 1. p. 47.49.52, etc.
which is not wholly natural. He also every where affirms, That the end of
the Magistrate is not; yea cannot, nor must not be, the procuring of men's
salvation: Ye, he says, it is Pelagianisme for any to affirm, that the
Magistrate, as a Magistrate, can do any thing toward the procuring of man's
salvation; but that he is worldly, and is to meddle only with the things of
this world: As for salvation, it is the sole work of Churchmen, as being
solely spiritual. In this he does not only play the Papist in removing godly
Magistrates so far from this spiritual end in procuring salvation, but also
openly resists the truth which he might have learned out of Calvin, Calv. 2.
in 1 Timothy 2.2.
who compares Magistrates to the earth, and plainly says, that the propagation
of Religion depends no otherwise from them, then the producing of Corn from the
earth.

Now every one knows, that the end and proper effect of the earth is to
produce corn; so that he who will now persuade us, that the earth brings not
forth corn, and that it conferres nothing to this production, or that this
production is no ways the end or effect of the earth, will make himself
ridiculous to Husbandmen and Children. Yet that is not made Spiritual,
whatsoever by Consequences depends upon this end, or by winding or doubtful
ways tend to this end.

We see this consequentiall dependencie of spiritual things, to have been
under the Leviticall Priesthood: The Temple was holy and spiritual; from this
flowed the Spirituality of the Levites which served in the Temple: From their
spirituality came the spirituality of their garments, and of the Temples
utensils; and lastly, the touching of all things which were made sacred,
because they served for the worship in the Temple: which though according to
Gods prescript, they were thus accounted, I doubt not but the succeeding
Levites added many things to increase their Spirituality, which we know were
not of the same esteem.

The old Papists in multiplying of spiritualities, did not only imitate, but
also in many things exceed the Levites: so that among them not only is that
spiritual, which immediately and primarily tends to the end of salvation and
worship, but whatsoever also has reference to this end, though a-farre off, is
in a manner honored with the same privilege of Spirituality by them. For
example.

The Pope with them is most spiritual: Hence whatsoever has relation to the
Pope, as to the end, is also spiritual. So his Crown, Keys, Cloak, Shoes,
Hose Conclave, Servants; yea, almost his Concubines, Mules and Asses, are
accounted for holy and spiritual.

The Mass with them is chiefly spiritual: From this, every thing that has
relation to it, as to the end, is also spiritual: Such are the Place,
Challice, Water-Box, Altar, Veil, Pictures, Gifts, Priest, Deacon, and
whatsoever has reference to this end, though never so remotely.

The new Walachrian Papists are yet sitting upon their eggs of spirituality;
if their Chickens be well hatched, we shall have a wonderful brood of
Spiritualities: at this day these are reckoned for spirituals, at least not to
be touched to wit, right to preach and pray publicly, to administer the
Sacraments, to censure, to call, to make Church-laws; the right of Synods and
Dependencies: and (which Apolonius lately has hatched) the power of collecting
and distributing of Alms: of each whereof, I will hereafter speak. This is
sure, that whatsoever God has appointed for the salvation of souls, is
spiritual; but if it be collected from hence, that all these things are
spiritual which are referred to this, as to the principal end, there will
arise a million of Spiritualities. As if one would say, the Bread in the
Sacrament is spiritual, because ordained by Christ for a spiritual use: Hence
some curious Caviller should doubt, whether the Wheat of which the bread is
made, was not also spiritual? Whether the Meal, the Baker, the Oven, the
Servant, and Basket in which that bread was carried to the Consistory, or
whether the Keeper of it, or Dish in which the Bread lay on the Table, be not
all spiritual? For this vain Arguer will proceed the same way that Apolonius
does, who faith that the use of the Supper is sacred and spiritual, because of
Christ's ^^^ination and end, will conclude that he also is eminently spiritual
above all Preachers, Proponents, Doctors of Divinity, Elders and Deacons;
because he thinks that by special right he may take that bread, break and
distribute it. If this intention of spirituality arises from the vicinity of
the principal end; then either some new Scotus must arise for these
Walachrians, or else Apolonius must be endowed with the Seraphicall Spirit of
Scotus, that he may unfold the quotlibeticall trifles which will arise in
Walachria, concerning the beginning, end, and degrees of Spiritualities; an
example of which I give in the Sacramental bread: for some will ask, When will
that Bread in the Supper first become spiritual? Whether then when it is
carried into the Consistory? But so the Bakets Boy should be spiritual, or
else he shall profane holy things, because he touches that Bread. Or is it
then first, when the Preachers being solemnly assembled in the Consistory, they
first taste the bread and wine, to try whether it is made of good Corn, and of
a good relish.

And give me leave here to report what I hear of the Walachrian Divines, whose
custom is to meet the day before the Sacrament, in their Consistory, where
they taste of the Loaves which are to be used in the Supper: But because that
dry spirituality would chea^ them, and so stop their preaching spirit, the wine
of the Supper is brought; by tasting of which, that dry spirituality is
moistened. This also is boldly reported, that the Pastor and his Elders in that
spiritual Classis, have tasted so largely of the Wine the day before, that
there was none left for the next day; and that the Preacher, with his Elders,
were scarce in ease to administer the Supper. But I reject this as a Fable; for
my part I do not think that Apolonius will confess that bread to be
spiritual, though it be made by tasting, somewhat nearer to the Supper,
because the Keeper of it must be spiritual, or else there would be a
profanation of holy things: For he with his wife doubtless, is as nimble to
taste the bread before, as the Preachers themselves.

I ask further, Whether then it become spiritual when it is put upon the Table
for the Supper? because then it is much nearer to its end.

But here again an absurdity will arise: the Keeper ought to be sacred and
spiritual,, or else he shall profane sacred things, because he brings the
bread and touches it when he puts it on the Table. It remains therefore that
only then the bread becomes spiritual, when Apolonius touches and breaks
it: for then it seems to be nearest to its end.

But now again there will arise a new Catalogue of quotlibets: for out of the
propinquity of the principal sanctity which is in the bread, there will arise
diverse degrees of spiritualities: for the nearer that every part touches that
spiritual end, so much the nearer it is to spirituality; and therefore because
of the object becomes more spiritual. So that now it is plain, that neither
Apolonius his feet, nor legs, nay, nor his shoulders nor head, are in
holiness to be compared to his hands, because not they, but these alone do
immediately touch that spiritual object.

But if one will argue more subtly, he will say, that not all the hand is
equally spiritual, but the singer points, by which the bread is touched and
broken, are more spiritual then the rest: and because the skin does most of
all immediately touch the bread, it will follow that this is the most spiritual
of all the parts; but the Cuticula, or Epidermis does touch yet more
immediately, except this little skin be lost by some accident, and so perhaps is
covered with gloves, then sure the Leather which immediately touches the bread,
must have most spirituality. Therefore Apolonius cannot be so ignorant of
quodlibeticall Philosophy, but must needs perceive that out of this final
objective spirituality, by reason of the diverse degrees of vicinity, that there
are diverse degrees of spirituality in that which medleth with the object. The
solution of these Riddles, if Apolonius can bring out of Divinity, let him; but
I to leave these trifles, say, that there is a third thing required to
spiritulity, which is the Mann^^.

Though that only is to be called spiritual which has God or the holy Ghost
for its Author, whether mediatly or immediately; and which properly is
ordained, and tends to Gods worship, and saving of souls, yet we can explain
rightly how much one thing or person is more spiritual then another; but it is
by the Manner, whereby we see more or less sparkles of spiritual light: for as
he is most Princely, on whom the Prince does bestow most favors and badges of
Majesty: So he is most spiritual, in whom shines most the dignity and
holiness of the Spirit: Which is apparent in the Prophets and Apostles, of
whom no body doubts, but that they exceeded all others in the privilege of
spirituality: But this also was evident in them, because they were chiefly
furnished with spiritual gifts by Christ: For they were truly his Ambassadors.
It were an absurd thing, if the King should send an Ambassador abroad, and not
furnish him with such things as are requisite for his Embassy: even so had it
been dishonorable for God, to have Ambassadors not qualified with all
spiritual gifts, Whence we may see the difference between the Levits and the
Prophets: For they being ordained for the ordinary service of the Priesthood,
had only outward sanctity: they wanted oftentimes the inwards, gifts of
holiness, and of the Spirit: For they were wicked ignorant, and deceitful,
neither did they any miraculous thing: The high Priest indeed gave Oracles by
Urim and Thummim; but this depended rather from the Breast Plate, Ark, and
Propitiatory, then from the High Priest himself. It was otherwise in the
Prophets and Apostles: for they were sent from GOD, Not from Men, nor by Men,
and that by a most spiritual Vocation. Whence they were highly graced with the
gifts of the holy Ghost: For their life was holy, their Doctrine and Writings
i^ fallible; and they excelled in the power of Miracles. Lastly, there were
none then in the Church except such as maliciously shut their eyes, who did not
see that they were truly spiritual, and Christ's Legates: So that the Title of
Spirituality did most properly belong to them: which conditions ceased upon the
Apostles departure.

From hence again appears the impudence of the old Papists, who so proudly
brag of their Spirituality, and yet have never a Badge of the Spirit in them,
as we may see in the Pope, who is the Epitome of all Romish Spirituality; who,
as it is well known not only fraudulently, possesses his spiritual Chair;
but is also destitute of all spiritual gifts: For his life is impious, and his
Doctrine false and deceitful. Lastly, he does no miracle, but is himself a
Miracle, and wonder, to the world in respect of his pride and wickedness.

The new Walachrian Papist wrote this whole Book of his own Spirituality, and
of the Magistrates Carnality; and almost in every third page he calls himself
Christ's Legate, and bragges of his spirituality; which pride he learned from
Antichrist his predecessor, having the Jesuits for his only Masters, whence I
can easily convince him of the like impudence.

For to say nothing of the Spirituality of his vocation, which is now truly
humane; let him tell us, where are now the Badges of his spiritual and
Apostolic Embassy? For Paul says, that they are carnal, not spiritual, who
are contentious, and puffed up: but what vice more familiar among the
Walachrian Ministers? which appears by this one writing of Apolonius.

Elsewhere Paul says, that they are carnal who know not the Word of God. The
Stilt-walker seems to have gone through humane Writings with old Papists, but
he never labored with Apollos to be powerful in the holy Scriptures. Lastly,
he affirms this of the lives of Modern Ministers, that they are very foully
spotted; but this he does not much regard, only he upbraids Vedelius with
this, that Professors also defile their Doctoral Function with feasting and
drunkenness.

The fallibility of Doctrine imitates the spotted life of Churchmen: For all
are forced to confess, that their preaching word is fallible; with which Badge
of Embassy the Apostles were chiefly honored, because they preached and wrote
infallibly, All of them prate much of this thing, as the Pope uses to do; but
experience shows the contrary.

Lastly, they are all destitute of the gifts of Miracles, in which chiefly
Apostolical Spirituality did shine: so that in this power they exceeded all
others: But I do not think that it was ever found yet, that at the prayers of
Apolonius the Church did shake, or that lying Ananias and Sapphyra did fall
down dead. It is not unlikely, if he had the power or spirit of Elias, to bring
down fire from heaven, but he would do it, and burn up all his Magistrates,
though there were fifty of them, such is his heat against them.

This I Will say briefly, That Christ is too rich a King of Spiritual gifts, to
employ such poor and naked Ambassadors as these, who have no Badge or mark of
his Embassy, except you will call him the Kings Ambassador, who taking upon him
the name of an Ambassador, but wanting Letters of Credence, and have nothing
to show for his Commission, will in a tumultuous way proclaim the Kings Laws,
and in the mean while transgress the Laws, and for his own benefit oppose
and mock the King.

What I have said of Persons, may be observed of Things, to wit, that there are
diverse degrees of Spirituality, according to the Manner; so that in this regard
a thing is more holy and spiritual.

This may be seen in the Jewish Church Government, as in a type, the Ark,
Propitiatory, Breast Plate, Cherubim, and other things that were kept in the
Holy of Holies, were most sacred and spiritual, because in them God was in a
manner immediately. There was less spirituality in the Holy of Holies, which
contained these things: Inferior to this was the Holy Place, whither all the
Priests came; and yet more inferior was the outward Court, whither all the
people repaired; then, Mount Zion, on which stood the Temple; and at last
Jerusalem, within which all these were enclosed. All these had not the same
sanctity; but in many degrees different; and he had played the Impostor, who
under the Title of a general spirituality, had made all holiness equal, and
promiscuously removed all from the secret places.

Now though the Leviticall worship be abolished, and external or local
Spirituality, yet this remains in Christian worship and Churchdiscipline, that
there is not the same degree of Spirituality, but much different in the Manner.

Gods word is most spiritual, which most plainly favors of the Holy Ghost its
Author, as being properly ordained for saving of souls: Hence it is most
true, that all things found in this for salvation, are most spiritual.

To this is next true Faith, which proceeding from this seed, always savours
of Spirituality, and in whom it is found, him it makes spiritual.

Inferior to these, are Hope, Charity, Prayer, and Confession, which borrow
their spirituality from it: Heb. 11.
For without faith it is impossible to please God, and consequently to be truly
spiritual: They differ also in this; for these are common to Hypocrites and
wicked men: so is not Faith.

Inferior to these are the outward means of begetting faith, and other
virtues in us: such are Reading and preaching of the Word, and administration
of Sacraments: which have this prerogative of spirirituality, that they are the
proper means to confer salvation; and to constitute a Church: yet these are
much inferior in dignity to Gods word, and Faith: For these are of themselves,
and always spiritual; but those are only spiritual actions, so far as they
are conversant about the others, as their spiritual objects; but chiefly if
they be in a lawful and spiritual way.

Lastly, these things are inferior in degree, which in the Church Discipline
belong only to the wel-being or properly which remove the evil being that may
arise from confusion and scandal: such are at this day the Calling of
Ministers, Discipline and appoynting of Laws. All which we see performed and
handled by wicked men. Nor are they absolutely required to the internal form of
the Church; because in some sort she may be without them: For so long do they
retain spirituality, as they do exactly answer the Rules of holy Scriptures,
especially so long as they carry plainly the marks and Badges of the Holy
Ghost, as was in the time of the Apostles.

I have briefly touched the differences and degrees of Spiritualitie, that I
might resist the fraud of Popery. For it was very familiar with old Papists, to
confound all the degrees of Spiritualitie, and principally to vent for chief
spiritual things, their own business and actions, which they perform about
these properly spiritual things: For they despise Gods word, which is most
spiritual, and their only contention is of the right of handling this Word:
whence they arrogate power and command to themselves: So they make small
account of true Faith, and truly faithful men, which indeed are truly
spiritual; but their main strife is, about the right of ruling, punishing, and
censuring those spiritual men: and in this they place all spiritualitie; so
that to themselves alone they claim the right of Spirituality, and exclude all
Christians as Laymen, and not spiritual.

The new Walachrian Papist with them keeps equal pace: For he does not place
properly spirituality in Gods Word, in true Faith, and other things truly
spiritual: For he knows that these are common to all Christians; but he
seeks all the pretext of spirituality in Actions which are employed about
these things, especially in such as he thinks belong only to him, and such as
he is: In whom although (as they are now) there is much carnality, but very
little spirituality, yet he croakes so proudly of these actions, and of the
right of performing them, as if the whole sum or highest pitch of
spiritualitie consisted in them, whose Plea is all one, as if a Levit of old
had compared the sanctity of the outward Court, or of Mount Sion, to the
dignities of the Holy of Holies, or Ark within it: For as to these the other
were ordained; so also from these they received all their dignity of holiness.

But let this premonition suffice concerning the acceptions of Church,
Spirituality and Sanctity, which in the following discourse I will handle more
at large.

CHAP. V. How far these things belong at this day to Church-affaires and
Government.
HItherto I have delineated the acceptions of these words, CHURCH, SANCTITY,
and SPIRITUALITIE, under which Cloakes the old Papists heretofore have, and the
new Walachrian Papists now do ensnare and delude the unwary: the sum of
which was, that clamourously they brag of the virtues and sanctity of the
Church, under the Title of Catholic Church and Invisible; which doubtless is
Holy and Spiritual: But when they come to the matter, they turn aside to
visible and particular Churches, which oftentimes differ as much in holiness
and spirituality, as the Kings Closet does in cleanness from a Swines-stigh:
For this abounds with hypocrites, sinners, and profane wretches.

Again, when they boast of the virtues of the visible Church, they handle the
matter as if they pleaded for the universal Church, Acts 15.
whose dignity consists in faith and profession. Hence also it is called the
Church properly in opposition to the Rulers thereof: but presently by a new
cunning trick, they turn aside to the Church Ministers, and their Government,
that the whole power and dignity of the Church might be united in the Churches
outward Government and Rulers, excluding the body of the Church, and the
faithful, as lay and carnal men.

Lastly, they do so prate of spiritualities, and the holiness of Government
and Rulers, that they stay not upon the commendations of the prime and chief
holy things; such are GODS Word, Faith, Sacraments, and other things, which
properly and primarily are spiritual; but by a confused acception of Holy and
Spiritual things, they dispute of business and actions of Church Matters, and
their dependencies, about which they themselves are conversant: in which things
either there is no true spirituality at all; or if there be, it is ^^^y remote
and improper, nor any way to be compared to the Apostolical Government, This
is surely Apolonius his Canvasse pack, (of which I have spoken often) which he
had not from Christ, but from the Pope.

For he willing to be reverenced of all men; every where he pretends the Name
of Catholic Church, and Spirituality; with which, when he has perswadeded
men's minds, he presently persuades them also, that the Government of the
Church is most holy, whence he contracts its sanctity to the ruling Clergy,
and because the spirituality of all Churchmen by degrees is collected in the
Pope, as the head of all. Hence the Pope acquires this dignity to himself, to
be thought and called, Most spiritual, most holy Father, as (...) the force,
form and quintessence of all spirituality resided in the Pope alone, so that
now among Papists none doubt but that the Eyes, Mouth, Tongue, Heart, yea,
Hairs, Skin, Hands, Feet, Heels, Shoulders, Ribs, Belly, (I had almost
said his Belches and Farts are either spiritual, or smell of spirituality.

This privilege of Sanctity by the worlds fatal error, he has now long
possessed, and I fear will possess to the end of the World. For though the
Christian World should happen to be freed of this first Antichrist, yet we see
by what is said, a new Antichristian seed springing out of Apolonius, who to
the great disgrace of Magistrates, does dawb over with the strange painting of
Spirituality, the business of the Visible Church, yet with this caution, That
he will have us believe, that it resides not in the whole body, but only in
the Ministers, as the Captains and Presidents thereof.

This Fiction having taken impression, there is arisen among Church men such a
pride of pre-eminence, that there is none of them, though never so basely born,
though promoted to the Pulpit by never so wicked means, but thinks himself
in Church Matters exempted from all obedience to the Magistrate, and that he is
to rule: them all. Which Pride, if at length (as is seen in the Walachian
Classis) be settled in such a Chough or Jack-daw as Apolonius is, how much I
pray will the world be eased of Antichrist? Apolonius will not be angry if in
time I detect to godly-men his arts and cunning tricks, and show how like a
Bird he is to the Romish Pope: So that he must not wonder, if hereafter all
good men bite him: For he will deservedly fall into Aesops Fable of the Cuckoo,
about which almost all Birds do fly, as about an Hawke, whereas it is a weak
and feeble Bird: For he says; That the Cuckoo once afked, why all the Birds
did peck at him, as if he were an Hawke? The Birds answered, because in his
feathers he was so like an Hawke, that they were afraid lest in time he should
be an Hawk.

But now to let this alone, I will examine severally the works of the
Eoclesiastick Ministry, by which, as by Instruments, inward Faith, outward
profession and union with Christ and his Church, are procured and preserved,
which therefore are accounted sc^^^ally, Ecclesiastic business.

The first of these should be the public reading of the holy Scriptures.
Ectypon.
For since it pleased God to comprehend the counterfeit of saving truth in
writing, he never granted so much to vocal preaching, as not to have it
examined and weighed in this balance of Scripture; So that neither Prophets nor
Apostles, John 5.
nor Christ himself were offended at this. Act. 17.
Hence not only the reading of holy Scriptures in private, has been familiar
with all good men, but also among the public Functions of the Church, it has
been a solemn custom to read the Law, that is, the Scripture; so that the
chiefest men have not scorned to perform this duty sometimes.

That place Acts 13.14. is worth the noting; Luke 4.16.
and chiefly that of Luke, where it is said, that Christ being at Nazareth on
the Sabbath day, rose up, and having taken the Book, did read that famous
place in Esaias 61.1. So that this task was performed by the best men, and not
put over to the meaner sort, as now: For at this day the holy Scripture is to
be esteemed no less then Vrim and Thummim of old among the Jews, and the
Sanctuary where God gave his Oracles. For as soon as he gave off to deliver his
Oracles there, and ceased to send Prophets, by whom he spoke extraordinarily,
they had nothing certain but the Law and the Testimony; that is, the Scripture,
with which they ought to consult.

The Pope at this day utters many lies concerning his infallible power of
deciding controversies. The new reformed Papists trusting to their
infallibility, will have men believe their interpretations upon pain of
excommunication, and danger of hell fire. But this should be known among
Christians, that now nothing is infallible, except the Scripture alone; which
if we had not, there should be no certainty in divine worship or religion at
all.

Surely, such is the use and efficacy of reading the holy Scripture, that it
is known by experience of all Ages, that in persecution many have been
converted and saved only by reading; which the Pope, Christ's adversary, the
fatal tyrant of Christ's Church, knew too well, who in the first beginning of
Reformation, that he might stop the course of the Gospel, inhibited the reading
of Scripture, under pain of death; but withal giving leave to preach: For he
knew that by the dumb and secret help of reading, many were so well instructed,
that not only thence got they knowledge and boldness to tax his errors, but
also to confess the truth in the midst of flames and tortures.

Neither here do I much regard Stapletons cavil, that men cannot by bare
reading be converted, Romans 11.
because it is said, How can they believe of whom they have not heard? How can
they hear without a Preacher? Also Faith comes by hearing: Because Paul has
not debarred from faith and salvation, such as are corporally deaf, for that
they cannot hear; but in expressing the one sense of hearing, he has not
excluded the other. Besides, faith comes by hearing, either public or private
reading. Therefore Augustine warned the godly, that they pray often, and read
the Scripture. For when we pray (says he) we speak to God; when we read, God
speaks again to us.

The most holy Ecclesiastic means then to beget and preserve faith, in us, is
the reading of the Scripture, and it is so much the more excellent, in that it
is not subject to the will or command of any man, but most purely conveyes to
us the liquor of divine Truth, as it were out of a Fountain of such
uncorrupted sincerity, that by reason of this sacred Function alone, Christ
commanded to hear the Scribes and Pharisees in all that they shall say. But
Apolonius does not much strive about this spirituality and privilege, because
there is in it nothing imperious, but servile rather: not would he cry out
that his sacred things were profaned, if perhaps the Magistrate should use
this office of reading; but would rather say, that it is a testimony of civil
servitude, no otherwise then of old the Gibeonites y for deceiving Iosh^a, were
commanded to minister Wood and Water to the true Priests and Levits.

Next to reading is preaching. Stapleton and the Jesuits are so proud of the
privilege of this Function, that they claim a power to themselves to save
souls, for thus they reason: No man can be saved without faith, no man can have
faith without hearing Gods word, no man can hear without a Preacher, no man
can preach, except he be sent. to send belongs only to the Governors of the
Church: Therefore they conclude, That the care and power of saving depends on
them. By which Title they insult over all, as if they were lay men, if they
offer to enquire more narrowly of matters of salvation, as if the business of
heaven did not belong to such.

This error Apotonins breathes every where, using almost the same weapons that
the Jesuits do, to wit, that modern preaching is the sanctified and
spiritual means, and by spiritual right Ecclesiastic, belonging only to
Ministers by their right of Vocation: But for others, especially for worldly
Magistrates, it is neither lawful nor possible.

I confess that preaching is in some fort holy and useful for the Church; but
he that will compare the manner of it as it is at this day, with that of the
Apostles, he will compare the shadow with the body: for they were truly
inspired by God, and taught by God, furnished with all the gifts of Knowledge,
Tongues, Miracles, by Divine authority, as Christ's Ambassadors, they preached
and faithfully dispensed the Mysteries of God, God speaking by them, and
therefore they abstained from all pleasing allurements of Arts, and humane
affections. But at this day whasoever declamatory Art is in preaching, it
proceeds of humane and secular precepts, with that pomp, that now nothing in
the Church is thought handsous, but what savours of Quintilians Tropes, or of
Aristotle's Metaphysics. This is no new thing: for shortly after the Apostles
departure, the subtilties of Philosophers, unknown to the Apostles, were made
use of to edify the Church withal, but with this success, that these Arts
brought more darkness then light into the Church: for they laid the foundation
of many errors, and chiefly of Antichristianisme then springing up. Which
humane Artifices are now vented with such pride, that all the Majesty of Gods
word consisting in simplicity, is by them obscured: For although there is some
use of these Arts against contradictors of the truth, yet we know by
experience, that more contenttions, differences and errors are raised then
abolished by them: ^^ther did the Church ever fight with better success, then
when the adversaries were confuted with pure Scripture.

Now if there be such failings in their virtues, what shall we say of their
vices? We find by experience, that they are destitute oftentimes of all things
requisite by Paul in a Bishop; and being armed with impudent Foreheads (as we
see in Apolonius) they rush upon this work with such pride, that they make
themselves spiritual, holy, Christ's Legates, and in a manner the Apostles
fellows; whereas they labor not always to furnish the pure milk of Gods Word,
but rather to vent their own affections, inventions, and fictions, and that
with such eagerness and quarrelling, that they can scarce abstain from
railing. Though these things were mended according to the manner and example of
the Apostles, yet I would say that Apolonius is swelled with Antichrian pride,
and so are all our new Papists, who place more holiness, and special
spirituality in their preaching work, then was ever held of old under the
Levitical law, or after under the Apostles. For albeit that all were debarred
from sacrificing except the Levits, yet no man was hindered from preaching,
neither Princes nor Lay People: Moses, Joshua, David Solomon, and other Princes
did preach publicly: When Josaphat, Josiah, and other Kings restored the
worship of God, they sent Priests Levits to teach, and so they did likewise
Laymen. When Religion was restored under Nehemiah, Esdras and the Levits
taught; but it is added, that Inshua, and some of the people did publicly read
and teach.

If this was of such special right, as the Ecclesiastic and Leviticall Office
of sacrificing, entering into the Sanctuary, separating and discovering of
Lepers, and other things which God granted to the Priests and Levits: why was
it so promicuously granted to the people? Who will not say that the Levits and
Apostles were irreligious, and tramplers upon their own holy Function, in
giving leave so promiscuously for men to preach, that they hindered no man from
it either publicly or privately, if he was apt. This may be showed by many
examples: Luke 2.46.
First, when CHRIST being about twelve years of age, disputed publicly in the
Temple with the Doctors: For though he might justly do this, having a Divine
calling thereto, yet the Scribes and Pharisees knew not so much: And indeed
they were too proud of the privilege of their Chair, and of preaching, to
suffer any, much less a child, to meddle with their y Office of preaching, had
they known that it was not lawful for any to preach without the solemnities of
calling: but simply perceiving the gifts and aptitude in Christ to teach, not
being sollicitous whether he was called or not, did make no scruple in
permitting him to teach.

Such another place there is in Luke, Luke 4.16.
when Christ being at Na^^reth, took the Book and read, and then preached, all
his hearers admiring him with attention. Whence I gather, that then there was
no such need of writings to show their Orders and Callings to preach; but any
man might preach that was apt. For it is most certain, that Christ had no
ordinary vocation: without which if it had been then so sacrilegious a thing to
preach, as Apolonius would now persuade us, doubtless they had pulled Christ
out of the Pulpit, whom the Scribes and Pharisees would not acknowledge for an
extraordinary Prophet.

The like we read of Paul, who on the Sabbath day at Antioch, Acts 13.
being unknown, first heard the reading, then the Rulers of the Synagogue sent
to him, saying, Men and brethren, if you have any word of exhortation to the
people, say on. Upon which occasion he made an excellent Sermon there. If then
the sanctity of preaching had been sostrict, sure it had not been so easy a
matter for Paul to preach without controlment.

Apolonius in some places shows at large, that Paul was known there: For out
of his singular skill in Scripture he thinks that this was Antioch of Syria,
where he was well known: But he is shamefully deceived, and feeds his Reader
with falsehoods. For Luke expressly says, that this was not Antioch of Syria,
but of Pisidia where he was not yet known: for that lies in Syria, over
against Cyprus, about the Bay of Issicum, by the river Orontes: But this of
Pisidia was over against Attalia, at the foot of Mount Taurus, and is distant
in longitude from the other, at least an hundred miles: He is then as much
deceived, as if he had confounded Lions with Leyden: which error is so plain,
that children may find it out; and surely it is not to be suffered in a man so
higly puffed up and presumptuous, who like a Scribe, or Pharisee, durst
prescribe to the English what they thought of doubtful and abstruse things,
when he saw not that which was before his feet. For because he knew that this
would hinder his fiction, if Paul being a stranger, should be admitted to
preach there, he found no readier way then to confound that which the holy
Ghost had so exactly distinguished, either out of ignorance, or out of ^^lice;
which he might have easily seen by the circumstances, if he had not shut his
eyes. For they are said to have sat down: Then, That the Rulers of the
Synagogue said to them, etc. For if this had been that Antioch of Syria, where
he was known, they had not suffered him to sit so far from the Rulets, as an
ordinary man among the people. Therefore they only conjecturing that Paul had
the gift of preaching, did not much enquire of the precise and special right
of calling. So the Fable in Aesop may be fitly applied to him, of the Ass
affecting principality over the other beasts, he covered himself with the
Lions skin: at which sight the beasts were affrighted; but the cunning For
laughed to see how he betrayed himself by his long ears and voice: For he
brayed like an Ass, and did not roar like a Lion. I think the learned
English did no otherwise laugh when they saw this Nightbird with such authority
determining of all sacred things, as if he were some great Councellor of holy
matters, whom they found to lie in so plain and ordinary things.

The like we read of those of Beraea, Acts 17.
who not knowing of Paul's vocation, and finding his doctrine consonant to
Scripture, did easily acknowledge him for a Teacher.

There is a more evident example in Apollos, Act. 18.24.
who being an Alexandrian, was admitted to preach at Ephesus, being known by no
privilege of vocation, but only famous for this, That he was cloquent, and
powerful in Scripture; except you will confess that the hands of the
Presbytery were laid upon one unfit, and not sufficiently learned. For it is
known that he had no solemn vocation: for the holy Ghost records, that Aquila
a Mechanic, and Priscilla his wife, after they had heard him apart, to have
taught the way of the Lord more perfectly: which differs much from Apolonius
his special sanctity of preaching; who not only would have kept off Apollos
from preaching, but if Aquila the Mechanic, and Priscilla a woman, had dared
to instruct him, not only would he have gruntled, but with his Rod and
Pastoral Sword he had thrust him out of the Church, and had it been in his
power, out of heaven too.

This case also is notable, Acts 11.20. that certain Cyprians and Disciples of
Cyrone, being dispersed by the death of Stephen, preached to the Greeks at
Anti^ch, as it were in a private zeal; which appears y from hence, because
the Church of Jerusalem hearing suddenly of this, sent Barnabas thither, that
he might enquire as of a thing unknown: Neither does it appear that he made
any inquiry concerning their special right of Calling; but seeing the effects
of their Doctrine, and the grace of GOD, he rejoiced, and approved their
endeavors. These things being thus performed by the Apostles, do agree with
the ordinary institution of teaching in the Church; which was, that every one
that was apt, might have leave to teach and prophecy in the Church, so it be
done orderly, one after another; only women were to be debarred from this
exercise for the better decorum. Whence it is clear, that under these great
divinely-inspired Rulers of the Church, the mystery of preaching was not of
such special right and spirituality, as the Treverian Stilt-walker, with the
Papists, would make us believe.

But by a pretty cavil he would feign escape: For he distinguishes between
Charitable or Edifying preaching (as he calls it) and powerful, or
potestative, which is with the power of the Keys, and of Gods Legates: that
says he, is lawful for all, this only for Ministers, as Gods Legates.

This invention of his, though childish, yet I will discuss at large, because
the business here agitate, is not of Goats-wooll, but of greatest authority in
the World; under pretense, or at least presumption of which, our modern
Preachers spue out their railings and reproaches against Princes, States, and
their own Magistrates: and the Pope has by this, subdued the whole world;
whom the Stilt-walker imitating, does oftentimes urge, that he is Christ's
Embassedour to the people: By which he assumes such power to himself, that he
thinks he preaches with the same authority that Gods Messengers did; so that
he who hears him, hears Christ; who rejects him, rejects Christ. With which
vizard if he deceive Gods people, as the Pope has done: it will be an easy
matter for him to babble out his dreams, and the affections or fooleries of
his distempered mind, in stead of Oracles. To prevent this, I will drive the
Night-bird out of his dark holes, where he endeavors to hide his deceits.

I grant first, that Christ's true Legate has very great privileges, and that
his Authority is such, that we must obey him no otherwise then Christ
himself: But I deny this to belong to our modern Preachers, though never so
godly, much less to the Stilt-walker, to be Christ's Messenger: For to obtain
the right of Christ's Embass^dour, two things are required.

First, that he be sent by God to discharge his Embassy in Gods Name.

Secondly, that he be furnished with Gifts requisite for this employment.

Which two things God has inseparably united in his Embass^dours. Hence it is
that Paul says. How shall they preach, except they be sent? Neither does he
send any Ambassador, but such as he furnishes with sufficient gifts; and not
without great reason: For he will have his Legates to be of such Authority,
that he will have absolute obedience to be yielded to them; and not to depart
from them, either to the right or the left hand, under pain of destruction, as
may be seen by Moses, Deuteronomy. 17.
Deuteronomy. 17. Upon which place Galvin commenting, how-ever he may seem a little to
doubt, or stick, yet at last he plainly writes, We are not to doubt, but God
has furnished those whom he will have excel in Authority, with the spirit of
understanding, and of uprightness, lest they should utter any perverse
opinion; which also the promise shows, they shall answer thee in judgment:
for it had been absurd, that the people should obey God in vain, and to their
own destruction. 1 Cor. 4.1.2.
To this Paul agrees, Let a man so esteem of us as of the Ministers of Christ,
and dispensers of the Mysteries of God. Now this is required in Ministers, that
some may be found faithful; which faithfulness, (says Calvin,) signifies
both the right knowledge of truth without error, as also a faithful and godly
mind. If modern Ministers be examined according to this exact Rule of Gods
Ambassadors, they will be found to come very short of them. The Antichristian
Popes, a bold kind of Vermin, as ever the world saw, say impudently, that they
overflow with these gifts of Gods Ambassadors; but long since they have been
refuted both by the writings of reformed Divines, and by experience.

This Stilt-walker does in lying exceed the Pope, in bragging himself to be
Gods Ambassador, whereas he should confess, as he does by his writings prove,
that he is both fallible and fallacious, and destitute of the gifts of Gods
Ambassadors, worthy to be checked by the Pens of all Orthodox men. Nor will
this avail him any thing in saying that the Church has made him Gods
Ambassador, by vocation, and imposition of hands. If the modern Church he of
this mind, she is as foolish as the foolish Stilt-Walker.

For God never gave this power to the Church, to con^erre the right and dignity
of a Legate, on whem God has not before bestowed necessary gifts: So that the
most excellent Church in the Apostles time, by whose imposition of hands
oftentimes followed notable gifts of Gods Spirit, could do no more but declare
by election and consecration, him to be Christ's Legate, whom they saw to be
furnished before by God, with the gifts of such an Embassy: Which appears by
that famous election of Paul and Barnabas to call the Gentiles; where God
himself commands to set Paul and Barnabas apart; but presently adds, To the
work to which I have called them, Act. 13.2.
so that the Church in calling, does nothing else but subscribe to Gods call,
and declare them to be called whom God manifests he has called: and this he
shows by necessary gifts bestowed on them; which I will make appear to be
true, not only in extraordinary, but also in ordinary callings, in Calvin's
words rather then mine, which are extant in his Commentaries on this place.

God commands Paul and Barnabas by the Churches Suffrages, to be sent abroad,
to that he had ordained them: Hence we collect, That there is no lawful
election of Pastors, but where God has the chiefest voice. For, in that he
has commanded the Church to choose Pastors and Bishops, he has not permitted
so much liberty to men, as not to be chief President and Moderator himself.
Indeed this ordinary election of Pastors, differs from that of Paul and
Barnabas, because it was behoofefull that they who were to be the Apostles of
the Gentiles, should be designed by divine Oracle, which was not needful to be
done daily in the ordination of Ministers: only this is common to both, that as
God witnessed Paul and Barnabas to be ordained particularly by him to preach
the Gospel, even so none ought to be called to teach, but such as God has
already in some sort chosen himself. Besides, it is not necessary that the
Spirit from Heaven should proclaim him to be called, of whom we speak;
because whom God furnishes with necessary gifts, (seeing they are fitted and
formed by his hand) we receive them delivered from him, as it were from hand to
hand. Thus he.

Hence the Walachrian may see his own fraud, that being destitute not only of
the Badges of Christ's Ambassadors, but likewise of ordinary Pastoral gifts,
supposes that he is made Christ's Legate by the Churches mission or
confirmation, and therefore demands with authority and power to be heard as an
Ambassador sent from Christ. All which are so many impostures and wrongs
offered to the Divine Majesty.

What Prince, I pray, will not punish such an Impostor? Paraus writes, that
such a thing happened in his time, that one in the name of an Ambassador from
England, came to the Prince Elector, whom the first day the Prince received in
State: The next day the fraud being detected (because he wanted the Badge of
his Embassy) was cast in prison, and thence in chains was sent to England to
be punished. If this cheating Walachrian be not thus punished here, let him be
assured he shall be punished hereafter by Christ, the Title of whose Embassy
he so contumeliously abuses; as in other things, so in the Popes fictions he
is fleshed and hardened; to wit, that it is in Divine and Ecclesiastical
Callings, as in Civil, that they who have may have, and who possess, may
possess; that is, if any as fit for an Office as an Ass for a Harp, yet being
chosen and employed by the Prince, acquites this right from God, that he must
be acknowledged for the Princes Legate, and must be obeyed no otherwise then
the Prince himself: And thus does the Pope esteem of his Offices.

But we have now seen, that God acknowledges no man for his Ambassador, but
he whom he has first called, and then sufficiently gifted: Which being wanting
in the Stilt-walker, we need not doubt, but that the Church in choosing him,
was deceived through Ignorante; but he sins doubly and maliciously, that
being void of gifts, dare brag himself to be CHRIST'S Legate, and in a higher
strain then the Church could be her election afford him.

Next to preaching, is the administration of the Sacraments, which at this day
is held so holy, and in a special manner Ecclesiastic, that from it, as from
a Sanctuary, they keep off Proponents endowed with the gift of Preaching: Which
special sanctity is not taken out of Gods Word, but first coined in
Antichrists Shop, and by an indelible contagion, is crept upon our Churches; in
which, as men do most smell of Popish Garlic, so they extol it, as we see
in the Stilt-walker, who having crawled through the Papists Dunghill more
diligently then others he cries out, that this part of his Church-furniture, is
in such a special manner holy, as that the Leviticall Office of sacrificing,
was not more. But he is much deceived. For under the Levits the right of
circumcising was in common, and not proper to the Levites: they killed and ate
the Passover when no Levit was present. John 4.1.2. 1 Cor. 3. Acts 6.
In the New Testament Christ's Disciples are said to baptize without any
difference: Paul in express and plain terms says, that he was not sent to
baptize, and rejoiced that he had not baptized many of them. The Apostles
laying aside the Deacons Office, did claim to themselves the Function of
praying and preaching; but never a word of Baptism, or administration of the
Supper.

Neither has this any show of truth, which commonly they object, that Christ,
Matthew. 28.19. did join preaching and Baptism by an indissoluble knot: For I
ask, To what preaching did Christ tie Baptism? Whether to the Apostolical
alone, which he there solemnly instituted, or simply to public preaching? If
to the former, then our modern Preachers are too blame, in that they preach not
Apostolically, and yet challenge the special right of baptizing out of this
place; but if to this, they offend in taking away the right of preaching from
Proponents and public Preachers.

And whreas we have proved, that God has debarred no man from public
preaching, if he be gifted, it follows, that the right of baptizing does not
belong to Church-Preachers alone Iure Divine: So that hence it is plain, that
our modern Divines do out of this place argue no otherwise, then if heretofore
the Princes of the Jews had said, that to them alone the right of circumcising
was given by God, because it was solemnly said to Prince Joshua by God, Jos.
6.2. Make to thy self knives of stone, and circumcise the Children of Israel,
etc.

The same reason is of the Supper. I confess Christ instituted and celebratad
the first Supper; but it is no where said, that this was made a perpetual Law,
that no man might do so, but he who is specially sanctified; yea, the contrary
appears rather, in celebration of the Supper, which was then usual in
Corinth, when as yet corruptions had not crept in among them. For as in diverse
places they met together to worship: so there they celebaated the Supper and
Lovefeasts, so that the richer sort among them brought from home their meat and
drink; by which first the rich and poor feasted together in common; then
breaking the bread, and distributing it with the wine among themselves, they
did solemnly declare the Lords death: which simple way of celebrating the
Supper without ceremony, so long as it wanted scandal, was never reproved by
the Apostles, nor after, but for scandals and abuses.

Whence I collect, that then ceremonial sanctity was not known among them;
for want of which they suppose the Sacrament to be profaned, consisting in
this, that none but the Bishop alone, who labors in the Word, must consecrate
the Bread, break and distribute it: for it is not likely that the Bishop was
present in all these meetings; for if he had been present, the Corinthians had
not been so exorbitant, as to profane the use of the Supper with
drunkenness, and other sins, or if such disorder had happened upon the
connivence of their Rulers, doubtless the Apostle had severely reproved such
Bishops, as the authors and fautors of all that mischief.

But whereas there is no foot-step of any such matter, it is likely that even
under the Apostles, the Rulers were not always present in their Churches, nor
always president at the administration of the Supper. And therefore our modern
sacramental sanctity of special right, was not known to them.

Hence, I say, that custom has conferred many things upon the Church-Rulers,
which have been common among Christians, for order sake, and decency. Upon this
grew the pride of the Rulers, that they challenged that to themselves of right,
which they enjoyed upon mere courtesy: whence at last sprung up that violence
and superstition, which begot Antichrist. This may be seen in the Pope, who
though he was so bountiful of Baptism, that he granted it to Midwives; yet
of the Supper he made an Idol, and a Sacrifice: by whose mystical
Spirituality he so befooles the world, that upon the privilege of bestowing
this, (which he claims solely to himself) has subjected to him all the
Princes of the earth, too superstitiously fearful.

From his institution arises whatsoever the Modern new Papists tumultuously
struggle for about the right of administering the Sacraments, that they persuade
ignorant men, that they are shut out of heaven, and out of the Church, if they
be debarred from the use of them. The right of conferring which, because with
tooth and nail they maintain belongs to them alone, that by this pretense
they might dominere over the souls and consciences of all men; every one nill
he will he, being desirous to save his soul, is forced at last to fawn upon
Churchmen, as the guardians of sacred things, and the arbitrators of the
eternal salvation of souls.

This is not much unlike the insolency of a bold and deceitful Butler, who
will threaten the Cash-keeper; yea, the Master of the House himself, that he
shall have no victuals or drink, except he will give him leave to put his
hand in the Money-bagge as often as he pleases.

That the great Romish Antichrist by such tricks has attained to his tyranny,
experience does show: That our Stilt-walker is his very Ape, I have already
declared, and shall more fully make it appear in what follows. Censura and
disciplina Ecclesiastica.


The right of preaching, praying publicly, and administering the Sacraments, is
not so sacred to Apolonius, as the privilege of censuring, and the right of
Ecclesiastic Discipline, of which he bragges every where, and chiefly, Part 2.
page 1, 2, 3, etc. For this he says [is the spiritual means of Reformation,
and jurisdiction of the outward Ecclesiastic Court, the noblest act of which
is Excommunication. He calls that a free power which is subject to no man's
pleasure, a Regal power, a spiritual compelling power, a spiritual Rod, and
Sword, to which all Magistrates are bound to submit themselves, and what is
theirs.] So that none is better seen in the Records of the Popes Hierarchy,
then this Treverian: He deserves a Calfe of the Pope; but being not yet clean
from Grammatical filth, has rashly broke in upon the subtilties of Scotus, or
Dionysius: for he distinguishes out of Cluto, Bellarmine, Cicestriensis, and
other Patriarchs of his Divinity, Church Discipline, into the lesser censure
which he calls that of the Publican, of the inward Court, of the preaching
Keys, of loosing and binding, but of juridiciall, and of Ecclesiastic
Discipline.

The Jesuits would be glad to see Apolonius well knocked about the head with his
monstrous distinctions: he is so fine and well versed in these, that no
Trichotomist can be more acute. Although I am content in this Art to yield to
the Stilt-walker; yet it will be no hard matter this way to make out of one
Apolonius, many: for I will distinguish him into a corporal and a spiritual
Apolonius; corporal, into a Treverian and a Middleburgian: the Middleburgian,
into a sober and well fed one: well fed into him that feeds on sweet meats, and
him that feeds on Lobsters: on Lobsters, into him being angry, and being
appeased: being angry, into him whilst he is writing, or whilst he is
speaking: whilst speaking, into a whisperer, or a blasphemer: As he is a
blasphemer, I distinguish him into a Consistorial, or a Church-blasphemer: a
Church-blasphemer, into a standing or a sitting Church-blasphemer: Again, he
sits either in the Assembly, or in the Pulpit, and so in infinitum. Again, I
will distinguish spiritual Apolonius, as he is moved by a good, or by an evil
spirit: as he is moved by a good spirit, into a young Scholar, or a Bachiler
of divinity: the Bachiler of divinity into a Pastor, or one that stands for
his degree of Doctor: the Pastor into a Preaching or a Praying Pastor: the
praying Pastor into a Sacramentarian and Disciplinarian: the Disciplinanatian
into an usurper of the greater censure, or of the lesser censure, that is, of
the Keys: and the Keys I divide into the Ministerial Key and the Juridiciall
Key: the Juridiciall, into that of Preaching, and that of Discipline.

And so we may run in infinitm upon distinctions, if out of one accident, or
small circumstance, we make a subject altogether different. I will not envy
him that is at leisure to go on in such trifles. I have in one example showed
his folly, and will now briefly proceed in discoursing of censure, and
Church Discipline; which with him properly is of force, because in it there is
more authority then labor. For he every where with the Pope his predecessor,
seeks for a jurisdiction that is absolute, spiritual, dis-joyned from the
worldly power of Magistrates, whereby he thinks that he has immediate power
under God to censure as he pleases, all Magistrates, Kings and Princes: for
he makes a twofold censure, the greater and the lesser: of both which, I will
severally speak.

The lesser censure is, when one for scandal is debarred from the use of the
Supper, according to the will of the Ministers; but yet that he remain a
member of the Church still. That this is a mere human invention, shall appear
by what follows,

First, I ask, by what divine appointment is he to be kept off from the Supper,
who is a member of the Church, and so continues? Their common answer is, That
what is holy must not be given to Dogs, nor pearls cast before swine. But
this is a blasphemy rather then a reason: For who will say that they are Hogs
and Dogs, who are yet cherished in the bosom of the Church? Sure they are
swine, who wallow in the filthy mire of wickedness; and they are dogs, who
bark in blaspheming Gods worship. Such were the incestuous Corinthian,
Hymenaus and Alexander, whom Paul delivered over to Satan.

But they obtrude another Fiction to us: For they say, That those who were
polluted ceremonially under the old Law, (though they continued members of the
Church) were not admitted to their Sacraments, so long as they were
ceremonially polluted, and that the same ought to be observed in moral
pollutions. This is frivolous and inconsequent: For the Scribes and Pharisees
were no less curious of their spirituality and sacred things, then the Modern
Walachrian Papists, and yet they brought to Christ in the Temple, the
Adultresse morally polluted, which if she had still been leprous, or
ceremonially unclean, they had violated their sacred worship. Yet the
Pharisees, with the Publicanes, who were morally polluted, went up into the
Temple to pray; so that Christ affirmed the Publican after prayer, to have
departed cleaner from the Temple then the Pharisee, Luke 16.
If there had been the same reason of moral and ceremonial pollution, all
these being morally polluted, should have been debarred from sacred things.

Nor is it to be doubted, but that God knows best what belongs to his
worship, and who are to be admitted to his holy things. However it be
certain, that God would not such as were polluted cetemonially, to come to the
Temple, or to holy things; yet it is known that he would have those who were
morally unclean, to come to his sacred things; without premitting any
ceremonial or penitentiary Rite, whereby they might be first morally
cleansed. For they who had defiled themselves with perfidiousnesse and rapine,
are commanded to offer a Goat for a Sacrifice to God, so far was it that they
were to abstain from sacrificing. So in the new Testament we read, Lev. 6.6, 7.
that John baptized the Soldiers, Pharisees, Sadduces, and that polluted kind
of men, which he calls, Generation of vipers.

Besides, if in Gods worship the same reason be of those that are ceremonially
and morally polluted, why do not the Walackrian Censors, keep off likewise
those that are morally polluted, from the whole worship? For this is known,
that it is not lawful for Excommunicate persons, either by the greater or the
lesser censure, to hear Sermons, to give Alms, to see the Supper administered,
to sing Psalms, or to lift up their hands in prayer to God: which being well
considered, is the most sacred thing of the whole worship: Isa. 1. 1 Timothy ^.
so that God commands this spiritual sacrifice to be offered by those that
have deans and pure hands: so that these light Walachrian Levits, are
inconstant and ridiculous in the prostitution and preserving of their sacred
things, in that they neglect other things, and are only careful that the
Supper be not polluted: the cause of which difference is, that they might hence
have the command and dominion over men. For they persuade the ignorant, that
there is such necessity of the Supper, that whosoever is debarred from it by
Church-censure, is in danger of eternal damnation.

To this Fiction they add another very ridiculous: That under pain of
sacrilege, none must give the Sacraments, but such as are consecrated by
imposition of hands, that is, Ministers. Which Fiction I have already refelled:
by which persuasion when they see the old Papists to have made themselves Lords
of the world, they still hope, that by the same means they shall attain the
same Fortune.

But let us yield to these Church Censures, that the case is alike in those
that are ceremonially and morally polluted. Where have they learned, that the
cleansed as well as the polluted, are to abstain from holy things? The Levites
indeed might keep off those that were ceremonially polluted: but by the Law
they were bound to absolve them, being cleansed. If they had so played in their
sacredthings, as either not to cleanse, or to admit to their Sacrifices, such
as were cleansed, the Civil Magistrate might have punished them. But the like
reason is of Moral pollution, it is unfit to debar those from holy things,
who are morally cleansed. There were diverse means ordained by God, by which
men were expiated from Legal uncleanness: But for moral impurity, we know
no other means to be expiated from it, but repentance, and prayer for pardon.

This may be seen in David, so long as he slept in his sin, and begged not
for pardon, he was unclean; but after he confessed his sin, Psalm. 32.
and asked pardon, Nathan told him, that God had pardoned his sin. So David
himself says, that so long as he did not confess and repent, his sin
remained; but when he confessed his sin, and begged for pardon, God forgave him.

God himself every where has appointed this general Rule: That at what time
soever a sinner did convert from his sins, he would not remember his former
iniquities; yea, though they were as red as Scarlet and blood, Isal. ^.
yea upon their conversion they should be made whiter then Wool, or Snow.
Which Law John repeates: If we acknowledge our sins, 1 John 1.
God is just and faithful, who will cleanse us from all unrigteousnesse. This
Christ showed in the Pharisees and Publicans prayers: For this by confessing
his finnes, and asking pardon, was forgiven and cleansed: the other, in not
confessing, but reckoning up his virtues, remained unclean. Which do clearly
show, that they who are morally unclean, are cleansed by repentance alone.

Hence it follows, that if a faithful man, though grievously fallen, yet if
he repent, and seek for reconciliation with God, he is no more polluted
morally, but clean in Gods sight. John upon this only ground baptized any
that were morally polluted, Luke 16.
if they were purged by repentance alone, and confession. Why then should man
invade Gods right, to think him unclean whom God esteems clean. Why should a
prating Priest think him unworthy of sacred things, whom God has not declared
to be unworthy? Thus the Pope plays in holy things, that he is not content
with that Law of expiation, which to God is satisfactory: For so he should lose
the profit and honor which he gets by his sacred Jurisdiction: Therefore he
afsumes to himself to judge of Christians repentance, and for this cause
prescribes times, and penitentiary penalties; which after he moderates by
indulgences, and remits when he pleases.

This is believed by foolish men, who think that this is done by special
privilege: he in the mean while like a Cheater, wipes them of their money.
For he imposes on rich men such penitentiary punishments, as he knows will be
most inconvenient for them. Whence oftentimes this penance is redeemed with a
great fumme of money. By which Merchandice the Popes Exchequer must become very
rich. Of this disease of Covetousness and Avarice, the Pope has been so long
sick, that shortly after the time of Phocas, s^aven hundred years ago, one
Isaatius a Patrician, and Ambassador of Heraclius the Emperor, robbed the
Palace of Lateran under Pope Severinus the first, affirming that it was unfit
that the Popes Exchequer should be fuller then the Emperors.

I doubt not but the Stile-walker is exactly skillful in the Papal Arts, and
therefore has assumed to himself, as a special privilege, the right of
excluding Christians from the Supper, and of appoynting the time how long they
shall forbear; hoping also that by this cunning he may procure of the richer
sort of Christians, who will be impatient to forbear long, either money or
else good cheer, or the promise of some Office, or some other kind of
gratification. How ever he may either enjoy or be frustrated of his hopes,
wise Christians, and honest-hearted Magistrates ought to be assured, that these
Walachrians play the lying Cretians, in making their Walachrian Tribunal more
rigid and precise then Christ's own Tribunal.

For he declares, that they who are morally unclean, are made pure by faith
alone and repentance, and therefore worthy of his sacred Mysteries: They on the
contrary, debar from their Sacraments Antichristian-like, faithful and
penitent men as unclean, until they have given satisfaction to their
particular and usurped right.

But they go about to wash out this spot. For (say they) it is not sufficient
that one declare himself to be penitent, but this liberty of sinning must be
kept under by the Rod of the lesser Censure, and that the scandal received
must be expiated as it were with an Ecclesiastic and spiritual penance.

I answer, It is most certain, that the licentious liberty of sinning is to be
curbed in Gods people, and scandals to be removed. But I deny that it is in
man's power to choose what means he pleases, and that what he chooses must
be held for divine. They are as much deceived, as if the old Levites had taken
upon them to expiate at their pleasure, those that were ceremonially polluted:
For GOD has set down the manner of expiating every sin: which being truly
Divine, they could not transgress. Now I would have the Walachrian
Stilt-walker show us by what Law has God commanded Preachers to remove
scandal from the Church so, as that a penitent sinner should be debarred from
the Supper so long time as the Churchmen shall prefixe; as if this power were
given to them by a sacred and Divine right. He shall as soon find this in
Scripture, as the rest of his lies (with which he has stuffed his patched
pieces) to be divine truth. For the Scripture is ignorant of the modern lesser
Censure; yea, it is repugnant to the institution of the Apostles, and their
practice, as may be seen by the Church or Corinth, in which Paul reproves
their filthiest sins, with which he says, most of them were tainted.

Surely in this case, if ever occasion was offered to debar them from the
Communion, and that for a long time, that the licentiousness of sin might be
for the time to come enrbed, and present scandals removed. 1 Cor. 11.
But what did Paul in this case? He forbids them not, but plainly commands them
to receive the Sacrament: he prescribes no penitentiary punishments, nor the
manner or times of repentance, but wills every man to examine himself, and so
to eat and drink. So that hence it follows necessarily, that either Paul
prostituted those holy Mysteries to the unclean, or else that he was ignorant
of this Walachrian sanctity.

But they will object, That Paul gave strict charge, concerning the incestuous
Corinthian, that as naughty leaven he should be cast out of the Church.

I answer, that Paul speaks there of delivering over to Satan, and not of the
lesser Censure, which is the fiction of Churchmen, for establishing of which
this is alleged idly. Secondly, the proceeding of Paul with the incestuous
Corinthian, shows that he was ignorant of the figment of lesser
Excommunication. For not only was that an abominable and capital Crime which
was committed by that member of the Church of Corinth, by polluting himself
once and again, but having no sense or feeling of his sin, he wallowed like
a filthy Swine, in the unclean mire of sin, in marrying and lying with his
stepmother, whom for his impenitencie, and security in sin, Paul delivers
over to Satan; but so, that hearing of his repentance, he would not have the
sentence pronounced put in execution.

But now if Paul had consulted with the Walashrian Divines, a great question
had been moved, how the scandal given should be removed? For it might seem fit
that he should be debarred from the Supper for some long time, or else some
penitentiary punishments inflicted on him. But Paul being ignorant of all these
new invented Artifices, as soon as he heard of the sinners repentance,
writes, It is sufficient for him that he has been reproved of many. He wills
them to comfort the sinner, that he be not swallowed up with too much grief.
He adds, Whom you pardon, I will pardon in the sight of Christ, that we may
not be deceived by Satan, because his cunning plots are not unknown to us.

This is true Divinity, but far different from that of the Popes, and
Walachrians, who for lesser faults will not show such lenity to the penitent;
but think that Christians must be tortured under pretense of removing scandal;
not that Christ might be honored, or souls saved, but that hence domineering
and profit might to them redound.

I confess this is no new evil custom, but ancient, and shortly begot after
the Apostles death. For the Church-Rulers wanting the Apostolical gifts of
Miracles, and of infallible preaching, by which the Apostles, as Divine
Master Builders, did curb all consasions, being then destitute of the
Magistrates help, they found out diverse Constitutions and remedies for
preserving of the Churches peace, and removing of standalls; which though they
had not divine and Apostolical authority; but were found out according to time
and place; yet through custom, by degrees, they became Laws: so that not
only did they pertinaciously insist upon them; but oftentimes used more rigor
to preserve them, then in Christ's open institutions, that they doubted not in
defense of them to lose their lives.

Now these Laws consisted chiefly in the right of censuring, and in
Ecclesiastic penalties; among which this was ordinary, that if any had
privately or publikly offended, he was debarred from the Sacrament, until he
had satisfied the Church concerning the scandal given; in which they were so
rigid, that oftentimes they would keep men off from the Communion, three,
four, nay, ten years, and sometimes all their life; especially if any through
impatience of their tortures had denied Christ; he was never again, or with
much difficulty admitted into the Church. Which rigor Superstition did so
confirm, that before the three hundredth year, Marcellinus, Bishop of Rome; who
because of his torments had denied Christ, came humbly to the Synod of an
hundred and fourscore Bishops at Sinuessa, and begged pardon for his sin,
though afterward taking courage, he suffered martyrdom for Christ, as
Cornelius, Cyprian, and others did. So then, this right of censuring was at
that time so rigid, that in many things it exceeded moderation.

And whilst the Rulers were too careful of their own, and of the Churches
honor, the common sort of Christians out of too much credulity, did
superstitiously subject themselves to Church-Lawes: Hence no moderation was
observed, either by the one in commanding, or by the other in obeying; which
Cyprian and others saw long before the three hundredth year of Christ. For he
reproving that rigid and penitential way of censuring, writes thus: I wish all
may be brought back to the Church: I pardon all, I wink at many things, I wish
and desire a Recollection of our fraterni^ie, I have alwast offended my self
in to much pardoning offenses. So Chrysostom later then he, writes plainly, If
God be so merciful, why should his Priest seem to be so rigid? For then they
saw that Pastors exceed in their censures, and rigorous commands of
penitentiary penalties: so that they confessed, they were against their wills,
as it were, carried headlong by a Turren; into by ways, which they could not
allow, no knew not how to help, by reason of the custom then received in the
Church. A though there might besome use of such Laws then, when Pastors and
Bishops did promiscuously submit themselves and the rewards both of ruling and
ruled Christians, then were tortures, benishments, and a thousand deaths.

After that Emperors became Christians, and Petern patrimony increased, pride
and prepostorous zeal ceised on the Teachers, so that they ascribed as much to
Church-inventions, as if they had been Gods Laws; nor did they urge less
obedience to them, then if they had been instituted by Christ; which we may
chiefly see in Ambrose about the year 400. who of a civil P^^tor, was
suddenly made Bishop by Theodosius the Emperor: He exceedingly vexed this
Emperor with this censuring Ferula, for some offense by him committed, whereof
notwithstanding he repented. Ambrose willing to let his master see the vigor
of Ecclesiastic power, forced him to sit among the penitents, being secluded a
while from the holy mysteries, until he had satisfied the Churches
penitential rights, and his humor, which was too dangerous and rash a
presumption. For if this Spaniard Theodosius had not been then seasoned with
that common superstition (which fell out well for the Church) that Church Laws
must be obeyed as divine (which had he been wise he might have seen, that
these were not ordained by God and his Apostles, but introduced by custom, and
humane invention,) he might have by his own power, hipped Ambrase his
Hierarchy, by disanulling these Church-inventions, and yet n^^ violating the
divine constitutions of religion.

These were the forerunners of growing An^^christ, which afterward increased
more and more in Church-Rulers, chiefly the Popes. For in the year 490. Pope
Anastasim durst excommunicate Anastasius the Emperor, grandfather of
Justinian, that is, debar him from the Sacraments, with John Bishop of
Const^^^^ple: Which censure, notwithstanding that Emperor contem^^ed, having
sent back the Popes Legates in a leaking ship, on condition that they should
not touch upon any part of the Greek shore; but deliver this message to the
Pope, That he must know the Emper^i^ is to comm^^ (...) the Pope.

The like censuring fact was performed by P^pe Martin the first, under
Constantius the Emperor, about the year 650. But the Emperor by Theodorus
Calliopa, commanded that Pope to be brought to him in chains, who banished
him into Pontus, where he died miserably. But Hildebrand, or Gregory 7.
out-matched all the rest in pride and boldness, about the year 1080. who
compelled Henry the fourth, Emperor, to come barefooted through Ice and Snow,
in an humble manner, to him, that the Pope might receive satisfaction in his
censuring right, or else Henry had lost his Kingdom.

Hence then it is apparent, that however this lesser Censure is brought into
our Churches, and permitted by the States, yet it is not of divine institution,
but a mere humane invention, which heretofore was devised upon a specious
pretense; but by reason of the pride and arrogance of Churchmen, it has
hatched much mischief, and will more doubtless, if religious and wise
Magistrates do not prevent it.

For all that the Walachrian Stilt-walker has said, tends to this, that the
lesser Censure was instituted by Christ in his Church; and therefore is
spiritual, holy, and of Divine right, and only committed to
Church Governors, but denied to Magistrates, who if they do offer to touch
it, they become sacrilegious, and trample on the blood of Christ. If godly
Magistrates suffer themselves once to be seasoned with this persuasion, these
new Papists will quickly prey upon their Majesty, Fame, and Estates. Which
worthy Vedelius smelling out, warnes Magistrates, and all Christians, that they
would not suffer themselves to be deluded. Hence the Stilt. walker growing
fierce against him, upbraids him for his lavish expressions, and falsely says,
that all good men are grieved, that such Books should be vented out of our
University, which call in question the sanctity of Church Discipline: yea,
elsewhere playing both the Prophet and the Disputer, uses direful
imprecations against Macovius, and I know not who else, who dare affirm, That
the Church-Difcipline at this day is a Civil business: under pretense of
which, Ministers will prey upon the goods and fame of every man, if prevention
be not used: and prephesieth, that that Writer will one time, or other be
entangled with the terrors of his conscience, when he lies down securely. Thus
the Cuckooe sings concerning the Conscience, and a Stilt-walker puts worthy
Vedelius in mind of piety: so the Sow will teach M^^erva: but his actions and
railings show, that conscience is far from him, neither is there any thing
sacred to him, except honors and worldly profit: Therefore Bal^ams cursings,
and Shemeis tailings are to no purpose. I wish him to beware, lest he be
punished for so many wicked deeds, by the hands of some Noble Joshua, or some
wise Solomon. Therefore let him look to it: this I Will say, that the lesser
Censure does not only contradict the Institution of the Apostles, and agree
with Papisticall tyranny, but also totally consists in this, That it is
prejudicial to the honor and profit of good Christians, and chiefly to the
Majesty of Princes and Magistrates, as Churchmen are maliciously affected. For
since Christians have learned to dissemble, and under the Vizard of Religion,
to hunt after honor and profit, Magistrates have begun to serve the pride of
Churchmen, that being honored by their commendations, they may attain the
repute of Godly men. Time also, and an evil Genius, have taught spiritual
Clergymen to be mercenary, and to make bargains of their Ecclesiastic
Functions, which they will not perform without wages, and familiar access to
the Persons and Tables of great men; as when either the Preacher himself; or
some of his near friends, do gape at some preferment in the Church or State,
the Magistrates help and suffrage is expected.

This has been no where more practiced then in the Walachrian Classis, that
such a Bargain being made, any man, though never so infamous and wicked, may
be protected by the Churches Target, and so defended by their censuring Sword,
that though he be guilty of sedition, fraud, drunkenness, and most grievous
scandals, he shall not be debarred from the Communion, or from keeping
company with the Clergy: but for his most notorious evil deeds, shall to the
grief and reluctancie of good men, attain to places of Honor in the Church,
and of profit in the State.

Nor is this spiritual Sword defensive only, but offensive also. For if some
grave man sit at the Helm of Government in the State, whose life and faith are
unblameable, only defective in not supporting Apolonian Church pride; he must
expect some mischief intended against him, by underhand dealing, and
corrupting of Suffrages. And I hear that cheating perfidiousnesse and
perjuries, cannot be practiced so impudently, but if occasion serve, the
holiness of the Wallachrian Ecclesiastic Discipline will sanctify them all
in the Apolonian Clergy. If in the Civil Court the thing succeed not, then
they fly for help to the censure and lesser excommunication, by devising
something, which may bring him in disgrace among the people: For this impaires
not their sanctity, that they know they obtrude upon the people falsehoods, and
fictions, if they can but obtain credit: neither matters it whether or not one
be accused in that Court of true or false crimes.

It is an old practice there, First to punish, then to enquire into the cause,
or to devise a cause of punishment: as the Scribes said of Christ, If he were
not guilty, we had not delivered him to you: we have a Law, by which he must
dye. So that no man can live there so warily, but that Walachrian Classis will
trouble him by the Arbitrary Sword of their lesser Censure: For they think
that they can by their lesser Censure, make a Publican of a Christian; that is,
a great sinner, and hateful to all the people. Which therefore they call, The
Publicans excommunication: So it is most evident, that there is no other use of
the lesser Censure there, but that these unhappily new up-start Papists, may
satisfy their own perverse affections; and by indirect ways remove them from
the Helm of Government in the State, against whom they have any spleen, by
lessening their esteem among the people, and wronging them by their slanders;
persuading ignorant people, that they never make use of this Censure, but upon
just and weighty causes. Apolonius cannot be so ignorant, but must know, that
by his help this Play has been acted an hundred times. Whence the godly and
prudent Magistrate may conclude, that the causes of inspection, and examination
of men's actions by the lesser Censure, are no less then by the greater: for
this they commit not to Churchmen alone, for some politic respects, lest they
should rashly insult over the fame of their subjects.

Because this is no less aimed at in the lesser Censure, the whole intent of
which is, that they may entrap indirectly, not only Subjects, but Princes
themselves, and may mock them after the old Papists example; they must provide
that the Common wealth receive no prejudice, and that men be not affrighted by
feigned pretenses of sanctity; whereas this lesser Censure is a mere humane
invention, equal to the figments of old Popery, as it is maintained by the
Walachrian Stilt-walker. For not only has it there rumated the Church, and
Religion; but also has brought the Civil Magistrate into subjection; from
which thraldom the High and Mighty States will not be long free, if the rest
of the Ministers follow the example of these Walacrian Papists, in daring to
insult by words and deeds over them.

But this lesser Censure will not suffice Apolonius, who is as wise as mad Ajax,
that killed his sheep to please his mind; and therefore has a high esteem of
the greater censure, by which he thinks he has power given him by God, to make
Heathens of Christians: Which way of censuring is the very old Popish way; nor
is it more like Christ's institution, and the Apostles practice, then Gold is
like Dross. For the old Censure, first instituted by GOD, and used by the
Jews, was practiced by Apostolical Churches; and that by the command of
Christ and his Apostles.

This consisted first in verbal reprehension, which all were bound to
exercise, and that by divine right, Levit. 19.17. Heb. 3.13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11, 12,
13, 14.

Secondly, in Separation, when they withdrew themselves from their company, and
avoided the conversation of such as were not bettered by admonition and
reprehension, Mat. 18.15.16. 1 Cor. 5.9.10, 11. Which separation was made for
two causes: First, that by this the contagion of sin might be avoided.
Secondly, that the sinner seeing himself despised, might be ashamed, and so
might hence take an occasion to repent.

The Jews in Christ's time by virtue of this Censure alone, debarred Publicans
and sinners from their companies in private, whom they could not keep out of the
Temple; who therefore reproved Christ, because he did eat and drink, and keep
company with Publicans and sinners, whose institution Christ did not absolutely
reprove, but corrected, showing that it was not simply unlawful to converse
with Publicans and sinners, but lawful, when any furnished with the gifts of
instructing, admonishing, and reproving, like a Physician cures them of their
evils and spiritual maladies.

This Doctrine Paul urges, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.14. where he teaches, that we must
not converse with them who live disorderly, that being by this separation
contemned, they might be ashamed: but that they should be excommunicated out
of the Church, or debarred from Divine worship, and means of salvation, we
read not in Scripture: but rather to admonish them, to reprove them, as
brethren, but not reject them as enemies. And as he teaches in 2 Timothy 2. v.
25. we must use them with lenity, although they make resistance.

This is the ancient Censure grounded on Divine Precepts, and the practice of
Antiquity, of most Divine right, and most fit to remove sin and scandal out
of the Church: which had it continued, all Ecclesiastic tyranny had been
removed out of the Church; neither had so much carelessness, and contagion of
scandals fallen among Christians, especially their Rulers. For each Christian
being sollicitous of his own and neighbors salvation, by admonishing,
reproving, and separating them, when need required, he had removed from his
brethren sins and scandal, yea even from the Doctors themselves, by right of
this fraternity: as we see how Paul reproved Peter, when he walked not
uprightly; and how Aquila and Priscilla did instruct and admonish that famous
Teacher Apollos.

But now here we see the Churches infelicity, for the Pride of the Doctors,
especially among Papists, has taken away this old Censure; because it gave too
much power to all and singular Christians, whom they began to account for
Laymen, and thought it unworthy that the care of great business should be
committed to every member of the Church: But Clergymen took all this upon
themselves, and made that Office peculiar to themselves, which God had granted
to all and singular: Whence arise these mischiefs which we see this day in the
Church: First, in that the common sort of Christians laying aside all care of
the Church, and holy mysteries, give themselves totally over to worldly
business, leaving the Office of censuring to Ministers altogether. Secondly,
in that the Clergy are so puffed up with this prerogative, that they think
themselves the only Judges of censures and Manners, and that they are armed
with such power, as if they could by divine privilege open and shut heaven,
bind and loose, and make of a Christian a profane man and a Publican: which
persuasion, as soon as it possessed men's minds, it first brought Ecclesiastic
tyranny into the Church, and at length begot Antichristian Popes, who by this
power of censuring has subjected to himself all Christians, especially the
Kings of the earth. As we may see in that wicked Hildebrand, of whom we spoke
before: who about the year 1080. forced Henry the fourth Emperor, a man of a
degenerate spirit, and who had committed adultery with the Whore of Babel,
Platina.
to make a journey barefooted through Ice and Snow to him, being then at
Canassa; where for three days togother he did humbly entreat to be admitted,
which he could not obtain without the intercession of dishonest Mythildes, and
her Ruffians; by whose mediation he was admitted at last to fall down at that
wicked Popes feet, and to receive pardon.

I confess at this day the Popes pride is not so great, because out of the
Revelation we are taught, that many Kings now forsake the Whore, and spoil
her. But whatsoever he does at this day, in his intolerable pride, he does it
under the sole Title of the Sword, and of the power of Censuring, whose
thunderbolt is Excommunication. And though this mocker of all holy things,
knows and believes, that this his thunder is not more valid then a Fart, yet
he persuades the timorous superstitious people, and they believe him, that it
is a thing of great spirituality and force: So that one who was too
superstitious, seeing with what pomp excommunication was denounced at Rome,
cried out, that doubtless he was thrust out of heaven, whom the Pope thus
excommunicated.

For he is a pleasant Actor in this Play, which is performed with strange
running up and down of Church-Ruffians and the Popes Parasites, with great
jangling of Bells, with a wonderful kindling of fires and Torches, and a
sudden putting of them out: and although in this he does nothing, but what with
as great dexterity is performed daily by Stage Players in their Tragedies; yet
by a fatal efficacy of error, he has so prevailed with Princes, that they
believe him to be a most holy Father, whom they see, and often confess, to be
a most wicked knave, and that his excommunication is a matter of wonderful
force and sanctity; albeit they know that he debarres them, not from heaven,
but from their earthly goods, except they resist him by force of arms.

The chief places out of which heretofore the Antichristian Giants did beat
out the Popes Ecclesiastic thunder of the greater Censure; are these, Matthew.
16.19. Matthew. 18.17, 18. John 20.21, 23. 1 Cor. 5.4.5. and that is of chief
account, which Christ promised to Peter, in giving him the Key^s of the
Kingdom of Heaven, that is, power to forgive and retain sins, and to bind
that in Heaven which is bound on earth: this is commonly thought to be given
to Peter, and the Bishops of Rome, by special privilege; with which Title the
Pope is so proud, that he carries the Keys in his Arms, as if he were that
Doorkeeper, or Claviger of hell, mentioned in the Revelation, and so ascribes
to himself alone, as being Peter's successor, this power of the Keys: By the
persuasion of this superstion, he has subjected the whole world to him: For so
he threatens, that he will shut Heaven gates against all those who will not
obey him.

The Walachriah Stilt-Walker being instructed in the Popes school, he trumpets
out every where, the power of the Apostolical Keys, with so great pride of
Jurisdiction, and of commanding power, that the Popes Keys, and those of
Apolonius, seem to be made by the same Vulcan, which want nothing but a little
better polishing, which in time will be done: For who ever will turn over the
Papists writings, and these of Apolonius, shall see, that whatsoever the Pope
proudly bragges of concerning his Hierarchy, in the right of Peter's succession,
the same does Apolonius, and the new Walachrian Papists proudly challenge in
right of Apostolical succession. Nor do I deny, but this has been too common
among diverse reformed teachers, to be somewhat superstitiously affected with
this right of the Keys, and of Excommunication; which is not to be wondered at,
seeing some of the Reformers had been bred in the Romish Church, whose Botchers
shop was filled with such old trash of Jurisdiction, it could scarce be
otherwise, but that the most part being born there, must smell of that mother:
But afterward some others treading in their footsteps, and prouder then the
former, did too much advance this Ecclesiastic power of the Keys: So that we
must confess, it has fallen out with many Reformers, as it does with those
who go about to purge out the Garlic which they have eat; who though they
do what they can to purge and remove it, yet they cease not to smell more or
less of it.

This may be seen in many, chiefly in our Walachrian Stilt-walker, who above
all others delighting in the menstruous blood of his Romish mother, and
smelling so rank of it, boasts so proudly every where of the power of the
Keys, that you shall scarce find his equal; whose fooleries that I may now
refell, this I say, That there is nothing more certain, then that Christ in
promising the Keys to Peter, and the Apostles, did confer on them no vulgar
thing, but what was both new, rare, and excellent, and by which he would exalt
them above humane reach, as it were, when he gave them this power of heavens
Keys. Whence it is not likely, that by these is meant so small and easy a
matter, as the Church at this day exercises. For what great or rare matter is
this, if a Church-Ruler, or Preacher say at this day, the Kingdom of Heaven is
open to thee, if thou believe; if thou beleevest not, it is shut against thee?
Not only was this the ancient preaching, but almost every ordinary man in the
Church can say so; Yea whoever reads the Scripture, or hears but a child
reading them, he exercises this judgment of himself, and uses the Key: For
if he see any disobedient, he will judge that heaven is shut against him, if
he repent not: If again he see him convert, he will judge that heaven is
opened, and so will use this Key.

Neither must Churchmen think, that they have now more power in using this
Key: For we find by experience, that Clergy. Assemblies, Consistories,
Classes, or Synods, are no more powerful in denouncing this judgment, then
any private man, being intent on the thing, and careful to search out the
truth; so that we find by experience, that one Layman has judged better, and
has made better use of this Key, then a whole Synod. For though Apolonius
prate much concerning the special assistance of the holy Ghost; yet we find
no other effects thereof, then what the Pope boldly bragges concerning his
infallibillity, and yet he is the lyingest faisister that ever the world saw:
So then, these Churchmen are very oftentimes deceived, who brag so much of
the power and certitude of the Keys.

Let Apolonius witness, then which no man is a more impudent bragger of this
power of the Keys, except the Pope: and yet by his preaching Key he has
produced so many lies, that he may seem to carry not the Key of Heaven, but of
Hell, with Apollion. And that you may not think this to be a personal error,
(except he will also ^e in this) lo the whole Walachrian Classis has co^ ented
to these fictions; so that hence appears the false judgment of the Church, in
the use of the preaching Key; because not only it is not of greater force then
a private Christian man's judgment, but oftentimes of less validity: For at
this day the judgment of Churchmen, is so corrupted with affections, that we
may believe many whom they condemn to hell, shall surely enjoy heaven: and on
the contrary, they shall go to hell, whom they judge worthy of heaven by their
Key. How ever the matter be, it cannot be evidently proved, that now Churchmen
have any greater power in using the Keys of Heaven, then any particular member
of the Church, whilst in their Sermons, their threatenings and promises of life
eternal, are conditional. Whence it is not likely that Christ gave so little
right as this to the Apostles, under the glorious title of the Keys of heaven,
and of so solemn a promise, but that there was in this some high matter, and
peculiar to the Apostles only, which I place in this, because they were the
first Heralds of salvation performed now by Christ, and of heaven opened by
him, which was never proper before nor after to any of Gods Ambassadors.

Before the work of salvation was performed, salvation was hoped for; but then
heaven was in a manner shut as yet. After Christ's Ascension it was truly
opened. And this privilege the Apostles had, that they were the first
witnesses hereof. Besides, before that time heaven was shut against the
Gentiles, who as it were by a partition wall, were debarred from entering
thither; so that no man, nay not the greatest Prophets before this, had power
to open heaven promiscuously to all Gentiles, the Jews being forsaken. This
matter was so high and rare, that even the Apostles, though illuminate by Gods
Spirit, came to know this when it was late, and not without Miracles too; which
being understood, they without wearisomnesse by a divine and wonderful rapture
contemning all dangers, carried the Gospel almost through all the world; so
that Thomas himself, as grave Authors witness, preached and traveled as
far as India. Which indeed was notable, and nothing else but the opening of
heaven.

To this was added their infallible power of preaching, that they said nothing
but by Gods prescription. For the preaching Key which Christ promised and gave
to his Disciples, was so excellent and divine, that with it he gave unto those
first Patriarchs of the Church, graces by which they delivered the truth
infallibly: so that not only did they show Heaven opened, but by their
infallible doctrine, as with a Key, did open it to every one, and declared it
infallibly by their divine power of judging, to whom it was opened or shut; so
that what they bound and shut on earth, was truly bound and shut in heaven: And
contrarily.

This power after the Apostles ceased. For what they once opened, remains
open, nor can it be shut again by any.

The Pope bragges, that this right remains only for him, as being Peter's
successor, and so commonly his subjects believe. But this is an impudent lie
fit for Antichrist. Our Apellonians do indeed convince the Pope of sacrilege
for his bragging thus; and yet they themselves are more impudently puffed up
with this power of the Keys. For they confess, and in effect prove, that they
cannot preach infallibly; and yet they cry out, that he is guilty of
sacrilege, who doubts of their possessing their Key now. Which impudency is
far greater then that of the Pope. For he assumes to himself the right of
opening heaven, because he says that he has an infallible Key, and truly
Apostolical.

But these will have the same right ascribed to them, and yet do confess that
they are not infallible: Although he be an Impostor, who promises to open
the Treasure, making show of having that Key which he has not: yet he is a
more impudent Impostor who cries out that he will open the Treasure, and yet
confesses, that either he has no Key, or if he shows any Key, it is so unfit
and rusty, that it cannot open the Lock. For because the modern preaching Key
wants true spirituality, which is the infallibility of truth, it is to be
accounted a dead body, or like a Clock which is moved about with wheels: But
these are set on work by the weight of honor and gain.

No otherwise can we think of the Judicial or Censoriall Key; which in the
Apostles, by reason of their gifts and power, was always just and effectual:
For they had a most divine certitude of Judicature; so that they conferred
Heaven upon none, nor debarred any from it, but by a sure knowledge and
revelation; so that assuredly Heaven was shut against them whom they bound, and
whose sins were retained on earth; and it was certainly opened to them whom
they loosed, and pardoned. It is sufficiently evident, that these gifts and
power were in the Apostles.

All which, as most rare, and exceeding humane reach, were promised to the
Apostles under the power of the Keys, which is apparent to all who will not
shut their eyes wilfully against the light of truth.

Whence it is clear, that the Keys are terminated in the Apostles, because
those conditions, with the gifts which I spoke, and which make up the
Jurisdiction of the Keys, are ceased with them: So with as great right they
make the Apostles Office permanent, and perpetual in the Church, as the use of
these heavenly Keys: So that it is frivolous and ridiculous for Apolonius, and
the Pope, to brag so much of the power of the Keys, as though he had power
to shut and open heaven, to bind and loose on Earth, what is bound and loosed
in Heaven: Whereas he knows not whom he shall certainly shut out of heaven,
or shut in: And oftentimes perversely he loses and judges worthy of heaven,
whom God binds and shuts out of heaven. And contrarily, he excludes from
heaven, whom God thinks worthy of Heaven: so that he who compares the vizard
of our modern Censure and Excommunicacion, to that of the Apostles, seems no
otherwise to play the fool, then the Jews did, who were wont to prate strange
things of the sanctity of their Temple, and fought for the honor thereof
against Titus, till they were destroyed. And yet they might have known, had
they not been blind, that that was not the old Temple of Solomon, because it
wanted Urim and Thummim, and all the benefits of Divine presence and
assistance, which made up the particular sanctity of that Temple.

But there seems to be a plainer place, Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church, and if
he hears not the Church, let him be to thee as a Publican and Heathen. In
which words, they say, Christ has given to the Church, Judicial Ecclesiastic
power of excommunication, which at this day is in use both amongst the old and
new Papists.

The vanity of this conceit will be easily seen, if we do but observe that
Christ in these words does not instruct his Disciples, as they were to be the
overseers and Rulers of the Church, but only taught ordinary things, which
are common to all Christians by the right of fraternity, according to that
general Rule given to all by GOD, Deuter. 17.19. Thou shall not hate thy
brother, but sharply reprove him, neither shall thou suffer any evil in him.
Which Law CHRIST here shows, must be kept, not only when a brother shall
offend God or others, but then also when he wrongs us; which brotherly duty
Christ will have wisely to be exercised, and with moderation, lest this
reproof may seem to proceed from revenge or evil words, by which the mind of
the injuring brother, may be exasperated, he will have the brothers offense
to be covered, and not to be divulged; but will have the difference to be taken
up in private between brother and brother, by two other brothers: whose
admonitions, if the offending brother slight, Christ permits not that the
brother offended shall forsake the brother offending, but then will have the
brothers offense brought out in public, that it may be made known to all the
Church, not to stir up all odiously against him; but that they might save
him: and that he who could not be brought to concord by the reproof of one or
more brothers, may be brought to it by the admonitions of some in the Church,
or all.

Which endeavor of the Church being brotherly and charitable, if the offending
brother go on to contemn, the offended brother is not only permitted, but
also commanded to esteem of the other, at a Publican and Heathen; that is, that
he shall have no private commerce with him; as the Apostle describes and
declares this act, 1 Cor. 5.9.11. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.14. For Christ alludes to
the custom that then was among the Jews, and of which we have already spoken.

Hence now it appears, that the old and new Papists have shamefully corrupted
this place, in turning this brotherly and charitable duty, into an
authoritative and judicial Office, and very insolently have appropriated the
word CHURCH, to the Rulers and Overseers of the Church only. Tell the Church,
that is (says the Papist) tell the Bishop, which is truly a foolish
interpretation, unworthy of refutation. Tell the Church, that is, (say our new
Papists) tell the Rulers of the Church; which is an unaccustomed acception of
this word: For they cannot produce one place out of Scripture, in which the
word CHURCH is appropriated to the Rulers only. I know the Walachrian
Stilt-Walker babbles much every where of the Church representative, and that
the word Church is given to the Rulers thereof, because they represent the
Church.

But because he learned this, not out of Scripture, but out of Popish
writings, the inventors of this; I answer him briefly, That to him who says
much, and proves nothing, of right no privilege belongs; which as it is true
in humane things, so much more in Divine and sacred matters.

Whence I now conclude; whereas both the Antecedents and Consequents, and the
whole context of Christ's words do show, that in this place he did not
institute a judicial, but a brotherly and charitable duty in the Church; and
that by the name of Church here, he understands all and each member of the
Church. It is ridiculous that the Walachrian Stilt-Walker, with the Papists,
should be understood here, who out of nothing, or the rags of old Popery,
(which at length begot Antichrist) has gone about to erect so glorious and
eminent a judicial Ecclesiastic power, to which Kings, Princes, and all
worldly Potentates, by divine and special right, ought to submit themselves.

He brings elsewhere other Reasons for his thunder of excommunication; but I
will not trouble my self to refell them, lest I should mispend good hours,
whereas the understanding Reader may easily perceive of himself, that now the
power of the Keys being taken away, with that place, Matthew. 18. Tell the
Church, all his Reasons will of themselves fall to the ground. There remains
only one main argument, one which he spends almost 15. pages of his patched
piece, his Argument is this, Part. 2. page 6. The Apostle (says he) writing
to the whole Church of Corinth, wills and commands, that they being all
assembled, should deliver over to Satan the incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
Therefore the right and power of excommunicating contumacims sinners, belongs
to all particular Churches. For as in his Assumption he is very liberal; so
he supposes, that to deliver over to Satan is nothing else then after his
manner to excommunicate.

Where first observe his fraud, in making this Argument: For thus he propounds
it, as if the Apostle had granted to that particular Church, power to give over
to Satan that Incestuous Corinthian, simply. Which being granted, he foresaw
that this Argument would carry some show of truth. But this Walachrian Impostor
deludes his Reader as he uses. Because the Apostle does not simply grant this
power to the Church of Corinth; for he wills, though absent in body, yet by the
presence and assiance of his power and Spirit, the Incestuous man to be
delivered to Satan, whom already he alone had adjudged to Satan, as he himself
witnesses.

These things being cleared thus, I will ask of the Stilt-walker, What Logic
has taught him so to reason? Paul gave power to one Church to excommunicate,
with the assistance of his Spirit, and of his power: Ergo, Every Church can do
this by it self, and without Paul's assistance, or of his Spirit. Here is no
sequence, and it is all one as if he would say, the particular Church of
Jerusalem, with the assistance of the Apostles, prescribed to all other
Churches, a Law to abstain from blood and things strangled: Ergo, the
Consistory of Middleburgh at this day has the same power over the other
Churches. Which consequence I know the Classes of Zealand will not admit; yet
they would easily grant this, if in their Consistory in stead of Apolonius one
Paul were president, or any other Apostle.

But (says he) the Apostle for this reason reproved the Corinthians, that they
had not removed the incestuous person: And therefore it is plain, that it was
in their power to have removed that wicked man.

I answer, this cannot be evinced out of that place of Paul, because the words
import no such matter. He reproves them that they were puffed up, and did not
rather mourn^ that he that had done this deed, might be taken away. Which form
of speech is all one, as if he that has been long and dangerously sick, should
be reproved by the Physician, for being so secure and careless in removing his
disease: For there were many things which the Corinthians might have done of
themselves in removing of this great evil. They might have signified this
offense to Paul by letters, and sought his advice, and the assistance of his
Spirit, that that wicked man might be taken away: But the Corinthians neglected
all this; in which respect they were not without cause said to be puffed up,
not to have mourned, that he might be taken away who committed this wickedness.

But (says Apolonius) Paul warnes the Corinthians that they purge out the old
leven. And in the end of the chapter commands, that they would cast out the
incestuous person, and judge of his ejection: Ergo, this was an ordinary act,
and in their power.

I answer, that the Antecedent is not simply true: for what the Apostle speaks
of leven, is not of removing the incestuous person: but in these words he does
in general only exhort them to a good life, as the Text shows. Secondly,
Let us grant this, that the Apostles words are meant of removing the incestuous
person, by what Logic again will he evince, that the business which the
Apostle enjoins to the Corinthians, was simply committed to be done by them as
an ordinary act altogether in their power? The Context shows no so such thing,
but quite contrary: He grants them power to judge, but not without his own
judgment: he will have them cast out this party, but not without the
assistance of his power and spirit; because therefore the Corinthians could do
many things concerning the outward circumstances of this act, which Paul being
absent could not do; therefore he himself enjoined this action to them.

For they might have reproved him verbally, and used many Imprecations against
him; they might have separated themselves from him; all which things, and
perhaps more, in exercising of this act, did meet together; but for the
internal vigor of this act, they of themselves could not produce or touch;
for it depended from the power of the Keys, by which Christ promised that
should be ratified in heaven, whatsoever the Apostles should here on earth
determine concerning sinners; the truth and effect of which promise, because
men had then found diverse times by experience, from hence it was that this
censuring power of the Apostles, whether they exercised it alone, or with the
Church, was always, and not without cause, horrid and terrible, not only to
them who were to be co^verted, but also to the refractory, whose blasphemies he
might have easily curbed, as Paul speaks of Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy
1.20. Surely if the delivering over to Satan, had been nothing else then a
verbal thunder out of the pulpit, as at this day refractory men being thus
excommunicate, would have learned to blas pheme more, as may be seen in Julian
the Apostate, and others after the Apostles departure, and in diverse at this
day.

But (says the Stilt-walker) it is not likely that Paul being absent could
deliver over the incestuous man to Satan. This is surely ridiculous in so great
a Doctor! who out of the History of Naaman, 3 King. 5. might have learned, that
the men of God, furnished with the gift or Miracles, did exercise their gifts,
not only near at hand, but also a far off: for Elisha cured Naaman being
far off from him: why then could not Paul do the same, especially being
present in spirit with them, though absent in the body? I (says he) though
absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged as being present, etc. And
again, You being gathered together and my spirit, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, etc. There was then, besides the ordinary and brotherly Office of
censuring, a more grievous correction under the Apostles; peculiar only to
those divinely-inspired men, by reason of their special gifts, with which
being then armen, could when need was, strike with blindness, or death, or
deliver over to Satan stubborn and blasphemous sinners.

Now if Apolenius think himself by virtue of his vocation, a Successor to this
power, we will expect that he also will give sight to the blind, feet to the
lame, raise the dead, command the Devils, and deliver men's bodies to be
tortured by them. We may see by his Writings, that if he could enjoy his own
Genius, sometimes he would revenge himself upon the civil Magistrate, with
this great Excommunication, except they abstain from his Spiritualities. But
let him know, that I do not much fear, if they be delivered over to Satan by
him; but let him rather fear, lest if with Sceva's sons he undertake this
exorcisme rashly, he hear the evil spirit say, Jesus I know, and Paul I know,
but Apolonius, who be you? So that he be forced to stye away with them, having
not only lost his Stilts, and narrow Chapines, but also stripped of all his
Clothes.

Thus I have briefly set down what was the ordinary right of censuring in the
Church, appointed by Christ; and I have showed, that it was not Judicial, or of
special right, but common and brotherly, consisting in a verbal and brotherly
reproof, and in separation from private Commerce. I have shown also, that
besides this common way of censuring, there was under the Apostles a more heavy
correction, which they used not against any kind of sinner, but only against
such as were infamous for stubbornness, or some heinous offense in troubling
and polluting the Church of Christ; which then was remarkable, and truly
divine, as depending on the power of the Keys, and divine gifts; of which
there was such efficacy in those being inspired by God, that whatsoever they
intended against sinners, was not only ratified in heaven, but on earth also,
had its effect. This Apostolical and terrible kind of censuring, how ever it
was necessary and useful for the Church in its infancy, whose beginnings
Christ would not have to be maintained by the Sword; yet he suffered this to
dye with the Apostles, until at last it brought Kings themselves to yield
subjection, and of bloody persecuters made them the Churches Patrons,
preservers, and nursing Fathers, according as David and Esaias had prophesied
before; which being fulfilled, a more rigid way of censuring was again revived
in the Church, by the ordinary power of Princes and Magistrates with which he
armed them, not only for preservation of natural society among men, but
chiefly to maintain the Church of Christ entire here on earth. For though
Princes laws and punishments of themselves they pertain not to the conscience;
yet accidentally they build up and defend Christ's Kingdom, whilst they set up
that outward and rigid discipline, and help the Church against wicked and
refractory men, who could not by brotherly reproof, be taken off from the
pollution of sin and scandal.

So that now every man may see, that the greater and lesser censures are
nothing else but the filthy secundine of that impure mother of the Romish
Church, and spots cleaving to our Churches from that Nativity; which
notwithstanding this walachrian Impostor, vents abroad for most holy, and
extells as most spiritual things.

But to him that will look narrowly, it is clear, that all this judicial and
censuring business which is urged by the Walachrians, and defended under a
divine and most holy title, is not instituted by Christ or his Apostles, but by
Man; which being by the ancient Papists set out in diverse dressings, at last
brought forth the Pope that great Antichrist, and in short time among the
Reformed, will beget many Antichrists; the contemners of civil Magistrates and
Princes, except they prevent this in time.

Heretofore, diverse of the first Reformers being holy, and provident men, did
foresee this; who therefore did their best to extinguish this Antichristian
Leaven, as their Writings witness.

Therefore, for their sakes, who perhaps are ignorant of this, I will here sub
join what they have written concerning this matter, which may seem to make
very much for our purpose. The words of Gualter in a certain Epistle of his to
Carolus Ionvilleus of Geneva, are these,

But if we must speak of excommunication, that was never totally and generally
condemned by us; for it is commanded by our Laws, whereby they are excluded
from our private society, and from the enjoying of our public Pastors; who
despising public and private admonitions, do not live according to the Rules
of Christianity, but that any should be debarred from our holy Assemblies, or
the Lords Supper, was never practiced in our Church, nor in many others: which
notwithstanding, no man hitherto could justly accuse, either for want of purity
in Faith and Doctrine, or for licentiousness of conversation: For no man
hitherto has demonstrated by fit and firm arguments, that that should be the
Symboll of exclusion or Superstition, which was ordained to be the means of
conservation of the Churches unity; for which cause, the Ancients called it a
convention or meeting. Therefore, I wonder, my most dear Ionvill, why you
should say, that I bring in a new and unheard of Paradoxe; besides, all men's
expectation in these calamitous times of the Church. For, why should that be
called new, or unheard of, which has been received in our Church, now from the
beginning full 50. years.

Surely Suinglius of blessed memory, the first Reformer of Religion among the
Helvetians, has written the same things expressly in his friendly Exposition to
Luther which we at this day teach and think. And though the same was most
strictly joined in friendship and love with Oecolampadius, yet he would never
bring into the Church of Tigurum, suspending from the Supper] and afterward.

[But what Bullinger my Master and reverend Father did think of this matter,
his Book against the Anabaptists will abundantly witness; and chiefly, what
he writes in c. 9. l. 6. etc. What shall we need to speak of Musculus, who
whilst the Churches of high Germany did flourish more then they do now taught
in Ausburge, and afterward in Berne, with great applause. He every where
admonishes Ministers to be careful rather to gather, then to exclude any.
And he so handles this matter upon the first of the Corinthians, that it is
clear he is of our opinion.

I could add to these, the example of the Church of Constance etc.] and a
little after [in our age, many learned and godly men have conferred about this
matter often times, and they have always agreed in this, that Discipline is
necessary in the Church (which we confess, yea we urge and shall urge, so king
as God will spare our life:) But for the manner and form thereof, it is to be
left free for every Church, that she may use the form which will build up, and
not which may shake and overthrow,] thus he who in another Epistle, to count
Lodovic Witgensteinius thus writes: [Whereas you reckon Church Discipline among
the outward means of salvation, although I do not altogether reject it, yet I
beseech your excellency not to take it ill if I shall say somewhat of this
matter, which by many at this day is controverted: and if the ambitious
rigidnesse of some men, be not tempered by the prudet authority of Princes,
they will raise greater troubles, then will be easily appeased, and will bring
into the Church a new tyranny, as intolerable as that of the Popes. We all
confess, that Churches cannot subsist without Discipline, and that it is
altogether necessary, that it be religiously ordained and preserved.

But for the form of this, all men do not agree; your men place the maine
point of Discipline, in excluding from the Communion: besides, they propose a
certain time for those who are excluded, how long they must abstain; and that
they may maintain the Discipline, they say there is need of an Ecclesiastic
Senate, to which men of all ranks and orders, yea Princes themselves must be
subject.

But these things are of such a nature, that godly and well affected men doubt
much of the truth of them: for it is demanded not without cruse, if the Lords
Supper instituted by Christ for a Symboll of Christian Society and Communion
and to preserve Faith, should be converted to any use, not only different but
quite contrary to Christ's institution; so that it becomes the instrument of
exclusion and dis union, and the torturer of consciences?

Again, whether this does not fight against Paul's rule, who commands every one
to prove himself, and not to make curious scrutinies over other men's
Consciences. Besides, whether it be not a hard and an unjust case that a sinner
who seriously repents, and whom Christ feeds with his own body and blood, as
being doubtless received into favor, should be driven from the Table, yea
prohibited, that he shall not declare the Lords death publicly with the
Church, whereof he is a true Member.

Moreover is it not like a Monster to set up two Magistrateships among the same
people] and a little after.

[Hence then arise the horns of new tyramie, and by degrees, ambitious
Ministers will list up the crest, who may easily draw the assessors to side
with them, when as they are the chiefest among them.

And that I do not speak this without reason, your excellency will
understand, if you will be pleased to enquire diligently, what trials these
your Ministers have already made among your people. For some men notable for
piety and goodness have been commanded by them to abstain from the Supper,
who could never yet know, why they were commanded this; but this seemed a
sufficient answer to those new Lords of other men's faith, that they could not
admit them with a safe conscience.

Must therefore a godly man abstain from the holy Communion, and neglect his
duty in preaching the benefit of Christ's death, for the conscience of a peevish
and importunate Minister? The Popish Bishops are more tolerable toward us,
who treely show the cause why they account us Schismatics, and Excommunicates:
neither do they hinder us from clearing our selves: what shall we hope for
then, when they have established their Kingdom: Whereas the first fruits of
their Discipline for which they so much quarrel, are such?

I think it were much fitter, that Ministers contain themselves within their
bounds, and that they leave to Magistrates what belongs to the Discipline of
life and manners.

I know they object, that the Magistrate does not always his duty; and
therefore there is need of another Senate, who may contain them within
compass. But I deny this consequence, whereas they cannot prove what they say
by any example Prophericall or Apostolical: It is indeed the Ministers part to
reprove the vices, and corrupt manners of Princes and Judges, to admonish them
of their duty, as the Prophets did of bad. But I never yet read, that they
should subject them to any other Magistrate, to receive punishment or
excommunication; because they were negligent in their office, or offended by
their old example: It is certain the Prophets never did any such thing. Of the
Apostles we need not speak, for in their time there were no Christian
Magistrates, which was the cause of making blders in the Church that should
have inspection of men's manners; which ought also to be done at this day under
tyrannical Persecutors of the Faith. But there is a far different reason of
our Churches, who have by Gods special favor christian Princes, which though
they have their blemishes, yet Ministers should maintain their authority, and
not make public spectacles of them. [At last in the end of the same Epistle]
This I rather wish, that the confusion which is brought in by some Innovators,
may by degrees be abolished; which will be easily done, if those who are of a
right and moderate opinion, may be suffered to live quietly, and to propose
their thoughts freely for others to judge. And let Divines be sent away from
governing the state, from meddling with councels of War, and matters of the
court to the Pulpit, and the Schools, which is their, proper ground and
wrestling place.] There is yet another Epistle of the same Gualter worth the
noting: in which writing to Beza, he sets down these heads of the whole
controversy.

1. Whether the Lords Supper which he calls the Symboll of communion, a
joyful and public thankesgiving, for the benefit of redemption performed to
us, should serve for excommunication, and so be converted to another use, then
what Christ has showed, or the Apostles delivered to us.

2. Whether such as repent should be for some time debarred from the use of it,
when they desire with the Church to declare the Lords death.

3. Whether it is not sufficient for him that comes to the Lords Table to prove
himself, and to find in himself a lively faith joined with the spirit of
serious contrition and repentance.

4. Whether where there is a christian Magistrate, there ought to be set up a
Presbytery, which may have power over the public Discipline of many, and to
remove from the comunion whom they think have deserved it? These things, I say,
seem to be the chiefest which are controverted in this cause; for I suppose,
we differ not about Infidels, the enemies of christian Religion, and impenite^t
siners, whose incurable cn^tumacy is too well known.

Now of the first, some not without cause doubt when they see how dangerous it
has been in all ages to abuse Gods Ordinances, though with a good zeal; nor
can I see, why out of that should be made a tormenter of men's consciences,
which serves to preserve and confirm Faith, and to comfort afflicted
consciences, and son these ends was ordained by God. I hope you will bear with
us patiently, if in this we differ from you.] And a little after.

In the second held, there is yet a greater difficulty; for though we know that
one should be excluded, yet we see no reason why he upon his repentance should
be longer suspended from the Communion; for seeing the Lords Supper is a
public thanksgiving, and belongs to the Confession of Faith, we think it a
hard case, that a Christian should be forbidden to do that which in it self
is just, holy, and a Christians chief duty; you rely upon that place, Matthew.
18. of which, much may be said, but for brevities sake, I forbear.

But let us yield, that such an excommunication is there commanded; yet by that
place can be meant no longer time, then till he confess his repentance, and
acknowledging his fault, desire reconciliation with the Church: For he that
said, Let him be to thee, as a Publican and Heathen, the same commands us to
forgive our offending brother seventy times seven times; by which precept,
there the Church is bound I hope you will not deny; for there also, you will
say, Excommunication is handled.

For why should the Church which consists only of Christians, be more rigid in
punishing of offenses, then becomes private men? Or, by what reason shall she
call him a stranger, from the Lords Family, whom the Lord himself of the
Family has received into grace.

We would feign see some example, to prove that God will not presently receive
converted Penitents. Did not that prodigal son publicly offend against his
Father, his elder Brother, the whole Family, yea against heaven it self? Did
not he give scandal both at home and abroad; yet upon his repentance, and
confession of his sin, his Father presently pardons him, restores him to his
former dignity, honors him being restored with the ring of reconciliation, and
for him will have that fat Calfe killled, that he might feast and rejoice with
his whole Family.

Why then should we debarany longer from that joyful and saving feast of the
Church, those that make the same confeshon with her? why then should we exact
new satisfactions? But there is danger you will say, least they counterfeit
repentance. I confess it. But shall we avoid this danger, if whole years they
be kept off from the Communion? Truly, no length of time will reclaim a wicked
Hypocrite. Neither let us fear to be deceived, whilst we imitate God the
Fathers Gentleness. If Hypocrites deceive us, its to their own danger, they
will to themselves eat and drink damnation, we shall be blameless.

But I beseech you Brother, may not we our selves be deceived, and in our rash
zeal exclude him from the Supper, who being truly converted, Christ feeds
with his own body and blood?

How unfitting is it, to cast him into a new sorrow whom the Son of God will
have to rejoice in him?

How shall we excuse that rigidnesse in rejecting him, whom the Lord receives
into his arms?

Here surely we may fear, lest we be found companions of that naughty servant,
who having obtained mercy of his Master, used his fellow servant hardly, etc.]

[And shortly after, what you write concerning setting up of Presbyteries in
Churches we will easily admit, where there is no Christian Magistrate. For some
there must be, by whose authority they may be contained in their duty, who are
apt to offend lest Religion be exposed to scorn among strangers. But under
Christian Princes, this care will be fitter and safer committed to them, who
sit at the stern of Government. And I know not how safe it may be, to create a
new Magistrateship, for many inconveniences may follow, which are tedious now
to renearse.

But this I cannot dissemble in the Palatinate, the greatest scandals fell out
by the fault of the Elders erected there. And who I pray, will endure such
censures hereafter, who suffered the Sicilian, an impure Sodomite, and a most
pestiferous calumniator, to escape unpunished, that he might not be drawn
before the lawful Judges? For they thought it fit to proceed slowly, that
they might be the Judges of that m^tter. Upon this reason, an Italian, one well
known to you, and a good man excused them, when I objected this example to
him. Now what is it to claim the Magistrates office to themselves, i^ this be
not? Man's ambition truly is unsatiable, and few are found, who grow not
insolent, upon any power committed to them. And if we will look upon ancient
stories, we shall find, that the greatest and most dangerous scandals of the
Church proceeded from the Bishops and other Ministers, which we may now see in
Germany, among the Lutheran superintendants, who think they may do any thing,
being armed with too much power; but what shall we hope of them, who in
Heydelberg plead this cause: This one boldness does suff^ciently admonish us,
by which they accuse all men of Atheism, that will not subscribe to their
opinion: and indeed, such men as excel in faith, doctrine, and holiness of
life.

If then we fear least a new tyranny be set up in the Church upon these
principles, who will say our fear, is without cause? But as I wrote elsewhere,
we will not hinder them to enjoy their own meaning, who think they can
profitably use this form of Discipline.

We only tell them this, that they must not go about to put, or to thrust the
same shoe upon every man's foot; and for a point yet in controversy, and whose
form cannot be every where the same, pull the Churches asunder, and by making
new controversies, make themselves ridiculous to the common-enemy.]

To this purpose, serves that which Bullinger wrote in a certain Epistle to
Peter Dathenus; where amongst many other passages, he writes thus:

[What we think, and what we have ever thought of Churches discipline, you
cannot be ignorant; whereas we have briefly touched it, in that confession of
the Helvetian Churches, but lately published, we never taught that there
should be no Church Discipline at all, which we confess to be needful.

Concerning the manner and way of this Discipline, all men are not, nor have
not been of the same opinion. Our Church never mingled Christ's mystical Supper
with Church Discipline: neither has she been (for ought I know) therefore
accused of impiety by any one: neither had we ever a Presbytery, or any such
Ecclesiastic Senate which examined Communicants, or admitted to the Communion,
or excluded from it sinners; those I mean, who by their coming to the Supper,
after serious and grave admonitions, do as it were promise amendment of life,
and desire to give thanks with all their hearts for their redemption. We think
that wicked men, and such as offend the Church should be curbed some other way,
and amended. For we suppose, and believe, that the Lords supper was instituted
by him not to be a Fan, or sive to sift and winnow men one from another, but to
be a Synaxis, that is a coagmentation society communion, and conjunction, to
collect and gather together sinners, I mean those, who feel the burden of
their sins and confess them, and believe that they are pardoned by Christ's
death; therefore now they come to the Supper to thank him, etc.

This opinion, brother, should not seem to you a novelty lately devised by us,
whereas in High Germany the Church of Tigurum, which has been accounted the
chief of the reformed has always been of this opinion; she began to be
planted in the year 1519.] and afterward [as for that worthy man Zuinglius of
blessed memory, the first restorer of these Helvetian Churches, he has left us
nothing to be exercized in this Church, which we have not carefully observed
till this day: neither did we ever study to bring in changes or innovations in
Church Matters, knowing what dangers may hence arise among the People, how many
scandals and schisms may hence proceed, and how this would give occasion to our
Adversaries to reproach us.

But Zuinglius would never mingle the mystical Supper with Ecclesiasticke
Discipline; He would never turn that gratulatory Supper of the Lord, and
joyful commemoration of man's redemption, into a sad punishment of such
sinners, who confessing their sins, make have to go to Christ, whom they
believe to have obtained pardon for them, by delivering up his body, and
shedding of his blood, and believing this, that he invites them to this sacred
and mystical Supper.

He added, that it is sufficiently known, what Guests Christ admitted to his
first Supper, which was doubtless the most absolute of all. And that it it
unfitting we should be quicker sighted then the Son of GOD himself, who
perfectly knows the hearts of the Sons of MEN alone; Or, that we should
otherwise judge of his Supper, then we have precept or example from him.

He touched some thing of this matter in his friendly Exposition to Luther, in
the 2. Tome of his Works, fol. 359.6.] and in the progress of the same
Epistle: [Neither, says he, does Musculus vary a whit from this, who was an
excellent Instrument of Christ, and a famous Doctor of the Church, Minister of
the Church of Berne, and Professor of Divinity. For what he wrote of
Church Discipline in his common places under the Title of the Minister of Gods
Word, is known to all. Out of all this it is clear that in this matter I
differ not in opinion, either from Zuinglius, or from the Churches or Doctors
of the Helvetian Churches, who either now live, or have lived, in governing of
the Church, these 50 years, etc.] These are the testimonies of Divines, which
I thought good to set down at large; not that I seek for any help from them, to
confirm this truth, but because I was willing to show, that if this cause were
to be defined by the votes of learned men, there are not wanting many of the
prime and most excellent Reformers, who hitherto fore have maintained the same
opinion with us, and have affirmed the same things, which I have defended
already against the Stilt-walker, and will defend yet, except I be convinced by
better arguments out of Gods Word.

For this is evident, that these Walachrian whirle-windes, believe not
certainly what they write; but as they are infected with pride and
superstition; that is, with Antichristian poison.

Wherefore, that I may put an end at last to this Discourse, I will gather
together these Walachrian Popish Keys of Apollonius into a bundle, and with
the rest of Antichristian trash, whence these were taken, I will fling them
into a corner, left this Treverian, like another tragical surie, go on to hurt
and disgrace (as he has begun) all Christians, and chiefly Godly Magistrates.

The right of making Laws, has affinity with the power of censuring. For
censure has place only upon Delinquents; there is no Delinquency, but against
the Laws. Therefore, that these Hierarchicall men might take occasion to use
their censuring power enough against Christians diverse Laws like so many
traps, were to be proposed to them, which being transgressed the censuring
power might be exercised.

Thus the Pope maintains his tyranny: he has long since prescribed so many
Laws to Christians, that neither the whole Bible nor the body of the
Civill-Law are to be compared to the Popes decrees, it is impossible for men to
live, without fault or other. Hence proceeds the Popes right of punishing, and
then his bounty in pardoning, whereby he remits, and dispenses with the
penalty, but first money must be paid, and they that has eyes may see, that
this Antichristian shop is artificially surnished for the Popes honor and
profit.

Our Stilt-Walker has finely learned the same mechanical way of cheating, out
of his Institutions: for not only does he vent the corrupted power of his
Church-censure; but because he perceived that he could have no occasion to
censure, except there were many Laws against which Christians might offend:
Hence, above other things, he strives to maintain the wonderful sanctity, of
the power in making Laws: of which, I will discourse a little.

And first note the man's giddiness, which like a Leprosy, he has drawn from
the Jesuits, in sometimes affirming, sometimes denying the same thing, either
out of forgetfulness, or impudence. For in many places he maintains, that the
Church has power to make Laws, which Christians are with all humility to
observe; which power, he says is holy, and so free, that Christ shed his
blood for it, and cries out, that the Magistrate will become sacrilegious, if
he hinder Churchmen in this.

And elsewhere also he does fiercely and in plain terms defend, that the
Church has no right to make Laws. For, says he, the servant ought not to
make laws for the Family, but the Master himself.] Who sees not here, I and
nay, and a plain contradiction? I confess, this our old cheater is not so
simple, as not to use means by a frivolous seavill to escape; for he adds,
[that the Church Laws, are not properly Lanes] but only Statutes or
Ordinances, which art he learned out of the same School of the Pope; who being
that whore in the Revelation clokes by her whorish impudence, her impurity and
hithinesse with honest pretenses.

It is ordinary with Bellarmine, to call Idolatry veneration of the Saints, the
Popes tyranny, Peter's pastoral power, and so boundless is the Popes
impudence, that though in his Festival perambulation he shines with Gold and
Jewels, yet he cries out openly, Gold and Silver have I none.

I confess our Stilt-walker is but a Dwarse to the Pope; yet in this as in
other things, he imitates him: to that het speaks one thing, but thinks and
beleevet another thing.

For though he confess, that his Laws are not properly Laws, yet he knows
that he speaks this only (pro forma) to delude the credulous.

For in truth he thinks, and with tooth and nail maintain, that his
Ecclesiasticke Statutes and Ordinances, by what mild name soever he calls them
are to be held for Laws. For because they prescribe to Christians under most
grievovs punishments, what they must do, or not do, as I will hereafter show,
who sees not, that these Ordinances have the nature of Laws?

So that he plays the cunning Iougler, in venting abroad his Holiness.

For amongst other Artifices wherein these cheating Hucksters, or Regraters do
abound this is one that walking in the dark under a Vizard or Veil, which
they can turn as they will: they use when they please to increase and lessen
their Greatness in a minute, so that they deceive the most cunning men that
are, as that they can scar^e think this to be the same person which they see.

If it were the purpose of this VValachrian, to learn this art of these
Knaves, I confess he is a ready Scholar, and deserves to wear Aristotle's
breeches in their School. But that he may not deceive the too credulous by
this art, in heightning and shortning suddenly the sanctity of his Laws, I
will in few words expedite matter.

First, I affirm that Churchmen, such as they are now, have he legislative
power in Church-businesses, that is, to make Laws, properly so called.

Neither is it material, whether here we call them Laws or Statutes: for
Statutes are Laws, When they prohibit, punish, promise, command, and obliege
all to observe them. But the failing of observation presupposes a penalty.
Hence it is clear, that he only has power to make laws who has power only
to punish the breakers of Laws.

Hence this whole legislative power is called jurisdiction, which consists in
constituting, that is, in making and executing the Law.

So that it is a common Maxim among Lawyers, that he only has this power,
who is invested with majesty, and the supreme power.] For, the Law is a decree
of supreme Power, and there is no constitution of Laws, without the power of
punishing and executing; without Empire or Principality there is no
jurisdiction.] For they who can only judge, and have no power to execute (such
is inferior Judges) they want jurisdiction. l. 5.15. D. de re jud. l. sin. c.
ubi, and apud quem cogu. in int. rest. By which we may see what a troubler and
confounder of the world the Power is, who has produced such Monsters: So that
he has made the Emperor a Hangman, and an Inferior to judge the Emperor;
for he has assumed to himself the highest Pawn in Church Matters, and under
this pretext, to judge and determine of Magistrates. But that he may not defile
his Church-sanctity, he abstaines from execution, and the use of the sword: he
carries it indeed, and shows it to Princes, as it were upbraiding them, that
he has snatch it from the^; yet of himself he does not draw, except very
seldom, but commands Kings to draw it, when he pleases. Thus he grants Kings
power to execute, but has snatched from them the power of judging and
ordaining. So that now the Prince being divested of all power of judging,
wanders up and down like a great Hangman or Giant, being armed only for this
end, that he might serve the Pope, that most monstrous Tyrant.

Our Stilt-walker, the Pope Ape in every thing, flyers with the same wings. He
confesses that he is subject to Princes, but not in Church Matters; For in
these he claims right to make Laws, even for Magistrates, which they must be
bound to obey, and to submit themselves; and if they obey not, he says, that
he is armed with divine power of censuring and excommunication. But if one take
the boldness, to deny obedience to the Statutes and Penalties, that then the
Magistrate is bound in duty to assist the Churchmen with his sword, at whose
beck, he must draw it, to punish the refractory, that they may keep the
Churches statutes: Who sees not here, the idea of Popery.

Among all Godly men it is believed, that it belongs only to God to make laws
concerning things necessary to his Worship and Salvation.

For as God every where examines obedience; so chiefly in his worship he will
have us to adhere to his Laws only: So that he accounts it stupendous
boldness for any to worship him, 1 Samuel 15.
according to men's precepts.

He is so rigid in this, Isa 29.13
that he will not only have the substance of his Worship, but the very Rites
and circumstances to bo observed according to his prescript, as we may see by
the Samaritans, who being returned home from the captivity, were devoured by
Lions, 2 Samuel: 17
because they worshipped not God, and yet it is said there, that they did
worship God; whence it appears, that they observed the substance, but neglected
the rites and circumstances of his worship: For which cause, Priests were sent
from Babylon, who might teach them the Rites of his Worship better, by which
means they were delivered from the Lions. So it is clear, that the whole
substance, and necessary circumstances of divine worship, must be sought only
from the mouth of God, and his commands.

And because we can consult with God no where but in the Scripture, it is
evident, that nothing can be taken for Law, or divine institution, necessary
for salvation, but what is in plain tea^mes set down in Scripture. So that the
Church has no power legislative at all, except in things not necessary and
indifferent: to which I will prescribe these Rules.

1. Let not any Rites and Ceremonies be used in Divine Worship, which do not
plainly agree with Gods Word, and with that order and decency fit for such a
Worship. The Pope here makes Religious Intentions his rules, by which pretext
he increases daily ceremonies to that number that by them he oppresses
Christians, and exalts himself.

The Stilt-walker delirous to imitate this Papal power in multiplying Laws,
prescribes also the same Rule; which is so large and loose, that he can daily
delight himself with dreams of new Laws and Rites, which he may belch out
and proclaim to his People, that he may upbraid their servitude.

I deny not, but here and elsewhere he contradicts himself; for he is so
rigid, that he calls it Superstition, to make any act to be of holy use, or to
give it place in Divine Worship, without a Divine Law. Which I impute either to
the man's giddiness, or to a desire he has to deceive.

For if he admit of no act in Religion, but what is plainly contained in
Scripture: Why does he under pain of Sacrilege keep off Religious
Magistrates, from making of Ecclesiastic Laws, in calling them sacrilegious,
if they offer to make Laws for the Church, without Church-mens assistance.

Is it not lawful for pious Princes to command men, that they observe Christ's
Laws and Ordinances set down in Scripture? Is there such odds, whether this
be enjoined by Laymen, or Churchmen, so it be agreeable to Christ's Laws? For
the Treverian prates openly elsewhere, that Magistrates must not make Church
Laws, because they should be made by spiritual jurisdiction. So that
necessarily some mystery of spirituality must lie hid in Churchmen, that the
same Laws of the same things (whether these things be necessary or
indifferent) may become spiritual, if they be given from spiritual; that is,
Churchmen, but profaine if given by Godly Magistrates. This the Stilt-walker
did not learn from Calvin, but of the Jesuires, who are wont to beg much of
the spiritual sanctity of their Churches. So that Calvin eloquently taxes
them for this; whose words I here subjoyne, By this pretense, false Bishops do
burden consciences with new Laws, that they are spiritual Legislators
appointed by God, lib. 4. inst q. 10. s. 6.
since the government of the Church is committed to them.

Hence Apolonius may see his disease much like the Popish Scab. It is well
known for what end the Pope does strive so much for this spirituality in
making Laws. For he would not seem to be the man he is, to wit, Antichrist
and the destroyer of his Masters Laws.

But by pretending spirituality, he challenges to himself power to declare
what is properly agreeing to Christ's Laws, what not,

But in saying, this does not belong to Laymen, how can he prove it; when
Christ says, Drink ye all of this: He says, Drink not all of this. CHRIST
says to the People, search the Scripture. He says, search them not, under
pain of death.

Again, Marriage is honorable among all men; the Pope says, it is
dishonorable, and more unlawful among Clergiemen, then Fornication.

Many such Laws has the Pope given us out of the Holy Scripture. But by the
help of his interpreting Spirituality. The Stilt-walker has publicly
manifested that he understands also that Maxim, thus.

That the actions of Divine Worship are to be taken only out of Gods Law, to
wit.

According to the POPES Dialect, that Apolonius, and such Spiritual men as he
only, are to explain, what is properly to be taken out of Gods Law. But
civil Magistrates must have no hand in this.

This is the new mystery of iniquity, which these walachrian Jouglers are
breeding; that by the privilege of their powerful Preaching, to them only
must belong this spiritual legislative power, of preclaiming Laws and
Statutes every day, not against or besides Scripture.

(For this were a disgrace to these new Papists) but according to Scripture.
yet conditionally, that under pain of sacrilege, no Laymen presume to enquire
into those holy Church-lawes, at least not to ordain, or being ordained, to
abbrogate them of themselves. For it is not the part of a good son, thus to
enquire into his Fathers actions; but to obey the Laws however prescribed, as
being spiritual, and given by spiritual men. If once godly Magistrates suffer
themselves to be blinded with this efficacy of error, in a short time (as
under the Pope) by pretending holy Scripture, all kinds of falsehoods will be
obtruded upon them: that if the Stilt-walker does not act his Comedy in
Walachria, as Becholitus did at Monaster; yet at least in out confederate
Provinces, he must have two separated forms of government, whereof the one
must be independent from the other; yea repugnant in contrary laws. That these
things are intended by our new Papists, under their spiritual liberty of the
legislative power, is most apparent, as I have showed already.

Secondly, it is not enough to adhere to the Scripture in ordaining new
ceremonies of divine worship; but the Church must now take heed that she be not
too liberal in inventing of such. For as man naturally grows proud by
greatness of spirit; so of mean and dejected spirits, arises superstition, and
then will worship; and if we be not wary, at last idolatry. For seldom here is
there a mean kept, but men go from one degree to another; which Paul shows
in the false Apostles, who going about to betray the Colossians liberty, they
first enjoined them not to eat: then higher, taste not: lastly, touch not, For
it is more strictness to abstain from touching, then from tasting: and again,
from tasting then from eating: so we see in Popery, that of small beginnings,
and those not evil, have arisen ceremonies, which still increasing, are become
a yoke more heavy then that of the Jews. If the Walachrian Classis did not
earnestly desire this, they would not be so hot in urging a sacred and
spiritual liberty, to prescribe laws to the Church.

The third thing that I would have to be observed, is, that laws be not too
rigorous: for they are only of things indifferent; which properly concern not
religion, but order only, and changeable circumstances; which to urge with such
imperiousness, is not the part of a Father, but of a tyrant. An example of
greater moderation cannot be had, then that which is extant in the
Apostolical Church. For when they were all assembled at Jerusalem to
deliberate about the peace and laws of the Church, although they had full
power, Acts 15.
yet they used so little rigor and authority, that they determined, or
ordained nothing, but by the consent and decree of the whole body of the
Church: And they used such moderation in giving Laws to the Syrian Churches,
that they did as it were by an entreating way, recommend them, and left in a
manner freedom to every Church to observe, and to abrogate them when they
became needless; as I will show in that which follows. He that sees Paul
ordaining rites and ceremonies, will easily observe, that he was careful of
nothing more, then that the consciences of Christians might not be oppressed
with the yoke of Laws. For thus he says, This I say, not the Lord: of this I
have no precept, This I say to you, not by way of command, but of counsel:
judge you if it be decent: So at last he concludes, that nothing was more
averse from his custom, or the custom of Apostolical Churches, then to
strive eagerly, or too imperiously in commanding rites or ceremonies: as even
then presaging the domintering pride of Churchmen, which he would shake off,
and teach Christians moderation in the observation of things indifferent, so
that it is to be admired, how men's perverse heat of ruling cannot be curbed by
his example and admonitions; so as not only mean men, but some of great worth,
have been carried headlong with too much heat. A notable example of this we may
see in Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester, recorded by Peter Martyr. He was so much
moved at the wearing of a Surplusse, Bishops Cap, and other ceremonies, (which
were the Relics of Popery then in England) that he threatened to forsake his
Bishopric; whose preposterous fervency learned Martyr appeased in a most wise
Tract.

Worthy Calvin himself when he was first called to Geneva, did contend so
eagerly with his Magistrates about the circumstance of unlevened bread in the
Lords Supper, to show his averseness from Judaisme, that rather then he would
yield, suffered himself and his Colleagues to be banished from thence: but of
this he repented afterward, which he did show, when he warned the Church of
Geneva, and other Churches afterward by his writings, not to strive about that
or any other ceremonies.

If the Bishop of Rome, according to these Rules, be examined, it will easily
appear, that he is Antichrist: For not only without Scrripture, does he
burden Christians with innumerable decrees and laws; but he is so rigid in
maintenance of his Laws, that he is more severely punished for the most part,
who denies obedience to his Statutes, then he that transgresses Gods express
commands.

The Stilt-walker follows him close at the heels, whilst he does so eagerly
contend for the right of making Church-lawes; so that he cries out, Christ's
blood, and all holy things to be profaned, if this power be granted to
Laymen, or if Churchmen in this be any ways hindered. For who but an
Impostor will go about to persuade men that there is such a mystical
holiness in ordaining things indifferent; as whether we may pray covered or
uncovered; standing, kneeling, or sirting? with our eyes looking upward or
downward? what day the congregation must meet? whether early or late? in what
place, and in what garments must men pray and preach? whether at night (after
Christ's example) or by day, the communion must be given? whether the wine must
be powered out into silver or glass? whether levened or unlevened bread must
be used? whether only the Preacher must give the Sacraments, or the Elders
also, and any religious man as it was in use among the Apostles? whether he
only is to preach that is called by imposition of hands, or others also, who
sometimes are better able, though accounted but Laymen? whether the right of
consecration, that is, of imposition of hands, belongs only to the Minister,
or to all the Elders also, and other members of the Church; so that confusion
be avoided, and innumerable other things, which touch not the substance, nor
necessary rites of divine worship; in ordaining of which, whereas there is
nothing so eminent, but may not be determined easily by laymen, as they call
them, especially by civil Magistrates, yet he so swells with the pretended
sanctity of this unspeakable mystery, that he will have us bleeve, they
overthrow religion and piety, who think or do otherwise in this, then he
pleases. Besides, in this also he imitates the Pope, for that he is almost
more rigid in arguing and venting his Ecclesiastic Laws, then those that are
truly Divine. This he upbraids elsewhere to the Pope, as Antichristian; but in
this he runs from the Limepit, and falls still into the Coal-pit; or as we
say, he leaps out of the drying pan into the fire: For they say that it is
ordinary for this Treverian to beget new dreams, especially such as serve for
establishing the majesty of the Church, and treading down that of the State;
in which he is so zealous, that he contends more about the not observation of
Christ's Nativity, and other Festival days, about driving the Harmony of
Organs out of the Church, about the most spiritual holiness of Deaconship,
and other trifles, then he is about the whole passion of Christ, or urging of
his merits; so that a whore does not scold more against an honest woman, then
he does against both Magistrates and Ministers, if they cross him in his
trifles. On the contrary, he offends not that abuses Magistrates openly or
privately, though he be never so infamous, seditious, an extortioner, a cheater,
and the sink of all wickedness. Yet he is not so cunning in hiding his Popish
leprosy, but the scabs which he covers in one place, he discovers in another.
He inveighs much against the Pope for making such laws as bind Christian men's
consciences; and yet (such is his giddiness) not only does he lavishly extol
the sanctity of Legislative power, but every where so prates of the necessity
of his laws, that he openly matcheth them with the Laws of Christ. For he
cries out, that the Laws and Statutes of the Church at this day, are of such
authority, that if any refuse to obey them, he is to be punished with the
greater and lesser censure by the Church: which every man my see touches men's
consciences. For what more grievous punishment can he denounce against a
whoremaster, an adulterer, a Blasphemer, and an open despiser of divine laws,
but to punish him with his censuring Rod, and excommunication. Besides, there
can be no greater punishment, then to be excluded from heaven; but if we will
credit Apolonius, he is excluded from heaven whom he excommunicates.

I believe the Stilt-walker laughs here within himself, as often as he
affeights simple men, with the terrors of his censure; which he knows to be
mockeries, and used by him for no other end, then to reign over men's estates,
bodies and consciences. But I now esteem of this thing as it is, and as each
holy man can judge of it. Surely, if the greater excommunication be the
punishment of Ecclesiastic laws, if excommunication be the Key that truly
shuts heaven, as the Walachrians say; who sees not that the conscience is
touched with this, when he shall find that heaven is locked against him with
the Popes or Stilt-wakers Key, except he will subscribe to the ordinances and
devices of the Walachrians? I confess Apolonius is not so unskilful an actor
in this Papal Stage Play, but he can with a fine distinction clear himself
of this blemish: for he says, That punishment is not inflicted for a Law, or
thing which is indifferent, but for contumacie: As if a Magistrate should say,
that the murderer is not executed for cutting the innocent man's throat, but
because he died y upon it. But I deny that this is contumacy, when one resists
stoutly and constantly the idle devices of Churchmen, whether they be obtruded
by Apolonius, or the Walashrians, or the Pope; there was never such authority
in a liar, as to make a lie become a truth. Therefore when the Church obtrudes
a falsehood, or commands a thing indifferent, as necessary, because she
deceives, he is not contumacious, who in this case resists the Church; but
the Church is contumacious herself, which perseveres in her falsehoods. So this
Walachrian Mom: is always dancing upon the Popes Scaffold, enlarging the
borders or fringes, not only of his preaching and censuring, but also of his
legislative garment, so far, that he would persuade us that he offends as
grievously, who obeyes not the corrupted word and decrees of his Church, as he
that resists the plain Oracles of Christ. He feignes that there is an
unseparable subordination between himself and other modern preachers of his
stamp, and Christ's; and consequently, such a selfe-commanding and imperious
power of teaching and charging Gods people, with no less authority, then if
Christ himself commanded; so that it is commmon with these pratlers, to
persuade men with the Pope, That they hear Christ who hear them, and reject
Christ, who reject them. That the Stilt-walker may see this rash assertion to
be taken out the Popes School, he shall do well to shake his most inward
theological Budget, and to free himself of this circle and labyrinth, which
here I will interlace; and because I shall touch here the crown both of old and
new Popery, I will so compose my self to gravity, as that I shall seem to jest
in a matter of so great weight as this. For I will ask, whether he that hears
Apolonius teaching and commanding, hears always Christ? If he affirms this,
then he will be Pope, and infallible: If he denies this (for out of this his
book we know that the Stilt-walker teaches many falsehoods;) then I will ask
further, when shall Christians be certain that Apolonius speaks truth? He will
answer, that then, when he speaks according to Scripture. Well, but I will ask
again, Whether he speak always according to Scripture? If he says I, then he
is Pope and infallible: If he says no; then I ask again, When does he speak
according to Scripture? He will answer, that then, when according to his skill
in languages, he weighes the Phrases, and searches out the circumstances of
place, and clears all by parallel places. Very good: But I ask a again,
whether Apolonius does this always well? If he says I, then he is Pope, and
infallible: if he denies, I will ask again, when shall we know, that Apolonius
does well? He will answer, that then, when he studieth, diligently, and prays
devoutly: for we must hope, that then God assists him, that he may not deviate
from the truth.

But here a double question will arise. First, how it is known that he always
preaches and prays well? For he that reads these his patched pieces, will
find, that a great part of his prayers and pains are intended to overthrow
the civil Magistrate, and to procure to himself rule and command in the
Church: but I will yield, that good Apolonius does all things well. I will ask
then again, if he (though he pray and labor well) does always preach truth?
If he does, then he is infallible, as the Pope: If he does not, I will ask
again, How may we certainly know, that Apolonius whilst he labors and
prays, has the infallible grace of the Spirit? God no where in Scripture
promises this to Apolonius, and our modern Lawgivers. This indeed was true in
the divinely-inspired Apostles and Prophets; but that this is true in the Pope,
is the lie of Apolonius, and all his Jesuits: And if this Walachrian Pompion
should presume to brag so much of himself, his own book would refute him; in
writing of which, though he labored most spiritually, yet it is plain, that he
has in it uttered many blasphemous and notorious lies. Here then having
catched him, I will hold him fast, and will convince him of fraud, in saying,
that Christ's commands are obeyed when he is obeyed commanding (as he says) in
Christ's Name, except he will fall into this absurdity, in saying, that he who
hears Apolonius lying, hears Christ in Apolonius commanding, which I suppose
he will think is blasphemy. Hence then it is clear, that Apolonius is a
deceiver, who would persuade the credulous, that his own and his Walachrian
Ecclesiastic Dictates and Commands, are to be accounted the Dictates and
commands of Christ, whereas Christians cannot be certainly induced to believe
this, upon any sure ground; Yea, it is certain, both by these Walachrian
sayings and writings, that Christ speaks not in them; for he is always true,
and these are full of lies and blasphemies, but rather the spirit of
Antichrist, who is a lier. But here is one hole, through which he may escape;
he will say, perhaps, that he submits his preaching to the judgment of the
Consistory; and because what Apolonius there determines, is approved by so many
Prophets, it is very just that the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the
Prophets, and so the people must believe Apolonius prophesying.

But here again I ask, whether all is truth that is determined by the
Consistory of Middleburgh? If he affirms it, then this Consistory is
infallible, as the Pope: If he denies it, I will ask, how he knows that the
Consistory does not err? He will answer, that he knows it by the approbation
of the whole Walachrian Classes: (for thus has he proceeded in canonizing his
patcht book.) But I ask again, whether that be infallible, what the Walachrian
Classis approves? If he affirms it, their this Classis is infallible as the
Pope: (But I do not think that then other Classes of Zealand will yield this
to the Walachrian Spirituality, that whatsoever they determine, must be
infallible.) If he denies this, then I ask again, How shall I know that the
Walachrian Classis does not err? He will say, I suppose, if all the other
Classes of Zealand, that is, the Synod, shall approve it, I will ask him, If
whatsoever the Synod of Zealand shall determine, be infallible? I believe the
Synod of Holland, and of the other Provinces, will deny this; nor will they
acknowledge the Papal infallibility of the Synod of Zealand. From hence,
perhaps, he will ascend to the Synod of all the Provinces, then to the
National, after, to the General, and last of all he will mount up in
infinitum: So that the Stilt-walker will find no outlet, except he conclude
in the Pope alone, to whose judgment we must submit, whether he err or not,
says Bellarmine, because he is subject to no man's authority and correction,
but is to be left to Christ's judgment alone, which shall be in the end of
the world. The Walachrians every where breathe this Antichristian spirit, who
though conscious of fallibility and error, yet are still crying out, that
obedience must be yielded to their Church-ordinances, under pain of
excommunication. They confess indeed, that they are not infallible, and permit
Christians to examine their doctrines and ordinances; but yet will not have the
Magistrates to abrogate or appoint any thing, except the Clergy refuse to be
reformed. The judgment of which ease must remain in Clergymen: so in truth,
opinion, and Popish persuasion is the very foundation of this Walachrian
Legislative power: thus all by an implicit faith must believe, that their
governors how ever at other times they may err, yet now they do not err; or
if they do err, yet they must not be resisted by the modest sons of the
Church, but obeyed. Surely this opniion differs much from that moderation of
the Apostles, who^ Christians absolutely were bound to believe, by reason of
their infallibility: yet the one did not absolutely believe, nor did the other
absolutely require it, but submitted their doctrine and ordinances to every
ones examination: so that it is intolerable, that a rabble of unskilful
fellows at this day, should domineere over the Clergy, and by divine right,
forsooth, enslave Christian men's consciences to yield obedience to their toys.

But here I will remove one seruple, which has much troubled the minds even of
some good Scholars. Romans 13. Heb. 13.
The Apostle wills every soul to be subject to the Magistrate for conscience
sake; and he warnes us to hearken and obey the Governors of the Church. Hence
they collect, if the Magistrates laws can bind the conscience, whereby God
will have us obey them; then the Church laws also must bind Christian
consciences: for them also we are enjoined to obey. If I were to cut this knot,
I would say that there is great odds between these two commands: for the holy
Ghost in plain terms commands every soul to obey the civil Magistrate for
conscience sake. As for Church-Rulers, he commands honor and obedience to be
given to them; but he does not enjoyne every soul to this, nor for conscience
sake. For those restrictions the maintainers of Pap^^^ Hierarchy do attex or
knit by their consequentiary threeds: but to such consequentiary Divines it
falls out as it does to unskilful accountants, who reckoning with counters,
do unskilfully transfer from one place to another the counter. Whence
proceeds so great a change in the sum, that they are quite mistaken in the
reckoning. But my prime answer shall he this, There is great difference between
the obedience due to civil Magistrates, and to Church Governors: For God has
appointed the former to be his Ambassadors and Vicars upon earth, and Gods in
his name; under which Tittle he give^ them this power, that not only every
soul, but also for conscience, is bound to obey them, that is, absolutely, not
only as they command justly, and lawfully, but as they command: Therefore he
has armed them with the sword, that they may force men. For if the civil
Magistrate command things, either just or Indifferent, the subject is bound to
obey for conscience. If he commands what is unjust, the subject is not bound
to perform, but to submit either by suffering the punishment, or by flight;
but the obedience due to Church-Rulers is far other: for they are not to be
obeyed absolutely, because they command, but conditionally, if they command
lawfully.

For these Spiritual Rulers must be tried if they are of God, or not: For if
they enter not in at the door, the straight way, but unlawfully, by a
back-doore, become Shepherds, Captains and Rulers, they are not to be obeyed,
but rejected as hirelings and wolves. Again, if they enter in lawfully, so that
they sit with the Scribes in Moses his Chair, and yet will mingle the leven of
their Traditions, they are to be avoided as blind guides: yea, [to be cast out
as unsavory salt, and to be trod under foot.] Christ himself commanding, as I
will hereafter show more fully: so that here now we may see another Legislative
Divinity, quite different from that of the old and new Papists: for the Pope
has long since persuaded Christians, that every soul must be subject to him
(even of Princes) as to the universal Steward of the Church, and that for
conscience sake, they are bound to obey his Edicts absolutely; for which end
he has armed himself also with the temporal sword (for he carries two) that
he may show himself to be the transcendent sword-bearing power of Paul, by
which right he claims to himself such absolute power in the Church, that
though sometimes he creeps in like a Fox, and reigns as a Lion; yet he will
be absolutely obeyed, till he die like a Dog.) The same is the ground of the
Walachrian Jurisdiction: For the Stilt-walker does not on this lay the
foundation of special and divine right of law-giving, that he is a lawful
Pastor, and commands things lawful, (for so he should be subject to every man's
examination;) but upon this privilege, that he is the Captain, Leader,
Shepherd, and Ambassador of Christ; in which Authoritative and Regal power,
he so rejoices, that he openly confesses the Magistrates themselves to be
subject to his laws, and that it is not in their power to make Church-lawes,
so that he doubts not to accuse them of tyranny, if they presume of themselves
to command Churchmen, or to question or abrogate Church-ordinances: so that
the Walachrian Papists chief drift is, under pretext of legislative power, to
dominiere over Magistrates, and to prescribe laws, not only in Church, but in
civil affairs also, as shall seem best to the Walachrian supercilious
spiritualities. Many examples of this matter does the Stilt-walker show at
Middleburgh; whereof some I have mentioned already, I will add one more, of
which he vapors much elsewhere in his patcht book.

Heretofore the Magistrates of Middleburgh (as they say) ordered, that in the
Church, Organs should be used, for regulating the tunes in singing of Psalms.
This gave occasion to the Walachrian to ^reprove the Magistrate; and, as they
say, he did shamefully in his Pulpit, inveigh against this order, showing the
indignity and erroneousnesse thereof, to the people, not without scoffs. And
because he was not ashamed to set down in this book, the sum of his reasons,
which he impudently used against his own Magistrates, it shall not be amiss by
the way to refell them. First, he says very imperiously, that this order is
very repugnant to Divine Right, and the Churches practice. His prime argument
is, That Organs were used in the Jewish Temple: whence he concludes, that he
digges up again Indaisme, who brings Organs into Christian Churches.

How frivolous this reason is, any indifferently learned, may see. For I ask,
if every thing used in the Jewish Temple, be unlawful in Christian worship? I
suppose he will not say so, if he be wise: For either there must be no
Christianity, or God must create new Elements; for in the Jewish worship were
not only Organs, Cymbals and Tymbrels, but Gold also, Silver, Garments, Silk,
Wool, Water, Bread, Wine, and many other things. He ought then to have
declared more particularly what was precisely ceremonial, and not to be used,
when we see that every thing is not to be rejected.

He instanceth, that Christians should at least omit these things, which served
for the worship of the Jewish Temple. For because God destroyed that Temple, he
gathers by an unanswerable Argument (as he calls it) that what was used in the
worship of that Temple, was abolished, and should be removed from Christian
worship.

But here again he feeds his Reader with toys: for if we must use nothing in
Christian worship, which was ordained for the Jewish worship, why does he use
Churches? In the worship of the Temple, there were not only Organs, but the
Book of the Law also, and Water, Bread, Wine, a Table, an Ark, Seats, Pulpits,
Stones, Linen, etc. Why does he not also desire the removal of these things?
The very singing of Psalms is borrowed from the Jewish worship, Epist. ad
Hooper.
says Martyr. Why is not this also rejected by the Lawgiver Apolonius.

He instanceth, That Pipes and Organs are dead things, and wind Instruments,
and as it were Rattles fit for such children and stiff-necked people, as the
Jews; but these become not Christians.

I answer, the Stilt-walker has so little breath, or spirit in his Assertions,
that he produces nothing that hurts these pipes or Jewish children. For the
question is still the same, to wit, if dead animal things used by the Jews in
their worship, are to be rejected by Christians in their divine service, why
does he only remove Organs? It is to be feared, that if such another
Night-bird grow as Apolonius, that not only Organs shall be taken away, but
Books also, Tables, Pulpits, Deskes, Garments, and other things. So that this
Walachrian pratler will be forced not only to weary himself in standing, but
also immodestly to wander up and down naked. This petty Lawgiver then is too
imperious against Magistrates, who dares break in upon their right so rashly,
and Magisterially declare these things unlawful, which God has not condemned,
but has left free to Christians. Besides, the Harmony of Organs is useful to
hinder the confusion that many times is in singing. The Magistrate indeed makes
use of skillful finging-men to regulate the tunes of the Psalms; but we find
by experience, that these are not sufficient to hinder the undecent confusion
in singing. Now if the Harmony of Organs be a decent help against this
seandall, who will not see that this Walachrian is a railing fellow, who so
injuriously rages against Magistrates about an order not prohibited, but of
long continuance and profit. Surely, he that will but indifferently think, that
when there was no public worship, David did drive away the evil spirit from
Saul, by his music: On the contrary, that Micha the Prophet stirred up the
good spirit in himself: He will confess with me, that Christian Minds may be
cheered, and modestly excited in divine worship, as well by the music of
Organs, as of voices: So then, by this example we may see what will be the end
and effects of this holy and free legislative Church Power, for which the
Stilt-walker in Walachria does so much contend; to wit, that some spiritual
Night-bird, out of idleness, and his itching pride, may whilst he is farting
in his study, conceive the cream of some new spirituality, and then in his
superlatively sacred Consistorial Affembly, by the Cocks egg of contention,
to which presently the Classick Toads crawle together, that by cherishing and
sitting upon this egg, at last the new Basilisk of Error and dominiering may
be hatched. Such was the proceeding of this new Apolonian Monster, and daily
such kind of Chickens will increase: If all such kind of Vermin be not choked
within their Consisto^all shell, by a plenipotentiary presence, before that by
their breath and hissing, they infect the air all abroad, to the destrnction
of all that shall hear or see them.

The sum of all is this, that now there is no special, or any mystical
privilege of sanctity, in making Church-lawes and statutes, from which pious
Magistrates are to be kept off: For either these are ordinances of things
necessary for salvation and divine worship, all which are contained in
Scripture, and are the ancient Laws of God, not of their modern Church; but
who will say that it is unlawful for godly Magistrates to make dicrees, and
command men to observe Christ's Laws? Truly, if wicked Magistrates would make
such Laws, and enjoin Curistians to keep the pure commands of Christ, they
should not be sacrilegious, but most worthy of praise: Or else the laws which
they make are of things indifferent, which concern the order and decency of
the Church. But because he confesses himself these things to be free, and no
way binding the conscience; whence I pray, proceeds so great a holiness in
ordering things not properly holy, but free? Or (as it often uses to be) laws
are made of things feigned, false, and unusefull, as we may see among Papists;
but these make the lawgivers profane, not holy.

I might now seem to have put a Bit in the mouth of this huge Beast of
Walachrian-Popish-legislative-power, but that there remains yet a halter
concerning the facred right of Dependency. For the Walachrian Papist is so
fruitful in hatching new sanctities, that just like a Potter he makes of the
same clay first a Censeriall Platter, and then a Legislative Chamber Pot, that
now nothing is more easy, then whilst the wheel is turning, there may be
framed a cover fit for such a pot, to wit, the holiness of Dependency: for
because it is the charge of Churchmen to have care of her, and so remove
scandals from her. Hence is begot among them the power of censuring, then of
making Laws, according to the spiritual and holy pleasure of the Walachrians.
Now Church-ordinances cannot be made cursorily in the Marketplace, Spargere
(...).
or streets: for this were to shit as dogs do when they are running: but
there is need of preparation, that this high spirituality might be uttered in
Consistories, Classes, and Synods: whence among Papists arises the sacred
right of dependence.

However, I confess that there is some use of Ecclesiastik meetings, yet this
I Will say, that these are mere devices, which the Walachrian Prates of their
precise sanctity: for hitherto it is not known by any example, or command of
Christ, that it is a matter of such necessity and sanctity, for making up of a
Church, that there should be meetings in Consistories, Classes, and Synods; as
if the Magistate must therefore be called sacrilegious, if either he hinder, or
join with them, according to his authority: for whilst they keep no moderation
in these meetings, but ascribe too much power to them, they make a Pope of the
Church, or else run in infi^^i^m. which I thus demonstrate: If a brother, says
Christ, wrong his brother, Mat. 18.
the matter must be composed between themselves; if that cannot be; two others
must be employed; if they can do no good, they must tell the Church: and here
Christ stays. That is a great argument for Independents, in that Christ goes
no higher then a partieular Church. Oftentimes experience teaches us, that
controversies are thus better taken up then in Classes and Synods; because
there they are better known in all their circumstances, and clearer from
affections. But the old and new Papists will none of this: for so they should
want much of their sanctities: whence they pleasantly talk by way of
comparisons: If the Church, that is, the Consistory, should err; then say
they, accoording to Christ's command, two or three Churches must be employed,
and they will make a Classis. Here is a goodly increase, for two or three
brothers to be enlarged into two or three Churches. This is the Popish
increase, who of one Peter, the chief Pastor of the Church, have made
innumerable successors Popes and Peter's, as it were. But if it should happen,
that the Classis should err, here the increase multiplies: for then two or
three Classes must be employed, which makes a Provincial Synod; and if this
Synod also should err, then the Synods of diverse Provinces must be assembled,
which make up a general Council of that Kingdom or State. But if this also
err, then the Councels of diverse Nations must be assembled; and so there shall
be a National Council: and if this suffice not, then all the Nations of the
world must be assembled; and so we shall have an universal or Ecumenical
Council. But here Bellar mine is doubtful: Loc. de conc. c. 2.
for if the decision of the truth depend from the judgment and meetings of all
nations of the world, we shall never be certain; because there will be always,
some doubt, whether some nation or other in the world has not been omitted,
and not consulted with: and because there is no Monarch that commands all the
world, he confesses that there can be no Assembly of such a Council, so at
last he puts a period to the increase of Synodicall dependence, as Apelles
did, who not being able to express the sweating of the horse back by his
Pencill, is said to have dashed his sponge against the picture, and so to have
expressed it. Even so with the sponge of ignorance it was needful to blot out
the increase of dependency, that he might find an end of Synods. For at last
he concludes, that that is to be accounted an Occumenicall Council, to which
if not all the nations of the world come, yet they might have come, because
none were excluded. Though I confess the Jesuits have found out a shorter and
certainer way to bound in Dependency: For they saw that this Synodicall
Argument did increase in infinitum; therefore Bellarmine, that he might not
leave the matter in suspense, at last terminates the decision of all laws and
questions in the Pope, either with or without a Council; so that indeed
Antichrist is the end of Roman dependency. The Walachrian Dependants do
execrate an Ecclesiastic Pope, but chiefly the Civil; whence necessarily the
end of their dependency is either in infinitum, or opinion, or many Popes: for
if all controversies must be drawn from a brother to a brother, from these to a
Consistory, from this to a Classis, from the Classis to a Provincial Synod,
from this to a National, from a National to an Universal, and this still
greater and greater, must not then this matter run in infinitum? or else it
will end in this opinion, that he who judges last, shall be thought to judge
best, whether his judgment be good or bad. What else is this, but to make
Popes of so many Judges? But it is unlikely that ever Christ ordained in his
Church such a Judicature of controversies; because it is absurd, and sets up
that domination which Christ forbids in his Apostles: Mat. 20.
For by these means, whether it be right or wrong, the greater Synod will
command the lesser; this lesser, the Classis; and this, the Consistory; and the
Consistory, the brethren, as it pleases: and so by right of this Dependency,
the whole Church Government will be no order, but Empire, or tyranny: for every
inferior will be forced by blind obedience, to yield to his superior. I call
that blind obedience not only when we must not enquire of the thing judged, or
to be judged, which is the Popes practice; but when such is the government of
the Church, that whether you find her error, or not, yet you must obey, until
the Churchmen shall say, that they have judged amiss, which will never be; I
will confidently say, that this right of dependency is so absurd, that the
Walachrian never borrowed from Christ, but from Antichriff.

It is commonly objected out of Mat. 18. where Christ himself instituted three
degrees of dependencies: from one brother to another, from brother to brothers,
from brothers to the Church; whence they collect by an argument, a paribus,
that Christ also instituted the other degrees from the Church to the Classis,
from this to the Synod, etc. I answer, that here a matter of privilege is
handled, and that most holy: but in privileges, words should be very plain,
neither must we give any thing to consequences, or where the law does not
distinguish, or add, must we add any thing: whence I gather, that by Christ's
command, men must not go beyond these three degrees; because he appointed no
more: for Christ ascends no higher then from the three brothers to the Church;
which she weth, that Christ by the word Church, understands only a particular
Cogregation, not Classes and Synods, even to the Ecumenical: for it were too
great a leap from three brothers, to send Christians to the universal
Council, if this were meant by the Church. Again, it is not likely, that
Christ under the name Church, does comprehend Classes and Synods; because he
there speaks only of private quarrels to be taken up between brothers, of
which there is no need of meetings of Classes, Synods, even to the Ecumenical;
for then every day these Synods should be assembled, because such controverfies
may arise daily; and if they did not arise, the Walachrian Dependants would
daily stir them up.

2. For Dependency they allege these words of Christ, Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there I will be in the midst of them. But what
they collect hence is of no validity. For first it is known, that all
Consistories are not gathered together in Christ's name, nor Classes, nor
Councels; but oftentimes two or three may be together reverently, and in the
fear of God, when on the contrary, a Classick, or Synodicall Assembly may cast
of all reverence of Christ. So we see that when the two Disciples were to going
Emmaus, Luke 24.
Christ was in the midst of them, when as he has not been present in greater
Assemblies, where contention has been. Therefore I say secondly, that this
consequence is weak; because Christ promises that he will be present to two or
three, therefore he will be much more present to ten, a hundred, or a thousand.
But thus the Walachrian, after the Jesuits manner, does in a manner conclude;
but in this he is unsavory, as if he should argue, that because Christ said
there should be peace and concord between two or three, therefore there should
be much more concord between ten, or a hundred: for as peace and order is not
so easily kept in great meetings, as in smaller; so there is no necessity to
think, that truth, or the decision thereof, should be more exactly found in
great then in small assemblies. Not only has Nazianzen, but also all times
have taught, that matters are not always better judged in greater
Church-meetings, then in lesser; so that necessarily either Christ performs
not his promise (which is blasphemy) or else the new Papists misunderstand
Christ's promise and think foolishly when they conclude a privilege of so great
and exact smctity, 1 Cor. 14.32.
out of a promise not rightly understood.

The words of Paul seem to be plainer, The spirit of the Prophets is subject to
the Prophets. Whence they gather the divine right of assembling Consistories,
Classes and Synods. For how shall it appear better, that the spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets, then when the ordinary Church-prophets
are subject to the Consistorial, and these to the Classick Prophets, the
Classick to the Synodal, in infinitum, and so a greater Prophet must command
the lesser subject to him? These are the Enthymems of old Papists, with which
the Stilt-walker does exactly correspond for polishing the right of his
Dependency. I answer, that he makes a Mountain of a Molehill, who will wrest
all this out of Paul's words: for this is not his meaning, that the fewer
Prophets should always subscribe to the vote of the greater number: this were a
rotten paradox, which brought in Antichrist; because we find many times, that
the opinion of one layman has been sounder then of many Clergymen. Neither
will this follow out of Paul's words, that the Prophets of lesser authority
should be always subject and obedient to those of greater authority. This were
true indeed, if there were present one that were divinely inspired, he truly
were to be preferred before a thousand others, and all others not divinely
inspired, were to submit to him. But whereas divine inspiration is ceased, no
such superiority or pre-eminence must be placed in any one, to which absolutely
other Prophets must be subject. For howsoever the Stilt-walker prates, with the
Papists, of the abundant assistance of the spirit, which laymen ought to hope
are in their Leaders and Pastors, when they meet together in the Consistory,
Classis, or Synod, that so he may procure to himself blind obedience: yet
this is certain, that there is no such promise extant, which shall continue for
ever. And all ages teach us, that oftentimes dangerous aad most hurtful poison
has proceeded from them that excel in number and authority; as may be seen in
the rising and progress of Antichristianisme: So that doubtless there is
another meaning of Paul's words, then this Popish one: For he speaks of the
government of the Church of his time, In 1 Cor. 14, 32, etc.
which was far different from that which is now, as Aretius notes. At this
day the Minister alone does all, and takes upon him whatsoever is judicial;
that he alone may preach with authority; as for other Church. Prophets, they
like women must hold their peace in the congregation; neither do they doubt,
but he shall be severely punished in Walachria, who though a Prophet, should
take upon him either privately or publicly, to reprove Apelonius for his
errors and lies, though he deserve it if he were not curbed by the Magistrate:
So that the whole marrow of modern Dependency, chiefly of the Walachrian,
obttude upon Christians (every one of which is now a Prophet) what they please;
and if perhaps he shall be found in an error, then to betake himself to the
Consistorials, such Prophets as himself, then to the Classiairies, (as we see
in this work) at last to Synods; of all which if the greater part should be mad
with the Stilt-walker, all other Prophets must be forced, whether it be right
or wrong, to submit to these mad men. It was far otherwise among the
Apostles, as Paul intimates in this place; every one performed his own part:
some did speak with tongues, others did interpret, others did rule the Church
as Governors and Captains, others gave alms, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12.
not only of the Church goods, but of their own also; some did give comfort,
others healed the sick, others did prophecy; neither was this done sparingly,
or by a few, so that not one did take upon him the Office of preaching by
authority (as the Walachrian would have it) but many had the gift of prophecy:
for God then did so abundantly power out his Spirit, that oftentimes in the
congregation, they might see one suddenly inspired by God, and furnished with
the gift of prophecy, who before sat among the common sort. Yet because Paul
was furnished with all spiritual gifts, excelling all others in Apostolical
dignity, lest the Church should employ too many Prophets without order, he
prescribes these laws, that by turn every one should utter his prophesies and
revelations, whilst others hold their peace. And left the people should be
wearied with too long exercise, that they should not prophecy above three at a
time: lastly, that they do not give themselves to strife and quarrelling, For
they prophesied by the inspiration of the holy Ghost alone, they should never
utter contrariety, though they spoke diverse things, and in a different way and
degree of revelation; as might be seen in the Prophets of old; an example of
this is recorded by Josephus in two famous Prophets, Ezekiel and Jeremiah: this
prophesied at Jerusalem under Zedekiah, that King Zedekiah should be carried
captive into Babylon: the other being captive in Babylon, foretold that
Jerusalem should be taken, and that Zedekiah should not see the King of
Babylon. These two prophesies did seem to be contradictory; but yet by
experience both were found true: for Zedekiah came captive to Babylm, as
Jeremy prophesied, and yet did not see it, as Ezekiel-foretold; because the
King of Babel had put out his eyes before he was carried away. So it fell out
among the Apostles, that though they preacheddivers things, and in a diverse
way, yet they all uttered the same thing. Thus then it was always true, what
the Apostle here says, The spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets,
so long as they met together being inspired by the holy Ghost: For it is
impossible that they should not agree among themselves; but as soon as the
false Apostles did mingle themselves with those who were divinely inspired, and
when with them began to quarrel Alexander the Copper-Smith, Hymeneus and
Diotrephes, speaking evil words, then it was no wonder if dissentions did arise
among them, and that the spirit of the true Prophets did never submit
themselves to false Prophets. If these things fall out then, when men divinely
inspired were present; how much more intolerable is it, that some Walachrian
babbling fellows should at this day meet together, and think that by right of
dependency, the spirits of all men must be subject to them?

There be some that expound Paul's words thus, The spirit of the Prophets is
subject to the Prophets, that is, to the writings of the Prophets, or the
Scripture; so that the meaning is, all the spirits and sayings of the Prophets
are to be examined according to the Scripture as the analogy of faith: which
interpretation is true indeed, but makes nothing for the Walachrian
independency, which goes about to set up Popish Hierarchy, to wi^, that
whatsoever the Treverian Rat dreams, the Consistorial Rattle-mouse must
approve; and what is liking to them must be received by the Classick Owl, by
whose consent it will finely fall out, that the spirit of the Prophets be
subject to those Prophets; that is, the Apolonian Prophets must meet in
Consistories, Classes, and Synods, as often as they please, that there they may
perhaps compound old quarrels, and beget new ones, or at least spend victuals.

For the persuading of the holiness of dependency, they ascribe much to the
institution of the Jews; whom they say had lesser assemblies in each city,
all which depended from the general assembly at Jerusalem.

I confess the old Papists have borrowed this (as many things else) from the
Jewish Commonwealth, that the holy Clergy might have among themselves a
dependency and subordination, so that at last all depend from the Pope, as from
a rotten thread. But because that government was tied to the ceremonial
sanctity of Jerusalem the holy City and Temple, which long since is destroyed,
I wonder the Stilewalker does not call to mind how disgraceful a thing it is
to dig up aagain Indaisme. For by this irrefragable argument, he did upbraid
his own Magistrates with Judalsme, and the rattles of carnal Jews; because
they only made use of Organs, used among the Jews, to rectify the tunes in
Psalms, whereas he borrowes not only from the Jews, but from the Papists
also, the whole mystery of dependency and government, as a thing most sacred;
although this also was in the Jewish dependency (as I will show elsewhere) that
Magistrates were present by divine right in all Judicatures: and thus has he
overthrown himself.

But the main ground of dependency is taken from the custom of the Apostles;
they had often Church-meetings, and (if Magistrates will believe it) they had a
Council at Jerusalem; which therefore by the old and new Papists is called,
the first Council of Jerusalem. This example is of such moment with Apolonius,
that he acounts him sacrilegious, that will dare to hiss against it: whence he
concludes, that it is of divine, sacred, and Apostolical right for Churchmen
to meet in Consistories, Classes, and Synods; and therefore that it is
Simoniacal, wicked, and tyran^ical for Magistrates to deny this now to the
Church-Walachrian-Papists.

I answer, the examples of Christ and his Apostles, as I have often said, do
not always make a perpetual law, except a command be joined, or some
circumstance evince it. For they did many things upon occasion, which we
neither can nor ought now to imitate. For example, rich men brought their
goods, and laid them down at the Apostles feet; which goods the Apostles
distributed: of which care afterward the Apostles freed themselves. Paul went
up to Jerusalem to see and to salute Peter; Phil. 4.15.
in imitation of which Bishops and Kings go up to Rome to kiss the Popes
feet. Paul, so great an Apostle, was maintained by the gifts of the
Philippians. The same Paul at Corinth with Aquila and Priseilla, returned to
his Handicraft, yet preaching that he might have regard to his honor and
maintenance. But it is strange to see how at this day the Apol^nian Z^lets do
abhor this exam^^e, that diverse times smatterers in learning, have crept from
their worldly Mechanic trades, into the holy, Ecclesiastic, spiritual
Pulpit; but I can find none now who will return to their Handicrafts again,
that he may ease the Churches: neither do I much urge this; for Apolonius will
say, There is no need now. However the Magistrate with him is worldly and
carnal, by reason of which he is unable to touch spiritual Church-affaires;
for they are of a heavenly extraction, and as it were Aristotle's quintessence;
yet he does well in heaping stipends upon Churchmen: yet the Stilt-walker with
his fellows, plainly threaten, that unless they will keep off their
sacrilegious lands from their spiritualities, that they will one time or other
strip the Magistrate of their bountiful power: nor is it hard for them to draw
this right also out of their divinity, if Magistrates will believe their
devices and tricks. For as hitherto the Walachrian divinity has ratified that
Magistrates have no right to be present or president in their Consistories,
Classes, or Synods, by reason of the holy Dependencie, or have any power to
gather or distribute the alms, be cause of the holiness of Deaconship: even
so they have no right to meddle with the revenues and stipends of Ministers, by
that Apostolical law: The mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, must
not be muzled: And, he who serves at the Altar must live by the Altar. By which
Title the Pope now a long time has challenged to himself this holiness; but
it is to be feared, that if the Magistrates out of their negligence, will yield
to the new Walachrian Papists, and chiefly to the Apolonians, this part also of
spirituality, lest a great earthquake arising out of this exhalation, miserably
shake and overthrow both the Cities of Zealand, and of the united Provinces,
and also destroy and overwhelm the Magistrate in this ruin. But this by the
way concerning the Major of the Argument.

I answer then first, it is usual with the Stilt-walker to blabbe out many
things without judgment, concerning the Apostolical custom of teaching,
censuring, and governing, which at this day belong no more to the Papal modern
Hierarchy, then heretofore Hercules his shoes to a child. For the custom of
the Apostles both in dignity and manner of meeting in the Church, is infinitely
different from our modern Assemblies. Secondly, I know the ancients do much
extol that meeting of Jerusalem; therefore they call it a Council, which the
new Walachrian Papist borrowes from him: and I deny not but those first
Church-worthies did excellent things in settling of the Church: But I cannot be
induced to believe, that it was a Synod, or that it had almost things requisite
for a Classis, if they be examined according to the pomp of modern dependency
and things required for a Synod, which will appear by the circumstances added
by Luke.

1. Luke says nothing of calling this Synod, concerning the right of which our
Dependants do so much strive; the Text intimates, that they met only
occasionally: some Judaizing brethren came from Jerusalem to Aatioch, where
they troubled the Church, saying, that Paul differed in doctrine from the
Apostles at Jerusalem. That the Church of Antioch might prevent this evil,
appointed that Paul and Barnabas, with a few that might accompany them, should
go up to Jerusalem: neither do I find any where, that an order was sent to
those of Jerusalem, that on such a day, in such a place, they should prepare
themselves for a Synod, which necessarily must have been done at this day: if a
day had been appointed for this Synod, would Paul and Apollo's going thither,
have traveled over Phaenicia and Samaria (as Luke records) which was in a
manner to go out of the way? Their coming also is so described, that it was
acceptable to the Church of Iernsalem, but yet unlooked for, as may be
conjectured. Besides, Luke records no where that the Legates of diverse Churches
and Synods came to this meeting, which must have been, had this been a Synod. I
confess, the Stilt-walker would fain persuade this to the English, that the
Deputies of diverse Churches did meet in this Synod: But in this he shows his
falsehood, and how he participates of that lying spirit, by which God would have
Kings to be deceived. But that he may not here cosen the English and
Netherlanders, I fore-warn them, that he in this lies, and cheateth them
diverse ways. He cites the 26. and 23. verses of that chap: Act 15.
but he who will read all things attentively, shall find, that Luke says nothing
of the Deputies of diverse Churches, as Apolonius feignes. But chiefly observe
his error in alleging to prove this matter, Acts 21.16. where it is recorded,
that with Paul going up to Jerusalem, there joined themselves some Disciples,
bringing with them one Mnason of Cyprus, with whom the Church had lodged; but
not a word of the Deputies of diverse Churches; and if any thing be found like
this; it is too much impudency and stupidity to confound this going up with
that Acts 15. For there is many years difference; for this was almost in the
beginning of Paul's Apostleship; but that in the end, because shortly after Paul
was taken, and carrid to Rome; so that Davus here has not well divided his
times, which is so much the less to be endured in one so proudly puffed up,
who is so luxuriant in urging his own Embassy, his authority in preaching, and
his inseparable subordination to Christ: So that there is nothing more likely,
then that this Walacheian does belch every day out of the Pulpit in
Middleburgh, many absurdities and lies by authority, who durst obtrude to the
learned English, both in writing and print, such manifest falsehoods. Now that
we may further search out in this sacred Assembly, the pomp of a Synod, we must
see if we can find in Luke any thing of Order, of Sessions, of letters of
credence, of the choice of a Moderator, of the right of decision, and many
other things required in a Synod; which the Pope has finely painted out; of
whose fetches this our Pope is not a little proud, so that he bewitches the
Magistrate with the sanctity of his Dependency. Surely Luke makes no mention of
these toys, which pride afterward found out: but on the contrary, we see that
the whole people were present at this Assembly. For it is said, Acts 15.4. that
Paul and his company were received by the Church, the Apostles and Presbyters:
Neither were they there only to consult, but also to decide and to determine.
For it is said, v. 22. It seems good to the Apostles, Presbyters, with the
whole Church. Neither is there any sign that matters were carried by votes,
neither was there any dispute about the Moderatorship. There were so many
Apostles, and pillars of the Church present, yet no man impaired the others
authority, as if there had been need of the Emperor to be there with his
Scepter, and of the Pope with his Crosier staff, but every one spoke as
occasion served, sometimes Peter, sometimes Paul, sometimes James, others being
silent: for all without law, or command, abstained from confusion and tumults;
so that when one spoke, the other held their peace. None therefore of the
Apostles did assume to himself any Judicial power or prerogative, such as is
bragged of at this day.

Now if we look upon the event of the Council, there is nothing that favors
of any pomp or Synodicall pride, such as is at this day: they concluded not
proudly, as the Pope does, but thus, it seems good to the Holy Ghost, and to
us. Nor did they impose their ordinances upon all Nations; but only upon the
Churches of Anti^ch and Syria, which had employed their help and Council. They
were so moderate in commanding, that they rather persuaded then commanded: for
in a familiar letter they wrote to them even concerning the piety of their
Legates, Judas and Sylas, praying rather obedience from them, then requiring it;
which they needed not have done, if they had purposed with the Pope, or the
Stilt-walker, to command with authority. Lastly, the laws which they made,
were of things indifferent, which they did not urge so rigidly, as not to leave
it free for any to do as they thought good, when occasion served, as
afterward we know the Galatians, Corinthians, and Romans did violate these
laws, when the^ was no danger of offense, as Calvin elsewhere fitly shows.

This then is that holy Synod! this is that first council of Jerusalem, of
which both old and new Papists do so much brag; in which if Apolonius show
me all the the toys and spiritual requisites in Synods, he shall be to me
great Apollo; such are, The calling of Synods, the chief of Deputies, the
Letters of credence, the power of consulting and dciding, the right of
Moderatorship, the pluralities and collections of Votes: whether Synods can
make Laws Dogmaticall, or Diatacticall: whether these Laws are to be ratified
by Magistrates? whether Magistrates are to be present at Syneds? or if they
are, to moderate? Whether they are to have a sentence definitive, or
deliberative? whether Church-ordinances may become Church-lawes? whether they
bind the conscience directly or indirectly? Whether they oblige by a coactive
spiritual power? and innumerable other things which he has gathered out of
the Popes Danghill for Jewels, and with them has stuffed his work. Truly, if
he can draw these things out of this Apostolical meeting, he will deserve to
be made of a poor Walachrian Shepherd, an English Bishop, or a German
Superintendent. I can scarce think that this Assembly was a Classis, in respect
of outward things, and not much otherwise to be accounted, then if the Church
of Snecana, or Doccoma, should in a different case consult with the Francian or
Leowardian Church, and should send two or three of their Church, and receive
from that Church, a writing concerning things indifferent.

They commonly answer, that all the Apostles were present, which gave to this
meeting the honor of a general Council. I confess, that the authority of
this Council was so great, that it exceeded all the Councels of the whole
world; and if at this day there were a council, in which so many, yea, if there
were but one divinely inspired, his authority should be of greater account
with me, then of all the wise men in the world: But because it is disputed
whether this was such a Synod, as the Dependents at this day describe, they are
no less foolish that persuade this, then if they should prove the Popes proud
Scarlet Robe out of Peter's Fishermans garment. Truly, if all the meetings in
which CHRIST and his Apostles were present, are to be accounted Councels, there
were many Councels in the Apostles times.

But they say more, that this meeting did impose laws upon the whole Church,
and therefore must be held for a Council but this is false, as I showed
before. For if every meeting which ordaines and decrees such things as may be
useful for many Churches, be a Council, then sure many Confistories are to
be held for Councels.

And now I have overthrown the Foundations of Popish Dependency, not that I
dislike the meetings and conference of one Church with another for the
preservation of peace and truth when time and place shall so require. But I
would not have men think, with these new Papists, that there is such necessity
in this work, as if Gods worship could not subsist without it, or that there
is such an inward sanctity in it, that pious Magistrates must not meddle
therewith. It is commonly objected, that civil Magistrates could not be
present at Ecclesiastic meetings; because in the Apostles times there were
none such among Christians: but besides that this is doubtful, this is at
least certain, that the Apostles did so govern the Church, that they admitted
the whole body in managing Church-affaires; which because it consisted of many
Laymen, it is apparent they were not so precise as to think any man unworthy
because of his secular calling, or unfit to manage all Church-businesse, as I
will hereafter show more at large.

But let pious Magistrates know, that of old under Christ and his Apostles, the
coactive and principal power of the Church resided miraculously in those
governors: and because this miraculous power is now ceased in the
Church-rulers, and resideth ordinarily in pious Princes, that it is their part
to be chief, and to be Presidents in all Church Assemblies: not as if they
were to do what they please against Law, which is the direct practice of the
old Papists, and indirectly intended by the new, under the vizard of
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction: But that being furnished with the gifts of piety
and prudence, they may be at this day, the Churches Eyes, Ears, and Hands, and
may every way benefit her; chiefly in such places where the Apolonians that can
turn themselves into all shapes, hunt after command and worldly honor, and by
their seditious pens and tongues, teach Christians to be saucy and rebellious
to pious Secular governors; whom if they keep under, according to their just
and divine authority, they will case Christians of many inconveniences, and
shall exceedingly benefit them.

The Scripture speaks of many other things which belong to the Ministry,
which are, To assist the poor with their prayers and comforts, to help poor
widows with their counsel, and with such things as they want, to visit the
sick; and to cure them if they can. These works God exceedingly commends; but
because they are servile therefore Apolonius leaves them for holy Laymen, whom
commonly they call Visiters of the sick: he reserves for himself whatsoever
has in it superlative spirituality and jurisdiction, to which he has lately
transferred the right of collecting and distributing alms to the use of the
poor. For although hitherto all good men have thought it a benefit that
Magistrates have out of their own purses helped the poor members of the
Church, and taken care for them: Yet the Stils-walker by his seraphicall acute
wit, finding out some inconveniences that may redound to him and his
colleagues, if this power should be in the Magistrate, he sharply contends for
this holy privilege, as being a part of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction; and
therefore is said publicly in writing to have in an imperious way signified to
his Magistrates, that they have no right to collect and distribute; and that it
is unlawful for them hereafter to thrust their profane Secular sickle into
this sacred corn. He is said also to become so untoward, that with his
Walachrian Classiaries he has forbid the Deacons of all the Walachrian
Churches, that they should upon any order from the Magistrate, gather alms for
the Irish. I confess that I cannot, being so far off, fish out every thing
exactly: yet because the rumor of this Paradox, and sum of his reasons are
come hither to us; such ridiculous delight there is in this inquisition, that
although I make haste, yet I cannot but a little touch upon these trifling
conceits which he has divulged.

He does not think alms in it self to be properly holy; that is, the gift
exhibited by Christians, which in Scripture is called properly, spiritual
sacrifice: For he sees this to be common to all Laymen, and of the Dative
case; which case the Pope exceedingly abhors: For Bellarmine feignes that he is
poor, and that he has nothing but what is given to him by Christians for the
use of the poor. Whence one said of old, not unpleasantly, that the Pope was a
Participle, and of the Ablative case. From whence doubtless the Stilt-Walker
learned, (as he has other things) to contend for the spirituality of alms,
not that he exceeds in giving, but only in receiving, and in the right of
distributing that which is none of his, the quality whereof I will briefly
discuss.

First, in a juggling way he supposes, that the sanctity of Churcha^mes does
wonderfully exceed that of Laymens: so that these are profane and worldly,
not appertaining properly to Christ's Kingdom, but the others are most holy.
Whence he concludes, that they are to be handled only by holy men, that is,
Churchmen, and not Laymen. Now he places the ground of sanctity of these
Church-almes, in this, that they are given by the holy or faithful men of the
Church, and for the use of holy men in another Church, that is, of the
faithful; so that here arises a heavenly sanctity of Church-almes, from the
terminus a quo; to wit, the faithful givers; and from the terminus ad quem, to
wit, the faithful receivers: whence necessarily must proceed the sanctity of
the terminus per quem, to wit, that this holy thing must not be meddled with,
but by holy men. Now ordinary sanctity will not suffice for this, such as is
found in all believers, and therefore in pious Magistrates, although this be
accounted most holy in Scripture; yet such is the Stilt-walkers Philosophy,
that he reckons this for none, or at least only for a privative sanctity,
which is unfit to handle those holy alms: but he admits here only
Ecclesiastic or positive sanctity of Deacons, or comparative of Elders; or at
last, superlative. This is the whole Eleemosynary dream, which the Walachrian
dreamed in the Vatican, or in the Popes Castle of S. Angelo. I will not spend
much time in dispelling these smoakes; yet I will show the absurdity of this
foolery, that honest men may laugh at it.

For I ask, if the civil Magistrate do bestow as much money for the use of
the poor, as the Church can bestow; whether this money shall be holier, if it
come out of the Churches treasure, then if out of the Magistrates? If he denies
this, then the fiction of Church-monies sanctity will fail. If he affirms it,
then it will necessarily follow, that in the Churches treasure there lurketh
some mystery of holiness, which can make that the same money which is given by
Lay men, is profane, but by the Church, sacred and holy, which is a mere
Jewish and Popish fiction.

Again, if the sanctity of Church-money arises from the terminus a quo, that
is, of the faithful giver, then necessarily it cease, if he be not holy who
gives it: Whence Apolonius and his Deacons must be very careful, that nothing
come into their treasure that is not holy; so that they must ask of every one
that gives, who art thou? Faithful or unfaithful? So that it is then
impossible to keep this sanctity within bounds, but it will break through: for
not only holy faithful men do give alms in the Church, but Laymen also;
yea, wicked men, and enemies to the Church; whence one of these must follow, to
wit, that either the sanctity of Church-almes is altogether profaned, by a
mixture of unhallowed money, or at least that this sanctity consists not of
the pure flower or dust of spirituality, because there is mingled with it much
Bran and Husks of infidelity.

I ask again, if a great part of the Church-money be given by unbeleevers, (as
oftentimes) how can the holy money sanctify the profane? For we will yield
this to Apolonius his strong faith, that Church-money is much more powerful in
sanctifying, then Laymens money in profaning: but that he may not with
Chemists make this power infinite, he must necessarily define how much
profane money can that holy Church-money sanctify? to wit, whether six
ounces, or eight ounces, or eleven ounces* then surely the holiness of
Church-money must needs be very high and intense, if one ounce of Church-almes
can sanctify eleven ounces of civil or profane; but it will be hard for
Apolonius to persuade the poor, (if victuals be dear) that there is more
sensible holiness in one shilling of Church-money, then in eleven of
Lay-money. Surely, if the holiness of Church-money be so fruitful, he did in
vain contend with his Magistrate about receiving of alms from the Deacons in
the Church, and not from Laymen with the Deacons from door to door. For
though it is to be feared, lest while they gather, some thing may be given by
the unfaithful; yet it is certain that a great part of the collection comes
from the faithful, from house to house, that we must hope, that a few pence
gathered from the holy members of the Church, will easily sanctify the
profane, although there had been ten times more; so that the Stil-Walker may
now see he was too sollicitous for his terminus a quo of his Eleemosynary
sanctity: the Apostles were not so exact in receiving of aims; for whether
they were offered by holy Barnabas, or by Ananias and Sapphira, hypocrites,
they received the gift, and employed it to some holy use. Sure this Apolonius
is more superstitious then the Pope his predecessor, who finds the smell of
gain pleasant out of any thing: whence this is one of his maxims: Let no man
ask whence he had it, but have it he must. The Stilt-walker is so delicately
holy, that he had rather want, and suffer holy poor Christians to perish, then
that they should receive any thing from godly Laymen, or by them, as being
profane. Here then we see, that there is nothing so sacred and holy with these
Walachriant; to which they prefer not the holiness of their Hierarchy: for
if the godly Magistrate be permitted to gather and distribute alms, then they
suppose that their jurisdiction is gelded, the chiefest sinew whereof they know
consists in this, that under show of sanctity they impose a tax upon
Christians, as their subjects; whose money so scraped together, if Churchmen
have also right to distribute, by reason of the same Eleemosynary sanctity, who
sees not but these men will in a short time get the holy treasure to
themselves; and if they think good at any time to shake off the yoke of
Lay-Magistrates, not only do they with their railing tongues stir up the
people against their Princes (as now they do) but arm ^^red Assassinates
against them. This was the Popes artifice, who not only by words and
superstition, subjected Monarchs to himself; but oftentimes spent lavishly
among Soldiers, Peter's patrimony, and the holy treasure, to maintain his own
Majesty, as is known by the late example of Julius, who being now about 70.
years of age, i^ his Soldiers coat mounted on Horseback, rid to the war,
and stinging Peter's Key over the bridge into the river Tybris, in the hearing
of many uttered these words, Since Peter's Key will not prevail, I will draw
Paul's sword. Now I will come to the other terminus of Church-sanctity, of the
Walachrian alms, to wit, ad quem, that these moneys being collected from holy
men, by reason of the communion of Saints, they should be bestowed [upon the
faithful only;] but here he will be put to the same nonplus.

For I ask, if they be always holy on whom the Church-money is bestowed? I
believe here Apolonius has often profaned his own sanctity, as often as he
has commanded to give out of the sacred Treasure to a knave or whore
something, which we see done daily. If it be thus, then the question is,
whether this sanctity be lame or not, forwant of the terminus adquem? Again,
whether the sanctity of the termi^us a quo, be more valid in sanctifying, then
the profaneness of the terminus ad quem in profaning? Besides, whether if the
san^^tity of Church-mony, by reason of the terminus a quo alone, remain
entire, we may not suspect that one time or other these knaves, who cheating
the Deacons, do not only touch but devour that holy money, may no^ be struck
with Vzziahs leprosy. Perhaps if the sacred money had been sent to Ireland, it
might have fallen into the hands of Pirates, some W^lachrian Casuist may doubt,
what should become of those Rogues, for touching and robbing the holy money,
should they not fall down dead with Vzza, or become leprous with Vzziah. I
believe these thieves would be as much astonished at the sight of that
treasure, as Dogs at a Gammon of Bacon, or Wolves at the bleating of Lambs; so
hard will it be for Apolonius to remove all scruples, which arise from the
terminus ad quem, except he will be of the Papists mind, that all is bestowed
upon Saints, which is bestowed upon wicked Raskals, so that the intention of
Apolonius, or the Deacon, be, to bestow upon the Saints, what he distributes
out of the treasure; which intentionall sanctity is so large, that the Cowes of
Holland (if this alms be bestowed upon feeding of them) may be of the number
of those Saints. Surely the springs of the Walachrian Eleemosynary sanctity,
are very muddy, if it must flow from the holiness of the Giver and Receiver:
out of this it is apparent that the terminus per quem of sanctity gathered from
hence, is ridiculous, and no more probable then if one should say, that what is
placed between two filthy sinkes, must needs be very clear. So then the
Stilt-walkers device is absurd, that they must be^very way holy, who receive
and distribute alms, because the alms themselves are holy, by reason of the
faithful givers and receivers; whereas we see that the sanctity of the
terminus a quo, and, ad quem, do often fail, and for the most part, become
profane through men's own default; and if this should fall out in Walachria,
that they are still holy, who give and receive; yet I cannot see how with their
sanctities they can beware of the terminus per quam: for not only may that
objective sanctity be violated, if Laymen touch the alms, (which he much
fears) but many other doubts will arise; to wit, whether if the Preacher
himself, or Deacon, be a thief or a knave, (such mischances they say, fall
out sometimes in Walachria) shall not that sanctity then be altogether profaned?
Again, if that money should be sent over to Ireland, or elsewhere, and cannot be
touched or handled but by holy men, whether this treasure can without
sacrilege be committed to a Servant, Post, or Money-changer? For it seldom
falls out, that in such sore of men is found positive, or comparative (much
less superlative) holiness, which if required so rigidly to the receiving and
distributing of this El^^mosynary collection, innumerable accidents will fall
out among the Walachrians, by which they will be forced to pollute their own
sanctity; so that the Stilt-walker has borrowed from the Pope (that rotten
Impostor) all these lurking holes of sanctity, who every where has scraped
together Chymeras, that he might blind Laymen as it were with the smoke of
sanctity, and might bring them into subjection to himself. Apolonius had never
been so contentious for this vizard of sanctimony, if he had not been willing
rather to imitate Antichrist then Christ: For Christ excellently understood how
great the sanctity of alms was, which by holy men was given to holy men, yet
he was so little sollicitous that this sacred money should pass only through
a sanctified hand, that he committed this business to Judas, whom he knew to be
a Devil, whereat it had been as easy to him to have committed this to some
more holy. If he will prefer Judas, a Thief, a Traitor, a Devil, in
sanctity to the pious Magistrate, the Stilt-walker for me may enjoy his own
paradox.

He spends much time in commending the example of the Apostolical Church, in
which Alms were handled only by Ecclesiastic persons, as Deacons, and no
ways by Laymen, who then were no part of the Church, but her enemies; this he
cries out is to be held for an inviolable and perpetual law.

But I have showed already, that in this Apolonius plays the fool: for the
Apostles did not any thing concerning the circumstances of divine worship,
which were changed in process of time; yea, they themselves did change them:
otherwise let him tell me, why first did Christians bring their goods, and lay
them at the Apostles feet, and afterward this custom was abolished? Why at
first had the Apostles care of the poor, and charge of the Tables, and
afterward eased themselves of this care? Why again, as occasion served, did
they take this care upon them? Why were Bishops of old, and Paul himself
maintained by the collections of the church and afterward stipends were
received of Laymen, as now it is? Do Christians at this day violate Paul's
precept, 2 Cor. 6.3.
whilst they go to law one with another about worldly busisinesse, which he
forbad the Corinthians, grievously reproving them? Custom and time can change
many things in the circumstances of worship, for main causes without offense.
If we believe Apolonius, Laymen were not admitted into the Church under the
Apostles: if this be perpetual, why are they not now kept out? Who sees not a
plain cause of this change? Of old they were not admitted within the Church,
because they were enemies and wolves; after wards they were admitted, because
they became friends, keepers, and nursing Fathers of the Church. The like must
we say of Alms, the Apostles did not demand them of any without the Church;
the reason, because they were enemies they would not take them: Now because
they may without controlment give, and as faithful members of the Church will
give them, why should their bounty be rejected:

But (says he) this is Arminianisme, and so all the offices of divine worship,
may to the ruin of religion, be transferred upon Laymen.

As though (forsooth) Arminius desired the ruin of religion, who however he
had his errors, yet in this he was the friend of Religion, because he was a
stout enemy against the Pope. For he (if ever there was any in the world) is
the over-thrower of Christ's worship and religion. Now whereas the Stilt-walker
does in every thing imitate him, he has also borrowed from him, this whorish
impudency, imposing upon another the ruin of Religion, which he himself, by
all the means he can, endeavors to overthrow. But in this he follows his
old masters the Pharisees, in casting odious names upon the truth, as they
injuriously called Christ a Nazarite, a Samaritan, a Carpenter. Surely Religion
should not be ruined, if godly Magistrates at this day, being furnished with
faith, and spiritual gifts, should perform and help all the Offices of the
Church, in which I have showed there is no special sanctity now, which should
cause them to forbear, if they had fit gifts, and the matter it self required
it; in this case Religion should no more perish, then when Saul was among the
Prophets. Apolonius is afraid lest his pride will be brought down: for like a
new. Papist, he will have some mysterious sanctity to lie hid in his
Church-businesse, not to be meddled with, except by Churchmen of his own stamp.
Which device, because he sees his laymen to despise, herailes, and is more
foolishly mas then heretofore Moses his servant, when he saw Eldad and Medad
prophecy in the camp, being but ordinary men, which he conceived to be an
absued thing, and disgraceful to Moses, therefore said, Moses forbid them: but
Moses being possessed with a better spirit then the Stilt-walker at this day,
Number. 11.
answered, would to God all did propheste. However, these things are consonant,
to truth, yet he needs not fear, that godly Magistrates have either leisure or
desire to thrust themselves upon Church-businesse, and confufedly to perform
them: they have left this care for order sake, to Preachers; to whom for this
end they have collected Stipends, and a private life; but yet they must not
beleve, that Magistrates are not to look into Church-businesse, nor to care for
religion, and if need be, to perform religious duties, and to punish negligent
and g^ady-hearded Ministers, as their hirelings. The Magistrates of Middleburgh
did think of nothing less (as they say) then to put off the care of the poor,
or to forbid the Church, or the D^acons, to meddle with it (as the Stilt-walker
accuses them in his writings,) but only to cross Apolonius in his Popish
pride; which was, That the care of the poor belonged only to him and his
Churchmen by sacred and divine right, and with such rigor, that he openly
writes, [that Magistrates do oppose Gods word, the divine right of the Church,
and their national oath; and (...) they give occasion to wrong divine worship
and Religion, if they offer to undertake the care of the poor, either alone in
the Churches name, or with the Church and Deacons, and to supply the
Church-stock with recollections gathered from house to house:] if this Plagiary
had read but Calvin he might have easily seen his own folly.

For he relates, that in the time of Gregory, Instit. l. 4. c. 4.5.7.
the care of all the Church, stock was in the Bishops power; of which there was
a threefold use: One, that out of it the Poor might be maintained; the other,
that Churches, and such things as belonged to Divine worship, might be looked
to: the third was, for the maintenance of the Bishop and his family. If all
these of old were of Ecclesiastic right, it is a wonder that Calvin did not
accuse his Magistrates of sacrilege, whom he knew had undertaken the charge of
the two last: he knew truly, that it was all one by whom these things should
at this day be ^^^ged, so that the Church enjoyed the fruit thereof. But this
turbulent Stilt-walker is mad that the civil Magistrate should have power over
the Stipendiary sanctity, or the reparations of the Church; in which business
he has kept a stir to no purpose. But for the third Eleemosynary part, he
does not so easily let fall his courage, but with all his forces, striveth to
reserve this at least to himself, persuading himself, that if once he get the
power (in the Magistrates negligence) under pretense of alms, to lay Taxes on
the Church, and to distribute them as he pleases, he will easily take occasion
to invade the Office of Aedil, or of looking to the Church-reparations, and the
stipendiary sanctity, and so totally bring Laymen into subjection, as that
Roman Pyrat did. Because the Magistrates of Middleburgh did smell this out,
they left not off to hinder by all means his underminings, vindicating to
themselves the charge of the public Deaconship: but this nail the
Stilt-walker endeavors to drive out with another nail: for they say, that
he has found out a private and most holy Consistoriall treasury, into which is
gathered whatsoever is given by those who are betrothed, the care of which the
Ministers alone reserve to themselves, excluding the Deacons and Elders. I will
not assever this for a truth, which rumor has brought to us so far off, but
if it be true, I must confess it is a fine device, with which the
Stilt-walker may sense, and delight himself, with that pecuniary sanctity:
neither do we doubt, but that this money is of most sublime holiness,
although in respect of the terminus a quo, it may have in it some rust of
profaneness; yet in respect of the terminus ad quem, and chiefly the terminus
per quem, it must ^eeds be most holy: for touching and handling of which, the
privative and cumulative civil sanctity of Laymen is not fit, neither the
Ecclesiastic, whether it be the positive of Deacons, or the comp^rative of
Elders, but the sole superlative of Preachers. So that, O you Freezlanders, we
are exceedingly desirous to see some of that superlatively-sanctified money;
which happiness if we cannot enjoy by reason of the distance of place, yet we
will admire the cunning of this Walachrian, who not only has drawn the waters
of his Eleemosynary sanctity, out of Antichrists stinking puddles; but seems
also to have learned it from Judas the traitor, who durst accuse, as profane,
that most holy Alms of Mary in anointing Christ himself, purposely that his
Bag might be the fuller for him to spend lavishly, and steal.

CHAP. VI. Of Churchmens Prerogatives for performing this business.
HItherto I have examined as briefly as I could, all the business of our
Religion and Worship, which is called commonly the Church-dressing, or
furniture; and withal I have showed, that they have in them no special
sanctity or difficulty, as if they were of special right, or unlawful for
some Christians, as the affairs of the Leviticall Temple were of old. I
confess they are sacred in respect of the Author, God, and of the End, Gods
worship; but this only is a general sanctity, such as is in reading, praying,
and singing Psalms, which are lawful for all Christians, if they be apt to
perform them. Nor will I deny, but that under the Apostles they were
exceedingly holy in respect of the manner, because they were ordained with
gifts of the Holy Ghost, such as infallible Truth, notable Piety, and power of
miracles, in which those great Master Builders of the Church excelled: hence at
that time those Church-businesses did almost exceed humane capacity; which
gifts albeit they have long since ceased in the Church, yet the old Papists
will not give off to measure their Church-businesse and vizzard of their
Ministry at this day out of that sanctity, whose footsteps the Walachrian
company of new Papists follow, which prate of such wonders of the sublime
spirituality of their business which they daily perform, that they would
persuade us, that no Layman, or vulgar Christian, especially a Magistrate, can
attain to the spirituality thereof: which how frivolous it is, may appear out
of the Ecclesiastic functions, being severally examined, the exercise of which
is not of such difficulty, but every common man in the Church may easily
perform: or if there be any thing of more eminency, such as preaching is
thought be at this day, that also is acquired by humane Arts, as mechanical
trades are; so that he is thought to excel most in this, who has best learned
Aristotle's Metaphysics, Quintilians Rhetoric, or the acting of Stage Players:
If the sanctity of Church-businesse flows from these fountains, it is no
wonder if it seldom produce effects truly holy and spiritual in its actors
and workmen, but rather savouring of the flesh, whence they came, then of the
spirit; so that there is nothing more ordinary, then for the flower it self of
Church-spirituality, to fall with such ease into errors, strifes, pride and
luxury, that he^ who with Apollonius and the old Papists at this day, will
place so (...) a mystery of holiness in the modern functions of the Church,
he plays the Cheater, and superstitiously makes men believe, that in the
outward functions and actions of the Church, there is that which indeed is not
to be found.

It is ordinary among the old Papists, to involve their business in phrases of
an unknown tongue, with wonderful pomp and gest^ula^ons, that they may induce
unwarie people to superstitious ignorance and admiration; which the
Stilt-walker, as he is instructed by them, performs very finely, when he plays
the Philosopher so abstrusely concerning his preaching with authority,
concerning judicial and censuring power, the decisions of Classes and Synods,
and the wonderful assistance of the Holy Ghost; so that from the sanctity of
those things he keeps off the most excellent of the Laity.

All which things savor of Popish leaven, not of the Apostles pure bread, who
were so little sollicitous of hiding the secrets of then Church Affairs, that
they admitted the whole Church, and every Christian to their Ecclesiastic
exercises: And after the Apostles, it is known out of Justin, Athenagoras,
Tertullian, etc. that nothing has been more hurtful to the Churches, then
that they were forced in times of persecution to exercise their worship
privately, and in vanite under ground: for, from thence were raised diverse
calumnies, as that their wives were common amongst them in the dark; that they
had Thyestean suppers, and did feast one with another upon a child's flesh, whom
they killed: which seems to have arisen from misunderstanding the supper: For
clearing themselves from these crimes, they found no better remedy, then by
publishing all the parts of their Church-businesse, and therefore invited
Princes themselves to be eyewitnesses of them. The precise superstition of
concealing and separating Church-businesse, was the seed of Antichrist, which
by a fatal progress at last exalted that Romish Outlaw above all that are
called gods, 2 These. 2.
and Monarchs of the world: which pride because the Walachrian does admire and
follow, he thinks to walk in the same high Chapins, but he is feign to fall to
childrens stilts: yet because he brabbles so much of his spirituality, which we
see is not to be found in the object, that is, in the Church-businesse it
self: I will go on to inquire, whether there is any right of special sanctity
in the Agents themselves, that is, in the Churchmen? For, however Apollonius
seeks for the lurking holes of sanctity in the object, and business of the
Church, yet every where he stays in the vocation and privileges, with which
Church Governors being adorned, excel in sanctity all Christians, whether
private Lay men or Magistrates: so that now we must inquire, what prerogative
of ^^^ctity there is in Church Governors, for performance after any singular
manner these Church-functions, which he believes arises from the dignity of
modern vocation; this he presenting to all Magistrates, as Minerva's target,
goes about to turn them into stones, that they may not see what the matter is;
whence it may be needful to try, De vocatione.
what mysteries of holy Church spirituality lurketh in modern vocation.

There is nothing that God recommends so much to men, as Religion and his
Worship, which not only has he revealed to them, but also prescribed, and
has ordered, that at all times there should be some which should preserve it,
and instruct men in it, so that God in Paradise did not disdain to be the
first Preacher himself: after this he raised up many at all times, whom he
employed as his Ambassadors, whom he adorned with so many badges of his
Embassy, that every one, who was not wilfully blind, might see, that these
were truly Gods Vica^ Extraordinaria.
whose words were no less to be obeyed, then if God himself had spoken from
heaven. Among these excelled the Prophets and Apostles, whom he exalted with
extraordinary gifts above humane condition, and after a wonderful manner sent
them abroad to preach. I confess that some things were ordinary amongst them,
when they were exercised in the Schools of Samuel, Esaiah, Eliah, and other
Prophets, the children of the Prophets for this function: but in Amos and
others, GOD had oftentimes rejected all ordinary means, and whenever he sent
abroad these ordinary men for this work, he furnished them with so much power
of his spirit, that in the gifts of infallibility and miracles, they were to be
admired and feared of all the world: for though wicked men would or might have
doubted of their divine vocation, yet by their effects and manner of preaching,
they could easily be convinced, to confess that which ^^^bornly these men
dissembled; so that hence Paul raises this general Maxim, How can they
preach except they be sent? Not as if he meant, Romans 16.
that all those were sent by God as his Legates, who could preach (for this had
been a starting-hole for innumerable Cheaters;) neither was this his meaning,
that no man, though never so fit, and furnished with Gods Spirit, should be
permitted to preach, until he were confirmed by the outward pomp of vocation,
as at this day the old and new Papists foolishly practice: but that Christians
might thence firmly gather, that there was a true and divine vocation, where
there was a true divine inspiration, and miraculous preaching; such as the
Apostles wondered was in many places among the Gentiles, and the Jews did not a
little storm at. This was an extraordinary vocation, so divine and powerful,
that such as God had chosen for this function, were more then men, and as it
were the Gods of the world: yet God did not bind himself to such a Law, that
all whom he designed for his worship, should be still called extraordinarily,
and thus gifted; whence it came to pass, that the Apostles did accustom
Christians to the ordinary way of calling, least when this extraordinary manner
of calling did fail, there should want good Ministers, and consequently
Preaching, and divine Worship: or least for want of order, wicked men should
creep into the Ministry, and so confusion should grow in the Church. Ordinaria.
Hence were begot those ordinary rules of calling, by which care was taken,
that none but fit men were admitted into Ecclesiastic Functions, and all
occasions of precedence or dominion were cut off: against which mischief, the
chief and first builders of the Church could find no better remedy, then that
Ministers should be called by the consent and approbation of the whole Church,
in which we see the Apostles wonderful moderation and spiritual modesty; for
such was their dignity in the Church, and exuberance of all spiritual gifts,
that they could easily, by reason of their authority and infallible judgment,
appoint and send abroad Governors, to whom people might have safely submitted
themselves, without the suffrages of the inferior sort, and such as were not
divinely inspired: but yet, because they had the spirit of modesty, they took
not upon them this prerogative, nor did they account that vocation ratified,
except it had been performed by imposition of hands, votes, lots, fastings,
prayers, and by the concourse and consent of all the members of the Church.
This is so pregnant an example of modesty and popular government in that most
happy age of the Church, Act. 1. Act. 6. part. 1. p. 159.
that Apollonius and his Bucer were troubled at it, That the Apostles gave too
much power to the people, because of the Churches infancy: But they smell too
much of Popery, who make that the infancy of the Church, which was her manhood
and greatest strength.

And this was the more to be admired, when the complement and confirmation of
callings was performed by imposition of hands, this custom being borrowed from
the ancient Jews: For though Elders, and perhaps all, could promiscuously lay
on hands, yet it was known, that then great virtues did arise from the
imposition of the Apostles hands, which virtues were presently seen in him on
whom their hands were laid: For, on them Christ had powered out such a
plentiful measure of his Spirit, that their garments, handkerchiefs; yea the
Apostles shadows healed the sick, their imposition of hands then could not be
ineffectuall, which was then so manifest to all, that Simon Magus being moved
at the novelty of this thing, endeavored for a sum of money to buy this gift
of imposing hands of Peter. Nor need we doubt, but that this virtue by little
and little decreased, till at last it quite failed: so that questionless the
Apostles imposition of hands was most sacred, seeing it never erred, and
always manifested its effects: but in others it fell out sometimes, that it
failed both in the choice and effects; so that even then Paul warned Timothy,
1 Timothy 5.
that he lay not hands suddenly on any man. It Is no wonder then, if this
simplicity of mission and vocation, with the concourse of so many spiritual
gifts, did give unto men some divine sanctity, which presently showed it self
by its effects, that I may speak freely, if there be now in the world such a
caller, or any called by such a calling, the respect of spirituality is to be
given to him, above all majesty's whatsoever. But now we may deplore the
unhappiness of our times, and the pride of Clergymen, who though they are
destitute of the badges of true divine calling, and of spiritual gifts, yet
are so highly conceited of the prerogatives of their calling, that the Prophets
and Apostles were much more numble. This is an old error among the ancient
Papists, that as soon as one is made a Ruler of the Church by Ecclesiastic
vocation, he is no less proud then if he had come down from heaven, endowed
with excellency above all other men: for they say, that the vocation and
consecration of the Church imprints an indelible character, not only on the
body, but also on the soul of the Clergiemen, which is observed by Martyr.
Loc. cem. p. 750.


From these the Stilt-walker has borrowed his device as he has other things,
in arrogating to himself under pretense of vocation above Magistrates, a
wonderful sanctity of special light, by which he alone is to meddle with
Ecclesiastic Formalities, in a holy manner, and formally Ecclesiastic; for
(says he) the whole derivation of Ecclesiastic right, and spiritual holy
power, by vocation is conferred upon the Minister: part. 2. p. 147.
and he affirms, that of this proceeds by spiritual right, universal
dominion in Ministers, and a selfe-commanding power under Christ, even over
Magistrates themselves: whence not in one, but in many places he discourses at
large of the mysteries of vocation, that with this Medusas head he may stupifie
superstitious and ignorant people. For I confess, that in this, as in other
things he ploughs with the Papists Heifer, and utters many fopperies; yet
because he deludes men every where with the Schoole-mens Flowers, I will also
briefly shake them off.

Our of them he makes three integrall parts of vocation; 1. Slection; 2. Trial
of life, and Doctrine; 3. Confirmation or Ordination. Where ever he walks he
shows his wit after his manner, but if in this division he has affected
acuteness, he is much deceived; for he sets Election before Trial of life and
Doctrine. For except he devises diverse sorts of Election, he makes of the
matter, or of the antecedent, the form, and perverts altogether the order,
except Apollonius mean, that first one must be called, and then must be tried,
if he be fit to be called. I think this is not absurd with him who is versed
in the Popish Schools, where they seldom look into the Popes calling, who he
is, or how gifted, but permits him by right or wrong to thrust himself into
Peter's chair, though a knave or a whore: let him have it that can, and let the
possessor possess it, for Peter's chair always finds the Pope holy, or makes
him holy, as they use to say: the Stilt-walker is not ignorant of this mystery
of iniquity, whilst in vocation he will be first elected, then examined, if he
be fit to be elected, as if you should put the cart before the horse. For if to
call rightly, is first to elect; and then to inquire of life and manners, then
the husbandman sows well, who first casts his seed into the ground, and then
inquires whether it be wheat or tares which he sowed.

He erres also in the third member, when he makes Ordination, or Imposition of
hands an integrall part, yea the principle form of vocation, whereas indeed it
is only a consequent, or (as it were) an addition: if I would show my wit (as
he does every where) I should thus reason: confirmation is a part either of
that vocation which is existent, or which is not existent; if this, then it is
no part of Vocation, for it is not as yet: If that, then it is no formal part
of that which was before. I know that the Apostles after Vocation did impose
hands, but this will not prove that imposition of hands is the formal part of
Vocation, no more then Christ's breathing was of the calling of the Apostles, or
the Priests declaration of the Cure of the Leprosy: Signs do not constitute a
thing, but show that it is constituted; as giving of the right hand makes not a
Bargain or Covenant, 1 Timothy 5.
but shows and confirms it: But where it is said, Lay not thy hands suddenly
on any man; that is, make not a Minister or Teacher; this does not prove that
imposition of hands is either an integrall or formal part of Vocation; for
every one knows it is a figurative speech, when the name of the efficient or
thing signified, is attributed to the effect, or sign: As if I should say, put
not the Kings Crown hastily upon any; it does not follow, that the Crown, or
setting of it on the head does formally make a King: Many have reigned long,
yea, all their lives, without the solemnities of Coronation; this was the Popes
cunning (that I may speak this by the way) which he first exercised about the
year 700. upon Charles, because ^e anointed and crowned him Emperor: This
honorable service he first proffered to the Emperors, as a free thing, and so
they received it, as a matter not needful but the old Cheater the Pope from
hence took a power to make Emperors and Kings; from hence it came to pass,
that though one were Emperor by election, yet he was not so accounted, till he
was confirmed by the solemnities of Papal Coronation and benediction: In like
manner he plays in Church Matters by this Artifice of Confirmation; he
confirms no Bishop till he has paid him one years Revenue of his whole
Bishopric, which he therefore calls Annats; he makes no man Archbishop, till
first he have Peter's pall or short cloak, which He only must fell. They say,
that this is made up of holy wool, and has a border of lead gilded over, and
that it is so short, that it scarce covers the shoulder blades, to show
forsooth the Popes poverty, as if he had borrowed this of Stage Players: I have
not such insight in the Popes old patched stuff, as to say, I know this by
experience; yet Sleidan reports this, that the Pope fells it not under thirty
thousand Florens, so dear a Merchant he is of his trifles; for his Religion is
to mock God, and men, and all Religion, as may be seen in his Office of
Confirmation.

The new Walachrian Papist being suitor to the same Lais of wealth and honor,
under this vizard of Confirmation, carries a high stomach; for because he
places in vocation the special right of spiritual Ecclesiastic sanctity, as
in the spring or fountain, p. 160. and 161.
he is very careful that the Magistrate, as being a Layman and polluted, have
no power to touch this most sacred or execrated calling, least Christ's blood be
trampled on; yet because he saw that it is a received custom, and yielded unto
by Divines themselves, that Laymen at this day should meet at the Election of
Ministers, to inquire of their Doctrine and Manners, to judge thereof, and
lastly, to approve of their Election, in which the whole vocation consists.
He being careful and willing to provide for his Saints, borrowed this pleasant
Fable from the Pope, That Imposition of hands is the integrall part of
vocation, and chiefly the formal, which because he saw that this by custom
belongs only to Preachers, he prates finely, that what the Layman does or can
do in this vocation, is of no validity, nor does it at all touch vocation,
because it confirms it not; that is, he does not impose hands, by which
device it will follow, that in Apollonius his mind, neither the Church nor the
Ministers do properly call, but he only who confirms: that is, who says
on his hands. So that if Apollonius alone in Walachria be this man, as most
commonly he is, he has reason to rejoice in his exuberance of sanctity, which
he possesses in so full a measure, and like a Torrent powers in upon others,
only by laying on his hands.

I deny not the sanctity and efficacy of this ceremony in the Apostles, but he
that will search for the same sanctity and efficacy at this day, in imitating
of this Ceremony, whilst the Stilt-Walker lays on his hands polluted in the
sink of all wickedness, he may as well persuade us, that because Christ (by
applying clay to the blind-mans eyes) restored him to his sight, and by
breathing on the Apostles, sent them abroad to preach, that therefore there
will be the same efficacy, if some Jugler should imitate Christ in laying clay
upon a blind man's eyes, or the Pope in Consecration should belch out the
stinking vapors of his surfeiting stomach.

But that I hold it frivolous to confirm divine Rights and Ordinances by
humane Authorities, I could again send this Walachrian to his own Calvin;
Lib. 4. Instit, c. 3.16
for he discoursing of Vocation and Imposition of hands, confesses, that there
is one precept extant for laying on of hands, or whether they are to be imposed
by one or more, this he leaves doubtful; but however we may doubt concerning
Laymens Imposition of hands under the Apostles: yet out of the sacred Story
we may gather, that many had power to preach who received no Imposition of
hands; and that this power of laying on hands was common to the whole
Presbytery. Lib. 4. Instit c. 4.15
Calvin confesses, that in process of time, when pride began to increase,
this business of Imposition of hands was left solely to the Bishop for honors
or orders sake; but withal he says, that the Bishop began, and the Presbyters
followed in the Act of Ordination. So that this brabler seems to me to be
involved in his own web like a silke-worme, who keeps off so carefully Laymen
from his sacred affairs, yet for his own benefit (as I said elsewhere) he
admits them daily into his Presbytery, except that Presbyteriall Vocation
(which is at this day with imposing of hands) makes some wonderful change in
Laymen: I will conclude against Apollonius his assertion, that they have also
power to impose hands, because I have proved both by Scripture and Calvin's
testimony, that this did not belong to Preachers only, but to all Elders and
to the whole Presbytery under the Apostles, and long after them: It is no
wonder that this new Papist thus play with his sacred things, to whom almost no
thing is sacred but what he pleases, especially when he knows that his
modern Vocation is not only unlike that of the Apostles in sanctity, but also
abounds in worldly and fleshly vices.

For as often as the Minister is to be called, Vocatio hedierna qualis.
there is care taken for the most part, that the Church shall not know him who
excels in gifts, for at this day many Clergymen are ambitious creatures,
impatient of parity, and swelling with the breath of popular applause, for
oftentimes men thrust in their kindred or acquaintance, especially if it be a
place fitted with a large stipend, vicinity of friends, Citizens that keep a
good table, or with any other humane respect: and because sometimes many gape
after one booty, it is not unspirituall, if every one extol his own creature,
and keep under his corrivall, if need be, with calumnies. Nor are Simoniacall
arts here altogether wanting, to wit of giving, of promising, re-promising, or
(if need be) of forswearing, that he who is more cunning, may deride him who is
more simple, and may so long adorn with fained feathers his Magpy, until he
be inaugurate for an Eagle. The Walachrian Classis was never so destitute of
Church-Sanctity in all their Church-trimming, but they rather exceeded other in
this point; they say also, that in this principal sanctity of calling, if a
Minister is to be removed from one Church to another, he is careful to seek
out a successor that has a good estate, or a full purse, that if he chance to
leave there behind him land, or a handsome house, he may sell these at a
deerer rate to his successor; and if the bargain go on, he on the other side
promises to fasten upon him that Church his ancient Spouse, of which he is
now weary, nor will he give over till by hook or by crook he has obtained
his desire; for this seems to be most essential, that the Consistory should
have power to choose a new father for the Infant the Church: and because the
Sanctity of the Consistory has diverse degrees, that of the Deacons is
positive, of the Elders comparative only, it is most fit that the whole right
of calling be left to the superlative sanctity of the Minister, whose
spiritual intent is oftentimes not the edification of the Church, but the
price of their own wares. Who then doubts of the effects proceeding from the
mysteries of this calling sanctity, that oftentimes not one amongst a thousand
is chosen fit for the place? If any doubt of this report, then I dare assever,
that there is no fitter witness of this spirituality then Apollonius himself;
who (if he will speak truth) knows that he obtained this special right of
Sanctity by the like mystery of Vocation, and that he has no other ways
almost bestowed it upon others.

I know that sometimes things are carried more conscionably, and that the abuse
of a thing takes not still away the use thereof; yet this I dare say, that
because at this day are wanting men divinely inspired to call, and because the
bestowing of spiritual gifts is separate at this day from Imposition of hands,
though it be done by Christ's command, and for a spiritual end, yet in respect
of the manner, modern vocation is merely humane, because the whole manner is
fallible, humane, and oftentimes corrupted; whence the effects must be also
humane, and oftentimes most vicious: so that we have instead of Apollo
Apollonius, a Sophister for a Prophet, a Sycophant for a Bishop: But because
this vocation is with Apollonius the chief Original of modern
Church-spiritualitie, least we should believe there is more in the effect then
in the adequate cause, I conclude, that the power of excercising
Church-affaires at this day, is not of divine but of humane right, and
therefore Apollonius plays the Impostor, who prates so at random of the
sanctity of his Church-affaires, and of the special spiritual right of
exercising them; he is not unlike to them that falsify coin, who wash brass,
leaden or iron pieces with a little silver or gold to impoverish others, and
enrich themselves. I confess that this is the old Popish garlic, sticking
close to many, but he who will look over the writings of all Divines (as he
brags he has done) may perceive that the most quick-sighted Reformers have
found out long since, that whatsoever is so highly talked of, the special
right of sanctity is nothing else but the secondine of the Romish mother, and
the pollution adhering to her sons since their nativity: there is none more
stubborn then the Stilt-walker, who above all others delights in the polluted
blood of that Romish Whore, and sips up again her excrements, not being
content with common Elogies; he prides himself so much in the right of this
privilege, that he affirms every where, that the Ecclesiastic power is a
kind of Majesty, and has in it some thing that is Regal. I confess, that the
name of Christians puts us in mind of our Kingly Office, which (as the
Catechist says) consists in this, that we strive against sin, and subdue the
lusts of the flesh, and this is common to all Christians: but the Stilt-walker
not content with this Privilege of a Ministerial right of vocation, he makes
a right of commanding and reigning in the Church, and that special,
censoriall, and nomotheticall; so that many times he calls this power under
Christ imperial, selfe-sufficient, absolute and regal. I confess they are
but trifles which he spreads every where, yet least he should seem to be
neglected because he is not laughed at, it will not be unpleasing to rub his
ears a little. Par. 1. p. 8. 25, etc. Mat. 13. etc.


He is wonderfully pleased, that Christ calls the Church his Kingdom which is
not of this world, but heavenly, and the Kingdom of heaven, whence he
concludes, that the visible Church is a Kingdom, and that the Government
thereof is like that of a Kingdom: and because the power of this Government is
in the Church-Rulers, that therefore their power is in a manner Kingly; such
are the Popish enthymemes concerning a spiritual and Ecclesiastic Kingdom.

I answer, here is a fallacy in the ambiguity of the word, when they mean
every where by the Church, the visible Church; for when Christ says, that his
Kingdom is not of this world, but heavenly, he means the Catholic Church,
the greatest part whereof is in heaven, and there reigns with Christ. But
because for the accomplishing of this Kingdom, the visible Church here on
earth is appointed and her Ministry, therefore Christ transfers the name of
the Kingdom of heaven to the affairs of the visible Church, not as if he
meant, that the visible Church or her Ministry should be held for a Kingdom,
or for the Kingdom of heaven, but by a known Metonymie he transfers the name
of the effect, and end, to the efficient, which leads to that end: no other
ways then we use to say, that a man labors for food and raiment, whereas he
works for money, not as if money were food and raiment, but because by it
these things are procured; he deserves to be laughed at who in silver seeks
properly for food and raiment, because figuratively it is called food and
raiment: as ridiculous are the Papists when they seek in the visible Church a
regal and celestial Power and dominion, because it is called the Kingdom of
heaven, for no other reason, but because it is the medium by which we attain to
that blessed Kingdom in heaven.

This is the old Papists Logic, to seek for literal conclusions out of
figurative speeches, which art almost every where the Walachrian Bapist
borrowes from them, and chiefly in this Argument; for because Christ calls the
visible Church and its Government a Kingdom, and of heaven figuratively, he
concludes that the Church-Rulers have a regal power, and that they are really
and simply heavenly Kings; although I suspect that he wrote this and many other
things but in jest, yet I will drive out this joculary nail with another
nail, that any one may see the absurdity.

If the visible Church be the Kingdom of heaven truly and simply, (as
Apollonius says) then I will infer, that of necessity the Church of Midleburg
is also literally the Kingdom of heaven, which if so, then I will conclude
with another consequence, that that Church is literally heaven; for England and
France are the Kingdoms of England and France: Hence further I conclude, that
as often as the visible Church meets in the temple of Middleburg, there
heaven is literally; and by another consequence, as often as the Stilt-walker
preaches in that Church, he preaches in heaven; then it must follow, that
while he is there with his Hearers, he is not properly on the earth, except he
will mingle heaven and earth together. And again, it will follow, that because
he is a Ruler in that Church, and has the power of censuring, he is not only a
King, but the King of heaven too, as Rhadamanthus is of hell. How blessed then
is Apollonius, who if he does not reign in the earthly Consistory of
Middleburg, yet he is King of Middleburgian heaven. Are not then the
Magistrates of Middleburg stupid, who yet doubt whether the Stilt-walker be
worthy of the earthly Kingdom of his Consistory, whom long ago they see to be
King of heaven? That he may reconcile these absurdities, he will be forced to
confess, that this word of the Kingdom of heaven is figuratively and
improperly attributed to the visible Church: But if Apollonius may with Papists
expound figurative words literally, there will be nothing certain in Divinity,
but Christians will be made branches, stones, trees, chickens, sheep, fish,
fruits, grass, corn, and what not? Of Preachers and Churchmen there will be
made not only Kings, Pastors, Captains, Householders (as they will have) but
servants, wolves, dogs, pillars, stones, bell-ringers, pipers, walls, flames,
candle-sticks, fires, and many more, to which the Holy Ghost compares them. So
that if he should shake the budgets of most abstruse Divinity, he cannot
compose these things, but he shall be laughed at by all. This is his error, in
that he will out of figurative speeches, draw literal conclusions, as if out
of painted gold, he would make a real crown of gold.

Much of this kind he spreads every where; chiefly Part 2. p. 28. he does
plainly dispute for the Kingly censuring power of Churchmen.

For (says he) the jurisdiction of the Church is called the right of the
keys, and the Churches key is called David's key, which was regal; whence he
concludes, That the jurisdiction of the Church is regal.

I answer: These things are spoken figuratively, and to be ascribed to Christ
only if they be taken properly, not to the modern Church, which properly
wants the keys of heaven, as I showed elsewhere.

The chief error is in this, that with the Pope he makes of the keys the
Scepter and regal Crown: If all be Kings that have the right of the keys,
then the Key-bearers of Temples, Cities, Hospitalls, of Bedlems, and of all
Cells, shall be Kings. And whereas he says, that David's and Christ's key is
regal, and that therefore such is the key of the modern Church; it is all one
as if I should say, there was a King who carried the keys of the City,
therefore all are Kings afterward who carry those keys: How false this is,
appears in Peter, who first and properly received these keys, and yet he was
a poor Fisherman, not a King. Surely if Apollonius had Peter's true key, yet
Christ would forbid in him all Kingly state and pride, Mat. 20. saying, The
Kings of the earth bear rule, but it shall not be so with you.

But Mat. 18. Christ gave to the Church power of judicature, which (says he)
is kingly.

I answered elsewhere, that in this place Christ did not bestow on the Church
the right of judicature, but only to intercede and to compose differences. For
the power of judging one to be a Publican or Heathen, he gives properly to a
Brother, not to the Church; and so every private man should have regal power.
Truly if all be Kings that judge, there will be innumerable Kings in the same
kingdom. If Apollonius play not the fool, he was a King long since, because
he carried the keys, and judged many things after his manner.

His chief argument is out of that place Mat. 28. Christ sending his Disciples
to preach, speaks first of his regal power, saying, All power is given to me
in heaven and in earth: he concludes also from his regal power, saying, I will
be with you till the end of the world: thence he gathers, That the power not
only of Christ, but also of the Church, and therefore of Ministers, is regal:
O wonderful!

Lindanus indeed, and other Papists are ridiculous in their devices; but what
Jesuit at this day is there of any brain, who will not burst with laughter,
when he shall see and think of these Apollonian scientificall demonstrations,
to wit, that Calvinists by such fictions do seek after power to reign in the
Church, which they have hitherto execrated in the Pope.

Christ the King of Kings speaking before and after of his Kingly power,
commanded the Apostles to teach and baptize: Ergo, he made them Kings, and
endowed them with Kingly power. If Apollonius were as quick-sighted in both his
eyes as Lynx, he could not see this consequence. He reasons thus out of his
foolish Dialectick: As often as Kings, speaking of their Majesty, command their
Heralds to publish their will and Letters Patents, they presently of Heralds
become Kings; that Herald were worthy of Hellebore, who would thus conclude;
especially if the King in plain terms should tell his Messenger; Although my
other servants may command and domineere in their Offices, yet I forbid thee to
do so, neither will I permit thee to reign: for this is the sense of Christ's
words; Mat. 20.
The Kings of the Nations bear rule, but it shall not be so with you. So we
need not stay any longer in the Walachrian devices, whereas we may every where
see, that the Pope and Apollonius are both of one mind; to wit, that they have
regal power, howsoever Christ and the whole Scripture contradict it: but by a
Jesuiticall quirk he tells us, that their power is not secular, carnal, or
despoticall, (for these husks he leaves for the Magistrate, reserving to
himself the pure flower of spirituality) but Ecclesiasticke, holy, and
celestial: which because it proceeds not from the special sanctity of their
Church Discipline, as the object, nor from the dignity of modern vocation, as I
have now showed, we must henceforth search into the other lurking holes of the
Walachrian Church sanctity, least these rattle-mice hide themselves any longer
in their underground caves of spirituality.

Therefore having overthrown the chief foundations of the Walachrian sanctity
and dominion, which are the spirituality of their modern Discipline, and the
mystical sublimity of their calling, now I will pursue the Arguments which the
Stilt-walker still uses to purchase authority to himself among the ignorant,
which with the Papists he borrows from the Epithetes, and names given to
Preachers in Scripture, by which he strives to establish his regal majesty in
the Church, in this playing the canvasse Merchant with Papists, which that the
Reader may see, I will first in general point at three of his ordinary
fallacies.

1. In that the most titles are figurative and metaphorical, Fallaciae in
titulis.
out of which he raises literal conclusions, by which he must needs fall into
a thousand absurdities, for if this be admitted in Divinity, that every one
interpret as he pleases, figures, similitudes, and metaphors, which are found
in Scripture, there will be nothing certain, but we may infer any thing out of
any thing: by this reason, I may easily of Apollonius and his other Preachers,
make stocks, stones, yea brute beasts, for Church-Doctors are called in
Scripture, Pillars, Foundations, and watchful Dogs: now we know that Pillars
are made of stocks, and stumps of trees, Foundations of stones, and that Dogs
are brute and impudent beasts: whence the folly of old Papists appears, who
have erected their whole Hierarchy out of parabolicall and figurative Scripture
phrases, (as famous Marnixius has merrily demonstrated:) and because he could
find no other new way to set up his regal power, therefore the VValachrian
Papist walks altogether in his Predecessors footsteps. Apollonius his other
error is, that of indefinite Propositions, he makes exclusive, and understands
simply what is spoken respectively; this he borrowed also of the Jesuits, for
Bellarmine commonly thus concludes: Christ gave the keys to Peter, Ergo, to
Peter alone; Christ said to Peter seed my sheep, and when thou art converted
confirm thy Brethren: Ergo, this power he gave to Peter only, to feed his
sheep, and to strengthen all his Brethren of the whole world, and which is all
one, to reign over all the people and Kings of the earth; whence he leaps with
ease to the Pope, Peter's fuccessor, that he may conclude these inspeakable
privileges to belong to him alone: the Stilt-walker does excellently well
follow this Jesuiticall Divinity; for as often as he finds in Scripture that
Teachers are called Bishops, Captains, Fathers, etc. he presently concludes,
that this right belongs always and absolutely to Ministers alone, as we shall
see in what follows.

His third fraud is, that of conditional propositions he makes absolute, and
applies to himself those privileges which belonged only to the Apostles, or
at this day appertain to them, under a condition only, who have things
requisite for these privileges: this is the play of old Papists: when the
Church is called the mother of Christians, which title belongs only to the
Catholic and truly Apostolical Church, they understand this of all the
Church, or at least, of their Romish. When it is said of Teachers, He that
hears or rejects you, hears or rejects Christ; which is only true
absolutely of the Apostles, and of infallible Preachers, they understand this
of themselves, chiefly of the Pope; although they confess him to be a most
impure monster. This VValachrian Papist speaks in the same dialect;
whatsoever in Scripture is said of the Church, of preaching, of vocation, of
censuring, and of the keys, being holy and spiritual, as under the Apostles,
this he interprets of his modern Church and Discipline, in which he is as
sottish, as if some Caiaphas or Ananias, who were wicked High Priests in the
time of Christ, and of Paul, had ascribed to themselves the praises and titles
that were given to Aaron, Eleazar, and Zadoc; who then lived when the holy of
holies, and all the sacred things of the Temple did shine with divine honor,
which in Christ's time were polluted with many spots and vices, and not only did
they lose the circumstances, but almost the whole substance of sanctity; or if
some Impostor and Money-changer should brag that his coin were sound and
current, which being brought to the touchstone, the gold-weights, or trial of
defraying of charges, will be found to be base metal, adulterated coin, and
to be washed, light and clipped: what I have now said in general, I would have
to be observed, for in every Epithete that the Papists brag of, you shall find
nothing but sophistry.

The Stilt-walker prides himself every where in this title, 1. Titulus membrum
principale.
that he is the eye, ear, hand and the Prince, a Member of the Church: whence
he goes about to persuade unwary men, that to him and such as he, belongs an
Authoritative Government in the Church.

I answer, that these titles are no where to be found spoken plainly of
Preachers, but are consequentially only drawn out of Scripture, which way of
demonstration, as we have said, is not sure, but inclining to error.

But if this were spoken plainly, it were a figurative speech and
metaphorical, which if wrested imprudently, would beget many absurdities:
suppose one to be an eye, ear, nose and hand in the Church, what wise man will
thence conclude, that whatsoever belongs to these Members in the body, belongs
to him? The eye is most tender, round, inconstant, and moveable, it alone sheds
tears, it shows in what we delight, and is the window of impudency: The nose is
in the midst of the face, jetting out, swelling, breathing in and out air,
and pride, and the instrument of indignation; so if I should philosophically
speak of the ears, hand, and other members, many things will be raised which
may belong to Apollonius, but with disgrace he will say, I suppose that it is
the property of the eye to see and to direct, of the nose to smell, of the
ears to hear, of the hands to work: whence the dignity and office of
Ministers may be borrowed, but who will persuade us that these similitudes do
note only virtues and not vices in Ministers? but if we should grant, that
there be eyes in the Church to see, ears to hear, and that the chief parts
are appointed for chief functions, by what art can he persuade us, that this
Prerogative belongs to Preachers only?

Paul truly in two places speaks excellently of the diversity, use and consent
of the principal and servile parts of man's body, and of the Church; but he
that will diligently weigh all things shall find no where, that it was Paul's
meaning in those places to give to Preachers, and Ministers alone, the honor of
being always principal parts, as eyes, nose, ears, etc. in the body of
Christ, that they might thence climb up to the top of pride and domineering,
but he rather urges the contrary, that most honor is to be given to those that
are less worthy, and more weak, because of necessary use, nor does he define
any thing else, but that to him is due in the Church, the honor of chief
member, but yet without pride and command, on whom God has bestowed chief
gifts for serving and looking to the Church: in which though the Apostles did
miraculously excel, yet they never so bragged of their principality, but that
they yielded a parity, and in some things a superiority over themselves, even
to those members that were less worthy: so far was that Apostolical
Government from pride, that no absurdity or disgrace followed, if one and the
same man to day were an eye, to morrow but an ear, now the foot, then the
hand, and sometimes the knee, that is, they applied themselves to any office,
as time and need required.

Who will not then storm to hear a VValachrian Stilt-walker so insolently
bragging of these titles, as if he were subject to none in Church-businesse?
nay, not to the Magistrate though he be the chief of all, because he thinks
the title of eye, ear, nose and hand belongs to him by the right of his
office? whereas we may see by his writings that if he be the eye, he is
pur-blind, or else blood-shot: if he be the nose, he is a snotty nose, if the
ear, he is troubled with the singing of sedition and pride, or else he is
thick of hearing; lastly, he is become mad with the intoxicating wine of
Church-majesty, Marejetice lymphatus.
so that neither hand nor foot can rightly perform their duty, so that he
seems to be fit enough to be the neck or throat, or if you will, the Cuckoo of
the Romish Church.

The title of Bishop, Seer, or Overseer, is honorable, Episcopi. Ezech. 83.
the Church Teachers are also called lights in a candlestick or on a hill, out
of all which Papists gather, that they have authoritative right to judge and
know all things; whence at last proceeds Kingly Power.

I answer, all these titles are figurative, of which this only follows, That
it is the Teachers office to take care of Christian men's salyation, and to
fore-warne them of destruction, which is not properly an imperial, but a
servile office; for he that was the Overseer of Boaz his husbandry, is called a
servant, Ruth 2. Ruth 2.
he were a fool that should think himself a King or a man of authority
because he carries, a torch, or a lantern before another, or because he is
hired to watch on a Tower or at a Becon perhaps the Stilt-walker will tell as
that he is no ordinary inspector or link-bearer, or a common watchman, but an
Ecclesiastic and an honorable one, because Paul faith, that the office of a
Bishop is a worthy office, and that Preachers are worthy of double honor.

The answer is easy, I deny not but the office of a Bishop is honorable, but
hence it follows not, that therefore Bishops must domineere, for so the
basest members of our body, and which serve for necessity, should be chief in
the body, because Paul says, that the greater honor is given to the weaker, 1
Cor. 12.13.
and more uncomely members of the body: I do not think that Apollonius is such
a dastard, as to persuade Christians to be subject to women's commands against
Gods Law and natures, because the Apostle says, that the greater honor belongs
to the woman as the weaker vessel; but what if overseeing and Ecclesiastic
inspection should confer Kingly authority, by what consequence will it be
proved, that this right belongs to Preachers only? for it is plain by many
places of Scripture, that the burden and office of a Bishop is not only
ascribed to ordinary Preachers, Act. 20. 1 Timothy 5.17.
but also to all Elders, yea it belonged to Deacons under the Apostles; so that
here Kingly power is not to remain in the superlative sanctity of Pastors, but
it must pass to the comparative of Elders, and positive of Deacons. I need not
then tell, that it was common to all Laymen and the Church Members, under the
Apostles, to teack, and consequently to exercise the office of a Bishop,
however the Stilewalker may cunningly go about to unfold himself of these,
yet this is sure, that Episcopal dignity did of old belong by a certain
pre-eminence, to the Apostles, and not now to Popish Bishops, because by this
right the Bishop of Rome excerciseth regal power, but he can have no leisure
to teach Christ's people. This new VValachrian Papist by this his unsavory
writing, shows, that he wants either power or will to provide for, and give
light to Gods people being he is convicted of so many falsehoods, whence it may
be justly concluded, that though Kingly power were contained under Episcopacy,
yet it belongs not to him, as being no Bishop.

The title also of Governor and Leader is often used among Papists. Prapositi
and Ducis. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17.
Christians are commanded to give double honor, and to obey those that are set
over them; whence they conciude, that Ministers must be presidents and chief
in Church-businesse, and that therefore they are subject to none, nay not to
the Magistrate.

I answer, if there were such Governors and Captains as there were then, of
whom Paul speaks this, the consequence might have some show, because they were
unblameable and infallible, and therefore were true lenders and presidents; but
if we look upon old Papists, they are seducers, if on this Walachrian Divine
with his Classis, (because their errors and blasphemies are so many) who will
account them leaders? they are blind leaders, whom Christ wills us to avoid,
least we fall with them into the ditch.

Again, if we should yield this also, that there are true Captains and
Presidents in the Church, who will thence grant to them a perpetual presidency
and dominion over Christians? May not a president or leader come sometimes
behind, and be led? They that know military affairs (whence this metaphor was
taken) know that it is ordinary, that he who leads a company to day and goes
before, is led to morrow, and comes after: now he should be laughed at who
should argue that he must never come after, because he went once before, or
that he must never obey, because he once commanded, for so every one must be a
Monarch, and all must run into confusion; wherefore I have often said, that
under the most spiritual Government of the Church, in the Apostles time, there
was no such maxim, that he who was once a ruler and leader must always be so,
but it was ordinary to lead, and to be led, to go before and after, to be
uppermost and lowermost. I know that Government is not answerable to the Popish
pride, who will always be before and uppermost, yet it agrees very well with
Paul's precept, who wills us to be obedient to our leaders, Heb. 13.27.
but he presently adds, because they watch for our souls, whence the
Walachrian Papist may see, that this title of Captain does not patronize his
regal pride, for Paul says plainly, that Preachers are such Captains as are
bound to watch over us, but there is no man so ignorant of military matters,
who knows not that they are the common and lower sort of fouldiers, who are
tied to keep Centinell or Watch: So that this Stilt-walker ridiculously goes
about to make himself a General or Monarch of a poor stipendary soldier.

The name of Angel also is used, 4. Aug^^.
to show their Ecclesiastic principality: but this word properly signifies a
Messenger: And who will brag himself to be a King, because he is a Messenger?
I confess the dignity of heavenly Angels and Spirits is great; but Apollonius
is said to be too carnal to live an Angelical life, except he mean by his
subtle inventions of new Popery, to strip Thomas of his title of Angelical
Doctor.

They pride themselves more in the name Pastor, Pastor^^.
whence Bellarmine draws the Popes mighty Majesty over all Christian Monarchs:
For, because it was said to Peter, Feed my sheep, he concludes, that to Peter
belenged the right of feeding all sheep: And because that right was given to
Peter, he inferres, that it was also given to the Pope, as to Peter, that he
should feed all Christ's sheep. But with him to feed is to rule, and to be fed
is to be ruled: Hence he proves, that it appertains to all Monarchs, as being
sheep, to be fed, that is, to be ruled; and to the Pope to feed and rule Kings,
according to Virgils Verse, Tytere coge pecus. --

This device pleases the new Popish Walachrian: for he speaks so often of his
authoritative office of feeding, that of his Shepherds crook he makes a
sword, yea a regal Scepter.

I answer: The title of Pastor is figurative; therefore by an ill consequence
do Popish Pastors draw to themselves whatsoever is found in earthly Shepherds
and sheep. At this day Shepherds are a mean and servile kind of people, which
being unfit for other employment, are of mean spirits, and fit only to
consume victuals: so the Poet describes the lazy Shepherd Tyterus,
stretching himself along in the shade, and singing love-songs of his fair
Amaryllis: This pastoral sport Pope Hellebrand that spiritual Shepherd
showed, when expecting that Honry the fourth Emperor should come to Canossa in
an humble way, he betook himself to the tower of Mathildis, that in the mean
while he might delight himself with his Amaryllis. Yet I do not think this
Walachrian Shepherd will be proud of these pastoral virtues: so that I doubt
whether he will have applied to himself all that is commonly found in
Shepherds.

So I will say of sheep: Christ's spiritual sheep differ much from our ordinary
ones; for these are brutish foure-footed beasts, wooll-bearers, which can
neither reason nor speak, but only bleat. But although Laymen among Papists
are of little better account with their spiritual Churchmen; yet this I will
say for Christ's holy sheep, that they differ much from bruit beasts, not only
because his sheep are reasonable creatures, but also that a sheep in Christ's
flock may become a Shepherd, and a Shepherd a sheep: which change were
miraculous in other sheep, but in Christ's flock it is no rare thing: for if to
feed, be to teach and rule, as Papists say, we shall find, that among the
Apostles this was usual, that he who taught to day, was taught to morrow; for
Apollos taught Aquila and Priscilla, as a Pastor does sheep: but Aquila and
Priscilla taking him apart, did instruct him more particularly, and of sheep
became Shepherds, but the Shepherd himself became a sheep. Neither will the
Stilt-walker deny but they oftentimes sit among sheep and disciples, who are
such proficients in their studies, that they become Teachers, and of sheep
Shepherds. I know this transformation is not liked by Papists, because they
will be always Shepherds, but never sheep. Yet this is true in Christ's
spiritual flock, that such a change oftentimes there is; whence appears the
foolishness of Papists, who from a metaphorical title of Pastor conclude,
that they may do to Christ's reasonable sheep what our common Shepherds do to
their brutish flocks. Similitudes must never be drawn further then his
meaning that uses them, except we will go beyond the compass.

The name of Pastor in Scripture is given to Kings, to show their moderation;
it is also given to Church-Rulers, but with great restriction, and prohibition
to reign: Let Kings bear rule, Mat. 20. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 5.
says Christ to his Apostles, it shall not be so with you. So Peter forbids
Pastors to domineere, but Papists are carried with a contrary spirit, who from
this title draw their authority over the Church.

For their Pastoral rod at this day is very imperious, powerful and regal,
and it has two keys fastened to it the one is preaching, the other is
jurisdiction or censuring, which old and new Papists use as a sword to strike
and push with, but in a different way: For the Pope being Antichrist, and an
old Sheep-stealer in Christ's flock, cares no more for the preaching top of the
Shepherd staff; for though in Scripture, to feed be to preach, and teach, yet
in the Popes and Jesuits exposition, to feed is to be filent as a dumb dog.
For if any man be stout in preaching the truth, he is oftentimes chosen to be
of the Popes Conclave, that his mouth may be stopped; so that out of the Popes
Court to feed is to teach, but within his Court or Conclave, to fied is not to
teach, but to be silent. Bellarmine to wash of this blot, says, it is not
convenient that the Pope should teach by himself, it suffices us, if he teach
by others whom he sends abroad, as Paul did Timethy and Titus whom he left in
Creet, that he might from town to town ordain Preachers: This subterfuge of
the Jesuit is pleasant, but saine, because Paul and the Apostles did not only
preach by others, but chiefly by themselves; the Pope never preaches himself
but by others; however the matter be, this is certain, that the Pope contents
himself with the sole judicial top of his Pastoral staff; for although he
does not abase himself to preach, yet in this he abundantly satisfies his
Pastoral Office, in that he rules the whole Church of Christ, by prescribing
Laws, hearing of Princes Ambassadors, dividing Kingdoms and Crowns,
bestowing Lands out of the plenitude of his power, waging wars for Peter's
Patrimony as Julius did, excommunicating Kings and Princes as disobedient
sheep, and compelling them to come as supplicants to him, and by setting all
the Christian world together by the ears, or if he be of a more moderate
disposition, then by erecting of obelisks, building of Castles, adorning of
Theaters and Stages, making of sumptuous feasts, delighting himself with his
Ganymedes and many things else, by which he is thought to have abundantly
satisfied his Pastoral charge; so that Christians may easily see, that this
Roman Pastor is not only a hireling, but a thief also and a robber.

The Walachrian Popish Dwarf uses as yet both the tops of his Pastoral rod,
and because the judicial is too weak to subdue and knock down all as he
pleases, he prefers the preaching top as yet, that if he dream at home of any
thing which may advance his Hierarchy, this presently he persuades the
unwarie people by his declamations; or if the Magistrates like rams, push with
their horns, and take upon them to reprove their Pastors more boldly then
becomes brutish sheep to do, then out of the Pulpit openly he accuses them of
Atheism, and indirectly stirs up against them all the sheep, that is the
people; that seldom does he lay aside this top of his Shepherds crock, except
he grow hoarse and speechless. Yet it is thought he takes not so much delight
in his preaching rod, but that with the great Pope he could be content to lay
it down, if he could light upon a good Bishopric in England, or a
Superintendency elsewhere, that so he might be silent by himself, but preach
by others: The other top, to wit judicial, is surely very sacred to him, so
that there is nothing more Pastoral with him then to have power of inspection
into all matters, to be present at all men's tables and affairs, to entrap the
honors and estates of all: lastly, to meddle with every worldly thing, with his
Pastoral crook, to rule all, and be ruled by none; in which he does finely
imitate the Popes Pastorship, but falls quite off from that of the Apostles,
and of Peter himself, who prescribes to Pastors rule without command, 1 Pet. 5.
but this man requires command without rule, which may end either in Papal
tyranny, or into a seditious Anarchy, that each Pastor may do what he please.
Again, this VValachrian Pope earnestly desires, that to him (as being a
Pastor) may be given authority and command without subjection, but Peter on the
contrary will have the younger sort to be subject to the Elders, but presently
adds, that they should all submit themselves to one another, and to be humble:
so that I must oftentimes say the Apostles were such Shepherds who were
content to be uppermost and lowermost, to rule and to be ruled: but Papists are
such who think it blasphemy and Simony, if in Church Matters they be subject to
any except to Christ alone immediately.

The title of Householder, is almost of the same authority, 6. O^conemi. 1 Cor.
4.1.2. Mat. 24. Part. 1. p. 354.
by which the Stilt-walker every where brags, and denies that he is subject to
the Magistrate; for he says, That Ecclesiastic and Pastoral causes are to be
judged only by Ecclesiastic Authority, and that it is absurd they should be
judged by Civil Power: For though he confess, that in some cases Churchmen
may be subject to the judgment of the Magistrate, yet he thinks this is only
extraordinary, and when the Clergy will not be reformed, and that then the
matter must be judged not by the Magistrates but by Churchmen alone, as being
Masters of the Family.

This Divinity he had from Bellarmine, who says, that the Pope is the general
Master of the Church-Family, Mat. 24.48.
who therefore obeys none but comm^nds all, and that by right of this
Oeconomie, he is subject neither to Magistrates not to a General Council,
which the Jesuit finely gathers out of the parable of the householder, for
(says Christ) if that servant shall begin to drink, and to beat his
fellow servants, the lord of that servant will come to which Bellarmine; Hear
you not who is the Popes judge? He faith not, he shall be judged by a Council,
but his lord will come; therefore he is left to be judged by Christ. It Is no
wonder that the Jesustes do delude Christians with such old-wives fables; for
they know that the Popes strength now consists not in persuasion, but in
coaction: it is more to be wondered at, that such a ^^ght-bird should creep out
of the Walachrian Classis, who being destitute of all secular power, dare utter
such like, yea greater fooleries: for the Pootifician fopperies end in
Monarchy, but the Walachrien in confusion and anarchie. For, if by the right
of Ecclesiastic ^economie, no Preacher is subject to the Magistrates
judgment, but that he depends immediately from Christ: It will follow also,
that he is not subordinate to the Exclesinstick, except their immediate
dependency from Christ be broken.

The Stilt-walker will say, that this oeconomicall right is not broken by
Ecclesiastic subjection; 1 Cor. 14.
for then the spirit of the Prophets i^ subject to the Prophets; all which
depend immediately from Christ, which is not repugnant to oeconomicall liberty.

This faction I have elsewhere touched, and I will more fully hereafter refell
it.

I ask now, whether the Pastor or Householder of a particular Church, who makes
such a decree, which the householders of the same, or of another Church say is
unjust, and therefore abrogate it, be delivered by authority or not? If he say,
I, then he resists the light of nature, which teaches, that that has not
absolute authority, which may be abrogated by another Judge. If he say, No,
then he is forced to confess, that those Householders of God, such as these
Walachrians boast themselves to be, have no absolute right; because by the
right of dependency (as I said before) the Consistory can judge the Brethren,
the Classis the Consistory, and the Synod the Classes; and so in infinitum.

Surely if Paul means by these words, the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to
the Prophets, that we should always rest in the greater number of suffrages,
as in a truth defined by such Householders as are at this day; then Christians
will be forced against science and conscience oftentimes to submit to it, which
is both false and unjust: for how often does this fall out, which Calvin
complains of the Council of Trent, namely, that a hundred horned Asses may
agree by their votes in a falsehood, if ninety nine on the other side stand for
the truth, that greater number must decide I warrant you a matter of such
weight. Neither should they except here, that they were false Bishops, and that
it is otherwise in those that are pious and reformed: For even among such there
will be found no certainty, except they be all divinely inspired, and
infallible, as under the Apostles; or one at least, which the Jesuits (but
falsely) say, is the Pope; and so in this they end all controversies. But the
Walachrian Juglers, because they dare not assever this, they must necessarily
run round, so that they as Masters of the Family, must and must not still be
believed. For, however they may persuade unwarie people, that their commands
are authoritative and unblameable, and that therefore they must be obeyed; yet
if by learned men they be brought to the scales or touchstone, they will be
forced to confess, that in many things they fall foul, and deceive others;
which we may even see in these patched pieces of the Stilt-walker, which not
only this proud Householder of Christ vents abroad for Oracles, but he has
taken for his defense the whole company of Classiaries, whom the reader may
see, have assented to lies, blasphemies and toys.

It is most sure, that now neither in the Church, nor in the whole world, are
there any such Pastors or Householders, to whom she can or should be absolutely
subject, but the judgment of this remains in the examination of every one,
according to the balance of Gods Word alone. I know that a great many
Christians are in this point either out of carelessness, or out of
superstition, very supine, to believe their Preacher in many things with an
implicit faith; but this supine carelessness costs the loss of innumerable
souls: so that these authoritative, and domineering Householders are to blame,
who hunt after honor out of Christians blind obedience.

If the VValachrian Papists had considered with what restriction that elect
vessel Paul had given to himself the title of Householder, 1 Cor. 4.1.2.
the Stilt-walker had not so often (to patronize his pride) alleged this
title; for, Paul also in that place uses the title of Minister or Servant
(...), which word comes from (...), to row, so that he makes himself an
inferior rower: But how absurd were it for one to brag that he is a rower or
boat-man appointed by the King to sit and row in the lower seat? The Apostles
that were divine Mariners in Christ's ship, were not ashamed to confess this of
themselves, although they were Householders by an incommunicable prerogative,
yet they were very far from pride, because they confessed that they would
row and sit in the lower seat.

The name Father also contains honor and authority, but not always command;
paternall right is most properly in natural fathers, for it is absolute and
indissoluble: b^ similitude it is given to many; for, Kings are called Fathers,
Lords; 1 Timothy 5.
Paul bids Timothy honor old men because of their gray hairs, as Fathers; so
the title of Father is given to Bishops, but from hence to infer an absolute
dominion and a privilege to obey no man, is childish; for if we would contend
about this word, the King shall be the Bishops Father, and the Bishop the Kings
Father, he shall also be an old man's Father, and again the old man shall be
his Father, so the one shall not obey, but command the other: Hence will arise
Anarchie, wherefore we must again consider, that figurative phrases must not
be too much stretched; Paul improperly attributes to himself the title of
Father, and yet he had many prerogatives by this title, none is properly Father
of the Church and of Believers but God, by whose Word (as by seed) we are
regenerated: Paul himself confesses that he is a sower and a planter, who
will not say, that it is improper for a husbandman to be called Father of
corn or trees.

Yet the Apostles had this privilege, because by instinct from God they
produced that divinely inspired word, which begets always faith.

He also glories in this to the Galathians, that he particularly as a Father
had first of all converted them, and had made them a Church; though in this
paternall right Paul had many Prerogatives, yet we see that in his Government
he was far from pride and imperiousness: wherefore the Stilt-walker again
imitates the Papists, that under this most common right of Father (by which he
is rather a Paedagogue then a Father of the Church) croaks so loud of his
imperial and kingly power, that he will have himself preferred to all
Magistrates, for the word which he preaches, is but a strange kind of seed
which he casts, nor is it infallible as that of Paul's, but corrupted and very
lying in many things. Neither do we think the Stilt-walker so old as that he
was the first Founder of the Church of Middleburg, so that he wants all the
prerogatives by which Paul claims to himself paternall right: how ridiculous
then is this figurative and personated Father of the Church, in making
Magistrates but children and his sons? whose Father he cannot be but by a very
remote reason, and in inveighing so eagerly against them, that he seditiously
moves the people to rob them of their honors and estates, and then goes about
to excommunicate them with his censuring key, that is, to exclude them out of
hezven it self? We did here jest among our selves, that these Walachrian
Fathers were of the race of those Cats, which, Philosophers write, use to bite
and devour their young chite which they bring forth, so that the female cats do
extremely hate the male cats or sires of their young chits, not suffering them
to touch or come near them. If this Wal^chrian be such a monstrous Father, he
will not wonder if hereafter the Churches (as mothers) do abhor and drive
him away as an unnatural Father. (...).


He wonderfully swells with the title of Legate, for which he quotes 2 Cor.
5.20. which Beza translates, we are Ambassadors, the word in Paul is (...),
and properly signifies we are Presbyters, but this our night-bird delighting
himself in this interpretation of Beza, cries out every where, that he is
Christ's Ambassador; for although Paul presently place the exercise of this
Embassy in Prayers and humble persuasion, yet this Walachrian rattle-mouse
desiring always to chirp louder in his caves under ground, then the howles do
cry at Athens, concludes from hence every where, that he is invested with this
title of Christ's Embassadur by an authoritative and powerful Jurisdiction
above all Magistrates.

For he says in the place quoted, that Magistrates are no where called Christ's
Ambassadors but only Ministers and Vicars of God. In this his device he
varieth much from his own Calvin, who very where honors Magistrates with
the title of Gods Legates; and surely had he well weighed what he wrote, he
would have seen that more belongs to the Magistrate then to Churchmen, because
they have the title of Vicar, which is more then Legate: For, I searce believe
that Apollonjus will willingly assume to himself the title of Christ's Vicar,
least he should make himself too like the Pope of Rome, who despising the
title of Legate, calls himself Christ's Vicar, so that we may laugh at
Apollonius his giddiness, who would out of the greater title fasten upon
Magistrates the lesser dignity, but contrary on Churchmen, greater honor out
of the lesser title.

But here the Stilt-walker seeks out another mote; for he makes a strange
distinction between Gods Kingdom and Christ's, or between Christ's Kingdom of
mediation and creation, making that much more worthy and holy then this: whence
he collects, that he is far to be preferred to all Magistrates, because these
are only Gods Legates, but he is Christ's Legate, as being the Mediator
exalted, as if he would have something more worthy and holy then God himself:
I confess I envy not this extortioner of phrases that every novelty may please
him, only this I say, that this his device is nothing to purpose; for Paul in
1 Cor. 15. describing Christ's Kingdom as Mediator, says, that by right and in
recompense of the work of mediation as it were by which he did exceedingly
humble himself, was given to him the chief honor, as being God and man, not
only to fit at the right hand of God the Father, but that also by a wonderful
dispensation, the Father from that time has submitted all power, and bestowed
on Christ the Mediator, which he will not lay down before the end of the
world, and after judgment will deliver it up to his Father. This the Apostle
calls a mystery, and I confess I am ignorant of it; yet I adore it. Hence this
assertion of the Walachrian Papist falls to the ground.

For if Christ after his Ascension alone reign in heaven, earth, and under the
earth, (as the Apostle speaks) then it must follow, that all Kings and
Magistrates, even Turks and Gentiles, belong to Christ's Mediatorie Kingdom:
and that they are the Vicars and Legates of Christ the Mediator: for how can
they be the Legates of any other Prince, when as he alone reigns every where?
So that of necessity the Walachrian Commentators must hatch some other fiction,
whose practice I compared elsewhere to Swine turning up dunghills.

Now I add, that to express this Impost^r by the picture of a Heg, is an
Egyptian Hieroglyphick: for this is the property of that filthy beast, to have
cloven feet, as the clean beasts have, with which they are always dividing
dirt and clay, yet never divides, or freeth it self from filth, because
naturally it delights in dirt: Even so we see the Walachrian heretics dividing
their fooleries with many distinctions, like impure hogs, parting the dirt with
their cloven hoofs; and yet they never free themselves from their errors.

The Walachrian chief error is, that rashly and most falsely they assume to
themselves the title of Christ's Legate, no other ways then the Jews of old
bragged of the Temple, and the Papists now of the Church.

That one may be the Kings Ambassador, two things are required: that he may
carry his badge, and may show his Letters of credence, that he is the Kings
Ambassador: The other, that he may have his instructions concerning the Kings
will and command; so that when he wills he may show all things ready for his
Embassy. For, if either of these be wanting, the whole honor of his Embassy
fails: so that if one take upon him to be an Ambassador, and having the
badges, yet go beyond his commission, either out of ignorance, or malice, he
shall not be a true Legate. Again, if one do faithfully deliver the Kings will
as a Legate, and yet have no right, or any thing to show for his Embassy, he
also is not to be accounted the Kings Ambassador; and it has oftentimes been
seen, that such Legates have been punished by Princes, as Impostors.

If according to this rule the Pope be examined, he will be found to be
Antichrist: If you ask for his Letters Patents of Embassy, he will tell you,
that he sits in Peter's chair, and that from person to person, from Peter to
himself, this right was derived, to wit, by true election, and many other
things with which he belyeth his Letters of credence. If you make inquiry into
his instructions, though many Popes were nothing but Monsters, despisers of
divine and humane Laws, yet they say that he is infallible, by the virtue of
his Chair, that he has all Laws within the cabinet of his breast. This
fiction is thrust upon men, under many ambiguities, and now for many hundred
years has so prevailed in Popery, that he who doubts to yield to thus, shall
be compelled to yield to arguments taken from excommunication, prison, faggots
and death. This is the old Popery.

The new Walachrian Papist brags much more unseemingly of his Embassy; because
he is forced to confess, that he has no Letters to show for his employment,
nor any ways so instructed, as to deserve the name of Christ's Ambassador: for
I will ask him, what certain badges has he to show that he is Christ's
Legate? he will doubtiesse say, he has badges or marks in that he was chosen
by the Church, that is, elected and ordained to preach by an outward company of
men professing Christ, but this is to prove the same by the same; for then the
question will be, where did Christ say, that he would account him for his
Legate who is chosen and ordained at this day to preach by an Assembly of
Christians? If there were now such a King who should acknowledge for his
Ambassadors such as should take upon them this function by some evil and
sinistrous ways, he should be held an inconsiderate Prince, and little
careful of his honor. How unworthy a thing is it then to suspect this of
Christ so great a Monarch, that he would so prostitute the glorious right of
his Embassy in holy things, that he should presently acknowledge for his
Vicars and Legates, who can show only the external pomp of Vocation? This
fiction was long since exploded among the old Papists, yet we deny not but
they had some kind of calling, but because it was not justly performed and
according to Christ's prescript, it is therefore accounted as none.

Though I will not ascribe the same degree of impudency to those Walachrians,
yet if Apollonius will confess what he knows, there is nothing more certain
then that the whole manner of Vocation there is humane, and oftentimes carnal;
so that I think it a most unworthy thing that Christ should be so loose and
profuse in bestowing the honor of this Embassy, whereas it is as easy in a
Brokers shop of old clothes to find a suit for a noble man, as it is there by
force or favor, to acquire through Apollonian spiritual Arts the title of
Christ's Legate.

Now for matter of instruction: If it be demanded, I have showed before, that
there is no man at this day who dare say, he is infallible: For, as soon as the
Scribes in their preaching departed from the chair, or reading of Moses, in
Christ's time, they did easily admit the leaven of their own traditions in
their doctrine, of which Christ will have us take heed, though nevertheless he
will have us hearken to them, so long as they sit in Moses his chair, that is,
continue in the simple reading. So this writing of Apollonius shows what is
done in the Walachrian Classis, who placing the authority of his Embassy not
in reading, but in declamatory preaching, has been diverse times convicted by
me of error, and found to have departed from the instructions of his King:
whence he seems to me to be no less sottish, when he obtrudes a corrupt
calling, and fallible preaching, for Christ's true Embassy, then if he would
pay his debts, by painting on a piece of board the figures and colors of
diverse coins, and so give them to his creditor instead of payment. Here is no
obscure report, that the Ecclesiastic spirituality of Apollonius is so ruinous
there, that not only out of the positive sanctity of Deacons, the comparative
of Elders, but (which is a wonder) from the superlative of Preachers, this
shameful disgrace has proceeded, Versuram facere fore cedere.
that some there out of a base intent to defraud men, took up money upon use
to pay their creditors, and played bankerupts. If it please Apollonius to help
his Colleague with such a payment, that he may bestow upon him a large sum of
painted money on a board, I will give him leave to use his bounty; yet he shall
no more satisfy his creditors there by paying painted money for true, then by
obtruding upon us here the shadows and pictures of his calling and preaching,
when he would show us the incorrupt honor of his Embassy.

Paul indeed and the Apostles might glory, that they were Christ's Ambassadors,
because they were sent immediately neither from men, nor by men; whence they
were furnished with the badges of their vocation, with piety of life,
infallibility of doctrine, and power of miracles. This Embassy of Christ, as
being an Apostolical function, was only in them, and ended in them. The
dignity of Evangelists was somewhat less, who wrote from their mouths, as
Luke; or taught, Act. 1.1.
as Timothy; whom Paul confesses to have heard the doctrine of salvation from
his mouth among many witnesses; and warnes him that he should commit it to
faithful men, 2 Timothy 2.2.
and apt to teach; such was Titus: These were not Christ's immediate Legates, but
the Apostles, to whom notwithstanding it belonged to speak with authority, as
Calvin translates it; or, with command, as Beza.

For although their Embassy was much different from that of the Apostles, yet
so long as they lived, they could have recourse to them. They also showed a
great measure of spiritual gifts in themselves: so that not without cause
their authority was great in the Church, yet not as Christ's proper and
immediate Legates, but of the Apostles; yet they were divine, and excelled in
the gifts of the Spirit. Since their departure, that glorious way of calling
and conferring of gifts by imposition of hands ceased, that scarce three
hundred years after Christ did there any whit of this rare vocation remain:
yea Antichrist breaking out in the place of gifts, all sorts of corruption and
vices succeeded. And yet if we look upon the lights of ancient times, namely,
Austin, yea Bernard, in the year 1300. (shining as a light in Cimmerian
darkness) we must confess that this Walachrian Jugler is but ice to compare
to those fires, of whom I think none durst venture to proclaim himself
Christ's immediate Legate, as this trifler every where does. He is like those
Painters, Luke 2.
which picture the Virgin Mary in Princely robes, and with rich hangings,
because she was descended of the royal blood of King David, of whose riches
she had nothing when Christ was born, but was destitute of all riches.

The titles that remain are as blasphemous as fallacious: 9. Pontisicis.
the Apostle in that notable place to the Hebrews, willing to exalt above all
humane reach Christ's incommunicable and ever to be adored vocation, Heb. 5.4.
to his eternal Priesthood and Mediatorship for the whole race of mankind,
does chiefly illustrate it by the excellency of the manner, which he declared
by the typical calling of Aaron, in glory exceeding the inauguration of all
the Leviticall High Priests that succeeded him; which notwithstanding the
manner of Christ's eternal Priesthood, did infinitely excel, in that he
received his inauguration not from any earthly man, but from heaven: for to
none of the Angels was it said, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
thee; of which the Apostle speaks plainly when he says, Heb. 1.5
no man takes unto himself this honor but he who is called of God, as Aaron
was, and Christ: whence it is apparent, that it is temeritie for any man after
Christ to take upon him the privilege of this title, yet Antichrist the old
Romish Pope durst do it, priding himself in this as in many other things,
that he has succeeded Christ as his Vicar and high Priest in the Militant
Church. Our Stilt-walker following the footsteps of his Predecessor does not
indeed (as yet) brag that he is high Priest, but desirous to make an impression
of the excellency of his preaching function upon unskilful and superstitious
people, he is so often commending it, that he would have all men believe, what
the Apostle speaks of Christ alone, and Aaron, to be meant of himself and
such as he: for he takes this for a general rule, that no man is called to a
sacred function, except also this belong to him, that he has not assumed this
honor, but has received it of God. This indeed did appear in Aaron
typically, in Christ truly: But he that will search for this in the Popes
naughty vocation, or in that vicious and humane calling of Apollonius, as I
have described it, will wrong Christ, 10. Tit^^^ spousi, and quad sit maritus
Ecclesiae.
and will make us believe that to be true, which we see and know to be contrary.

Apollonius thinks it also no mean title for a Bishop to be called the
Bridegroom and Husband of the Church; if this be true, they will suppose that
the Church (whose lesser and meaner part is the Magistrate) must be subject to
the Minister, as a wife to the husband, because it is plainly said to the
woman, thy will shall be subject to thy husband.

But these parabolicall allusions are of little weight among wise men, if in
Scripture sometimes the title of Husband or Bridegroom were given to
Ministers; but it is so far from this, that in it we find the Baptist
conferring this honor on Christ alone, that he is the Bridegroom because he
has the Bride, reserving to himself the title of friend only: which modesty
is far different from the pride of modern Papists, who boldly prate that
they are the Bridegroomes and therefore have the Bride. I think that it is more
injurious to Christ's incommunicable honor, for one to call himself a Vicar,
Bridegroom or Husband, then the Ministerial head of the Church. Concerning the
indignity of this last, many books have been written against the Pope, whereas
notwithstanding it is evident, that this involves no dishonor to Christ, if he
have under him a Ministerial held, but it contains obscoenity, for one to be
called Vicar, Bridegroom, or secondary Husband of Christ's Church upon earth.

But I will not spend time about this as any great matter, I will only drive
this Walachrian Papist to quotlibetary fooleries, by which he may with his old
friends, delight or vex himself.

For first I will ask if a Pastor or Preacher be the Bridegroom or Husband of
the Church, what kind of Husbands were the Apostles, who had no particular
Church, but had the care of all? If he say, they were not Husbands or
Bridegroomes, which they themselves would have easily acknowledged, he will
make them less worthy then the Walachrian night-birds: but if on the contrary
he do confess it, he will bring upon them the suspicion of bawdrie, as though
they had power every where to lie with other men's wives. Which monster Mahomet
in his Alcoran did challenge to himself, that according to his prophetical
majesty, he might have power to leap into every woman's bed.

Again, if he says, that the Church is married to ordinary Pastors, I ask,
whether it be not an unseemly thing for one woman to have many husbands, which
no Law does allow? and yet in this spiritual marriage there is nothing more
common: for, many Churches have two, three, four Pastors, and perhaps the
Church of Middleburg has many more, and consequently husbands; which if he
shall make use of as his Vicars to lie with his wife, Apollonius himself will
make her to be suspected of adultery, except he be assured that she will be
loyal to him as the chief husband, yet he shall carry the horns, when he
gives way to his colleagues as his underlings to make use of her.

But if one Church be duly married to one husbands, I ask again, if any thing
can be more proper for marriage then indissolubility? but in this holy and
spiritual wedding there is nothing more absurd; for no sooner do young men
leave the School, but out of the heat of their youth they begin to be suitors,
neither is there any Church so mean and poor, to which they will not make
suite, as if she were the fairest Bride in the World, if so be she will
confer upon them a pastoral Cloak and a stipend; but this is not with any
intention to stay always with this wife, but like insects, they gather
company, till they can get wings, with which they may fly higher; which when
they have got, they take no longer delight in their former wives, but like
adulterers they begin to woe other women, which are much more beautiful,
either because of rich Citizens, or City commodities, or for some others
worldly respect. And those spiritual husbands are oftentimes so impudently
importunate, that not only do they use unlawful ways to obtain their new
Brides, but make such haste also, that before the former be lawfully divorsed,
they marry with the later.

Now I will ask this also: if the Church be the Ministers wife, how will it
stand with the chastity of Wedlock, that a busy Minister, who loves other men's
fruit better then his own, should go to delight himself in other Provinces, and
leave his Church to other spiritual Husbands, that they may perform the dues
of Matrimony to her? Is not he a Bawd to his own wife? especially if by
gluttony or sloth, his means being spent, this Husband of the Church be forced
to sail to the Indies, or some other part of the world, to recover his losses,
in which case he forsakes his Wife, and for the time joins himself to a
richer, and lest she should be forsaken like a Widow, some other Husband
succeeds in the place of the former, who notwithstanding does not suffer
himself to be divorted totally from the former Wife, but reserves a power to
return to her if this later afterward displease him. Many things could be
alleged against the Ecclesiastic marriages of Ministers and their Churches,
which seem to me so immodest, that if it be true what these night-birds
whisper, that Ministers are the Husbands of their Churches, all Churches will
be accounted bawdyhouses, and Ministers Bawdes or Whooremongers, but enough of
this title.

There is one thing remaining for establishing of Apollonius his Kingdom, which
I wonder, that he who is in every thing the Popes Ape, did not also borrow this
of him: there is a notable place in Jeremie, Jer. 1.10.
where God sending the Prophet as his Ambassador, does inaugurate him with this
high elogie, Behold this day I set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, to pluck up
and demolish, to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant, etc. If this
elogie should be taken literally, you would think it gave so much power to
Jeremie, that it might seem he had leave to command imperiously all Kings and
Nations; but Jeremie by his own example taught that this was not to be taken
literally; because he so performed that great Ambassie, that floating through
diverse injuries, opprobrious speeches, prisons, and many dangers, he preached
Gods judgments in great humility. The Pope who strangely despises Gods word,
has far otherwise expounded this elogie; for Sixtus the fifth, in the Bull
by which he excommunicated Elizabeth Queen of England in the year 1588. so
takes these words, that by them he assumes power to overthrow the whole
Kingdom of England, for performing of which he had Philip of Spain ready as
his executioner, who by his mighty Fleet of a 150. Ships resolved then to
invade that Kingdom, and by the Popes command to extinguish all the
Protestants, but that paper-thunder vanished into the wind: it appears then by
his Popes Bull what his spiritual power is, that if he cannot by himself
immediately, yet by his soldiers he may overthrow Kingdoms and Nations with the
spiritual Sword of Excommunication; and that by the same privilege which
Jeremie had, who though he was the first possessor thereof, yet took so small
pride in it, that he plainly show by the moderation of his life, that he could
see no such thing in that privilege, as the Pope by his new interpretation
draws from it, but what can be expected else from Antichrist (the man of sin,
and son of perdition?) the Walachrian Stilt-walker, conscious of his own
weakness, durst never (as I know) apply this elogie to himself; who
notwithstanding seems to observe his clandestine counsels, and machinations,
which he is daily practicing against the Magistrates of Middleburg; they say
that there is nothing he desires more, then that he may once have power to
overthrow and extirpate the Government of that famous City, by the severity of
which alone, he perceives that his unbridled desire of domineering is curbed,
and though no catechism is with him of greater esteem (as is thought) then
that he may recommend to trusty men the care, to leave no occasion unattempted
for overthrowing the foundations of that Government, and dissolving the bands
of their union; yet I will counsel him, that he would not be too busy and eager
about this hemp work, lest whilst he studies to weave this Church-web wherewith
he may adorn himself, sit ^^st he end in a Magistrates rope, wherewith he may
hang himself.

I have briefly touched the elogies by which Papists do every where extol the
majesty of their Church, some whereof are fained, and not found in Scripture;
most are figurative and metaphorical: but all conditional; which show not
what Ministers are, but what they should be, to wit; Pastors, Leaders, Fathers
and Overseers of the Church, and so they are to be accounted, if they be
endowed with gifts requisite for these Functions, and use them aright:
wherefore when Teachers were divinely inspired, the calling divine and
imposition of hands effectual, Christians might lawfully rest in, and give
obedience to their Pastors and Leaders as unto faithful Fathers, Bishops, and
Ambassadors of Christ, even as to God or Christ himself, because they were
infallible; but this happiness lasted not long; for even whilst the Apostles
were living, false brethren crept into Churches, who proud of their eloquence
and vocation, durst equal, yea prefer themselves to the Apostles, so that
these Divine men then gave warning to Christians not to beleve absolutely every
spirit, but first to examine according to Scripture whether or not these
spirits were of God. If Christians then stood in need of such circumspection,
when there were so many infallible Teachers, to whom they might in blind
obedience safely trust their souls; how careful now must we be of our
salvation, when for the space of so many hundred years there has been none
found in all the world whom God has so assisted with infallibility, as that we
may safely rely upon him? the Pope has now for a long time strangely bewitched
the world in making Christians believe he is infallible; and this supine
credulity has in Gods just judgment cast innumerable souls into hell: nor is
the Pope only guity of this remerity, there is no Monk or Priest so drunk, as
will not brag of the character of his vocation, and boldly cry out that he is
a Captain, a Watchman of souls, as set over the souls of men, a Houshelder of
heaven, an Ambassador of Christ, which is performed by these brawlers with such
eagernes oftentimes, that they imprecate all curses against themselves, and
pawn their bodies and souls to the people, if they teach or lead them
otherwise then they should, though some of the wiser sort smell that these are
mere Impostors of which they br^gge: yet by this their often bragging, it
comes to pass that the people casting aside all care of salvation, in their
supine negligence commis the most precious treasure of their souls, and of
life eternal, to blind guides, whom the blind people following, innumerable
souls must needs fall into the pit of destruction. The Stilt-walker stretches
out every where the same way: he is not content to receive honor for his
well-doing, and to be accounted the faithful man he shows himself to be,
(which Paul speaks of true householders) but though he perceive his own
giddines, and every one sees his childishness, yet by the force of his
vocation, or (as the old Papists say) by the character he ascribes to himself
every where, a right to do and teach in the Church (by authority and power)
which he and his followers brag of, for no other end but to induce the people
to blind obedience to subscribe all that he shall say and command. Which if he
obtain, it will not only come to pass that they shall rest in his
authoritative lies and deceits, (with which his mingle-mangle is filled) but
also if I be not deceived in the man's nature, scarce will that Church continue
14 days together in one theological opinion: For because he prides himself in
this, that like a be he flies through all meadows; but wanting the true sting
of Judgment, it must needs be with him, as with the changeable Camelion, on
what tree or plant soever he sits, he puts on the shape and color thereof:
whence he must daily produce new dreams; all which if his sheep and sons are
bound to receive by his commanding and authoritative power, surely a giddy
progeny must arise of such a giddy father, and a family fit to be sent to
Bedlem. Howsoever he may fasten upon ignorant people his fictions, Naviget
Antyceras.
yet we here in Frisia cannot believe that he shall so far blind the
Magistrates and Governors of Middleburge, as not to see his potestative and
authoritative frauds and knaveries; for the name of Middleburge-Governours is
famous here and in other Provinces, even in this regard, in that by their
Mariners they so brake the strength of the terrible name of Dunkirk-Pirats in
one year, that this one City did show they might be extinguished, whom we
thought had been unconquerable: And chiefly, in that they being troubled with
the malice and treachery of strangers on all sides, by their happy wisdom have
overcome all impediments to the liberty and benefit of the State, showing
invincible courage among so many difficulties, deserving to sit in the Conncel
at the Hague for the common defense of their country; so that the Deputies of
our Province have long confessed, that they seldom repented to have subscribed
to the judgment of that City: for though at present their advise may seem
somewhat hard, yet time has made it appear that their counsels have
oftentimes proved most just and wholesome. But I wonder that a City of such
constant prudence does suffer so long such a Viper as (as we see by his
writings) to lurk in their bosom, which is still laboring to cast out amongst
them the poison of dissension, and to trouble them either with Ecclesiastic or
Politic hissing, that he might shake and overthrow the foundations of that
Government. The famous State of Amsterdam was brought once into such a hazard,
by such a Wasp as this; but the Senate by their authority thrust him out of
their hive and so restored peace to the Church and State. The Walachrian
Metropolis shows an example of rare moderation, which having got among them a
more troublesome Drone, have hitherto used no severity, but suffer him to grow
dull in his own humming; so that we have great hopes, the Church there shall
never be infested with this New Popery: for she having such famous Patrons and
Nursing-fathers, will easily escape the plots of such turbulent fellows as
these Walachrians are, lest new Popery creep first out of that corner of our
confederate Commonwealth, where the Popes tyrannical dominion was driven out
first. I have hitherto done what I can to hinder it, and in this last Chapter
will proceed to stop the progress of it.

CHAP. VII. Of the Magistrates duty in Church-businesse.
WE have hitherto seen the Stilt-walkers eloquence in extolling their modern
Ecclesiastic businesses, which is done by them who in Walachria are called
[Church-men] and [Spirituall] as among the Papists [Clergy-men.] And we have
showed that there is not in all their Church Discipline any thing sacred,
particularly or specially, as to keep off Christians by any right of sanctity
from exercising them, if they be furnished with gifts fit for them: And that
there is now no manner of inauguration by special Divine right, for any man to
exercise alone these Affairs, ( authoritavely or potestatively, as he speaks.)
For, Vocation, Election, and Consecration by Imposition of hands, at this day,
are merely humane and corrupted means, in which we see by experience there is
no Spiritual efficacy; for they are performed by Simony, fraud, and wicked
ways, that seldom is the fittest man chosen, but commonly such as promises,
bribes, and favor promoteth. Imposition also of hands, retaining the form,
but not the force of the ancient institution, is not found to confer any
Spiritual gifts; only we find, that such as have obtained the pomp of external
Vocation, are puffed up with Apollonian and Papistical pride, as if they were
filled with new and infused sanctity; that is, As soon as young Fellows are
freed from the lash of the Schoolmasters rod, having got Ordination, and the
privilege of Ecclesiastic character, within three days after they think
themselves more spiritual then all the Magistrates and common Members of the
Church. But if they want the knowledge of Tongues, Sciences, and good Arts,
they are not found by Imposition of hands to be made more learned: Yet if any
before his Vocation be a Trifler, Cheater, Drunkard or winebibber, it seldom
falls out that afterward he leaves these vices, but only hides them warily,
lest he lose his Ministerial stipend. A fit example we see in this Walachrian
Papist, who long has bragged of the right of his Church-calling, and yet has
not forgot to lie, cheat, and blaspheme the Magistrates. I know that in the
Apostles time the matter was otherwise, because of the plenty of spiritual
gifts; but now such is the Churches poverty, by reason of men's corruptions and
Gods just judgments, that having lost that true and pure grain with which at
first Christians were fed, we are at this day reduced to husks, of the
dispensing of which this Walachrian Night-bird does now brag much more, then
they did of their pure corn: he deserves the title rather of a swineherd then
of a shopherd, and fitter for a hogs-sty then for a sheeps-coat. He truly that
will seriously weigh the matter, shall confess with me, that no otherwise then
among Papists, despair makes a Monk: for many at this day, for fear of poverty,
and out of a desire to raise their fortunes, apply themselves to Divinity as to
some Mechanical trade; neither have they any other intention more spiritual
then to enjoy a fat Benefice, and may be freed from the stink of Mechanical
sweat, and fear of starving. Presently aspiring higher, they insinuate
themselves, under pretense of sanctity, into rich men's houses, and so stuff
themselves with worldly wealth; more wary then Christ, who did not allow so
much as one bag to the Apostles his ambassadors, but these arm themselves
against poverty both with public and private bags. The hope of which good
fortune arising from the Calling of the Church, or Imposition of hands, its no
wonder that they place in them a spiritual power, which so suddenly change
their fortune: But it is plain to them that will look into this more narrowly,
that the whole force and sap of Ecclesiastic dignity flows from the
Magistrate; for except from them the Treasurer receive a command to pay them
their Stipend, scarce would any Vocation or Consecration of the Church move so
effectually the Ecclesiastic spirit, but it would be easily stopped and choked
as it were with the silver quinsey. I will instance the truth of this by one
example of the Stilt-walker, which was here told us. The Senate of Middleburg
had resolved some years ago, to pacify those superlatively spiritual Bees, at
that time making a strange tumult within the hive, with a silver or
money-medicine, (in which Marnixius says, Church-bees take wonderful delight)
giving order to the Treasurer to bestow on each Minister of their City 100
Florens for an extraordinary gratuity. This bounty coming so unlooked for, did
exceedingly please them, hoping it would prove annual or hereditary; but these
Governors of the City had made an express law, That no reward or benefit
should be bestowed out of the public stock upon any man for his life, or for
ever, but upon condition of recalling it, if it stood with the public good.
Yet there is no certain or perpetual possession there of any gift which is
conferred by the Town-bounty; but whosoever enjoys any such benefit, he is
bound yearly to petition for the continuation thereof; which if out of pride or
carelessness it be neglected, ipso facto the benefit cease, and another may
beg it. This law was prudently made; for by long experience it was observed,
that these perpetual possessions of offices or benefits in subjects caused
pride and carelessness, so that they seemed to despise their benefactors.

This law then not being observed, and the necessity of burdens coming on,
occasioned a cessation of this benefit in Ministers. There the Stilt-walker (as
if he had been fed with garlic) and his underlings, sent messengers to the
Magistrates to solicit them; then they began to check them, and in their
pulpits at last, yea in the streets and highways, and in every house and
conventicle, to rage and rail, and revile them, as wicked Atheists and enemies
to Religion, and such as indirectly went about to overthrow all Divine worship,
by withdrawing food from the Ministers, and in muzling the mouth of the Oxen
that tread out their corn, lastly plotting all means to cause sedition: But the
Magistrate being nothing moved at all this, their spiritual pride and anger at
last grew cal^, and all their froth vanished into the air. If this be true,
(which I will not assever) it shows that the principal foundation of
Ecclesiastic spirituality among the Walachrians, is not in the heart, or
mouth, or in the head on which there was Imposition of hands; but there where
Judas his devotion lay, in the bag. For every Philosopher knows, that the chief
organ or sense is there which when it is moved, ^^iveth all the other organs.
N^w because the Ecclesiastic bag being touched, all the preaching, censuring
and thundering spirits grew so quickly hot in these Walachrian Clergymen, that
they wrong all sorts and functions. I am of Erasmus his judgment, of whom
Sleiden writes, that being asked of the Duke of Saxony, why there was so much
trouble in the world at Luthers preaching? answered, that Luther undertook a
hard task; for he touched the Popes crown, and the Monks belly: showing that
the whole spiritual heat of old popery consisted in the honor and pride of
the Pope and great Bishops, and in the belly or food of inferior Priests and
Monks. And now let this my jesting discourse serve for a preface to what I am
now to speak in this last Tract, in which Apollonius has opened all the boxes
of subtleties, that he might make a formal and specificall distinction between
Ecclesiastic and Secular officers, or (as he speaks) between the Ecclesiastic
and Secular power, which he so divides, that he places this as a star in
heaven, but the other on the ground; which two he thinks can no more be united
then heaven and earth; so that secular men, as secular, can no more meddle with
Church-businesse, then one standing upon the ground can touch the heaven. Thus
like an Exorcist he makes a circle (of Ecclesiastic internals, and of
internal externals) as he speaks, within which if any Layman offer to set his
foot, he shall be presently smitten with Vzziahs leprosy, or vexed with a
devil. Upbraiding the Magistrate, if he venture to break in upon the preaching,
censuring, legislative, and chiefly Sacramentary business, that he is
Simoniacall, wicked, a Tyrant, a trampler upon the right and laws of Christ, a
violator of Christ's spouse, yea a trampler on Christ's blood, lastly a Monster,
and a Secular Antichrist. These he every where sets down as orthodoxall,
Dictator-like, and therefore says that Musculus, Macovius, Vedelius, and so
many as disagree from him, contradict sound doctrine, have wide shoes, they
cover their shame with figleaves as Adam, and that they ere the parasites and
flatterers of Magistrates; the poysonable betrayers of the Churches rights and
liberties. So that no stable can be fuller of dung, then this work is of
Apollonian flowers of railings against godly Magistrates, the Fathers of their
Country. And although (to speak freely) these are childish toys what he utters
here with such eagerness, yet I will gather together in a heap all his foolish
chantings upon this business, that the Reader may see in an epitome all to be
of no validity what he spues out here against Magistrates.

The sum of his Arguments tends to this, That he may show Ecclesiastic
functions to differ generically and totally from those of the secular power,
because they differ in the Author, end, object, means, part. 1. p. 47. and p.
4^ 94.
subject, and other things. Now he proves all by asking still the things in
question, that is mere fictions and chimaeraes, which he borrows (without
judgment) from Papists and sellers of trifles.

As for the Author he says, that the secular power and Government belongs
only to the Kingdom of God as Creator, as though God (as Creator) only were
the Author thereof, but the Ecclesiastic power to the Kingdom of the
Mediator, and has Christ the Mediator, for its Author, and as he is exalted,
because it is said, Ephesians. 4.
that Christ being exalted, gave gifts to the Church, some to be Apostles, etc.
but not secular Magistrates.

I answer, that I wonder at the man's drunkenness, who seeks for diversity in
things well compared: For, what matter is it whether God as Creator, or as
Mediator, do appoint or command any thing? If this mincing of Divinity into
small parcels be admitted, innumerable fooleries will arise. But I have
hitherto answered principally, that all secular Magistrates have been
instituted in the New Testament by Christ as Mediator, and exalted, and there
are daily such. For I will ask whether he thinks not that Paul by the gifts
and command of Christ the Mediator, did affirm the secular power which
carries the sword, to be esteemed for Gods Vicegerent, Romans 13.
and every soul to be subject to it? except he will say, that Paul wrote this
by the command of God the Creator, not the Mediator: it follows necessarily
that the secular Power and Government in that place is established by Christ
the Mediator, as Paul his divine Ambassador affirms: So that now no doubt is
to be made, whether Christ as Mediator and exalted has ordained the secular
Power. For, it is expressly said by Paul, whatsoever power there is it is,
ordained of God; and he that resists it resists the Ordinance of God. But
that the Stilt-walker may not think that by God here is meant the Creator, let
him remember that I showed before in 1 Cor. 15. that Christ the Mediator after
his exaltation has received the full power of reigning, and therefore of
ordaining upon earth: For, as Mediator, he has received of his Father all
power deposited by him, till the consummation of the world, which then he shall
give up again to the Father; whence I conclude, that now there is no secular
Prince who has not his Authority from Christ the Mediator, because he alone in
heaven, earth and under the earth conquereth, reigns and triumphs, whence
the first difference taken from the Author falls.

The other he places in the end, for thus he writes, As for the ends of these
powers God has placed apart the secular power in order to natural things,
Fine par. 1 p. 62, 61, etc. p. 51. p. 58.
and Ecclesiastic apart to supernatural, so that both cannot extend
themselves to these things alone which are are of another order: And because
Vedelius said that the Civil Magistrate had for its chief end the eternal
salvation of the people, he answers boldly, but we deny that is spoken of the
proximate and immediate end which the Magistrate by himself in the force and
power of his office aims at or cares for; p. 52.
and elsewhere more plainly, so we must confess in Christian Commonwealths,
that the Civil Power does not touch nor can by it self, or of its own nature
do any thing toward the attaining of eternal bliss, except we will be
Pelagians. Because this saying is most absurd and monstrous, therefore I was
willing that the Reader might see it in the Stilt-walkers own words, the
impiety and falsity of which I will now briefly touch.

First, observe the madness of this brawler in calling it Pelagianism, if the
Magistrate by the nature of his Civil function should touch or meddle with the
affairs of modern Church Discipline, it seems he is ignorant, what was
Pelagius his opinion; Pelagius thought that a natural man without grace could
attain to true faith; which opinion is as false as if one should say, that
Lazarus being half rotten could rise by himself, though Christ had not called
him. Wherefore this opinion has been justly rejected, but what is this to the
question now in hand? First, he shows his mad malice against Christian
Magistrates, because he considers them in respect of their office of
Magistrateship, and as secular men, as in the state of nature, the property of
which is to be blind in their minds, perverse in their wills, the enemies of
God and sons of wrath, so the Scripture speaks of a natural man, of whose
power Pelagius disputed. Is not this to blaspheme potentates and to curse the
Rulers of the people? To make them in respect of their holy office, which God
himself ordained and appointed, men blind in their mind, perverse in their
will, the sons of wrath, and of hell? Was there ever any Anabaptist that durst
so rail against Magistrates as this night-bird does?

Another of his fictions is, that he equals the external works of modern
Church Discipline, to the most holy, divine, and spiritual work of true
faith: For, true faith is a work of that difficulty that none of the holiest
Apostles had any power to confer it, much less can a natural man attain to
it; for Paul says of himself, he that plants and he that waters is nothing,
1 Cor. 3.
but it is God that gives the increase, and elsewhere, the circumcision of the
heart is not in the letter, but in the spirit, true circumcision is that whose
praise is of God, not of men, Romans 2.
so that they are mad indeed, who think with Pelagius that man by himself can
acquire true faith, or confer it, being the work of God alone. Now let the
Stilt-walker here see his own perverseness, who that he may despise the
Magistrates compares them to a natural man, and that he may extol the
affairs of his Church Discipline among ignorant people, compares them to the
most divine work of faith, from which they are infinitely distant: For, no man
can truly believe but he that is truly spiritual, holy, and the child of God.
But the outward Church Discipline as it is now, has so little excellency in
it, that Judas himself a Devil, Nicolas the Deacon, false Apostles and
innumerable wicked men could perform them with profit and praise. For, Paul
says, that in his time all did not preach Christ sincerely, Phil. 5.16.
but some for honor, some for profit, and yet he confesses, that their
preaching was fruitful; it is then so far that the Civil Magistrate (in
respect of his secular power) should be debarred as sacrilegious from the
outward Church Discipline, that scarce can there be found any Impostor so
wicked, any Brawler so perverse, any Stage Player so impudent, who may not (if
he will dissemble) perform these Church-businesses, and sometimes too have
with applause performed them. We need not go farther then this Walachrian for
an example, who will not have us doubt but he has a long time performed these
spirirituall works of Discipline and Doctrine with authority and power, and
yet we see he is an impudent blasphemer of Magistrates, but this by the way.

I principally answer, that he is a manifest corrupter of Scripture, and a
blasphemous falsifier in saying that secular Magistrates, as secular, that is,
in respect of their secular power, are so ordained by God, and restrained, that
they only can and should meddle with carnal and secular things of this world,
and by no means with spiritual, and such as may of themselves procure the
peoples eternal salvation: which is both false and blasphemous against
Magistrates, and God himself. This he learned not of the Apostles, but from
the Masterbuilders of Romish Babylon; they (as I have often said) handle the
Scripture irreverently, taking out of them what they will, and adding to them
what they list: when it is said to Peter, when thou art converted confirm thy
Brethren, they expound this, (by adding) thou Peter alone should confirm all
thy Brethren, nor thou only, but all the Bishops of Rome also alone, who are
thy successors, shall have the same right to confirm all thy Brethren, that,
is, to judge, spoil, and pervert all Kings and Kingdoms of the world: In this
phrase spoke the old Romanists, which this new Papist has finely learned of
them; the Scripture speaks simply, that the Magistrate or higher power is
ordained by God to defend and maintain public peace and tranquillity. Romans 13.
It says also, we must obey for conscience sake, and that he is the rewarder
of them that do well, and that he bears the sword to punish the evil doers,
not discriminating whether it be secular, or Ecclesiastic, good or evil,
which is subject to this power. This Walachrian night-bird willing to free
himself in his Church-businesse from this power, he trumpets out with swelled
cheeks, that God has appointed Magistrates in his Word to worldly affairs
only, and that he contains them as such within the business of this life,
and of temporal tranquillity, yea that he has ordained, that they must not
meddle with the things of life eternal, nor aim at them, or properly procure
them, because it belongs not to them to bind the conscience: Is not this to
corrupt and wrest the Scripture? That we may see what a monstrous paradox this
is, I will show the absurdities thereof.

1. If God ordained the Civil Magistrate for intent, and with this
restriction, then it follows, that all Magistrates do well in neglecting,
despising, and not procuring what belongs to Worship and Religion: for he that
so performs his duty, as to follow the prescript and order that God has set
down, he performs his duty well, but the consequence is blasphemous and
absurd, Ergo.

2. If the Stilt-walkers opinion be right, then Magistrates are worthy of
praise and reward when they lay aside the care of Religion and are provident
only in the corporal things of this world, and profits of this life, such as
were the Gentiles, and wicked Emperors, and Kings, who had little or no care
of Religion, these followed Gods Ordinance exactly, but this consequence is
impious and blasphemy, Ergo.

3. If the Stilt-walker be in the right, then Josua, Solomon, Josias and all
good Princes who were careful to restore Religion, did evil, and deserved
punishment, because they went beyond their office, and Gods command, which was,
to forbear meddling with Religion, and to remain within the affairs of this
life; but the consequent is absurd and blasphemy, Ergo.

4. If the Stilt-walker be in the right, then the order and power of the
Magistrate is the most monstrous thing in the world. God makes and ordaines all
things for himself, even the wicked for the evil day, all are from God, by
God, and to God, nor is there any thing which has God for its author, that
has not for its chief and proper end Gods glory, which is no where more
advanced then when true Religion is advanced. Whence I gather, that the
Ordination of Magistrateship is most perverse, because God did expressly ordain
this, that it should not meddle with Religion, but contain it self within the
dunghills of the world; whence it will follow that Magistracy is not properly
ordained for Gods glory: but the consequent is blasphemous, Ergo,

5. If God has shut up the Magistrate within this end and prescription, then
he has strangely perverted his own order, where so often he has armed Kings
and Princes, and has commanded them that they should meddle with his Worship
and Religion: for this end he gave the Law to Moses, the Book of the Law to
Josua, and he has prescribed and commanded many other, that leaving their
secular affairs, they should be chiefly careful about matters of worship and
salvation, as we may see in one Solomon; all which God has done against the
first institution and ordination of the politic power, which inconstancy to
attribute to God is blasphemy: We must then rather ascribe giddiness to the
Stilt-walker, who obtrudes so false an Ordinance of God to men, concerning the
power and office of Magistrates.

Lastly, if it be Gods perpetual Law, that the Magistrate (as such) must not
meddle with Religion by himself and properly, then it is very absurd, that in
the Scripture so many contrary commands are found, such as Psalm. 2. and now O
Kings kiss the Son, etc. Esa. 40. Kings shall be nursing Fathers, etc. 1. Tim.
2.2. Paul bids us pray for wicked Kings, that under them we may live peaceably
with honesty and piety: whence it is apparent, that God is so far from
debarring Civil Magistrates from the care of Religion and piety, that on the
contrary he commands, and will have it their chief business to promote
Religion and his Worship.

Hence the Stilt-walker willing to award this blow, brings out his satchell of
distinctions, that with his canvasse smoke he may blind the Readers eyes; for
first he says, Paul does not show that the end of Magistracy is to look to the
good of the Church, because there he speaks of wicked Princes, who then
intended no such thing, but rather the contrary.

I answer, men do not always intend in their offices, the end prescribed by
God, yet on the contrary they often resist, and yet nevertheless it is true,
that they should follow the end prescribed by God, if they would do well; this
Paul says, to be tranquillity and piety, which those wicked Princes then
intended not, but they should have intended: and Christians ought to hope and
pray that they would intend it. If the Stilt-walker would understand the
matter, let him look on himself, he knows that he seldom intends the
salvation of men's souls in his Ministry, but rather maintenance, worldly
honor, and revenge on all them whom he thinks do not sufficiently regard his
sanctity, such are chiefly the Magistrates; yet I believe he will have no man
doubt but that the end and intent of his Church Discipline is properly the
salvation of souls, let him say the same of the Civil power.

At last he confesses that Paul here shows the end of the Magistrate
prescribed by God, to be the promotion of piety: but least he should seem to
yield any thing out of the Scripture to the Magistrate in sacred affairs, he
interposeth an army of distinctions; for he says, that this end is not
immediate, proximate, proper, which it may by its self produce, but only by
accident by the Ministers of the Church, and of piety, so that though the
Scripture should say a hundred times, that the end of Magistracy and the chief
intent of the Magistrate is the care of Religion, and advancing of salvation,
this will not a whit move the Stilt-walker, for he on the contrary will say,
that he has no right to these sacred affairs, but he must continue in his
proper end, which is the care of peace and worldly good things, but matters of
salvation are an improper end, remote by accident, for obtaining of which, he
of himself does nothing, but to procure that it may be done by Christians,
especially by Preachers, to wit, if he build fair Churches, bestow large
stipends upon Ministers, get good bread and generous wine for the Lords Supper,
the taste whereof may warm the Preachers spirits, if they afford good tables,
and plentiful feasts, and invite oftentimes the Preachers thither, that
shaking off the gravitie of mechanicke sobriety, their spirits may be made
fine and subtle, for pumping out the starrie spiritualities of their
Church Discipline: which things when they have fallen out heretofore according
to his desire. I doubt not but he has oftentimes said to himself of his
discipline, as the Pope once said of Christian Religion, How much honor and
profit has this fable of Christ brought us? How much honor and delights are
conferred upon us by this fable of the wonderful sanctity of
Church Discipline? The indignity of the thing, and the manifest corruption of
Scripture, have driven me against my will to break this jest upon the
VValachrian fained sanctity of their Church Discipline and Doctrine. I wish
that before he had abused this excellent place of Paul, with so many childish
subterfuges, he had read Calvin's Commentary upon this place, which for fashions
sake he so much esteems, that he calls him his Calvin: but here truly he
rejects and neglects him as a stranger: for rarities sake I will set down here
a few passages.

If then any care either of the public peace, or of piety, or of honesty move
us, let us remember that a care must be had of them (he means Magistrates) by
whose Ministry so many excellent things come to us. If one ask whether we
should pray for Kings, by whom we reap no such thing. I answer, that our wishes
tend to this, that being ruled by Gods Spirit, they would begin to be Ministers
of those good things which heretofore they have deprived us of, etc. For this
principle must be always remembered (Stilt-walker prick up your ears) that
God has ordained Magistrates as well for the preservation of religion, as of
public peace and honesty, no otherwise then the earth is ordained for
procreation of food. Therefore as we praying for our daily bread, beseech God
that he would fructify the earth with his blessing; so in those former
bounties we ought to look upon the ordinary means, which he has in his
providence set up, etc.

Besides, let Princes and all Magistrates be warned here of their duty; for it
is not sufficient, if in rendering to every man his due, they suppress all
injuries, and cherish peace, except also they study to promote religion, and by
honest discipline to compose men's manners. For David does not exhort them in
vain to kiss the Son; Esaias 49.
nor does Esaias in vain call them nursing fathers of the Church. Therefore let
them not flatter themselves, if they neglect to afford their help in
maintaining divine worship.

As these passages are notable and godly, so they are diametrically opposite to
this Walachrians fictions. So far is he from denying the care of religion to
belong to the Magistrate properly, proximately by it self (as the Stilt-walker
prates) that he rather shows him to be principally ordained by God, to take
care of religion, and that not remotely, improperly, and by accident, but
properly and by himself; except this Walachrian Papist will persuade us, that
it belongs to the earth, improperly, remotely, and by accident to produce
fruits; so that if we weigh this matter with an even hand, we shall find that
Calvin ascribes more, and greater parts to the Magistrate, in promoting
religion and salvation, then to the Ministers themselves. Romans 13.
For these are only considered as husbandmen, and sowers of the seed, but the
Magistrates as the earth. But as we know the earth is the more proper and
nearer cause of corn, which receives the seed into its bosom, some, and
ripens it, then the husbandmen, who rest after they have sowed, and removed
what may hinder the growth thereof; even so Calvin either wrote unwisely, or
else he has made the civil Magistrate the prime and chief efficient cause of
religion, and procuring of salvation. I have been somewhat large about the end
of the civil and Ecclesiastic power, that I might refell all the
Stilt-walkers fooleries: he truly deals no otherwise with Magistrates, then
Circe in Homer did with Ulysses his Fellows, whom though they were other ways
prudent men, yet she is said to have changed them, with her singing and rod,
into hogs, so that they could not lift up toward heaven their brissly necks;
and this she did to make them her slaves. Even so this Impostor, that he might
reign alone in his Ecclesiastic Kingdom, by his preaching rod endeavors to
make beasts of Magistrates, that they may believe, the care of heaven and
salvation belongs nothing to them, but that it exceeds their capacity: and that
they have abundantly discharged their office, if they have thought only, with
Martha, of corporal, earthly, and culinarie things; and, like hogs, wallow
perpetually in things fading, and only fit for the belly, leaving high and
heavenly matters to Churchmen.

The third difference between the civil and Ecclesiastic power he places in
the means which they use; which he feignes to be most different, and as far
as heaven is from earth.

The power of the Magistrate, says he, exercises its judgment after a carnal
way, by a corporal sword, by a force external, coactive, and armed; but for
that of the Church, after a spiritual manner, by censure, reproof, suspension
and excommunication. And elsewhere he calls these means sanctified and
spiritual: so here again, he considers his Church-businesse and government
as heavenly and spiritual, but the secular, as carnal and earthly.

I answer: Here Apollonius fills his bag-pipes of lies again, that he may
adorn the fringes of his Church Government. For both the Members of the
antecedent are false and fallatious; that the falsehood, may be found out, I
will ask whether he thinks the means which the Magistrate uses (which
wrongfully he calls carnal) to be quite void of spirituality, so that they
neither have nor can have it? Again, whether the Ecclesastick means (chiefly
those of the Walachrian Church Government) be such as have no corporality or
carnality in them? If he affirms that, and denies this, sense and experience
will easily convince him of falsehood. As for secular means, imagine they are
nothing else but rods, wracks, halters, and swords, all corporal (which is
false) yet it will not follow thence, that those means are merely corporal and
carnal, for they may have much spirituallity joined with them: such
accordietly the Ordination of God, and Christ the Mediator, who as a
spiritual King, arms them with a spiritual command, and in that respec^^ Gal
(...) says he makes them his spiritual and holy Ambassadors. Again, these
means are much changed in regard of the use, for at that which pre^ecds not
from true faith, is polluted and ^^^^all; soq^^ which hid don't, by truly
faithful men puts on a far other manner of sanctity and spirituality, so that
the sword of reformed and pious ^agistrates, may have in it much more
spirituality and sanctity, because it is exercised in reverence and fear of
God, which the sword of wicked men cares not for.

Lastly, the end and intention of the Agent, does much change the nature of the
work; whence we may wonder that every where the Stilt-Walker does promiscuously
consider pious and impious Magistrates in the right of handling sacred things,
for there is great odds whether he use the sword, to establish idolatry and
false worship, as the wi^^ed does, or on the countrary, to premote the time
worship and salvation of souls, which is the intent of the pious Magistrate;
he that sees not this difference, he must needs confess that he does as
justly use the sword who defends murthesers and wicked men, and ^ppresseth good
men, as he who punishes (...), and defends good men; these things thus
considered do show, that the secular me^^es, even the sword it self, are not so
carnal as that they have no spiritualitie mixed with them, but they become
spiritual, in the Author, subject and end; if Apollonius understand^^n this I
will make it clear by the example of Christ and his Apostles; he will not I
hope deny, but they used in the Church spiritual and body means; but the
sacred History teaches that they often used corporal means and equivalently
the sword; Mat. 21. John 8.
as when Christ whipped out of the Temple the buyers and sellerse, overthrew
the tables, and purged the Temple: When he made himself an ontward Judge of the
Adulteress, whom he had not absolved, if she had had just aquasers, when with
his Word he laid ^at on the gro^nd the South^ers that (...) to exprochend him;
when Peter in a moment flew Animins and S^^ita, at his foot; whem they struck
Simon and E^y^^ with blinll ^^^e; when Paul gave up Hymene^s and Ale^^^^^ to
Satan so be vened in the flesh. Were not these caternall and corporal means
equivalent to the sword? For what can tortures of the (...), but (...) and hill
the body? so that it is most certain that Christ and his Apostles used a
coercive power, by corporal means equivalent to the sword. Now I hold this
Walachrian Rat in a precipice, for either he ought to say that Christ and his
Apostles used corporal and not spiritual means, and consequently evil in
building of the Church, which is blasphemy, or else that those external and
corporal means of the sword may be spiritual and ecclesiastic, which he
has now denied; there is no chinck then left to escape thorough, except what
the Pope affords him.

He uses prison, sword, arms, poison, and all carnal means, yet he denies
them to be carnal, but spiritual, because they are used by him who is most
spiritual; which though it be mere mockery, yet being armed with main power,
he so aws men that they dare not whisper against him; if this Walachrian Papist
had equal power with the Pope, though being guilty of so much wickedness does
now execrate and fear this carnal sword of the Magistrate, he would in a
short time make use of prisons, tortures whips, and the sword, to fulfill his
own mind, which notwithstanding he would quickly honor with the name of
spirituality, because he that uses them is Ecclesiastic and spiritual, and
that against ecclesiastic men and Christians.

Before I leave the first member, I will add this also, that all the means
which the Magistrate uses are not whips, tortures, and swords: he oftentimes
uses laws, admonitions, reprooffs, and threatenings, which we doubt not but
the Stilt-Walker has felt sometimes, by reason of his turbulent spirit, which
experience shows is oftentimes of such force, that those whom Churchmen by a
hundred reprooffs could not curb and reform, the Magistrate by one check has
amended; so now it is apparent that Apollonius is every way malicious and
injurious against his Magistrates, in calling the means, which they use
contemptuously, corporal, external, carnal.

Now let us see the ecclesiastic means, he bragges every where that they are
merely spiritual; but he lies egregiously, for we have seen Christ and his
Apostles, the most divine builders of the Church, to have used lawfully many
corporal means, for though it be certain that they used spiritual means
for building of the Church, yet they did not take them so precisely, that all
must be spiritual, nothing corporal, which they may use, for they used common
water to baptize, bread and wine in the Supper, oil to anoint, and many other
things, which are corporal and natural, to which notwithstanding were added a
spirituality, and relative sanctity from the use, the Stilt-Walker elsewhere
out of his Parker discourses so spiritually of the eccles^astick mulistry,
that he scarce leaves a hair of (...) in it This i^ done (says he) by gifts,
and the Author of our spirits, for the edification of our spirits and souls,
by spiritual a^^^es, the Word and ^^cramen^s, and by a spiritual way of
working by the (...) spirit. If this Night-bird could perswadeous that all
these (...) found in the modern Church Discipline, at they were in the ancient
Apostolical, yet he should not persuade us us that there is no corporality; or
carnality in his ecclesiastic means. For Paul among the spiritual means of
his worship, numbers the red Sea and Cloud, (...) Is^uelits were baptized, as
also the Manna and w^^ed that flowed out of the rock^ which he calls spiritual
meat and drink^^ asliany should go to persuade that that Sea, Cloud, Manna, and
Rock, were altogether spiritual, and had in them nothing carnal or natural,
because they are called spiritual; we should think he were almost a fool,
because not only men, but greater and smaller beasts also went through that
Sea, did eat of the Manna, and drink of the Water out of the Rock (...) that
here again he player the Cretian in the Papist^ dialect, and takes simply what
is spoken respectively; to wit, because in Church means and Discipline there is
something spiritual vergo, they are totally spiritual: and in them nothing
cardal. The matter might have some show oft^^^ if he spoke of the Church
Discipline in the Ap^stles time, of which only that is to be mean, which he
cites out of his Parker. But he is there faulty, ^n that he vapors such great
matters of his modern C^^rch g^vernemt, which he knows to be so corrupted, that
it may he turly said, what the Prophet says of the worship in his (...) and
thy Wins is mixed with mitter, if Apolleni^^ should be (...) to a feast, where
looking to drink Theological (...), should receive from his Host wine mixed
with much water or piss, would he not complain of wrong done him, and of his
cheasing Host, who thrust upon him such stoffe for good (...) after the same
(...) does this Night-bird cheat Christians, (...) of this corrupted Church
government, with that (...) the Apost^es; for his preaching is fallible, yea in
many things ^uga^orie, lying, and blasphemous: the use of the Sacraments,
chiefly of the Supper is vendible, and serviceable to humane affections;
oftentimes he (...) them to the impure, and denies them to the worthy; his
preaching key is rustie, and most unfit to open or (...) heaven against them,
to whom God faith (in is open, and opens it to them, against whom God says
it is s^^t; (...) Key, such is he affects, is nothing but an incroaching
indirectly upon men's fame and estares, and the corturer of the conscience in
simple and superstitious men; as for his legislative power, it is nothing else
but a spring of novelties, childish scruples, and feminary of strife or law
suits; so that what one approves, the other reproves; what is ratified to day,
is abrogated to morrow, and so one suit begets another always. For because
these Walachrian whirlewinds have no certain stars to direct them, or rules
of equity and justice, which they may follow in, working, but do all things at
their pleasure, so that he shall carry it, who with fraud, clamours, and
pertinacie, draws most votes to him: hence it falls out very seldom, (as we
see also among Papists) that truth and equity prevails amongst them but rather
opinion, which depending on the whirligig of men's dispositions and perverse
affections with which they boil, its no wonder (as experience shows) if out
of this legislative dependencie nothing proceed, but what is prejudicial to
the Churches peace directly, to the Civil indirectly. Lastly, their vocation,
as it is at this day, is not only humane, but also if the Walachrian be
considered, as the Stilt-walker uses it, it is Simonaicall and defiled with
much fraud and perverseness; and to speak freely, the Stilt-walker has no
reason to upbraid Magistrates with the carnality of their means, because he is
forced to confeesse, that there is no less carnality in his Ecclesiastic
means: and indeed in the end and intention of spirituality, it yields to the
Civil, which though they use corporal means, yet there is found in them such
as directly tends to Gods worship and man's salvation. In the Stilt-walker, and
such like vermin, there is never any direct intent to Gods worship or man's
salvation, but properly to maintenance, worldly honor, and a fulfilling of
their humors, in such as obey or disobey them.

He scrapes together many things out of certain circumstances, which befell
not to the Ecclesiastic, but to the Civil power; of which, if these things be
true that he says, he may constitute as formal a difference between the
Ecclesiastical and Civil power, as he can make between a Crow and a Swan, out
of their blackness and whiteness; yea between one Hen and another; for an
accident can make no essential difference, especially such a one as may be
common to both subjects.

The Civil power (says he) may be in a child, wom^^, or wicked man: it may be
also (hereditary) all which cannot befall the Ecclesiastic power, hence he
concludes that there is a formal difference between both these powers. I
answer, if thence a formal or genericall difference should arise, then
doubtless the Kingdoms of France and England should differ formally, because
there only men, here women also reign: so these two Kingdoms should
generically differ, from the Kingdom of Poland, because this is elective, and
not hereditary, but those are successive: this fiction should have some show,
if he spoke of such accidents as are not to be found in Ecclesiastic power;
but most of them are found in Ecclesiastics, those great Ecclesiastic Levits
from whom he is still borrowing his sanctity, were they not born Levits, and
being children they had right to this sanctity? Samuel, the children of the
Prophets, Jeremie, Christ, John and Timothy, were not hindered from the
Church Service because they were children, or as yet very young, being
furnished with gifts for that service; it is not the infancy of years, but of
knowledge and piety, that debars men from Church-functions, in which how much
Apollonius is defective, this his unsavory writing shows, who being now many
years a Churchman, yet is indeed but an old boy, who has not lived long,
Seneca.
but has been long. By the Prophetesses Anna, Mary, and others, it appears,
that God has not altogether debarred women from Church Affairs, as this
trifler persuades; but when he says that Gentiles and wicked men, could
perform civil offices well he says nothing; for in the end of the world many
shall say, have we not prophesied in thy name, and yet Christ will say to
them, I know you not, Apollonius knows that there are many preachers who are
impious and hypocrites, whom notwithstanding he keeps not off from
Ecclesiastic functions, why then should Magistrates, be kept off? he has much
more such stuff, which I pass by, as being of no validity.

His chief and most beautiful argument, which he often delights in is this:
Ecclesiastic power and government is heavenly, because it is called the
Kingdom of Heaven, it is not of this world, Mat. 13. Joh. 18.13. 2 Timothy 24.
^or Christ says, my Kingdom is not of this world: lastly, no man that
warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, hence he concludes
that the civil government is altogether distant from Ecclesiastical, because
that is earthly and of this world, and they who serve the commonwealth,
entangle them selves with the affairs of this life; yea, (as we saw before)
like hogs they should wallow in them alone; I answered before somewhat by the
way, to this fiction, now I will more narrowly look into it, for both the
members of the antecedent is false and fallacious. First, I deny that visible
Churches are the Kingdom of Heaven; for then the Church of Middleburg, should
be Heaven indeed, which is False, as may appear by this mark, in that Christ
says men do not marry, nor give in marriage, in that Kingdom: but in that
Apollonian heaven of Middleburg there are marriages daily. I confess that in
the visible Church, men are instructed and taught concerning the Kingdom of
heaven, that at length they may obtain it, which business (metonymically) is
called the Kingdom of Heaven: but to conclude thence that the visible Church
is properly the Kingdom of Heaven, or that the things thereof are heavenly, is
two childish and repugnant to sense: then certainly the Stilt-walker the
Metropolitan of the Walachrian Church, should be very heavenly, whom yet by
these his patched pieces we see to be very earthly; so that the leprosy of
the earth, sticks not only close to him, but is also very familiar to most
Kings of this heaven; that if that heavenly Kingdom were not contained within
compass by the civil earthly Kingdom, those Heavenly Kings would quickly
destroy one another, so that I may truly say, that the earthly Kingdom
sustaines that heavenly Kingdom, or else it would fall to the ground.

Another fraud of his is in the other place, where Christ says, my Kingdom is
not of this world, Christ was asked by Pilate, if he were a King? he confesses
that he was a King, but not of this world, that i^ he would not exercise his
Kingdom in this world, he adds a reason, if my Kingdom were such, my
soldiers would fight for me, whence it appears, that Christ spoke plainly,
because he said that he had such a Kingdom, which he did not exercise upon
the earth, as openly and properly he did not, but in Heaven when he sat down
at Gods right hand.

The Stilt-walker thinks that by this Kingdom of Christ is to be understood
the government of the visible Church, which if true then Christ had answered
Pilate intricately and captiously, because so taking it, Christ's Kingdom had
been properly in the world, and a part of the world, yea in this Kingdom he
had his soldiers, and in process of time he got more: for Kings and Emperors
were made the defenders of this Kingdom and Church of Christ, although then I
should yield, that in some respect, the title of Christ's Kingdom and of Heaven
belong to the visible Church, yet it were absurd in this place so to take it;
whereas it is here absolutely denied; that this Kingdom is of this world; but
the visible Church, chiefly that which the Walachrian devises, is in the
world, and of the world, and is too full of worldly corruptions.

And there is no less fraud in corrupting that place of Paul, which he
preposterously cites with the Pontificians; no man warring to God, does
entangle himself with secular cares, the words properly sound thus, no man
that warreth, intangles himself with the affairs of this life, that he may
please his General: in which words the Apostle compares, to soldiers, the
Preachers of the Word, and also what he says that Elders who labor in the
Word which consecrate themselves to the Ministry of the Word, ought not to
entangle themselves in the affairs of this life, to wit, in merchandising,
husbandry, and such like, so that they entangle themselves, and be so carried
away with the business and sweetness of them, as with Demas, to forsake their
station for the love of this present world. This is the plain sense of that
place in Paul, how perversely it is corrupted, I will now show; out of this
place he concludes, that it is altogether unlawful and unseemly, for a
Minister of the Word to care for the affairs of this world, or any way to
meddle with them; which not only is repugnant to Scripture; but is also a mere
Popish fiction: Paul indeed would not have preachers entangle themselves, that
is, altogether involve themselves in secular business, but not to touch them
at all, or totally to forbear them, he commands no where. Yet the practice of
Christ and of his Apostles show the contrary; for I will ask whether fishing,
be a secular work of this life? I think no man will deny it; but the Apostles,
for the three years together, that they were Christ's disciples, did still
exercise their fishing, yea they went to fishing after Christ's Resurrection:
and who knows whether they did not fish after the Holy Ghost was sent? truly
Paul himself after he had long exercised his Apostleship, at Corinth, whilst
he was a preacher with Aquila, he exercised his mechanical trade of making
tents. If Paul understood his law, as this Walachrian wrests it, then he was a
manifest breaker of his own law; therefore it is a Popish fiction, which this
new Papist has borrowed from the old ones; when he interprets these words so
as if it were altogether unlawful for preachers to meddle with secular
business: this error in length of time has made Preachers idle, and dainty,
yea it occasioned Antichrist; for rich Christians considering with themselves,
that the task of preaching was a difficult business, and required a whole
man, by degrees they furnished them with so many things out of their own
estates, that they would have them be altogether free from the care of things
necessary, belonging to their food or livelihood. For which end they built
Monastries and cloystures, and endowed them with great revenues, in which the
preaching Monks might live plesantly and commodiously, being free from all
cares, that so they might the more freely give themselves to their studies.
This institution at first though worldly, yet was not evil, but in process of
time covetousness possessed the minds of the Clergy, that like spiritual
harpyes they still affected and craved for more, until their covetousness
grew to that height, that the Pope alone became richer then all the Kings of
the earth: from which vice at last proceeded pride, then lasinesse, and neglect
of theological studies, and lastly all kind of luxury, so that these
Monasteries became brothell-houses, and swine-styes of Sodomites; all which
sprung up, out of the misunderstanding of that place, which now the
Stilt-walker goes about to wrest against the Magistrate; for because he thinks
he can by these delude ignorant people, by persuading them that it is
unlawful and unseemly for preachers to meddle with secular affairs, hence he
concludes, as in a round, that therefore it is unlawful for secular men to
handle Church Matters: for he faines them to be hogs, only addicted to
worldly things, and of this life; in which they are still entangled: thus not
only does he injure godly Magistrates, but impudently patroniseth his
Ecclesiastics; for as it is known that many godly Magistrates have been very
moderate both in mannaging of secular affairs, and also matters belonging to
Religion very zealous, so experience teaches, that not a few preachers having
neglected and contemned their duty in preaching have been so entangled with
worldly business, that as at this day it must not offend Christian ears, if
some preachers, having broke their estates with Merchandising and taking up
money upon use, have cheared godly Christians by turning bankerupts; which
shows that this Walachrian is an impudent vermin, who under pretense of
avoiding secular affairs, puts so great a difference between Civil
Magistrates and Churchmen, seeing he is convicted by these Walachrian examples
and his own conscience, that there is nothing which busy Churchmen more
affect, then the affairs of this world.

Like to this is another, which he is always prating of The civil Power is
Monarchical, the Ecclesiastical should be always Aristocratical: ergo Civ^^
Magistrates cannot rule the Church. This argument also is made up of diverse
lies, for it is false that the Civil Government is always Monarchical, the
Government of our Country is Aristocraticall; such also is that of the
Venetians, Helvetians, and others: another lie is, that the Church Government
is always Aristocraticall, because under Heli, Samuel, Macchabees, and others;
it was Monarchical: yea in the New Testament it was not still Aristocratical,
but oftentimes Monarchical. For I ask, when Christ lived upon the earth, and
ruled the Church, whether the Church Government was not then Monarchical?
Doubtless it was, if ever it was. Again, when Paul alone was at Antioch, and
in Syria, was not then the government of that Church Monarchical? For who was
to be compared with so great an Apostle? Lastly, when John the Apostle was
alone in the world, (for he lived longest) had not then the Church on earth a
notable Monarch? Surely, if such a Doctor at this day could be found in the
world, he should be as it were the Monarch of the Church, and worthy to whom
the whole Christian world should rise and give honor.

Whence the Pope makes no bad consequence, in calling himself the head and
Monarch of the whole Church, and not Kings and Princes; because they rise and
give honor to him: if it be true what he brags, that he is Peter's successor,
and endowed with the gifts of infallibility, as well as Peter. But because
experience teaches, that he wants all Peter's gifts, chiefly that of
infallibility; and on the contrary, to be nothing else but a monster, and load
of all vices: hence it is, that he is a mere Impostor, and a mocker of
Christianity; and Princes are miserably deluded, in yielding so much to so
unworthy and wicked a man. All then that the Stilt-walker babbles for Oracles,
are mere lies. But this I will add, that though Christ and his Apostles were
by right Monarchs of the Church, yet they still ruled the Church with that
moderation, that their government seemed rather Aristocraticall, then
monarchical; so that hence it appears, there is no necessity that he should
always rule monarchically, who has the right of Monarchy; for he may use it
aristocratically. If this be true of Ecclesiastics, why should it not also
hold in civil Princes, that though they be Monarchs, yet they may handle
Church Matters in an Aristocraticall way, as oftentimes Kings do. And so the
Kingdom of the Church shall not be monarchical, though a Monarch live in it,
ruling Aristocratically.

He ascribes much strength to this Ram, which he is still showing, as if it had
exceeding great Horns; whereas indeed it is a horn-lesse calfe: The power
formally Ecclesiastic depends immediately from Christ the Mediator, the
Churches husband, who gave Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, par. 1. p. 37.
and Pastors to his Church; but not Magistrates, Ephesians. 4. And has placed this
power in the Church, Mat. 18. But Magistrates are not the Church: whence he
gathers, that the Magistrates office is neither requisite nor belonging to the
Church, and consequently that it appertains no ways to them to use the
Churches power. He parted this one Argument into diverse; I have gathered his
fooleries together in one bundle, that I may fling them down together.

First we must note, that this is an old, and oftentimes refuted device of
his, in persuading us that Ecclesiastic power has for its author Christ the
Mediator and Spouse of his Church, but not the Civil Power, I have showed
before, and now will more at large demonstrate, that this is a most notorious
lie.

His principal Argument is, par. 1. p 37
that while Christ lived on the earth, he did all Church functions either by
himself, or by his Apostles; but did not meddle with the Magistrates office,
but refused it, and prohibited it to his Apostles: whence Anabaptist-like he
concludes, that Magistracy has neither Christ for its Author, not belongs to
the Church: all which are a mere heap of lies.

For first I ask, whence learned he that no Function is required for the
Church till the end of the world, but what Christ must discharge, either by
himself, or by his Disciples living upon the earth? The Scripture says no
such thing, but is the mere fiction of Apollonius: otherwise let him tell me,
when did Christ or his Apostles perform the Precentors part in the Church?
because Martyr doubts whether in the Apostolical Church, there was any use of
public singing, which we borrowed at best from the Jewish Church: many
offices ceased in the Churches upon the Apostles departure, to supply which,
Necessity has gathered together many things, and man's industry has found out
without any sin, or blemish, if Antichrist had not corrupted all with
multitudes.

His other lie is that Christ and his Apostles did not here discharge the
Magistrates office; that Fiction I have already refelled: for they used a
co-active external power, equivalent to the sword. Christ with a whip purged
the Temple; Mat. 21. John 8.
he suffered the judgment concerning the Adulteress to be referred to him;
with his word he cast to the ground the Soldiers that came to apprehend him,
and chiefly when on the day of Palms, sitting upon an Ass he rid to Jerusalem
in a Princely but humble pomp, suffering the acclamations of the People, and
their garments to be spread in his way, Mat. 21.
as if he had been a King; which is so manifest, that Matthew adds Zacharies
Prophecy to be fulfilled, Behold thy King comes to thee, meek, etc. So the
Apostles inflicted in the Church corporal punishments, as death, blindness,
etc. All which evince, that however they despised and avoided the pride and
earthly pomp of Civil government, yet the office it self they discharged in
the Church when necessity required.

But (says he) Christ being exalted, gave to the Church, gifts and offices
necessary for it, among which the office of the Magistrate is not mentioned,
whence he concludes, that this is not requisite fore difying of the Church. I
answer, among these offices mention is made of Governors, 1 Cor. 12. and of
Rulers, Romans 12. which Calvin and Aretius on those places show to have been
censures of life and manners, supplying the Magistrates office. Lastly, suppose
that in those places no mention is made of Magistracy, did he therefore not
ordain it? Yea Peter did plainly institute this, and chiefly Paul, Romans 13. and
1 Timothy 2. as I have at large showed before; neither needs he tell us that
Christ himself gave these offices by himself, but Magistracy he commended
only by the Apostles; this is but a frivolous cavil, for he sent the Apostles
only immediately, then the Apostles instituted the other functions, and after
them Timothy, Titus and others: whence it appears, that Christ the Mediator
being exalted, is no less the author of Magistracy, then of Church offices;
because that by a most famous Elogy of the same Apostle is ratifyed in the name
and authority of Christ exalted, by whose government alone, now all things in
heaven, earth, and under the earth are ordained and ruled, as I have often
showed.

He objects that these offices and gifts were given to the Church, but not
Magistracy.

I answer, that these were given indeed to the Church, or in the Church, as it
is said, 1 Cor. 12. but Ephesians. 4. the Apostle says, that they were given to
men, using a general word. so Paul gave and instituted to the whole world the
office of Magistracy, but under them also to the Church: because he makes him
to have the charge of every soul, except he will say that Churchmen want
fowls: whence it follows, that Paul has also subjected the Church to the
Civil powers, so that she must be by them defended in good things, and
punished in evil. What wise man then will deny that Christ has instituted
Magistracy, and has not given it to the Church? when as he by Paul has
ordained the Magistrate for his alone Legate upon earth, to whom alone he will
have all souls be subject, and therefore Ecclesiastics also, and that for
conscience sake; by whose sword and authority he will have the Church defended
in good things: all these are so clear in this place of Paul, and in other
Scriptures, that by no means can they be darkened.

I know this Divinity does not please the Stilt-walker, who is possessed with
papisticall fury, that the Magistrates office is not Ecclesiastical, that is,
necessary for the edification and conservation of the Church; yet he rather
places this office without the Church, not within or in it, par. 1. p. 24.
because that phrase is too ambiguous to him, and repugnant to Divine right;
and therefore places the Magistrates office only about the Church, or
Churchmen; so that he speaks no other ways of Magistrates then Heccius and
other Cornuted Asses of Luther, who coming to the Conference at Worms, was
not presently admitted into the full Assembly, where the whole Quire was of
holy Churchmen, but was lead first apart into a private closet, which these
Cornuted Beasts said was well done, and according to Scripture: for it is
written, Without shall be Dogs and Witches. Not much more reverently does this
Walachrian prate of godly Magistrates, whom every where he fasteneth to the
cares of this world, as carnal men, but elevates the Church, and Churchmen
above the world, even to the Skies; but these are mere chimera's: the
Scripture on the other side does so extol Magistracy, as a thing perpetual in
the Church, and so necessary, that it cannot be parted from her; and without
this she cannot subsist, but must wither; no otherwise then corn that wants
earth, as Calvin speaks, which I will show hereafter more at large.

He prates every where that the Church under the Apostles, and at other times
wanted the civil Magistrate; but these are Lies which I have already refuted,
and will hereafter refute more: and if this impossibility should fall out, that
the Church were totally destitute of civil government; yet it should not cease
to be an office in the Church, and as it were a part necessary for the
constitution thereof: for as a body that has lost a foot, remains yet
without that foot but lame, being destitute of a necessary part: so the Church
may consist without Magistracy but not long, and that with much difficulty; for
presently there would arise Anarchy, and every one would do as he listed; which
because Apollonius does what he can to bring into his City, under hope of a new
Popery: hence arise so many railing devises, by which he endeavors to hiss
out the Magistrates, as mere worldly men, that they must not meddle with
Church-businesse, how ever the matter be, because the Church has often wanted
godly Teachers, Sacraments, and other things requisite for her; I might also as
well infer that these belong not to the Church, but are accidents
circumjacent; which were most absurd to the Stilt-walker.

Perhaps he will object if this were true, then Christ had made the Churches
power imperfect and lame, which must depend from an outward civil power; but
this is repugnant with Mat. 18. tell the Church, where he has furnished her
with full power.

I answer: That all these are Jesuiticall fictions which they have devised for
their Hierarchy, and which he has borrowed from them; for first I deny when
Christ said, tell the Church, that he understood by these words, as if he had
armed Churchmen (being discriminated from Laymen) with full power of
exercising Government among themselves, excluding the Magistrate: For I said
before, that by the word Church is understood in Scripture, any kind of
meeting, whether merely Ecclesiastic, or Ecclesiastic and Civil, yea any
tumultnary Assembly called together to determine business, Act. 19. Act. 15.
and oftentimes the whole body of the faithful in opposition to their Rulers,
sometimes the body of the Church with their Rulers, but never (for ought I know)
the Rulers separate from the body. Now here Apollonius must needs go to
consult with the Delphick three-footed stool, that he may divine to us what
Christ meant here by the Church, seeing he did not define it in this place, nor
do we see it elsewhere explained in Scripture.

Apollonius doubtless with the Papists having a watchful eye over his
merchandise, rather understands it of the Church-Rulers; for this is all his
care, that this wonderful Ecclesiastic power, by many windings and turnings,
being snatched from the body of the Church, and chiefly the Magistrate, may be
settled only in the Governors as in the Center, that is, in the Consistory;
and because Deacons are only positively Churchmen, as bellows in a pair of
Organs, Elders only comparatively, as the pipes which of themselves sound not:
hence at last the whole power ends in Preachers superlatively Ecclesiastic, as
if they were Masters of the music, and so sing and play upon that
Ecclesiastic Organ, that every pipe shall yield no other sound then what
pleases these Organists. Thus the old and new Papists do play the
Philosophers upon this there, tell the Church, as if Christ had meant tell the
Pope, or the Clergy, or the Preachers of the Gospel, but of this never a word
in Matthew; yea it is contrary, for Christ being so understood should have
named a Judge who was neither then, nor long after in the world: What an
absurdity had it been for Christ to have said to the godly, that you may free
your consciences from strife with your brother, go to the Consistory, or
Church-Rulers, which were not then, nor to be in many years after. Whence it is
more likely that Christ by the Church meant there a Judge or Arbitrator in
controversies indefinitely, and (as I said elsewhere) without any express
quality; that is, such a one as they could repair to, whether consisting of
Ecclesiastics and Civil Magistrates, as the Sanhedraham was then, or only of
Ecclesiastics as afterward under the Apostles, or of Civil Magistrates, as
was in the Church after Magistrates became Christians, members, keepers, and
nursing fathers of the Church. Hence we see how much the Stilt-walker is
deceived in thinking Magistrates to be excluded from Church-affaires in this
place, because of the word Church, seeing in the most significations of this
word Church, the Magistrate is included only one that excludes him which is
not only devised, but is not plainly expressed by Christ; how vain then is
this his argument, wherein he so much prides himself! Christ gave this power
to the Church, but the Magistrate is not the Church, for if he deludes us
under the collective name of the Church, represented or representing, then we
grant that the Magistrate is not the Church: but so neither is Apollonius the
Church, except he will call himself the Pope; and so this power belongs no more
to Apollonius then to the Magistrate, but if he speak of the Church as it is
indefinitely used by Christ, then he cannot make it appear that Ministers
alone are more comprehended under this word, then Magistrates alone, because
both are parts of the Church, and the Magistrate in respect of his judicatory
power the more excellent part.

The other error is, that out of these words tell the Church, the old Papists
beat out by a strange paraphrase the whole building of the huge papal
Hierarchy, as if they would show that the Pope is Judge of all controversies
between Kings, the donor and distributer of Lands, the Monarch of all Monarchs,
the infallible censurer and poler of all Nations, the dispenser of all
wickedness in others and in himself: all this they think Christ established
in these words, tell the Church.

The Stilt-walker instructed in the same Catechism, out of these words tell
the Church, does almost draw out every thing, to wit that the Magistrates must
not meddle with Church Matters, and that they are not within but about and
without the Church, that they have no power of Vocation, making of Laws, or
decisive censuring of Ministers, but that all these belong solely to Ministers,
who in this are free, and immediately depending on Christ and no way depending
on the Magistrate, so that if they should fail in their life and manners, yet
the Magistrate if he be a pious son must not presently rise up against the
Minister his Father, but he must first wink at his vices, and then (except in
some few cases) must not punish him, but only he must procure that Churchmen,
as being specially holy, punish the specially holy Minister, which is as likely
that these Walachrians will do, as if you should make Elephants clear one
another of their Leprofie. These and much more does he conclude out of these
three words, tell the Church; but indeed this is to make a beam of a mote, I
rather say, that Christ in this place ordained nothing else, but that a brother
who is willing to be reconciled to his brother which is unwilling, should and
may (for ending the controversy) implore the Churches help, and in this case
the Church ought to help him. But what I pray, is this for grounding that huge
Hierarchy of the Church, that she must have absolute power of consecrating,
excommunicating, commanding, and such like? for, if the words following, if he
hear not the Church let him be to thee as a Publican and Heathen, ordain the
right of excommunication, then Christ bestows it not there on the Church, but
on the brother who desires to be reconciled: For, he does not say, let the
Church account or declare that brother for a Publican and Heathen, but let him
be to thee a Publican and Heathen, etc. that is, as a brother thou may esteem
him for a Publican, etc. if this signifies to excommunicate, then Christ gave
the power of excommunication not to the Church, but to every private brother,
that I wonder so proud a Divine should so carelessly weigh his own laws, out
of which he draws so many privileges.

One lie more there rests in this Argument to be showed, in saying that
Ministers are immediately subject to Christ and depend from him: whence he
concludes, that they are not subject to the Magistrate, but this is a mere
fiction, for I will ask, how shall we know this, for I never read it in
Scripture? he will say, that Christ is the immediate Anthor of the Church
power, because he gave the keys to the Church, he said tell the Church, and he
gave Apostles, Prophets, etc. out of all which it is manifest, that the office,
or (as he calls it) the Church power is immediately ordained by Christ. I
confess, this is truly said of the Church functions, and it is no less true
of the civil power, which Christ the Mediator also immediately established,
saying, give to Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is Gods, especially
when by Paul he has declared Magistrates to be his Legates, and has subjected
to them the Ministers for conscience sake, so that now the Civil power depends
as well immediately from Christ as the Ecclesiastic: But how will he hence
prove, that all who use this power, that is Ministers and Preachers, are
immediately subject to Christ, and depend from him? This is a Popish fiction
and an old cheat, the falsehood whereof any may quickly perceive; for if all do
immediately depend on Christ who discharge any office which Christ or God has
immediately ordained, then all Magistrates, Fathers, Masters, Deacons, Readers,
and whosoever exercise any function ordained by God, must depend on him
immediately, and therefore shall be under the command of none, in respect of
that function, but of God or Christ. Which fiction the Stilt-walker will find
in himself; for if all Preachers be subject to none but to Christ, because of
their free Ecclesiastic power which they exercise, how will their dependencie
consist, and the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets? For, he
confesses, that the brothers are subject to the Consistory, this to the
Classis, the Classis to the Synod, and the lesser Synod to the greater, and so
in infinitum. I know Apollonius teaches this only pro forma, because he says
elsewhere, that he is only tied to the authority of the Synod as humane: But
here I hold him fast entangled in his own gin, for either it is false, that
Ministers in regard of their Ecclesiastic functions are subject only to
Christ immediately, or else it is true, that the Consistory, Classis, and
Synods are nothing else but Christ himself; but this last is blasphemy; Ergo,
the first is most false, it is truly ridiculous to say, that he is only subject
to Christ immediately, who is subject to so many, of which none is Christ. So
we see this Walachrian is carried every where with a Popish giddiness. Whence
now I conclude, if it be no ways against the immediate and fictitious
dependencie of Preachers from Christ, that they are subject to so many
Churchmen, why should this be a hindrance from being subject to the Civil
Magistrate? he will say (I suppose) that this subjection is of another court,
to wit carnal and altogether absurd, and insociable, (for this is all his
care, that he may free himself from the power of the sword which he does
exceedingly execrate) but I have showed already that there is no such
difference or disparitie between the Civil and Ecclesiastic power, but rather
conjoined by God, and so coupled, that the one cannot subsist without the
other, but yet so as in marriage, the Ecclesiastic must be subject to the
Civil, as the wife to the husband; for, the Apostle says, that every soul
must be subject to the Civil powers, and therefore the Church and Christians
who are souls, and to whom properly the Apostle wrote this command. But I
find no where that every soul must be subject to the Church-Rulers, for it
were absurd and against Gods Ordination, even as if the husband should be
forced to be subject to his wife: this was Antichrists invention, as John
foretold, who paints him out as a woman and a proud whore clothed in scarlet,
Apoc. 12.17. etc.
armed with a cup and enchanting wine, with which she has so bewitched
Emperors and Monarchs, that she has subjected them like beasts to her, and
sits upon them; which we truly see in the Pope, who is a Church, and indeed a
woman and whore, with her superstitious devises of sanctity has so bewitched
Princes, that laying aside their manly and husband-like strength, like uxorious
men, have given to the Pope and the Whore, all the strength of their Dominions
and government; but he like a Hecuba or imperious Woman, has compelled them
not only to kiss her Thumb, but basely her very feet too, a most monstrous
thing! which rose from this, that they cast off the care of Religion, and of
Church business at home, the Magistrates committed them, as if they had nothing
at all appertained to them, to the Churchmen; no otherwise then if the husband
should commit the whole business of the Family to his wife; only contenting
himself with feeding of his own belly; or as the Historians report, like
uxorious Ninus, who for three days only gave to his wife Semiramis the
command and government of his whole Kingdom; but what fell out? She presently
with rewards, delights, and diverse cunning ways did so entice the Peers of
the Kingdom, that before the three days end, Ninus was murdered, and the
whole Empire came to his Wife: so it fell out with those uxorious halfe-men in
spiritual things, as soon as Princes by their sloth, neglect Gods worship and
religion, or being affrighted from them, as not belonging to them, with
childish fears, commit them to Ecclesiastic women, the purity of Religion
does not continue long, and the Peace of the Civil State is also disturbed,
which is not only true in the Popes Dominions, but also in some neighboring
Kingdoms of late.

Apollonius his other demonstrative argument follows; the power of the
Magistrate, says he, is architectonicall, with command and coactive power; but
the Ecclesiastic power is ministerial, without command, for it is said Mat.
20. The Kings of the Gentiles bear rule, it shall not be so with you; ergo,
these two powers differ altogether, nor can they be mixed. In this Argument, if
any where, he plays the Juggler and Witch, as Poysoners use to cover their
venomous Medicaments or Pills with gold; so does he use the Scriptures: so the
Devil used it, by depraving it, with a purpose to deceive Christ when he
tempted him.

First he sets down a true Maxim, that the Magistrates power is
Architectonicall, which Paul confirms, not only Romans 13. but hitherto no man
has questioned it, except the old Papists and the Walachrians agreeing with
them: but that this matter may not lurk in obscurity, I will in few words
declare wherein this Architectonical power consists. This power does not
require that he who possesses it, should or can do all things by himself;
that he should be exempted from all laws, subject to no counsel or reason; so
Bellarmine speaks injuriously of the civil Power, calling it despotical or
domineering, which power should be barbarous and tyrannical: from this kind of
reproaches our Stitewalker can scarce refrain himself. But the
Architectonicall power does not require, that none should be absolutely subject
to any, except to God: For, so none should have this power properly, except he
that had all the Monarchs of the world in subjection to him; but there was
never yet such a Monarch on earth: whence Paul did prophecy well of Antichrist,
2 These. 2.
that such should his pride be, as that he shall exalt himself above all that
are called Gods or Monarchs. This we see in the Pope, who says, that he is
subject to none except to God alone, and that all Monarchs are subject to him:
For, he obeyes none, he commands all, says Bellarmine. This power indeed were
chiefly Architectonicall, but it is seldom or never given; therefore the
Architectonicall or Supreme power commonly described consists in this, that
one has chief power within his own precincts subject to none other; but on
the contrary, all are subject to him, none excepted; so that there he alone can
prescribe, command, and compel with power to punish and force, if need be.
Thus Pharaoh describes it, when under him he bestows upon Joseph
Architectonicall power over all Egypt, Genesis 41.44.
I am Pharaoh, without thee no man shall lift up his hand or foot in the Land
of Egypt: he exempted him not from his own power, nor did he free him from
the law and justice, but (except himself) he subjected all men and all things
to him; so God describes the supreme regal power, that it had right over
their sons and daughters, their servants and cattle, 1 Samuel 8.
finally over the goods of their Subjects, not that he could do all that he
pleased, (for in this he should do ill and tyrannically) but that he had power
according to the rules of justice, to take notice of all things, to order and
put them in execution; for so the Lawyers say, that there is no Empire without
Jurisdiction, no Jurisdiction without power of examining, judging, and
executing, such is the Architectonicall power, which if he understood well, and
if he wrote seriously, not ironically, he confesses does belong only to
Magistrates, as the title of his book, the Right of Majesty, shows: but he
mocks Magistrates, as I will show by and by.

The other member of the antecedent is, that Churchmen want altogether this
Architectonicall power, and that therefore the whole power Ecclesiastic should
he Ministerial, and without command: which Maxim precisely taken, is false,
because I showed before, that Christ and his Apostles, when they ruled the
Church, had an Architectonicall and supreme power, which they exercised in the
Church sometimes, but not with any external pomp, nor always. But it is
objected, Matthew. 20. that Christ said, the Kings of the Nations bear rule, it
shall not be so with you; for then they disputed about precedence in Christ's
Kingdom, and Christ said absolutely to the Apostles that were to be Rulers of
the Church, you should not reign, but serve: whence he gathers, that the
whole government and power of the Church should be without command, and rather
with service; these are the enthymems, which he after a Jesuiticall manner,
has patched together.

I answer: That I cannot read in that place the Stilt-walkers fiction, to wit
that the whole power or government of the Church should be without command, or
Architectonicall power always: For, if he say, that the whole power of the
Church was in the Aposties, to whom he speaks here, he asks the thing in
question, or at least supposes it. For the chief part of Ecclesiastical
power and government is always (as I said) in the Magistrate, and in the
supreme power; whence it fell out, that in the Apostles time this
Architectonicall power resided in Christ and his Apostles miraculously, because
the ordinary Magistrates were enemies. 2. I deny that this Law which he gave
here to the Apostles was perpetual, at least, it cannot be showed out of this
place, that what Christ there commanded his Apostles, does belong always and
to every Minister of the Church, this will be clear by an example: When Christ
sent Apostles, he said to them, take not a staff, or bag, nor money, nor two
coats, nor houses would he allow them, but whatsoever house they came into,
they should abide there till they departed, etc. all this he commanded the
Apostles that were to be Rulers in the Church, when he sent them to that
purpose: For except one will allow the institution of Monks, of Beggars, of
nastie Anchorites, which are ridiculous among Papists, every one may see that
these precepts are not perpetual and common to all Preachers. This literal
exposition should not be welcome (I think) to the Stilt-walker, and his
Walachrian Papists, to have never above one coat, to be without money in their
purse, and to have neither a house of their own nor hired, but hop to and fro,
like locusts: If so many Laws so solemnly delivered to the Apostles, the
Church Governors, are not perpetual and necessary to the Church. It will be
a difficult thing out of the circumstances of the place, to draw a just
difference, by which it may appear that this Law is perpetual and common to
all Ministers; which if he should effect with his rusty instruments, he will
never make this to be true, that what was prohibited to the Apostles or
Bishops, was prohibited to the whole Church: For many absurdities will arise,
they may not meddle with secular affairs, nor wear rich, soft, and
Court-garments, nor wander from place to place, nor be abroad sometimes in the
Country about their business. Must none of those things be done by any in the
Church? They be frivolous fictions which arise hence, in that the Walachrian
Papist thinks that nothing is Ecclesiastic or belonging to the Form and
Government of the Church, but what is concluded in the Consistory or Quire of
Preachers alone: the Scripture contrarily makes Kings and Magistrates the
chief part of the Church, to wit tutors and nursing fathers, and as Calvin
says, as it were the earth in spiritual husbandry; let me show by a simile
or two the stupiditie of this Walachrian, it is all one as if one resolving to
be a husbandman, provideth seed, horses, and instruments fit for husbandry,
have also Plowmen, Waterers and Planters in a readiness, and thinks that he is
now persectly furnished for husbandry, whereas he has not Land or Fields to
sow his seed in, or play the husbandman upon: he doubtless will be laughed at
as a fool, and one altogether ignorant of agriculture. Mat. 13.
I confess that out of Christ's Parable, all men are as the ground into which
the seed is cast: but this is not repugnant to Calvin's Simile; for private men
are but little clods, separated from one another in the ground, on which the
seed immediately falls; but the Magistrate is considered as the general
ground, which if it did not contain all the clods together, they could not
fructify, but would fall away, and the seed wither in them. So fitly does this
Simile of Calvin's express the Magistrates office in the Church, and the
Stilt-walkers stupidity, who is still striving to thrust the Magistrate out of
the Church: I will use another Simile which Paul intimates, 1 Cor. 4.
when he calls Preachers (...), that is, Rowers in the lower seat of the
Church: whence he considers the Church visible as a Ship. Now who will
imagine a Ship in a tempestuous Sea, without a Master, or Mariner? Christ's
Church then must have a Master or Steers-man. It is asked who this is? The
Stilt-walker says, it is he and his Preachers, because they are Captains and
Governors, and many other prating Speeches which I have heretofore refuted: I
say that they are not even, because Paul calls them Rowers, and that of the
lowest rank in this Ship: who ever saw in the Kingsship or Gally; that the
naked Rowers and those of the inferior rank, tied to their Oars, should have
the command of the Ship?

This stands not with reason, and experience; and if the Stilt-walker did not
perceive this absurdity, the law of Christ would convince him; for he as the
Master of the Ship said, you Rowers must not do so, that is, I will not have
you to bear rule in my Ship. Hence then it appears, that to whomsoever the
government of the Ship belongs, it belongs not ordinarily to the Preachers, by
the Princes own express will: now there remains nothing but that this Ship of
Christ either want a Master, or else some other must be sought for besides the
Preachers, who cannot be her Masters: the Walachrian to award this blow, says,
that there is no Master, which is the scope of his whole argument, that he may
drive out of the Church architectonicall power, and may place it only about the
Church: but the absurdity of this will appear out of this Simile; it is
incongruous to imagine a great Ship in the vast Sea without a Master or Pilot:
or to conceive such a Master who is not within the Ships decks, but without
them, flying about like a Coot, or Sea-mew. These opinions of the Walachrian
are chimaeras and monsters, the Master then should be within the ship; and if
this night-bird were not purposely mad, he would see that this can be no other
then the Magistrate, because he confesses himself that the Magistrate is the
head and father of the people. But if he should again deny what he has
granted, Paul would convince him, who makes the Magistrate the general
governor of every soul, that is of this ship of Christ's also. So that here all the Stilt-walkers false opinions tumble down together, towit, That the
Architectonicall power should be without the Church, that the Magistrates
supreme regiment cannot be within the Church; but that all the power and
government of the Church belongs to the Preachers, as Captains, for by this
Simile all these vanish to nothing; surely if he had diligently weighed these
words of Christ, Kings heararule, but it shall not be so with you, he would
have found by them, that the government of the Church belongs to Christ, for
the Disciples disputed not simply for rule, but for rule in the Church: whence
I collect that Christ gave to Kings and Magistrates rule over the Church, for
what he denied to the Apostles and Preachers, that he has granted to
Magistrates: for he said Kings bear rule, it shall not be so with you, but he
denies to the Apostles rule over the Church, ergo, by the law of opposites he
has given and granted to magistrates rule over the Church: I will expect how
the Stilt-walker will elude this Argument taken from Christ's own words, it
agrees surely with Calvin's Paraphrase upon this place, out of whose
commentaries I will allege these few passages.

They are deceived then, who extend this saying to all godly men promiscuously;
when notwithstanding out of the thing it self Christ teaches, that the
Apostles were ridiculous, who disputed for degrees of power and honor in their
order, because the office of preaching, to which they were appointed, has no
affinity with the Empires of the world, etc.

But Christ has set Pastors ever the Church, not to command, but to serve. So
the error of the Anabaptists is refuted, who exterminate out of the Church
Kings and Magistrates, because Christ denies them to be like his Disciples;
whereas the comparison here is not between Christians, and profane men, but
between their offices: Besides, Christ had not so much reference to the men, as
to the condition of his Church: for it might be, that he who was Lord over a
town or village, upon necessity might be forced to undertake the office of
teaching: but it was sufficient for Christ to show, what the Apostolical
function did import, and what it was not to meddle with. And a little after: I
answer, if we examine every thing, Kings themselves do not rightly govern,
except they serve: yet in this the Apostleship differs from earthly
principality, that Kings and Magistrates are not hindered by their service from
ruling, and with magnificent splendour and pomp to show their eminency over
their subjects; so David and others, etc. And a little after: Christ separates
the Apostles from the order of Kings; because the condition of Kings is
different from that of the Apostolical function.

There is yet one thing remaining concerning this argument to be touched, to
wit, that Apollonius wrote this in jest not in earnest, when he grants to the
Magistrate supreme power, and denies it to Churchmen; he meant no such thing:
but in all this work he strives to make Preachers supreme, and the Magistrates
poor slaves; for of himself and Preachers he says every where, That Christ's
Legates depend immediately from Christ the Mediator exalted, who have power to
command with authority, who have selfe-sufficient power under Christ, and that
regal. Can any man have such a power, except he that is supreme? But that I
may not seem to dispute about words, let us wei^^ the thing it self. What
does agree more with supreme power, then to be absolutely free, and subject to
none in any Commonwealth; so as that he may not be punished, though he do
evil, no not by the supreme power of that place: but such does he feign all
Preachers to be. Their calling ought to be free and absolute, they ought also
to use freely and absolutey the preaching and censuring keys; it belongs only
to them to make and proclaim Ecclesiastic Laws, and to force the disobedient
with punishment and excommunication. And in all these, as being formally
Ecclesiastic, he says that the Ecclesiastic power of Preachers is so free,
that it is an way lawful for the Magistrate who is supreme, to meddle with
them: For, if the Magistrate call, that is, (by his paraphrase) confirm, if of
himself, and decisively, he appoint Ecclesustick Laws, if by himself, and by
Ecclesiastics, he offer to punish Churchmen, yea if he dare take off any
Church-penalties inflicted upon any man, or defend them who are thus oppressed,
when they appeal to them, though the lawfulness of the penalty be questioned:
In all these cases, he affirms the Magistrate to be a tyrant, and a trampler
upon the Church Priviledges, Christ's spouse, and which Christ bought with his
blood. Yea, which is more, par. 1 p. 91 93, 94.
if the supreme Magistrate offer such things, he says, that the Churchmen
have power to punish him with excommunication: and that it is his duty, as
being a sheep of the Church, to subject himself and all his to the Ministers.
This is the Stilt-walkers hierarchicall divinity, which indeed makes of
Ministers supreme Magistrates, and of the supreme Magistrate, a poor flave to
Preachers. Neither should the Magistrate permit Apollonius to delude them, in
saying, that his power is only in Ecclesiastics; and (as he speaks) formally
internalls, or externally internalls of the Church. For, this he says every
where, That nothing canbe so secular, par. 1. p. 9.
but that in some respest it belongs to the Ecalesiastick Court. Whence it
follows, that there is nothing in the whole Empire, in which the Magistrate
can be free from the jurisdiction and censure of Churchmen. Nor is this of any
moment, which he says, that the Church inflicteth no punishment but
spiritual, and of excommunication almost, which belong not to the body: For,
all these are mere mockeries, with which he would cover the turpitude of his
intentions, for all Ecclesiastic penalties, chiefly the Walachrian, have no
other end, but directly to wound men's reputations, and so indirectly their
estates and lives; for li^^ and a good name go together, who observes the
seitious speeches, writings and counfells, which he daily has with seditious
Tertullus, whom the Magistrates punished with disgrace, but he uses him as his
right hand, may easily perceive that this Stiltwalker breaths no thing
spiritual in his censure and Ecclesiastic government, but all are carnal and
corporal, which the Magistrate should quickly feel, if they would be
careless, and suffer him to obtain his will: he has the Pope for his Master
in this fraud; he by the same songs, and (as it were) by the Sirens melody,
has subjected to himself Monarchs, by braging that he is the servant of
servants, and that gold and silver he has none; which yet he speaks falsely at
this day: he says that he is altogether spiritual, and that all his affairs
are spiritual, and therefore altogether different from the affairs of this
life, which belong not to the civil Court, therefore he has made to himself
a particular court, and a particular hall; in which though he does every thing
with barbarous pride, yet he brags that there is nothing secular, but all
spiritual. By which arts not only has he freed himself from punishment of
the secular power, (to which by divine right he is subject) but on the
contrary by his counterfeit humility and verbal service, he is flowne so
high, that now he gives and takes away Kingdoms and Empires, and has
compelled the greatest Monarchs of the earth like horse-boyes, to hold his
bridle and stirrups, yea to yield their necks as a stirrup for him to tread
upon, and humbly to kiss his feet. Although the Stilt-walker be many miles
distant from this height, yet he is no less tickled with the thought of the
event thereof then Alchymists with hope of making gold; upon which though they
waste their estates till they turn beggars, yet they are still affected with
that imaginary gain, the desire whereof does still renew in them, and their
minds grow sick with curing of them; but enough of this argument.

Hitherto he has fought indirectly; now he flings his dart directly taken from
the Leviticall worship. For he thinks it is most certain, that God in the Old
Testament under the Levites made an insociable rupture between the civil and
ecclesiastic powers, which difference he thinks to be moral and perpetual,
and ought now to be religiously observed. I have diverse times spoken of the
vanity of this argument; now I will more particularly show its absurdities and
falsehoods.

First, I say, it is false that God has put a difference between Secular and
Churchmen properly; he made indeed a difference between the Levites and other
tribes, that whether they were secular or ecclesiastic, being not Levites,
they were debarred from the office of Priesthood: if on the contrary they were
Levites, although they were secular, they were not kept off, as we see in
Samuel, Eli, and others, in whom the secular and ecclesiastic government were
united. I hope the Stilt-walker will not deny that the most divine Prophets
were Churchmen, and yet they could not sacrifice nor perform Levitical
functions, if they had not been Levites; for God chose them out of all tribes.
So that here we see the Stilt-walker betakes himself again to his old trick of
lying, in laboring to persuade us that God had put a difference between all
secular and ecclesiastic persons, which is his fiction, whereas it is now
known, that this difference was between some secular and ecclesiastic persons,
and the sole Levites; so that this cannot help the Walachrian Preachers except
they will show that they alone are the true Levites, and that all other secular
men are of other tribes.

Secondly, its known that all this difference was ceremonial in the business
of the Priesthood, which God by an express law had tied to the temple, and so
likewise all the Levites; but now it is certain that all this was ceremonial,
and tied to the temple, as we may fee in the Epistle to the Hebrews; which
consisted in entering into the Holy of holies, lawful only for the High Priest,
in keeping of the Ark and other things, in sacrificing within the temple on the
altar, and other things which God prescribed, how they were to be performed by
the Levites alone. But now we see that the Temple is overthrown and all these
sacred things abolished, and all sacrifices ceased with Christ's passion; who
then sees not that this special Leviticall privilege is also ceased and
abrogated? so that if the true Levites should arise again, they would confess
that the Temple and sacred Ceremonies being abolished, their special is also
ceased, because it should be now of no use. Out of this we may see what a
stiff Levite the Walachrian is, who elsewhere so fearful to dig up again
Judaisme, that he could not endure the harmony of Organs in churches; here he
is more light then the ancient Levites, and will reserve the Levitical sanctity
of special right, though the temple with all its sacrifices and ceremonies be
abolished.

But let us yield that there remains at this day among Christians a Leviticall
separation, must he therefore do what he pleases in appointing the sacred
rites of Divine worship? this was not lawful in the old and true Levites. If
the High Priest had said to the other Priests, it is lawful only for me to
enter into the Holy of holies, therefore you must not enter into the holy
place; they had denied this, because God had otherwise appointed. If the
Priests had said to the people and Magistrates, it is lawful only for us to
sacrifice, therefore it is not lawful for you to come hither, to see these
sacred things, to pray, to teach in the temple, to celebrate the passover and
circumcision, and to perform other parts of divine worship; they had been
laughed at by the Magistrates, because God had not allotted all those things by
special right to the Levites, nor had he prohibited them to the people and
Magistrates. Here I hope the Walachrian Levite will see his own unsavory
licentiousness, which he learned with other things from his masters the
Papists, who that they might adorn the dressing of the Churchservice with the
greater pomp, to catch simple souls, they have borrowed most of them from the
Levitical Priesthood, such as they pleased, but so that they fitly adorned
their Comedy. The Levites of old were consecrated and set apart for holy
duties, so are the Clergy there; they had their holy vestments, so these; they
had their sacrifices, so these their unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, which no
Layman must touch; they had their High Priest, so these their Pope; the
High Priest were a crown, the Pope wears 3 crowns; the High Priest had a
breast plate, the Pope has Peter's cloak; the Levites had their sanctum
sanctorum, the Popes conclave is his sanctorum sanctorum; in the Leviticall
holy of holies was the Ark and Propitiatory; in the Popes conclave is Peter's
chair. There be many other sacred things, which I confess I am ignorant of;
there was one chiefly among the Levites, which was the Vrim and Thummim, in the
Holy of holies, whence God gave his infallible oracles by the High Priest: so
when the Pope fits in his conclave, and in Peter's chair, he says, that God by
him gives infallible oracles; not in all things, as Bellarmine confesses, (for
that were too palpable a lie) but in matters of faith and general manners; so
that if the Pope should deliver every day an hundred oracles out of his
conclave, which were plainly false, yet he should be always free from
falsehood, either because he failed only in the determination of a particular
fact, or by what means soever he were convinced of lies, yet he shall never
err from that infinite scope of verity, which is the general prescription of
faith and manners; so that if in the conclave the Pope should play the wanton
with his whore (as it fell out in the Delphick temple) and not his Oracles, but
his Mistresses should thence be delivered to the Church, we must not doubt but
that it is of most high holiness, whatsoever issues out of that most holy
place. So then every one may see, that the acts and scenes of old Popery are
most finely fitted according to Judaisme. Apollonius seeks the like among the
Protestants, but hitherto (for ought I know) he has not found them.

We should wish surely, Par. 1 p. 391
that according to the liberty of the Walachrian heaven, under which he is born
and educated, and accustomed to all kinds of boldness, he had called a boat a
boat, and an egg an egg; for it is not safe for us to be always in such
danger. Who will not pity Vzza, who was struck dead by touching the Ark only,
which was not to be touched. Was not Saul's fact destructive, in daring to
sacrifice partly out of fear, and partly out of impatience for Samuels long
staying? whereby he fell not only into the displeasure of Samuel, but also of
God himself. What Prince will not tremble to see Vzziah struck with leprosy,
for touching that which he should not have touched; Quid apud reformates
sanctum sanctorum.
whereby whilst he lived he was deprived of his kingdom, and when he died, of
the Kings sepulcher? So then the Stilt-walker will do a most acceptable work,
if he will hereafter unfold what things in his Churchgovernment are not to be
touched.

I could never yet find the place of holy of holies among Protestants, except
it be among the Walachrians, Apollonius his study, where with his Tertullus and
other conspirators he is secretly plotting to overthrow the Magistracy of
Middleburg, and to erect a new Papal hierarchy. Though the Consistory be a
conventicle of superlative Spirituality there, yet it does not seem to me to
deserve the name of the Holy of Holies, because the Keeper, with Women, and
dogs, do familiarly go in thither; and then there must be also so many Holy of
Holies as there be Churches: therefore in this point the Walachrian Judaisme is
fallen into a swound.

Now Levites have no external sacrifices peculiar, except they will have the
Mass with Papists: Spiritual sacrifices are Alms, Prayers, Psalms, which are
called the calves of the lips, and the whole reasonable service of God, which
is commanded as common to all Christians. So that we are sure Magistracy
cannot be removed from all these, by reason of any special sanctity. For who
will say that it is unlawful for Magistrates to pray in the Church? He may
(says the Stilt-walker) but not publicly: Then sanctity here consists in a
circumstance, to wit, the same prayers uttered in private are holy in a common
manner, but in a special manner holy if they be said by the Minister in
public. This subtle difference is no where mentioned in Scripture: but the
Walachrian Levite differs much from old Judaisme; their sacrificing was a
special privilege not only in public, but in private also: for if they had
granted to them that were not Levites to sacrifice privately in the temple,
reserving the right of sacrificing publicly to themselves, the Levites had
polluted their sacrifices.

But if it be so sacrilegious a thing for the Magistrate to pray publicly in
the Church, and like women to be silent; why not only is leave given to
Magistrates, but also to women to sing openly and with a loud voice in the
church? for this also is a spiritual sacrifice of praise. In this surely he
seems to prostitute his sacrifices, unless he will say that this liberty is
also taken away from Christians, because it is the Precentor, whose singing
has the special privilege of sanctity, whose tune the whole Congregation
follows; but so the Precentor also should be received among those that have
the special right of sanctity: but I think this Mechanical smell will be too
Goatish for Apollonius to make him partaker of the authoritative and special
right of preaching stacte. I confess there is small difference; because this
man only in of the book sings the Psalms and sacred hymns, but the other not
willing to be a clerk in the book, prays there without book, yea I believe
oftentimes without the Bible, whatsoever the Apollonian spirit is able in his
heat to some out. There are indeed very godly prayers set out by Calvin and
other Divines in their Catechism, for this purpose, that all the people may be
acquainted with them, and so may be uttered by one spirit, the Pastor going
before, which use many times the Church in Synods has established: but these
things are vulgar, and come too near that strait and bookish spirituality of
the Precentors, to satisfy the spirit of the Stilt-walker, that most servent
Zelot.

This, lastly, is a wonder, That he places special sanctity in public
prayer; when under the ancient Levites, Anna Samuels mother, Solomon at the
dedication of the temple, K. Ezekiel. and in Christ's time the Pharisee and
Publican, did pray publicly in the temple. I confess that the business of
prayer has bin sometimes upon special command committed extraordinarily to
some, as to Isaac, Moses; Noe, Daniel, and Job; but this was no Levitical or
ordinary privilege, but proceeded from the person, whether ecclesiastical or
civil, as he was most in Gods favor. It were to be wished that all they to
whom the Magistrate has out of his bounty given charge to pray publicly, may
not be only fit to do that modestly, but also acceptable to God for their
piety; for in many there is such a confused babbling, and such an impuritie in
their hands, that we may fear lest by such messengers the Church-prayers prove
detestable to God, I conclude that there was no special sanctity in prayers
under the Levites; why then should it be under these new Levites?

He seeks for prerogative in Preaching; and says, Praedicatio.
that it is lawful in private for all men to preach, but in public only for
Ministers; for this is authoritative and potestative, and by right of the
Legate, that is only edifying. Much more such stuff he has devised upon this
matter, but without Scripture: so that here again sanctity consists in the
circumstance, much different from that of the ancient Levites for if the
High Priest had placed his special sanctity in this, that he entered publicly
and by daytime into the Holy of Holies, but he granted to the rest of the
people that privately and in the nightime like rats they should creep into
the holy of holies; he had certainly polluted his sacred mysteries. This new
Levite is no less ridiculous, who gives leave to Magistrates, Laymen and
women, to preach privately the same Word, but reserves to himself the
circumstance of preaching publicly in the Pulpit. This circumstance was not of
such sanctity among the Levites, much less among the Apostles; for they would
not have been so bountiful as to grant to every one who was fit, leave to
preach publicly, so that they did not forbid women to prophecy with their
heads covered, if occasion served; otherwise let Apollonius resolve me how
Paul, who elsewhere bids women be silent, says expressly, A woman praying or
prophesying with her head uncovered, dishonors her head. For Paul does not
give charge of that which was never to be, if it was absolutely unlawful for
women to prophecy; neither does he speak of any private speaking at home, for
it was not required there that she should in that case be always covered. Then
it is certain that this subtle difference of preaching sanctity was not known
to the Apostles, that the Pastor alone should preach in public by special
sanctity; and authoritatively, but not others who did this in private.

He places wonderful sanctity in the right of Calling; but in this also he
deviates from the old Levites: they were born Levites; and if particularly they
were selected to the priesthood, or to any office of special privilege, this
was done commonly by the Magistrates, not by the Levites.

Moses a Magistrate, Number. 20.28.
made Aaron the High Priest; he put on his robes, and took them off, and set up
Eleazar after him. There were many famous Priests, but God preferred the
Magistrate. They say that he did this exrraordinarily as a Prophet, but this
the Scripture does not affirm, but by not showing the cause of a matter of such
importance, intimates that this difference is nothing. So David did order the
Leviticall ministry; 1 King. 22.26.35.
Solomon thrust Abiathar from his priesthood, and set up Sadoc in his stead:
neither was then religion decayed, nor is he said to have taken advise of the
Levites, but this he did of his own authority, neither had he done this if he
had supposed that in it there was so great danger of sacrilege. If then the
Levites had no peculiar privilege of calling, the new Walachrian Papist did
ill to borrow this from them.

Of the same nature is their privilege of [Judicature and Censuring] which he
calls the Legislative power, and of the Keys. This also was not peculiar to
the Levites, but had under God its general original from the Magistrates.

So Moses, Deuteronomy. 17.9.12.
Joshuah, David, Solomon, Jehosophat, Josias, all Magistrates, not
ecclesiastic Levites, ordained ecclesiastic laws. God gave indeed to the
Levites and to the High Priest, power to judge by Moses, yet not apart from the
Magistrates, but jointly with them: yea because twice he puts the secular Judge
in the last place, it is not unlikely that he place the principal right of
Judicature in the Magistrate, from whom the power of punishing depended. So
that this new Levite is a plain perverter of Levitical privilege, who under
pretense of a Levitical custom goes about to thrust Magistrates from the
legislative and judicatory power in Church Matters; when on the contrary we
see, that God by an express command has, in point of Judicature, joined the
Magistrate with the Levites.

Nor were the Apostles of any other mind, who admitted the whole Church, which
consisted of Laymen, in all weighty matters of the Church, both of Calling,
Making of Laws, and Censuring; Act. 15.
so that they gave them power also of Decision, which they had not done, had
they conceived that it was altogether unlawful for the Magistrate.

Now rests the right of [Administring the Sacraments] which with Apollonius is
of such precise sanctity, that it is to him as Vrim and Thummim, or the Holy of
holies, from which not only he debars Elders and Deacons, as well as carnal
Magistrates, but also the Proponents themselves under pain of sacrilege: so
that in this he places the height of his authoritative and potestative
preaching, which is with the privilege of administering the Sacraments, as he
wrote to the English.

In this fiction truly he has plainly forsaken the old Leviticall privilege;
for in this they had no special right; seeing the Passover at first was
killed by any one in his own family, Circumcision was administered at home by
the father, Josh. 5. 1 Cor. 10.
or Joshua the Magistrate did it by public authority; all did gather and eat
Manna, they all did drink of the Rock that followed them, they were all
baptized in the sea and cloud. These were the spiritual Sacraments of the Old
Testament, which were common to all; nor had the Levites alone any special
right in these, but by process of time it fell out that the administration of
these was solemnly performed by the Levites. But this was rather brought in by
custom, then by Gods law, which seems rather to be against it.

As the Walachrian here forsakes his old Levites, so he cannot claim the
Apostles for him in this preciseness, in that the power of Baptizing was of
less esteem among them then of Preaching; for Paul says, Christ has not sent
me to baptize, but to preach; he also thanks God that he did not baptize many.
How much is this from the Walachrian Divinity? Calvin himself out of Austin
proves, that presently after the Apostles, Laymen baptized, which Christians
had not done so quiekly, had they suspected that the precise and sacred right
consisted in this.

The like reason is of administering the Supper, the precise right of which (so
far as I can perceive) came from Popery, where the Supper was turned into an
Idol. If in the right of administering this Sacrament, there did consist so much
sanctity and preciseness as the Stilt-walker feigns, the Holy Ghost had done
imprudently in saying nothing of a matter of such importance in Scripture, but
rather the contrary.

It Is commonly alleged, that Christ instituted the first Supper, took bread,
brake and distributed it; likewise the wine. Because Christ was Pastor and
Doctor of his Church; hence they take it for a sure law, that none but the
Pastor, not a Doctor, must administer the Supper. I have showed already that
this ground of the Stilt-walkers is imperfect, and now again I show it. Christ
washed the Apostles feet, refelled the Scribes and Pharisees objections,
explained the parables and obscure passages of Religion; he prayed for all the
elect: Must therefore no man but the Pastor wash the Apostles feet, refell
objections, explain the doubts of Religion, pray? etc. Christ used to pray at
feasts, must therefore hence a law be made that in weddings and feasts none
must pray but the pastor? If the Stilt-walker too curiously affect this
example, he will be suspected that he desires to borrow also from Papists this
gluttonous Spiritualty, among whom it is an old custom, that the Pastor should
sit down first at the feast, and by right of Spirituality sit next to the
bride. Christ did many things upon occasion, which are not laws for us to
imitate, except it be expressed that this example is so, and no otherwise to be
followed, which the Scripture in this circumstance never does, no more then
that the Supper must be administered at night, 1 Cor. 11.
or in unleavened bread, because Christ did both. Besides, in that place of
Paul concerning the institution of the Supper, there is no such thing found,
but rather the contrary; For Paul wrote not this properly to the Bishops only,
but to the whole body of the Church; for he says, that he delivers to them the
institution of celebrating the Supper, which he received from Christ. What was
that? Not only to receive the bread broken, and eat; but to take, break, eat,
drink, distribute among themselves with reverence; For he says, that all this
rite which he received from Christ, he delivers to them. I wonder whence this
superstitious partition should arise, that the Pastors alone, under pain of
sacrilege, must have right to [receive, break and distribute] the Bread with
the Wine, and that other Christians must only receive, eat and drink, and
examine themselves well before, as a certain Divine speaks; for although he
enjoins the whole Church with the Bishops, that they should each one prove
themselves: yet the modern Hierarchy assume also this privilege to
themselves, of prescribing to others power to try themselves, whereof they are
to be Judges; but to try themselves, they think they are not liable to, but
that they may without any proof at all thrust in upon the Sacrament: For, by
virtue of their special spirituality, they may dispense with trying
themselves, and with all their vices. He that does not smell this Popish
Garlic, he is certainly a dull-nosed Divine. Therefore I gather out of this
place, that Pasters alone have not right to take bread in the Supper, to break
and distribute it; and that it is no sacrilege, if a Deacon, Elder or
faithful Magistrate, or any other member of the Church that is a godly man, do
the same.

I confess, that for orders sake, and decency, in process of time, these
solemn actions were appropriated to preaching Ministers; but this did not
proceed from any divine precept; and therefore if any be so superstitious, as to
believe, in case the Pastor be dead, absent, or sick, that a Deacon, Elder, or
any famous member of the Church had minister the Sacrament, he seems to me to
have licked, not only the outward, but the inward rine also of the Mass.
Briefly I will say this: Apollonius can find nothing in the ancient Leviticall
worship, which by special right he can transfer as sacred into the modern
Church Discipline: For, all the affairs of this modern government, which he
counts so specially holy, were under the Levites, not of any special right,
but common to all Magistrates. He took these rather from the Papists, but so
unfitly, that both Priests and Levites may laugh at him.

His last dart against Magistrates is cleft into diverse parts, filled with
poison of malice and contempt.

Magistracy is only a separable accident of the Church; it consists of the
basest Members of the Church: whence he concludes, that it is a most unworthy
thing, that the Magistrate should guide the Church and perform
Church-businesses. I answered before, that Apollonius did again pre-suppose a
falsehood, that in the Apostles time, and at other times, the Church wanted a
Magistrate, of whom again I will discourse. Now I will explode this
Philosophers consequence; he thinks that to be a separable accident, which can
be a way without the destruction of the subject, whether it be a substance or
an accident, by which shilosophie he can make at his pleasure an accident of a
substance, to wit, if a thief take away Apollonius his cloak from him, then it
will be an accident, if in his purse he has ten Crowns, and his purse-bearer
steal one, because Apollonius his purse remains with the rest of his money,
that crown will be then not a substance, but an accident; so that the
Stilt-walker must not be moved if he sometimes have such a loss, seeing it is
but the loss of an accident; nor will the thief deserve any great punishment,
who did not steal a substance but an accident. If we may prate so in Divinity,
then the written Word of God will prove an accident separable from the Church,
because without it the Church has been sometime: the Apostolic office will be
an accident of the Church, because the Church was sometime without it, and is
now again; and let me speak without blasphemy, Christ's actual passion and
incarnation will be a separable accident of the Church, because it was only in
the fullness of time, and now long since has ceased: So absurd then is this
Philosophy. What if Magistracy be accidental to the Church? Will it therefore
follow that the Magistrate can do nothing in the Church? Are not accidents the
original of all operations, without which substances can do nothing? For
though a coal burns, yet it burns not without a fiery quality and heat. I
will not urge further this absurdity of Apollonius, because I know that he is
more afraid of this secular accident then he has hope in an Ecclesiastic
substance, so that accidentally he vexes himself and in vain, in thrusting
this accident out of the Church: which if it were absent, by the concourse of
Ecclesiastic substances, on a sudden, heat and cold bodies, moist and dry
would bring in again the old chaos; so that I may truly say against Aristotle's
Tenent, the secular accident sustains the Ecclesiastic substance, or else it
would fall to the ground. But now I will pass from the accident to the
substance: For, the Stilt-walker is such a wonderful Philosopher that of
Magistrates he can on a sudden make an accident, and again a substance; for he
makes them members of the Church, but of the meanest or vilest sort, the reason
is because Paul says, set them to judge who are least esteemed in the Church:
1 Cor. 6.4.
whence by a Walachrian paraphrase, he concludes, that at all times the meanest
members of the Church are to be Judges; part. 1. p. 14, 15.
wherefore by inverting the Proposition, he collects, that whosoever are Judges
are to be accounted for the meanest members of the Church, though they had been
heretofore the most learned of the Church. Thus does he use the Scripture like
a nose of wax, that he may persuade us, that Magiftrates are to be esteemed no
better then Asses, as the Papists compare Magistrates and Kings to the Ass on
which Christ sat. I do not think the Stilt-walker wrote this in earnest, for
they say, that he earnestly endeavors to place his Legate a latere on the
bench directly, that so he may sit in it also indirectly: But now I will show
how he handles the Scripture irreverently, and abuses this place of Paul,
that he may make it serve his phancie. This I will clear by a plain
explication of the words, there was an ill custom among the Corinthians, that
Christians went to law one with another about worldly businesses, which
controversies they did not take up among themselves, but had them decided by
Magistrates that were Infidels and Enemies of Christ. Paul (as he ought to
have done) reproves this custom, and like a good Physician prescribes remedies
to mend it, one whereof was above the rest, that they should lay aside their
quarrels, and rather suffer loss, for if all Christians were of this
moderation, rather to suffer loss then to go to Law, all occasions of quarrel
would be cut off: But the Corinthians wanted this moderation; for Paul says,
you yourselves do wrong and defraud your Brethren, therefore he farther
persuades them, that if they would go to Law, they should remain within the
Church which was then separated from the unfaithful Magistrates, and that they
would among themselves take up their quarrels. He uses many reasons for this
purpose, especially this, that no faithful man should be so unfit to judge,
but that he may easily be able to judge an Infidel or wicked man; for, he
says, that faithful Christians shall judge the world: whence he concludes, if
the godly are reserved for judging of such great matters, it were absurd, if
they were not able to judge of trivial and worldly matters. Whence appeared
their absurdity in choosing wicked and unfaithful Magistrates for their
Judges; for they were inferior to Christians, they did all one, as if they had
made the basest amongst them their Judges, passing by those that were
worthiest; to this Paul's words tend, they that are of least esteem among you
make them Judges, which ironically he speaks, not that he approved that
Judges should be chosen of the meanest persons, but contrarily he dislikes that
evil custom, for he says presently, I speak this to your shame; is there
never a wiseman among you, who may judge between brother and brother? By which
words he does plainly show, that he does not like their custom in going to law
before Infidels, because in doing so, they made the meanest men their Judges;
but this (he says) is preposterous, because this belongs rather to the wiser
sort, so that he upbraids them for want of wise men, and in that they passed by
their brethren, and made Infidel Magistrates Judges of their differences, whom
they exceeded, or should have exceeded in wisdom. This is the plain meaning
of Paul's words, which overthrows the Stilt-walkers fooleries: He thinks that
Paul here made a perpetual and absolute Law, as if they that sat on the
Benches, and were Judges of secular affairs, that is, Magistrates, were, in
respect of their Magistracy, the meanest persons always; whereas on the
contrary, Paul considers this meanness in respect of infidelity, because they
were then Infidelis that bare the office of Magistracy: Whence it follows,
that Paul's reason cease in Magistrates, when they become faithful. And
whereas they are such, under whom now the Stilt-walker lives, he is injurious
to ubpraid them with this meannesse, which Paul expressly imposes only on
Infidells.

Apollonius his other perverseness is, in calling Magistracy base, and the
Magistrates base, in respect of their office; when as Paul assevereth, that the
office of a Judge is so excellent, that it should not be committed to the
basest, but to the wisest: So that he reproves them for want of wise men among
them, that they were forced to appeal to Infidells, who were not wiser, or
worthier then Christians, but rather, because of their infidelity, baser: And
therefore they did ill when they made them their Judges, by which means they
accused themselves of unfitness and unskilfulnesse, and preposterously
conferred the office of judicature upon base and unworthy persons. So then,
Paul affirms the office of judicature and Magistracy to be most worthy, and
therefore to belong only to wise men, so it be not transferred upon Infidells,
for then it is accidentally conferred on the meanest. Is not then the
Walachrian injurious, to account faithful Magistrates base, whom Paul thinks
worthy of honor, and the prerogative of wisdom.

I have now examined the arguments, or rather scoffs and fallacies with which
the Stilt-walker would persuade us that Magistrates are so carnal and vile,
that they neither can nor should meddle with the holy and spiritual affairs
of the Church, such as they are at this day. And so unbridled he is in his
language, that he could not rail with greater audacity, if he had the sole
Dictatorship in the State of the united Provinces.

For, what Nathan, Eliah, or Paul, who were divinely inspired, durst thus rail
against impious Magistrates, as he does against godly ones? You (says he) are
only a separable accident of the Church, your power is not in, but about the
Church, you are the basest members in respect of your Magistracy: you are
only carnal and worldly, who are not to meddle with the affairs of heaven,
but of earth; and if you would ascend higher, to handle the holy affairs of
our Church Government; it is impossible for you to handle or touch them, so
that you cannot meddle with spiritual things, and belonging to the salvation
of souls, by your selves, but by us: you are not to prescribe laws to us in
Church Matters, or abrogate without the consent of Churchmen the laws
prescribed by Churchmen,: controversies and Church Censures are not to be
judged by you, nor can there be from hence appeals to you; yea whatsoever
Churchmen shall in Church Matters ordain or judge, that you are by your
cumulative power to approv^ and put in execution, and to submit your selves and
all yours: if you do otherwise, you are monsters, amphibious animals, Church
Laymen, Popes; that is, Lay Antichrists, out-lawes, part. 1. p.16. 2 These. 2.
Christ's enemies, men of sin, and sons of perdition. You will be sacrilegious
tramplers upon the Churches privileges, and Christ's blood, you will offer
violence to Christ's Spouse; and such like. I only proferre the gleanings: he
that will have the whole crop, let him repair to his patched pieces, and they
will see that he is no less mad, then if he had been hired by the Pope or
Spaniard to stir up the people against the Magistrates and united States.
For, no man is so ignorant, that sees not the laws which he positively sets
down, to be broken by the Magistrates in their Synods and other
Church-businesses; and that therefore they deserve, as being wicked and
sacrilegious, to be destroyed by the people, and thrust out of their
Magistracy: that these things are indirectly intended by those Walachrian
Sticklers, every one may see who is not blind. I recommend the care of this
business to the Magistrates, as Fathers of the Country; and I will further
show, with what privileges God does honor them in Scripture, what power they
had in Church-affaires in the old and new Testament, and consequently, what
their office is at this day.

That is a famous elogie above the rest, Esa. 49.23 and 60.16.
which God gives to Kings and Magistrates, in that they were to be the nursing
Fathers of the Church, which Prophecy is twice repeated in Esaias; by which
metaphor is showed, that Magistrates should be as it were keepers and nurses,
to nourish and feed the Church. Which if it does belong to the Magistrate in
respect of his office, how should he be without the Church? For, who will not
say, it is an absurdity, that the nurse, who should feed the infants of the
family, must be placed without the house? no other ways, then if a Ship-master
or Pilot be placed without the ship.

The Stilt-walker storms against this title, and says, That it must be
understood warily; part. 1. p. 29, 30.
at last he concludes, that it is impossible for the Magistrate to nourish
Christians with the dug, which is not much less, then to upbraid the Prophet
with falsehood, who plainly says, it shall be, which this man boldly says,
shall not be, by Kings properly, but by Churchmen: so that the Prophet should
rather have foretold, Churchmen shall be thy nursing fathers, not Kings.

I confess this title is figurative, and not to be drawn beyond the Prophets
intention: This is also true; that Magistrates cannot properly nourish the
Church, as nurses do infants; but so neither can any Ecclesiastics do at
this day: For, as I said before, no man is properly a father, but he that has
seed within him, and generates: not he who casts another seed; so none is a
nurse precisely, but she that has milk in her breasts, and with this nurseth
the infant; which honor belongs to none, but to God only.

Gods grace alone is the nurse properly, whose two breasts are the old and new
Testament, in which all saring (...), is truly contained, which not only
Churchmen, but Magistrates, and all Christians ought to suck, as being the
quickening and saving milk, so that neither Magistrate, nor Churchman is
properly the Churches nurse, except we feign such a nurse as transferres milk
from the breasts of other women, to here when; and that being in a manner
corrupted, at last by a pipe conveighs it into the infants mouth, which were a
monstrous kinds of nourishing. So that now there is nothing belongs either to
secular me^, or Churchmen, but to distribute to Gods children the milk drawn
and sucked out of the breasts of grace in the two Testaments, which is not
properly to nourish, except we will call milk-women, who sell milk from house
to house, which fredeth infants, nurses.

I think the Stilt-walker will say, that there is no absurdity, if he
transfer the milk drawn out of the breasts of Stripture into his brain, as
into a dug, and from thence imparting it to the Church, he perform the nurses
part. But I say, this is an improper way of nourishing: for, as often as his
study transferrs the milk which he sucks and draws out of Scripture, into his
brain, as into a milk-paile, which is rank with malice, and the filth of
ignorance: the milk which he distributes to Christians is vitiated by the
vessel of his corrupted brain, which is improperly to nourish. So that now
properly the question is concerning the right of distributing the milk which is
contained in the breasts of holy Scripture. The old and new Papists excluding
the Magistrate, say that this right belongs only to them. The old Papists
boldly, like thieves and pirates, have driven all Chris^ians away from the
breasts of Scripture, forbidding the reading thereof; by which cunning they have
reserved alone the right of distri^uting that milk; and they do it so
sparingly, and made so thin with waterish traditions, that they starve many of
Gods children.

The new Papists are more wary, but withal more basec they commannd all
Christians to suck out of the breasts of Scripture, and to abound in it; this
also they command the Magistrates, that they would flow with it, and bestow it
upon others; or cause it to be bestowed: yet they cry out that it is unlawful
for any or impossible; except he be a Churchman, to distribute any drop of
this nutritive milk; because they alone have a power to confer it by reason
of their Vocation: they confess indeed, that it is lawful for Magistrates,
and all private men to bestow this milk privately; but they will have us
believe, that whatsoever they do there is not one drop of true nutritive milk
bestowed by them: for this is Stapletons perpetual fraud, that Gods Word is
not truly milk, but as it is preached by the Church, which is as much as if
you would say, milk is not properly nutritive as it is milk, but as it is
publicly distributed; so that in this they are like base Monopolists, who
confess the milk to be nutritive in it self, however it be drawn in or sucked
out of the breast privately: But they will not have it to be accounted so,
except it be brought from them only.

I know, it is an old song, that this right is conferred only up on Churchmen
by their vocation: but I have showed before sometimes, that now there is no
Vocation which is divine, or which shows any divine effects, or confers any
divine right, but that it is merely humane both in the manner and right
thereof, which though it was divine of old, yet now it depends only from the
gifts requisite for that function, which if they be found in any, his Vocation
tieth him as a hireling of necessity to perform this office, but hinders not
others (who are also furnished with these gifts) from the free exercise
thereof: whence appears the fraud and violence of Papists, chiefly of the new
ones, who confess that the quickening saving milk is contained in the breasts
of the Scripture, out of which, all may suck and draw, even Laymen, and may
distribute it privately, but publicly they must not, or if they do, it is not
nutritive, which are mere mockeries. However I have been large in discoursing
of this nourishment, yet this I affirm, that Isaiah by this doubled and rare
Prophecy did foretell some extraordinary matter of Magistrates, when he
says, that they shall be nursing Fathers of the Church. Apollonius thinks that
nothing else is foretold but only that they shall procure bountiful stipends
for Churchmen, to fatten themselves well, and so may nourish the Church the
better: But this was no new or extraordinary matter, God himself provided meat
for the Levites, and godly Kings had now a long time done that plentifully; and
it seems absurd to adscribe such a work to Kings, the chief perfection
whereof could never be reached by them, but by Churchmen only.

Wherefore this seems to agree with the said Prophet, that Kings and
Magistrates in the New Testament, the Leviticall separation being taken away,
should handle all ecclesiastic business by themselves, or else that they
should be so diligent in them, that if they did not perform all things by
themselves, yet at least, they should be so diligent in procuring of them,
that they should go before churchmen, take the charge of them, and prescribe
to them no other ways than if a Mother Queen who had permitted her infant to
be nursed and bred by nurses, and her handmaids, afterward out of her
motherly care should sit down among her nurses and maids, and give her own
breasts to be sucked, performing her self all the parts of a nurse, which we
see many famous Princes have done in the New Testament.

Above other titles, that of God is most illustrious, with which the Psalmist
honors Princes, which title we never find in Scripture given to churchmen.
Aaron was an eminent man, and was to be the most worthy High Priest; yet God
said not, I will make thee a God to Moses, but contrarily, I will make Moses a
God to thee; whence we see that God from the beginning did not purpose to
commit the supreme care of the world, and of the Church to churchmen, but to
secular Magistrates; for he knew that things would not be well guided by
churchmen, as appears by Aaron, who when Moses was absent but 40. days, was
of such a soft, and effeminate spirit, that presently upon the prayers and
menaces of the people, turned the whole worship into Idolatry: this was the
cause that when Christ was asked of the Apostles concerning government, he
permitted it to Magistrates, but denied it precisely to churchmen: so that in
this famous title of God all churchmen are subject to the civil powers; and
all civil powers are to rule the churchmen: for these are called only Angels,
but they gods, who will not confess men to be subordinate to Gods, and Gods
to have superiority over men* I doubt not but Apollonius will here murmur with
himself, that the Prophet did so unwisely bestow this title upon Magistrates,
when out of the principles of Walachrian divinity, this title of God belongs
rather to churchmen, than to Magistrates, for these as sheep should be subject
to their ecclesiastic pastors. Magistrates are only earthly Kings, but
cleargy-men are beavenly, Magistrates are Legates of God the Creator; churchmen
of Christ the Mediator exalted: lastly Magistrates are carnal and worldly, but
churchmen are spiritual and holy, who sees not from hence that churchmen come
nearer to God, than Magistrates, and that therefore the name of God belongs
more justly to them? So that we need not doubt but in time the Stilt-walker
will mend this magnificat; as his predecessor the Pope did, who not being
content with the titles of Bishop pastor, and president, in which the
Walachrian for the time rejoices, has assumed to himself also the title of
God; so that now he is styled our lord god the Pope; but that our proud
Ministers may not rise to this height among protestants, I hope the Magistrate
will take care, whilst he shall consider, that he alone by divine gift and
right does possess this title of God, which be cannot without sacrilege
impart to Ministers, by which also is admonished, that he is subject to none,
but to God only, and that there is nothing so spiritual, so holy and so
heavenly under his jurisdiction, if it be humane, but that it is subject to his
power; which will more appear by that famous place of Paul, where not only he
is honored with the name of God, but also is endowed with the privilege of
Divine pre-eminence.

Among other elogies, 2 Pet. 2.13. Romans 13 1
that is notable one which is given to the Magistrate by Peter, and chiefly by
Paul, where the great dignity of the civil power upon earth is described,
which he places in three.

1. That there is no supereminent power armed with the sword, which is not
subordinate to God, and by him ordained; for he says that all powers which
bear the sword are ordained by God, and he that resists them, resists the
Ordinance of God: therefore every such, by what name soever it is called,
bearing the sword, has God for its author: so that the Apostle does not permit
any man to enquire who or what he is that uses this power, nor how he has
attained to it, nor indeed how he uses it; but absolutely commands to give
obedience civil, whether to the King as chief, or to governors: it was then
known to the Apostles, that the Emperors by fraud and violence invaded the
Empire, and that they used their power tyrannically against Christians; so that
if this general rule had suffered any exception, he would have mentioned it:
but both the Apostles do absolutely make this law, That whosoever possesses
the sword, he is ordained by God; nor must any doubt of his power. This did
Abraham and Isaac well understand, when they came within the jurisdiction of
Abimelech; [Perhaps the fear of God is not in this place] They doubted of the
Kings piety and justice, but yet they prepared themselves to obey, even till
death. They will kill me for thy sake, say they; Thou shall say thou (...) my
sister. So Pompey, when he went out of his own ship into the King of Egypt's
barge, in which he was treacherously murdered, he rehearsed this sentence;
Whosoever enters into the house of a Tyrant, he is his servant, though he
entered a filee-man. This then is sure, wheresoever there is a superior power
bearing the ^^^^d, no man ought to enquire how he has obtained it, which is
the form of it; how he uses it, at least not too curiously, o^ with an intent
to resist. For however the faults of his government are not from God, but are
displeasing to him, yet the civil order is still from God. So that whosoever
out of his own private motion resists this he resists God himself, and
hasteneth vengeance upon himself.

The other is, That he subjects every soul to the higher Powers. Origin ^y
every soul understands the Natural man; but he trifles. Paul understands every
man, which in Scripture is ordinary, Act. 3. and 27
for every man has a soul. Now the Apostle said rather every (...), then every
body, because men in respect of their bodies differ much, but in respect of
their souls they are all uniform. Whence Chrysostom upon this place, Though he
be an Apostle, though a Prophet, though an Evangelist, this subjection does not
overthrow piety. Whence in appears, that no man upon what pretense soever who
is under another jurisdiction, can free himself from the government of the
Civil Magistrate, whether he be Clergy or Lay, rich or poor, learned or
unlearned, no condition excuses him from obedience. These named famous
Patriarks, and as it appeared afterward, more excellent then King Abimilech
himself, yet confessed humbly, that even to death they were subject whilst they
were under his jurisdiction. Who more worthy then Christ? yet he subjected
himself to Caesar and Pilate, impious Magistrates. It is then an unworthy thing
for any man to exempt himself from the Civil power, under pretense of sanctity
or religion, or any prerogative; for this is flat repugnant to Paul's general
maxim, That every soul should be subject, none excepted.

The third thing is, That he commands subjection in all, and obedience to
Magistrates; so that he will not have them resisted, not only for punishment,
but also sor consoience, because he that resists the Magistrate, resists
the ordinance of God, and hasteneth judgment against himself, which to do is
against a good conscience. All these are emphaticall, and show how absolute the
Civil power is over all, and in all things; because absolutely it commands all
without exception to be subject, and absolutely commands subjection without any
restriction. Wherefore if there had been so many cases in which subjection was
not to be given to Magistrates, suppose in spiritual and ecclesiastic
matters, (as the Papists at this day prate) the Apostles had done unwisely in
commanding Christians so absolutely to obey Magistrates; for they might have
known (had they known this new divinity) that Churchmen as Christ's Legates,
especially in formal Church Matters, are not any ways subject to the
Magistrate, but to Christ immediately. Paul has no such cautions and
exceptions; whence I collect that he knew them not, but that they are devised.

Must all then obey the Magistrate, Act. 5.
and in all things? What if he command that which is evil, as not to preach
Christ, or to commit sin; must we not then say with the Apostles, We ought
rather obey God then men? Therefore the Magistrate is not absolutely to be
obeyed in every thing. Whence it follows, that this law of Paul concerning
obedience to Magistrates, is not general. To remove this scruple, I will
observe these following passages.

There is an obedience which is most absolute, admitting of no conditions or
exceptions, such as is due to God in all things, whose will is always just,
and therefore the rule of justice, because it is impossible that that should
not be just, which God who is justice it self commands. Therefore we must
always yield absolute obedience to God, because he commands it.

The same power also was eminently in Christ, God and man; therefore it is said
that he taught as one who had authority, and not as the Scribes: for though he
suffered his commands to be examined because of men's ignorance, yet he was to
be obeyed absolutely, as it was said from Heaven, Hear him; not only because he
commanded what was just and right, but also because he commanded absolutely.

The like obedience was due to the Prophets and Apostles, who were divinely
inspired, but it was ministerial; for though they were not God, yet because
the infallible Spirit of God kept them from erring, hence absolute obedience
was yielded to them: so that if such now were in the world, absolute obedience
must be yielded to them by all, and in all things. But there have been none
such now a long time, although the Pope brags this of himself falsely as
Antichrist.

As for the Magistrate, he must also be absolutely obeyed in all things
agreeable to Gods word, or not repugnant to it; such are things indifferent.
You I say perhaps, that in these things we must obey Preachers, and all who
propose them; ergo, they are of equal authority with the Magistrate. I answer,
there is great odds; because we obey those only for commanding what is right,
but we obey the Magistrate because he commands, and because it is right which
he commands; for God has given to them a coactive power and the sword, by
which they command with authority, and can by right of their office compel all
subjects without exception to fulfill his just commands; which supreme power
belongs only to them by divine right, which is here insinuated by the Apostle.

But as for evil and unjust commands, which are flatly opposite to Gods law,
although the subject is not bound to obey them, yet he is bound by this law of
Paul to be subject to him, either by counsel and prayer in removing the Prince
from his evil purpose, or in flying away; or if they cannot do these, in
suffering: so did the Apostles, and chiefly those famous young men, who seeing
the Kings wicked edict, endeavored to persuade the King with reasons; when
they could not do these, nor could they fly, they were cast into the furnace.
Here appears the supreme civil power, in commanding not only what is good, but
also what is evil, Dan. 5.
with authority. For though in commanding evil, they deviate from the object,
for which they shall be punished by God, yet they err not in using their
absolute power with which they are invested by Divine right.

Hence then appears the great difference that is between the Civil and the
Ecclesiastic power, which the Papists strive still to confound.

1. In that every Civil power, whether great or small, new or old, of what
quality soever it be, or by what name soever it is called, if so be it bear the
sword, it is divine, having God for its author; otherways that saying of Paul
were not true, The powers that be are ordained by God. But among Churchmen
there be functions which have not God for their author nor the Scripture for
their authority; such are Archdeacons, Archbishops, Metropolitans, Abbots,
Canons, Cardinals, and such like proud names of offices are not to be
acknowledged, but rejected.

2. In the Civil power it matters not how one has got the sword, whether
lawfully, fraudulently, or forcibly, as oftentimes. I confess it is more just
to obtain government by lawful means, for such can command with a better
conscience: but in respect of the power it is no matter, nor is it fit for a
Subject to be too carefully inquisitive in this, but he ought to obey and
acknowledge Gods ordinance wheresoever he sees the force of the sword; For how
could Paul truly say, The powers that be are ordained of God, and whosoever
resists them resists Gods ordinance? It is otherwise in Ecclesiastics: if any
enter in at the backdoor by symony or fraud, Christ says he is a thief, and
must be accounted and avoided as a robber, but no ways to be obeyed or
acknowledged for a Pastor.

3. If he too rigidly command good things or indifferent, or if he command
unjust things, to which the Conscience is not bound; the Subject must not tell
him that the things which he commands are not necessary, but unjust, therefore
we will not, or we are not bound to obey: but on the contrary, Subjects must
obey; or if they obey not, he has the sword, he may by divine right force
them. But in Ecclesiastics, all their power is conditional: If they teach
rightly, command justly, and according to Christ's prescript, then they must be
obeyed for Christ's sake; but if they err, and command that which is evil, we
must not obey, but resist them, we must drive them out and forsake them, as the
Scripture shows every where.

In Ministers it is required that they be found faithful; Believe not every
spirit, but prove the spirits if they be of God, So Christ commands to hear the
Scribes whilst they sit in the Chair, and enjoin what is good; but withal he
bids us take heed of their leven; and if they should go quite out of the way,
he will have us leave those blind leaders of the blind, lest we fall into the
ditch. All which do show that there is no necessity of obeying Churchmen, but
only conditional obedience is requ^^ed; for God has not given them a coactive
power to compel Christians absolutely, but it is lawful for every Christian
to examine the life and doctrine of their Pastors; and if he find them to be
repugnant to Gods word, he may resist them, contradict them, and if he have the
Magistrates power he may depose them, or if he have not, to depart from them.
Thus the first Reformers did against Popery; and the Magistrates daily do, in
(...).

I believe this will be a paradox to the (...) Innovators; but it suffices
that I have showed it to agree with the Scripture. And that I may not seem to
have seen this alone, I will bring Calvin, on whose suffrage among (...) I will
willingly rest. There is a passage in his Commentary (...) c 23. Act v. 5.
where he discou^seth of Paul reproving Ananias that wicked High Priest; in
which Paul corrected himself, saying, I knew not (brethren) that this was the
High Priest: and he adds a place out of Moses, Thou shall not speak evil of
the Ruler of thy people. Exo. 22.28
For (with Austin) he makes this correction of Paul iroical, at length he thus
writes -- But here ^^iseth a question whether we are to they the Prance when
he acts the Tyrant? For if he is not to lose his hon^ur that performs his
office ill, Paul sinned in robbing the High-^riest of his honor. I answed
(...) the Civil Magistrate and Church Governors there is (...) difference; for
though the administra^^^ of he (...) and ^ivil (...) be confused and untoward,
ye God will have subjection to continue, but when the Spiritual, government
degenerates, the consciences of good men are free from ^^eying an unjust
government, especially if the wicked and profane enemies of hol^n^sse do
falsely pretend the title of Priesthood, for overthrowing the doctrine of
salvation, arrogating to themselves a domineering power over God himself. So at
this day it is not only lawful for faithful men to shake off the Popes yoke,
but also it is needful when they cannot obey his laws but by falling off from
God. Thus he.

Whence it appears how much the Pope does pervert divine order: He does not
acknowledge them for lawful Princes, who bear the sword by election or
inheritance, unless they receive inauguration from him; and if they obey not,
he excommunicates them, absolves Subjects from the oath of allegiance, and
commands to dethrone them, and if he can, he poysoneth them; so that he has
made a mere slave of the supreme Architectonicall power; whom he accustometh
not only at his beck to draw the sword, as if he were his hangman, but also to
come in an humble manner and kiss his feet. And on the contrary, he has made
himself and his Clergy the supreme powers; for first he has exempted all
Clergymen from the Secular power, which are innumerable souls; Then, that he
may satisfy that place in Paul, has assumed to himself the sword, though he
be a Churchman, yea he carries two swords, so that now he must needs be the
Supreme power armed with the sword; and Christ (it seems) has not said, Kings
bear rule, it shall not be so with you Churchmen; but contrarily, Churchmen
bear rule, it shall not be so with you Kings. These are the mysteries of old
Antichrist.

The new Walachrian Papist delights himself exceedingly in the same fable, and
indirectly goes about to renew it; for first he endeavors to prescribe to
secular Magistrates, what civil offices they are to appoint, and on whom to
confer them; if this be not done, at his pleasure he reviles them in private
and public, and stirs up the people against them.

Then in all this work he maintains, that churchmen in the affairs and
formalities of the Church, are not subject to the Magistrate, but are
immediately under Christ, so that churchmen have an absolute power of calling,
making laws, and executing ecclesiastic penalties, in which the Magistrate
indeed may cumulatively help them, but no ways hinder them, or do any thing of
themselves, nay not enquire with an intent to hinder or change them, or do any
thing of themselves, except they will be accounted sacrilegious; whence it
appears that the supreme power of the sword, given to Magistrates by Paul, is
very short, having lost the command over Clergymen so long as they meddle
with Church-affaires, for then the Magistrares (as sheep) must be subject to
their Church-Pastors: Perhaps the Stilt-walker will say, that they are subject,
but only by reason of some secular circumstances in their Church Government,
which the Government cannot want. But the answer is easy, that the power of
the sword in Church-affaires is now become very poor and weak, seeing it
consists only in circumstances, when as on the contrary the Ecclesiastic
power is substantial in Ecclesiastic matters: and because there is nothing so
fecular, which in some sort does not belong to the Ecclesiastic Court; if then
Ecclesiastic power is every where substantial, who sees not that this is
much more supreme then the civil? because that meddles with substances, this a
mere accident, handles only accidents and small circumstances; so that we
may wonder what Paul meant if he knew these mysteries, in not ascribing this
supreme power rather to Churchmen then to Magistrates. This the Walachrian
learned not out of the Apostles, but out of the Popes School, and if he be
employed by him to make a combustion in our native Country by this new Popery,
let him look to be well rewarded by this his rich Master. 2 Timothy 2.2
There is also a notable place of Paul to Timothy for the civil power in
Church Matters, but because I have largely handled this elsewhere, I will now
leave its Elogies, and will examine the practice to wit what godly Magistrates
have under the Old and New Testament done in Church-businesse: we will find
that there is now nothing among the Walachrian formally Church Matters, and
sacred things of special right, which have not been cared for by godly
Magistrates, and immediately performed by them.

The most holy work of the whole Church Government, is the reading of holy
Scripture, because then we go into the holy of holies, and consult with Vrim
and Thummim: But because the Stilt-walker is guilty to himself that he
handles the Scripture basely, and as Jesuits use to make a nose of wax, and a
Lesbian-Rule, for he takes more delight in reading of Spalato, Bellarmine,
Thomas, Cajetan, and other triflers: hence he places not much special
privilege in this matter, but leaves it for mechanics, and he would think
that it did not consist with his honor and authoritative power if he should
stand in the Readers place and read the Scripture to the Congregation.

Vocation is with him of greater account, which is his holiest of holies, and
the spring of all special privilege; wherefore he will have this handled
warily, and will have great care taken that this fountain of holiness be not
polluted by the touch of secular men; yet because he saw, that against his
will by the grant of godly Divines, the right of electing and approving of
Ministers, now for a long time does belong to Magistrates, in which election
the form of Vocation properly consists: that he may not seem to be driven
out of this lurking hole of his fained Sanctity, he has so narrowly contracted
that form of Vocation, that he places it only and properly in confirmation,
that is, in Imposition of hands, which he has learned of old Papists: for,
because now use has prevailed, that Preachers only should impose hands, that
is, imprint the character of Vocation and special Sanctity, he thinks that
it goes well now with his superlative holiness, in that only Preachers are
to imprint this character by imposing of hands, and that only upon Preachers;
hence he is assured that the Sanctity of superlative holiness consists in
Preachers only, and in them only should remain: he grants indeed elsewhere,
when he speaks of the right of decision in Synods, that it has some show of
Vocation, when a private man (by the tacit consent of the Synod or Church) is
admitted to suffrages: But these are only spurious Vocations that is only
holy, which makes one a Preacher by confirmation and Imposition of hands: let
us then see what godly Magistrates in the Old Testament could do in this point.

The most notable confirmation and auguration above the rest, is that of Aaron,
when he was made high Priest, but this was performed by Moses the Magistrate at
the command of God: For he put Aarons robes upon him, and anointed him, and
when he was to die upon the mountain he took off his robes and put them
upon his son Eleazar. I know he will say here, that Moses was a Prophet, and
an extraordinary man, but this is thing: for however God, we see, performed
this notable work of Ecclesiastic confirmation by the Magistrate. Hence we may
conclude, God never thought that Ecclesiastic callings should be ordinary and
holy, and that Consecrations should be performed by Churchmen only, for this
had been all one, as if God should make a law for chastity and wedlock, and
begin himself from Whoredom and Adultery, there were indeed many famous
Levites and Priests, by whom he might have performed this work if there had
been so much holiness in it.

Such is recorded by David, 1 Chronicles. 16.22.
when he appointed orders and turns for the Priests in their service, it was
common indeed, for all to perform this divine service; but to do it on this
day, or after this manner, it was a particular right and duty, though this then
was a mere Ecclesiastic business belonging to Ecclesiastic men, yet David a
secular Prince performed it, and did not grant it to the Priests.

That act of Solomon is more illustrous, 1 king. 2, 27.35.
when he thrust Abiathar from the Priestood, and by his own authority set up
Zadok in his stead. Here the Stilt-walker being put to a nonplus, flies to the
help of petty distinctions.

He says, par. 1 p. 84
that Solomon did not properly depose Abiathar from the Priesthood; for, by his
Divinity, he had been sacrilegious. But, what then? he only banished him,
which secular punishment alone the secular Prince could inflict, by which means
the Priesthood became void casually.

Surely now Apollonius deserves to plead for thieves and robbers: if one be
accused for murder, the Walachrian Philosophy will deny that there was any
such thing done. What then? only he thrust his sword into his breast, and so
pierced first the skin, then the muscles, and at last opened the greater
veins, and then casually the life fled away with the blood. Or if a thief be
accused for stealing of money, and should deny it stoutly, he will say, that
principally he only carried away the purse, that he neither saw nor touched
money: that he gave the purse secondarily to another; and thirdly the purse was
opened, and consequently the money taken away. He will make a pleasant piece of
work, who out of the Walachaian patches will make up such jesting serious
disputations. I do not think that Apollonius will be so senseless, if he be
banished by the Magistrate, that he may not any more make tumults, and stir
up the people to sedition: But he will think, that by this punishment he is
thrust from his holy preaching charge at Middleburge, if he had not a Swines
soul, or if it were not his purpose to delude the Scriptures, he might have
easily seen his foolerie out of the very Text: For, the place shows, that the
punishment which Solomon would inflict upon Abiathar was not properly
banishment, for this was rather a benefit he bestowed upon him, for he said,
thou art a dead man, but I will not slay thee: he had deserved this punishment
which he remitted, and showed mercy in banishing him. What was then the
punishment properly which he inflicted upon Abiathar? To wit this in deposing
him from the Priesthood; for the Holy Ghost says, in express terms, thus
Solomon cast out Abiathar, that he might not be the Lords Priest; by which it
plainly appears, that Solomon intended and did that which this night-bird
says he did not, nor could do: besides the History adds, that Solomon made
Zadok high Priest; and because he did all this, whilst the Priesthood stood by
himself, without taking advice of the Priests, surely Solomon in so doing was
very sacrilegious, or else the Stiltwalker is a cheating Divine.

The special privilege of holiness is placed in prayer and public
preaching: And because this authoritative sanctity consists in a
circumstance, in that these are done publicly, it is to be wished, that
Apollonius would declare out of the cabinet of his abstruse Divinity, what
properly it is, to pray publicly: whether only in the Church and pulpit, or
not also at a table, in a ship, in in the street, in the marketplace, in a
chamber, as Paul did? If he should unfold that exactly, yet I will say, that
pious Princes have prayed and preached in public.

So did Moses on the Mount, Exodus 17.
when Aaron and Hur held up his arms.

So did Solomon at the dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8. 2 Chronicles. 17.
and he blessed the people in the presence of the Levites and Priests.

Josaphat sent his Nobles with the book of the Law, to preach from city to city.

Josias standing in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 34.31.
read and preached to the people.

When Nehemiah restored religion, not only Hesdras and the Levites, but Joshua
and the Nobles read, and publicly spoke to the people. So that here are no
footsteps of special sanctity in preaching, from which Magistrates are
prohibited.

At first there was a right of administering the Sacraments common and
promiscuous to all masters of families; and when they had been a long time
omitted in the desert, the right of renewing them was given to Joshua a
Magistrate, Josh. 5. 2 Chronicles. 35.
and afterward to King Josiah, by God.

The power of making Laws concerning things indifferent in Religion, David and
other Kings undertook, though the Levites were present,

The taking up of controversies was in the power of secular as well as of
Churchmen, Deuteronomy. 17.
as appears by Moses his first institution, where plainly there is joined
with the high Priest a secular Judge.

For Iosaphat gave Lay-Judges of controversies to all Cities, not making any
mention of Levites. At Jerusalem he set up the chief Tribunal, which
consisted of Law-men and Clergymen. The Stilt-walker concludes, that the
Ecclesiastic Tribunal under Amarias the high Priest, in the matters of the
Lord; was distinct from the secular under Sebadia his predecessor, 2 Chronicles. 19.
in the Kings business: but this collection is not certain; for, presently to
Sebadia are subjoyned the Levites: so that we can see nothing to hinder us from
thinking it to be the Sanhedrim of Magistrates and Priests, in which the high
Priest was to handle Ecclesiastic matters principally, and Schadia secular;
but so that the sentence should be pronounced by the consent of both. The
Laity then were never secluded from Ecclesiastic controversies, but still
included.

The ordinary power of punishing was in the Magistrate; even for Ecclesiastic
offenses.

Aaron and the people sinned by idolatry: Moses the Prince commands to slay
three thousand Levites. Achan stole the holy things, Joshua punished him. Jehu
slew the Priests of Baal, Solomon deposed the high Priest Abiathar, and so
oftentimes Magistrates have punished Ecclesiastical persons for Ecclesiastic
offenses, or else have defended them from the unjust ordinances of Churchmen.

The fact of Jeremy is memorable, who being accused by the Priests for
preaching, was defended by the Princes: And although the Priests endeavored
seditiously and unjustly to murder him: Yet Ahiacam the Prince resisted, Jer.
26.
and delivered the Prophet from the unjust judgment of wicked Clergymen; who
notwithstanding is commended for it, and after the captivity is left in stead
of a chief Ruler among the remainders of the Israelites: whence it appears,
that then there was nothing in all the Church Government in the old Testament
of any special right, or not to be touched by Magistrates; from the separation
of which notwithstanding the Stilt-walker borrowes his separated right, as if
all had been Sacerdotall functions, and entrings into the holy of holies, which
had been ridiculous to the very old Levites.

It remains that we look into the new Testament, what the Magistrates did
there.

Here the Walachrian sings the triumph; and thinks that the Magistrate had no
power, because he says there were none in the Apostles time: whence he
concludes, that the Magistrate is a separable accident of the Church; and that
non-(...) have no accidents, or right and operations.

I answered before, that the Church was so far from wanting Magistrates, or
supreme power at that time, that on the contrary it resided in Christ, and in
his Apostles, who indeed used not that earthly pomp, but yet by their word they
miraculously effected that which Magistrates did by their sword; but to deny
that this power was corporal, or supreme over bodies, because it was used by
Ecclesiastic persons miraculously, and not in any ordinary way, is as much as
if you would say, that to kill as Phineas did, is not to kill, because he
being a Priest, did it extraordinarily. I do not think the Stilt-walker was
ignorant of this; but he is angry, because that power was then in the Church,
and among Church-rulers, but is not without the Church, and among Magistrates.
He had rather it should continue within the Church: for all that he intends
is, to hurt and disgrace any man by direct, or indirect courses: But if he
will have the same supreme power which was in the APOSTLES, CHRIST'S Legates, to
remain, he should by some sure token let us see, that the same gifts are in
him, which were in them; but being destitute of such, he does all one, as if he
did brag of Croesus his wealth, and yet is poorer then Irus, not having scarce
a penny to buy himself a halter. It is familiar with him to imitate the Pope
his Predecessor, he drove Magistrates out of the Church, and snatching the
sword from them, took to himself both the Secular and Ecclesiastic sword. If
by this gulf he swallow the Magistrates, especially the prudent
Middleburgeans, that being in discord by his devices, they let go the civil
helm of the Church, and commit it to this Churchman, he will be to us a great
Apollo, and the wonder of the world. This, I hope, I speak not without reason;
But secondly, I answer, it is most false, that there were no Magistrates under
the Apostles, who by the Civil power defended and guided the Church, either
without or within. This the Rattle-mouse dreamed to be out of all doubt,
because Nero and other supreme Magistrates were without, and the Churches
enemies. What then, were there no chief rulers of an inferior rank, who
favored the Church? he is as much deceived, as if he should say, that our
Chmmon-wealth of the United Provinces had not in the beginning any lawful
Princes, because the King of Spain and his bloody Council were their enemies.
For the lesser Governors, to wit, the Nobles and the Cities, that is, the
States, endowed with just power, under the government of the illustrious Prince
of Orange, did happily begin their business of Reformation and liberty. So
there were then lesser Magistrates in the Church under the Apostles, such as
Cornel us the Centurion, the Jailer, Sergius Paulus the Pro-consul, Erastus the
Treasurer at Corinth, Narcissus, Nero his Chamberlain, whom the holy Ghost has
recorded, and doubtless many whom he has not recorded. Shall we not believe,
that these men prudently used their power and estates also to defend the
Church, if they had not done so, and had not been members of the Church? they
would not have bestowed their gifts for the common benefit of the body of the
Church.

Now to place all these without the Church, is to place the Sun out of the
world. Surely the Church Government under the Apostles was so popular, that the
whole body of the Church was present promiscuously at the famous acts of
calling and law-making: Act. 16. Act. 15.
the Walachrian then is a preposterous practice, in thinking that there
Magistrates were excluded from Church-business, except he will say, that they
were of meaner condition then women, and could not do that, which women could
then, or that they should lay aside their supreme right, as soon as they came
into the Church. All which fictions agree well with the Popes institution, who
accustomed the Emperors, when they came to him the head of the Church, to lay
down their Crowns and Sword, to kneel on the ground, and to kiss his foot,
which comedy doubtless is very pleasant to the Walachrian new Papist; but this
grieves him, that he has as yet a large sea to sail over, before he can
arrive to that harbor. I say, that all these Chymeraes were unknown to the
Apostles, and that they permitted Magistrates as Magistrates to be present at
sacred meetings, and to deliberate in sacred business, and consequently, that
there were Civil Magistrates then in the Church.

I add, thirdly, that among Church-offices, there were such, who though they
were not Preachers, and Pastors of the Church, yet had a government in it, 1
Cor. 12.28.
for Paul says, that among the offices of the Church, there were Governors,
and (...), Presidents or Bishops: Which offices, because they were separated
from the general government of the Apostles, it is not to be doubted, but that
they consisted in the special power of censuring and curbing of Christians,
Romans 12.
against Ataxie, and alse of defending the Church. Whom therefore Aretius
thinks were Laics, who had inspection over men's manners, Lib. 4. Instit. c. 20.
and discharged the office of Magistracy. So Calvin says, that there were
grave men who had charge of manners, which is all one with the Civil power,
that under these may be commended every kind of just government.

Lastly, I will prove by a necessary reason, that there were then in the Church
who judged of secular matters, that is, were Magistrates. For we know out of 1
Cor. 6. that there were among Christians, controversies about secular business:
Hence I necessarily collect, that their Judges were either within or without
the Church. If they were without only, then the Corinthians did well in going
to them, or else they must have left them still unjudged. But the former is
repugnant to Paul's reprehension, the latter to equity and reason. Hence
necessarily it follows, that within the Church there were such as decided
controversies, or might have decided them; and I pray what else were these, but
such as Magistrates at this day? So that here I hold this Walachrian Batt by
both his wings fastened with ten-peny nails to the doors of his Church, where
having discovered his deformity, he may spend his days in biting and chirping.

But what if it were as certain, as the Walachrian would have it, that there
were not Civil Magistrates under the Apostles, and consequently, that then
there were no right and operations of non-entities, how will his Logic prove
that it must be so continually? except he will persuade us that Magistrates
should be always infidels, and enemies of the Church, because they were such
under the Apostles; which assertion were impious and monstrous and contrary to
experience. For three hundred years after Christ, Emperors as it was
foretold, kissed the Son, Psalm. 2.
were made the Churches nursing Fathers and Patrons, as it was apparent in
Constantine and others. Whence we see the Stilt-walkers madness, for he
disputes no other ways, then if I should say of Nebuchadnezzar, so long as he
was a beast, he was unfit for government, and therefore had no command in his
Kingdom. Hence I should collect that this was perpetual, and that he never
had his Kingdom again; whereas we know, that as soon as he was restored to
his reason, he was also restored to his kingdom and honor, and betook
himself to his ancient government: or if a Master of a Family should be unfit
to rule his house, because he is distracted in mind, so that he must guide it
by some other: but if he recover his health, who will say that he must not
return to guide his family again? This is the intent of these Walachrian
Sophisters, because impious Magistrates were sometimes mad, and unfit Fathers
to guide the family of Christ's Church, that therefore now they are still unfit,
although they be restored to their wits: and albeit that God has honored them
with faith, piety, knowledge, prudence, and all other gifts fit for a Father,
yet they must be accounted mad still, and must be kept out of the Church, bound
fast in Bedlam, that these unnatural sons alone might rule as they please.

I will rather thus reason, because Magistrates did not in the Apostles time
rule the Church, (which they always should have done, by Gods own
institution) because they were Infidels, and enemies, therefore now they are
bound to rule her, in that now they are made by faith tutors and nursing
fathers of the Church. This is all one as if we should say of the Israelites,
that they must never use husbandry and mechanical trades, because God for 40
years together sent them Manna from heaven, and kept their utensils from
wearing, so that neither their clothes nor shoes were worn, for experience
taught the contrary. And although perhaps many would have been well content to
have been idle, and to enjoy that benefit still; yet as soon as they went over
Jordan, Josh. 5.
Manna failed them, and their utensils began to wear, whence they were forced
to return to their agriculture and mechanic trades. I will then hence
infer, since Magistrates are become Christians, they are to be admitted into
the whole ancient right, which out of the Old Testament we have showed what
that was. So that there is now nothing in the whole Church Government which is
not lawful to them by Divine right, both for matter of action, rule and care.
This is not my opinion alone, but Calvin himself every where infinuates this
in his Writings.

Although Christ would not have the beginnings of his Kingdom to be helped by
the sword, Com. in Deuteronomy. 13.5.
etc. yet he had not prescribed to himself an eternal law; but at last he
forced Kings to obey him, etc. and of persecutors, made them keepers and
patrons of the Church. Magistrates at first exercised tyranny against the
Church, because the time was not yet come that they should kiss the Son of
God, and having laid aside all violence, should become nursing fathers of her
whom they persecuted.

In his Commentary upon 1 Timothy 2. he says, that Magistracy in the Church is
as the earth, by whose fertility as the corn is procreated, so by the
Magistrates office the Church is nourished. In his Comment. on Mat. 20. says,
that by this command of Christ, we see the Anabaptists fury in excluding
Magistrates from the Church of God, for it may be, that he who was Lord of a
town or village, might also in case of necessity perform the function of a
Teacher. It is then plain, that this man was of a far other opinion then the
Walachrians, who under pretense of hostility exercised by Nero in the Apostles
time against the Church, go about to debar Magistrates for ever from meddling
with Church-business. This was the cunning of growing Antichrist, to keep off
Magistrates from Church-affaires, as being holy, and not to be touched; so that
like another Aeolus he swaggers alone in the Church court. Neither have there
been wanting at all times, some Hermaphrodites, half men, soft and effeminate
Princes, who with Sardanopalus laying aside all their masculine vigor, have
submitted themselves to Ecclesiastic whores. Such was among the rest
Theodosius the younger, who wrote to the Synod of Ephesus,

That it was unlawful for any man who was not in the catalogue of holy
Bishops, to meddle with Church queries. But much more carelessly Basilius the
Emperor, who in the 8. Synod said,

That no Laey-man of what dignity soever ought to move questions in
Church Matters; this belongs to the Patriarchs, Bishops and Priests, who have
power to bind, and have the Church keys, and not to us who are to be fed, and
stand in need of loosing. These words, as if they were golden and pleasing to
the Popes pride, are oftentimes cited by the Jesuits; and the Stilt-walker out
of them, part. 1. p. 265, 266.
as if they were very notable, does every where repeat them: for this is
properly his intent, to strike a superstitious fear in Magistrates, that they
may abstain from the Church Government, that he and his may the more freely
domineere, and use Papal Tyranny.

Yet there have been now and then famous and generous Princes, who by their
masculine carriage have curbed these whores, and made them betake themselves to
their distaffes, especially those of Rome, by prescribing Laws to them, and
forbidding them the privilege of caling. Among others, Justinian the Emperor,
who had well deserved of the Civil Law; about the year 500. he made diverse
Laws concerning the election of Popes, by which he commanded the Church of
Rome, that they should not think of calling a Pope, except they paid a sum of
money, and should by way of Petition, ask leave of him to choose: Such an order
was prescribed to Gregory the Great by Mauritius; but he being murdered with
his sons by Phocas about the year 600. gave occasion to Boniface the third to
become Antichrist, who then was first called, and held the head of the Church.
Then the Empire strugled to get out, and the Popes licentiousness increased,
until after the 800. year it was again repressed by Charles, as appears by
the Institutes of Ludovicus Pius, Otho, and others, concerning this matter; but
chiefly about the year 1070. Henry the third Emperor, a generous Prince,
caused the people and Clergy of Rome to take an oath, that they would never
afterward meddle with electing the Pope, until first they had obtained leave
of the Emperor, which law within ten years after Pope Hildebrand did utterly
overthrow; bringing his son Henry the 4. unto subjection, whom he compelled
at Canossa to come on his knees to him, as may be seen in Platina and Onuphrius.

There has been always strange stubbornness in the Pope and Churchmen in
making of Laws, and inflicting of punishments, by name spiritual, but indeed
corporal, against which many times generous Princes have strugled, until by a
fatal violence the Pope at last got the masterie.

This Ambrose first began to put in practice; who by Theodosius of a Praetor
was suddenly made a Bishop, whom afterward he vexed very much with diverse
penitential inventions, that if the Emperor had not for the greater good of
the Church endured it then, it might have given occasion utterly to destroy the
Church.

Pope Anastasius was more impudent, who durst excommunicate the Emperor, by
whom he was justly punished. This boldness increased in Nicholaus, and others,
so that they durst resist the Emperor to his face, as Onuphrius brags.
Generous Princes at last lost their vigor, in that they would not command
these Church-witches to be brought to them in chains, thrust them from their
Bishoprics, punish them with exile and death. Lastly, in that they did not
rule all things in the Church Discipline according to their authority and will,
when they saw how they were handled against Law and Justice. Besides, their
power lasted so long over the calling and decrees of Councels, that Churchmen
could do nothing without their beck and Suffrages; and Princes were too blame,
in that they did not curb by their authority, the inbred stubbornness of
contention in those spiritual men, and did not interpose their judgment, in
the most serious affairs of the Church and of Religion, slighting the infinite
quarrels of Ecclesiastics.

Bellarmine cites examples out of Brevic. Collat. that in Austines time there
was a great question between the Orthodox and the Donatists, which could not be
composed by Divines, but at last was ended by Marcellinus notary, and Tribune
to the Emperor Constantine the younger.

The same reports out of Socrates, Socrat l. ^. c. 10.
that under Theodosius the younger, Divines had disputed long concerning the
controversies of Religion, which could not be taken up by the Synods.
Theodosius then commanded that every one should deliver to him the form of his
Religion, which being read and weighed, he prayed and at length chose the
Orthodox opinion, rejecting the rest, and commanded that alone to be observed.

Bellarmine doubts of the credit of Socrates, for, how could he know (says he)
what Caesar did in his closet? He thinks these things fell out upon the prayers
of Theodosius by chance, rather then by providence, for if he prayed to God
(says he) it was rather, that he would pardon him for putting his sickle into
other men's corn, in that he thrusted himself rashly upon this Church business:
So it is plain, that the old Papists, and new Walachrians speak with one
mouth, and play upon the same strings.

But I on the contrary, out of this conclude that this mystery of iniquity was
not known to those famous and pious Princes, that they must do nothing
precisely under pain of Sacrilege in ecclesiastic business. For had they
understood that this was so ordained in Scripture, they had abstained, and so
many Pious Doctors of the Church with whom they lived, had not so easily
granted this to them. But histories tell us, that all contention about this
arose from the Bishop of Rome, who was driven to this by his pride and
antichristian fate. With whose arrogancy the Walachrian Stilt-walker itching
now again, has published so many absurdities, falsehoods and blasphemies,
against Pious Magistrates: which I have hitherto touched, that I am glad to
have got out of the dirty and thornie place of his fooleries. But that I am in
the last place to show the acuteness of his distinctions wherein he every where
abounds, which though I have scatteringly refuted: yet here as in an
abridgement I will briefly point at: for whilst he counterfeits modesty, he
seems to bestow bountifully on the Magistrate power in Church business; but
this he does so inconstantly and carelessly, that presently he puts some
obstacle or other by a petty distinction, least he should seem to have yielded
too much.

Such is this above the rest, that he grants leave to the Magistrate to handle
Church matters objectively, not formally: by which distinction he will easily
obtain, that, if he has done all Church-business, he has done none, because
he has done ecclesiastic things, par. 1. p. 91
but not ecclesiastickly, or as ecclesiastic. The vanity of which device
consists in this, that of a circumstance and base accident he makes a form,
for he will have so great force and efficacy in modern vocation, chiefly among
the Walachrians, that it introduces a new form into a man, or as the Papists
speak, a new character which pierces into the soul; so that one and the same
thing being handled by a Magistrate, is not ecclesiastic, but being done by a
Churchman, or one that is called, it is formally ecclesiastic.

Which difference seems no greater to me, then if one should do the same thing
in a gown or in a cloak, in a long black Divines cloak, or in a scarlet and
military coat. For so the old Papists play with this their formality, who
being secure of the possession of their spiritualitie, have very frequently
this changing of gowns among them, that upon the changing of the gown, the
formal sanctity is also changed. For it is not unusual, that he who is to day
a Church-Cardinall, to morrow laying aside this gown, and changing his habit,
become a Secular Prince. So that some are Churchmen in the morning,
Secular-men after dinner: nor is the Stilt-walker as yet so secure of his own
holiness, as to play so openly, especially in the superlative sanctity, but in
the comparative he uses the same bounty, when he calls Consuls and Senators to
the Eldership, who therefore must either in the same, or in another gown, be in
the morning Aldermen, in the afternoon Churchmen. He is so rigid in his
preaching superlative holiness, that he will not impart it to proponents,
although now they be half-men, but to them alone, on whom there has been
imposition of hands, whence the authoritative and sacramental dignity proceeds.

I confess this fiction is not without a beginning, and some show also: for it
is taken from the Levites, in whom there was an innate and genuine sanctity by
Gods Ordination; whence arose this difference, that one and the same thing
being touched or handled by a Levite it was holy in Priesthood, by reason of
the sanctity of the person: but it was profane being handled by him who was no
Levite. So in those first worke-men of the Arc and Tabernacle Bezaliel and
Aholiab, whom God had filled with his Spirit, and dedicated for this work: The
same work might have been done by others, as it was in Solomon's Temple, which
work had been objectively holy, but they were not done formally holily, that
is by holy men, and for this work sanctified, as Bezaliel and Aholiah were. The
Walachrian Legendary from this beginning took his fable, which we would
confess might have some show, if he could himself without laughter assever
that modern Vocation, and chiefly his Walachrian had in it any divine thing,
except the common institution of Vocation, and the end; as for the manner, he
knows himself that it is so worldly and carnal, that no other ways is a
cloak or gown bought in a Brokers shop of old ware, then there this special
right of sanctity. So that if he would lay aside his dissembling vizard, he
would say with Scevola in Cicero, that he wonders when one sooth-sayer sees
another, why he does not laugh; for, the office of sooth-saying was of great
authority and honor, and the ignorant people had a wonderful opinion of it;
but that most learned man knew well, that in the secrets of soothsaying there
was no true soliditie, because they collected uncertain trifles from the
chatring, feeding, and flying of birds.

Even so I am sure that this Walachrian amongst his fellows (if he may with
freedom) will oftentimes laugh, for cheating simple men with such a fine
fiction, that there is in his Vocation wonderful sanctity which he knows
himself to be none at all; or if there be any, it is spoiled with his evil
devices: So that oftentimes he is not called who is best gifted, but whom
favor and promises promote. Whence we need not wonder that no spiritual
effects at this day do follow upon this Vocation and Imposition of hands, but
oftentimes carnal, as of pride nnd envy, surely he seeks water in a
pumaice-stone, who out of so profane a Vocation does hunt for special
sanctity, and thinks that it is introduced and infused into men. If in modern
Vocation, and Imposition of hands there were any thing like that express
Ordination, or Leviticall separation ordained by Gods own Law, or if it were
any ways to be compared to the special calling of Bezaliel and Aholiab, or to
that notable calling of the Apostles, which spiritual gifts and eminent
sanctity either followed or went before, then there might be some show of
obtruding the special right of sanctity, although the Apostles had an humble
opinion of their own authority and would not brag of it. 1 Cor. 3.
But because this calling wants all these gifts and prerogatives, and is
deprived of them, by reason of the wicked fraud of Churchmen, what else is
this, then (as I said) to boast of riches, by having a board full of painted
money? Their Vocation indeed has the outward form of that Vocation which was
in the Apostles time, though in many things corrupted; they have also
Imposition of hands after their manner, but although all things were done
without fraud, lawfully, and as near the Apostles manner as could be, yet
there were no certain reason to infer that they have special and certain
sanctity who have this calling, (as the Walachrian brags) because there is not
any special promise extant in Scripture, that all who are called after this
manner must be holy in a special manner; therefore it is folly and
Superstition to believe this so firmly, because faith is Superstition which
has not for it Gods express promise; and suppose God had promised that this
should be, because Gods promises are conditional, to wit, if men do not by
their corrupt actions hinder his grace: hence it is, that Gods bounty at this
day is many ways hindered, that from the Vocation and modern Imposition of
hands, especially the Walachrian, there can proceed no store of spiritual
gifts, much less any permanent sanctity of special right, no more then health
follows upon Popish breathing and anointing, as daily experience shows.
There is no Vocation then at this day so holy and lawful, as to confer any
special privilege of sanctity, or make any man after a special manner
sanctified and Ecclesiastic, but the whole right depends now from the gifts.
So that there is a lawful calling and right, for performing of all sacred
things, where God has bestowed gifts and aptitude, whatsoever the party be,
whether Churchman, or Layman; modern vocation, confers nothing else but order
and a power to perform these businesses of divine worship, which may be done by
any man who is fitted, but he that is called is bound to do it, because he is
hired: no otherwise then in a ship (which simile Paul uses 1. Cor. 4.) all
promiscuously may row if they will, or if there be need; but he that is the
Boat-man, or is tied to the lower seat, is bound torow by the Law, or because
he is hired; 1 Timothy 5
which seems to be Paul's opinion, who says, that Bishops who labor in the
Word, that is, spend their whole life in thus laboring, are worthy of double
honor; that is both of honor and profit, because he adds presently, thou
shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn, for the
Labourer is worthy of his hire. Whence it appears, that Presbyters are not so
distinguished by Paul, as if it were not lawful for some to preach; for that
is against the place, Act. 20. where he calls Presbyters promiscuously Bishops,
and bids them all feed the flock, which is properly to teach: both had then
liberty to preach. But because some did it freely, and according as their
affairs would permit; but others again spent their whole life in laboring,
casting away all secular businesses, as the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets
did.

Hence the Apostle says, that they labor properly in the word. And by reason
of this duty and office, they were not to be Emperors, or Potestative Kings (as
the Papists prate) but, Oxen treading out the Corn, and hired Laborers, to
whom not only honor as to others, but profit also is due, that is, wages and
maintenance out of the Public purse. Surely, now in modern vocations, all the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit cease, with which the church did then abound,
in Gods just judgment. So that if God were now willing to use his bounty, the
vices of those that are called would hinder him. Now then, there is almost
nothing left of their vocation, nor in the Walachrians intention, but reward,
or a yearly stipend, whence it appears, that Preachers have no special right
of sanctity by their vocation but only that (leaving their secular affairs,
which they are loath to do) they spend their whole life about divine worship
not as Princes, but as Mercenaries, who are hived by the States from whom they
expect their wages. So that of their mercenarie work, they have nothing to
brag above other worthy Members of the Church, especially the godly
Magistrates. For they are as foolish, as if in an Army, the common soldiers
who are hired to watch and ward and perform other military duties, should brag
against that Prince who hires them, or against those Volunteers who freely
venture their lives, who are therefore more happy and worthy then others,
because they are not hired, but fight out of mere honor, and may, when they
please, lay down the dangers and burdens of warfare. But this is sufficient
for the vanity of the first distinction.

His other fiction he gathers out of Thomas, and the Schoolmens old trash, that
he may yet the more stoutly keep off Magistrates, from touching his holy
things. For if this which he seared be evinced, that Magistrates or Laymen
can be formally Churchmen, as surely they are when they be chosen Elders;
because Presbyters by the Apostles institution were all Bishops, Pastors, and
therefore Preachers: Act. 20.21.
that he may put in a cavil for his special sacred things, he affirms, that
whatsoever Magistrates do, is nothing, because they do only [imperatively] not
[elicitivelyly] in which destinction, as in most, he seems to affect obscurity
of terms, that he might cheat with such canvasse ware, country people
cheaters with multitude of words and nimblenesse of hands, hide their trifles,
and oftentimes cry out, Let not one Artificer confound another. If the
Stilt-walker should cry this a hundredth times, yet he could not save his
impostures from being ridiculous, which now I will in few words show. If he
understood his own distinction, this is his meaning, that Magistrates must not
meddle with modern Church-businesse [by themselves] that is, they must not
preach, pray publicly, administer the Sacraments, call or do the rest
Immediately which with him is to do (elicitively) and properly [to doe] for this
(he says) to do were a great sacrilege in the Magistrate. What then? the
Magistrate can do all Church Matters [imperatively] that is, he can command
Preachers, who are alone, specially sanctified, that they handle Church Matters
diligently. For which purpose, he can heap benefices upon them, he may
admonish them will veverence as Fathers, and if they be quite negligent, he may
compel and punish them, but not by himself, for this were sacrilege, to
touch those anointed, except it be by Ecclesiastic persons; and even in the
case of Rebellion and Sedition Churchmen ought to be Judges. This is that he
means by acting [ imperatively and elicitively] by which pleasant devise, he
thinks he has obtained a means to delight Magistrates, with words and wind,
and whereas he seems to ascribe much, yea all to them in Church Matters; yet,
indeed, he gives them nothing.

1. Then I answer, this fiction is grounded on false suppositions, and mere
fables, as appears by what is said before, concerning the special sanctity of
Church-affaires, which we cannot find to be such as should exclude any of the
faithful, or who belongs to Christ from touching, or immediate handling of
them, for all are of common right and sanctity. Again, if any thing in Church
government, were in a special manner objectively holy at this day, there
should be now no medium to obtain this special divine right for performance of
that sacred business: for no man is born with this right, as the Levites were
of old; no man is sent from Heaven, as the Apostles and Prophets were; no man
is called by divine calling, or confirmed by a spiritual imposition of hands,
conferring any extraordinary spiritual gifts, as of old under the Apostles;
but the whole modern vocation, in respect of the manner is purely humane and
oftentimes abounds with many vices and frauds: so that there is nothing more
sure, then that such a vocation cannot make one spiritual and holy by special
right. For there should be more in the effect, then was in the adaequare cause,
and so of a bad tree should come good fruit. Modern vocation does nothing else,
but only for orders sake, tie one to his office of performing divine worship in
such a place. So that what others, who have the gifts may do, as voluntary
soldiers, he is always bound to do, as a Hireling. For which cause he is by
the States and Magistrates set down in the catalogue of Hirelings. And the
treasurer is commanded to reward him for his service, as a mercenary. To
persuade us that by this vocation a man is made [spirituall, holy, and in a
special manner sanctified] is like children to make us believe, that of chalk,
clay, or sand, loays, pies, or marchpain can be made. For so they out of their
infancy babble among themselves, whom the Stilt-walker truly imitates, when he
would persuade swade the English and all Magistrates, as if they were Babies,
that modern vocation is of such esscacy, the contrary whereof, he and others
who are thus specially sanctified, show by their example. So that now we see it
is a mere fiction that Magistrates as such, cannot elicitively by themselves,
properly and immediately perform all the business of their Church Government.
For this they could do in the Old Testament; why then can they not do it as
well in the New, in which the ceremonial preciseness is taken away and all
faithful men are made truly holy, and sanctified to be Prophets Priests, and
Kings, as Peter speaks, and so Calvin does openly confess, that a
Lay-Governour of a Place or Village may teach in case of necessity: we showed
also before, out of the Law and institution of Christ, and his Apostles, that
the administration of the Sacraments was not of such special sanctity, but
that it was permitted to lay men: and the Christians at Corinth did administer
the supper among themselves, without respect or presence of any Bishop, or
Preacher, as appears out of Paul's narrative; 1. Cor. 11.
now if under the Apostles, there was no such special sanctity of those
things, it is clear, that that which the Walachrians obtrude, is either
fictitious, or borrowed from Popery.

2. The other devise of this distinction is, that it affirms, the Magistrate
can do nothing in Church Matters properly, or formally, because he does nothing
by himself, or elicitively, but yet all things imperatively, and by others.
For this he says, is to do nothing, which truly is an elicitive fiction: for
if this be true, then a Hammer, Saw, Plainer, and other tools, do properly
make a statue or hedge because they properly touch the subject, and produce the
effect, not the workman. Then David did nothing in murdering Vriah, because
the enemies did it by themselves, and properly; Ioab by so ordering it, and
David imperatively. But the Srripture contradicts the Stilt-walker; for it does
not say to the enemies, or to Ioab, but to Da^id only: thou killedst Vriah.

There is a notable example of the building of the Temple by Solomon, in which
we know the King did nothing by himself, or elicitively, for he was no Mason,
Carpenter, or any other tradesman. All these things he committed to the
Master Builders and hirelings: he only commanded and directed Hence the
Walachrian Divinity will conclude that Solomon did nothing properly or
formally, but only the builders and mechanics. But the holy Ghost speaks the
contrary, who does not name those in the building of the Temple, but the whole
work is ascribed to Solomon, who was chosen of God to that purpose: so that
he is called the builder of the Temple, and every where it is called the
Temple of Solomon. So we see that the Stilt-walker scatters abroad mere
fooleries, when by his specious distinction he will persuade us, that the
Magistrate does nothing in Church Matters, because he does all things
imperatively, but nothing elcitively; that is, he did by his command, order,
and cost, as the Magistrate does at this day.

His last destinction is altogether seraphical, and so subtle, that the
Magistrate will never be able to break this bar, but if he seem to do
things formally and elicitively, yet the Walachrian Divines will mock and hiss
him out: for when he believes that he has done something in holy
Church Government; because it is a mere accident, they will say, that he has
not touched, yea that he cannot touch the substance of Church holy things, but
to be conversant only in worldly circumstances, and accidents, which fine
fiction, fit indeed for Oedipus, does for ever debar Magistrates from
Ecclesiastic holiness, and will also free the Walachrian Ecclesiastic from
carnal, and civil circumstances, except among the secular circumstances, one
should prove very substantial, which is the procurement of the Ministers
yearly stipend which comes so near to Ecclesiastic substances, that it is of
more worth then the substance of all sanctities. The old Papists have long
challenged this part of Spirituality to themselves, that they might have
spiritual lands, revenues, and treasurers, by which art they have totally
freed themselves from the lay carnality,

There is no doubt, but that the Walachrian Papist, who sees every thing, saw
this also, that it was a base thing for such spiritual men, to be maintained
by such carnal and secular money, Whereas chiefly they scrape together our of
the Spiritual Tenths, what they bestow sparingly on the maintenance of
Ministers. But Magistrates as yet have not been so spiritual, as to let go
the right of this circumstance, for they fear that seeing they are excluded
from the whole substance of Ecclesiastic Government, by those superlative holy
men, they shall be divested of all circumstances, if that principal
circumstance be omitted. However the matter be, surely this last fiction at
first sight, smells of the Popes forge.

For they to maintain their Idol of transubstantiation, that the bread may
not be eat up and vomited by dogs, or gnawed by rats, have found out the like
fiction, to wit, that what soever it be they eat, there is nothing diminished
from the Sanctity of the bread, because they gnaw eat, and spue but bare
accidents, and not the substance. One egg is not more like an other, then this
new Walachrian papist is like the old one; who that he may the better preserve
the sacred things of his Church government from the Majestrats profane touch
affirms also, that whatsoever they can, or will do in these sanctified
things, yet the dignity of Church facred mysteries, shall be never a whit
lessoned because they never touch but the [accidents and circumstances] being
debarred from medising with the substance. For my part, let like lips, have
like lettice, I think it sufficient that I have showed all the fooleries of
these distinctions, with which the Stilt-walker every where plays in his sacred
things. He has fully by his example proved that ignorance is very bold there
is no question so absurd, but he if it come into his head, will vent it for an
oracle. That he may keep off godly Magistrates from his holy things, not only
does he for the most part use the example or wicked men, but else where he
openly affirms, that a faithful Magistrate [hath no power in regard of his
dignity and office] over Ecclesiastic matters [which does not equally belong to
an Infidel, in regard of his Office] he shall persuade wise men to believe
this rash assertion, when he persuades them, that Lazarus had the same power
to come out of his grave, whilst he lay half rotten, which he had when after
Christ had raised him, he stood up alive, or that a Dog has as much right, who
is turned into a Woolfe, to keep the flock, as he that is naturally apt to
keep the sheep, and is an enemy to the Woolfe, or that a blind man has as
much right to show the way, as he who is quick-sighted, and has both his eyes.

He does so contemptuously mince the inestable gist of faith and conversion,
that he makes it almost but a small circumstance in Magistrates, whereas in
Scripture it is so described, as that it makes a blind man see, and of a Woolfe
makes a Dog, that is, changes as it were the whole man.

He also many times cries out, that the Church was happier under the cross,
then now under Godly Magistrates; if they should make their power [privative]
not [cumulative] that is, if they should hinder Ministers from discharging
their sacred affairs by themselves, which he chiefly means of the power of
the [keyes, of making Laws, and of calling] for he thinks that this chiefly
belongs to the Churches happiness, that Church men may freely call whom they
please, preach what they list, make Laws as they think good at last, censure
when and whom they will. This he thinks was absolutely done under the cross,
and because he perceives that Magistrates do meddle with these affairs by
reason of the fleshly corruptions and sins, which they observe are introduced
in these things by Churchmen. Hence surfeiting with this peace [like the dull
Ox in the Port, he wishes for a saddle, and with the Horse desires to plough
the ground] he thinks the Church was happier under the cross, when she had
no Magistrates, then now when she has such. This I will confess, if the
Churches happiness consists in this, that new Walachrian Papists domineere in
her, as they please: but this is a childish happiness. For youths are glad,
when in the absence of their Parents, they manage the estate and Family as they
will, and they wish it might be so still, whereas things are never more
unhappily managed in the family, then in such a case: So that it is a Proverb
among us, when things are in a confusion [there is none at home, but the
children,] How happy this Ecclesiasticke selfe-government, is without the
Magistrates inspection, may be seen in Popery, where the Magistrate being
thrust out, only Churchmen rule, but how happily? When there is nothing there
except miserable butcheries, both of bodies and souls. The Game was not much
unlike this, which the spiritual king Becholtius played at Munster, swelling
there with as great pride as the Pope does at Rome, who wanted nothing to make
him happy but continuance: if the Stilt-walker thirsts for this, he deserves
to consume away with despair. He speaks too freely of the Churches
happiness under the cross; Apollonius thinks it no trouble, to lean upon
cushions stuffed with other men's blood, and as they say [subdue Alexander at
the Table] if he had seen but a far off the whips, rods wounds, and
tortures, all his courage would quickly be cooled.

I have insisted somewhat long upon this discourse, not as if I disliked the
Worship of Christians, or the lawful Church Government, but that I might show
the impudent fooler^es of the Walachrian Stilt-walker, whose purpose is not to
maintain true Religion, but to introduce a new Popedom: therefore, I hope,
impartial Judges will not think I have done amiss, that I have with laughter
exploded his unsavourie fraudulencies, not that I mock at true holy matters,
but because I would tread down the Walachrian swelling leven of Popery.

For no godly Magistrate intends to overthrow the Churches true order, to
defile the sacred things of Religion, or to destroy them; this were a madness
fit for Libertines and Atheists, from which I am very averse.

Neither do I think that any godly Minister does seriously believe there is
such abstruse spiritual sanctity in the affairs of modern Church Discipline,
as this Walachrian Rat dreameth, out of the Jesuits writings read by him
without judgment: for this were to thrust upon Magistrates in stead of truth,
the Legends of Frances, or the Ottoman trifles of the Turkish Alcheran, which
we saw lately, whom no wise man will believe, except he be carried headlong by
Superstition, or violently compelled to confess and disseble that to be true,
which he knows is false, such is the impudency of these Walachrian sticklers,
who are not content to persuade christians to esteem of that which the
Scripture records has been by Christ ordered in matters of Religion, but
they will have men also believe chiefly that in the work wrought in the
persons working, and in other circumstances, there do lurk wonderful and
secret worth of holiness, with which they so bewitch ignorant men, that
neglecting the kirnell of truth, they do nothing almost, but lick the outward
rine of holiness^; by which madness it comes to pass, that Churchmen are
puffed up, and obtain too much respect, which is that they hunt for, and
account superstition Religion. I will freely appeal here to the conscience of
godly Ministers, who will here confess ingenuously, I know, that in the whole
outward work of Church Government at this day there is not any such,
internal, mystical, spiritual, and untouchable holiness; for where does
this lurk? the word of God is read, the Psalms are sung by all, prayers are
said, either by heart, or in the book, the Text of Scripture is explained by a
humane manner and way, known to all; he that is haptised, is besprinkled with
ordinary water, in the name and after the ordinance of God, Men sit at the
table common bread and wine are distributed ^ats, and drunk by all; concerning
the order of administering the Sacra^ eats, care is taken that confusion may be
avoided; they that transgress in the Church, are admonished and reproved, or
by public authority are separated from the communion of Christians. The gifts
and alines of Christians are received, and as much as can be, are bestowed on
the poor. All these things I rehearse as they are done in a most simple
manner, and come as near as may be to the Apostles custom, from which we see
how far every day the Wallachrians depart, so that almost there is not greater
corruption in Popery, then there is among them in matters of censure, etc. Will
any ingenuous man say, that in these, there is such abstruse mystical
sanctity, or in the Ministers themselves? and if this were necessarily in
them, who will say, that it proceeds from modern vocation? they are men that
choose, that call, that lay on hands; and although the Church at this day,
uses imposition of hands, prayers, fastings, and other means, yet Christ
never promised, that he would so concur by his Spirit with these actions,
that the same effects should be prounced, which the Apostle she wed by their
vocation; neither will any man, except he be superstitious, affirm, that he
has upon imposition of hands, received suddenly the gifts of tongues and
sciences, and if this Wallachrian smatterer should brag any such thing of
himself, experience, and his own act ons will refute him, who then sees not
that the Stiltwalker is a fool, who in such things seeks for the lurking holes
of special sanctity, that he may beg a domineering power in the Church, to
the overthrow of all Religion^^^ true piety.

If it were lawful to bewith men with such fictions, what may not we believe
of Magistrates? for as soon as they are chosen to the supreme government,
although they were private men before, now on a sudden, they become Gods holy
Logats, Vicegetents, and servants, every soul to them is presently subject,
the Sword to them is committed, with the power of life and death, nest her
matters it how they obtain this power, whether by right or wrong how they use
the sword whether justly or unjustly; and although they since against God, yet
they must be obeyed by their subjects, except they will resist Gods ordinance
and bring judgment on themselves. Lastly, they become Gods not by humane, but
divine right. Who then will wonder if Hered, Alexander, and other Monarchs
dreamed of themselves that they exceeded humane pitch, when they had such
infinite power, and had the command over so many lives and bodies of subjects,
so that if superstition can puff up any with pride, it may have a place among
Magistrates, whom not opinion, or superstitions persuasion, but Gods Law, and
manifest oracles make Gods, and such as have the charge of all men's souls: Yet
there is no godly Magistrate so mad I know, as thinks not himself to be a
man, and subject to all humain infi^mities, that by his supreme power he has
not obtained any sudden sanctitre or divinity, but that they are the fame what
they were before, ^^^ly made more honorable, and bound to a new service of the
State: They that have any higher conceits of themselves are mad, and deserve
with proud Herod to be smitten by the hand of an Angel with Lice and Vermin.
If then such pride is unseemly and unlawful for Magistrates, to whom both
divine and human Laws have given power to reign, and bear role with power,
and to have the supreme authority, let the old Roman, and new Wallachrian
Papists be ashamed, who place the whole strength of divine worship and Religion
in this, that spiritual dignity may ^ecr^^e to them, also a superstitious
respect, and a power grounded on seigned privileges, by the charge which they
have of sacred things, and the mercinary performing of them: so that in this
the unhappiness of human affairs is to be lamented, In that from the best
things, do most cammonly arise the worst corruptions. For whom God has
expressly set over the preservation of Order, worship, Modesty, and Piety: they
(...) given occasion of Confusion, Pride, Impiety, and contempt of divine
worship, as experience of all times do show; God of old made the ^^vites holy
by consecration, by his Law, and by an accumulation of many honors on them: but
who knows not, that in process of time, of them have proceeded wicked men,
despisers, and overthrowers of Religion? He gave Vrim and Thommim to the High
Priest, and special privileges, as to the Keeper of the most sacred things,
but what more hideous m^nsters could there be in the world, then some of them
were? It was the High Priest with his company, Jer. 23.
who would have treacherously put Jeremiah to death, excent Abican the
Magistrate had resisted. Caiphs and the Chief Priests put Christ to death
unjustly, Acts 20.
It was Anonius the High Priest whom Paul called a Whited-wall and that
deservedly, because he went about trea^herously to murder him, the Scribes and
Pharisees had the key of knowledge and a right to sit in Mose^ his chair, but
the world could not show more pernicious monsters, whom Christ for often
cursed. After the Apostles time, for a while, the Bishop of Foam did
excellently maintain Religion, as we know out of Histories, but afterward by
degrees Antichrist proceeded of them; as we see at this day in Popery. What
wonder, if the same fall out now?

That of the reformed Wallachrians there arise a seditious crew, breathing
Anarchie, or papisticall Hierarchy, with the contempt of godly Magistrates, and
the open blasphemy of Potentates. I purpose not to wrong the piety and esteem
of all: there are many godly Ministers, who deserve honor, whose moderation
does abundantly testify that they are exceedingly displeased with the
wranglings and quarrels of proud men, about their devised sanctities, they
place their chief honor in modesty, integrity of life, and simplicity of
doctrine: but because the mind of man, out of innate corruption, is bent upon
error, except it be strengthened (...) the extraordinary assistance of Gods
Spirit, which God has seldom done, and it is certain that now for so many
hundredth years he never did it.

Hence godly men have endeavored always to find out and prescribe ^emedies
against this spreading disease, or carruption of true Religion, an evil so
fatal, that scarce could any Age be so provident, as to keep it from
ruinating it self, and breeding its own moth, because it seemed to stand upon
firm pillars, and to be shut up within a strong Bulwark.

Our Reformers in the beginning did write Confessions, and Catechismes, that
they might preserve the purity of Doctrine, the Laws and Ordinances of
Church Government, for the better ordering thereof, have not been more exactly
looked into (as they say) then in Zeland, where the States by their approbation
have ratified the Ecclesiastique Polity. The Hollanders and Frislanders, have
not as yet attained so much happiness, upon a just suspicion, as they would
have it, lest this peevish^ and extravagant kind of men always seeking one
law our of another, should deduce right out of right, and should force the Law
givers by their own Laws and Statutes, to become servile by their
consequentiast windings and ambiguities. Yet, as we see in this (...)
Magistrates were never more railed against, then there where Apolloni^ himself
confesses the best Church policy is erected, there were never greater
rebellions any where, then there where the Magistrates have out of piety and
gentleness most favored the Clergy; so that this, like an incurable
sickness, seems to increfe by the cure: Before I give off writing. I will
briefly, according to my ability, show by what means this Leprosy, and
increasing evil may be met with, least the force of Religion be weakened by
contempt, or by reason of too much respect given to the Clergy; Instead of
Religion, we have superstition; between these quicksands the Ship of Christ's
Church has always with much difficulty failed, so that coming too near
either of them, she has endangered her self, or made shipwreck. This the care
of the Magistrate may prevent in matters of Church Discipline, Laws, and
Vocation.

Let this be held sure in the first place, that the Modern Church Ducipline is
of order, not of Divine right, properly, or spiritual, whose effects are none,
except on them who are bewitched with superstitious persuasions, or are moved
with the reverence of the Order; but in others who are stubborn, it is no ways
effectual, except by the Magistrates secular force, it be supported: for what
had excommunication or discipline been, except under the Apostles miraculous
force, and fear of punishment had curbed the refractory? this now passes to
the Magistrate, by an ordinary way. At this day also, the order, censure, and
discipline of the Church, had been nothing, if refractory and disordered
persons were not contained by the awe of the Magistrate, and fear of the
Sword. It had been an unworthy thing in the Church to have excluded the
Apostles, in whom was the force of all government, they are guilty of the same
error, who at this day would separate the Magistrates Authority from the
Church, which is indeed the foundation of all order and discipline; wherefore
godly Magistrates should be confident of this, that it is in their power, now
to give vigor and life to Ecclesiastic order and discipline; whence it
belongs to them to prescribe Laws in this, how, and on whom they are to be
observed; that simple men may not rashly be deluded with the false persuasion
of sanctity, or with the mercenary collation of holy Offices, or denial
thereof, men's minds be disquieted; or the holy things of Religion be profaned.
This was surely the chief criginall and foundation of the Popes mighty power,
and the base contempt of Princes, that he armed himself with a power of
censuring, and excommunitating, by reason of the carelessenesse of simple
Laymen, and the superstitious gentleness of Magistrates, to which the
Wallachrian incendaries hope that they also will come, and so do every where
all the new Hierarchicall Papists, but they shall never come to it; if by your
authority it be established, that nothing be absolutely committed to
Church-Rulers, or Ministers, concerning the denial of the common Sacraments,
or the conferring of them; nothing concerning receiving into the Church or
excommunicating thence, but that all these things be judged and ordered by you.
So you shall by your supreme power bring to pass, that the malice of
ill-minded Papists, shall not hurt the consciences, fame, goods, and lives of
godly men, and that the wicked perverseness of seditious Incendiaries may never
hinder the sincere labors of godly Ministers, in preserving of Religion,
promoting of man's salvation, and in maintaining the true order and decency of
the Church, this benefit also with many more, will be had by your presence,
that new Papists will be hindered from profaning the Supper, and all holy
things: there is nothing more common among these Outlaws, then to prescribe
Laws of sanctity to others, which they themselves will scarce touch with one of
their fingers. They seem to have taken this from the Levites, who as Christ
told them by keeping of the Sabbath profained it. For they did labor, and
perform all the work of burchers, whereas the Sabbath commanded them to rest.
But this was unavoydable, and belonged to their worship, but the Papists
enormity, is neither necessary, nor unavoydable, but Arbitrary and agreeing to
the Popes evil custom, who indeed prescribes innumerable laws to Christians,
but he himself is lawless; that when he sins, he must not be thought to sin,
for who dare excommunicate the Pope? If he lead a thousand souls to bell, who
will say to him, what do th^^? because he has power to dispense, and to
forgive all. Who knows not that he has dispensed all things to himself
aforehand? this Leprosy comes cre^ping by degrees upon the new Papists; they
command Christians that they come not to the Supper, till they be examined;
they make inquiry into every man's life and manners, not that they might help or
ease their minds (for this care they have cast off) but that they may show
their power, and may entrap every man's estate and good name, but if they
quartell among themselves with violent malice, if they brawle and fight with
all disgraceful names, if they also are scandalously drunk, if they play the
merry Greeks, or be convinced of notorious fraud, yet who will think that they
will offer to come to the Supper without examining themselves? every one of
them dispenses with his own corruptions. But if the matter be committed to the
censure of the Consistory or Cla^^s, they do but as Affes claw or bite one
another. The censurer will say, Brother, thou have offended: He that is
censured will answer with laughter, Brother, I have sinned, but not I alone,
you also, etc. do you remember? so the matter is hushed up ridiculously, and
daubed over with a dirty pensill. What else is this, but to profane all sacred
things? therefore it is necessary that your supreme power be present, with
penalties, and the terror of the sword, which may curb such A^axes, and teach
the Ministers not to prostitute their holy mysteries.

Now I come to their Legislative power, and dependence, which as a most holy
thing, the Wallachrian Papists will have free to themselves, but I have showed
before that there is no divine right in them. The Apostles indeed had meetings,
but they were popular with the presence of all the Members, in which there
appeared no pride, or arrogance at all, but order. But now pride has found out
the arrogant names and inventions of Classes, Synods, Provincialls, National,
Universal, and the rest unknown as I showed before, to the Apostolical
Churches. Neither do we find that the Apostles made many Laws there or rigid
or necessary, which might lay a yoke upon Christians, and give occasion to
will worship, but they did stoutly every where forbid such, least it should be
said to Christians what the false Apostles urged, 1 eat not, then taste rot,
lastly, much not; Besides the Apostolical meetings were extraordinary, for the
supreme power resided in the Apostles miraculously, which showed it self when
occasion served. Many were present who had the gifts of Prophecy, of Tongues,
of Government, of discerning spirits: and a full measure of the Spirit, so that
there was no need then of contentions and quarrels, for seeing all were moved
by one holy Spirit, it was easy for the spirits of the Prophets, to be subject
to the Prophets, and to agree among themselves. He that will compare to those
Divine meetings, the modern Conventicles of Papists, were as good compare the
running together of Bears, Porters and Pedlers, to the assembly of the seven
wise men of Greece. Nazianzen was not the first that observed, but experience
of all times has taught us, that the chief use of Clergy-mens, meetings, is
to spend victuals, or by settling of one quarrel, to raise many more, for
because every one thinks that he is Christ's Legate, subject immediately to him,
under no man's command, and full of the Holy Ghost. Hence it falls out seldom,
that the one will yield to the other, in matter of spitting, quarrelling, and
contending; until they that are more moderate, though they excel the rest in
piety, wit, and other gifts, being wearied with their brawlings, dismiss the
business, and suffer by connivence, the worser cause to prevail, this might
be seen even in the first Nicen Synod, where there had been no end of
contentions, had not the Emp^rour ^e^n President in the higher seat; by whose
authority notwithstanding the contentious Churchmen were not hindered from
exhibiting to the Emperors bundle of Petitions and papers full of reproaches,
brawlings and quarrels, how that he might ease himself of their burden,
flung them all into the fire, if it were thus with Church men, when the Emperor
was there present armed with the sword, what will not fall out there, where
lumps of rank (...) shall meet together, without the mixture of secular salt.
Such are oftentimes found among the Wallabrians, as may be seen by this work.
It is most sure, that there are no such contentions and disorders, as are in
their Consistory, and Classical meetings, so that it has been still
troublesome and scandalous for moderate Christians to be present amongst them.
And many have taken such offense at them, that they have afterward doubted
whether piety, true Religion, or the Spirit of God could be there, where they
saw order, right, and modesty, so shamelesly violated, he that will truly
consider the truth of this, will he not be of my opinion, that it will prove a
most unjust, and calamitous thing, if liberty be granted to such meetings, to
prescribe Laws for men's Consciences, and force Christians to observe what they
please, under pain of the greater and lesser excommunication? If this
superstition once get hold of Magistrates, surew^ll Religion; Protestants must
look for no other Religion then Popery. There is no other remedy for this
evil, but to hinder such Churchmen from meeting thus often, the end of which
meetings can be none else, but to beget one quarrel out of another, and to
seek out a period for Ruling. Let not the^ the Civil Power be absent, not that
there you may sit as harmless Constitoriall Lamb^, among the cornuted Rams,
for ^o the Sti^^-walker will by plurality of Votes cunningly deride you; but
that sitting in the higher seat, as Gods Vicegerents and having the supreme
power, to which God has subjected every soul, you may take charge of
Ecclesiastic souls also, least they leaving the charge of souls, should gape
(...) secular business, and lay shares against your Government.

Vocation remains, the lurking hole of all sanctity; from this (...)
Wall^thrians earnestly desire to keep the Magistrates by right of (...), or at
least of (...) and imposition of hands. But we have showed that these are
fained things to afright men. As for the right of election the ^^^^t-Walker
though unwillingly, grants to the Magistrate, Imposition of hands is nothing
but a consequence or appendix of vocation: neither is it of such a separated
and precise right, but that the Ap^^^^es sometimes used it, sometimes not, and
sometimes it was permitted to diverse that were not Preachers, as an indifferent
ceremony; so that Calvin shows how the Elders did promiscuously impose hands;
but pride and custom did at last confer this upon the Bishop: to remove
which evil, this will be the remedy, that confirmation by imposition of hands
may not be superstitiously done by the Preacher, but sometimes by the Elder,
the Deacon, the Magistrate, or any Christian who is of a known godly life, and
not always one, but sometimes more, that the old simplicity being restored, it
may abolish Popish superstition. If the Magistrate will effect this by his
authority, he will cause that enchantment of Ecclesiastic superstitions
sanctity of special right to cease, and will hinder the spiritual knaveries
of some Clergy men, which are solemn, there in their Vocations, as I have
often showed, and experience does daily teach us; especially, that superstition
shall cease, which the Stilt-walker strives to taint all men with, that it is
not lawful for Magistrates to choose their Ministers, under pain of
Sacrilege, and being chosen, to remove them, without the consent of the Clergy.

I confess, that when these men become moderate, the matter should be handled
by their counsels in common, but if this come to pass (what we see in the
Stilt walker and his company) that the whole strife be about pre-eminence, that
what the Magistrate approves, the Churchmen by right or wrong disapproves,
that they may obtain to themselves the whole Church Government; if in election
of Ministers their intent be to choose such as by secret catechisings and
promises, they have tied to them in promoting the Ecclesiastic Liberty, as
they call it, that is to say, the Popish Hierarchy, which at this day is called
the holy Mystery of the Wallachrian Vocation. In such a case why should not the
Magistrate use his authority? which not only Solomon and others did, but the
Apostles also being supreme and plenipotentiaries, who suffered indeed the
Church to choose men by prayers, lots, imposition of hands so long as order
continued sincerely, but as soon as the people by their carnal choice began
to err, and false Apostles intruded themselves perversely and violently when
Alexander the Smith, Hymeneus, and Elymas, and other deceivers stirred, they
failed not, by their miraculous Monarchical authority which they had, to force
them all to their duty. This power is now in godly Magistrates, and by them in
the Church. Who will dream this to be sacrilege, if in calling of a Minister,
Churchmen should desire him who is most unfit, looking to their own private
interests, who if they be stubborn, even to the Churches ruin; I say, who
will think it, sacrilege if the Magistrate use his authority in procuring
betimes for the Church an able man? Again, if by fraud such a For as wants
spiritual gifts should creep in, and strive mainly for pre-eminence and go
about to overthrow the civil government, sow quarrels, and hunt for popular
applause, that he may raise sedition against the Magistrates, when they will
not flatter him in his pride; who will debar the Magistrate from curbing such
a man with his authority, and compelling him to submit to Divine Ordination,
that is, obey the secular Sword? not that he should be still thrust out of his
Ministry, which Solomon did, and some of our age. Many remedies may be against
this evil, so that there is no necessity always to use desperate remedies,
against desperate diseases. First, let the fault be mended by some mulct, or
penalty, not that ridiculous Church one, that the censurer should reprove in
words, and the party censured shall satisfy with words again, or laughter,
but let the mulct be pecuniary. which will vex the Church-mans soul; Let a
command be laid upon the Treasurer, to detain some part of his yearly stipend,
for neglecting his Ministry, and not discharging his duty; I know there is no
Minister so spiritual, as will not fear this sensible penalty.

There is a higher degree, which they say in Ecclesiastic Policy is ordered in
Zeland, among their acts; that who, though upon just cause, shall stir up any
party in the Church against the Magistrate, he shall be silenced from his
Ministry in that place, and never to be admitted thither again. Let it not be
amiss if they borrow a remedy from the Gentiles, even from the Pope himself,
as Solomon of old did gold and wood from the Tyrians and Gentiles, for the
building of his Temple.

Among the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, they had their Ostracisme and
Petalisme, by which they used to banish from their Cities for ten years
together, not those that were infamous, but whom the favor of the people made
suspected of affecting the tyranny. This banishment was not dishonorable, nor
perpetual, for after the expiration of ten years they returned. This was the
effect thereof, that by their long absence they ceased to be burdensome to the
State, and less feared. The like custom at this day the pope or Bishop uses,
when he sees any man either for his virtue or preposterous zeal, or else for
some tolerable fault to be any where suspected, or burdensome, he sends him
away to some other place, by a change not dishonorable, that so the personal
or local inconvenience may be avoided without any great loss of honor or
profit to him who is thus translated. There are other remedies which may be
found out by others to cure the heat of Ecclesiastic pride at this day; which
if you will carefully prevent, by plucking up the cares of superstition, and
papal tyranny, the corn of Religion and Order will continue pure, and free
from all contempt: One perhaps will say; what shall be done, if a wicked
Magistrate, and an enemy of the Church should be endowed with such power in
Ecclesiastic matters? Will not such an exorbitant power prove destructive to
the Church? Which will be prevented, if he be debarred from meddling with holy
things.

I answer, We must not do evil, that good may come, neither must men's minds
be filled with devices, that the Church may be kept from danger. Paul, as I
have often said, was not ignorant of this evil, and yet he injoynes every
soul to be subject to every Magistrate. Besides, we must note that religion,
has been more ruined by too great Ecclesiastic, then by too great Secular
power; so that this is always an intestine and domestic destruction, that
when necessity requires may be secluded. Let Papists, and chiefly Anabaptists
witness, amongst whom the contempt of the Magistrate is the occasion of
infinite, and irreconcilable Schisms. This had always been incident to
Christ's Church, if the supreme power had not preserved unity, and purity of
Religion, miraculously, under the Apostles, and after them, by the ordinary
means, so that in the fullness of Antichristianisme, Religion was not
extinguished, until the secular Sword was suppressed, and Church-tyranny had
seized upon all. If it should please God to afflict the Church with this
extreme misery, that our Magistrates should prove impious and enemies to the
Church; Apollonius his fictitious Hierarchicall Government, will prove but
small help against it, no more then childrens seed, which they sow in their
little Garden-plots, will resist hunger, if the ground be generally barren, as
it was in Egypt: in such a case we must pray to God, says Calvin, that he
would turn the Magistrate; and we must endure the affliction; and if Order and
Government cannot be precisely observed yet by all means the purity of
Religion must be maintained, as we see how little contention there was among
Christians for pre-eminence, command, and power, when they were under the
cross, who rejoiced, if by any means they could preserve the form of Divine
worship, and true Religion.

I confess I have been longer then I purposed in this Discourse, and have
given this advice in general, not that I might carpe at the true Chrian
worship, or the true Order thereof, but that I might bring my b^cket of help
and counsel, to quench the raging Hierarchicall fire among the Wallachrians;
and chiefly that I might perform the funeral Obsequies, to the Ghost of your
worthy Vedelius, so pious and well-deserving, which the Popish Wallachrian
crew, with their Captain the Stilt-walker, did endeavor to bespit and bepisse.
I hope, I have not done amiss, if I have for his misdeeds rubbed him somewhat
roughly, my chief drift is, only to unfeather this Wallachrian Cuckoo, or
Aesopicall Mag^pye, who has adorned himself with diverse sorts of feathers, the
greatest part whereof he has borrowed from the Pope, the Roman Peacock; as I
have showed at large. And whilst I am now drawing to an end, that which
Aristotle records of the wild Bull, is very pat for my purpose: This beast the
Paeonians call Bolinthus, which had a Mane like a Horse, Arist. lib. de mira^.
initio.
but in all the rest of his body. he was like a Bull, or Ox; so that his
horns were black, big and crooked. He defended himself with his heels, and
squirting of his belly, for he used to void great store of dung, for the space
of four paces, so hot, that it scalded off dogs hairs, if it had touched
them; but this was only when the beast was angered, for when it was quiet, the
dung had not such force, thus far he.

Surely the Wallachrian Ox that treads out the corn, Maned like a Horse,
has exceedingly struck at the Magistrates with his horns, but such as are
crooked or bended inwardly, and so could touch nothing, he indevoured to kick
with his heels, but to no purpose, so that like that enraged beast, he has
done nothing but shit out dung in a large measure, and for many paces together,
which he had gathered out of the Jesuits Privies, of such heat, that it seems
to scald; but this heat has only touched the hairs, and I doubt not, if the
beast be quiet, but that his dung will lose its heat and force: But if he go
on in his madness, I believe he shall find those who will shit and squirt his
own hot stuff upon his own back, so that the beast will stink, and be
scalded with his own excrements.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line 23. for folies read follies, p. 15. l. 21. for of r. or, p. 28.
l. 27. for Apolian^. Apollonian, p. 31. l. 37. for spiritually r. spirituallity
p. 51. l. 30. for is it r. it is, p. 60. l. 28. for ^ r. of, p. 63. l. 9. for
ceised r. seized, p. 73. l. 11. for there r. this, ibid. l. 35 for loosen r.
loosed p. 75. l. 25. for ar r. as, p. 77. l. 13. for assia^^e r. assistance, p.
84. l. 14. for excommunicates r. excommunicants, l. 28. for bad r. old, l. 31
for old r. bad. p. 85. l. 30. r. contumacy, p. 86. l. 1 for held r. chapter, p
89. l. 35. for it r, is, p 92. l. 35. r. the matter, p 93. l 16 r. such as, l.
21. for pawn r. power, l. 35. for Pope r. Popes, for flires r. flies, p. 99. l.
28. r. believe, l. 30 for arguing r. urging, p. 103. l. 9. r. the, p. 110. l.
14 dele in. l. 36. r. it, p. 111. l. 29 r going to, p. 129. l. 26 r. to be, p.
136. l. 17. for one r. no, p. 160. l. 17. for held r. head, The letter Y. for
101 r. 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168 p. 161. l. 4. for husbands r
husband, p 162 l. 22 for his r. this, l. 27. for show r showed, p. 164. l. 17,
r. Be. p. 165. l. 1. for yet r yea. p. 168. l. 30. for ^re r. are, p. 172. l.
19. r. this, p. 181. l. 38. for is r. are, p. 202. l. 1. r. sanctity. p. 204.
l. 29. for this r. his, l. 32, dele of. p. 209. l. 19. r. administer, p. 218.
l. 22. a is left ou^, p. 251. l. 34. r. not p. 255. l. 2. for how r. now, p.
256. l. 38. for spiritual r. fit, or acquired.

THE KINGDOMS Weekly Intelligencer. SENT ABROAD To prevent misinformation.
From Tuesday, May 11. to Tuesday, May 18. 1647.
I Had an intent in the Preface to this Intelligence to acquaint you with what
is THAT which has raised a coil in the Army; And truly to inform you with
the first Rise the Growth and progress of it, and how at has been headed and
handed on: I should have told you of the admirable care and patience of the
General, I should have elecred the common Soldier. I should have extolled
many officers, I should have acquainted you with what subtle boldness some
men drive on their Design to to oppose those Worthies by whose Authority they
have acted, and performed great and glorious things. I should have represented
to you the sad condition wherein we are, but having spoken something of
LIBERTY the last week, lest I might be mistaken for a Libertine, I will begin
this week with something concerning RELIGION.

For this is the Bond by which we do oblige our selves to God in a commanded
obedience for the performance of holy Duties according to his Will and Word. I
say a commanded obedience, for should we sancy a Divine worship of our own,
there would be as many Religions as men, since every man does differ from
another as much in opinion as in countenance, and is more precisely singular in
the business of Divinity. We should not therefore trust to our own dark and
false and misguiding lights, but in submission unto order apply our selves to
such Pastors and teachers, who presume not too much on private inspirations,
but take pains to receive their light from the Counsels, and Doctors of the
Church, who so the suppressing of Ignorance and superstition, have been famous
in their Generation, and shall be forevermore.

Tuesday, May 11.
THe printed Books of the Confession of Faith with notes of Scripture annexed
to it were this day delivered to the Members of both Houses of Parliament, the
Members subscribed their Names at the receipt thereof; before the Books are
published, the Parliament are to give their License and approbation of them.

This day Judge Jenkins a Prisoner in the Tower, Petitioned the House of
Commons, whereupon it was ordered that an Ordinance should be drawn up, and
brought in for his trial, which it is believed will be very speedy.

It was this day ordered that no Passes shall be granted to go beyond the Seas,
but upon business of some great concernment. A Vessel was taken passing from
Dover unto Calit. wherein were some Merchants and their Wives, who intended for
a day or two to see foreign Countries only for their pleasure, and to make
mecry at Calice, but the Pinnace being taken by Captain Mildmay, they were
sent prisoners to Captain Batten, who (as I hear) has with some check
discharged them.

A Letter was received from Sir John H^lland, one of our Commissioners with the
King at Holmby; wherein he desires leave to go awhile about some business of
his own into Hampshire. The Earl of D^^^igh did also write to the House of
^^ords, that for a certain space of time he might have leave to come to
London, to the condiscending of which I shall acquaint you in the passages of
the day following.

Wednesday, May 12.
THe Commons this day received a Message from the House of Lords, concerning
the Letters of the Earl of Di^bigh for his coming to the City, to which the
House of Commons did give their assent.

A Letter being the day before received from the Scort Commissioners concerning
the going of the Earl of Da^^irm^^ing unto the King at Holmby, It was this day
Ordered that the said Earl should have access unto the King according to
agreement.

This day the House of Commons finished the Propositions to be sent unto the
King and they were passed with this Caution, That all such who have compounded
for their Estates shall be free, Provided that they have delivered a just
account of their Estates and at a true Rate. It was Ordered that the Assent of
the House of Peers should be had unto it. Colonel Rainsborought Ordinance for
the reducing of Iarsoy was this day sent unto the Lord; for their Concurrence.
The differences in Ga^^oso^ betwixt the Deputy Governor Colonel Russell, and
the Inhabitants of that Island were referred to a Committee to have them
examined.

Letters from Wales did this day confirm that the Soldiers at Poole in
Mountgomeryshire have made a new Insurrection and have seized upon the persons
of two of the Committee and a Gentleman who was Collector of monyes in that
County: Master Thomson who was the Collector had his liberty upon his assurance
that he would within three days pay three hundred pound unto the Soldiers.

It was this day Ordered by the Lords that the Ordinance for the two hundred
thousand pound for the securing of all those who sha^^ advance the said monyes
for the service of England and Ireland shall be forthwith Printed: The
Ordinance is extant at large to which I shall refer you.

The Lady Cave who brought Letters from the Qu^^n^ unto his Majesty and
perempterily and boldly affirming that she would deliver them unto him, was
taken, examined and sent Prisoner to Northampton; she was said to be as full of
height of spirit (...) her deportment as she was delicate in her beantyes.

From Ireland we hear but little this week of action, I shall in this place
insert some Proceedings of the general Assembly of the Confederate Catholic^es
in Ireland.

WHereas the Confederate Roman Catholics of pre^an^ have been forced to take
Arms for the necessary defense and preservation of their Religion, plotted,
and by many foul practices endeavored to be quite suppressed by the Puritan
faction, as also for the defense, safeguard and maintenance of his Ma^esties
regal power, just prerogatives, and rights invaded upon by the Mangnant
Parliamentary party of England, Ireland and Scotland and for the presrvation
of the Religion, lives, liberties possessions, estates and rights of the said
Confederate Catholics, have to that effect heretofore taken an Oath of
Association in Declaration, and firm binding of a real and unanimou^ union
among them for the effects aforesaid.

It is ordered that all and every Magistrate and Officer as well within Cities
and Towns Corporate, as likewise all manner of Offficers of what name condition
or degree either in the Marshall or Civil List within the Quarters of the
confederate Catholics shall upon the taking of any employment swear and take
the Oath of Association aforesaid, Otherwise not to be admitted in any such
public trust or employment. And all and every Magistrate or other Officer of
what nature, name or comdition whatsoever already in authority, or entrusted
from the Confederate Catholics in any employment either Civil or Martial,
that shall fail or refuse to take the Oath aforesaid to be immediately upon
such refusal displaced and put from command power, Office or employment among
the said Confederate Catholics and to be treated with and proceeded against as
an enemy in manner as before declared: and forasmuch as grievous and daily
complaints are made against the Commanders and Officers of the Army for their
contempts and disobedience to the Orders of such as are placed in authority, or
in the government of the Kingdom, to prevent the like in the future, by the
tie and obligation of obedience, by the aforesaid Oath imposed. It is further
ordered that no manner of Commander of what degree soever in any the Army or
Armies of the Kingdom shall receive or be paid either for any past arrears or
future means, to accru from the public unto him or them respectively until
such Commander or Commanders officer or officers do produce his and their
certificate respectively of taking the Oath aforesaid. And it is further
ordered and declared that no person or persons of what degree or quality soever
shall be admitted to sue, implead or shall have any other judgment, sentence
or decree in any court or courts Judicature or Judicatures whatsoever either
spirit all or temporal within the Quarters of the confederate Catholics
before such person or persons first take the said Oath of Association, and that
they not taking or refusing to take the said oath of Association shall be a
sufficient plea in Bar, and shall abate the suit or suits of any such person
or persons whatsoever. And the Superiors and other persons aforesaid of
secular and regular Clergy entrusted to administer the said Oath of
Association and to return Rolls as before declared are enjoined as they tender
the public good of Ireland and of the Catholic cause duly and effectually to
pursue and observe the contents of this order, and least herein they or any of
them should prove negligent those to be entrusted in authority and with the
government of the Kingdom by this Assembly are upon such failer, by issuing
of Commissions to such whom they shall think fit to trust or by some other
means to prescribe a Course; whereby the said Oath of Association shall be
generally taken by all the Confederate Catholics of Ireland in manner as is
before expressed and declared.

Given at Killkenny the 12 of March 1647.
Thursday May 13.
THis morning there was a debate in the House of Commons about a Burgess for
Rippon in Yorkshire, by name Solomon Swale of Grayes Inn Esquire, a gentleman
of a very ancient family in that County, and of undoubted fidelity to the
Parliament, which moved the Corporation to make choice of him in his absence,
without any seeking of his at all; and they carried it for him with so general
a consent, that Sir John Bourcheier his competitor had (though present at the
election) but sixteen voices at most, whereupon the Indenture was returned by
the Major of the Town for Mr. Swale to the most worthy, and faithful high
Sheriff of Yorkshire who very nobly and freely signed and sealed it, sending
it to his undersheriffe to be return up speedily to the House: But to the
affront of the Town, and the noble Sheriff, and the dishonor of the worthy
gentleman elected^^e took the boldness to retard the dispatch; while in the
mean time some Adversaries to this election have endeavored to null it by
questioning Master Swale yesterday upon a pretended delinquency at Haberdashers
Hall for passing through the Kings Quarters to a solemn funeral of the Lady
Vicountesse Cambden, Henry Nonell Esquire, and his only Son and Heir; all at
the same time interred in Cambden in Glocestershire: At the performance whereof
he was engaged to be present, being much trusted by the said Lady in the
execution of her great Will, and also in her real estate, for raising Portions
and preferring her Grandchildren; and accordingly had leave given him to
pass, by a warrant signed under the hands of the Committee for safety of both
Kingdoms: All which I mention, to note the insolent partial dealing of an
under-officer, in a business of so high concernement as the free election of a
faithful Gentleman, for the service of his Country in Parliament.

The Petition of the Earl of Mulgrave, the Petition of the Earl of
Northampton and the Petition of Mr. Cartwright were this day read: It was
Ordered that the Earl of Mulgraves Petition should be referred to a Committee
to consider of his losses: It was Ordered in relation to Mr. Cartwrights
Petition (who desired ten thousand pound out of the Earl of Northamptons
Composition) that the said Earl of Northampton shall be referred to Goldsmiths
Hall to compound for his Delinquency upon the usual Rates.

It was Ordered that a Letter should be sent to Captain Batten for the
discharge of those Ships which belonging to the Queen of Swethland he lately
brought into the Downs.

A Committee was named to consider of the great losses of Master Bourcher and
Master Challoner and to receive Petitions and consider of the whole business
concerning Alome and Aloms Pits.

Ordered that a third part of the Arreares of the Officers of the North shall
be paid unto them in full of their Arreares which shall be charged upon the
Excise in course with allowance of eight pound in the hundred to such as shall
advance it.

Friday May 14.
IT was this day Ordered that a fortnights pay shall be added to the Soldiers
six weeks pay upon the disbanding: And that those who go for Ireland shall
have six weeks pay more: The Ordinance was past for Indemnity of Soldiers as
also of the Committees of the several Counties for what they have done in the
parsuance of the Ordinances of the Parliament.

Letters came from Helmby certifing the Kings expectation of the Propositions
to be sent unto him to which already he has prepared an answer, and that if he
could not be allowed a Secretary to transcribe his answer he would write it
over himself as fair, and as well as he could, the King was heard to say,
that his answer was such that he hoped to be justified in it, Letters were also
directed by the King unto the House of Peers, representing something (as is
conceived concerning the Proposition.

Saturday May 15.
By Leteers from Ireland it was this day certified that the Town and Castle of
Caterlagh is surre ^dred to the Rebels upon quarter, and that they intend to
advance from thence to besiege another hold called Trymen: Our ^orse are taken
into the field, the Rebels intend with a running Army to sall into the English
quarters and sweep away all the cattle before them. There is a report that the
Lord I^^he q^i^ has performed good service in Munster and taken a strong
Castle from the Rebels called Cupoquine where was found some store of
Ammunition and provision. It is also said that General Preston is designed
with a strong power to march into Munster to divert the proceedings of the Lord
Inchequin against him.

In the mean time from the Headquarters at Walden it is certified that the
Soldiers have made their several returns by their officers who say that they
find no distempers in the Army, but many grievances: It is referred to a
Committee of general officers to digest into order and method what is
propounded by the whole Army: this accordingly has been done, and the
grievances distinctly set down in the name of the officers and soldiers of
the whole Army, which has been presented to Field Marshall Skipper to
represent them to the Parliament. In this they meddle with nothing, but that
which pertains to them as Soldiers.

Monday, May 17.
THe Committee for Ireland did this day sit for the promoting of the affairs
of that Kingdom from whence we received further confirmation, that General
Preston being advanced to hinder the prosperous success of the Lord Inchequin,
in the Province of Munster, Owen Oneale is ordered to defend the Province of
Lemster, and what the Rebels do enjoy about Kilkenny, which is a flourishing
Country, and by some called The Garden of that Kingdom: A numerous party of
our Horse, with some companies of Foot are marched into the Field, betwixt
whom, and the Rebels you will shortly hear of Action.

The Letters from Scotland do this day certify, that the affairs in that
Kingdom do continue in the same condition, as I declared to you in my last,
with little or almost no alteration at all: Kolkiteth continues, and repeateth
his old cruelties.

Lievtenant-Generall Lesley does continue still at Pearth, on the foot of the
hills, not far from Saint Johnstons, he does what he can to incurrage and
fortify the Garrisons in the Counties of Carlisle and Larue; He is making great
preparations to advance into those Counties for the relief of the poor
Inhabitants, and to fight with Kilkitoth, who it is said expects daily
Recruits of men and Arms from Ireland.

The Lord Dunfermeling is not as yet gone unto the King to Hol^^by but sets
forth from London about Thursday next.

The present necessities of the Kingdom of Ireland, do crave sudden and
considerable supplies.

That which this week is most remarkable is first from England.

The Kings Letter to the Parliament, His Answer drawn up to the Propositions:
And his judgment of it. The Queens Letter is the King. The Desires and the
Demands of the Soldiers of the Army, and an Order for more Pay for them. The
strong Castle of Catterlagh is Ireland surrendered to the Rebels, And the
success of the Lord Inchequin in Munster. The preparations there of our
Forces, and the Designs of the Enemy. The cruelty of the Arch Rebel Kolkitoch
in Scotland, and the preparations of Lieutenant General Lesley to march up the
Hills, and to give battle to him.

Printed for H. B.


