The unlimited PREROGATIVE OF KINGS subverted. Or a Short Treatise grounded
upon Scripture and Reason, to prove that Kings ought as well as others to be
accountable for their Actions.
MATTHEW 22.21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are Gods.


By a well wisher to the Church of God, His King and Country.

And dedicated to all such as love the Truth.

THere will be times (says the Apostle) wherein men will not endure sound
doctrine, 2 Timothy 1.3. but will give heed to seduceing spirits, and doctrines of
devils. 1 Timothy 4.1. And certainly if ever these times shall come to be
fullfilled, now they are, when as Court Parasites and ambitious flatterers,
Divines as well as others whose chiefest Policy now it is to have men's persons
in admiration for advantage sake, Jude 16. and to please those by whom they may
be dignified or rewarded; care not what falsities they speak, nor what untruths
they do maintain; and which is worst of all, are not ashamed to father their
lies even upon the very Scriptures of truth themselves, wresting the same (as
S. Peter says, 2 Pet. 3.16. through their willingly wilful Ignorance) to
their own destruction. Among which this is none of the least, which they say,
That Kings are not responsall to any, save God for their actions: And for this
they bring the saying of the Preacher, Eccles. 8.4 where he says thus, Where
the word of a King is there is power, and who may say unto him what do thou?
Which words if they be thoroughly scanned and examined, you shall find they yield
no such construction; but rather the contrary: For in the 2d verse before
going, the Wise man gives us this charge to keep the Kings Commandment. I
suppose, if they understand themselves they will not say that by virtue thereof
we are bound to do whatsoever the King injoynes us, whether it be right or
wrong: but that it has respect to those things that are either agreeable, or
at least not contrary to the Commandment of God; and the reason thereof is
given in the words following in regard of the Oath of God. Now there are none
(I think) will say (if Kings come lawfully in with the choice and consent of
their People, as all lawful Kings do) that his Oath has only respect unto
the People, as if it did bind only on their part; but also on the part of the
King, who Swears to rule and govern them according to the Laws of God, and of
the Land; and upon this condition they Swear Obedience unto him. This we may
see sufficiently proved by the Covenant of David made with his people, 1 Chronicles.
11.1. where it is said. All the Elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron,
and David made a Covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord: and then it
follows, they anointed him King over Israel. And then again we see this
proved by the mutual Oath between Ioash and his people, 2 Chronicles. 23.11. where
it is said, they brought out the Kings Son and put upon him the Crown, and gave
him the Testimony (that is to say) they made him enter into this Covenant to
keep the Law of God, and to Govern them according thereunto: and then it
follows, they made him King, and Iehojada and his Sons anointed him, and said,
God save the King. And so again in the 16. v. of the same chapter. By this you
see here was an Oath as well on the Kings part as on the peoples; and thus the
people are bound to keep the Kings commandment, when he walks according to
this rule. And such is the Oath of the Kings of England when they come to their
Crowns and Kingdoms.

Then he says further in the 3d verse, Be not hasty to g^e out of his sight,
stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever he pleases. I hope there
are none that dare be so Sacrilegiously bold as from these words to attribute
unto Kings an Almighty power as the words seem to import, which is an Attribute
only proper unto God to be Almighty, as the Psalmist shows. Psalm. 115.3. Our
God is in the heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased: And Psalm 135.6
Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did he in heaven and in earth etc. This were
in an high measure to rob God of his glory and to give that to the creature
that is only due to the Creator. Yet I know no reason why they may not say
from these words (The King does whatsoever he pleases) that Kings have an
Almighty power; as well as to say from the other words (who may say unto him
what do thou?) that therefore Kings are accountable to none save God for their
actions. For you see how the words follow one another, and what may be said of
Kings in one respect, may be said of them in the other. But we may (if we will
at least) take notice that these words are brought in as having relation to
good or evil; and that this is a phrase applied unto Kings, only to show that
their Power is great, and of a large extent. For the good of those that do
well, and for the punishment of those that do evil; and that in respect
thereof, we should have an awful and reverentiall regard of them; for so the
words run, Stand not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever he pleases.

Then for the words following, which are quoted by those that stand for the
unlimited Prerogative* they have respect also to the same. And so it is most
true, That where the word of a King is there is power: If speaking as a King
should, performing the Office of a King; having respect to his Oath and
Covenant between God and his people, in commanding those things that are good,
and punishing those things that are evil, then indeed who may say unto him
what do thou? no man may call him to Question: for as much as God the King of
Kings has put this power into his hands. And what is that indeed that makes
Kings many times so slighted, and so little feared of their people but this
that they take no care at all to govern them according to their Laws? and what
is it on the other side that adds majesty and magnificence unto them, but
this, that they make the Laws of God and of the Land the rules of Magistracy
and government? Herein consists the power of Kings, which the Wise m^n here so
much speaks of. But now that this place is not so to be understood, as the
Royalists of our times for their own ends would have it that Kings are not
accountable unto men for their actions, may easily appear, by comparing this
place with that in Dan. 4 35. where Nebucadnezzar after that he was restored
again to his senses, and to his Kingdom, makes this acknowledgement concerning
the power of God (Who may say unto him what do thou?) Implying thus much,
that howsoever Kings may be great, and their power may reach very far, as he
for his own part was none of the meanest, being the greatest Monarch that was
then in the world yet this did not belong unto him nor unto any King else
whatsoever but was Gods sole Prerogative only to be responsall unto none for
his actions.

By this you see how weak this place is for their purpose, who from hence would
prove Kings unlimited power, as unaccountable to any save God: whereas all that
the W^se man aims at, is nothing but this, to show the extent of the power of
Kings for their peoples good, as by their Oaths they are tied by all lawful
ways to advance it; and withal to signify unto us, what an awful regard we
ought to have of Kings, whom God has invested with such a power.

I: But say they Kings are Gods, and therefore are not accountable for any
actions they do, and the Scripture calls them so.

Answ. I^ is true the Scripture does so: yet none I believe will be so
blasphemous as to say they are (...), such as have an infinite being of and
from themselves from all eternity: They will at most confess them to be but
Elohim, and this name of God is communicable, and is oftentimes in Scripture
applied unto other creatures, both Angels and Men; yet not to such Men only as
have Kingly dignity, but unto all Rulers and Governors whatsoever: as we may
see Psalm. 82.1. where it is said, God stands in the Congregation of the mighty,
he judges among the Gods. And in the words following, the Psalmist incites,
and stirs them up to the performance of their duties, in their place saying
How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked; defend
the poor and fatherl^sse, do justice to the affli^ted and needy, deliver the
poor and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked. Then in the 6. verse
again he says, I have said ye are gods etc. In all this here we see there is
not a word spoken of Kings in particular, but generally this phrase is applied
unto all Rulers and Magistrates whatsoever: and besides we know that the duties
before spoken of, are proper to them as well as unto Kings. Moreover, I do not
know in all the Scriptures, where this word Elohim is so particularly applied
unto Kings as it so be in regard thereof, they should be less accountable for
their actions then any other Rulers. So then if this be true, as we plainly out
of Scripture see it is that other Rulers as well as Kings are called Gods, then
Kings as well as other Rulers are accountable for their actions unless that we
will say that all Rulers and Governors whatsoever are not accountable unto men
for what they do.

But say they Kings are the highest powers on earth how then can they be
accountable unto those that are inferior and under them, which is not
accidental unto other Rulers and Governors because there are higher above
them that they may give account unto: but none are above Kings: therefore they
are to give account to none, save only God.

Ans I deny that Kings on earth are the highest powers, and this I say, that
the Kingdom is above the King, and so consequently the representative body
thereof* the whole power of all the body of the people of the Land, being by
general consent transmitted over unto it; and I prove it thus: The end is
always greater then the means, or the means are subordinate to the end, and
therefore must needs be inferior, for the means could never have bin but for
such or such an end for which they were appointed: no wise man that understands
what he says will deny, but that the cause is greater then the effect: but
Kings were ordained for this end; they were chosen and appointed both by God
and Man, to be a means for procuring of the good and welfare of their
Kingdoms, and had there bin no people, there had bin no Kings: by which it
appears, that Kings have their dependence upon their People, and that they
were the primary cause, and Kings but the ^effects proceeding from them:
therefore their Kingdoms are greater then they; and so consequently the
representative bodies thereof. And surely there is somewhat in it too, that Kings
are called the Ministers and Servants of the State, and so all good Kings and
Governors have acknowledged themselves to be.

Then again Kings are but the ordinance of Man, as the Apostle shows, 1 Pet.
2.13. Submit you^ s^lv^s to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
it be to the King as supreme. Where the Apostle gives us this exhortation, to
submit to Kings though they be the ordinance of man. How will any say that they
which do infuse a power into others are inferior unto them into whom they do
infuse it; that the power electing is inferior to the power elected; that the
original is inferior to the consequence; that the fountain head is inferior
to the streams that flow from it? I believe there are none that are in their
right senses will say it. So then, if the people are the original of that
power that is in Kings, and that the power they have is borrowed from them, as
the streams slow from the Fountain, let any judge whether is greater the King
or his people. Not any particular person among the people nor any particular
Corporations or Assemblies thereof but the whole body of the people I say
considered together; of those that by especial consent of all the people do
represent the whole.

But here it may be said, How say you that Kings are the ordinance of man, does
not the Apostle once and again Romans 13.1, etc. call all Rulers, and so
consequently Kings the ordinance of God? Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God: Whosoever therefore resists the power resists the ordinance
of God, etc. If they be the ordinance of God, how be they the ordinance of Men
then?

Answ Here give me leave to ask one Question: Say any Polity or State choose
any kind of Government, whether Kings, or Dukes or Judges, or the like, and by
general consent for the good of the people they establish it by Law, is not
this then a humane ordinance, this or that kind of Government that they have
chosen; yet I suppose you will not deny but that this is the ordinance of God,
that now they should submit themselves thereto? Therefore the Apostle speaking
concerning Magistrates in Romans 13. says not a word concerning Kings, as if
they were more a divine Ordinance then other Rulers, but in general terms he
says, that all rulers whatsoever are of God: But when he comes to speak of
Kings in particular, as he does 1 Pet. 2.13. he calls them the ordinance of
man, whereby he does as it were comment upon, and explain the meaning of those
words of S. Paul, Romans 13 as if he should have said thus: It is true, Power,
Magistracy and Government is the ordinance of God, and by divine institution:
but so are not Kings, nor this nor that nor any other kind of government they
are of man, and through his appointment. So that I say Kings, for their kind of
government, are the ordinance of man: For God has not tied any people in his
Word, that they shall be governed by Kings, or by Dukes, or by Judges, or
Estates or the like, but referres that unto themselves for their choice,
according as they shall see most convenient for their good and prosperity; but
when this or that kind of government is ordained and established by general
consent of the people, this is the ordinance of God, which the Apostle gives a
charge, that every one be subject unto (according to the old saying, Vox Populi
vox Dei. The voice of the people is Gods voice) which they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation. So that still you see there is a power on earth
above Kings (as I said before) which lies in the generallity of the people,
from whence they do receive as from their Fountain head their Sovereignty and
Kingly dignity.

Now then from what has bin said, follows this consequence of necessity,
that if there be a greater power on earth then Kings are, Then Kings are
accountable for their actions thereunto, and ought to be subject as well as
others, as appears by that in Rom 13 1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God etc. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
In which words we see the Apostle gives a general charge to all inferiors to
submit themselves to their superiors: therefore if Kings be inferior to their
Kingdoms, and so consequently to the representative bodies thereof; then Kings
ought by virtue of this charge, to be subject thereunto as well as others.

But how ought they to submit what? in doing only and in matter of obedience,
are they discharged there, so as though they abuse their power never so
exorbitantly, to spoil oppress and destroy their people, censure may not
pass upon them nor punishment be inflicted? surely I find no such distinction
in all the word of God: Nay, we are commanded the contrary, and the law of
nature teaches us as much, that if there be a festred and a gangreen'd member
in the body, that would destroy the whole, to cut it off for the preservation
of the whose.

I, it is true will they say, if there be any festred or corrupted member in
the body that would destroy the whole we ought to cut it off, rather then to
suffer all the body to perish, the Law of God and nature teaches us thus much:
but in case the head should have any Gangreene in it, and you cut that off, you
do immediately destroy the body; the life can not be preserved when the Head is
gone. So in like manner the King he is the Head of the State, and in that
respect he has such an influence upon the State, that if you cut Him off, you
destroy the whole State together with Him, as you destroy the body when you
take away the head thereof: therefore be he never so wicked, He is to be suffered
and borne withal.

Answ. This similitude or resemblance here does not hold good, therefore we must
distinguish between a natural head, and a civil head: for if the natural
head of the body of man be taken away, the body dies: but it is not so with the
civil Head of the State, as experience does sufficiently show by the death of
Kings. But if it were possible in the body of man, when one head is taken away
to find another to put in his place, and so to preserve the life as it may be
done in the State, surely Heads would oftentimes be changed, and cut off as
well as other members. So that if we will thus reason, that the Head of the
State should be in respect of His body, as the head of man in respect of the
body of man, then it does necessarily follow, that the Head being dead, the
body should die also, as is manifest in the body of man. But it does not hold
so in the head of the State as it does in the head of the body of man, that if
the head of the State be cut off the State dies, as does the body of man:
therefore the King who is the Head of the State, if a corrupted and a festred
Member, that may endanger the destruction of the body of the State, ought to be
cut off, for the preservation of the whole, for, Salus populi suprena lex:
nothing ought to be so much regarded as the Peoples safety, which is the end of
all Law and government whatsoever.

This similitude, though it hold not good as it is above proposed, yet it does
in the contrary, that if a King by his wicked and Tyrannical courses, does
destroy his Kingdom, he does destroy himself, as when the natural body is
destroyed, the head of necessity must perish with it.

I but will some say this is strange, Where in all the Scripture do you find
that the people have with Gods likeing and approbation so much as resisted
their Kings, how much less censured them, or brought them to trial or
punishment, for any actions that ever they have done?

For the first of these I Answer, that Kings in their wicked and ungodly
courses have bin resisted by their people, the Spirit of God speaking by way of
commendation of them for it, or at least wise not disapproving the same. This
is evident by diverse places of Scripture; As first of all we have an example
hereof in Ionathans case. 1 Samuel 14 44. where because that lonathan had eaten a
little Honey, contrary to the Commandment of his Father Saul, who was then
King of Israel he would have put him to death; thereupon the people stand up in
his just defense, against Saul his Father, saying. Shall Jonathan die who has
wrought this great salvation in Israel, God forbid, as the Lord lives there
shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with
God this day. Then it follows, the people rescued Jonathan that he died not.
Did they not think you resist Saul, when the people rescued him out of his hand
whether he would or no, and contrary to the Oath that he had sworn?

Secondly, we have the example of David in Keilah, 1 Samuel 23.7 etc. where David
being at Keilah, and Saul hearing of it, thought he had got now his opportunity
to take him, that he might kill him, as oftentimes he had before endeavored:
but it so pleased God that this came to David's ears, that Saul secretly
practiced mischief against him, to come and take away his life. Hereupon David
inquires of God, First to know whether it were so or no, as that Saul would
come down to Keilah? God answers him, that he would. Thereupon the second time
he asks him Whether the men of Keilah would deliver him and his men into the
hand of Saul, or no? God answers him that he would deliver him up. By this last
it does clearly appear, that if so be the Keilites would have bin true to
David, and have stood to him, he would have maintained the Town against Saul,
and have defended himself in it: otherwise, why should David ask God the
second time, Whether the men of Keilah would deliver him up and his men into
the hands of Saul, or no? he might have gone his way, when that he heard Saul
would come down, without asking any more questions, unless we will say that
the second question, which David propounded to ask of God, was frivolous and
vain, and so consequently the answer that God gave it; which I suppose there
are none will be so bold as to affirm. (This was the very case of Sir John
Hotham in Hull, who for this very action His Majesty was pleased to Proclaim
him Traitor.)

Then again, it may be further said of David, if he had not had a purpose to
have resisted Saul in case of exigency, and extremity, what did he with 600.
men about him? he might have fled from Saul when he was coming toward him,
without such a train and guard of men attending him, and so have saved himself
without them. Nay, he might in all probability have escaped his hands better,
for had he not had so many with him, he might have kept himself the more
close, and secret, so that he could not have bin so easily discovered. And
besides this we read 1 Chronicles. 12.22. that There came to David to help him
before Saul's death an host, like the host of God: and what? was all this
preparation and assistance for nothing?

One more example I will bring out of the Scriptures, and that is of King
Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26 16. who incroached upon the Office of the Priests, and
would take upon him to offer Incense in the Temple of the Lord, contrary to the
express commandment of God: whereupon it is said in the 17. verse, that
Azariah the Priest went in after him, and with him fourscore Priests of the
Lord, that were valiant men, and they withstood Vzziah the King, and said unto
him, it pertains not to thee Vzziah to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense; go out of the
Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from
the Lord God. Then Vzziah was wroth, and had a Censour in his hand to burn
Incense: and while he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy even rose upon
his forehead, before the Priests in the house of the Lord, besides the Incense
altar. Then Azariah the chief Priest, and all the Priests looking upon him, and
beholding that he was leprous in his forehead, thrust him out from thence. If
this be not resistance, I know not what is.

Besides all this, the more to stop the mouths of such ill affected persons
in our times, that will take upon them to make much more of Kings, then ever
God made or did intend there are examples even in the Primitive times among the
Christians, who have resisted their Kings in their sinful and unlawful
actions. As to instance in Lycinius the Emperor who had granted to the
Christians to enjoy their Religion, yet afterward turning persecutor, they
sent for Constantine the great to assist them against him, and overthrew him.
And again being persecuted by the King of Persia, the Christians sent for
Theodosius the Emperor to help them against him. And I doubt not but if the
Ecclesiastical Histories of those times were searched there might more
examples of this nature be found out.

But besides all this, we have seen and known the like in our own times, as
lately in the Scots, whom the King himself, that now is, acquitted, when he
came to a right understanding. So the Protestants in France, England all Queen
Elizabeth's days did help them. In our days again in King Charles his own
reign, we sent over a great Force, in show at least, to help Rochel against
the King of France. So in High Iermanie. the Princes there maintain their right
against Charles the 5, and were helped by France and England. In the
Neather-Lands it is evident from the beginning. Now shall we take upon us to
condemn all these Churches for so doing?

Then for the second, which is the principal point here in dispute, Whether
Kings in case they do Tyrannize over their People Oppress, Spoil and Destroy
their Subjects, and do other such like wicked and unnatural actions may have
Censure and Punishment inflicted upon them, according to the nature of their
several Offenses? They say where is there any example or express command in
Scripture for this?

Answ. It is true, there are no examples, or Commands in Scripture for this
particular case, or at least not as I know of; yet that matters not, so long as
we have a rule to walk by, and Commands in general that reach to all
particulars. And for this the like may very well be said, as may for Parents
murdering of their Children, there is no direct Law set down, either divine or
humane, for the punishment of such* the thing is so detestable and contrary to
very nature, that it may be conceived, that there would be none such found: but
if there be, there are general Laws in force for their censure and punishment,
as in case of Murder; and by how much the nearer the relation is, the greater
being the bond and tie for procuring the peace and welfare of such and such
parties, so much the greater is the offense, and so much the more liable are
they to punishment. So I say though there are no particular Laws set down, for
the correcting and punishing of such Kings and Princes as do Oppress Spoil
and Destroy their People, yet so much is included in those general Laws both
of God and Man; and so much the more liable are they to Censure and punishment,
by how much they are Ordained, to be greater instruments of the good and well
being of their People then others are. (For this is the very nature and being
of a King. He is such a one as cares and provides for the Common vealth, takes
pleasure in the commodity and profit of His Subjects; and in all his doings
has respect to the prosperity of those over whom He rules.) Now what those
general Laws are, it is well known; As for example This God has said. He that
sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Gen 9 6. And He that
blasphemes the Name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death. Levit. 24 16.
And again If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter,
or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, (the
King himself may be within the compass of these or most of these relations, as
the case is put) entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other gods,
which thou have not known, thou nor thy fathers, thou shall not consent not
him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him neither shall thou
spare neither shall thou conceal him but thou shall surely kill him thine hand
shall be first upon him to put him to death; and afterward the hand of all the
people and thou shall stone him with stones that he dye Deuteronomy. 13.6 etc. In
which words the Spirit of God plainly shows, that in this case, the greatest
and nearest relation of friendship love and duty, that we can owe to any
whatsoever they be, of what dignity or degree soever should not make us desist
from the execution of Justice. These things are spoken you see without the
least exception that may be, that in case the Rulers or the King should do
thus, that the like should not be done unto them: but God requires that Equity
and Justice be done alike upon all without respect of persons; as we well know
that this is the charge that God has given Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou shall not wrest
judgment, thou shall not respect persons. Where God shows thus much unto us,
that to respect the persons of any in matter of Judgment, or Justice, is to
wrest Justice, and to go aside from that which is right. God will have equal
and impartial judgment administered alike unto all: And the reason hereof is
given by the Holyghost in the place before ci^ed. Deuteronomy. 13.11. That all Israel
may hear and fear and do no more any such wickedne^se. Now there is none
that will deny, but that Kings by nature are as bad as any, and are subject to
be worse then any others, by reason of those Flatterers and evil Counselors,
that usually are about them, as we may see in the examples of Ioash, 2 Chronicles.
24 17. and of Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles 10.8 etc. should it be so then that there were
no Laws in force binding unto them as well as unto Us, and examples of true and
equal Justice made upon them as well as upon others, it were the very next way
to open a gappe to all Kings and Princes to all manner of wickedness and
licentiousnes, and to make them Tyrants that otherwise would be good and
gracious toward their People. Whereas this would be a very good means to keep
Kings in as well as others, from running into such extravagant courses to the
dishonor of God, and the destruction of their people as usually they are wont
to do; unless we will say that God has given unto Kings and Princes a
dispensation above all others, to run headlong unto Hell without control.
They that teach such Doctrine by this now it appears what friends they are
unto them whatsoever they may pretend, who would make Kings of all others the
most miserable, by ascribing unto them an unrestrained liberty to all
wickedness whatsoever, to their destruction.

But here comes in another Objection, for will some say again, Kings are Gods
anointed: therefore men may not question them much less may they touch their
lives whatsoever their actions be: And thus much says David concerning Saul,
who was King of Israel though he were a wicked King and his enemy that sought
his life; and that for no just cause neither; yet when David had an opportun^ty
to slay him, 1 Samuel 24 6. he speaks thus, The Lord forbid that I should do
this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand
against him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord. So again, 1 Samuel 26.9. Who
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltless?

To this I answer, David was a private man (notwithstanding he was Saul's
successor by Gods appointment to the Crown) and so had no warrant to do such
a thing as this, as to take away the life of Saul the King, though he had done
him, or should seek to do him never so much harm. For in a case far
Inferior to this, we know that if a private man be a Thief, and by Law is
condemned to die, yet no man may lay violent hands upon him to take away his
life, but only in a Legal way, and by the executioner that is by authority
appointed for this purpose, if any man should, he would be accounted a
murderer for so doing, and be liable to suffer the Law in that case provided.
So then if this cannot be justifiable upon a private person condemned by Law,
much less then upon a public person, especially such a one as a King is, and
uncondemned too. Therefore in this case had David taken away Saul's life, who was
then King of Israel, he had bin much to blame, and had sinned exceedingly in
the sight of God, wherefore David would not do it.

But we do not know what David would have done, or what he might have done, in
case Saul should forceibly have come upon him to have taken away his life, in
his own just defense for his own safety and preservation: for else for what end
had David those 600. men with him? Surely it will be answered, and I believe
the most malignant among them all will not deny it, that he had them for his
Defense; was it so? Then truly I think that they that will defend themselves, by
Arms and armed men, must needs offend, when they are offended. For this is a
mere conceit that even very children will be ready to laugh at, to say that
when a man's enemy comes against him to do him a mischief he must only defend
himself, but must not strike again. For how is this possible, for a man to
defend himself from his enemy, and yet not offend his enemy?

Then for as much as Kings are called the anointed of the Lord; they are so
called in two respects. First either in regard of the Anointing Oil that was
powered upon them, by the performance of which Ceremony they were inaugurized
into their Functions and Offices. Or else, in regard of that authority, which
by their people they are elected unto, whereby they become Gods Deputies and
Vicegerents here on earth, in ruling and governing of his people.

For the first of these, in as much as Kings are called the anointed of the
Lord, because of the Anointing Oil that was powered upon them, by the
performance of which Ceremony they were inaugurized into their Functions,
whereof some there were that God did in a more especial manner thus institute
and ordain, even by His own immediate appointment, as to wit Saul, David,
Solomon, Iehu, and Hazael, whom he commanded Elijah to Anoint King over Syria.
Yet I see no ground, nor reason, why even these should not be responsall to the
Laws and to their Kingdoms, for their Actions. For I do not perceive that God
did any whit hereby exempt them from the observance of his Laws, either
Actively or passively. If not, then surely they that would attribute thus much
unto them, do exalt and set them above the Laws and Commandments of God (for
you must understand that the judicial Laws in those times, whereby God would
have his people to be governed, were immediately ordained of God; as well as
any other Laws whatsoever) which therefore for my own part I conceive to be no
less then blasphemy; at least I am sure it is a high contempt of Gods
ordinance. Wherefore now (with submission to better judgments) whereas it is
said, Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and be
guitlesse, I suppose this to be the meaning of it; That this is a thing not to
be rashly or unadvisedly done by any, and that it belongs to none but to the
Magistrates only, and that in a legal way, having herein an awful and
reverentiall regard of the Commandment of God.

Yet further I will not deny but that it may probably be, that there may be
somewhat extraordinary in the case of these 5 Kings before mentioned, their
persons being of Gods immediate choice, and by his especial appointment
inducted into that Function, as the rather it seems so to be, because this term
of the Lords anointed, I find it applied in Scripture to no King else, that was
anointed with Oil, but only these, though we read of diverse Kings else besides
these, that were anointed with Oil.

Then for the other, in that Kings are called Gods anointed with respect to the
authority, which by their people they are elected unto, whereby they become
Gods Deputies and Vicegerents here on earth, in ruling and governing of his
people, Thus, and no otherwise then thus are our Kings called the Anointed of
the Lord; Now as much as this is proper and belonging to other Rulers as well
as to Kings, to be called Gods Deputies and Vicegerents, and therefore it is
that they, as I showed before, are called Gods as well as Kings, which little is
applied unto them, in this regard, because they represent the place of God, and
have his Image stamped upon them in a more especial manner, by means of that
authority that God, by the consent of his people has conferred upon them for
their good: From hence therefore neither do I see any ground, why Kings should
not be accountable for their actions. For if so be that they are not
accountable in this regard because they are Gods Deputies and Vicegerents, why
then I say, nor any other Rulers, nor Magistrates besides, because they are
Gods Vicegerents as well as Kings? The which, I think there are none will be
so simple as to affirm.

So now by what has been said, we see that even Kings in a legal way may be
resisted, neither do we want examples among our selves of this kind and yet it
is thought no grievance or unlawful thing, or unbeseeming the profession of
good Christians, as some do say. For it is not manifest that the King himself
is impleaded by his own Subjects, and has many times trials at Law with them
at the Kings bench, and is diverse times too overthrown: And if this be done in
slighter matters, then certainly much more it ought to be done in matters, of
far greater weight and consequence, as in cases of oppression, Tyranny, or
Destruction of his People.

But here again say they, should we grant you this, that other Kings may be
resisted, as you have declared, and may Legally be accountable for their
actions, yet the case is not alike between other Kings and ours of England,
for as much as they have their right to the Crown by Conquest, as is evident by
William the Conqueror, whose Successors they are, and therefore there is no
other way for us now, but either to obey what they command us, or else to
submit our selves to suffer.

Answ. It goes beyond my apprehension to coneive, how this kind of arguing can
hold good, and I do admire upon what ground it should be built. But besides it
is not here amiss, to take notice of the baseness and servility of the
spirits of these men, who can be so well content to argue themselves into a
very vassalage and slavery: Therefore for satisfaction in this point as well as
in the rest, we must take notice that there is a two fold conquest; one is
Absolute, and the other is Conditional. For the first of these, will they
affirm it, that we are absolutely conquered, and so overcom by an altogether
overruling and Tyrannical power, that our Lives, Persons and Estates lie at
the mercy of the Conqueror, all that ever we have being at his will and
pleasure, that he may make a prey of them how he list, and when he list;
without any bonds or ties at all on his part, toward his people, but that by
virtue of the Conquest, we are wholly become his Vassalls and slaves: I say in
this case a people may by force of Arms, nay they are bound to do it (for as
much as all people ought both by the Law of God and nature to provide for their
own welfare and salvation) when they have a fit and convenient opportunity,
and strength sufficient, to rescue themselves from under the power of such a
Tyranny, and free themselves from such a Yoke, though it should be even with
the personal destruction of those Kings, that should usurp such a power over
them. And I prove it clearly by the examples of the people of God in the times
of the Judges, approved by the Spirit of God; as, Judge. 3 8. Israel there
rebelled against the Lord, by turning unto Idols, whereupon it is said, the
anger of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of
Cushan Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia, and the Children of Israel served Cushon
Rishathaim eight years (that is to say, they served him in a servile slavish
way) then it follows, that the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord, and
the Lord raised up a deliverer unto the Children of Israel, who delivered them,
even Othniel the brother of Kenaz, Kalebs younger brother, and the spirit of
the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war, and the
Lord delivered Cushan Rishathaim, into his hand, and his hand prevailed against
Cushan Rishathaim, and so the Land had rest 40 Years.

By which words you see, that the people of God by force of Arms were
violently overcome, and kept powerfully under a Tyranny, for the space of eight
years but see when God had raised up unto them a deliverer, that is to say,
one that would stand up in defense of them against the King of Mesopotamia, who
had them under, and they now had a convenient opportunity to redeem themselves
from under this Tyranny, they take it; and by force of Arms recover their
liberty again. It is needless to instance in any more particulars at large, I
will therefore only point out the several places that for your better
satisfaction you may read them at your leisure. The ensuing Story does
manifestly prove it beginning at the 12. verse, etc. so again, Judges 4. the
whole Chapter is a Story to this purpose: This is clear also in the example of
Gideon, who delivered Israel from the hand of the Midianites, the Story is in
the 6. and 7. Chap. of Judges. It is clear also by the example of Ieptha, who
delivered Israel from the hand of the Ammonites Judges the 19. and 11.
Chapters. So much in brief may be said concerning absolute Conquest. And now I
hope they will take heed, how they say, we were absolutely conquered. Then for
the other, and that is Conditional Conquest. So say they we were Conquered,
and it is not denied: That is to say; when William the Conqueror invaded the
Land, we were content to submit our selves unto him, (for the prevention of
blood shed and destruction, that otherwise might have ensued) to serve him as
our Liege Lord, and Sovereign, so that he would promise to govern us,
according to these and these Laws and Customs, to which covenant he
consented, as all the Kings of England have done since. And so we are become
not his slaves to be destroyed at his pleasure, but his Subjects, having sworn
him and his Successors Allegiance upon these conditions. If this be so; then
here we plainly see, we are not bound to submit to the Kings will and
pleasure, in all his commands, but only so far forth as he commands
according to his Laws, which is the condition upon which we swear him
Allegiance, and become his Subjects. Therefore if the conditions of the
Covenant be broke, and instead of governing his people by his Laws, he rules
them as he list, according to his will and pleasure; is it not manifest, that
the King does absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance, nor are they any
longer, legally bound to obey him. For this every one knows, that when the
condition, whereby the Covenant is tied to each party, is broken, the Covenant
it self by virtue thereof is quite dissolved, or at least dissolvable at the
parties pleasure with whom the Covenant was made. By this it appears that the
King is as much bound to the Subjects as the Subjects to the King, and that in
this case the Subjects may make lawful resistance to recover their undoubted
Liberties and Privileges, and yet not be termed Rebels against their Prince.
For none but they only can be called or esteemed such, as violate their oaths
of Allegiance, which we do not, if the King break with us his Covenant, whereby
he has bound himself to us and upon performance whereof we swear him
Allegiance.

But now besides all that has bin said, let us a little look into the foul
absurdities that follow upon this tenent, that people must so submit themselves
unto their Kings, as either to obey their commands, though never so unlawful,
or else to suffer whatsoever they shall inflict upon them, and not to take up
defensive Arms against them: but in case their Kings come against them in a
hostile manner seeking their destruction; all that they must do say they, is
to run away from them. But, say they do so, they may so follow and pursue
their people, or incompasse them in that they can be able to run no further,
so that then they must either perforce stand upon their defense, or submit
themselves unto their mercy. Why? I say they, so they must, all the weapons
they must use in this case are prayers and tears. So that then, if Nero like
they should wish that the whole body of their people were but one neck, that
he might cut them off at one blow, they must as we say, lay their necks upon
the block, and submit themselves to their own destruction. And so now
consequently it follows, be their Kings never so great Tyrants, not only over
their bodies, but over their souls too (as the case may be, they may set up
Popery and Idolatry in their Kingdoms, as the Kings of Israel and Judah did:
nay if they will, bring in very Heathenisme, and what not, utterly depriving
their people of all the outward happiness, and comfort of their lives, and
also as much as in them lies, prostituting their souls to utter ruin, by
denying them the means of their salvation) yet they may not do any thing in
this case to help themselves by way of just defense or Legal Justice. If this
be so, then indeed we are beholding only to the Kings good nature, for every
thing that we have and do enjoy, and not at all unto the Laws, and that will
prove good doctrine that has not long since bin so freely taught among us,
That our lives, our Liberties, our Estates, our Wives and our Children, and all
we have, are at the Kings mercy, and that we do enjoy any of these, it is of
his mere favor and bounty toward us: And then what need at all is there of any
Laws, or why should the Parliament trouble themselves to make any more Statutes
or Ordinances, whereby to govern us? the which how ridiculous it is, and how
abominably false, and contrary to Gods word, you have already heard.

It will not be improper for this discourse to look a little into the case and
condition, which wicked King Ahaz brought his people into by his abominable
Idolatry which he established in the land, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. It is said, He burnt
incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire,
after the abominations of the heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the
children of Israel. He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places,
and on hills, and under every green tree: wherefore the Lord his God, it is
said, delivered him into the hand of the King of Syria, and they smote him
(that is to say, his people) and carried away a great multitude of them
captive, and brought them to Damascus; and he was also delivered into the hand
of the King of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter. For Peca the son
of Remaliah slew in Judah 12000. in one day, which were all valiant men: and
the reason follows, because they had forsaken the Lord God of their fathers. By
whose means was this that they had done it, was it not by reason of their
Idolatrous King Ahaz? Then in the 8. verse, the children of Israel carried away
captive of them 200000. women, sons and daughters, and took also away much
spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. Again in the 16. verse,
Ahaz sends to the King of Syria to help him against the Edomites that came and
smote Judah, who carried them away captive; the Philistims also had invaded the
Cities of the low Countries, and of the south of Judah, and had taken diverse
Towns from them, as there they are reckoned up, and dwelt there: for it is
said, The Lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz King of Israel, for he had
made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord. So in the 20. verse
again it is said, That Tilgath Pilnezer, King of Assyria came unto him, and
distressed him, but strengthened him not, for Ahaz took a portion out of the
house of the Lord, and out of the house of the King, and of the Princes, and
gave it unto the King of Assyria, but he helped him not. There you see was also
so much of the treasure of the land lost. Again it is said, that in the time of
his distress he did trespass yet more against the Lord. (This is that King
Ahaz,) for he sacrificed unto the Gods of Damascus which smote him: and he
said, because the Gods of the Kings of Syria help them, therefore will I
sacrifice to them, that they may help me: but they were the ruin of him, and
of all Israel. To this lamentable condition was Israel now brought, through the
wickedness of this man. How much better had it bin for them to have executed
the judgment of the Lord upon him, who in his most just and righteous Law
required, that all Idolaters, without respect of persons, should be destroyed;
and had given more then an ordinary charge concerning this particular, then, by
the neglect of the execution of justice, to have brought themselves to that
miserable condition wherein they were, both in respect of their souls and
bodies. And who knows whether God might not lay the heavier load upon them, for
this their contempt, in not obeying his Commandment; whereas if so be they had
done this, they might still have continued in the favor of God, and bin a
blessed and renowned people as their predecessors were.

But if it shall be said, Why did they not execute justice in this kind upon
him, and other their Idolatrous Kings, it seems there was somewhat more then
ordinary in it, in that it was omitted?

I answer. It was no marvel they did neglect the execution of justice in this
regard upon their Kings, when as they were so careless to do it upon common
and private persons: for we never read that ever there was so much as any one
person, after they were come into the promised possession of the Land of
Canaan, that they did put to death for their Idolatry, of what kind or
condition soever they were: and if this were thus omitted upon persons of
ordinary and mean rank and quality, how should it be expected that it should
be executed upon their Kings.

Yet besides all this that has bin said, to show the unreasonablenesse and
falsenesse of this Deposition (that Kings are unaccountable for their actions,
and may not be resisted, though they do those things that are never so
dishonorable to God, and prejudicial and hurtful to their Subjects) there
may somewhat more be said with reference to the Wisdom of God. For how is it
possible to be imagined, that He who is so infinitely wise (having in His
unsearchable understanding appointed Government as the only means for his
peoples happy and well being here on earth, should leave His people in such a
condition, that if so be the means and instruments, which he has ordained for
their good, should rise up against them to their destruction, they should have
no power lest them to help themselves, nor means to provide for their own
safety, but must be feign to submit themselves to their wills and pleasures. How
does this exceedingly reflect upon the Wisdom and Providence of God; and is it
not manifest and apparent that Gods ends and intentions in Government are
hereby quite frustrated and void, so as that, that which he has appointed for
his peoples greatest benefit and security, should turn to their greatest hurt
and mischief. And this were the next way, instead of making God the author of
peace, 1 Cor. 14 33. to make him the chiefest author of all disorder and
confusion. For let any man judge that has but the ordinary understanding of a
man, if this be not occasion sufficient to make even the best of Kings (if God
do not give them more then an ordinary measure of his Grace) to become
Tyrants, and to live as they list, when they are persuaded that they may do
what they list, and none may control them.

Therefore for the more full clearing of that which has bin already said, it
will not be amiss to search a little narrowly into the meaning of that place,
Rom, 13.1 etc. and so to acquaint our selves what that power is, which the
Apostle there calls the ordinance of God, Let every soul be subject unto the
higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are
ordained of God. They are Magistrates that are here meant by these powers, and
these powers the Apostle says are of God. Now I ask, did ever God give a
power unto any for the destruction of his people, and of those that are
committed to their charge? is this the Ordinance of God for Kings and Rulers to
seek the undoing and ruin of their people? Surely no. God did appoint them for
his peoples good, as before was showed; and thus much also the Apostle declares
to us here in the words following, verse 3. Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Will thou not be afraid of the power? do that which
is good and thou shall have praise of the same for he is the minister of God to
thee for good, etc. (Here by the way this shows unto us, that the acts of Kings
for the good of their people, are not acts of Grace, as some flatterers would
make them, but they are acts of Duty, which God requires from them toward
their people.)

And besides, let us have a respect unto Kings and Governors too, as they are
a humane ordinance, as the Apostle calls them, as you heard before, 1 Pet.
2.13. etc. Did ever the people who elected them, give them any such power as to
rule them according to their wills and pleasures? If they have, what made they
those good Laws for, according to which they Covenanted for to govern them? And
therefore as the Apostle before says, they are the ordinance of God with
respect to their peoples good; so here the Apostle says, they are the
ordinance of man with respect to the same: For so he says, Submit your selves
to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether unto the King as supreme,
or unto Governors, as they that are sent by him; What for? Or to what end?
(surely not for their destruction, but to be instruments of their well being,
for so it follows) for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well. Therefore hence I say, If Kings who are Ordained by God, and
Chosen by Men, for this end, to be instruments of good to their People, do
contrarily abuse their Authority, wherewithal they are entrusted both by God
and Man, to the hurt and destruction of their People: if in this case the
People to preserve themselves do stand upon their own Defense, and take up
Arms for their own protection, they do not resist the ordinance of God, nor
come within the reach of the Apostles censure, as those that for so doing shall
receive damnation.

Here is one thing yet more that I have to say concerning the Unlimited
Prerogative; and so I shall finish this Discourse; and that is, What good can
there come by ascribing such a Power? For every circumstance in point of
Government must have respect unto some good or other, either for the glory of
God, or for the benefit of the People: if so be that they conduce not to these
ends, they are utterly to be rejected, as sinful and obnoxious. For God never
gave Magistrates any such power, as to be unlimitable in breaking his
Commandments; or to become terrible and dreadful to their People: but this He
requires, that they especially, whom He and His People have trusted with power
and Magistracy, should by their example honor God in a holy and godly
conversation, and be comfortable and profitable to their People, through their
pious, peaceable, and Religious government.

But how or which way does it appear that the unlimited Prerogative has, or
can have respect to any such ends: nay reason tells us the contrary; and We
have learned as much by the best of Schoolmasters, to wit, experience; And if
the Spirit of God say true, a great deal of evil and mischief may come by it,
but no good at all as ever I could read. Thus much we may perceive, if we will
look into that place in the 17. Deuteronomy. 18. where the Spirit of God speaking
concerning the King, when he shall come to sit upon the Throne of his Kingdom,
He shall write (says he) a coppie of this Law in a Book, out of that which is
before the Priests the Levites, and it shall be with him; and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God, to keep all the words of this law, and these Statutes to do them. Here we
see the rule, which God would have Kings apply themselves unto in governing of
their People, but here is no grant or Charter that God at all has given them,
to rule them according to their wills and pleasures; and he binds them within
the compass of His Law. And it cannot be denied but that these Statutes and
Commandments of God before spoken of, require passive as well as active
Obedience. For what is here said unto Kings, is oftentimes in this Book, and
else where, said unto the People; and I believe there is none will say, but
that they are required thereby to obey in both kinds: why not Kings then as well
as others, for here is no exception. Nay the Spirit of God here gives us a
sufficient reason, that they ought so to do, in the words following, for so it
is said, least his heart be lifted up above his brethren. He foresaw what
mischief would come of it, if Kings should have any such Unlimited Power
allowed them. And indeed how can it otherwise be, but they must needs
exceedingly swell with Pride, when they shall be made like God, subject to no
Laws. And what do they else, that ascribe such a power unto them, as that they
are no ways accountable, or punishable for any actions that they do? Is not
this the very next way to cause them to despise and trample their People under
their feet, as if they were so exceedingly beneath them (though in truth they
be the same, and equal with them, in respect of their nature and being,
(therefore the Spirit of God here calls them their Brethren) the difference
only lying in their power and Magistracy) and to make them forget themselves
and their humane condition, as if they were a degree above Men, by exalting
them above all Laws, as if by virtue of their place and Dignity, their very
nature were changed into the Divine.

Besides this, it is further worth the marking, what other evil consequence
will be ready to follow, if such a power, as is said before, should be
ascribed Therefore it is said in the next words (that he turn not aside from
the Commandment, to the right hand or to the left) as who should say to give
Kings such a power as is Unlimited and disresponsable, it is the very next way
to cause them to presume and take liberty to themselves, how they list and when
they list to break the Commandments of God and to cast his Precepts behind
their backs.

Here we see now the evil that comes by this Prerogative, I would any one
could show me what that good is that does from it arise; or where in all the
Scripture it is said, that Kings shall not be accountable for what they do. I
persuade my self that it will be a task too hard for any man to undertake.

By this it appears, what Enemies they are to the Commonwealth, and what a
deal of mischief they do, that teach such Doctrine as Kings Unlimited Power,
and how abominable they must needs be both in the sight of God and Men, that
teach men to err from Gods Commandments; and to conclude all in a word, I may
here say to such as our Savior does, Math. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one of
the least of these Commandments, and shall teach men so to do, shall be
called the least in the Kingdom of heaven. And here also I may well remember
them of the words of that prediction of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. which are
truly verified in these men. God shall send them strong Delusions that they may
believe a lie, that all they might be damned that believe not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness.

I do not much question but that this paper may light of those that will not
spare to lay Censure hard enough upon it; and it is not unlikely but it may
suffer under that terrible name of Treason; yet I say it would be well for them
before they shoot their bolt, to consider wisely with themselves what they do
least otherwise they prove to be such as fall foul upon the Truth of God, and
so be found to be such as fight against Him, which if they do, let themselves
judge how it is like to be with them. But let it be as it will, yet the comfort
is, it is not the first time that Truth has suffered under as bad a Censure as
this can be: and let them that are enemies to this Truth do what they can, yet
let me tell them that Truth is strong, and shall prevail; and that howsoever
it may be blamed by those that hate it, yet it shall never be ashamed. And as
all Truth ought to be known, so especially every Truth in its chiefest time
and season: for as the Wise man says, Pro. 25.11. A word spoken in due season,
is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, then it is most like to do good,
and then most acceptable and delightful. I have spoken a few words upon this
theme the rather, that hereby at least I might provoke those of better
judgments, and are able to say far more of this point then my self,
according to the necessity of the times to speak in this behalf, if they be
lovers of their King, of the Truth, and of their Country: And so I commend it
to the blessing of GOD.

FJNJS.

