Aula Lucis, OR, The House of LIGHT: A Discourse written in the year 1651.

By S. N. a Modern Speculator.

Hic locus est, quem (si verbis audacia detur) Haud timeam magni dixisse
palatia Coeli

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Crown in Fleet Street, between the two Temple Gates, 165^.

To my best, and noblest Friend, Seleucus Abantiades.
WHat you are, I need not tell you: what I am, you know already. Our
Acquaintance began with my Childhood, and now you see what a Peer you have
purchased. I can partly refer my inclinations to your self, and those only
which I derive from the contemplative Order, for the rest are besides your
influence. I here present you with the fruits of them, that you may see my
Light has Water to play withal. Hence it is, that I move in the Sphaere of
Generation, and fall short of that Test of Heraclitus, Lumen Siccum optima
Anima. I need not expound this to you, for you are in the Center, and see it.
How soever you may excuse me, if I prefer Conceptions to Fancies; I could never
affect any thing that was Barren; for Sterility and Love are inconsistent. Give
me a knowledge that is fertile in performances, for Theories without their
effects, are but Nothings in the dress of things. How true this is, you can
tell me; and if I but recite what is your own, you must not therefore
undervalue it, it being in some sense a Sacrifice; for Men have nothing to
give, but what they receive Suffer me then at the present to stand your Censer,
and exhale that incense which your own Hands have put in I dare not say here
is Revelation, nor can I boast with the prodigious Artist you read of, that I
have lived three years in Regione Lucis. It is enough that I have light, as
the King of Persia had his Sponsa Solis; and truly I think a happiness to
have seen that Candle lodged, which our Fathers judged to be Lux errans,
quaerens Habitaculum. But I grow absurd, I speak as if I would instruct you;
and now me thinks you ask me, Quis Legit Haec?

It is I Sir that read the Tactics here to Hannibal, and teach him to break
Rocks with Vinacre. I am indeed somewhat Pedantic in this, but the liberty you
are still pleased to allow me, has carried me beyond my Cue. It is a trespass
you know, that is very ordinary with me, and some junior Colleagues: nor can I
omit these Verses which you have been sometimes pleased to apply to this
forwardness of mine.

Talis Amyclaei domitus Pollucis habenis
Cyllarus, and quorum Graij meminere poetae,
Martis equi bijuges, and magni eurrus Achillis
It is my opinion Sir, that truth cannot be urged with too much spirit, so that
I have not sinned here as to the thing it self, for the dangers only in your
Person. I am afraid my boldness has been such, I may be thought to fall
short of that Reverence I owe you. This is it indeed which I dare call a Sin,
and I am so far from it, that it is my private wonder, how I came to think
it. Suffer me then to be impertinent for once; and give me leave to repent of
an humor, which I am confident you place not amongst my faults, but amongst
your own Indulgences.

Your humble servant. S. N.
From Heliopolis 1651.
To the present Readers.
IT will be questioned perhaps by the envious, to what purpose these sheets are
prostituted; and especially that Drug wrapped in them, the Philosophers Stone. To
these it is answered by Solomon, There a is time to cast away Stones: And truly
I must confess I cast away this Stone, for I misplace it: I contribute that to
the Fabric, which the Builders in all ages have refused. But lest I seem to
act Sine proposito, I must tell you I do it not for this Generation, for they
are as far from Fire, as the Author is from Smoke. Understand me if you c^n,
for I have told you an honest Truth. I write Books, as the old Roman planted
Trees, Posteris and Diis immortalibus: for the glory of God, and the benefit
of Posterity. It is my design to make over my Reputation to a better Age, for
in this I would not enjoy it, because I know not any from whom I would receive
it: And here you see how ambitious am grown, but if you judge the humor amiss,
tell me not of it, lest I should laugh at you: I look indeed a step further
then your lives, and if you think I may dye before you, I would have you know,
it is the way to go beyond you: To be short, if you attempt this discourse,
you do it without my advise, for it is not fitted to your fortunes. There is a
white Magic this book is enchanted withal: it is an adventure for Knights of
the Sun, and the Errants of this time may not finish it. I speak this to the
Universitie Quixots, and to those only who are ill-dispos'd, as well as
ill-discipli'nd; there is amongst them a generation of Wasps, things that will
fight though never provoked: These buckle on their Logic as proof, but it
fares with them, as with the famous Don, they mistakea, Basin for a Helmet; for
mine own part I am no Reformer, I can well enough tolerate their positions, so
they do not trouble mine. What I write is no rule for them, it is a Legacy
deferred to posterity, for the future times, wearied with the vanities of the
present, will perhaps seek after the Truth, and gladly entertain it. Thus you
see what Readers I have predestined for my self, but if any present Mastix
fastens on this discourse, I wish him not to traduce it, lest I should whip him
for it: This is my advise, which if it be well observed, it is possible I may
communicate more of this nature: I may stand up like the Pharus in a dark
night, and hold out that Lamp, which Philalethes has overcast with that
envious phrase of the Rabbis, Saepes sapientiae silentium.

Aula Lucis, etc.
I Have resolved with my self, to discourse of Light, and to deliver it over to
the hands of posterity, a practice certainly very ancient, and first used by
those who were first wise. It was used then for Charity, not for pomp, the
designs of those Authors, having nothing in them of glory, but much of
benefit; it was not their intention to brag, that they themselves did see, but
to lead those, who in some sense were blind, and did not see: To effect this,
they proceeded not as some modern Babarians do, by clamorous, malicious
disputes; a calm instruction was proposed, and that being once rejected, was
never afterward urged; so different, and remote a path from the the Schoolmen
did they walk in, and verily they might well do it, for their principles being
once resisted, they could not inflict a greater punishment on their
Adversaries, then to conceal them. Had their doctrine been such as the
Universities profess now, their silence indeed had been a virtue, but their
positions were not mere noise and Notion, they were most deep experimental
secrets, and those of infinite use, and Benefit: Such a tradition then as
theirs was, may wear that style of the noble Verulam, and is most justly called
traditio Lampadis. But I observe, that in their deliverie of mysteries, they
have as in all things else, imitated nature, who dispenses nor her light
without her shadows: they have provided a Veil for their Art, not so much for
obscurity as ornament, and yet I cannot deny but some of them, have rather
buried the truth then dressed it; for my own part, I shall observe a mean way,
neither too obscure, nor too open, but such as may serve posterity, and add
some splendour to the Science it self, And now whosoever thou art, that in
times to come, shall cast thine eyes on this book, if thou art corrupted with
the common Philosophy, do not presently rage, and take up the pen in defiance
of what is here written. It may be thou have studied thy three questions pro
forma, and a quick disputant thou art: but have thou concocted the whole body
of Philosophy? have thou made nature the only business of thy life? and bast
thou arrived at last to an infallible, experimental knowledge? If none of these
things, upon what foundation do thou build? It is mere quacking to oppose the
dead, and such perhaps as thy betters durst not attempt in time of life, but as
one said, that advantage breeds baseness, so some may insult because their
Adversary is out of the way, and tell me with that friendly Stoic.

Audisne hoc Amphiarae sub terram abdite? If any such Tares spring above
ground, when I am under it, I have already looked upon them as an idle,
contemptible bundle, I have prepared them a convenient Destiny, and by my
present Scorn, annihilated their future malice: It is a better and more serious
Generation I would be serviceable unto, Generation that seek nature in the
simplicity thereof, and follow her not only with the Tongue, but with the hand.
If thou art such then as this Character speaks, let me advise thee not to
despair; give me leave also to affirm unto thee, and that on my soul, that
the consequences and treasures of this Art, are such, and so great, that thy
best and highest wishes are far short of them, read then with diligence what
I shall write, and to thy diligence add patience, to thy patience hope, for I
tell thee neither fables nor follies.

-- Tibi res Antiquae laudis, and Artis Aggredior, Sanctos ausus recludere
fontes. I tell thee a Truth, as ancient as the fundamentals of the world: and
now lest my Preface should exceed in Relation to the discourse it self, which
must be but short, I will quit this kind out-work, that I may bring thee
within doors, and here will I show thee the Throne of Light, and the
Chrystalline Court thereof.

Light originally had no other birth then manifestation, for it was not made
but discovered, it is properly the life of every thing, and it is that which
Acts in all particulars, but the communion thereof with the first matter was
celebrated by a general contract before any particulars were made; the matter
of it self was a passive thin Substance, but apt to retain Light, as Smoke, is
to retain flame. After impregnation, it was condensed to a Chrystalline
moisture, unctuons and fiery, of nature Hermaphroditical, and this in a double
sense, in relation to a double Center, Celestial, and Terrestrial. From the
Terrestrial Center proceeded the earthly Venus, which is Fiery and Masculine,
and the earthly Mercury, which is Waterie and Faeminine; and these two are one
against the other. From the Celestial Center proceeded two living Images,
namely a White, and a Red light, and the white light settled in the Water, but
the Red went into the Earth. Hence you may gather some infallible signs,
whereby you may direct your selves in the knowledge of the Matter, and in the
Operation it self, when the Matter is known. For if you have the true Sperm,
and know withal how to prepare it, which cannot be without our secret fire;
you shall find that the Matter no soonerseels the Philosophical heat, but the
white light will lift himself above the water, and there will he swim in his
glorious blew vestiment like the Heavens. But that I may speak something more
concerning the Chaos it self, I must tell you it is not rainwater, nor dew;
but it is a subtle mineral moisture, a water so extremely thin and spiritual,
with such a transcendent incredible brightness, there is not in all nature any
liquor like it, but it self. In plain terms it is the middle substance of the
wisemen's Mercury, a water that is coagulable, and may be bardned by a proper
heat into stones, and metals: Hence it was, that the Philosophers called it their
stone, or if it be lawful for me to reveal that, which the Devil out of envy,
would not discover to Illardus, I say they called it a stone, to the end that no
man might know what it was they called so: for, there is nothing in the world so
remote from the complexion of a stone, for it is water, and no stone. Now what
water it is, I have told you already, and for your better instruction I shall
tell you more: it is a water made by nature, not extracted by the hands of Man,
nor is it mere water, but a spermatic viscous composition of Water, Earth,
Air, and Fire; all these four nature unites in one Chrystalline coagulable
Mass, in the form or appearance of water, and therefore I told you it was a
water made by nature: But if you ask me how nature may be said to make any
such water, I shall instruct you by an example that is obvious. Earth and water
are the only materials whereupon nature works, for these two being passive,
are compassed about with the active superior bodies, namely, with the Air,
Heaven, Sun and Stars. Thus do they stand in the very fire, at least under the
Beams and ejaculations thereof, so that the Earth is subject to a continual
torrefaction, and the water to a continual coction: Hence it comes to pass,
that we are perpetually overcast with Clouds, and this by a Physical
Extraction or sublimation of water, which nature herself distills, and rains
down upon the earth: Now, this water, though of a different complexion, from
the Philosopher's Mineral water, yet has it many circumstances, that well
deserve our observation. I shall not insist long upon any, I will only give
you one or two instances, and then return to my subject. First of all then,
you are to consider, that nature distills not beyond the body, as the Chemist
does in the Recipient; she draws the water up from the Earth, and to the same
earth does she return it, and hence it is, that she generates by circular and
seasonable imbibitions. Secondly, you must observe, that she prepares her
moisture before she imbibes the body therewith, and that by a most admirable
preparation; her nethod in this point is very obvious and open to all the
World, so that if men were not blind, I needed not much to speak of it. Her
water (we see) she rarisies into Clouds, and by this means does she rack
and tenter-stretch the body, so that all the parts thereof are exposed to a
searching spiritual purgatory of wind and fire; for, her wind passes quite
through the Clouds, and cleanses them, and when they are well cleansed, then
comes Heaven in with her Fire, and fixes it in Ente puro Saphirico: But this
is not all, there are other circumstances, which nature uses above ground, in
order to her vegetables, and now would I speak of her subterraneous
preparations, in order to her Minerals, but that is not lawful for me as it
was for the Poet,

Pandere res alta terra, and Caligine mersas. Howsoever I shall not fail to tell
thee a considerable truth, whoever thou art that studiest this difficult
Science. The preparation of our Animal and Mineral sperm (I speak of the true
preparation) is a secret upon which God has laid his Seal, and thou may not
find it in books, for it was never entirely written, thy best course is to
consider the way of nature, for there it may be found, but not without
reiterated, deep, and searching meditations. If this Attempt fails thee, thou
must pray for it (not that I hold it an easy or a common thing to attain to
Revelations, for we have none in England) but God may discover it to thee, by
some ordinary and mere natural means: In a word, if thou can not attain
to the knowledge of it in this life, yet shall thou know it in thy own body,
when thou art past knowing of it in this Subject; but because I will not deprive
thee of those helps which I may lawfully communicate, I tell thee that our
preparation is a purgation, yet do not we purge by common ridi^uous
sublimations, nor the more foolish filtrations, by a secret, tangible, natural
fire, and he that knows this Fire, and how to wash with it, knows the key of
our Art, even our hidden Saturn, and the stupendous infernal lavatorie of
nature; much more could I say concerning this Fire, and the proprieties
thereof, it being one of the highest mysteries of the Creation, a subject
questionless wherein I might be voluminous, and all the way mysterious, for it
relates the greatest effects of Magic, being the first male of the Mercury,
and almost his Mother: Consider then the Generation of our Mercury, and how he
is made, for here lies the ground of all our secrets. It is plain that
outwardly we see nothing but what is gross, for example, Earth, Water,
Metals, Stones, and amongst the better Creatures Man himself. All these things
have a lumpish, ineffectual outside, but inwardly they are full of a subtle,
vital limositie impregnated with fire, and this nature makes use of in
generations, wherefore we call it the sperm: For instance sake, we know the
body of Man is not his sperm, but the sperm is a subtle extraction taken out of
his body: Even so in the great world, the body or fabric it self, is not the
seed, it is not Earth, Water, Air, or Fire: for these four if they were put
together, would be still four Bodies of different forms, and Complexions. The
seed then, or first matter is a certain limositie extracted from these four,
for every one of them contributes from its very Center, a thin slimie
substance, and of their several slimes nature makes the sperme by an inessable
union and mixture; this mixture and composition of slimie principles, is that
Mass which we call the first matter, it is the Minera of Man, whereof God made
him; in a double image did he make him in the day that he becam a living
soul; hence a famous Artisi speaking of the Creation of Adam, and alluding to
the first matter, delivers himself in these terms. Creavit Deus Adam de
limositate Elementorum, scilicet de limositate Terrae, Aquae, Aeris, and Ignis,
and vivificavit eum a sole Sancti Spiritus, and de Luce, and claritate, and
lumine Mund^. Have a care then that you mistake not any specified body for the
sperm, beware of quicksilver, Antinomie, and all the metals, and have nothing
to do with ought that is extracted from metals. Beware of Salts, Vitriols, and
every minor mineral: beware of Animals, and Vegetables, and of every thing
that is particular, or takes place in the Classis of any known species. The
first matter is a miraculous substance, and of which you may affirm contraries
without Inconvenience. It is very weak, and yet most strong, it is excessively
soft, and yet there is nothing so hard. It is one and all: spirit and body:
fixed and volatile, Male and Female: visible and inviflble. It is fire, and
burns not: it is water, and wets not, it is Earth that runs, and Air that
stands still; in a word it is Mercury, the laughter of fools, and the wonder
of the wise, nor has God made any thing that is like him. He is borne in the
World, but was extant before the world, and hence that excellent Riddle, which
he has somewhere proposed of himself. Habito in Montibus and in Planitie,
pater antequam Filius: genui matrem meam, and matter mea, sive pater tulit me in
matrice sua generans me, non opus habens Nutrice.

I dwell (says he) in the Mountains and in the Plains, a Father before I was
a Son: I generated my Mother, and my mother carrying me in her womb generated
me, having no uye for a Nurse. This is that substance which at present is the
Child of the Sun and Moon; but originally both his Parents came out of his
Belly. He is placed between two fires, and therefore is ever restless. He
grows out of the earth as all vegetables do, and in the darkest night that
is, receives a light from the stars, and reteins it. He is attractive at the
first, because of his horrible emptines, and what he draws down is a
Prisoner for ever; he has in him a thick fire, by which he captivates the
Thin, and he is both Artist and matter to himself. In his first appearance he
is neither earth nor water, neither solid nor fluid, but a substance without
all form, but what is universal; he is visible, but of no certain color,
for Chamaelion-like, he puts on all colors, and there is nothing in the world
has the same figure with him; when he is purged from his Accidents, he is a
water colored with fire, deep to the sight, and as it were swollen, and he has
something in him that resembles a commotion, in a vaporous heat he opens his
belly, and discovers an azure Heaven, tinged with a milkie light, within this
coelum he hides a little Sun, a most powerful red fire, sparkling like a
carbuncle, which is the red gold of the wisemen. These are the Treasures of
our sealed fountain, and though many desire them, yet none enters here, but he
that knows the Key, and withal how to use it; in the bottom of this Well lies
an old Dragon, stretched along and fast asleep; awake her if you can, and make
her drink, for by this means she will recover her youth, and be serviceable
to you for ever, in a word, separate the Eagle from the Green-Lyon, then clip
her wings, and you have performed a miracle: but these you will say are blind
terms, and no man knows what to make of them. True indeed, but they are such
as we received from the Philosophers; howsoever that I may deal plainly with
you. the Eagle is the water, for it is volatile, and flies up in Clouds as an
Eagle does, but I speak not of any common water whatsoever. The green Lion is
the Body or Magical earth, with which you must clip the wings of the Eagle,
that is to say, you must fix her, that she may fly no more. By this we
understand the opening, and shutting of the Chaos, and that cannot be done
without the proper key, I mean our secret fire, wherein consists the whole
mystery of the preparation; our fire then is a natural fire, it is vaporous,
subtle, and piercing; it is that which works all in all, if we look on
Physical digestions, nor is there any thing in the world that answers to the
stomach, and performs the effects thereof, but this one thing, it is a
substance of propriety solar, and therefore sulphurous; it is prepared as the
Philosophers tell us, ab antiquo Dracone, and in plain terms, it is the fume
of Mercury, not erude but cocted. This Fume utterly destroys the first form
of gold, introducing a second, and a more noble one. By Mercury I understand
not quick silver, but Saturn Philosophical, which devoures the Moon, and
keeps her always in his Belly: by gold, I mean our spermatic green gold, not
the adored Lump which is dead, and ineffectuall, it were well certainly for the
Students of this noble Art, if they resolved on some general positions, before
they attempted the books of the Philosophers.

For Example, let them take along with them these few Truths, and they will
serve them for so many rules, whereby they may censure, and examine their
Authors.

First, That the first matter of the stone, is the very same with the first
matter of all things.

Secondly, That in this matter all the essential principles, or ingredients of
the Elixir, are already shut up by Nature, and that we must not presume to add
any thing to this matter, but what we have formerly drawn out of it; for the
stone excludes all extractions, but what distill immediately from its own
Chrystalline universal Minera.

Thirdly, and lastly, that the Philosophers have their peculiar secret metals,
quite different from the metals of the vulgar, for where they name Mercury they
mind not Quicksilver; where Saturn not lead, where Venus and Mars, not Coper
and Iron, and where Sol or Luna, not gold or silver. Their stone verily is not
made of common gold and silver, but it is made as one delivers it, Ex Auro and
Argento vilibus, faetentibus simul and suaveolentibus, virentibus, animatis,
ubique repertitiis, sed admodum quam paucis cognitis, Of gold and silver that
are reputed base that stink, and withal smell sweetly, of green, living gold
and silver to be found every where, but known of very few: away then with
those Mountebanks, who tell you of Antinomie, salts, Vitriols, Marchasits, or
any mineral whatsoever; Away also with such Authors as prescribe or practice
upon any of these bodies, you may be sure they were mere cheats, and did write
only to gain an opinion of knowledge: There are indeed some uncharitable but
knowing Christians, who stick not to lead the blind out of this way; these are
full of elaborate studied deceits, and one of them who pretends to the Spirit
of God has at the same mouth vented a slipperie spirit, namely, that the stone
cannot be opened thorough all the grounds as he calls them, under seven years.
Truly, I am of opinion that he never knew the stone in this natural world,
but how well acquainted he was with the Tinctures in the spiritual world, I
will not determine. I must confess many brave, and sublime truths, have fallen
from his Pen, but when he descends from his inspirations, and stoopes to a
Physical practice, he is quite besides the But. I have ever admired the royal
Gieberim, whose religion if you question, I can produce it in these few words,
Sublimis naturarum Deus, Benedictus, and gloriosus. This is the title, and the
style he always bestows upon God, and it is enough to prove him no Atheist.
He I say, has so freely, and in truth so plainly discovered this secret, that
had he not mixed his many impertinencies with it, he had directly prostituted
the mystery. what I speak, is apparent to all knowing Artists, and hence it is
that most Masters have so honored this Arabian, that in their books he is
commonly called Magister magistrorum; we are indeed more beholding to this
Prince, who did not know Christ, then to many professed Christians, for they have
not only concealed the Truth, but they have published falsities, and mere
inconsistencies therewith, they have studiously, and of mere purpose deceived
the world, without any respect of their credit or Conscience. It is a great
Question, who was most envious the This receip^ was extant in Bodiley'
Archieves.
Devil in his Recipe to our Oxford-Docter, or See Arnol^us his Flos Florum.
Arnoldus in his accipe to the King of Aragon, I know well enough what that
Gentleman de Villa nova prescribes, and I know withal his instructions are so
difficult that Count Trevers when he was Adept suo modo, could not understand
them: for he has written most egregious Nonsense, and this by endeavoring
to confute greater Mysteries, then he did apprehend. Now if any man thinks
me too bold, for censuring so great an Artist as Arnoldus was, I am not so
empty, but I can reason for my self; I charge him not with want of Knowledge,
but want of Charity, a point wherein even the possessors of the Philosopher's
stone are commonly poor. I speak this, because I pity the distractions of our
modern Alchimists, though Thilalethes laughs in his sleeve, and like a young
Colt kicks at that Name. For my own part I advise no Man to attempt this Art
without a Master, for though you know the Matter, yet are you far short of the
Medicine. This is a Truth you may be confident of, and if you will not believe
my Text, take it upon Raymund Lullie's Experience, He knew the Matter, it
being the first thing his Master taught him, then he practiced upon it in his
own phrase, multifarie multisque modis: but all was to no purpose, he had the
Cabinet but not the Key. At last he found himself to be (what many Doctors
are) a confident Quack, a Broyler and nothing more, as it appears by his
subsequent confession. Eleganter (says he) dixerunt Philosophi, quod opus
magnum non est nisi solutio and Congelatio, sed ista fiunt per viam Circulorum,
quorum ignorantia plures Magnates in literatura decepti fuerunt in magisterio,
credentes notabiliter cum confidentia, se intelligere formam, and modum
Circulandi, ex quibus nos fuisse unum lethaliter vulner atum celare non
intendimus. Cum sola enim presumptione and temeritate, scientiae hujus naturam
firmiter nos intelligere credebamus, sed nullo modo intelleximus, donec tempus
adfuit, in quo spiritus nos docuit, non immediate sed mediate per Magistrum
Arnoldum de Villa nova qui largitate sua immensa reficienter in nos inspiravit.

Thus he: and now I shall advise the Chemist to set a watch at his lips,
because of some invisible Gentlemen, that overheare. I my self have known some
men to affirm, they had seen and done such things, which God and Nature cannot
do according to the present Laws of Creation, but had my young friend Eugenius
Philalethes been present, he had langh'd without mercy. Take heed then what
you say, least you make sport for the Wise, for they are something like the
immortals.

(...). Many men there are, who think it Ordinary to be instructed in these
secrets, but in this they are confidently mistaken. He must be a known tried
Friend, a friend of years, not of days; not a complement all thing, whose
Action is all Hypocrit: not a severe dissembler who gives thee fair words, but
if once tried, his heart is so sarr from his Promises, that like a Fly in a
Box, it is scarce a part of his Body. Raymund Lullie has in a certain place
delivered himself handsomely in relation to the practice, and this for his
friends sake; but how rigid then was he in scriptis? His Disciple (if he
could understand him) was to be accomptable to him in the use of the mystery,
and therefore he tells him plainly, that he did it mutuo tantum, and sub
restitutione coram judice generali, we must not expect then to be instructed,
because we are acquainted, and verily acquaintance with such persons is a
thing not common. In ordinary favors it is supposed, that men should deserve
them, before they receive them: but in this thing, which is a Benefit
incomparable, it sals out otherwise, we look for present discoveries, we
believe the Philosophers will teach us, and in plain terms tell us all their
Art, but we know not wherefore they should be so kind unto us. Such impudent
Hopes have no more reason in them, then if I should spend a complement on a
rich Gentleman, and then expect he should make me his Heir in lieu of my
phrase, and so pass his Estate upon me. This is very absurd, but nothing more
common, though I know there is another sort of well-wishers, but they are most
miserable, for they cast about to fool those men, whom they know to be wiser
then themselves. But in this point the Philosophers need no Instructions, they
can act many parts, and he that plots to overreach them, takes a course to
break before he sets up. It remains then, that we bestow our Attempts on
their Books, and here we must consider the two Universal Natures, Light and
Matter. Matter as I have formerly intimamated, is the House of Light, here he
dwells and builds for himself, and to speak Truth, he takes up his lodging in
sight of all the World. When he first enters it, it is a glorious transparent
Room, a Chrystall-Castle, and he lives like a Familiar in Diamonds. He has
then the Liberty to look out at the Windows, his love is all in his sight, I
mean that liquid Venus, which lures him in, but this continues not very long.
He is busy as all Lovers are, labors for a more close Union, insinuates and
conveyes himself into the very substance of his Love, so that his Heat and
action stir up her moist Essences, by whose means he becomes an absolute
Prisoner. For at last the Earth grows over him out of the water, so that he is
quite shut up in darkness, and this is the secret of the AEternall God which
he has been pleased to reveal to some of his Servants, though mortal Man was
never worthy of it. I wish it were lawful for me to enlarge my self in this
point for Religion's sake, but it is not safe, nor convenient that all Ears
should hear even the mysteries of Religion. This leprous Earth (for such it is
if it be not pur'gd) is the Toad that eats up the Eagle, or Spirit, of which
there is frequent mention in the Philosopher's Books. In this Earth also have
many of the wisemen seated that tincture, which we commonly call darkness:
Truly they may as well bestow it on the water, or the Air, for it appears not
in any one element, but either in all Four, or else in two, and this last was
that which deceived them. Now the water has no blackness at all, but a
majestic, large Claritie. The Earth likewise in her own nature is a glorious
Chrystallized body, bright as the Heavens. The Air also excels both these in
complexion, for he has in him amost strange inexpressible whiteness, and
serenitie. As for the Fire, it is outwardly red and shining like a Jacinth, but
inwardly in the spirit white as Milk. Now if we put all these substances
together though purged and celified; yet when they stir and work for
Generation, the black color over-spreads them all, and such a black, so
deep and horrid, that no common darkness can be compared unto it. I desire
to know then whence this Tincture arises, for the Root of every other Color
is known. It is to be observed, that in the separation of the Elements, this
blackenesse appears not any where, but in that Element which is under the
Fire; and this only whiles you are drawing out the Fire, for the Fire being,
separated the Body is white. It is plain then that Darkness belongs to the
Fire, for in truth Fire is the Manal of it, and this is one of the greatest
Mysteries both in Divinity and Philosophy; but those that would rightly
understand it, should first learn the difference between Fire and Light.

Trismegistus in his Vision of the Creation, did first see a pleasing, gladsome
Light, but interminated. Afterward appeared a horrible sad Darkness, and
this moved downe-wards, descending from the Eye of the Light, as if a Cloud
should come from the Sun. This darkness (says he) was condensed into a
certain water, but not without a mournful inexprossible Voice or Sound, as
the Vapors of the Elements are resolved by Thunder. After this (says that
great Philosopher) the holy word came out of the Light, and did get upon the
water, and out of the water he made all Things. Let it be your study then who
would know all things, to seek out this Secret water, which has in it self
all Things. This is the Physical and famous Pythagorean Cube, which surpriseth
all Forms, and retains them Prisoners Huic sundo (said my Capnion) Si qua
forma demersa, huic solido Receptaculo si fuerit illapsa, and in hanc sedem
materialem reposita, non vage nec communiter recipitur, sed stabiliter and
singulariter, fit individua and incommunicabilis, tanquam ascriptitia glebae,
tempori and loco subjecta, and quasi de liberate in servitutem Materiae
proscripta.

The Consequences of this Prison, which sometimes are sad, and the steps that
lead unto it, are most elegantly expressed in the Oracles.

-- Praecipitium in Terra subest,
Septemvios trahens per gradus: sub quo
Horribilis Necessitatis Thronus est.
In a word all things in the World, as well Events as Substances flow out of
this Well. Hence come our fortunes and our misfortunes, our Riches and our
poverty: and this according to the scales of the supreme Agent in his
dispensations of Light and darkness, we see there is a certain face of light
in all those things which are very dear, or very precious to us. For Example,
in Beauty, Gold, Silver, Pearls, and in every thing that is pleasant or
carries with it any opinion of happiness. In all such Things I say there is
inherent a certain secret concomitant luster, and whiles they last the
possessors also are subject to a Clearenesse and Serenitie of Mind. On the
contary in all Adversities there is a certain corroding, heavy sadness; for
the spirit grieves because he is Eclipsed, and overcast with darkness. We
know well enough that poverty is but obscurity, and certainly in all
disasters there is a kind of Cloud or something that answers to it. In people
that are very unfortunate, this darkness has a Character, and especially in
the forehead there lies a notable judgment, but there are few can read in such
Books. Of this Virgil (who was a great Poet, but a greater Philosopher) was not
ignorant, for describing Marcellus in the Elysian fields, he makes his sad
countenance an Argument of his short life.

Atque hic Aeneas (una namque ire videbat
Egregium forma juvenem, and fulgentibus Armis,
Sed frons laeta parum, and deiecto lumina vultu.)
Quis pater, ille, virum qui sic comitatur euntem?
Eilias? anne Aliquis magna de stirpe Nepotion?
Quis strepitus circa Comitum? Quant un instaria Ipsoest?
Sed NOX atra Caput tristi Ctrcumvolat Vmbra.
But these are Things, that ought not to be publickely discussed, and
therefore I shall omit them. He that desires to be happy, let him look after
Light, for it is the Cause of Happiness both Temporal, and Eternal. In the
House thereof it may be found, and the House is not far off, nor hard to
find, for the Light walks in before us, and is the guide to his own
habitation. It is Light that forms the gold, and the Rubie, the Adamant and
the silver and he is the Artist that shapes all things. He that has him, has
the Mint of Nature, and a Treasure altogether inexhaustible. He is blessed with
the Elect substance of Heaven and Earth and in the opinion of the Turba, Felix
dici meretur, and super circulos mundi elevatur.

Nor indeed without Reason, for Nature her self dictates unto us, and tells us
that our Happiness consists in Light, Hence it is that we naturally love the
Light, and rejoice in it, as a Thing agreeable and beneficial unto us. On the
contrary we fear the darkness, and are surprised in it with a certain
Horror, and a Timorous Expectation of some Hurt that may befall us. It is Light
then that we must look after, but of it self it is so thin and spiritual,
we can not lay hands upon it, and make it our Possession. We cannot confine it
to any one place, that it may no more rise, and set with the Sun; we cannot
shut it up in a Cabinet, that we may use it when we please, and in the darkest
Night see a glorious Illustration. We must look then for the Mansion of
Light, that oily Ethereal substance that retains it, for by this means we
may circumscribe, and confine it. We may impart and communicate it to what
Bodies we please, give the basest Things a most precious Luster, and a
Complexion as lasting as the Sun. This is that Mysteric, which the
Philosophers have delivered hitherto in most envious and obscure Terms; and
though I do not Arrogate to my self a greater Knowledge then some of them
had; yet I do affirm, and that knowingly, that this Secret was never
communicated to the World in a Discourse so plain, and positive as this is. It
is true, this Script is short, and the Body of Magic has no Proportion to
these few Lines. To write of it at large, and discover its Three Scenes,
Elementall, Caelestiall, and Spiritual, was sometimes the Design of one that
was able to perform. But He (and it was ever the Fortune of Truth to be so
served) was not only Opposed, but Abused by a barbarous malicious Ignorant. I
should think that Gentleman did set up for Bartholomew Fair, he has such
Contrivances in his second Lash. The Tutor Dedicates to his Pupil, and the
same Pupil versifies in Commendation of his Tutor. Here was a Claw, there was
never any so Reciprocal: Sure Rozinant and Dapple might learn of these Two.

But this is stuff to stop our Noses at, let us leave it for Cambridge, whence
it first came. The Coagulation of our Water, and the Solution of our Earth, are
the two greatest and most difficult Operations of the Art, for these two are
Contrary Keys, the Water opens, and the Earth shuts. Be sure then to add
nothing to the Subject, but what is of its own Nature; for when it is
prepared, it is all-sufficient: He coagulates Himself, and dissolves Himself,
and passes all the Colors: and this by virtue of its own inward Sulphur, or
Fire, which wants nothing but Excitation, or to speak plainly a Simple,
Natural Coction. Every body knows how to boil Water in Fire; but if they
knew how to boil Fire in Water, their Physic would reach beyond the Kitchen.
Study then, and despair not, but study no Curiosities: It is a plain straight
Path, that Nature walks in; and I call God to witness I write not this to
amaze Men, but I write that which I know to be certainly true.

This is all I think fit to commnicate at this time, neither had this fallen
from me, but that it was a command imposed by my Superiors, etc.

They that desire experimental knowledge, may study it as a sure guide, but
he that rests at his lips, and puts not his Philosophy into his Hands, needs
not these instructions: Wits Commonwealth, or a Book of Apothegms may serve his
turn. I prescribe not here for any, but such as look after these principles,
and they must give me leave to inform them, if they be not perfect Masters of
the art. As for Liberty of opinion, I rob not any man of it, I am one that
gives and takes, and this to avoid Contentions I can suffer the School-man to
follow his own Placets, so he does not hinder me to follow mine. In a word,
I can tolerate men's Errors and pity them: I can propound the truth, and if it
be not followed, it is satisfaction to me, That what I did was well done.

A POSTSCRIPT To the READER.
THis small discourse was no sooner finished (though by command) but the same
Authority recald their Commission, and now being somewhat transformd, I must
(as some mysteriously have done) live a Tree. Yet the wise know, that Groves
have their Durdals, and I remember I have read of an Image who is Hic fodias
placed the substance in the shadow. To be plain I am silenced, and though it
be in my power to speak, yet I have Laws as to this subject, which I must
not trangresse. I have chosen therefore to oppose my present Freedom to my
future Necessity, and to speak something thing at this time, which I must
never publicly speak hereafter. There is no Defect in ought that I have
written, if I but tell you one thing, which the Philosophers have omitted, it
is that which some Authors have called Vas Naturae, and Vas viride Saturni, and
Miriam calls it Vas Hermetis, a menstruous substance it is, and to speak the
very Truth, it is the Matrix of Nature, wherein you must place the Universal
sperm, as soon as it appears beyond its Body. The Heat of this Matrix is
sulphurous, and it is that which coagulats the sperm, but common Fire, though
it be most exactly regulated, will never do it, and in this point see that you
be not deceived. This Matrix is the life of the sperm, for it preserves and
quickens it, but beyond the Matrix it takes cold and dies, and nothing
effectual can be generated thereof, in a word, without this Matrix you will
never coagulate the Matter, nor bring it to a mineral Complexion, and herein
also there is a certain measure to be observed, without which you will
miscarrie in the practice of this Natural vessel, speaks Miriam in these
following words. In omnibus corporibus est scientia, sed Stoici propter eorum
vitae brevitatem, and operis prolixitatem hoc unicum occultaverunt; Illi vero
invenerunt elementa tingentia, and ipsi docuerunt ea, and omnes Philosophi
docent illa, praeter vas Hermetis, quia illud est Divinum, and sapientia Domini
Gentibus occultatum: and illi qui illud ignorant nesciunt Regimen veritatis
propter Vasis Hermetis Ignorantiam. In the proportion and Regiment of this
thing, which they call their Vessel, and sometimes their Fire, consists all the
secret, and verily the performances thereof are so admirable- and so speedy
they are almost incredible. Had I known this at first, it had not been with
me, as it has been, but every Event has its time, and so had I. This one
thing ( to lay aside other Reasons) does not only persuade, but convince me,
That this Art was originally revealed to man, for this I am sure of, that man
of himself could not possibly think of it, for it is invisible: it is removed
from the eye, and this out of a certain Reverence, and if by chance it comes
into sight, it withdrawes again naturally, for it is the secret of Nature,
even that which the Philosophers call primus Concubitus. This is enough to a
wise Artist, at least it is all I intend to publish, and now Reader farewell.

Felix qui potuit Rerum cognoscere Causas.
Atque Metus omnes, and inexorabile Fetum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari,
Illum non populi Fasces, non purpura Regum
Flectit, and Infidos agitans discordia Fratres:
Non Res Romana, perituraque Regna: neque Ille
Aut doluit miserans Inopom, aut invidit habenti.
FINIS.
Reader,
THe neglects, and omissions of the Press are so gross, and so many, that if
it were not for thy sake, more then any other consideration, the Author would
be ashamed to list them. Be pleased to correct what others have corrupted,
and for mere peccadillos we present them not; thou have here only such
Errors, as may pervert thy judgment, not thy candor.

In the Epistle Dedicat. page 2 lin. 8, read I think it a happiness, etc. ibid.
p. 3. l 4. r. Those verses, etc. in the Epistle to the Reader, p. 2. l. 3. r. I
am grown in the book it self, p. 5. l. 11. dele kind and r. This o^^-worke, p,
9. l. 22. r. Method. p. 10. l. 15. r. That it is not lawful. p. 11. l. 24. r.
but by a secret. p. 12. l. 9. r. to the greatest effects. p. 21. l. 2. rea. out
of his way, etc.

Books Printed or sold by William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet-stret between
the two Temple gates.
YOrk's Heraldry. Bible of a very fair large Roman letter, 4. Orlando furioso.
Callis learned Readings on the Sta^, 23. Hen. 8. Cap. 5. of Sewers. Perkins on
the Laws of England. Wilkinson office of Sheriffs. Vade mecum of a Justice of
Peace. The book of Feet. Persons Law. Mirror of Justice. Topics in the Laws
of England. Sken de significatione verborum Delamans use of the Horizontal
Quadrant. Mathematical Recreations. Welby, second set of Music, 3, 4, 5, and
6. parts. Cordarius in English. The Fort Royal of the Scriptures, or the Vade
mecum Concordance, Presenting to the World above an hundred heads of Scripture,
most of them common places for publ^que use, the second Edition much enlarged
Dr. Fulks Meteors Malihus Fireworks. Nyrs Guanery and fire works. Cain Major,
with Anno^^tions by Will. Austin Esquire. Mel Heliconium, by Al^x. Ross^^ Nosce
reipsum, by Sir John Davis. Annimadversions on Lillyes Grammar. The History of
Vienna and Paris. The Spanish Mandevile of Miracles Lazarille de Tormes.
Christ's Passion w^^h Annotat. by G. Sands. Hero and Leander, by Christopher
Marlow, and G. Chapman. Alcilia or Phi^o^as lo^ing ^olly. Epigrams divine and
moral, by Sir Thomas V^chard. Mayers Catechism 8, Exercitatio Scholastica.
Bishop Andrews Sermons. Adoms on Peter. Posing of the Accidence. Amadis de
Gaul. Gu^lliams Heraldrie. Herberts Travels. Borcas Tales. Man become guilty:
by John Francis Senalt, and Enligshed by Henry Earl of Monmoth. The Idiot in 4.
books; the first and second of Wisdom; the 3d. of the mind; the 4. of
Statick Experiments of the Balance. The life and Reign of H. 8. written by the
Lord Herbert. Cornwallis Essays, and Paradoxes. Cleanards greek Grammar 8.

Plays. Henry the fourth. Philaster. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. The
grateful Servant. The wedding The strange discovery. The Hollander, O^^ello,
or the Moore of Venice. The Merchant of Venice, Tragedy of Hoffman.


