CHRIST and the CHURCH: OR PARALLELS, IN THREE BOOKS.

In the first ye have the Harmony between Christ and the foregoing Types, by
which he was fore-shadowed in the Old Testament, both Persons and Things.

In the second the Agreement between Christ and other Things, to which he is
compared in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

In the third the Agreement between the Church and the Types, by which it was
foreshadowed in the Old Testament; and other Resemblances, by which it is set
forth in the holy Scriptures.

By HENRY VIRTUE, M. A. Rector of Alhallows Hony-lane.

Joh. 19 30. It is finished.

Joh. 4.26. I, that speak unto thee, am he.

Col. 3.11. Christ is all, and in all.

Ecce elementa concutiuntur, quia Dominus paetiebatur ipsorum, Matthew. 27.45, 51.

Caeterum, adversario laeso, coelum luminibus floruisset, magis Sol radiis
insultasset magis dies stetisset, libenter spectans in patibulo pendentem
Christum Mar^ionis. Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 4.

(...), etc. Christus tibi factus est omnia, vestimentum, mensa, domus, radix,
amicus, sponsus, frater, pater, caput. Chrysostom. to. 1. hom. 21. Cateches. ad
illuminandos.

London, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, 1659.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, MY HONORED PATRONS, THE Aldermen, Master, Wardens,
and Assistants of the Right Worshipful Company of the Grocers, (...).
My ever Honored Patrons.
I Have more then once made my addresses to your worthy Society, by way of
Petition, and never departed from you without satisfaction to my requests. Give
me leave now to make my address to you by way of gratitude. In testimony
whereof I make bold to present you with some fruit of my Studies.

Having observed, in search of Divines, Ancient and Modern, many comparisons
between our dear Savior and the Types, by which he was fore-signified to the
Church of the old Testament, and the clearing also of other resemblances, by
which in the old or new Testament he is set forth, it came into my mind, to
make them Public: And, acquainting some of my Brethren with my thoughts in
this kind, I was much encouraged by them in this my purpose; They judging it
of singular use, both to Demonstrate against the Jews, Jesus of Nazareth to be
the true Messiah foretold by the Prophets, and also to set forth the usefulness
of Christ, and so to stir up men, both earnestly to desire him, and to be
seriously thankful for him: Besides the help that it might afford to younger
Preachers, which (in their apprehensions) would be much: Upon this
encouragement I resolved to set my self to the business. And this was my first
intention: yet, Christ being the Head and Husband of the Church, and the Church
the Body and Spouse of Christ, I thought it fit in the Third Book to acquaint
the World with the Comparisons, which in reading I had observed between the
Church and the Types of it, and other resemblances, by which it is set forth in
Scripture, which also, I hope, that by reading, ye shall find not unuseful.
But there was yet one rub in my way, and that is the complaint of Saint Paul,
Phil. 2.
that all men seek their own, and not the things, that are Jesus Christ's: And
even those also, that should be, as Midwives, to help forward such Births, even
these, among the rest, I find sick of this disease, in which respect They will
not undertake the Publishing of any man's Labors, though never so useful,
except They may be sure to be great gainers by it; whence it is, that the World
is deprived of many Monuments of Learning and Piety, which otherwise we might
have. But this difficulty I was willing to leap over, choosing rather to Publish
it (at least for so many Copies, as I desired to have Printed) upon my own
account, and at my own charge, rather then to deprive any of any help (how
little soever it might be) which (at least in the apprehension of some of my
Brethren) this Treatise might afford unto them: especially having withal this
advantage by it, namely, an opportunity to leave a Public Record, both of your
Love to me, and of my Thankfulness to you. One thing I shall desire of you,
that if in reading, you shall find any fault by which the sense may be
obscured, you would be pleased to look to the end of the Treatise, where you
shall find the faults Corrected. I have no more to say, but only to desire
your favorable acceptance of my weak endeavors, and to believe, that I am,
(as indeed I am)

From my Study, March, 1658/9. Your faithful servant in our Common Savior.
HENRY VIRTUE.

The names of the Authors cited in this Treatise.
A Insworth Ambrosius Arnobius Athanasius Augustinus Author operis imperfecti
in Matthaeum Basilius magnus Basilius Seleucia Bernardus Beza Brightmannus
Broughton Bucanus Bullingerus Calvinus Cartwrightus Chrysostomus Cicero Clemens
Alexandrinus Ferus Fulgentius Googe Goulartius Gregorius Magnus Gregor.
Nazianzenus Gregor. Nyssenus Herodotus Hieronymus Hilarious Pictaviensis Homerus
Horatius Jansenius Iraenaeus Junius Justinus Martyr Lactantius Lubbertus
Lutherus Macarius Aegyptius Marloratus Mason Seb. Meyer Mollerus Paraeus Pemble
Prosper Aquitanicus Ribera Rivetus Rollocus Sadeel Scarpius Scultetus Sibs
Simlerus Simsonus Tertullianus Theodoretus Tremellius Vsserius Weemse
Whitakerus Winclemannus Wotton Xenophon Zanchius Zuinglius.
A brief Survey of the whole Treatise.
LIB. I.
Christ compared with TYPES PERSONAL. Adam, Page 2 Abel Page 6 Seth Page 6
Lamech Page 6 Henoth Page 7 Methuselah Page 7 Noah Page 8 Melchisedech Page 8
Isaac Page 10 Jacob Page 12 Judah Page 14 Joseph Page 14 Moses Page 26 Aaron
Page 35 The high Priest Page 39 Joshua Page 41 Jephte Page 43 Sampson Page 45
David Page 55 Solomon Page 60 Elisha Page 63 Jonah Page 65 Cyrus Page 70
Zerobabel Page 73
REAL. Noah's Ark Page 75 Paschal Lamb Page 75 Manna Page 91 Holy place Page 99
Shewbread Page 99 The second Vail Page 101 Altar of burnt offering Page 103 The
golden Censer Page 104 The Ark of the Covenant Page 105 Aarons rod. Page 108
The Mercy seat Page 109 The red Heifer Page 111 The brazen Serpent Page 118 The
Temple Page 125


Hence three Corollaries. 1. The rule of godliness always the same, p 126. 2.
The rule of godliness is diversely administered, p. 150. 3. Christ is the Messiah
foretold by the Prophets, p. 146.


Christ set forth by other resemblances. LIB. II.
Bread and Wine Page 161 Branch. Page 171 Christians Page 174 Door Page 185
Eagle Page 191 Foundation Page 192 Grain of Mustardseed Page 206 Head Page 216
Hen Page 233 Husband Page 241 Lamb Page 254 Light Page 264 Lilly Page 272 Lion
Page 274 Physician Page 280 Shepherd Page 288 Stone Page 299 Sun Page 307 Vine
Page 312 Way Page 327 Word Page 327 Worm Page 337
And the Church LIB. III. Compared with Types. Set out by other resemblances.
Noah's Ark Page 342 Tabernacle Page 351 Golden Candlestick Page 356 Ruth Page
365 Body Page 369 City on an Hill Page 380 Dove Page 385 Hill Page 390 House
Page 394 Moon Page 407 Mother Page 417 Sheep Page 420 Threshing floor and
Winepress Page 426
(...), PARALLELS. In which is showed How the Types of Christ and the Church,
and the Resemblances by which they are set forth in Scripture, are made good
and fulfilled in Christ and the Church, and how Christ and his Church do answer
them all. LIB. I.
CHAP. I.
IT being my intent to represent to the World, for their benefit, a Comparison
between Christ the Head of the Church; and the Church, the Mystical Body of
Christ, and the Types by which they are severally fore-signified in the Old
Testament, or the Resemblances by which they are set forth either in the Old or
New Testament; I shall (as there is just cause) speak first of Christ the Head,
and afterward of the Church his Mystical Body.

And, for that which concerns Christ, I shall endeavor to show the proportion,
first, between Christ and the Types, by which he was fore-signified to the
Jewish Church; and then between Him and the Similitudes and Resemblances, by
which he is set forth in Scripture.

The Types of Christ were either Persons or Things.

The Persons are diverse, which I shall lay down in order.

CHAP. II.
THe Persons, which I find noted as Types of Christ, either in the ancient
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, or in our Modern Divines, either Foreign, or
of our own Church, were either such, as lived before the Law, or under the Law.

Of those that were before the Law, take this account.

Adam, the Protoplast, the first man, and Christ, the second Adam, compared.
Adam is by the Apostle acknowledged to be a Type of Christ, for so he says
plainly, That he is (...), Romans 5.14.
the figure of him that was to come, that is, of Christ, in that, as Adam
communicated his Offense, and the fruits of it to all, that come from him in
the way of ordinary generation, so Christ communicates his Obedience, and the
fruits of it unto all, that come from him in the way of Spiritual Regeneration.
And so the Apostle proceeds to manifest it in many particulars: for he adds;
Verse 18.
As by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation; so by
the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all men unto Justification of
Life: And, Verse 19.
As by one man's Disobedience many were made sinners, so by the Obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. Elsewhere also does the Apostle thus make the
Comparison; As by Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15.22.
so by Christ shall all be made alive. And so does St. Austin make the
Comparison; Sicut in regno mortis nemo sine Adam, ita in regno vitae nemo sine
Christo: Sicut per Adam omnes injusti, sic per Christum omnes justi homines:
Sicut per Adam omnes mortales in poena facti sunt filii seculi, ita per
Christum omnes immortales in gratia facti sunt filii Dei. Ep. 157. ad Optat.
Milevit. in appendice operum Hieronymi.
As none are under the Kingdom of Death without Adam, so none are in the
Kingdom of Life without christ: As by Adam all are unrighteous, so by Christ
all are righteous: As by Adam all men were made mortal by way of punishment, so
by Christ all the Children of God are graciously made immortal.

Prosper, from St. Austin, does somewhat otherwise follow the Comparison: Adam
slept, that Eve might be made: Christ dyed, Dormivit Adam, ut fiat Eva: Moritur
Christus, ut fiat Ecclesia. Dormiente Adam, fit Eva de latere: Mortuo Christo,
lancea perforatur latus, unde profluant Sacramenta, quibus formetur Ecclesia.
Prosp. sent. ex August. sent. 329.
that the Church might be made. Adam sleeping, Eve was made out of his side:
Christ being dead, his side was opened with the Spear, whence issued the
Sacraments, of which the Church is formed. Hear him again: Ex latere Adae
dormientis formatur Eva, ex latore Christi in cruce pendentis formanda fuit
Ecclesia. De promiss. and praedict. Dei, part. 1. cap. 1.
Out of the side of Adam, Eve was formed: and out of the side of Christ hanging
on the Cross, the Church was to be formed. This way also does Gregory the Great
make the Comparison, in these words: Adam sleeping, Eve is brought forth: Adam
dormiente, producitur Eva: sic moriente Christo, formatur Ecclesia. In Ezech.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
so Christ dying, the Church is formed. And this allusion does learned Zinchy
follow at large in his Treatise of the Spiritual Marriage between Christ and
his Church. And, among our own Divines, Dr. Maxey, in his Sermon of Man's
Excellency, among his printed Sermons, p. 417. etc.

Broughton makes the Comparison between Christ and Adam in many particulars:
The Stories of the Fathers from Adam to Joseph, p. 33.
The first Adam was made a Soul having life, of Earth earthy: and therefore by
the Earthly one came Disobedience, Sin, Judgment, Condemnation, Death. The
second Adam was made a Spirit, giving life, from Heaven heavenly; and therefore
by the Heavenly One came Obedience, Grace, Forgiveness, Justification, Life.
Adam was made the sixth day, and did eat of the forbidden Tree the sixth hour.
Christ reforming Man, and healing the Fall, is fastened to the Tree the sixth
day, and the sixth hour. Adam was made a man without a Father, made not
inferior to the Angels, and lost all. Christ was made man without a Father,
made lower then the Angels, is crowned with Glory, and all the Angels worship
him. Adam was tempted; Christ was tempted. Adam lost Salvation at the time of
eating: Christ brought Salvation to all at the time of eating. Adam was made
Ruler of the World, and lost it: Christ was made Ruler of the World, and did
hold it. Adam did fall in the Garden: Christ went into a garden to recover
Adams fall in the garden. Adams soul was in darkness from the sixth, till the
ninth hour. Christ, when he suffered, caused darkness to cover the whole earth
from the sixth, to the ninth hour. Adam, by breaking one commandment, lost
all: Christ, by fulfilling all the commandments brought life to all. Adam was
called to account at the ninth hour: Christ at the ninth hour gives up the
ghost, and goes to give account to his Father. Adam was debarred of the tree of
life: Christ is the true tree of life. Adam was driven out of Paradise: Christ
on that day opened Paradise to the poor thief. Adam was the head of his wife:
Christ is the head of his Church. Adam was a King, a Prophet, and a Sacrificer:
Christ was a King, a Prophet, and a Sacrificer. Adam lived 1000 years, wanting
70: Christ was born 70 years before 4000.

Zanchy does in two things note the parallel between Christ and Adam.

1. 1. Creatus est Adam die sexto: sic in sexta aetate, in plenitudine
temporum, missus est Filius Dei, qui factus est homo, and sub lege, ut nos a
peccato and morte liberaret.
Adam was created on the sixth day, so in the sixth Age, in the fullness of
Time, the Son of God was sent, who was made man, and under the Law, that he
might free us from sin and from death. 2. Post creatum Adamum die sexto secutum
est Sabbatum, quo Deus quievit ab operibus suis: sic post missum Christum hac
sexta aetate, nullus praeterea Servator expectatur: novissime enim per Filium
locutus est, Heb. 1.2. sed Sabbatum aeternum expectandum est. De Creat. part 3.
l. 1. c. 1. p. 605.


2. After Adam, created on the sixth day, followed the Sabbath in which God
rested from his works; so after Christ, sent in the sixth Age, no other Savior
is to be looked for: for now in the last days he has spoken by his Son, Heb.
1.2. but an Eternal Sabbath is to be expected by us.

CHAP. III.
Christ and Abel compared.
OF this hear S. Austin. Abel, the younger brother was slain by his elder
brother, Occiditur Abel minor natu a fratre majore natu, Christus occiditur,
caput populi minoris natu, a populo Judaeorum, majori natu: ille in Campo iste
in monte Calvariae, contr. Faust. Manich. l. 12. c. 9.
namely Cain, and Christ, the head of the younger people, namely the Gentiles,
was slain by the elder people, the Jews: Abel in the field, Christ in the
mount Calvary.

And a little after he adds. The voice of the blood of Abel cried to God from
the earth, Vox sanguinis Abelis ad Deum de terra Clamavit, habet and magnam
vocem sanguis Christi. Maledictus est Cain a terra, and maledictus est populus
Judaeorum infidelis ab Ecclesia, Ibid. c. 11.
and the blood of Christ has a loud voice. Cain was cursed from the earth, and
the incredulous people of the Jews is cursed from the Church.

Christ and Seth.
The story of the Fathers, etc. p. 43.
Broughton makes the comparison thus. The name Seth, signifies foundation: and
Christ is the rock, and sure foundation of his Church. Seth was begot in the
image of his father Adam, and Christ is the very character of his fathers
person. Heb. 1.3.


The story of the Fathers, etc. p. 49.
Christ and Lamech: not that Lamech, that was of Cains family, but another of
that name, who was of Seths house: of a far different nature.
Broughton makes the comparison thus. His name signifies, stricken or
heart-wounded. And he was so called, in respect of some inward sorrow, that he
should bear for the afflictions of the sword. And Christ was both outwardly
stricken and inwardly wounded. Outwardly, when in the open Hall he was
buffeted, scourged, and spit at; and upon the Cross, peirced both hands, feet,
and sides. Inwardly when he was reviled with blasphemous speeches at his death,
and when, instead of drink to comfort him, they gave him gall and myrrh
mingled together: but most especially when his guiltless soul did suffer
torments, to redeem our guilty souls from the trial of Satan.

Christ and Henoch.
Broughton makes the parallel thus. The history of the Fathers, etc. p. 54.
Henoch was a Prophet, for he prophesied of the destruction of the world by the
flood; and Christ was a Prophet, and prophesied of the destruction of the
world. Henoch walked with God; and Christ did the will of his Father: The days
of Henoch were as the days of the Sun, 365 years, according to the days of
the year, a day for a year. And Christ is the bright Sun of justice, whose
days are as the days of the Sun.

Christ and Methuselah.
Broughton makes Methuselah a type of Christ in regard of his name. The name,
The history of the Fathers, etc. p. 65.
Methuselah signifies spoile-death, or spear-death. And Christ both died, Romans
14.9.
and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and dead. And, he
suffered death, Heb. 2.14.
that by his death he might overcome him, that had the power of death.

Christ and Noah.
Sicut Noe, sic Christus bibit de vinea sua illum calicem, qui transire non
potuit: dormiit in passione sua, and ita nudabatur carnis mortalis infirmitas.
Contr. Faust. Manich. l. 12. c. 24.
Of this hear St. Austin also: As Noah, so Christ drunk of his Vineyard that
Cup, which could not pass by him; and so the infirmity of his mortal body was
discovered.

The History of the Fathers, etc. p. 56
Broughton thus compares Christ and Noah: Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness;
and Christ was the true Preacher of Righteousness, Dan. 9. Noah found grace
before God; and Christ grew in favor with God and man, Luke 2. Noah was a King,
Prophet, and Sacrificer; and so was Christ.

CHAP. IV.
HItherto I have set before you the Types of Christ that lived before the
Flood; now follow those that lived after the Flood, before the giving of the
Law upon Mount Sinai.

Christ and Melchisedech.
It is plain, that the Scripture makes Melchisedech a Type of Christ: for both
it was in the Old Testament foretold, that Christ should be a Priest after the
order of Melchisedech; Psa. 110.4.
and our blessed Apostle, noting the accomplishment of that Prophesy, Heb.
6.20. Heb. 7.1, 3, 4.
affirms, That he was made a Priest after the order of Melchisedech: and then
he proceeds in many words to set out and describe this Melchisedech: from
whence many of the Divines of the Reformed Church have taken knowledge of many
resemblances between Christ and Melchisedech. Among the rest, Goulartius takes
knowledge of these. Melchisedech was both King and Priest; Melchisedech fuit Rex
and sacerdos, talis revera est Christus unus: fuit Rex pacis and justitiae:
Talis est Christus unus revera. Proponitur Melchisedech spectandus, ut
principio and fine carens, cum nec pater, nec matter, nec majores, nec mors ejus
describantur: talis revera est silius Dei, sacerdos nimirum aeternus: quatenus
Deus, sine matre ineffabiliter genitus: quatenus homo, sine Patre,
ineffabiliter conceptus. Melchisedech, ratione sacerdotii, fuit ipso Abrahaemo
superior, utpote quem decimavit, and cui, ut sacerdos, benedixit: talis revera
est Christus, a quo pendet ipsius Abrahami and omnium credentium sanctificatio,
atque adeo quem, ut omnium autorem, colere and venerari omnes debent, An. in
Cypr. p. 182. col. 2. Sicut ille Abrahae milites refecit, ita Dominus,
relinquendo Sacramentum coenae, Dei Patris exercitum, Ecclesiam, inquam, suam
perpetuo restaurat. Annot. in Cypr. p. 505. col. 2. init.
and such indeed is Christ alone. He was King of Peace and Righteousness; such
indeed is Christ alone. Melchisedeck is set out to be considered as greater
then Abraham, in repect of his Priesthood, as receiving Tithes of him, and as a
Priest, blessing him: such indeed is Christ, upon whom depends the
sanctification of Abraham himself, and of all believers, and to whom, in this
respect, all owe Worship and Veneration, as the author of all. The same Author
elsewhere adds. As he, that is, Melchisedech, refreshed the Soldiers of
Abraham, so Christ does perpetually refresh the Army of God the Father, that
is, his Church, by leaving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for their constant
use. And of all the foregoing particulars our learned Mason, sometimes
Archdeacon of Norfolk takes notice. De Minister. Anglic. p. 567. lin. ult.


CHAP. V. Christ and Isaac.
OF this hear the Author of that imperfect work upon St. Mathews Gospel, among
the Commentaris of St. Chrysostom upon the new Testament, where he does make
them to agree in three things.

Sicut Isaac, desperantibus jam parentibus, in ultima senectute donatus est
laetitia suis, sic and noster Isaac in novissimo seculo productus est gaudium
cunctis, Luke 2.10, 11. Sed iste per virginem, ille de anu; ambo praeter spem
naturae: ille, postquam matter ejus parere posse cessaverat: iste, priusquam
matter ejus parere posse coepisset. Sicut ille ligna portavit, ubi fuerat
incendendus; sic and iste lignum portavit, ubi fuerat crucifigendus: Sicut ille
non restitit Abrahae, cum eum occidere vellet: Sic and iste non contradixit
Patri, sed paratus respondit: Non sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu vis Math. 26.39.
Hom. 1.
1 As Isaac, his parents being now past hope, in extreme old age, was given, as
a matter of joy to all his friends: so our Isaac (namely Christ) was brought
forth in the last Age of the world, an occasion of joy to all nations, as it is
foretold, Luke 2.10, 11. Christ indeed by a Virgin, Isaac of an old woman, but
both beyond the hope of nature: Isaac, after his mothers power to bring forth
had ceased, Christ, before his mother began to be able to bring forth. 2. As
Isaak carried the wood, on which he was to be Sacrificed; so did Christ carry
the Cross, on which he was to be crucified. 3. As Isaac withstood not his
father, when he would kill him, so neither did our b^^ssed Savior contradict
his Father, but readily answered, Not as I will, but as thou will, Math. 26 39.
Quis alius, in Isaac, lignum sibi or tabat ad victimam, nisi qui crucem sibi ad
passionem ipse portabat? contra Faust. Manich. lib. 12. c. 25.
And the second of these particulars is mentioned by St. Austin. Who else in
Isaac did bear the wood, which was to burn him, as the sacrifice, but he that
did afterward bear the cross, on which he was afterward to suffer death? And
Prosper excellently enlarges himself about this. ' Abraham (says he) saw the
day of the Passion of the Son of God figured in his own son, Diem passionis
filii Dei in filio suo figuratum vidit Abraham: quod unico filio non pepercit,
quod velut ad aram crucis triduo cum in sonti victima convolavit, quod patiens
and sine voce, similis agno coram tondente se filius Patri, ut percuteret, pia
colla praebuit: quod se ligno, quod pertaverat ipse, suspendi Isaac non
reluctatus est; quod aries cornibus in vepre detentus, spinis coronatum
Christum ostendeus, pro Isaac immolandus apparuit: quod ideo Isaac immolatus
non est, quia resurrectio filio Dei servata est: de promiss. and praediction.
part. 1. c. 17.
in that he spared not his only Son, in that he took a three days journey to
the altar of the cross with his harmless sacrifice: in that his son did
patiently and without any crying out, give his obedient throat to his father,
ready now to give the fatal stroke, being like the sheep before the shearer:
and that Isaac withstood not the binding of himself to the wood, which himself
had carried. That the Ram, held in the Bush by his horns, foreshewing Christ
crowned with thorns, was offered up in stead of Isaac, so that Isaac was not
offered up in sacrifice, because the son of God was presently to rise again.
And then the learned Father concludes all in these words. All these things,
Haec omnia credens Abraham videre meruit per figuram, quae nos per gratiam
impleta esse cognoscimus.
Abraham believing, saw in a figure, which we by Grace know to be accomplished.
Gregory the Great mentions also Isaac, Isaac ad immolandum ducitur, and ligna
portat, arae supponitur, and vivit, sic Christus ad Passionem ducitur, lignum
sibi crucis ipse portavit, sicque in sacrificio pro nobis ex humanitate mortuus
est, ut tamen maneret ex divinitate immortalis. In Ezekiel. l. 1. hom. 6.
as a type of Christ in these words, Isaac; is led forth to be sacrificed, he
carries the wood, he is laid upon the Altar (nay (I may add) his fathers hand,
furnished with a slaughtering knife is stretched out to give the fatal stroke)
and yet Isaac's life is spared: so Christ is led out to his Passion, carries
the wood of his own Cross, and so by death was sacrificed for us, as he was
man, that yet, as he is God he remained immortal.

The history of the Fathers, etc. p. 113.
Broughton makes the comparison to stand thus between Christ and Isaac. Abraham
offered his son Isaac upon the Altar, Jam. 2. And God did not spare his own
son, Romans 8.32.
but gave him to death for us all. Isaac was bound, and Christ was bound.
Isaac, after three days, was given up to death, and after a sort revived to
life: And Christ, having suffered death, rose again the third day.

CHAP. VI.
Christ and Jacob.
HEar Justin Martyr. 'Jacob served Laban for the speckled and spotted cattle.
And Christ served an hard service even until the cross for diverse men of all
sorts, (...), etc. (...) dial. cum Triph. Judaeo.
setting them at liberty by his blood and the mystery of the Cross.

Jacob in nativitate ejus apprehendit calcaneum fratris sui, and Jacob vocatus
est, i. e. supplantator, luctans, and vincens. and ad hoc nascebatur Dominus
sicut legimus, exivit vincens and ut vinceret. Advers. haeres. l. 4. c. 38.
Hear Irenaeus, Jacob laid hold on his brothers heel in his birth and therefore
he was called Jacob, i. e. a supplanter, striving and overcoming, as we read it
said of him, he went out conquering and to conquer, Rev. 6.2. And a little
after, Jacob got the birthright, Primogenita accepit Jacob, cum ea vituperabat
frater ejus, and junior populus Christum primogenitum accepit, cum eum repulit
populus aetate provectior, dicens, Non habemus Regem nisi Caesarem. ibid.

Omnia fecit Jacob, propter juniorem, quae praefigurabat Ecclesiam, propter
quam omnia sustinuit Christus. Ibid.


when his brother despised it, and the younger people received Christ the first
born, when the elder people refused him; saying, We have no King but Caesar,
Ioh. 1. And a little after, ' Jacob did all his service for the younger sister,
which prefigured the Church, for whom Christ did undergo all his Passion.

Hear St. Austin. Quomodo Christus venturus erat in mundum, ut jungeretur
Ecclesiae, in beato Jacob hoc praefiguratum erat, quando in regionem longinquam
peregrinaretur, ut conjugium sortiretur. Primo vidit Rachel ad puteum, and ad
aquam Baptismi Christus inventurus erat Ecclesiam. Quod in illa peregrinatione
duas uxores Jacob accepit, duos populos praefigurabat, Judaeorum and Gentium.
De Temp. ser. 80.
How Christ was to come into the world, to be married to his Church, it was
prefigured in blessed Jacob, traveling into a far Country to seek a wife.
Jacob first saw Rachel at the well; and at the water of Baptism Christ was to
find his Church. And this, that Jacob in that journey took two wives, did
prefigure two people, namely of the Jews and of the Gentiles. Sicut Jacob
duodecim filios genuit, sic and noster Jacob duodecim Apostolos genuit, in
spiritu, non in carne: verbo, non sanguine. Sicut ille cum suis duodecim in
Aegyptum descendit, ut multiplicaretur; sic Christus cum suis duodecim
discipulis descendit, and multiplicatus est per totum mundum. Sicut ille
descendit, ut medullam Aegypti manducaret. Sic Christus in istum intravit
mundum, ut medullam hujus mundi manducaret, i. e. sibi acquireret: medulla enim
hujus mundi sunt homines sancti hom. 1.


Finally, hear the Author of that imperfect work upon St. Matthews Gospel. As
Jacob had twelve sons, so our Jacob had twelve Apostles, begotten not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. And as he with his twelve sons descended into
Egypt, there to be multiplied, so Christ, with his 12. disciples descended,
and was multiplied in the whole world. And as he went down to eat the marrow of
Egypt, so Christ came into this world, to eat the marrow of the world, namely,
that he might gain it to himself: for the marrow of this world, are holy men.

Christ and Judah the son of Jacob.
Hear the author of that imperfect work upon St. Matthews Gospel. Judah is
interpreted a confessor, and Christ was to be a confessor to his Father; for so
he says. (...). Father I confess to thee, Judas interpretatur confessor, and
Christus confessor Patris futurus, Math. 11.25. and sicut ille meretrici
conjunctus erat, sic Christus Ecclesiae meretrici ex Gentibus se conjunxit: and
sicut ille meretrici dedit virgam and annulum, sic Christus Ecclesiae: pro
conjunctionis mercede dedit virgam crucis and annulum spiritus sancti per
baptismum, hom. 1.
or as its Translated in our Books, I thank thee, (Matthew. 11.25.) And as Judah
joined himself to an harlot, and gave her his staff and his ring, so Christ
joined himself to the Church of the Gentiles, once an Harlot; and gave her for
her reward, the staff or rod of the Cross, and the Ring of the Holy Ghost by
Baptism.

CHAP. VII. Christ and Joseph the son of Jacob.
HEar Tertullian. Joseph died prefigure Christ, Joseph Christum figurabat, quod
a fratribus venundatus sit in Aegyptum, sic Christus a fratribus venundatus, a
Juda cum proditur. Contr. Jud.
in that he was sold by his brethren into Egypt, so Christ was sold by his
brethren, being betrayed by Judas.

Hear Arnobius. As Joseph helped the Israelites, in the time of famine, who was
sold, who being sold, Sicut Israel famem passuris Joseph succurrit, qui
venditus est, qui postquam venditus est, ad regnum ascendit and fame perituris
aliquantis gentibus and patriis frumentatione repesita caute succurrit: ita
venditus a Juda Christus in triumpho crucis exaltatus est, ante quidem passus
falsam testem synagogam, sicut Joseph dominam meretricem. Post haec exurgens a
mortuis regnum accepit, and fame perituris bis mill generationibus, appertis
horreis, succurrit, non solum eis speciem frumenti, sed and vini and olei
administrans. Erudiit Joseph principes ejus, etc. sic, Christus Apostolos. In
Psalm. 105.
rose at last to a Kingdom, and relieved many Nations and Countries ready to
perish with famine: so Christ, being sold by Judas, was exalted on the Cross,
having been first falsely accused by the Synagogue as Joseph was by his wanton
Mistress. After this rising from the dead, he received a Kingdom, and opening
his treasures, relieved thousands of generations with corn, wine, and oil. And
as Joseph instructed the Princes of Pharaoh and taught his Senators wisdom, so
Christ his Apostles.

Hear St. Ambrose. Joseph is sent to his brethren: so Christ: His brethren said
of him, Let us kill him: such words uttered they, that thought of that
sacrilegious parricide, Matthew. 21.38. Joseph Missus ad fratres, sic Christus:
dixerunt de Joseph fratres, Occidamus eum. Nonne haec verba dicebant qui de
parricidali sacriligio cogitabant? Matthew. 21.38. Addiderunt fratres, Et
videamus, quid proderunt ei somnia sua: hoc de Joseph scriptum est, completum
est de Christo quando Judaei dicebant in ejus passione, Si Rex Israel est,
descendat de cruce; venditur Joseph Ismaelitis; venditur Christus odio
habentibus Deum suum. Dixerunt, Manus nostrae non sint super eum: hoc Judaei in
Domini Passione dixere, Joan. 18.31. Exutus est Joseph tunica, Christus tunica,
hoc est, carne, quam assumpsit, exutus est. To. 4. de S. Joseph. cap. 3.
This is the heir, come let us kill him. His brethren added, And let us see
what will become of his dreams. This is written of Joseph, it was accomplished
in Christ, when the Jews said in his Passion; If he be the King of Israel, let
him come down from the Cross. Joseph was sold to the Ishmaelites, so Christ
was sold to them that hated their God. They said, let not our hands be upon
him: and thus the Jews said in the Lords Passion, Ioh. 18.31. Its not lawful
for us to put any man to death. Joseph was stripped of his coat, And so Christ
was stripped of his coat, that is, of his flesh, which he had assumed: yea, and
according to the letter, of his garments, when they would crucify him.

And afterward the same Father adds. Joseph opened his storehouses, so Christ
opened his hidden treasuers of wisdom and knowledge of heavenly mysteries that
none might want food. Aperuit Joseph horrea, sic Christus mysteriorum
coelestium thesauros scientiae and sapientiae absconditos patefecit, ut nulli
alimenta deessent. Vendidit autem Christus non paucis in Judaea, sed vendebat
omnibus ut ab omnibus crederetur; and omnes regiones venerunt in Aegyptum ad
Joseph emere. Ejusd. lib. c. 7.
Nor did Christ sell to a few in Iudaea, but he sold to all, that all might
believe in him; as all Countries came into Egypt to Joseph, to buy corn, and
he sold to them all.

Hear St. Austin. Ioseph's brethren, selling him, did cast him from them, but,
Fratres vendentes Joseph abjecerunt, and cum fame tribularentur, ad opem illius
confugiunt, to. 4. quaest. super libr. Judic. sic, qui abjecerunt Christum, ad
cum rursus conversi, in to inveniunt salutem.
when they were pressed with famine, they fly to his help: so they that
rejected Christ, turning to him again, find salvation in him.

And elsewhere the same Father. Joseph, Joseph, a fratribus persecutionem
passus, ab alienis honoratur. Sic Christus, Judaeis persequentibus, a Gentibus
clarificatus est, to. 4. de 83. quaestion. q. 58.
persecuted by his brethren, is honored by strangers: so Christ, the Jews
persecuting him, is magnified by the Gentiles.

And again elsewhere. Vivente Joseph, non referuntur crevisse filii Israel, sed
postea quam mortuus est, germinaverunt: and haec in illo Joseph figu^ata sunt,
in Christo completa: priusquam moreretur Joseph noster, scil. Christus, pauci
in eum crediderunt: postquam autem mortuus est, and resurrexit, in universo
mundo multiplicati sunt and crevere Israelitae, i. e. populi Christiani, Joh.
12.24. To. 16. de temp. ser. 84.
While Joseph lived, the children of Israel are not said to have increased in
number, but after his death, they did mightily increase. This was a figure in
Joseph, but it was accomplished in Christ: while our Joseph, namely Christ,
lived on the earth, few believed on him, but after he was dead and risen again,
the Israelites, that is, the Christian people, were exceedingly increased in
the whole world, as he himself said. Except a corn of wheat fall into the earth
and dye, it remains alone, but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit, Joh.
12.24. And afterward, Ver. 32. if I be lifted up from the earth, I will 'draw
all men to me. Ver. 33. And this, says the Evangelist, he spoke of his death.

Hear St. Chrysostom. As Joseph went to his brethren to visit them, and they,
neither regarding the Brotherhood nor the cause of his coming, (...), etc.
Sicut Joseph ad Fratres abiit, invisens eos, et illi, nec fraternitatem, nec
adventus causam reveriti sunt, sed primo quidem occidere voluerunt, postea
autem vendiderunt barbaris: Ita et Dominus noster advenit, invisens genus
humanum, et suscepta carne, dignatus fieri frater noster, sic advenit; sed
ingrati Judaei animarum et corporum medicum occidere conati sunt, et opere
complerunt animo suo decretam caedem, eumque crucifixerunt: et isti quidem
apprehensum et cruci traditum occiderunt: illi autem consultabant quidem, sed
opere, quod consulebant, non impleverunt; oportebat enim figuram minus habere,
quam veritatem. To. 2. In. genes hom. 61.
thought first of killing him, but afterward sold him to barbarous people, so
our Lord came to visit mankind, and having taken humane flesh upon him, so he
came: but the unthankful Jews endeavored to kill the Physician of souls and
bodies, and did actually accomplish this intended murder: and these indeed,
having apprehended him, and delivered him to be crucified, killed him: but
those indeed consulted Joseph's death, but did not actually accomplish it; for
it was meet, that the type should have somewhat less, then the truth.

And so the same Father elsewhere. Many things are found alike in Joseph, and
in our Lord. Joseph's own brethren laid in wait for him, so our Lord. (...),
etc. multa similia in Joseph and in Domino reperiuntur. Joseph a propriis
consanguineis suis insidiis appetebatur, sic Dominus. Joseph varia tunica
exutus est, sic Dominus: Joseph Ismaelitis est venditus, sic Dominus a Juda
Pharisaeis. Joseph, in vacuam cisternam injectus, ascendit illaesus: sic
Dominus, in monumento novo sepultus, tertio die resurrexit. Joseph a fratribus
agnitus est, and Dominus post resurrectionem discipulis est manifestatus.
Joseph in carcere cum duobus Eunuchis inclusus, illis somnia declaravit, unus
quidem a vulneribus devoratus est, alter in patriam suam restituitur: and
Dominus, cum duobus latronibus crucifixus, incredulum quidem in escam Gehennae
transmisit, fidelem autem paradisi civem constituit. Joseph a best is devoratus
nunciatus est, and, tanquam Rex, praeconis voce renunciatus. Dominus tanquam
homo, crucifixus est, and, tanquam Deus, glorificatus. To. 6. ser. de negat.
Petri.
Joseph was stripped of his party-colored coat so our Lord. Joseph was sold to
the Ishmaelites, so our Lord by Judas to the Pharisees. Joseph cast into an
empty pit, came out unhurt; so our Lord, buried in a new sepulcher, rose again
the third day. Joseph was made known to his brethren, and our Lord, after his
resurrection was made manifest to his disciples. Joseph being in prison with
Pharaohs two Officers, declared to them their dreams, hanging the one, and
restoring the other to his Office: So our Lord being crucified with two
malefactors, sent the incredulous one to hell, and made the believing thief a
Citizen of Paradise. Joseph was said to be devoured by some cruel beast, and
was proclaimed, as a King. And our Lord was crucified as man, but glorified, as
God.

Finally, hear Prosper. Jacob loved Joseph: and God said of his Son, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. Jacob diligebat Joseph:
dicit and Deus de Filio, hic est filius meus dilectus, etc. somniavit Joseph
somnium, narravitque fratribus suis. Putabam nos, ait, ligare gremia in campo:
surrexit gremium meum, and erectum est: Conversa autem gremia vestra
adoraverunt gremium meum. Hoc in Christo futuru^ praedixit idem Jacob in
benedictione, quam acceperata Patre Judah, dicente, Adorabant te omnes filii
Patris tui. Rursus, alia sacramenta vidit in somnio, and haec suis fratribus
indicavit: quasi Sol, inquit, and Luna, and undecim stellae adorabant me: and
de Joseph nostro, Domino Jesu Christo dicitur, per prophetam: Laudate eum Sol
and Luna: landate eum omnes stellae and lumen. De praedict. Dei part. 1. c. 25.
Joseph dreamed a dream and told it his brethren, I thought, we were binding
sheaves in the field, and my sheafe arose and stood up: and your sheaves did
obeisance to mine, Genesis 37.7. This did Jacob foretell to come to pass in
Christ, while, blessing Judah, he said, all thy fathers children shall bow down
unto thee, Genesis 49.8. Again, he saw other mysteries in a dream, which also he
showed to his brethren, Genesis 37.9. Behold, I have dreamed another dream, and
behold, the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars made obeisance to me: and of our
Joseph, the Lord Jesus Christ it is said by the Prophet, Praise him, Sun and
Moon; praise him, all ye stars of light, Psalm. 148.3.

The same Father goes on with the story and applies it unto Christ. Joseph is
sent to visit his brethren and the sheep, and our Joseph said, I am not sent,
Mittitur Joseph ad visitandos fratres ejus and oves. Dicit and noster Joseph,
Non sum missus, nisi ad oves, quae periere, domus Israel. Oderunt Joseph
fratres ejus propter somnia ejus. Dicet and Christus de Iudaeis fratribus,
Oderunt me gratis. Viso Joseph, fratres ejus dixere, Ecce venit somniator,
venite occidamus eum, etc. Haec in Evangelio illi dixere de filio. Hic est
haeres, venite, occidamus eum, etc. Math, 21. Accipientes Joseph fratres ejus
expoliaverunt tunicam illam variam. and misere eum in lacum: hoc and noster
Joseph de Passione sua per prophetam dicit, projecerunt me in lacum, Psalm.
88.6. tunicam autem expoliatam desuper contextam Evangelica authoritas
confirmat. Venite, inquit unus e fratribus ejus, venundemus Joseph, and non
occidamus eum: hoc and Iudaei de Christo quem venditum tradiderunt Pilato ad
necem, dixere, Nobis non licet interficere quemquam. Et vendiderunt Joseph
fratres ejus Ismaelitis negotiatoribus euntibus in Aegyptum viginti aureis.
Venditum autem nostrum Joseph, Christum Zacharias and Hieremias prophetae,
testantur, Dederunt, inquit, precium adpretiati triginta aureos. Quod etiam
Iudam a Iudaeis accepisse Evangelia narrant. Ib. c. 26.
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Ioseph's brethren hated him for
his dreams. And Christ says of his brethren the Jews, they hated me without a
cause, Ioh. 15. Ioseph's brethren seeing him come, said, behold the dreamer
comes, come let us kill him. And so said they in the Gospel concerning the Son.
This is the Heir, come let us kill him, etc. Mat. 21.38. ' Joseph's brethren
receiving him, stripped him of his coat of diverse colors, and cast him into a
pit. And this says our Joseph of his Passion by the Prophet, Thou have laid
me in the lowest pit, Psalm. 88.6. And his being stripped of his seamelesse coat,
the history of the Gospel does confirm. Come, says one of his brethren, let us
sell Joseph, and let us not kill him. And this said the Jews of Christ, whom,
being betrayed to them, they delivered to Pilate to put him to death. It Is not
lawful for us to put any man to death, Ioh. 18.31. Joseph was sold by his
brethren to Ishmaelites, Merchantmen going into Egypt, for 20. pieces of
silver. And, that Christ, our Joseph was sold, both Zachary and Jeremy, the
Prophets, Zach. 11.6.
do confirm. They weighed for my price 30. pieces of silver, which that Judas
received of the Jews, Matthew. 26.
the Gospel confirms.

The same Father goes on still: Dictum est, Dominus est cum Joseph: and noster
Joseph dicit, Non sum solus, sed mecum est, qui misit me Pater. Joan. Id. cap.
27.
It is said, The Lord was with Joseph; and our Joseph says, I am not alone, but
my Father that sent me is with me.

And again: Traditur Joseph in carcerem: Noster Joseph, Christus, ut ait
Propheta, inter iniquos deputatus est: Esa. 53. Inter sontes insontem Dei
sapientia dum gubernat, quae descendit cum eo in soveam, in vincula, non
dereliquit eum. Exlamat hic noster Joseph, Christus, Factus sum sicut sine
adjutorio, inter mortuos liber: Psa. 88.4, 5. Quod sequitur, universas claves,
totamque Custodiam traditam fuisse manibus Joseph, illud intelligendum fuit, Vt
omne genu Joseph nostro flectereter, coelestium, terrestrium, infernorum: Phil.
2. Duo Pharaonis spadones cum eo in illa passione detrusi sunt, ut trium
crucifixorum numerus quodammodo suppleretur. E quibus [sicut ille Joseph]
noster Joseph, Christus, revelando mysteria, unum puniret per debitum
supplicium, alterum per indebitam gratiam liberaret. Id. cap. 28.
Joseph is delivered into Prison; and our Joseph, Christ, as the Prophet says,
was reckoned among Transgressors; Isai. 53.12. While the Wisdom of God governs
this innocent among the guilty, which went with him into the Pit, and into the
Prison, never left him. Our Joseph, Christ, cries out here, I am as a man
without strength, free among the dead, (Ps. 88.4, 5.) In that which follows,
that all the Keys and the whole Prison was put into the hands of Joseph, this
was to be understood, That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of
things in Heaven, and of things in Earth, and of things under the Earth: (Phil.
2.) Two of Pharaohs Officers were put into Prison to him, to make up, after a
sort, the number of the three parties crucified. Of which [as that Joseph] our
Joseph, Christ, should punish one with a deserved Punishment, and free the
other by undeserved Grace.

And again: After two years, Post duos annos, tertio incipiente, de carcere
educitur Joseph; and noster Joseph, Christus Dominus, tertio die resurrexit a
mortuis: Praesentatur Pharaoni, mundo Resurrection declaratur: Exponit Pharaoni
somnia, and, futurae famis arcendae gratia, ex abundantia septem annorum per
sapientem virum condi debere frumenta and impleri horrea salubri consilio
instruit. Et Christus tale consilium dedit; Nisi, inquit, granum tritici, in
terram cadens, mortuum sit, ipsum solum manet; sin autem mortuum fuerit, multum
fructus afferet. Joan. 12. Data est Joseph a Pharaone in tota Aegypto potestas:
Et Christus post Resurrectionem dicit, Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo
and in terra: Matthew. 28.18. Misit Joseph suos per totam Aegyptum, and collegit
frumentum multum, quasi arenam maris. Misit and Christus suos per mundum,
dicens, Ite, baptizate gentes in nomine Patris, Filii, and S. Spiritus: Matthew.
28.19. and collectus est credentium numerus sine numero, quasi arena maris.
Constituit Joseph horrea per universam Aegyptum, and per totum mundum Christus
consecravit Ecclesias. Aperuit Joseph horrea tempore famis, and ministrabat
populis. Hoc de nostro dictum est, Oculi Domini super justos, ut eruat a morte
animas eorum, and pascat eos in fame. Famem vero animae, Amos Propheta
ostendit, Dabo eis, ait Dominus, famem, non panis and aquae, sed famem audiendi
Verbum Dei: Am. 8. In hac fame positis, noster Joseph, Christus, ex horrels
suis nobis divinam corporis sui annonam administrat, quam gustantes, videmus,
quam suavis sit Dominus. Dictum est, quod acquisieret Joseph Pharaoni totam
Aegyptum: and de nostro dicitur, Deus erat in Christo reconcilians mundum sibi,
Id. c. 29.
the third beginning, Joseph is brought out of Prison; and our Joseph, the Lord
Christ, rose from the dead the third day. He is brought before Pharaoh, and the
Resurrection is declared to the World. He expounds to Pharaoh his Dreams, and
gives him wholesome counsel, that as a remedy against the future Famine, the
abundance of the seven years of plenty should be laid up in Storehouses. And
Christ gives such counsel: Except a grane of Wheat falling into the Earth dies,
it remains alone; but if it dies, it brings forth much fruit. Power is given to
Joseph over all Egypt; and Christ, risen from the dead, said; All Power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth. Joseph sent his Agents through all Egypt, and
gathered together much Corn, as the Sand of the Sea. And our Joseph, Christ the
Lord, sent his Apostles through the whole World, saying, Go and baptize all
Nations in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. (Matt.
28.19.) And a numberless number of Believers is gathered together, as the Sand
of the Sea. Joseph made Storehouses throughout all Egypt, and Christ has
consecrated Churches through the whole world. Joseph opened his Storehouses in
the time of famine, and furnished people with corn. And this is said of our
Joseph, The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, to deliliver their souls
from death, Psalm. 33.
to keep them alive in famine. But the Prophet tells us of a soul famine. I will
give them a famine, says the Lord, Am. 8.
not of bread and of water, but a famine of hearing the word of God. To them,
that lay under this famine, our Joseph, the Lord Christ, gives the divine food
of his body, which we tasting, see, how sweet the Lord is. Its said, that
Joseph purchased the whole Land of Egypt for Pharaoh. And of our Joseph it is
said, God was in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.
reconciling the world unto himself.

The same Father goes on still with the history. Joseph's brethren, constrained
by the famine, come into Egypt to buy corn of him, whom they had sold.
Venerunt in Aegyptum fame compulsi fratres Joseph, ab eo, quem vendiderant, sub
pretio comparare frumenta. Venerunt ad nostrum Joseph, qui eum crucifixerunt,
ut ejus refecti cibario, famem, qua eorum vexabantur animae, auferrent. Adorant
illi, adorant and isti: videns Joseph fratres agnovit eos, ipsi vero non
agnoverunt eum: and fratres nostri Joseph non cognoverunt eum; Si enim illum
cognovissent, nunquam Dominum gloriae crucifixissent, 1 Cor. 2.8. Alienatus est
Joseph a fratribus suis, eisque per interpretem dixit, exploratores estis, etc.
Hoc and noster Joseph per Interpretem Petrum ait persecutoribus; Vos sanctum
and justum negastis, and principem vitae interemistis. Poenitent fratres Joseph
ex his, quae gesserunt, Dicitur and his poenitemini; Dicunt illi, In peccato
sumus de fratre nostro: and Reuben dixit illis, non dixi vobis, nolite vexare
puerum? and non me audistis. Ecce sanguis ejus exquiritur: Et Judaei, qui
Pilato dixerunt, sanguis ejus sit super nos and super filios nostros, Matthew.
27. dicunt Apostolis, Quid faciemus, viri fratres, monstrate nobis. Id. Ib. c.
30.
And they come to our Joseph, who had crucified him, that being refreshed with
his food, they might be freed from the famine with which their souls were
vexed. They do adore, and these do adore. Joseph, seeing his brethren knew
them, but they knew not him: so the brethren of our Joseph knew him not, for
had they known him, they would never have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor.
2.8. Joseph made himself strange to his brethren, and said to them by an
Interpreter, Ye are spies, etc. and this also says our Joseph to his
persecutors by his Interpreter Peter, Ye have denied the just and the holy one,
and have murdered the Prince of life, Act. 3.14. Joseph's brethren repent of the
things, which they had done, and its said to these, Repent, Act. 2.38. and 3
19. Joseph's brethren said, we are guilty concerning our brother, Genesis 42. And
Reuben said unto them, Said I not unto you, do no hurt to the lad? but ye would
not hearken to me: and now his blood is required of us: so they, that could
once say to Pilate, Matthew. 28.
His blood be upon us, and our children, said afterward to the Apostles, Act.
2.37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? we pray you show us.

The same Father goes on further. Joseph gave order that his brethrens sacks
should be filled with corn, and the money to be returned in each of their
sacks, which they have brought; that the Grace of Christ might not be of Works,
Iussit Joseph fratrum suorum saccos impleri frumento, and reddi unicuique
pretium, quod attulerant; ut gratia Christi non esset ex operibus, alioqui
gratia non esset gratia. Fratres Joseph cum Benjamin veniunt, and ex Iudaeis
tria millia veniunt ad Christum, subsequente minimo Apostolorum Paulo. Vidit
Joseph Benjamin fratrem suum ex una matre, et lachrymatus est. Vidit Christus
Paulum saevientem in Ecclesiam matrem, et miseratus est. Dixit Joseph
praeposito domus suae de fratribus, Introduc istos in domum, mecum enim
manducabunt panem. Dicit et noster Joseph per prophetam fratribus, Venite,
edite de panibus meis, et bibite vinum, quod miscui vobis. Munera dedit Joseph
fratribus suis: Et Christus dedit dona hominibus cum S. Spiritum dedit suis.
Benjamin autem fratri minori ampliora dedit, quam fratribus dona: hoc praedicat
et Benjamin Paulus noster, dicens, plus omnibus illis laboravi, non autem ego
sed gratia Dei mecum. Poculum suum Joseph in sacco Benjamin clam jussit
immitti, quod requisitum cum fratres perturbaret suos, inventum est poculum in
sacco Benjamin. Calix Passionis. Christi datus occulte in corpore Pauli
cognoscitur, cum dicit, Stigmata Domini nostri Jesu Christi in corpore meo
porto. Cum jam vellet Joseph cognosci a fratribus suis, emisit vocem dicens,
ego sum Joseph frater vester, Adhuc Pater meus vivit? and noster Joseph.
Christus, ut se ostenderet fratribus suis, dicit in Psalmis, Annunciabo nomen
tuum fratribus meis. Dixit Joseph fratribus suis, Non vos huc misistis, sed
Deus: dicit and de nostro Joannes Apostolus, Ad hoc misit Deus filium suum in
mundum, ut vivamus per eum. Id. Ib. c. 31.
otherwise Grace were not Grace. Joseph's brethren come with Benjamin; and 3000
Jews come to Christ, Act. 2.41. Paul following, Act. 9. who speaks of
himself, as the least of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.9. Joseph, seeing Benjamin his
brother of the same mother, wept: and Christ seeing Paul raging against the
Church his mother, had pity on him. Joseph said of his brethren to his
Steward, Bring the men home, for they shall dine with me: and our Joseph says
by the Prophet to his brethren, Eat of my bread, and drink of my wine, that I
have mingled for you, Prove. 9. Joseph gave gifts to his brethren, so Christ
gave gifts to men, when he gave the Spirit to his. But to Benjamin, his younger
brother, Joseph gave larger gifts then to his other brethren; and this does
Paul, our Benjamin confess, saying, I labored more, then they all, yet not I,
but the Grace of God, that is with me, (1 Cor. 15.) Joseph commanded his cup to
be put in Benjamins sack, which, when it troubled his brethren to have it
challenged of them, was yet found in Benjamins sack. The cup of Christ's
sufferings, is acknowledged hiddenly given in the body of Paul, when he says,
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6. When Joseph would make
himself known to his brethren, he lift up his voice and said, I am Joseph your
brother: Is my father yet alive? And Christ, our Joseph, that he might show
himself to his brethren, Psalm. 22.26.
says, I will declare thy name to my brethren. Genesis 45.
Joseph said to his brethren, Ye sent me not hither, but God, to preserve
life: And of our Joseph, the Apostle John says; To this end God sent his Son
into the world, that we might live by him.

CHAP. VIII.
HItherto we have heard of the persons by whom Christ was foresignified, while
the Church was in the narrow bounds of a Family. Proceed we now to the Persons,
that were Types of Christ, when the Church of God came to be in a people.

Christ and Moses.
God himself by Moses prophesying and foretelling of Christ to be raised up as
a Prophet, Deutr. 18,
has this clause, that he should be like unto Moses: but so, that, as the
Truth is far above the Type, the Body above the Shadow, so Christ above
Moses, in all respects.

1. Moses was a true man, so is Christ: but Moses was (...) a mere man, but
Christ is Immanuel, (...), God and man in one person. Moses was a God to
Pharaoh, Exodus 7.1.
but he made a God; I have made thee a God but Christ is (...), God; of
himself, He is Deus genitus, God by Eternal Generation. And, even in regard of
the Humane Nature. Moses came from Adam in the way of ordinary Generation, by
conjunction of male and female, he had a father and a mother: Christ also came
from Adam, but not in the way of ordinary Generation; as man he had a mother,
but not a father: He was born of a Virgin, but conceived of the Holy Ghost.
Hence also Moses was conceived and born a sinner; even to him, as well as to
others came the contagion of Original sin, and hence he was subject to
miscarriages in his life: but of Christ the Apostle can say, Such an high
Priest we have, who is holy, Heb. 7.
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners: and hence he could appeal to his
enemies themselves; and say, Joh 8.46.
which of you convinces me of evil?

2. As Moses brought Israel from bondage under Pharaoh, so Christ has set us
free from bondage under Satan the Prince of darkness: and here the comparison
holds aptly: the Parallels are, Christ and Moses, Satan and Pharaoh, bodily and
spiritual bondage, Israel according to the flesh, and Israel according to the
spirit: but here also Christ is (though like Moses, yet) far more excellent
then He. Moses wrought an external deliverance, the conveniences of which
reached to the bodies of the Israelites, an handful of the world: but Christ
has wrought a spiritual deliverance, the conveniences of which reach to the
souls of all Believers of all Nations; what comparison is there between them?
Moses, though he began the work, could not yet consummate it: he brings Israel
out of Egypt, he carried them through the red Sea, and through the Wilderness,
even to the Borders of the Land of Promise, but he must not put them into the
possession of it: Joshua must begin where Moses left, he must: bring Israel
into it. But yet neither could Joshua make a perfect work of it: he put them
into Possession, but neither could he, nor all the following Judges and Kings
keep them in Possession: how soon and how frequently were they molested and
brought under their enemies? how were they at last dispossessed, the Ten Tribes
by Salmanasar, the other Two Tribes by Nebuchadnezzar? And, though they were
released by Cyrus, and by Ezrah and Nehemiah brought again into their own
Country, yet how were they by the Romans so dispossessed and scattered into all
Nations, that to this day, they never had the happiness to return again to
their native soil; but remain scattered Vagabonds over the face of the whole
world: but Christ has wrought a full and perfect salvation for us: He has set
us free from that miserable slavery, in which we were under Satan, that hellish
Pharaoh: He has brought us into, and (maugre the malice of all our spiritual
enemies) upholds us in the state of salvation.

3. Moses was a mediator between God and the people, Deuteronomy. 5.5. 1 Timothy 2.5.
I stood, says he, between the Lord and you: and so is Christ a mediator
between God and us; There is one Mediator, says the Apostle, between God and
man, even the man Jesus Christ. Herein therefore He was like Moses: but yet
herein also He far exceeded him: as the Apostle says, Heb. 8.6.
He, namely Christ, is Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established
upon better promises.

4. Moses wrought great signs and wonders in Egypt, and the Red Sea, and in
the Wilderness, the History of the old Testament makes it manifest: And Christ
also wrought great miracles; the History of the Evangelists is clear for it:
therefore herein also Moses was a Type of Christ: and yet herein also He far
exceeds him. Joh. 15.24.
Hear we our Savior; If I had not done among them the works that no other man
did, etc. hear the blind man restored to his sight; Ioh. 9.32.
Since the world began was is it not heard, that any man did open the eyes of
one that was born blind. Hear the attestations of the people, upon the stilling
of the Tempest: Matthew. 8.27.
What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him? upon the
casting out of the unclean spirit: Mar. 1.27.
what thing is this? what new Doctrine is this? for with Authority commands He
even the unclean spirits, and they obey him: upon the healing of the
paralitick: we never saw it on this fashion, Mar. 2.12.
and finally, upon the healing of the man, that was dumb and deaf, (...), Mar.
7.37.
He has done all things well, He makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb
to speak.

5. He was like to Moses in respect of excellency. Moses excelled all the
Prophets in the manner of Gods revealing himself unto him. Hear now my words,
Numb. 12.6, 7, 8,
says God, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known
unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is
not so, who is faithful in all my house: with him I will speak mouth to mouth,
even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall
he behold: But herein did our Savior far surpass him and them all: No man,
says St. John, has seen God at any time: and then he adds, Joh. 1.18.
the only begotten, which is the bosom of the Father, has declared him.

Lastly, Christ and Moses are by the Apostle likened in the point of
faithfulness, but yet even in this, the preeminency is given unto Christ in two
respects: 1. Heb. 3.2, 5, 6.
Moses as a servant, Christ as a Son. 2. Moses in the house of God, Christ over
his own house, as the builder thereof.

Hear Tertullian. Moses Pharaonis Deus, Christus universae creaturae Dominus
and Deus esse reperitur. Lib. de Trin.
Moses is said to be a God to Pharaoh: Christ is found to be God and Lord to
the whole world.

Hear Athanasius. (...), etc. Moses famulus erat: Christus filius. Moses
fidelis in domo, Christus super domo ut qui eam constituerit, dominusque ejus
and architectus sit, and ut Deus, eam sanctificet. To. 1. contra Arrian. or. 3.
Moses was a servant, Christ the Son. Moses faithful in the house; Christ over
the house, as who has constituted it, and is the Lord and builder of it, and
as God does sanctify it.

(...), etc. Moses figura erat Christi, sicut enim a Mose impleti erant S.
Sancto 70. seniores, ita a Christo orbis terrarum accepit S. Sanctum. Tom. 6.
sermon. de S. Sancto.
Hear St. Chrysostom. Moses was a Type of Christ, for as from Moses the Seventy
Elders were filled with the Holy Ghost, Number. 11.17. so the world has received
the Holy Ghost from Christ. And so indeed St. John says, we have an unction
from the Holy one. 1 John 2.20.
The Holy one is Christ, the Unction is the Holy Ghost.

Hear St. Austin. Moses is cast out by his mother, Moses a matre sua
projicitur, and a Pharaonis filia colligitur, fic Christus a synagoga, de qua
nascitur, repudiatur, and ab Ecclesia invenitur and suscipitur. Moses
dereliquit populum suum, and in regionibus longinquis Aethiopissae conjungitur;
sic Christus derelicto populo suo, de extraneis regionibus Ecclesiae sociatur.
De temp. sermon. 86.
and is taken up by Pharaohs daughter: Christ is refused by the Synagogue, that
is of the Jews, of whom He came, and is found and received of the Church.
Moses left his people and in a strange Country married an Ethiopian woman: so
Christ, having forsaken his own people, is married to the Church in Foreign
Nations.

Cum eum amplius celare non possent parents ejus; accepit matter ejus capsam
linitque a foris bitumine, and misit infantem in eum, projecitque in amnem:
figurae succedunt figuris, dum tame^ omnes astiones Christum Ecclesiamque
significent: Et Paulo post, Descendens filia Pharaonis lavare in flumine,
agnovit, quod de infantibus Hebraeorum esset, eumque suscipiens educavit, ut
filium. Dum descenderet ad Christum doctrina hujus mundi, abluta spirituali
unda superbiam deposuit, suscipiensque, quasi grandis parvum por humilem
gratiam Ecclesiae sociata personae, quae filia Christi efficitur matter. Et
paulo post. Per Mosem filii Israel ab Aegyptiis, and per Christum a spiritibus
immundis animae liberantur. Adultus Moses factus vidit quendam Aegyptium
injuriam facientem cuidam ex gente sua, quem vindicavit, mactando Aegyptium.
Hoc agit and Moses noster, mediator Christus, eruens animas de potestate
tenebraram in illa multitudine spiritualis semini^ Abrahae, quae crevit, ut
arena maris. Obruit Aegyptium, dum clamant daemonia expulso, Quid nobis and
tibi, Jesu fili David? Venisti ante tempus perdere nos. De promiss and
praedict. Dei. part, 1. c. 33.
Hear Prosper. When the Parents of Moses could no longer conceal him, his mother
provided an Ark of Bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and pitch, and laid her
child in it, and cast him into the River: here are figures upon figures, while
yet all these actions Typifie Christ and the Church. And a little after:
Pharaohs daughter going to wash in the River, knew that this was one of the
Hebrews infants, and, taking him up, she brought him up as her Son. And the
learning of this world coming to Christ, being washed in the spiritual water,
laid aside her pride, and as a great one, taking up this little one, by the
grace of humility, joined to the person of the Church, which is as the daughter
of Christ, becomes a mother. And a little after. 'By Moses the Israelites were
set free from the Egyptians, and by Christ the souls of men are set free from
unclean spirits. Moses being grown up, saw an Egyptian offering wrong to an
Hebrew, delivered the Hebrew by slaying the Egyptian. And this does our Moses,
Christ the Mediator, freeing souls from the power of darkness in that
multitude of the spiritual seed of Abraham, which has increased, as the sand
of the Sea; He destroyed the Egyptian, when devils cast forth, cry out, What
have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of David? art thou come to destroy us
before the time?

He goes on with the History of Moses: Vidit Moses alia die, secum Hebraeos
altercantes, coepitque eos ad pacem componere. Dixitque ille, qui alteri
injuriam faciebat, Quis te statuit Judicem nobis? Numquid and me vis occidere
quemadmodum hesterna die occidisti Aegyptium? Et noster Moses, Mediator
Christus, clamat per David, Cum eis, qui oderunt pacem, eram pacificus: cum
loquebar illis, impugnabant me gratis. Fugit Moses in illo sermon, and factus
est transfuga in terra Madian. Dicit and noster, Ecce elongavi fugiens, and
mansi in deserto. Accepit Moses uxorem filiam Jethri sacerdotis Madian, ut
Mediatorem nostrum ex alienigenis sumpsisse conjugem signaret Ecclesiam.
Pascebat Moses oves Jethri soceri sui in cremo. Et noster Mediator Christus,
oves pascens, dicit, Pastor bonus animam suam ponit pro ovibus suis. Terribili
visione motus, Moses pergit videre, cur ignis in montem descenderat, rubum
minime concremaret. Noster Moses testatur, Se venisse, ignem mittere in terram,
quem utiliter vult amplius inflammari. Mosi dicitur, Solve calceamenta de
pedibus tuis, ut sint liberi and speciosi pedes Mediatoris annunciantis bona.
Jubetur Moses pergere ad filios Israel, and ad Regem Aegypti, ut populum suum
dimitteret ex terra sua. Et dicit noster Mediator, Non sum missus, nisi ad
oves, quae perierunt, domus Israel. Excusat Moses, quod sit impeditus lingua,
and gracili voce. Dicit and noster Judais, Sermo men's non capit in vobis.
Rursus instanti Deo, ut pergeret omni ex part excusat Moses, dicens, Domine
provide alium, quem mittas, ut vox Mediatoris nostri infirmitatis humanae
susceptae signaretur, dicentis, Pater, si fieri potest, transeat a me Calix
iste. Dicitur Mosi, ut societ sibi Aaron fratrem suum, ipsique ad Deum agenda
suscipiat, ille ad populum. Dicitur and Mediatori nostro, Dabo tibi gentes
haereditatem, etc. Paulum vero electum, qui loqueretur ad populum, per Aaron
significatum possumus intelligere, de quo Mediator noster ad Ananiam dicit,
Ipse est mihi electionis vas, ut ferat nomen meum coram Gentibus, and Regibus,
and filiis Israel. Sic enim Moses and Aaron, Hebraeo populo praedicantes,
missos se a Deo, ut eos ex Aegypto eruerent, firmaverunt, quos audiens populus
ingeniculans adoravit, quibus and signa facientibus credidit. Praedicante vero
Paulo Gentibus and Judaeis, salutem animarum fiducialiter promittente, signa
dum faceret, ad agnitionem Dei, mira celeritate convertit, ipsosque Reges ex
futuro Dei judicio eruit: Cap. 34.
Another day (says he) Moses saw two Hebrews striving together, and he sought
to set them at agreement. And he that had done the wrong, said, Who made thee a
Judge over us? Will thou kill me as thou killedst the Egyptian yesterday? And
our Moses, Christ the Mediator, cries by David; My Soul has long dwelt with
them: I am for Peace, but when I speak they are for War: Psa. 120.6, 7. Moses
fled at that word, and became a stranger in the Land of Madian. And our Moses
said, I would go far off, and abide in the Wilderness: Psa. 55. Moses took to
Wife the Daughter of Jethro the Priest of Median, to signify, That our
Mediator should take to Wife the Church out of the Gentiles. Moses fed the
sheep of Jethro his Father-in-law in the Wilderness. And Christ our Mediator,
feeding his sheep, says, The good Shepherd lays down his life for his sheep.
Moses, moved by that terrible Vision, went to see, why that Fire came down upon
the Mountain, and the Bush was not burnt. And our Moses testifies, That he came
to send Fire upon the Earth, which, for the profit of men, he would have to be
further kindled. It Is said to Moses, Loose thy shoes from off thy feet, that
the feet of our Mediator, publishing good tidings, might be free and beautiful.
Moses is commanded to go to the Children of Israel, and to the King of Egypt,
that he should send his people out of his Land: And our Mediator says, I am not
sent, but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel. Moses excuses the business,
that he is slow of speech, and of a slow tongue: (Exodus 4.) And our Moses to
the Jews, My Word has no place in you. God again being instant with him to go,
he altogether puts off the business, that it might be a Type of that Voice of
our Savior, savoring of humane infirmity, which he undertook; Father, if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: (Mat. 26.) Order is given to Moses, that
he should join his Brother Aaron with himself; and Moses to do the business
toward God, and Aaron the business toward the People. And it is said to our
Mediator, I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, etc. (Psalm. 2.8.)
But by Aaron we may understand Paul chosen to speak unto the People, of whom
our Mediator says to Ananias, He is to me a chosen Vessel, to bear my Name
before the Gentiles, and Kings, Acts 9.15.
and the Children of Israel. Moses and Aaron, speaking to the Hebrews, assured
them, that they were sent of God to bring them out of Egypt, whom the People
hearing, bowing their heads, they worshipped, and seeing their Miracles, they
believed. So, while Paul preached to the Jews and Gentiles, confidently
promising Salvation of their Souls by Christ, and wrought Miracles, he suddenly
converted them to the acknowledgment of God, and freed Kings themselves from
the future Judgment of God.

Hear him again: God calling Moses into Mount Sinai, gave him a Law written in
Tables of Stone, Vocans Deus Mosem in monte Sinai, Legem in tabulis lapideis
adscriptam, ut populo traderet, dedit, quam rite servans, terram promissionis
acciperet. Noster vero Mediator Jesus Dominus (cujus figuram gestabat etiam
Moses) in montem ascendens cum discipulis suis, quibus modis beati homines
fierent, Legem non in tabulis lapideis, sed in tabulis cordis carnalibus Dei
Spiritu scripsit, qua non terra, sed coelo and vita potiantur aeterna qui ejus
mandata servaverint. De praedict. and promiss. Dei, part. 2. cap. 1.
which he was to deliver to the People, which they carefully keeping, they
should receive the Land of Promise. Our Mediator, the Lord Jesus (of whom Moses
was a Type) ascending into the Mount with his Disciples, shows by what means
men may become happy, wrote a Law, not in Tables of Stone, but in the fleshly
Tables of the Heart by the Spirit of God, by which they may come to enjoy, not
Earth, but Heaven, and Eternal Life, that keep his Commandments.

Cum multis modis precaretur Dominum Moses, seipsum pro peccato populi
offerens, nostrum Mediatorem sub figura expressit, qui animam suam pro impiis
posuit. Id. Ib. cap. 4.
Hear him again: Moses many ways praying to God for the People, at last offering
himself for the Sin of the People, ( Exodus 32.) under a figure he expressed our
Mediator, who dyed for the ungodly: ( Romans 5.)

Erat Moses mitis prae omnibus hominibus, qui sunt super terram, Number. 12. In
hac mansuetudine resonat noster Mediator, qui de se dicit, Discite a me, quia
mitis sum. Detraxerunt Aaron and Miriam Mosi germano suo, quod Aethiopissam
accepisset uxorem. Detraxerunt and Domino fratres sui, quod cum Publicanis and
peccatoribus vesceretur. Id. Ib. c. 9.
Hear him again: Moses was the meekest man upon the Earth, wherein he was a Type
of Christ, who said of himself, Learn of me, that I am meek: Mat. 11.29. Aaron
and Miriam speak against their Brother Moses, for that he had married an
Ethiopian woman. And the brethren of Christ spoke against him, for that he did
eat with Publicans and sinners.

Hear Junius. Mediatio Mosis fuit umbra quaedam mediationis Christi, and corpus
suum in Christo obtinet. Parallel. l. 1. parall. 89.
The mediation of Moses was a certain shadow of the mediation of Christ, and in
Christ it has its body or truth.

CHAP. IX.
Christ's Priesthood and Aarons.
THe Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews compares these together, but so that
he acknowleges and proves the Preisthood of Christ to be far more excellent,
then the Priesthood of Aaron; and that in many particulars.

1. They that are the Sons of Levi, Heb. 7.5.
who recieve the Office of the Priesthood have a commandment to take Tithes of
the people according to the Law, that is, of their brethren: Verse. 6.
but He, whose descent is not reckoned from them, received Tithes, Verse. 9.
of Abraham: and so Levi, who received Tithes, paid Tithes in Abraham: for He
was in the loins of Abraham, Verse. 10.
when Melchisedech met him.

2. Aaron came of Levi: but He, of whom these things are spoken, says the
Apostle, pertains to another Tribe, Verse. 13.
of which no man gave attendance at the Altar, for its manifest, that our Lord
sprang out of Judah, Verse. 14.
of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood.

3. Verse. 16.
Those Priests were made after the Law of a carnal commandment, but Christ,
after the power of anendlesse life.

Ver. 21, Psalm. 110.4.
4. Those Priests were made without an oath, but Christ with an oath, by him,
that said unto him, The Lord has sworn, etc.

Verse. 23.
5. They were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason
of death: but this man, because He continues for ever, Verse. 24.
has an unchangeable Priesthood.

6. they were all sinners, even Aaron himself had his sins, Verse. 26.
as the History makes it manifest. But such an high Priest have we, who is
holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners.

7. Those high Priests needed to offer sacrifice, first for themselves, Verse.
27.
and then for the people: its not so with this high Priest, for He was void of
sin.

Verse. 28.
8. The Law made men high Priests, which have infirmity, but the word of the
oath, which is since the Law, makes the Son, scil. high Priest: so that the
other Priests were mere men, infirm men, but this high Priest, our Lord Jesus
Christ is Immanuel, (...), God and man in one person.

9. Other Priests sacrificed bruit creatures, Oxen, Sheep, Verse. 27.
Goats, but our high Priest offered up himself. Oh excellent sacrifice.

Heb 9.6. Verse. 7.
10. The priests, namely, the inferior Priests, went always into the first
Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God: but into the second went the high
priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself
and for the errors of the people: Verse. 11.
but Christ being made an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and
more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this building,
neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, Verse. 12.
he entered in once into the holy place, not into the holy places made with
hands, which are figures, of the true, but into heaven it self, Verse. 24.
now to appear in the presence of God for us.

11. Verse. 25.
The high priest enters into the holy Place every year with the blood of
others, but Christ needs not to offer himself often, for then, as the Apostle
argues, Verse. 26.
must He often have suffered since the foundation of the world: but now once in
the end of the world has He appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice of
himself. And then he amplifies it by a comparison, As, says he, Verse. 27.28.
its appointed unto men once to dye, and then comes the judgment: so Christ was
once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall He
appear the second time unto salvation.

12. The sacrifices, Heb. 10.1.
which they offered year by year continually, could not make the people perfect:
the Apostle proves it two ways: 1. for then, says the Apostle, Verse. 2.
would they not have ceased to be offered? As if he had said, they would, and
he proves the consequence, because the worshippers, once purged, should have
had no more conscience of sin: but now in those sacrifices there is a
remembrance of sins every year. 2. Ab impossibili: for, says he, Verse. 3.
its impossible, Verse. 4.
that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away sin; So inefficacious
were all the Legal Sacrifices. But then he adds, concerning the efficacy of
Christ's Sacrifice, by way of opposition: But this man, Verse. 12.
after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right
hand of God. And then he adds this, as the reason: Verse. 14.
for by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

Thus far I have traced the Apostle in his Parallel; now hear others. St.
Chrysostom takes notice of this difference between them, that the Priest,
under the Law, was Priest, not King, but Christ is both King and Priest, as
also Melchisedech was, King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God. Among
you (says he, (...). etc. Apud vos regnum and sacerdotium distincta sunt, in
Christo autem utrumque conjunctum est and copulatum. To. 6. sermon. de uno
legislat.
speaking to the Jews) the Kingdom and the Pristhood were divided each from
other, but in Christ both of them are joined together.

Sibrandus Lubhertus takes notice of some of these differences. In sacerdotio
Veteris Testamenti fiebant quotidie cruenta sacrificia: in sacerdotio autem N.
Testamenti non est nisi unum cruentum sacrificium, idque non nisi semel oblatum
est, nec soepius offerri debuit. In sacerdotio Vet. Test. summus sacerdos
quotannis semel ingrediebatur in Sanctum Sanctorum, quod manufactum erat. Sed
summus sacerdos N. Test. non in S. Sanctorum, quod manufactum est, sed in ipsum
coelum ingressus and ibi semper pro nobis apparet. In sacerdotio Vet. Test.
summus sacerdos and hostia toto genere diversa erant. At in N. Test. sacerdos
and hostia reipsa unum and idem sunt. Jesus Christus enim est summus sacerdos,
and idem est ipsa hostia. Ille enim seipsum obtulit Patri in remissionem omnium
peccatorum. Sed quid opus est verbis? Ipsa scriptura dicit, inter summum
sacerdotem Vet. and Novi Test. hanc esse differentiam, quod illi succeditur,
huic non succedatur. De Papa Romans l. 5. c. 2. p. 319.
Under the Priesthood of the old Testament bloody sacrifices were every day
offered, but in the Priesthood of the new Testament there is but one bloody
sacrifice, and that was but once offered, nor ought it to be often offered. In
the Priesthood of the old Testament, the high Priest entered once every year
into the most holy place, that was made with hands: but the high Priest of the
new Testament entered not into the holy place made with hands, but into heaven
it self, and there He appears continually for us. In the Priesthood of the old
Testament the Priest was one thing and the sacrifice another thing. But in the
new Testament the priest and the sacrifice are indeed one and the same: for
Jesus Christ is the high Priest and He is the sacrifice it self, for he offered
himself to his Father for the remission of sins. But what needs many words? for
the scripture it self makes this a difference between the high Priest of the
old and of the new Testament, that the high Priest of the old Testament had
successors, but Christ has no successor, As the Apostle tells us, Heb. 7.23.
They were many because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death:
but this man, because he continues for ever, Verse. 24.
has an unchangeable Priesthood.

Christ and the high Priest.
Hear St. Austin. The high Priest went alone into the Holy of Holies, Summus
sacerdos solus intrabat in sanctu^ sanctorum; populus foris stabat. Sicut
Christus nunc in secreta coelorum intravit, ut pro nobis interpellet; populus
autem, cujus ille sacerdos est, foris gemit. To. 7. part. 1. contr. epist. Par.
l. 2. c. 7.
while the people stood without: as now Christ is entered into the secret place
of Heaven, to make intercession for us, while the people, whose Priest he is
sighs without.

Weemse makes the high Priest a Type of Christ in five things, in his person,
in his annoynting, Christ. Synag. l. 1. c. 6. s. 3.
in his apparel, in his marriage, in his death.

1. In his person: there must be no blemish in him: so neither was there in
Christ.

2. In his Anointing: the high priest was anointed with the holy oil: and so
was Christ: Psalm. 45.
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness, etc.

3. In his garments: his crown signified his Kingly Office: his Urim and
Thummim signified his Priestly Office, and his Bells his Prophetical Office.

4. In his marriage. It was not lawful for the high Priest to marry a widow,
because he had not her first love nor a divorced woman because he had not her
just love, nor an whore, because he could not have her whole love: he might
only marry a Virgin: so Christ requires of his Church her first love, just
love, and her only love.

5. In his death: He that killed a man negligently, fled to the City of Refuge,
and stayed there till the death of the high Priest: and then he was free: so
Jesus Christ by his death frees us, and sets us at liberty.

Dr. Gouge also makes the comparison between Christ and the high Priest in
sundry particulars.

Exodus 30.30. Psalm. 133.2. Psalm. 45.7.
1. The high Priest was anointed, and this ointment ran down from his head to
the skirts of his garment: this was an outward sign of his Calling and Gifts:
Heb. 5.5. Joh. 3.34. Joh. 1.16.
so Christ was anointed, He was Called and had Gifts to fit him for the
execution of his Offices: and of his fullness we all receive, and Grace for
Grace.

Exodus 28.
2. The high Priest was arrayed with rich and glorious apparel, which is
described by Moses. So Christ is arrayed with Immortallity, Incorruption,
Purity, Majesty, and all manner of glory fit for his place.

Exodus 28.30.
3. Among other things wrought by the Art of man, the high Priest had in his
breast plate two things, Vrim and Thummim, Col. 2.3.
which (according to the notation of the words) signify Light and Integrity.
And Christ, the true high Priest, has in him all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: and his purity is set out by the Apostle to the full, Heb. 8.26.

Exodus 28.9.10
4 The high Priest carried before him on his breast plate the names of the
twelve Tribes of Israel. And Christ has the names of the whole Church in
continual remembrance, and presents them to his Father, to be graciously
accepted by him.

5. On the high Priests Mitre, in a plate of gold, was engraven, Holiness to
the Lord. Two reasons are rendered hereof, one, that he might bear (and so take
away) the imperfections of their best works; the other that he might make the
people acceptable to the Lord, In Christ were truly and properly accomplished
those things, which only were typified in and by the Priest.

6. There were Bells of Gold on the skirts of the high Priests Ephod, which,
with the least motion of his body, sounded. So Christ by his intercession makes
a continual pleasant sound in the ears of God.

CHAP. X. Christ and Joshua.
HEar St. Chrysostom. (...), etc. Jesus etiam ille dicitur, qui, post Mosem,
populum in terram promissionis introduxit. Vides figuram, respice veritatem.
Ille in terram re promissionis introduxit: hic autem, scil. Christus, in
coelum, and ea, quae sunt in coelis, bona. Ille, postquam Moses mortuus est;
iste, postquam lex per Mosem lata cessavit. Ille ducis dignitate pollens; iste
autem Regis majestate praefulgens. In Matthew. hom. 2.

(...), Ipse, scil. Josue, populum introduxit in terram promissionis sicut
Jesus in coelum: non lex, sicut nec Moses: (...). non potest lex introducere,
sed gratia. In hebr. hom. 27.

Nec Moses, nec Aaron introducunt Israel in terram promissam (uterque enim
moritur, priusquam intrarent Israelitae) sed Josue: hujus rei mysterium datur
intelligi, Quod nec sacerdotium, quod prius institutum erat, cujus personam
gerebat Aaron, nec Lex, cujus personam gerebat Moses, in terram haereditatis
aeternae populum Dei introducunt, sed Josue, in quo erat typus Christi, i. e.
gratia per fidem. Et Aaron quidem ante defunctus est, quam Israel in aliquam
partem terrae promissionis intraret: Mose autem vivente, capta est and possessa
terra Amorrhaeorum; sed Jordanem non est permissus transire. Ex aliqua enim
part observatur Lex in fide Christiana; ibi enim sunt praecepta, quae and
hodie jubemur observare Christiani. Sacerdotium autem illud, and sacrificia
nullam partem tenent in die fidei Christianae, nisi quod in umbris futurorum
acta and transacta sunt. To. 4. quaest. super Numer. q. 53.


He was called Jesus, who after Moses, did bring the people into the Land of
Promise, but Christ into heaven, and the good things, that be in heaven:
Joshua, after Moses was dead; Christ, after the Law given by Moses ceased.
Joshua had the dignity of a Duke or Captain, Christ has the Majesty of a King.

Hear him again. He, namely Joshua, brought the people into the Land of
Promise, as Christ into heaven, not the Law, as neither Moses; the Law cannot
bring us in, but grace.

Hear St. Austin: Neither Moses nor Aaron bring the People into the Promised
Land (for both of them dyed before the People entered) but Joshua: The mystery
of which we may understand; That neither the Priesthood, which was instituted
before, which is represented in Aaron, nor the Law, which is represented in
Moses, bring the People of God into the Land of Eternal Inheritance; but
Joshua, who was a Type of Christ; that is, Grace through Faith. And Aaron
indeed dyed, before Israel entered into any part of the Promised Land: but the
Land of the Amorites was taken and possessed, Moses yet living: but the People
was not suffered to pass over Jordan. For the Law is in some part observed in
Christianity, as containing Precepts, which we Christians, even to this day,
are commanded to observe. But that Priesthood and those Legal Sacrifices have
no place in the time of Christianity, saving that they were transacted as
shadows of things to come.

Hear him again: After the Death of Moses, Joshua entered upon the
Principality; and when the Law ceased, Mortuo Mose, Josua suscepit imperium,
and, cessante Lege, Dominus Christus totius obtinuit principatum. De Temp. Ser.
106.
Christ entered upon the Government of the whole.

CHAP. XI. Christ and Jephte.
HEar Saint Austin: The name Jephte signifies opening: Jephte nomen significat,
aperines: sic Christus discipulis suis aperuit sensum, Luc. 24.27. Hunc Jephte
reprobaverunt fratres sui, and e paterna domo ejecerunt, objicientes, quod
esset filius fornicationis, tanquam ipsi essent de uxore legitima nati: Hoc
egerunt adversus Christum principes Sacerdotum, qui de Legis observatione
gloriabantur, tanquam ille Legem solveret, and ideo velut non esset legitimus
filius. Jephte fugit, nec minus Christus: fugit, quia se, quantus esset,
abscondit: fugit, quia eos saevientes latuit, 1 Cor. 2.8. fugit, quia morientis
infirmitatem viderunt, virtutem autem resurgentis non viderunt. Habitavit
Jephte in terra Tob; id est, in terra bona and opima: Videtur hic intelligenda
Christi a mortuis Resurrectio: quae enim terra magis opima, quam corpus
terrenum excellentia immortalitatis and incorruptionis indutum? Colligebantur
ad Jephte viri latrones, etc. Christo hoc objiciebatur, Matthew. 9.11. and in
Christo hoc implebatur, Luc. 23.33. Maxim tamen, postquam resurrexit, quando
collecti sunt ad eum scelerati homines propter Remissionem peccatorum, qui cum
illo ambulabant, quia secundum ejus mandata vivebant: nec hoc desinit fieri
usque nunc and deinceps, quousque confugient ad eum mali, ut justificet impios.
Qui abjecerunt Jephte, conversi sunt ad eum, eumque quaerunt, per quem
abhostibus liberarentur: quod clare significat, quod, qui abjecerunt Christum,
ad eum conversi rursus, in illo inveniunt salutem, sive ii intelligantur, de
quibus Scriptura loquitur, Act. 2. sive illa potius significetur, quae in fine
speratur, gentis vocatio Judaicae. Tom. 4. quaest. super libr. Judicum.
so Christ opened to his Disciples the sense of the Scriptures concerning
himself: Luke 24.27. Jephte's Brethren rejected him, and cast him out of his
Fathers house; objecting to him, that he was a Bastard, as if they were born of
the lawful Wife. So dealt the chief Priests with Christ, who boasted of keeping
the Law, as if he had broken the Law, and consequently were not a legitimate
Son. Jephte fled; and so did Christ: He fled, because he concealed it from them
how great a person he is: He fled, because he was hid from them that raged
against him: (1 Cor. 2.8.) He fled, because they saw his infirmity in dying,
but they saw not his power in rising again. Jephte dwelt in the Land of Tob:
Here the Resurrection of Christ seems to be understood; for what is a more rich
Land, then an earthly Body, having put on the excellency of Immortality and
Incorruption? Vain persons were gathered to Jephte; and this was objected to
Christ, Why (say they) eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? (Matt.
9.11.) and this was fulfilled in Christ, when they crucified him between two
Thieves: ( Luke 23.33.) But especially it was fulfiled in him after his
Resurrection, when wicked men were gathered to him, to obtain Remission of Sins
through him, who walked with him, because they lived after his Laws. Nor does
this cease to be done to this day, and so on, as long as sinners shall fly to
him, that he may justify the ungodly. Jephte's Brethren, that cast him out,
turn to him, and seek him, that they might be saved by him from the Ammonites:
which clearly fore-signifies, that they, who rejected him, turning to him,
find Salvation in him; whether we understand them that were converted by Saint
Peter's Sermon, ( Acts 2.) or whether we understand that Calling of the Jewish
Nation, which is hoped for in the end of the World.

Hear Prosper: having gone over the History of Jephte, he adds; These Figures
and Mysteries do so relate to the Lord Jesus, Haec figurata mysteria ad
Judicem, Ducemque nostrum Jesum Dominum, ita referunt, ut cognoscamus, eum, pro
nostra Redemptione, de inimicis nostris vindictam volentem suscipere, unicam
virginem carnem suam, eamque filiam immolasse. De Promiss. and Praedict. Dei,
part. 2. cap. 20.
our only Judge and Captain, that we may know, that He, being willing for our
Redemption to take revenge upon our Enemies, offered up his flesh, as his only
Virgin Daughter.

CHAP. XII. Christ and Sampson.
HEar Saint Jerome: Sampson was a Type of Christ, Typum tenebat Salvatoris
Sampson, quod meretricem adamavit ex Gentibus Ecclesiam, and multo plures
hestium moriens, quam vivus occiderit. To. 1. contra Jovin. l. 1.
in that he loved the Church of the Gentiles, once an Harlot; and killed many
more Enemies dying, then living.

Hear Saint Austin: Who was it, Quis erat in Sampson, obvium Leonem necans, cum
uxoris petendae causa ad alienigenas tenderet, nisi, qui, Ecclesiam ex Gentibus
vocaturus, dixit, Ego vici mundum? Et paulo post: Quid sibi vult in ore Leonis
occisi favus extractus, nisi quia ecce conspicimus Leges ipsas regni terreni,
quae adversus Christum ante fremuerunt, nunc jam, perempta feritate, dulcedini
Evangelicae praedicandae etiam munimenta praebere? Contra Faust. l. 12. c. 32.
that in Sampson killed the Lion in the way, when he went to take a Wife among
the Philistines, but He that, being about to call a Wife among the Gentiles,
said, I have overcome the World? And a little after: What meant the Honeycomb
in the mouth of the Lion killed, but that the Laws of the Kingdoms of the
Earth, which once raged against Christ, do now defend the preaching of the
Gospel?

Hear him again: Viro forti Sampson venienti ad ducendum uxorem ex alienigenis
Leo fremens venit in obviam: sic Christo descendenti ad habendam de Gentibus
Ecclesiam. Sed quid fecit? Accepit, tenuit, fregit, dissipavit Leonem, and
factus est in manibus ejus, velut hoedus caprarum: Sic, occisa feritate illa,
jam non sic fremit potestas regia, non sic fremit populus Gentium; imo, in ipso
regno Gentium invenimus Leges pro Ecclesia, tanquam favum in ore Leonis. Id. in
Psa. 81.
A Lion met and roared upon Sampson, going to take a Wife from among the
Philistines: So the World roared upon Christ, going to have a Church among the
Gentiles. But what did Sampson? He took the Lion, and held, and tore him in
pieces, and he was in his hands as a Kid of the Goats: So, Christ having
destroyed the former fierceness, the Kings and people of the Gentiles rage not
against Christ; nay, even in the Kingdoms of the Gentiles we find Laws for the
Church, as the Honeycomb in the mouth of the Lion.

Hear Prosper: Having mentioned the Birth of Sampson, he concludes thus: Every
action of whom, Hujus omnis actio in figura Christum Dominum resonat. De
Promiss. etc. part. 2. c. 21.
sounds out the Lord Christ in a figure.

Then, descending to particulars, he adds; Sampson went to Timnath, Descendit
Sampson in Tamnatha, and dilexit illic mulierem ex alienigenis, suosque
parents petit, ut eam sortirentur uxorem. Descendit and noster de coelo
fortissimus, ut sibi dilectas ex Gentibus animas sociaret, and fide conjungeret.
and loved there a woman of the Philistines, and desired his Parents to procure
her to be his Wife. And our valiant Sampson descended from Heaven, by Faith to
join to himself in marriage beloved Souls among the Gentiles.

Dum pergit Sampson videre desponsatam sibi, catulus leonis ei obviam factus
est, quem repletus spiritu dispersit, eumque misit per parts. Rursum rediens,
and declinans viam, dum cadaver inspicit animantis, favum mellis in ore leonis
suscipiens abstulit, idque comedens, sui ex eo parentibus dedit, nec illis
factum sui overis intimavit. Hoc and noster Nazarenus Jesus Dominus egit.
Discerpsit populum Iudaeorum, de quo Balaam ait, Catulus leonis Juda. Hujus
particulas per orbem sparsas testatur David, dicens, disperge eos in virtute
tua. Quod factum non credimus, sed vidimus. Favum vero mellis, quem in ore
leonis hujus invenit, legem spiritalem populi bujus intellige, quod apes,
Patriarchae and Prophetae, construentes, in eum mella infuderint divini
eloquii: hoc ex ore leonis mortui abstulit, qui, repulsis Judaeis, legem ipsam
etiam gentibus ministravit. Idque comedit corpus fortissimi nostri Judicis
Christi Domini, ut dicit, Quam dulcia faucibus meis verba tua super mella and
favas ori meo. Et Solomon ait, favi mellis sermones. Dedit ex eo parentibus
suis, sive discipulis suis, Cum aperuit sensum eorum, ut intelligerent
scripturas, sive his, qui ex Judaeis transierunt and fidem Christi, ut etiam
ipsi gustantes viderent, quam suavis est Dominus. cap. Eod.
He proceeds in the same Chapter. While Sampson went to see his espoused Wife, a
young Lion meets him, which he, being full of the spirit, rent in pieces. And
in his return, going out of the way, he looks upon the karkase of the Lion, and
finding an honeycomb in his mouth, he did eat of it, and gave thereof to his
Parents, not telling them what he had done. And this did our Nazarite, the Lord
Jesus: He divided the people of the Jews, of whom Balaam said, Judah is a young
Lion: And the parts of this people to be scattered abroad, David testifies,
saying, Scatter them by thy power. Psalm. 59. Verse. 11. And this we do not so
much believe, as see to be done. But, by the hony-combe, which he found in this
Lions mouth, understand the spiritual Law of this people, which the Bees, the
Patriarchs and the Prophets framing, they powered into it the honey of the word
of God. This he took out of the dead Lion, who, the Jews being rejected, gave
that Law to the Gentiles. And this did the body of our valiant Judge, the Lord
Christ, as he says. How sweet is thy word to my taste? yea sweeter then honey
unto my mouth, Psalm. 119.103. And Solomon, Pleasant words are as an hony-combe,
Prove. 16.24. He gave of this to his parents, either to his disciples, while he
opened their minds to understand the scriptures, ( Luke 24.) or to those of
the Jews, who embraced the faith of Christ, that even they might taste and
see, how gracious the Lord is.

He proceeds. Hujus actionis aenigma Sampson in die nuptiarum protulit sub
certa sponsione 30. syndonum totidemque stolarum viris, qui aderant si
proposita narravissent. Ex devorante, inquit, produ^t esca, and ex forti dulce.
Quam, propinquante solutionis die, cum intelligere nequivissent, ejus mulierem
nimlit terroribus coactam explorare faciunt sensus viri, and sic parabolam
pandunt, dicentes, quid dulcius melle, and fortius leone? Quibus ille ait, Si
uon domassetis vitulam meam, nunquam intelligeretis parabolam meam. Magnum
igitur illud dominicae pietatis Sacramentum, quod in lege fuit velatum, fuitque
a seculis in Deo absconditum, revelatum per Christum, manifestaetum fuit in
gentibus. ibid.
He brought forth a riddle of this action on the marriage day, under a certain
promise of thirty sheets and thirty changes of raiment if they could open his
riddle, Out of the eater, says he, came forth meat, and out of the strong
came forth sweetness: which when they could not understand, they prevailed
with the woman by threatenings to get out of him the meaning of the riddle, and
so they unfold it, saying, What is sweeter then honey? what is stronger then a
Lion? to whom he said, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found
out my riddle. So that great mystery of the Gospel, which was veiled under the
Law, and lay hid in God for many Generations, being reveiled by Christ, was
manifested among the Gentiles.

A se prostratos exuens spoliis, promissa Sampson omni celeritate persolvit, ut
de nostro quod dictum fuerat, etiam signaretur, Fortium spolia dividet.
Salubriter enim noster suos occidit inimicos, dum peccato peccatum occidit in
carne, reddens spoliorum promissiones, non merita meritis, sed pro malis bona
conferens miseris. Ibid.
Again. Sampson having destroyed many of the Philistims, stripped them and so did
speedily perform his promises, that it might be a Type of that, which was said
of Christ, He shall devide the spoils of the mighty: for He has destroyed his
enemies, while for sin he condemned sin in the flesh, making good his promises
of the spoils, not according to merits, but rendering good for evil to the
miserable.

Pergens sampson ad diem festum hebraei populi, uxorem ejus viro alii parents
tradiderunt: and hoc faciunt leves animae, quae consortium unici sponsi,
Christi, easto fidelique cord minime retinentes, cuilibet se haereticae
tradunt doctrinae. Ibid.
He goes on. Sampson going to his people, his wife was by her parents given to
another man: and this do unstable souls, which not keeping the communion of
Christ with a chaste and faithful heart, give themselves up to every heretical
Doctrine.

Proceeding in the history, he adds further. Reversus Sampson, cum cognosceret
uxorem suam viro alteri conjunctam, trecentis vulpibus apprehensis, earum in
invicem caudas innectens, faces his ardentes posuit, Compendio succendit. Dicit
quidem and noster fortis Dominus (haereticos signans) capite nobis vulpes
pusillas exterminantes vineas, quibus sunt faces incenndii, potius erroris quam
divini amoris, etc. Ibid.
Sampson returning, when he saw that his wife was given in marriage to another
man, having taken three hundred foxes, tying their tails together, and putting
firebrands between, he suddenly burnt their country. And our valiant Lord,
says (meaning Heretics) Take us the little foxes, that mar our vines, which
have also firebrands rather of error, then of divine love, etc.

He proceeds in the story, continuing the Parallel between Sampson as the Type,
and Christ, as the Truth. The same Sampson, says he, loved another woman of
that people, to whom while he was going, Idem Sampson in illo populo aliam
dilexit mulierem, quam dum pergit accipere, transeunti viam inimicorum insidiae
irruerunt. Cui virtus divina statim adfuit. Apprehensa enim asini maxilla,
mill viros ex ea prostravit; caeterosque in fugam vertit. Qui, cum siti
praeliando deficeret, invocato Deo, ex rima illius maxillae aqua profluens
virtuti priscae reddidit satiaetum, eumque adversariis, superatis fecit esse
victorem. Si nostrum fortem dominum respicias hoc animali vectatum, ampliorem
numerum ab eo prostratum invenies. Sitienti corpori illius, ex latere, tanquam
ex rima, sanguis and aqua manavit, qua satiata omnis anima Christiana dicit,
Super aquas refectionis educavit me. De promiss. etc. part. 2. c. 22.
his enemies laid wait for him; but the divine power was present with him; for
taking the jaw bone of an Ass, he slew with it a thousand men, and put the rest
to flight. And, when he was ready to faint with thirst, calling upon God, water
flowing out of an hollow place in the jawbone, restored him, being satisfied
with it, to his former strength, and made him a conqueror, his enemies being
overcome. If ye look at our valiant Lord, riding upon an Ass, you shall find
a far greater number vanquished by him. And to his body ready to perish with
thirst, water and blood issued out of his side, with which every Christian soul
being satiated, says, He led me out to the waters of comfort.

Venditur Christus, in Joseph ante legem: venditur in Sampson sub lege:
venditur a Juda Judaeis sub gratia. Ibid.
And a little after he adds. Christ was sold in Joseph before the Law, he was
sold in Sampson under the Law, he was sold by Judas to the Jews under the
Gospel.

Sivit se Sampson nervis recentibus colligari, and dicente ei Dalila, Philistim
super te, Sampson, ita illa vincula virtute dissolvit, tanquam stupa cum
tetigerit ignem, adversosque omnes vertit in fugam. Noster etiam Dominus
fortitudinis apud Jerusalem velut his vinculis se ligari permisit. Adducunt
enim ad eum mulierem in adulterio deprehensam, et dicunt tentantes, Magister,
modo hanc deprehendimus. Moses jussit hujusmodi lapidari. Tu vero quid de ea
statuis? Nervorum velut ex lege vinculis se crediderunt legasse Jesum, and
maxim recent^um, cum dixerunt, modo. Quae noster Jesus hoc responso disrupit,
Qui vestrum, inquit, sine peccato est, prior in illam lapidem mittat; quo
audito, unus post alterum discesserunt, ut illud vinculum ita solveretur, sicut
fluit cera a facie ignis. Ibid.
He goes on. Sampson suffered himself to be bound with green wyths, that were
never dried: but when Dalilah said, the Philistims be upon thee Sampson, he
brake the cords, as a thread of tow is broken when it touches the fire, and put
all his enemies to flight. And our strong Lord suffered himself at Jerusalem
to be bound with such cords, for they bring to him a woman taken in Adultery,
and tempting him say, Master we found this woman in the very act of Adultery,
and Moses commanded such to be stoned, but what say thou? Joh. 8.3, 4, 5.
And now they thought they had bound him fast. But our Jesus broke these cords
with this answer, Verse 7. Who among you is without sin, let him cast the first
stone at her: which when they heard, they departed one after another, so that
the cord, with which they had bound him, was broken, as wax melts before the
fire.

And again. Ligatus fuit funibus novis: Cumque id fieret, Adversarii ad te
inquit, Sampson. At ille, repletus spiritu, disrumpens funes a brachiis suis,
tanquam filum spargit, omnesque fugavit adversarios. Ligari se sinit and noster
Dominus, dum veniunt ad eum Pharisaei, dicentes, Magister, scimus, quia in
veritate doces, and nullius personam accipis, Licet tributam dare Caesari
annon? Sed fortis noster nodos omnes ista voce disrupit, Quid tentatis me,
hypocritae? Adferte mihi numisma census: At illi attulerunt ei denarium. Et ait
Dominus, cujus est imago and superscriptio? Dixerunt, Caesaris: Reddite, ait
Dominus, Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, and Deo, quae Dei sunt. His dictis mira
celeritate vincula illa disrupit ille susceptus homo, qui Deo suo canit in
Psalmis. Dirupisti omnia vincula mea. Ibid.
Sampson was bound with new cords, and when that was done, Dalilah said, the
Philistims be upon thee Sampson. But he being filled with the spirit, brake
them from his arms, like a thread. And our Lord suffefered himself to be
bound, when the Pharisees came and said unto him, Master, Thou teach in
truth, and regardest not the person of any, Is it lawful to give Tribute to
Caesar, or not? (Matthew. 22.16, 17.) but Christ broke all the knots with that
word: why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? show me the tribute money: and they
brought him a penny: and he said, whose image and superscription is this? they
said, Caesar's, Render (says the Lord) to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and to God, the things that are Gods; with these sayings he did speedily break
those cords, who, as man, sings to his God, Thou have broken all my bonds
asunder, Psalm. 116.16.

He goes on. Dalilah a third time solicites him, and says, How often do thou
deceive me? Tertio solicitat mulier virum; Quousque, inquit, illudis me? Indica
mihi, in quo infirmetur virtus tua? Pene eadem verba and Judaei dixerunt Judici
nostro Christo, Quousque animos nostros tollis? Si tu es Christus, dic nobis
palam. Sed Sampson tertio ligari hoc modo permisit, Si alligati fuerint, ait
capilli capitis mei in palo orsorio, infirmabor, etc. quod cum faceret mulier,
^idem insidiantes ad te, ait, Sampson. At ille exurgens, disruptis omnibus,
fugatos inimicos prostravit. Fit and nostro forti Jesu Domino hujusmodi
colligatio, velut in palo orsorio contextio capillorum. Dicunt enim ad Jesum,
Scripsit nobis Moses, Quod si quis mortuus fuerit, non habeus filios, accipiat
uxorem ejus frater ipsius, and suscitet semen fratri suo. Septem autem fratres
erant, accipit uxorem fratris secundus and tertius: Postea vero omnes eam
acceperunt, sine liberis mortua est and mulier, in resurrectione, aiunt, cujus
erit uxor? Quanto vehementius se ligasse nostrum fortem crediderunt, tanto
velocius solvit, quam intulerant, quaestionem: filii, inquit, seculi generant
and generantur: qui autem digni fuerint, seculum illud contingere, nec nubunt,
nec nubuntur, non enim mori poterunt quia sunt similes Angelis.
tell me how thou may be bound: The Jews spoke almost the same words to our
Judge Christ. How long make you us to doubt, If thou be the Christ, tell us
plainly, Joh. 10.24. Sampson suffered himself a third time to be bound on this
manner: If, says he, thou weavest the seven locks of my head, I shall be weak:
which the woman did, and then said, The Philistims be upon thee Sampson: But he
rising, put his enemies to flight: so was Christ used: for the Pharisees come
and say to him. Master, Moses said, if a man dye, having no children, his
brother shall marry his wife and raise up seed to his brother: now there were
among us seven brethren, and all the younger brethren in order married the wife
of the Elder brother, and all of them and the woman at last died without issue;
in the resurrection therefore whose wife shall she be of the seven? Matthew.
22.24.28. but, by how much more strongly they thought they had bound our strong
one, by so much more speedily he answered the Objection, ( Luke 20.34.) the
children of this world, says he, marry and are given in marriage, but they
that shall be Judged worthy of that world, neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, for they cannot dye, but are like unto the Angels.

He goes on: The hour of Sampsons death was coming: Venit hora mortis Sampson;
Dicit and noster, Venit hora, ut glorificetur filius hominis: Nisi enim granum
tritici, cadens in terram, mortuum fuerit, solum manet; si autem mortuum
fuerit, multum fructum affert. Ibid.
and our Sampson said, The hour is come for the Son of man to be glorified: For
except a grain of Wheat fall into the Earth, and dye, it abides alone; but if
it dies, it brings forth much fruit: (Joh. 12.)

He proceeds: Dalilah being urgent upon him, Instante and flente mendaciter
coram se muliere, pusillanimis factus est Sampson usque ad mortem, ut nostri
figurata actio impleretur, dicentis, Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem.
and weeping before him, he was vexed to the death; as a Type of that, which
Christ our Sampson said, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: (Mat.
26.38.)

He adds further: Before Dalilah did these things [namely, Antequam haec
fierent, misit mulier ad viros, dicens, Afferte argentum, jam enim mihi omnia
veraciter indicavit: fit certa traditio, quam supplevit Judas, accepto argento.
Ibid.
before she shaved off the seven locks of his head] she sent for the Lords of
the Philistines, saying, Bring the silver, for now he has told me all his
mind: And receiving the silver, she made a certain delivery of him into their
hands, as Judas did of Christ.

He adds: Impletur in Sampson per figuram, quod in nostro Christo Domino actum
est etiam manifest. Nam, quod eum accipiens mulier, fecit dormire in sinu suo,
hoc est, quod noster fortis Dominus dixit. Non expedit Prophetam mori extra
Jerusalem. Quod novacula adhibita rasit caput ejus, hoc est, quod eum in loco
Calvariae crucifixit. Raso capite Sampson, discessit and virtus; and noster in
ligno pendens, clamavit, Deus meus, quare me dereliquisti? Accipientes inimici
Sampson, ligaverunt eum ferro: hoc clavi indicant crucifixi. Ib.
That was done in Sampson as a Type, which was afterward manifestly acted in
our Lord Christ: for this, That Dalilah made Sampson to sleep in her Bosom, is
that which our Lord said, It cannot be that a Prophet should perish out of
Jerusalem: (Luke 13.) That with a Razor she did shave his head, was a Type of
Christ's being crucified in the place called Calvary, in the place of a dead
man's skull. Sampson being shaved, his strength departed from him: and Christ,
hanging on the Tree, Matthew. 27.
cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Sampson was bound in
Fetters; and Christ was nailed to the Cross.

He concludes with this: One great Miracle Sampson wrought in his death, which
also our Lord fulfilled: Vnum extremum in morte sua Sampson fecit miraculum,
quod etiam noster Dominus implevit: Apprehendens duas columnas, super quas
totum aedificium ferebatur, invocato Deo, semel se adhuc confirmari petit,
atque impetu Spiritus columnas evelleus, omne illud aedificium cum populis
cadens, plures Sampson in morte sua occidit, quam in vita sua occiderat.
Dominus etiam noster manifestius, quod ille mystice fecit, exhibuit: duos
angulos mundi, circumcisionem scilicet and praeputium, velut duas columnas, in
sua morte movens, omnem culturam idololatriae subvertit. Ibid.
Laying hold on the two Pillars, which upheld the House, on which the
Philistines were set, calling upon God, he desires the renewing of his strength,
and by the power of the Spirit he threw down the Pillars; and so, the House and
the People falling, Sampson slew more at his death, then he had slain in his
lifetime. And our Lord did that more manifestly, which he did in a mystery:
for, in his death, moving the two Corners of the World, namely, the Jews and
Gentiles, as two Pillars, he destroyed all Idolatry.

Def. of Perkins, p. 472.
Hear Wotton: As Sampson saved Israel by his death, so did Christ save his
Church. And, as Sampson killed his Enemies more by death then by life, so did
Christ.

Hear Scharpius, who, speaking of the fact of Sampson bringing down the House
on his own head, and so occasioning his own death, says; In that fact he was a
Type of Christ, In eo facto typus fuit Christi, ultro se offerentis ad mortem,
ut vindictae de hostibus Dei and Ecclesiae sumerentur, and de his vel moriendo
triumpharet. Symphon. Prophet. and Apostolor. p. 174.
of his own accord offering himself to death, that he might take revenge upon
the Enemies of God and the Church, and might, even in dying, triumph over them.

Finally, hear Weemse making the the Comparison: On the Decal. part. 2. p. 102.
Sampson (says he) was a Type of Christ, as in his Conception, so in many of
his Actions, and in his Death. As the Angel Gabriel told the blessed Virgin
Mary of her Conception, so the Angel tells Sampsons Mother. Judge. 13. (...)
Sampson was a Type of Christ in his Name: he was called Shampson, Solilus, or
little Sun: Mal. 4.2.
so Christ was the Sun of Righteousness. He was a Type of Christ in his
Marriage; as he married with the Philistines, so did Christ with the Gentiles.
And as Sampson killed more at his death then in his life, so did Christ.

CHAP. XIII.
Christ and David.
HEar Arnobius: Absalom persecuted his Father [David] and was hanged in the
Tree: Persecutus est Patrem Absalom, fronde a collo ligatur: Judas tradidit
Dominum, and laqueo co^^ctatur. Sicut passionem David praeteritam historia
indicat; it a mysterium passionem Domini futuram adnunciat. Comment. in Psalm. 3.
Judas betrayed his Lord, and he went and hanged himself. As the History
declares the bypast suffering of David, so the Mystery foreshews the future
sufferings of [Christ] the Lord.

Hear Athanasius: David was a Shepherd, (...), etc. David Pastor, Pastor and
Christus; led ille pecudum, iste animarum. (...), etc. Vnxit Davidem in Regem
Samuel Sacerdos; baptizavit Salvatorem Joannes, ut Sacerdos. (...), etc. Vnctus
in Regem David non statim arripuit Regnum, sed sustinuit in longum tempus
servire Sauli: Noster item Salvator Rex genitus ante secula, and ipse quoque
servire sustinuit: Philip. 2.7. (...), etc. Persecutus est Davidem Saul,
persecutus est Christum Herodes: (...), etc. sed nec Saul persequens Davidi
nocuit, nec Herodes persequens Christum l^^sit. (...), etc. Insurrexit adversus
Davidem Absalom filius suus: insurrexit and adversus Christum Judas, and ipse
quidem filius: Discipulos enim suos Christus appellat filios: Joan. 21.5.
(...), etc. Hic David a Samuele oleo sensibili unctus est, aliter autem
Salvator noster, Psa. 45.7. (...), etc. Ille ab homine unctus est, iste a Patre
omnipotente, eaque unctio est ineffabilis, ut res ipsa incomprehensibilis. To.
1. hom. de semente.
and Christ a Shepherd; but David of Sheep, Christ of Souls. Samuel, a Priest,
anointed David to be a King; and John, as a Priest, baptized our Savior.
David, being anointed to be a King, came not presently to the Kingdom, but was
content for a long time to serve Saul: And so our Savior, though he was
begotten a King from all Eternity, was yet content to serve; for he took upon
himself the form of a Servant: (Phil. 2.7.) Saul persecuted David; and Herod
persecuted Christ: but neither did Saul, persecuting, hurt David; neither did
Herod, persecuting, hurt Christ. Absalom, David's Son, rose up against his
Father: and Judas rose up against Christ, and he also a Son; for so Christ
calls his Disciples Children, while he says, Children, Have ye any meat? Ioh.
21.5. [And so, before, while Judas was yet alive among them; Children, How
hardly shall they, that trust in Riches, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? Mark
10.24.] This David was anointed with visible Oil, but our Savior far
otherwise, even with the oil of gladness above his fellows. David was anointed
by man, but Christ by his Almighty Father: and this anointing is a thing
unspeakable, and incomprehensible.

Hear Saint Austin: David fled into the Cave, David fugiebat in speluncam, and
contegebatur terra, ne a Saul inveniretur; sic portabat Christus terram,
carnem, quam acceperat a terra, and in ea se occultabat, ne a Judaeis
inveniretur Deus. Ideo enim non invenerunt eum Judaei, quia spelunca se
texerat, i. e. infirmitatem carnis oculis eorum objiciebat, majestatem autem
Divinitatis in corporis tegmine, tanquam terrae abdito, contegebat. Tom. 8. in
Psalm. 57.
and was covered with Earth, lest Saul should find him; and Christ did carry
about with him Earth, that is, the flesh, which he took from Earth, and hid
himself in it, lest the Jews should find him to be God: for hence it was, that
the Jews found him not out, because he had hid himself in the Cave; that is, he
had set before their eyes the infirmities of his Humane Nature, but had hid the
majesty of his Divinity in the Cover of his Body, as in some hidden place of
the Earth.

Hear him again: Jesse misit David filium, ut requireret fratres suos: Sic Deus
Pater misit unigenitum suum ad requirendos fratres suos. To. 10. de Temp. Ser.
197.
Jesse sent his Son David to seek out his Brethren: So God the Father sent his
only begotten Son to seek out his Brethren.

And a little after: David's elder Brother, Filius senior, qui David increpabat,
populum Judaicum significabat, qui, per invidiam, Christo Domino, qui pro
salute generis humani venerat, detraxit, and multis opprobriis affecit. Ibid.
who did chide with him, 1 Samuel 17.28. signified the people of the Jews, who,
through envy, slandered the Lord Christ, who came for the Salvation of
Mankind, and laded him with many reproaches.

Hear Prosper: Pastor ovium David, ut nostrum signaret Pastorem, unctum Dominum
Christum, qui dicit, Ego sum Pastor bonus: Joan. 10. Eripuisse se, praedam de
ore Le^nis, David fatetur, 1 Samuel 17.35. and noster David de ore Leonis
Diaboli, and Petrum negantem, and latronem eripuit confitentem. De promiss. and
praedict. Dei, part. 2. cap. 25.
David was a Feeder of Sheep, that he might be a Type of our Shepherd, Christ
the anointed Lord, who said of himself, I am the good Shepherd: (Joh. 10.)
David confessed [namely, to Saul] that he delivered the prey out of the mouth
of the Lion: (1 Samuel 17.35.) and our David did rescue out of the mouth of the
Lion, the Devil, both Peter denying, and the Thief confessing.

And a little after: David cut off Goliahs Head with Goliahs own Sword: Goliam
suo gladio truncavit, and noster David Diabolum suo peremit gladio, dum mortem
morte occidit. Invidia enim Diaboli mors introiit in orbem terrarum. Hanc
suscepit innocuus Pastor ille bonus, qui pro suis animam posuit, ut sua morte
Diabolum debellaret. Ibid.
so our David vanquished Satan with his own Sword: for by the Envy of the
Devil, Death entered into the World. This, though altogether innocent, that
good Shepherd [namely, Christ] did undergo, who laid down his life for his
People, that by his Death he might vanquish the Devil.

He goes on yet in the Parallel: The Enemy [Goliah] being vanquished and slain,
Saul, because of this Victory, Extincto prostratoque host, adversus David Saul
inique invidiam concepit ex victoria: retribuensque mala pro bonis, fugat,
odit, persequitur innocentem. Dicit and noster Dominus de talibus, Retribuebant
mihi mala pro bonis, and odium pro dilectione mea. Psa. 35. Ib.
does unjustly conceive Envy against David; and requiting evil for good, he
drives him away, he hates him, he pursues him, being altogether innocent. And
of such says our Lord, They have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my
love: (Psa. 35.)

He proceeds yet further: Whereas David (says he) Saul persecuting him, Quod
David per latebras montium, per speluncas, and per deserta, Saul persequente,
discurrit; corporis sui noster Dominus, i. e. Sanctorum membrorum suorum,
Martyrum videlicet, in hac figura persecutiones expressit: de quibus Apostolus
Paulus dicit; Cum his dignus non esset orbis terrarum, per deserta errabant,
and per speluncas, and per cavernas terrae. Ibid.
did run over Mountains, and through Caves and Deserts; the Lord in this figure
sets out the Persecutions of the holy Members of his Body, namely, the Martyrs;
of whom the Apostle Paul says, When the whole World was not worthy of them,
they wandered through Deserts, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth.

He goes on: David killed not Saul his Persecuter, Persecutorem suum Saulem non
occidit David, cum ei traderetur in manibus; abscindensque pinnam chlamydis
ejus, se odienti pepercit. Hoc quotidie agit noster Pastor Christus Dominus
circa osores and persecutores suos: a quibus dum adscindit vitium magnum
superbiae, parcit etiam Regibus saevientibus, quia non vult mortem impiorum,
sed ut revertantur, and vivant. Quod in omnibus suis fecit and facit inimicis
ille, qui, non ex meritis, sed gratis justificat impium. Ibid.
when he was given into his hands; and cutting off the skirt of his garment, he
spared him that hated him. Thus does our Shepherd, the Lord Christ, deal with
his Enemies and Persecutors: from whom cuting off that great sin of Pride, he
spares even Kings, raging against him, because He desires not the death of
sinners, but that they should repent and live. This he has done and does, who
justifies the ungodly, not out of merit, but of his free Grace.

He adds yet further: Eundem David, declinantem insidias Saulis, Gentes
excipiunt: sic se noster Christus Dominus, savientibus subtrahens Judaeis,
Gentibus dedit. Ib.
While this same David declined the laying in wait of Saul, the Gentiles
entertained him: so, while the Lord Christ withdrew himself from the Jews
raging against him, he gave himself to the Gentiles.

Christ and Solomon.
Of the Judic. Law, c. 8.
Weemse compares them together in sundry Particulars; but so, that in them all
the pre-eminence is given to Christ.

2. Sam. 12.25
1. In their Name: Solomon was Jedidiah, beloved of God; and Christ was the
only beloved Son of God: which is not so to be understood, as if God loved
none but Christ; Psalm. 146.8
for He loves all the righteous: but that Gods love was primarily set upon
Christ, and through him we come to share in his love: as God himself says,
Matthew. 3.17
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Ephesians. 1.6.
And the Apostle, He has made us accepted in his Beloved. Here is then a
greater then Solomon.

2. In his Anointing: Solomon alone was anointed, and all the rest of his
Brethren secluded from the Kingdom; 1 John 2.20
but we are anointed by Christ, we have received an Unction from that Holy One,
and receive Grace for Grace from him, Joh. 1.16 Romans 8.17
and are made Coheirs with him in his Kingdom. Here is a greater then Solomon.

3. Solomon was Crowned, his Father being alive; here was the Lion and the
Lions Whelp: So Christ thought it no robbery to be equal with his Father,
Phil. 2.6
and to reign with him: Here is a greater then Solomon.

4. Solomon was obedient to his Parents: So Christ says of himself, John 8.49
I honor my Father; that is, my heavenly Father: and he went home, and was
obedient to his Parents: Luke 2.51
Here is a greater then Solomon.

5. By Solomon's Marriage, Friendship was made up between Egypt and Israel: But,
Christ marrying his Church, friendship is made up betwixt God and man: Here is
a greater then Solomon.

6. In the extent of his Kingdom. Solomon's Kingdom reached but from the
Mediteranean Sea to Euphrates: but Christ's Kingdom reaches to the ends of the
earth, I will give thee (says the Father to the Son) the ends of the earth for
thy possession: Psalm. 2.8.
Here is a greater then Solomon.

7. Solomon exceeded all the Kings of the earth in riches: Col. 2.3.
but in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Here is a
greater then Solomon.

8. Solomon built the Temple. But Christ was both the Temple, the Priest, the
Sacrifice, and the Altar. Solomon offered 100000. Bullocks, but Christ offered
a greater Sacrifice, even himself upon the Cross: Here is a greater then
Solomon.

9. The Kings of the earth were subject to Solomon: but Christ had written upon
the hemme of his garments, The King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords: Rev. 16.19.
the lowest thing that is in Christ, is above all the Princes of the earth.
Here is a greater then Solomon.

10 When Solomon went to the Temple, he had 24000. 1 Chronicles. 27.1.
to guard him with their Targets out of Leb^nus: and about his bed stood 60
valiant men, of the valiant of Israel: Cant. 3.7.
but Christ has ten thousand times ten thousands, Rev. 5.11.
and thousands of thousands of Angels to attend him: Here is then a greater
then Solomon.

11. Solomon, in regard of his wisdom, 1 King. 4.29.
had a large heart, as the sand of the Sea. His wisdom is to be observed in
deciding the matter between the two women: the thing was done in the night, 1
King. 3.
there were no witnesses, no probable conjectures favoring the one more then
the other, the allegations of the mothers both alike, no difference of the
childrens age. Only Solomon gathered, that she was the mother, who had the
bowels of compassion toward the infant. Solomon by his understanding drew out
here who was the mother of the living child: but he must have some means,
whereby to know this: But Christ, Heb. 4.13.
to whom the darkness is as the light, sees the secrets of the heart, and all
things are naked before him. Here is a greater then Solomon.

12. Solomon's justice was showed in punishing Joab with death, and putting
Abiathar from the Priesthood. But Christ shall put down all his enemies, and
purge his Church of hirelings. Matthew. 21.12.
Here is a greater then Solomon.

13. Lastly; All the earth shall be blessed in Solomon. When the Jews blessed
any man, they pray for him after this manner. God be beneficial to thee and
liberal, Beneficus sit tibi Deus and liberalis, sicut se praestitit erga servum
suum Solomonem.
as he showed himself toward his servant Solomon, this is fulfilled but in
Type in Solomon, but the truth is fulfilled in Christ: Esa. 65.16.
he that blesses himself on the earth, says the Prophet, shall bless himself
in the God of truth.

CHAP. XIV.
Christ and Elisha.
HEar of this St. Basil of Seleucia: who moving the question, why Elisha did
not restore to life the son of the woman of Shunem by prayer, as St. Peter did
Dorcas, but applied himself to the dead body of the child, Cur Elisaeus
Sunamitidis filium non ad vitam erexit oratione, ut Dorcedem Petrus, sed puero
cadaveri scipsum instratam applicavit.
lying upon him, putting his mouth upon the childs mouth, his eyes upon the
childs eyes, etc. (2 King. 4.34.) returns answer, first in general, in the
words of the Apostle: (...). All these things happened to them for Types, or as
we have it Translated, for examples. And then explaines himself more
particularly. ' Elisha (says he) was a Type of Christ, and the people of the
Gentiles, by reason of their sins, was as that dead child: the spiritual Elisha
comes, Elisaeus figura erat Christi: populus autem Gentiu^ erat ille mortuus vi
peccatorum, venit spiritalis Elisaeus and deprehendit: o^, oculos, manus,
pedes, and universe mortuus erat, os, quod ad laudandum Deum non potuit
aperiri, oculi mortui, qui in Deum universi non figebantur, etc. Putridum erat
corpus universum: egebat medico praepotenti, qui vel mortuos posset excitare.
Venit exquisitus medicus Elisaeus, Christus Dominus, qui invenit corpus
mortuum, and totum se imposuit corpori toti, hoc est tota Dei tatis plenitudo,
totum nostrum gestavit hominem, oculos habuit more hominum, manus, pedes, etc.
(...), etc. Imaginarium visum non erat, sed vera res, quae videbatur, and vita
mortuum gestavit indumentum, ut immortalitate sua mortem commutaret. Cum autem
deitas in corpus devenisset, omnes artus, os, oculi manus, pedes, sanctificati
sunt, and ad usum meliorem traducti. Orat. 10.
and finds them so. It was dead in the mouth, eyes, hands, feet, yea, it was
universally dead; the mouth, because it could not be opened to praise God, the
eyes were dead, because they were not fastened upon the God of the whole world,
the whole body was putrid and corrupt; it stood in need of a powerful
Physician, who might be able even to raise the dead. The Lord Christ comes, our
spiritual Elisha, an exquisite Physician, and finds the body dead, and he
lays his whole self upon the whole body, that is, the whole fullness of the
God took upon him self the whole man, having eyes, hands, feet, etc. as other
men have: and that, which, seen, was not a Phantasme, but was really that which
it seemed to be. And God being thus incarnate, all the members of the body, the
mouth, the eyes the hands and feet are sanctified, and better employed then
before.

Hear Prosper also. Elisha by his servant sent his staff, which, being laid on
the dead body of the child of the Shunamite, might restore it to life. Misit
per servum suum baculum, quod supra exanime corpus positum mortuum vitae
restituat. Misit and Dominus per Mosem servum suum legem, quae mortuum mundum,
sicut illud baculum, vivificare non potuit: quia si data esset lex, quae posset
vivificare, ut dicit Apostolus, omnino ex lege esset justitia. Postea ipse
Helisaeus descendit, magnus ad parvum, vivus ad mortuum: descendit and noster
Dominus: ut mortuum parvulum suscitaret: Juvenilia membra contexit propheta; Et
Dominus Jesus seipsum exinanivit, formam servi accipiens, parvum se illi parvo
coapravit, ut efficeret illud corpus humilitatis nostrae conform corpori
gloriae suae. Jacens, subter se frigidum suo calore succendit: similiter and
noster Salvator Dominus mundum; and sic suscitatus est mortuus, dum a morte
perpetua justi ficatus est impius. De promiss, etc. Dei. part. 2. c. 31.
So the Lord by Moses his servant, sent the Law, which could not give life to
the dead world, as not Elisha's staff to the dead child: for if a Law were
given that could give life, then righteousness should be by the Law, as the
Apostle says, Gal. 3.21. Afterward therefore Elisha goes down, a great man to
a little child, a living man to a dead child. And our Lord also descended.
The prophet, that he might recover the dead child, covered the childs body
with his own: And the Lord Jesus humbled himself, taking to himself the form of
a servant, and so suited himself to our condition, that he might make our vile
bodies conformable to his glorious body. The prophet with the heat of his body,
put heat into the cold body of the child lying under him. And so did our Lord
and Savior to the world. And so the dead is restored to life, while the
ungodly are justified from everlasting death.

He goes on. When the King of Syria besieged Elisha in Dothan with his Army, he
leads the Army being stricken with blindness, Coecitate percussos hosts
captivos in Samariam induxit. quibus reddito visu simul and indulgentiam
impetravit: hoc in Paulo Dominus ostendit. Coecatus quippe prostratusque in via
Captivus Domini dum fuerat persecutor factus est praedicator. Ibid.
captives into Samaria, for whom, sight being restored to them, he did withal
obtain mercy, (2 King. 6. And this did the Lord show in Paul: for being stricken
with blindness, and cast down in the way to Damascus, becoming the Lords
prisoner, and having his sight restored to him, of a persecutor becomes a
Preacher.

Christ and Jonas.
Hear St. Hierome. Jonas the son of Amittai, for the condemnation of Israel, is
sent to the Gentiles, because Nineveh repenting, they remained in their
wickedness: Jonas filius Amathi, in condemnationem Israelis, ad Gentes
mittitur quod, Nineve poenitentiam agente, illi in malitia perseverent: sic
Dominus noster, columba, vel, dolens, (utrumque enim interpretatur) vel, quia
S. Spiritus in specie columbae descendit, and mansit super eum, vel quia
nostris doluit ipse vulneribus, vere filius Amathi, i. e. veritatis, Deus enim
veritas est, mittit ad Niniven pulchram, i. e. mundum, quo nil pulchrius oculis
carn^is aspicimus, ut quia Israel audire contempsit, totus gentium mundus
exaudiat. To. 3. in Jon. 1.1, 2.
so our Lord, a Dove, or sorrowing (for the word signifies both) either because
the Holy Ghost descended in the likeness of a Dove and rested upon him, Math.
3.16. or, because he bore our sorrows, (Isa. 53.4.) truly, the son of Amittai,
that is, of the truth, for God is the Truth, is sent to Nineveh, the fair, that
is, into the world, then which with our bodily eyes we see nothing more
beautiful, that because Israel refused to hear, the whole world of the Gentiles
might hear.

Hear him again. The Prophet would fly to Tanshish, Voluit propheta fugere in
Tharsis, non ad certum aliquem locum, sed mare ingrediens, quocunque fugere
festinat. De Salvatore autem possumus dicere, quod dimiserit domum and patriam
suam, and assumpta carne, quodammodo de coelestibus fugerit, veneritque in
Tharsis, i. e. in mare seculi istius. Ibid.
not to any certain place, but, entering the Sea he hasted to fly any whither.
But of our Savior we may say, that he left his house and country, and assuming
our nature, he did after a sort fly from Heaven and came to Tarshish, that is,
the Sea of this world.

Hear St. Chrysostom, who glossing upon Matthew 12.41. brings in Christ thus
speaking. (...), etc. Ille servus fuit, ego Dominus sum, ille e ceto exiliit,
ego a mortuis resurgam: subversionem ille urbi futuram praedicavit, ego regni
coelestis evangelia vobis annuncio, and Ninevitae quidem absque signo
crediderunt, vos autem multa miraculorum signa videtis, nec quicquam ante Jonae
verba illi audiverunt, vos autem per diversa Philosophiae genera educavi.
Praeterea, Jonas tanquam minister, ad Ninevitas accessit ego autem ad vos
Dominus and Creator deveni. Illi quidem Barbari erant, vos autem inter
prophetas innumeros educati. De Jona nemo illis praedixit, de me plurimi
praedixere, and opera praedicationi consona perspicitis. Jonas etiam, ne
derideretur, fugit; ego autem, and crucis patibulum subiturus, and illusiones
vestras laturus, ultro adveni. Et ille quidem peregrinus erat, and hominibus
illis omnino ignotus; ego autem vobis conjunctus secundum carnem, ab iisdem
oriundus sum progenitoribus. In Matthew. hom.
He was a servant, I am the Lord, he was vomited out of the fish, I shall arise
from the dead, he foretold overthrow to that City, I bring the tidings of the
Kingdom of Heaven; and the Ninevites believed without any sign, but ye see many
miracles: neither heard they any thing before those words of Jonas; but I have
educated you by diverse kinds of Philosophy. Besides, Jonas came to the
Ninevites, as a Minister I am come to you, your Lord and Creator. They were
Barbarians, ye have been brought up among many Prophets. No man had told them
beforehand concerning Jonas; many have prophesied of me, and ye see works
answerable to the predictions. Jona also, for fear of mocking, fled; I am come
of my own accord, ready to undergo the death of the Cross, and to bear all your
mockings. And he was a stranger and altogether unknown to those men; but I am
nearly joined to you according to the flesh, and have the same progenitors with
you.

Hear Hilarious Pictaviensis. To him (namely to Jonah) the Lord compares
himself; for Jonah, Huic se Dominus comparat: namque Jonas, ventis
desaevientibus projectus e navi est, and devoratus a ceto, and post triduum
vivus emissus, non retentus a monstro, non cibi condition confectus, sed,
contra humani corporis naturam, integer and illaesus in superas auras evadit.
Hoc potestatis suae signum constitutum esse demonstrat, ipse, remissionem
peccatorum per poenitentiam praedicans de Jerusalem vel Synagoga, immundorum
spirituum dominante flatu, ejiceindus, and Pilati potestati, i. e. seculi
judicio, tradendus, and a morte glutiendus, and post triduum ex ea, contra
conditionem hominis, quem assumpserat non retentus, vivus and incorrupius
emergens. Comment. in Matthew. can. 16. col. 544.
the winds being boisterous, was cast out of the ship, and devoured by a Whale,
and after three days, sent out alive, not retained by that monster nor
consumed, as other meat uses to be, but contrary to the nature of an humane
body, he comes into the open Air entire and without hurt. This does the Lord
show to be a sign of his power; preaching repentance for the remission of sins,
he was to be cast out of Jerusalem or out of the Synagogue, by the prevailing
power of the unclean spirit he was to be delivered to the power of Pilate, that
is, to the secular judgment: he was to be swallowed up of death, and and after
three days, contrary to the condition of man, which he had assumed, not held
of death, he rises alive and incorrupt.

Hear St. Basil of Seleu^ia. Jonas (says he) did rather immitate Christ in
suffering evil, then preach him in words, nor did he in words foretell the
burial of Christ, (...), etc. Jonas malorum tolerantia Christum est imitatus
potius, quam verbis praedicarit, nec verbis Christi sepulchrum praedixit, sed
in ceto sepultus, and post triduum sine noxa redditus, omnes docuit mortales,
immortalitatis januam esse mortem, and de sepulchro vitam erumpere. Orat. 13.

Jonas ex navi in ventrem ceti, Christus a liguo in sepulchrum transit. Jonas
pro nautis periclitantibus: Christus pro nobis in hoc seculo fluctantibus.
Jussum est primo, ut praedicaretur Ninevitis a Jona, sed non ad eos pervenit
prophetia, nisi post quam eum evomnit piscis: Ita prophetia praemissa est ad
Gentes, sed, nisi post resurrectionem Christi, non pervenit ad Gentes. To. 2.
epist. 49. ad Deo. gratias Praesbyt.


but being buried in the Whale, and after three days, restored to the free and
open air, he taught all men, that death is the gate of immortality, and that
out of the grave life breaks forth.

Hear St. Austin. Jonah, says he, passed from the ship to the Whales belly: so
Christ from the Cross to the grave. Jonah, for the mariners being in danger,
and Christ for us being tossed up and down in this world. Jonah had order, but
the prophesy came not unto them, until the Whale had vomited him upon the dry
ground: and the calling of the Gentiles was foretold before, but they were not
actually called, till Christ was risen from the dead.

Missus Jonas ad Nineven, ut ejus finem praedicaret: missus a Patre Christus,
ut finem mundi omnibus demonstraret. Fugit Jonas in Tarsis a facie Dei: Fuga
Jonae velox transitus Christi, de quo Propheta, Psa. 19.6. Ascendit navem
Propheta fugiens: lignum ascendit Christus per mare hujus seculi transiens.
Irruit tempestas magna in mari; perturbatio maris, Judaeorum perfidia. Data est
sors, ut Propheta fugitivus in mare mitteretur: Sors data est in vestimenta
Christi. Projicitur e navi in mare Jonas: mors Christi in cordibus Gentium
collocatur. Susceptus est a bestia Propheta custodiendus, non comedendus. Audi
illud Psa. 16.10. In ventre bestiae marinae oravit Propheta: In inferno
Christus descendens mortuos suscitavit. Tertio die littori Propheta redditus
est incolumis: die tertio Christus de sepulchro surgens super coelos est
exaltatus. Ad praedicationem Jonae per poenitentiam salvata est civitas: per
praedicationem Christi Sancta Jerusalem redempta est civitas. To. 9. de symb.
fid. ad Catechum. l. 4. c. 6.
Hear him again. Jonah (says he) was sent to Nineveh, to foretell the end of
it: and Christ was sent by his Father, to show unto all the End of the World.
Jonah flies to Tarshish from the presence of God: Jonahs flight is the swift
passage of Christ, of which the Prophet does speak, Psa. 19.6. His going out is
from the end of Heaven, and his circuit is to the ends thereof. The Prophet
flying went up into the Ship; and Christ ascended the Cross, passeing through
the Sea of this World. There came a great Tempest upon the Sea: the unquietness
of the Sea was the perfidiousness of the Jews. Lots were cast, that the
fugitive Prophet might be cast into the Sea: and Lots were cast upon the
Vesture of Christ. Jonah was cast out of the Ship into the Sea; and Christ's
Death is placed in the Hearts of the Gentiles. The Prophet was taken into the
Whale to be safely kept, not to be eaten: And now hear what the Prophet says;
Psalm. 16.10
Thou will not suffer thy Holy One to see corruption. In the Whales belly the
Prophet prayed; and Christ descending into Hell, raised the dead. Jonah was on
the third day restored safe to the shore; and Christ rising on the third day
out of the Grave, was made higher then the Heavens. At the Preaching of Jonah
the City was saved by Repentance; and by the Preaching of Christ the Holy City
Jerusalem is redeemed.

Vt Jonas nautas a morte, ita Christus nos servavit: and, ut ille per triduum
fuit in ventre Ceti, ita Christus in ventre terrae. Symphon. Prophet. and
Apostolor. p. 174.
Hear Scharpius: As Jonah saved the Mariners from Death, so Christ saved us:
and, as Jonah was in the belly of the Fish, so Christ in the heart of the Earth.

CHAP. XV.
Christ and Cyrus.
SCultetus observes the Parallel in many Particulars.

1. Cyrus duobus diversarum gentium parentibus ortus est, matre Meda, Astyagis
Medorum Regis filia, patre Persa Medis subjecto: sic Christus Dei and hominis
filius.
1. Cyrus came of Parents of different Nations, his Mother a Mede, the Daughter
of Astyages the King of the Medes; his Father a Persian subject to the Medes:
So Christ is the Son of God, and the Son of Man.

2. Astyagi exponunt Magi somnium de partu filiae: Sic Legisperiti Herodem ex
Scripturis crudiunt de ortu Christi.
2. The Magicians expound to Astyages his Dream of the Son of his Daughter: So
the Scribes out of the Scriptures acquaint Herod with the Birth of Christ.

3. Astyages, auditis Magis, insidias struit vitae Cyri: sic Herodes vitae
Christi, auditis Magis.
3. Astyages, having heard his Magicians, lays snares for the life of Cyrus: so
Herod plots against the life of Christ, having heard the Wise men.

4. Cyrus infans exponitur in montanis, sed a pastoribus educatur, quem
Astyages credidit interfectum: sic Christus in Aegyptum deportatur, quem
Herodes credidit interfectum: Matthew. 2.
4. Cyrus, being an Infant, is put into the Mountains, but is brought up by
Shepherds, when Astyages thought him to be slain: So Christ is carried into
Egypt, whom Herod believed to be killed.

5. Cyrus, being yet but a Child, 5. Cyrus, jam tum puer, specimen edidit
judicii in alio puero contumace: sic Christus duodecennis specimen edidit
divinae suae sapiemiae: Luc. 2.
gave a proof of his judgment in another Child, being contumacious: so Christ,
at twelve years of age, gave an evidence of his Divine Wisdom.

6. 6. Cyrus unctus, and Christus unctus.
Cyrus is called Gods anointed, Esa. 45.1. and Christ is anointed.

7. Cyrus was Gods Servant, 7. Cyrus servus Dei, and Christus servus Dei: Esa.
53. Cyrus Pastor Dei: Esa. 44.28. Christus bonus ille Pastor: Joan. 10.
and Christ was Gods Servant, Esa. 53. Cyrus is called Gods Shepherd, Esa.
44.28. and Christ is that good Shepherd: Joh. 10.

8. It Is said of Cyrus, 8. Cyro dictum, Sternam aute faciem ejus Gentes: Esa.
45.1. Christo dictum, Dabo tibi Gentes: Psalm. 2.
I will subdue the Nations before him: Esa. 45.1. and to Christ it is said, I
will give thee the Heathen: Psa. 2.

9. Cyrus said, 9. Cyrus dixit, Dominus Coeli dedit mihi omnia Regna: Ezra 1.2.
Christus, Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo and in terra: Matthew. 28.18.
The God of Heaven has given me all Kingdoms: Ezr. 1.2. And Christ says, All
power is given to me both in Heaven and Earth: Matt. 28.18.

10. Cyrus had it given him in charge to build the Temple of God; Ezra 1.2. 10.
Cyro in mandatis data aedificatio Templi Dei, Ezr. 1.2. Christo incumbebat
repurgatio Templi materialis, de qua, Luc. 19. and instauratio Templi
spiritualis.
and to Christ it did belong to purge the material Temple, of which we read
Luke 19. and to build the Spiritual Temple.

11. Cyrus restored to the Temple the Vessels of the Temple that had been taken
away; 11. Cyrus ablata vasa Temple restituit, Ezr. 1.7. Ita Christus Imaginem
Dei in nobis restituit.
Ezra 1.7. and Christ restores to us the Image of God.

12. Cyrus mitissimus erat, sicut de eo Herodotus, lib. 3. ob tributi
ordinationem a^t Persas Darium nominasse Insticorem, Cambysen Dominum, Cyrum
Patronum, quia, inquit, mitis erat, and omni ratione de illis been mereri
studens: sic Christus mansuetudinis exemplum: Matthew. 11.29.
12. Cyrus was eminent for mildeness, as Herodotus says of him, lib. 3. for the
appointment of the Tribute (says he) the Persians called Darius an Institutor,
Cambyses a Lord, Cyrus a Patron, because (says he) he was most gentle, and
studied to deserve well at their hands: So was Christ an example of mildeness,
Mat. 11.29.

13. The Kingdom of Cyrus was of a large extent, 13. Cyri Regnum amplissimum,
Xenophon lib. 3. ubi Nationes ferme eaedem nominantur, quae Act. 2.9, 10, 11.
de Regni ejus amplitudine etiam Esaias, c. 45. v. 14. Ita Regnum Christi
amplissimum, utpote nullis locorum spatiis definitum.
as Xenophon testifies of it, lib. 1. where almost the same Nations are
reckoned up, of which we read Acts 2. and so the Prophet speaks of it Esa.
45.14. So is the Kingdom of Christ most ample and large, as not having any
bounds.

14. God called Cyrus in Righteousness; 14. Cyrum vocavit Deus in justitia,
Esa. 45.13. Itidem and Christus just vocatur: nec enim sibi ipsi honorem hunc
tribuit, etc. Heb. 5.5.
Esa. 45.13. and Christ was called in Righteousness: for he took not this Honor
unto himself, etc. Hebr. 5.5.

15. God gave Cyrus for a Light to the Gentiles; 15. Cyrum dedit Deus in lucem
Gentium, Esa. 42.6. ut scirent ab ortu Solis ad occasum, non esse Deum praeter
Jehovam: Esa. 45.6. Ita Christus lumen Gentium: Luc. 1.78. and 2.32.
Esa. 42.6. That from the rising of the Sun, to the fall thereof, men might
know that there is no God but Jehovah: Esa. 45.6. So is Christ the Light of the
Gentiles: Luke 1.78. and 2.32.

16. 16. Cyrus missus ad aperiendum oculos caecorum, ad educendum e clausura
vinctos, Esa. 42.7. vel ad captivitatem dimittendam: Esa. 45.13. sic Christus
emisit vinctos de lacu, in quo non est aqua: Zach. 9.11. Scult. Idea Concion.
in Esa. 42.
Cyrus was sent to open the eyes of the blind, and to bring the Prisoners out
of Prison; Esa. 42.7. or to dismiss the Captives: Esa. 45.13. So did Christ
send the Prisoners out of the Pit, in which there was no Water: Zach. 9.11.

Thus is Cyrus owned, by this learned Divine, as a Type of Christ; and that
justly, it being most true, that Zanchy says, Liberatio Babylonica per Cyrum
typus Redemptionis per Christum. Detrib. Elohim, lib. 5. cap. 4.
That the Deliverance of the Jews from Captivity in Babylon by Cyrus was a Type
of the Redemption of the Church by Christ.

Christ and Zerubbabel.
Of this hear Saint Jerome: Zerubbabel, who was of the Tribe of Judah, of the
lineage of David, was a Type of our Savior, who truly built the ruined Temple,
that is, Zorobabel, de tribu Juda, i. e. de stirpe David, descendens, typus
fuit Salvatoris, qui vere destructum aedificavit Templum, i. e. Ecclesiam, and
reduxit populum de captivitate; and tam de veteris Templi lapidibus, quam de
novis, qui prius fuerant impoliti, aedificavit Ecclesiam; idem, and de
reliquiis populi Judaici, and de gentium multitudine, Deo Patri extruxit
Tabernaculum. Et sicut Zorobabel in Babylone natus est, sic Dominus in
confusione hujus seculi. To. 3. in Agg. 1.
the Church, and brought the People from Captivity, and built the Church, as
well of the stones of the old Temple, as of new stones, which were before
unpolished; and raised up a Tabernacle to God the Father, both of the
remainders of the Jewish Nation, and of the multitude of the Gentiles. And as
Zerubbabel was born in Babylon, so our Lord was born in the Confusion of this
World.

He adds: If ye respect the History, Zerubbabel is one, who was of the Kingly
Tribe; Quantum ad historiam pertinet, alter est Zorobabel de tribu regia, and
alter Jesus de tribu sacerdotali: Quantum autem ad intelligentiam spiritalem,
unus and idem est Dominus noster and Salvator, Rex and magnus Sacerdos: cujus
typum, secundum id, quod Rex erat, portabat Zorobabel, secundum id, quod
Pontifex erat, portabat cognominis ejus, Jesus, qui est filius Josedech: quod
in lingua nostra vertitur in (...), i. e. Deus, and (...), i. e. justus:
juste^^ enim and sanctus Deus Pater, and Deus Filius, and non est in eo
iniquitas. Estque vere Jesus magnus Sacerdos, cui omnes Dei Antistites
comparati, parvi sunt and nihil, ut, sicut est primogenitus omnis creaturae,
sic Princeps sit in universis Sacerdotibus. Ibid.
and Jesus, or Joshua, another, who was of the Priestly Tribe. But, if ye look
at the Mystery, our Lord and Savior is one and the same, a King and a great
High Priest: of whom, as he is a King, Zerubbabel was the Type, but his
namesake Jesus, or Joshua, as he was a Priest; who is the Son of Josedech,
which in our language is turned into Jah, that is, God, and (...), that is,
just: for God the Father is righteous and holy, and so is God the Son, and
there is no iniquity in him. And Jesus indeed is a great High Priest, in
comparison of whom, all other Priests of God are small, or nothing, that, as he
is the first begotten of every Creature, so he may be the Chief of all Priests.

CHAP. XVI.
HItherto we have seen, how our dear Savior was typified or fore-signified in
the Old Testament by Persons from Adam to Zerubbabel: now take we notice, how
he was then typified by Things: of which I shall give you account in order,
showing how all those things did typifie, and were fulfilled in our blessed
Redeemer.

Christ and Noah's Ark.
Broughton makes this Parallel to stand in two things. Of the ten first
Fathers, p. 69, and 70.


1. The Ark had a Door, by which Noah and his Household entered into it, to the
saving of themselves: And Christ is that Door, by whom we enter into the Holy
of Holies, to the saving of our Souls.

2. The Ark rested upon the Mount Ararat, which is a Mountain in Armenia, and
signifies, Take away fear. And Christ is that Ararat; upon whose shoulders if
we rest, we shall be safe, and shall not need to fear what Men, or Devils, can
do unto us.

Christ and the Paschal Lamb.
Hear Lactantius: Deus percussurus Aegyptios, ut ab ea plaga immunes faceret
Hebraeos, praeceperat eis, ut agnum candidum sine macula immolarent, and signum
liminibus suis de sanguine ejus imponerent. Itaque, cum Aegyptiorum primogeniti
una nocte interiissent, Hebraei soli signo sanguinis tuti fuerunt: non quia
pecudis cruor tantam in sevim gerebat, ut hominibus saluti esset, sed imago
erat rerum futurarum. Agnus enim candidus sine macula Christus fuit, i. e.
innocens, justus, and sanctus, qui ab eisdem Judaeis immolatus, saluti est
omnibus, qui signum sanguinis, i. e. crucis, qua sanguinem fudit, in sua front
conscripserint. Sed tum figura tantum valuit in praesenti ad depellendum
periculum, ut appareat, quantum veritas ipsa valitura sit ad plebem Dei
protegendam in extrema totius orbis necessitate. Divin. Instit. l. 4 cap. 26.
God (says he) intending to smite the Egyptians, to provide for the indemnity
of the Hebrews, commanded them to sacrifice a Lamb without spot, and to mark
their doors with the blood of it: and so, when all the firstborn of Egypt
perished in one night, only the Hebrews were safe by this means: not that the
lambs blood of it self was of force to save men, but it was an Image or Type of
things to come: For that Lamb without spot was Christ, innocent, righteous, and
holy; who being slain by the Jews, is an Author of Salvation to all who mark
their foreheads with this blood, that is, with the Cross, in which he shed his
blood. But then the figure was of such force for the present to drive away the
danger, to show, what force the Truth it self should have to protect the People
of God in the extreme necessity of the whole World.

Saint Chrysostom handling those words of the Baptist, J^h. 1.29. observes,
That he says not simply, Behold the Lamb, but, Behold the Lamb of God: Non
dixit simpliciter, Agnus, sed Agnus Dei: (...), etc. Quia enim and alter agnus
erat Judaicus, ut ostenderet, hunc esse Dei, ideo ita dixit. (...), etc. Ille
pro illa sola gente offerebatur: hic pro toto terrarum orb oblatus fuit.
(...), etc. Et illius quidem sanguis corporalem plagam prohibuit a Judaeis:
hujus autem sanguis purgationem orbi attulit universo: (...), etc. Et vero hic
sanguis Judaici agni, non ex sua potuit natura, quod potuit, sed quia hujus
erat figura, hanc vim obtinuit. To. 1. hom. 32.
For, because there was another Lamb of the Jews [meaning the Paschal Lamb]
that he might show, that this was the Lamb of God, therefore he so spoke. That
Lamb was offered only for that Nation, but this for the whole World: And the
blood of that Lamb kept off a temporal plague from the Jews; but the blood of
this Lamb [of Christ, namely] obtained a cleansing for the whole world. And
indeed this blood of the Jewish Lamb could not of its own nature do that, for
which it was appointed; but because it was a figure of this Lamb, hence it
obtained this power.

Hear St. Hierome. The Lamb, (says he) is killed, Occiditur ovis, celebratur
pascha, and interpositis quinquaginta diebus, datur lex ad timorem scripta
digito Dei: occiditur Christus, celebratur verum pascha, and interpositis
quinquaginta diebus datur ad charitatem spiritus, qui est digitus Dei. To. 4.
epist. 21. de celebr. pasc.
and the Passover is celebrated, and after fifty days the Law is given for
fear, written with the finger of God: Christ is slain, the true Passover is
celebrated, and after fifty days, the Holy Ghost, who is the finger of God, is
given, to work our hearts to charity.

Hear him again. The Lamb, Agnus non in die, sed ad vesperam immolatur, quia
Dominus noster and salvator in consummatione seculi passus est. To. 4. epist.
33.
says he, [namely of the Passover] was killed and Sacrificed, not in the day,
but in the evening, because Christ suffered in the end of the world.

Pucanus clears this parallel in sundry particulars.

1. God required a Lamb without spot or blemish, 1. Agnum integrum, immaculatum
and a reliquo grege seperatum exigebat Deus, ut scirent ad Deum propitiandum
requiri excellentius pretium, quam inveniri posset in toto genere humano: and
ut denotaret Agnum innocentem, segregatum a peccatoribus, Patri obedientem,
legem perfect implentem; and coelesti puritate praeditum, ideoque de Spiritu
Sancto in virgin conceptum, ut aliorum noxam expurgaret.
and separated from the rest of the flock, to show that for the appeasing of
Gods wrath, a more excellent price is required, then can be found among all
mankind: and to foreshew that innocent Lamb, separate from sinners, obedient
to his Father, keeping the Law perfectly, and endued with heavenly purity, and
therefore conceived in the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, that he might purge away
the sins of others.

2. God required a male, to foreshew, 2. Masculum, ut designaret potentem
futurum illum agnum, and virili robore praeditum, ad tollenda peccata mundi,
and destruendum regnum pecati, and liberandum nos a servitute peccati, Satanae,
etc. Anniculum tamen, i. e. tenerum, imbecillum, and scientem infirmitatem,
quoad naturam humanam, quia de fratrum suorum grege sumi, and per omnia milis
nobis, excepto peccato, esse debuit. Heb. 4.13.
that that Lamb which was to come, should be powerful, and endued with man-like
strength, to take away the sins of the world, to destroy the kingdom of sin,
and to free us from the service of sin, Satan, etc. Yet of an year old, that
is, tender, weak, knowing infirmity, in regard of his humane nature, because he
was to be taken from among his brethren, and to be like unto us in all things,
sin only excepted, Heb. 4.13.

3. Haberi in custodia volebat Deus quatuor diebus, viz. a decimo die mensis
primi usque ad decimi quarti extremum, ut innueret, Christum non statim a
nativitate sua morti tradendum, sed aliquanto tempore, a Patre praefinito,
publicam Evangelii functionem administraturum.
3. God would have it kept up four days, namely from the tenth day of the first
month to the close of the fourteenth day, to imply that Christ should not be
delivered to death presently upon this birth, but for some space of time, set
by God, should administer his public function of preaching the Gospel.

4. Inter vesperas mactari ut notaret, hunc Agnum tandem ad vesperam dierum, i.
e. plenitudine temporum mactandum.
4. God ordered the Lamb to be slain in the evening, to note that this Lamb of
God should be slain in the evening of Time, that is, in the fullness of Time.

5. He ordered, that the doorposts should be sprinkled with the blood of the
Lamb, to show, 5. Illius sanguine posts aspergi, ut significaret hujus solius
sanguine aspergi, tingi, insigniri, purgari, and sanctificari corda fidelium,
per fidem nitentem meriejus, aspersione facta fasciculo hysopi, (h. e.) virtute
purgante spiritus. Ad haec sanguine Christi liminibus cordium nostrorum
asperso, exterminatorem averti, protegi nos ab ira Dei, etc.
that only with the blood of Christ the hearts of the faithful are sprinkled,
washed, marked, purged, and sanctified, by faith resting on his merits, the
sprinkling being made with a bunch of hyssope, that is, by the purging virtue
of the Spirit of God. And, moreover, that by the blood of Christ sprinkling our
hearts, the destroyer is turned away, and we protected from Gods wrath, etc.

6. 6. Reliquis ceremoniis indicavit, hunc scilicet Christum, totum fide
comedendum.
By the other Rites of the Passover he shows, that whole Christ is to be eaten
by faith, etc.

7. That he is to be eaten in common with our neighbors; 7. Eundem communiter
cum vicinis, i. e. Gentibus, commedendum, hoc est, Gentes accersendas voce
Evangelii ad Christi communionem.
that is, the Gentiles, namely, that the Gentiles are to be brought in by the
sound of the Gospel to the fellowship of Christ.

8. That he is to be eaten, 8. Manducandum esse, non crudum, nec aqua coctum,
sed igne judicii divini veluti tostum.
not raw, nor sod with water, but as it were roasted with the fire of Gods
judgment.

9. That he is to be eaten. 9 Edendum esse illum, 1. Cum panibus azymis
synceritatis and veritatis, 1 Cor. 5.8. 2. Cum amaris lactucis, i. e. cum
amaritudine and compunctione cordis, seu cum seria poenitentia, etc.
1. With the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.8.2. With bitter
herbs, that is, with bitterness and compunction of heart, or with hearty
repentance, etc.

10. Docere voluit, vescentes agno, habitu peregrinantium induendos esse, qui
accincti lumbis cingulo veritatis, Ephesians. 6.14. expediti sint ad ingrediendam
viam mandatorum Dei, quique fidei and justitiae cinctonio coerceant and
reprimant carnis sensum, libidinem and pravas cupiditates, sint etiam calceati
praeparatione Evangelii, and parati ad majores progressus in Evangelio
facie^dos, praeparati ad ineunda praelia sustinenda pericula, and vitandas
occasiones lapsuum et scandalorum, quibus, ceu tribulis, spinis aut
serpentibus, piorum pedes nonnunquam sauciantur. Adhaec baculo spirituali
promissionum verbi Dei innixi, gressus suos in itinere regant, and labentes
erigant, de quo, Psalm. 23.4. Virga tua and baculus tuns consolata sunt me.
10. That they who eat of this lamb are to put on the habit of travelers,
having their loins girded with the girdle of truth, and so ready to enter upon
the way of Gods commandments, and with the breastplate of faith and
righteousness, restraining and beating down sense, lust, and evil desires, and
having their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel, ready to make
greater progress in the Gospel, ready to enter into the spiritual warfare, to
undergo dangers, and to shun the occasions of slips and scandals, with which as
with briers, or thorns, or Serpents, the feet of the godly are sometimes
wounded: and moreover resting on the spiritual staff of Gods promises, and so
guiding their steps in their journey, and upholding them that are ready to
fall: of which David says, Thy rod and thy staff have comforted me, Psalm. 23.
4.

11. That this lamb is to be eaten of standers and of hastners, 11. Manducandum
etiam esse hunc Agnum am stantibus, and festinantibus, i. e. ab iis, qui non in
hujus vitae itinere torpeant, non cunctantur in Aegypto aut Babylone
spirituali, sed celeriter regnum Satanae relinquant, and ut sanctos viatores
decet, ex hujus vitae ergastulo ad coelestis patriae sollennitatem and (...),
anhelent.
that is, of them that are not sluggish in the journey of this life, nor make a
stay in the spiritual Egypt or Babylon, but speedily leave the Kingdom of
Satan, and (as becomes holy travelers) long to come out of the prison of this
life to the solennity and conversation of the heavenly country.

12. 12. In una domo comedendum, i. e. (...) spiritualem fidelium in uno
corpore, and capite Christo sanciendam and servandam.
That the Lamb was to be eaten in one house, that is, that the spiritual
communion of the faithful in one body, and in one head Christ, 13. Os nullum
illius agni frangi voluit Deus, ut typice ostenderet, quid in filio vellet
praestare, Joan. 19.33.

Instit. Theol. p. 623, 624. 625. 626.


is to be established and kept.

13. God would have no bone of that Lamb to be broken, that he might show as by
a Type, what he would perform in his Son, Joh. 19.33.

Hear Scarpius. It was required, says he, that the Lamb should be without
spot; where spots notes not variety of colors, Requirebatur agnus sine macula,
ubi macula non varietatem coloris significat, sed deformitatem, defectum,
morbum; it a Christus sanctus, inculpatus, Heb. 7.26. fuit etiam masculus, ad
significandum Christum qui masculus dicitur, Apoc. 12.5. quia fortis ad
facienda justitiae opera, nil habens molle, fluxum, instabile, sed ut Rex
recturus Gentes in virga ferri. Denique anniculus, non excedens annum unum, quo
significatur Christum simplicem, syncerum, innocentem, vel Christum annum
placabilem, mansuetis praedicaturum. Symph. prophet. etc. p. 148.
but deformity, defect, disease. So Christ was holy, blameless, Heb. 7.26. It
was also to be a male, to signify Christ who is called a malechilde, Rev.
12.5. because he was strong and courageous to do the works of righteousness,
having nothing loose, remiss, unstable, being, as a King, to rule the Nations
with a rod of Iron. Lastly, it was to be of an year old, not exceeding an year,
by which was signified the simplicity, sincerity, and innocence of Christ, or,
that he was to preach the meek acceptable year of the Lord, Isa. 61.2.

Hear him again. God appointed, says he, the Lamb to be eaten, to signify,
Carnes agni Deus comedere jubet, ut significet, totum Christum prout in verbo
revelatum, and in sacramentis oblatum, fide apprehendendum.
that whole Christ, as he is reveiled in the word, and offered to us in the
Sacrament, is to be apprehended by faith.

2. God would have the people to eat the flesh of the lamb not raw, 2. Carnem
assam, non crudam aut elixam populum edere voluit, quia assa est solidioris
nutrimenti, quo significatur, Christum doloribus crucis assandum ut Justinus
Martyr vult in dialogo cum Tryhpone Judaeo, item significatur, ardentissimam
fuisse Christi erga nos charitatem.
nor sod, but roasted, because flesh roasted is of more solid nourishment, by
which its signified that Christ was to be as it were roasted with the sorrows of
the Cross, as Justin Martyr has it. dial. cum Iryph. Jud. Hereby its also
signified, that the love of Christ is most ardent toward us.

3. Leven was forbidden in the Passover, 3. Ideo fermentum vetitum, ut
significetur, quale futurum esset illud unicum Christi sacrificium, nempe
syncerum, purum, integrum: typus enim fuit Christi very paschatis.
to show what that only Sacrifice of Christ should be, namely, sincere, pure,
and entire: for it was a Type of Christ, the true paschal lamb.

4. God ordered it to be eaten with sour herbs: 4. Lactucas agrestes edere
jussit quae amari saporis sunt; ita Christus percipiendus cum vera poenitentia
and amaritudine ex sensu peccati.
so Christ is to be received with true repentance and bitter sorrow arising
from the sense of sin.

5. He ordered them to roast and eat the head with the feet and inwards, 5.
Caput cum pedibus and intestinis agni assare and edere jubet, ut significaret,
totum Christum singulas ejus parts doloribus mortis pro nobis assatum, and
sine mora fide percipiendum.
by which its signified that whole Christ, and all the parts of him, are as it
were roasted with the pains of death, and is by faith speedily to be received.

6. Nil reservandum ad mane fuit, nec, ut cibus profanus: extra tempus
sacrificii comedendum, ut significaret, Christum se totum fide percipiendum
exhibere.
6. None of it was to be left unto the morning, nor was it as ordinary meat, to
be eaten out of the time of the Sacrifice: to show that Christ gives his whole
self to be received by faith.

7. Neither any uncircumcised, nor any unclean with any legal uncleanness, 7.
Nec incircumcisi, nec immundi aliqua legali immunditia agnum edere potuerunt,
quo significatur, Christum solum ab iis, quorum corda fide purgata sunt recipi.
were to eat of the Passover, to show, that Christ is received only of them,
whose hearts are purified by faith.

8. The Lamb might not be eaten, but in the place, 8. Agnus comedi non potuit,
nisi in loco, ubi erat arca and tabernaculum, quo significatur, Christum semper
nobis exhiberi verum praecipue in sanctis caetibus.

9. Renes accingere jussit Deus, quo significare voluit nos debere expeditos
esse ad laborandum in virtutum excercitio; item, quia renes seeds sunt
voluntatum, significat, debere nos voluntates domare.

10. Pedes calceare jussit, calceis ad iter propriis, quo significatur, iter
per desertum hujus mundi longum esse and difficile, nos vero firmatos pedes
debere habere. Gregorius vero ait, pedes esse opera, et sicut calceamenta sunt
ex pelle mortuorum animalium, ita antiqui Patres sunt mortui, ex quorum pelle
nostri pedes muniuntur, ut eos sequentes, ad vitam aeternam eamus: dum enim
eorum opera conspicimus, nostros pedes munimus, and vestigia a peccato
defendimus.


where was the Ark, and the Tabernacle, to show that Christ does al way give
himself to us, but especially in the holy assemblies.

9. He commanded them to gird their reins, by which he signified that we should
be prompt and ready to labor with the exercise of virtue: And because the
reins are the seat of the affections, therefore it teaches us, that we ought to
tame and subdue our affections and passions.

10. God ordered them to be shod with shoes fit for a journey, to show, that
our journey through the desert of this world is long and difficult, but we
should have our feet well fenced. But Gregory says, that feet are works, and
as shoes are made of the skins of dead creatures, so the Ancient Fathers are
dead, by whose skins our feet are fenced, that following them, we may come to
eternal life, for while we look on their works, we fense our feet and keep our
steps from sin.

11. Baculum tenere in manibus jussit, quo significatur, pios debere
disciplinam sanctam, quasi virgam ad carnem castigandam, and ad omnia vitae
negotia dirigenda, in manu semper habere. Item baculo, spiritualis pastoralis
cura Christi significatur.
11. He gave them order to have their staves in their hands, to signify, that
the godly are always to have in their hand an holy discipline as a rod for the
chastning of the flesh, and for the directing of all the business of this
life; or else this staff signifies the spiritual care of Christ, 12.
Festinanter comedere jussit quia Christus est subitus noster ad Deum transitus.
as of our shepherd, for us.

12. He bad them to eat it in haste, 13. Agni ossa non fracta fuerunt quo
significatur id, quod de Christo narratur, Joan. 19.36.
because Christ is our sudden passage to God.

13. The bones of the Lamb were not to be broken, 14. Denique per septem dies
festum fuit, ut significaretur, universum tempus vitae, seu septem gradus
aetatis ita Deo consecratos, ut a fermento peccati semper abstinendum esset.
Id. Ib. p. 150. 151.
whereby that is signified, which is related of Christ, Joh. 19.36.

14. Lastly, the feast was to continue seven days, to signify, that the whole
time of our life, or the seven degrees of our age, are so to be consecrated to
God, as that we must always abstain from the leven of sin.

Of the cerem. Law. Exerc it. 19.
Hear Weemse. 'The paschal Lamb, says he, was a figure of Jesus Christ. The
Paschal lamb was taken the tenth day, and separated until the fourteenth, and
in the evening of the fourteenth it was killed. Jesus Christ, the true Paschal
lamb, came six days before the Passover to Bethany, Joh. 12.1.
and the morrow after he went to Jerusalem, where they met him with branches of
palm trees, and this was five days before the Passover, then he stayed four
days in Jerusalem and was killed in the day of the Passover at night.

Hear also Rivetus, In Exodus 12. part. 1. p. 281
laying down the Parallel between Christ and the Passover in sundry Particulars.

1. The Lamb was to be taken out of the flock, by which Christ is shadowed, in
that, 1. Agnus ex grege sumi debuit, quo Christus fuit adumbratus, in eo, quod
inter animalia nullum prae se fert magis innocentiam, nullum sit mansuetius,
nullum utilius. Christus fuit innocentissimus, mansuetus and humilis cord, and
humano generi multis modis utilis. Sicut autem agnus fuit assumptus de grege:
sic agnus Dei, verus homo, ex hominibus sumptus est.
among all the brute Creatures, none more shows innocence, none is more meek,
none more profitable: So Christ is most innocent, meek and lowly of heart, and
many ways profitable to Mankind. And as the Lamb was taken out of the flock;
so this Lamb of God, true Man, is taken from among men.

2. It was severed from the rest, and kept up to be killed: without spot, an
He-lamb, 2. Separatus fuit ab aliis, and in custodia servatus ad mactaticnem:
sine macula, masculus and anniculus: haec omnia referebant Christi
perfectionem, and exemptionem ab omni peccato: fuit separatus a peccatoribus,
fuit agnus immaculatus, innocens and impollutus. Masculus fuit, in quo nil
molle and effoeminatum, ita ut simul agnus fuerit and leo: unius anni; quod
etiam ad perfectionem refertur: agni enim unius anni spatio in perfectam
aetatem adolescunt.
and of an year old: All these did shadow forth Christ's perfection, and
exemption from sin: He was separate from sinners, he was a Lamb unspotted,
innocent and unpolluted: He was a Male, in whom there is nothing of delicacy,
nothing effeminate; so that he is together and at once a Lion and a Lamb: and
of an year old. And this also belonged to his perfection; for Lambs in the
space of an year come to their perfect age.

3. The Lamb was to be killed and roasted: 3. Mactandus fuit and assandus: in
quo typus fuit Christi, qui passus fuit and mortuus, 1 Cor. 5. Assus agnus
significabat Christum virum dolorum, and ignibus afflictionum tostum, qui,
amore nostri captus, acerbissimum supplicium tulit, in quo nil habuit aquae, id
est, nihil mitigationis, nihil solatii.
in which it was a Type of Christ, who suffered and dyed: 1 Cor. 5. The roasted
Lamb signified Christ, a man of sorrows, and as it were roasted with the fire
of afflictions; who, out of the great love which he bears toward us, suffered
for us most bitter punishment, in which he had no water, that is, no
mitigation, no solace.

4. Debet manducari circa vesperam agnus, etiam inter duas vesperas mactatus:
sic Christus in consummatione seculorum, ad abolendum peccatum per immolationem
sui, patefactus est, Heb. 9.26. Per vesperam enim dies novissimos intelligi
recte Hieronymus notat, in Marc. 14. Vespera (inquit) dies, finem mundi indicat.
4. The Lamb was to be eaten about the Evening, being also killed in the
Evening: so Christ was made manifest in the End of the World, to take away sin
by the offering of himself. For Jerome well observes, on Mark 14. That by the
Evening of the day the last days are signified. The Evening of the day (says
he) signifies the End of the World.

5. On the fourteenth day of the Month, 5. Decimo quarto die lunae, quo, suo ad
Solemn suum accessu lumen Lunae decrescere incipit, cujus numeri similitudo
innuit, intelligentiae nostrae naturalis lumen propiore ad Christum accessu,
imminui oportere, si nova luce agni velimus illustrari.
on which the light of the Moon begins to decrease by her approach to the Sun;
to show, That the light of our natural understanding must be diminished by our
nearer approach to Christ, if we will be enlightened with the new light of the
Lamb.

6. Posts sanguine ejus fuerunt aspergendi, nempe in testimonium indulgentiae
and Remissionis, quae est in effusione sanguinis, purificantis conscientias
nostras, Heb. 9.14. and in signum certae salutis per sanguinem Christi
conferendae. Sanguis hic super utrumque postem hodie ponitur, quando non solum
corporis ore sacramentum, sed ore cordis sanguis hauritur. Distinxit sanguis
agni inter Israelitas and Aegyptios. Baptismus, quo abluimur Christi sanguine,
distinguit filios Dei a profanis, and qui sunt extra Rem. pub. Israelis: sed
apud Deum haec distinctio fit, non tam externo signo, quam ipsa resignificata.
6. The Posts were to be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, namely, in
testimony of Remission, which is in the sheding of the Blood that purifies our
Consciences, Hebr. 9.14. and in sign of certain Salvation to be conferred by
the blood of Christ. The blood is now put upon both Posts, when not alone with
the mouth of the Body we drink the Sacrament, but also the blood with the mouth
of the Soul. The blood of the Lamb distinguished between the Israelites and the
Egyptians: And Baptism, in which we are washed by the blood of Christ,
distinguishes between the Children of God, and those that are profane and
strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel: but with God this distinction is
made, not so much by the external sign, as by the thing it self, which is
signified.

7. The Destroyer passed over the Houses that were marked: so they that are
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, 7. Transiliit interfector aedes signatas;
sic tinctos sanguine Christi nulla attingat condemnatio, nec mors in eos
habebit potestatem.
are freed from Condemnation, and Death shall have no power over them.

8. The Lamb was to be eaten in the several Families, 8. Manducandus fuit agnus
in singulis Familiis ab omnibus domesticis circumcisis: sic per fidem
applicandus Christus unicuique, qui vult particeps esse vitae aeternae.
by all of the Families that were circumcised: so Christ is to be applied by
Faith, by every one that would partake of eternal life.

9. The Lamb must not be eaten raw, nor sod in water, 9. Crudus non debuit edi,
non elixatus aqua, ut doceremur, Christum esse cibum, qui alio non indiget
condimento extra seipsum; nil esse cum eo admiscendum. Qui per humanam
sapientiam sacramenta Divinitatis and Humanitatis evacuant, qui olim Legem cum
Christo voluerunt conjungere, qui nunc traditiones humanas, qui merita sua and
satisfactiones, illi coquunt agnum cum aqua.
to teach us, That Christ is food, that needs no other seasoning besides
himself; that nothing is to be mingled with him. They that by humane Wisdom
make void the Mysteries of the Divinity and Humanity; they that once joined the
Law with Christ, they that now join humane Traditions, or their own Merits and
Satisfactions; these all seethe the Lamb with water.

10. Totum assare oportebat, and comedere, ut integra in Christum fides
assereretur, Christus non divideretur, omnes articuli fidei conjungerentur.
10. The whole Lamb was to be roasted, and eaten, to teach us to have an entire
Faith in Christ, not to divide Christ, but to join together all the Articles of
our Faith.

11. Manducari debuit Agnus fine fermento, Christus sine hypocrisi and malitia.
11. The Lamb was to be eaten without Leaven, and Christ without Hypocrisy and
Malice.

12. It must be eaten with bitter Herbs; 12. Cum herbis amaris, Christus cum
tolerantia crucis, and nostri ipsius abnegatione. Indicatum etiam fuit, neminem
dulcedinis Remissionis peccatorum per Christum fore participem, nisi eorum
amaritudinem antea cord compuncto senserit.
so Christ with the bearing of the Cross, and Self-denial. It shows also, That
none shall share in the sweetness of the Pardon of sins by Christ, except he
first feels with compunction of heart the bitterness of them.

13. The Lamb was to be eaten in haste; and they that did eat it were to be
habited as Travelers, 13. Festinanter and peregrinantium habitu, ut sciamus
eos, qui accedunt ad Christum, paratos esse debere ad incedendum in viae
salutis, cum studio in dies proficiendi, desiderio and expectatione vitae
coelestis.
that we may know, that they which come to Christ must be ready to walk in the
way of Salvation, with a study to make a daily progress, out of a desire and
expectation of the heavenly life.

14. Praecinctis lumbis: sic, qui Christum manducant, debent stare lumbis
circumcinctis veritate, and induti thorace justitiae: Ephesians. 6.14. Vnde Christus,
Luc. 12.35. Sint lumbi vestri praecincti. Pedibus calceati: quibus
significatur, carnis affectus spiritualiter esse regendos, ne mundi hujus
salebris offendantur: Ephesians. 6.15. Cum spirituali baculo, quo gressus suos in
itinere regant, and seipsos in via sustineant: hic autem baculus est vera fides.
14. With their loins girded: so they that eat Christ, ought to stand with their
loins girt about with Truth, and having on the brestplate of Righteousness:
Ephesians. 6.14. To which purpose Christ also says, Luke 12.35. Let your loins be
girded about. With shoes on their feet; by which is signified, That our
affections are to be spiritually ruled, lest they be offended with the rugged
ways of this World: Ephesians. 6.15. With a spiritual Staff, by which they may guide
their steps in their journey, and uphold themselves in the way: but this Staff
is true Faith.

Ainsworth observes the Parallel between Christ and the Paschal Lamb in sundry
Particulars.

1. The Lamb must be perfect: 1 Pet. 1.19
so Christ was a Lamb without blemish.

2. The Lamb was to be slain in the Evening: and at that season Christ dyed:
Matt. 27.46, 50. and in the Evening of Times, in the last days.

3. The sprinkling of the Blood notes the applying of Christ's Blood, sprinkled
upon all Believers: Heb. 9.13, 14.

4. It was to be eaten with unleavened Bread: the Apostle declares the meaning
of it, 1 Cor. 5.8. Not with the Leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.

5. The bitter Herbs were to type out the bitter Sorrows of Christ, and our
Mortification and Afflictions with him.

6. It must be roasted with Fire: a figure, both of the Spirit of God, compared
to Fire, Matthew. 3.11. through which Christ offered himself to God, Hebr. 9.14.
and of the Fire of Gods Wrath, which Christ was to suffer, while he was made a
Curse for us by his Death.

7. It must be roasted with the Head, the Legs, and the Purtenance thereof;
viz. That it must be roasted all and whole, not cut in pieces; to signify our
full Communion with Christ, whole and undivided.

8. None of the Lamb must be left till the morning; they were to eat up all, if
they could, at that Meal; to teach care for the present enjoying of Christ by
Faith, and of his whole Covenant without delay. Hereby also God would teach
Israel, That when the Morning, the time of Grace in Christ is come, there
should be no longer reservation of those legal shadows, which were to have
their accomplishment and end at our Lord's Death, Col. 2.16, 17
and be condemned as unlawful, as if they were burned by the Fire of Gods Word
and Spirit.

9. They must have their loins girded; and this signifies the girding of the
loins of the Mind with justice, strength, verity, etc. Isai. 11.5. Ephesians. 6.13.

10. They must have their shoes on: this was a figure of the Gospel of Peace,
Ephesians. 6.15
wherewith our feet should be ready and firm.

11. They must eat it in haste: so must we in haste, and as with violence,
Matthew. 11.12
apprehend and apply Christ to our selves by Faith. The Original word signifies
an hastening away as with fear and amazement, and so may signify the sudden
fears wrought in the Conscience by the Gospel of Christ at the first Preaching
of it; Acts 2.37
though afterward it gives comfort and peace.

12. No bone of the Lamb was to be broken; to foreshew, Joh. 19.35, 36
That no bone of Christ, our Passover, should be broken, as it was fulfilled.

CHAP. XVII. Christ and the Manna.
SImlerus makes the Comparison in many Particulars. In Exodus 16.


1. Manna was called, as it were, Mah hu, 1. Dicitur, quasi Mah hu, quod
ignorarent quid esset: Christus autem in sua venit, and sui eum non agnoverunt.
because they knew not what it was: and Christ came to his own, and his own
knew him not.

2. Or it is so called, as it were, 2. Vel dicitur Donum, and praeparatum: sic
Deus dilexit mundum, ut daret nobis filium unigenitum. Ante secula
praedestinatus est, ut carnem assumeret.
a Gift, or prepared. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son: And he was predestined before the World to be incarnate.

3. Manna descended from Heaven: and what is more known, 3. Manna de coelo
descendit: Quid notius, quam Messiam de coelo venisse? quod non tantum de
divina, sed etiam humana Natura, adeoque integro Messia dicitur. Substantia
carnis Christi eadem est cum nostra, and ex Virgin matre sumpta, sed tamen
coelestis dicitur, non substantiae natura, sed conceptionis ex S. Spiritus
ratione.
then that the Messiah came from Heaven? which is said not only of the Divine,
but also of the Humane Nature, and so of the whole Messiah. The substance of
his flesh is the same with ours, and taken from the Virgin his Mother; yet it is
called heavenly, not in regard of the nature of the substance of it, but in
regard of the Conception of the Holy Ghost.

4. The Manna was equally distributed to all the Israelites: 4. Manna
aequaliter omnibus distribuitur: Christo integro fruuntur fideles, sive sint
mares, foeminae, Servi, Domini, Graeci, Barbari.
And all the faithful enjoy whole Christ, whether they be Males, Females,
Servants, Masters, Greeks, or Barbarians.

5. Omnes Israelitae in deserte victitarunt Manna: ita non hahemus alium cibum
vitae coelestis, sed hoc solo vivimus in hoc mundo.
5. All the Israelites in the Desert lived upon the Manna: so we have no other
food of Eternal Life, but of this alone we live in this World.

6. The Manna was white, and Christ is a Lamb unspotted: 6. Candidum est Manna:
Christus est agnus sine macula; dolus non est inventus in ore ejus.
There was no guile found in his mouth.

7. Suavis est mellis sapore; Christus pronunciat jugum ejus suave.
7. The Manna was sweet with the taste of Honey: And Christ affirms his yoke to
be pleasant.

8. Contunditur in mortario, and mola frangitur: sic Christus, primum in cruce
passus, nos alit,
8. The Manna was beaten in a Mortar, and ground in a Mill: so Christ, having
first suffered on the Cross, does nourish us.

Symphon. Prophet. etc. p. 159.

1. Manna sine labor and industria Israelitis dabatur: ita Christus gratis
sine dignitate aut meritis nostris nobis datus.


Hear Scharpius also of this.

1. The Manna was given to the Israelites without their labor and industry; and
Christ is given to us freely, without our worth or merits.

2. Manna de coelo pluebat, idque non sine miraculo: ita Christus ex miraculosa
conceptione S. Spiritus incarnatus, natus, etc.
2. The Manna rained from Heaven, and that not without a Miracle: so Christ was
incarnate, and born by the miraculous Conception of the Holy Ghost.

3. Manna ab initio fuit ignotum; ita in terris Christus: si enim illum
cognovissent, Dominum gloriae non crucifixissent: 1 Cor. 2.8.
3. The Manna was unknown at the beginning; so Christ upon the Earth: For had
they known him, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory: 1 Cor. 2.8.

4. Manna aequaliter distribuebatur, nec ex illo unus plus alio habuit, licet
unus altero plus collegisset, ita Christus, sinc praerogativa, sine exceptione,
singulis fidelibus ad salutem datur: in eo enim nec masculus, nec foemina,
Judaeus, nec Graecus, Gal. 3.28.
4. The Manna was equally distributed, and one of them had not more then
another, though one gathred more then another: so Christ is given to all the
faithful to salvation, none excepted, none privileged above the rest: for in
him there is neither male nor female, neither Jew nor Greek, etc. Gal. 3.^8.

5. The Manna did nourish well, 5. Manna been alebat, and copiose dabatur: ita
Christus sufficit ad omnes copiose alendos.
and was given in great plenty, so Christ is sufficient, plentifully to nourish
all.

6. 6. Manna habuit suaves and admirandos sapores: ita Christus jugum suum
suave, and onus leve ait esse, Matthew. 11.30. and David, Gustate, ait, and
videte, quam suavis est Dominus, Psalm. 34.8.
The Manna had sweet and admirable relishnesse, so Christ says, his yoke is
easy and his burden light, Matthew. 11.30. and David says, Taste and see, that
the Lord is sweet, Psalm. 34.8.

7. The Manna was white, 7. Manna candidum fuit, i. e. purum: Sec Christus
describitur, Apoc. 1. quia sine peccato and innocens, 1 Pet. 2.22.
that is, pure: so is Christ described, Rev. 1. because he was without sin and
innocent.

8. 8. Manna mola contundebatur: ita Christus, ut animae nostrae cibus esset,
doloribus mortis in cruce contundebatur.
The Manna was bruised in a mill; so Christ, that he might be food for our
souls, was bruised with the pains of death on the Cross.

9. Manna was given only, 9. Manna dabatur in deserti itinere tantum, itae
Christus nobis in deserto hujus mundi tantum in verbo and sacramentis,
while they were in the wilderness; so Christ is given to us in the desert of
this world in the word and sacrament

10. 10. Manna non fuit datum in Aegypto, sic nec Christus infidelibus
manentibus in Aegypto peccati.
The Manna was not given in Egypt, so neither Christ to unbelievers, remaining
in the Egypt of sin.

11. Manna desiit esse, cum populus ad terram promissionis pervenisset; ita
Christus a glorificatis fide non percipitur, quia Deum, sicut est, vident facie
ad faciem.
11. The Manna ceased, when the people came to the land of promise: so Christ is
not received by faith of the Saints in Glory, because they see God as he is,
face to face. 12. Manna cadebat quovis anni tempore, and quovis in loco, ubi
populus fuit, fluebat, ita Christus continuo and ubique nobis offertur.


12. The Manna fell at all times of the year, and in every place where the
people were, so Christ always and every where offered unto us. 13. Manna noctu
cadebat die ante Sabbatum, ut eo die pro Sabbato Collegi posset in Sabbato enim
non inveniebatur, ita Christus before jam, ante diem ultimum suum, initium
Sabbathi nostri aeterni, revelatus, and in aeterna requie fide cessavit.


13. In the day before the Sabbath the Manna fell in the night, that on that
day it might be gathered for the Sabbath: for on the Sabbath it was not found:
So Christ is now (before his last day, the beginning of our eternal Sabbath)
more fully revealed, and in our eternal rest, ceases in respect of faith.

14. The Manna, kept till the morrow, 14. Manna conservatum in erastinum,
vermes ebulliebat, quo significatur, Sacramentum Novi Testamenti, extra usum,
non esse Sacramentum, nec asservandum, ut in Papatu fit.
bred worms, by which it signified, that the Sacrament of the new Testament,
out of the use of it, is no Sacrament, nor is to be kept till another time, as
it is in the Papacy.

Hear also Rivetus, In Exodus 16. part. 1. p. 435. col. 2. As God (says he)
prepared nourishment for the Israelites for the nourishment of their bodies, so
has he prepared for us spiritual nourishment, Quemadmodum Deus parabat
Israelitis alimentum ad corpora eorum alenda, sic paravit nobis alimentum
spirituale, Christum, ad alendas animas nostras. Hanc analogiam inter signum
and rem significatam docuit ipse Christus, cum dixit, se esse panem, qui
descendit de coelo, and dat vitam mundo: sicut descendebat e coelo Manna, and
hanc vitam conservabat Israelitis manducantibus. Hoc est praecipuum. Alia sunt,
quae quisque pro suo ingenio excogitat, non quidem plane contemnenda, ut, quod
candidum est Manna, sic Christus est agnus sine macula; suave erat mellis
sapore, sic Christi jugum suave: contundebatur Manna in mortario, sic Christus
contusus est in cruce: Aequaliter distribuebatur omnibus Manna, sic Christus
totus singulis datur. Non dabatur Manna, nisi liberatis ex Aegypto, nec se dat
Christus, nisi cis, quos liberavit ex captivitate Satanae: Haec non sunt
contemnenda.
even Christ for the nourishment of our souls. And this analogy between the
sign and the thing signified. Christ himself taught, when he said, that he is
the bread that came down from heaven and gives life to the world, even as the
Manna came down from heaven and preserved life to the Israelites that did eat
of it. And this is the chief resemblance. Others there are, which men have
devised according to their own apprehensions, which yet are not altogether to
be slighted, As, that the Manna was white, so Christ is a Lamb without spot and
blemish. The Manna was sweet, as the taste of honey, so Christ's yoke is sweet:
The Manna was bruised in a mortar, so Christ was bruised on the Cross. The
Manna was equally distributed to all the Israelites: so whole Christ is given
equally to all the faithful. The Manna was not given to any, but to them, that
were freed out of Egypt; neither does Christ give himself unto any, but those,
whom he has freed from the bondage under Satan: and these resemblances are not
to be contemned.

And a little after he adds this also. The Manna (says he) kept till the next
day, bred worms: so the Eucharist, Manna, servatum in sequentem diem, vermibus
s^atebat, sic etiam a vermibus soepe, a muribus etiam, roditur Eucharistia
nostra, in multos dies servata. Item servatum in diem sequentem corrumpebatur,
nec amplius erat panis usuarius: sic panis Eucharisticus, extra usum temporis
illius, quo distribuitur ad manducandum, amittit vim Sacramenti. Et sicut non
asservari debuit Manna, sic neque sacramentum. Ibid.
kept many days is often consumed with worms, and with mice also. Furthermore,
the Manna kept to the next day, was corrupted, and was no longer bread fit for
use: so the bread of the Eucharist, beyond the use of that time, in which it is
distributed to be eaten, loses the virtue of a Sacrament. And finally, as the
Manna might not be kept, so neither may the Sacrament.

In Heb. 9. p. 316.
Dr. Gouge does in many particulars observe the comparison between Christ and
the Manna.

1. The word Manna comes of a word that signifies to prepare, and to distribute
or appoint: and so it as much, as a portion prepared. This typified Christ, as
a portion prepared for us: a worthy portion he is, 1 Samuel 1.5.
as Elkanah said of the portion which he gave to his wife Hannah: No such
portion was ever given to the sons of men.

Exodus 16.12.
2. The Author of this Manna was God: for Moses said to them, This is the bread
which the Lord gives you to eat. Christ himself thus applies this point, My
Father (says he) gives you the true bread. Joh. 6.55.


Exodus 16.4. Joh. 6.33.51.
3. The Manna came from heaven: And so says Christ of himself, The bread of God
is he that comes down from heaven and gives life to the world.

Exodus 16. Isa. 53.2. Phil. 2.7. 2 Cor. 8.9.
4. The Manna was a small grain. So Christ, that he might become food for us,
was made small, that is, mean and of no reputation. As Christ became poor to
make us rich, so he became small to make us great.

5. The Manna was round, not as wheat, but as coriander-seed; Col. 1.19.
and this figure notes out fullness and perfection; and this typified the
fullness of grace, that is in Christ.

6. The Manna was white, Exodus 16. This color in scripture is used to set out
purity, Psalm. 5^.7. And this typifies the purity of Christ, Heb. 7.26. Cant.
5.10.

7. Exodus 16.
The taste of Manna was like wafers made with honey, that is, sweet and
pleasant. This typified the delectableness that is in Christ, especially to
them that have their spiritual appetites well ordered. Joh. 6.34.
If once we have tasted rightly of Christ, we shall say, Lord give us evermore
this bread.

8. The Manna was given freely, for by their murmuring they deserved to have
perished, Exodus 16.2. and plentifully, for it was rained down, Exodus 16.4. and
they gathered every man according to his eating. Exodus 16.18.
So was Christ given freely, and he, that comes to Christ, shall never hunger,
Joh. 6.35.

9. The Manna was given only to Israel, which was then the only Church of
God. So Christ is given to the spiritual Israel, the Catholic Church.

10. The Manna was sent with dew, Exodus 16.14. So Christ is sent down from
heaven with the dew of the Spirit, and accompanied with all graces: Joh. 1.14.
Joh. 1.16.
full of grace and truth, so as of his fullness we have all received, and grace
for grace.

11. The Manna was given from time to time, so long as they were in the
Wilderness, till they came to Canaan, Exodus 16.35. Josh. 5.12. So Christ has
been preached hitherto, and shall continue to be preached in the Wilderness of
this world, till we come to the heavenly Canaan. In heaven there shall be no
need of preaching him.

12. Every man, rich and poor, gathered it, Exodus 16.16. So must every one that
will partake of Christ, use the means, Mar 16.15.
wherein and whereby he is offered to the Church: for Christ commanded to
preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, Gal 3.28.
to every reasonable creature. And there is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor
free, male nor female, for ye are all only in Christ.

13. They went out to gather it: so says God, The people shall go out and
gather. Exodus 16.4.
We may apply this to Christ's going out of the Camp, Heb. 13.13.
and by resemblance, to our going out of the world from the vanities of it, and
out of the old man, from the iniquities thereof; Christ is not to be found in
the Tents of the one, or of the other.

14. There was a time limited for the gathering of it, after which time it was
not to be found, they gathered it every morning, and when the Sun was hot it
melted: Exodus 16.21.
So there is a time for the seeking and finding of Christ. Seek the Lord, while
he may be found, Isa 55.6.
says the Prophet. And This is the time, accepted year, 2 Cor. 6.2.
the day of salvation, says the Apostle, when such a time was overslipt, the
Spouse, to her great grief, Cant 5.6. Mattth. 25.10, 11.
sought Christ, but could not find him; and the foolish Virgins by this means
utterly lost him

15. The people grownd the Manna in mills, or beat it in mortars, Number. 11.8.
and baked it in pans, and made cakes of it. These set out the manifold
sufferings of Christ, of which read, Isa. 53. Christ himself speaks expressly
with reference to himself, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and dye,
Joh. 12.24.
it abides alone, but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit.

16. If the Manna were otherwise used then God appointed, Exodus 16.20. 2 Cor.
2.16.
it bred worms and stank. Thus is Christ to the incredulous and rebellious: he
is a savor of death: he is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, 1 Pet.
2.8.

17. That the Israelites might reap benefit by the Manna, they were to eat it.
Eat that to day, says Moses. Exodus 16.25.
So, to partake of the true benefit by Christ, we must believe on him: this is
spiritually to eat Christ.

CHAP. XVIII.
Christ and the holy Place
DOcter Gouge observes the parallel between Christ and the Tabernacle in sundry
particulars.

1. Exodus 29.44, 45. Col. 2.9.
God sanctified the Tabernacle to be a place to dwell in. So in Christ the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.

2. Exodus 40.34. Joh 1.14.
Gods glory was most conspicuously seen in the Tabernacle. Never was any place
so filled with the glory of God, as the body of Christ.

3. In the Tabernacle, Sacrifices, Oblations, and Incense were offered up, Heb.
5.7. and 10.5.
and all holy services performed. So Christ in his body offered up his
Sacrifice, his prayers, and all his holy services.

4. Lev. 1.3. Heb. 13.15.
To the Tabernacle the people brought all their Sacrifices and Offerings, so we
must bring all ours to Christ.

5. The Tabernable sanctified all in it: Matthew. 23.17.
so whatsoever is offered up in Christ, or from him conveyed to us, is
sanctified.

6. As the Priest did tread upon the Sanctuary, so did Christ tread upon his
body by his manifold sufferings

7. Exodus 26.33. Heb 9.12.
The high Priest entered by the Tabernacle into the most holy place, so Christ
by his body did enter into heaven.

Christ and the Shewbread.
Of this hear Dr. Gouge. Com. on Heb, 9.
This shewbread was a type of Christ, who styled himself the bread of life,
Joh. 6.33.35.

1. As bread is to the body, the means of life, so is Christ to the soul.

2. The soul stands in as great need of Christ, as the body does of bread.

3. The shewbread was called in Hebrew the bread of faces, because it was set
before the face and presence of God, Exodus 25.30. And this typifies Christ's
appearing before God for us continually.

4. The shewbread was made of flour. This was a type of Christ's incarnation
and Passion: he was as grain, that grew out of the grownd, and as grain ground
in a Mill and Bolted.

Heb. 7.25.
5. The flour was fine flour, to show the purity of Christ's nature.

6. There were two tenth deals in each loaf, which is almost half a peck, more
then a bushel in the 12 loaves. This typified the plenty of food, which we have
by Christ: in which respect he says, He that comes to me shall never hunger.
Joh. 6.35.


7. The 12 loaves were set in two rows, six in a row. This typified that unity
and order, which is in the Church of God, which is the body of Christ.

8. An especial appurtenance was Frankincense on each row: This prefigured that
acceptance, which all the members of Christ have with God in his beloved by
virtue of which the Lord smells a sweet savor upon all the oblations of his
people, Ephesians. 1.6.
Genesis 8.21. Lev. 24.8.
as he did on Noah's burnt-offering.

Heb. 10.12. Lev. 24.9.
9. This bread was renewed every Sabbath, that bread might be always before the
Lord. Thus is Christ continually before God for us.

Matthew. 12.5. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.
10. The Priests only were to eat of this bread. This typified, that they only
have a right to feed upon Christ, who are of the spiritual and royal
Priesthood: Behold here the Privilege of Saints: by feeding on Christ, John 6.51
we are made Partakers of Eternal Life.

11. Levit. 24.9
The Shewbread was to be eaten in the holy place: And Christ is fit to be fed
upon only in sanctified hearts: He dwells in our hearts by Faith. Ephesians. 3.17


12. The Vessels, in which these were to be kept, Exodus 25.29
were of sundry sorts, two for the Bread, one to hold it, and another to cover
it: and two for the Frankincense, one to hold it, and the other to cover it.
This teaches, That holy things must be charily kept: our Hearts are these
Dishes, which ought to be as pure as Gold. In them this Bread of life and sweet
Incense is to be kept: They must be kept close from the dust of Wickedness,
yea, and of Worldliness.

Christ and the Second Vail.
Of this hear Dr. Gouge: In Heb. 9. p. 309.
It Is called the second Vail, in reference to another, by which the Priests
entered into the Holy place; but by this the High Priest alone entered into the
Holy of Holies.

This second Vail was a Type of Christ's flesh: for so the Apostle expounds it
in these words, Hebr. 10.20
Through the Vail, that is to say, his flesh.

1. This Vail shadowed the glory of the most holy place; Phil. 2.7
so did the flesh of Christ overshadow his Divine Glory.

2. Heb. 10.19, 20
By this Vail there was an Entrance into the most holy place; so by the flesh
of Christ there is an Entrance into Heaven.

3. This Vail was made of fine Linen; and this was a Type of the pure
Righteousness of Christ, Revel. 19.8
with which the Saints are clothed.

4. This Linen is said to be twined, and that for strength: which showed the
stedfastness of Christ's Righteousness, and that as apprehended by Faith.

5. The colors were most precious, blue, purple, and scarlet. These colors
show forth blood; and show, That in Christ's flesh is that pure blood, wherewith
the Church is purged: Revel. 1.5.
They show also the Glory of Christ even in his flesh.

6. This Vail was of curious workmanship: And this, with the forenamed
colors, was a Type of excellent Graces, Psalm 45.2, 7 John 3.34
with which Christ in his Humane Nature was adorned.

7. This Vail was wrought with Cherubims: These were shapes of young men with
wings: They did in particular set forth the attendance of the Angels on Christ,
as he was God-man, the Head of the Church: for the Angels are said to ascend
and descend upon the Son of man. John 1.51
This is a point of great comfort: Hebr. 1.14
for, by virtue hereof they are made ministering spirits to us, Psalm. 91.11, 12
Psalm 34.7 Luke 16
and have a charge given them to keep us in all our ways; and therefore they
pitch their Tents about us, and are ready to carry our Souls to Heaven, when we
dye.

8. This Vail was hung on four Pillars of Shittim Wood, covered with Gold, and
set in Sockets of Silver; the Hooks, to which the Vail was fastened, were all
of Gold. The Pillars set out the Deity of Christ, by which his Humanity was
supported in all that he endured. The Hooks and Sockets of Silver set out the
Union of Christ's Humane Nature with his Divine.

On Exodus 26
Ainsworth observes the Comparison between Christ and this Vail.

1. The special use of this Vail was, to divide between the holy place, and the
Holy of Holies, and so to debar men from entering, yea, or looking into the
most holy place, Heb. 9.8
whereby the Holy Ghost signifies (as the Apostle says) that the way into the
Holies was not yet manifested, while the first Tabernacle was standing: that
is, the way to Heaven (which the most holy place shadowed) was not by those
legal Services, Heb. 9.24 and 10.19
but should be opened unto men by Christ, first entering there with his blood.
Therefore also this Vail signified the flesh of Christ (under which the Godhead
was veiled) and through which (by suffering death) he entered himself, Heb.
9.19, 20
and made way also for us to enter into Heaven.

2. The curious Embroidery, and glorious Cherubims of this Vail, signified the
manifold Graces of the Spirit, and heavenly Affections, which Christ had in his
Humane Nature, and which he also communicates unto us by the Ministry of his
Word and Spirit: likewise the heavenly Mysteries, which are in the Ordinances
of Moses's Law, rightly understood.

Christ and the Altar of Burnt-offering.
Ainsworth compares these together. On Exodus 27


1. The Altar and Sacrifice signified Christ, sanctifying himself for his
Church, and by his Mediation sanctifying the daily Service of his People, of
which also the Altar was a public sign.

2. The Altar had four Horns, which were not only for ornament, Ezekiel. 43.16
but also to keep things from falling off the Altar, for the Horns were upward.
And (Horns usually signifying power and might) these four Horns signify the
Power and Glory of Christ's Priesthood, for the Salvation of his Church, Hab. 3.4
gathered from the four Corners of the Earth.

3. The Altar was overlayd with Brass, which was strong to bear the Fire, that
continually burned upon the Altar, hereby figuring Christ's suffering Gods Wrath
and Afflictions, without being consumed and overcome.

Christ and the Golden Censer.
In Heb. 9. p. 311.
Of this hear Dr. Gouge: It is (says he) an Instrument made with a broad Pan to
hold Fire on it, with an Handle to hold it by.

1. This Censer was of Gold: this typified Christ, and his Purity,
Preciousness, and Everlastingness.

2. Incense was put upon the Censer; this typified that sweetness of Grace and
Goodness which was in Christ.

3. Burning coals were put under the Incense, to make it send forth the sweet
savor thereof: and so the burning coals set out the manifestation of the
sweetness of his Grace by his Intercession.

4. The Incense was beaten small, and declared Christ's Passion and bitter Agony.

5. The High Priest, together with the Incense on the Censer, carried also
blood with him, which typified that Satisfaction which Christ made by his
Passion. Thus Christ, our High Priest, entered into Heaven with his Censer of
Incense and Blood, to show, That his Blood was a price to ransom us from Sin,
and his Intercession moved God to accept thereof for us.

6. This Censer with the Incense was brought within the Vail into the most holy
place, which typified Heaven: so as Christ in Heaven makes Intercession for us.
Romans 8.34.


7. The burning Coals and Incense were put upon the Censer, Lev. 16.13.
that a Cloud might cover the Mercy-seat: the sweet Incense by the heat of the
burning coals caused such smoke to rise from it, and made a thick cloud; for
God appeared in Glory on the Mercyseat, so as the Priest could not endure the
brightness of it: but the Cloud of Incense so covered the same, as he might
stand before it. Thus by the Mediation of Christ we are made capable of
appearing before the Throne of Gods Grace: When a Cloud covers the Sun, we may
look upon it; so may we look upon God through the Mediation of Christ.

8. Lev. 16.19.
The issue of the High Priest's so appearing with burning Incense in the
Censer, was, that he should not dye: Our sins provoke God to Wrath, who is a
consuming fire; but, by the Mediation of Christ, that Fire is like that, which
did not consume the Bush. And so may we, who are Gods Priests, with this Censer
and Incense burning on it, appear before God with much comfort.

CHAP. XIX.
Christ and the Ark of the Covenant.
OF this hear Dr. Gouge. In Heb. 9. p. 313.
This is a special Type of Christ, and a very fit one: For,

1. It Is called Arca, a Chest or Coffer. And in a Chest or Coffer men put their
Jewels, Plate, Treasure, and whatsoever is precious, and whereof they make high
account: and, his Treasure being in his Coffer, his Heart is there also. Thus
in Christ are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: Col. 2.3 John 1.14
Col. 1.19
He is full of Grace and Truth. It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell: Hereupon is Christ the Son of Gods Love; Col. 1.13 Isai. 42.1
Heb. 10.12
his Elect, in whom his Soul delights; and he is ever at the right hand of God.

Exodus 25.10, 11
2. The Ark was made of Shittim Wood, and Gold. It Is here said to be laid over
with Gold: The word that is here translated overlayd, (...).
signifies, to be compassed about, or covered about. It is expressed, Exodus
25.11. Thou shall overlay it with Gold, within and without thou shall overlay
it. This added much to the glory and excellency of the Ark, and declared, That
Christ is every way glorious and excellent, within and without, in Soul and in
Body, in his Humane and Divine Nature.

Exodus 25.11
3. It was adorned with a Crown or Border of Gold round about: This did signify
the Glory of Christ, and the Excellency of those Graces, with which he is
crowned.

4. It had Rings of Gold, and Bars; and they were for the carrying of it about:
And these showed, That Christ, and the Treasures of God laid up in him, are to
be preached wheresoever the Church is.

5. The Ark was had in high account, both by God himself, and also by his
People.

1. God made it a sacred Representation of his Presence. In this respect it is
styled, The Ark of God, whose Name is called by the Name of the Lord of Hosts,
2 Samuel 6.2
(or, at which the Name, even the Name of the Lord of Hosts, was called upon)
that dwells between the Cherubims. Where the Ark was, there was God counted
to be present. Number. 10.33
Therefore, when the People removed from place to place, the Ark went before
them. There God promised to commune with Moses of all things which he would
give him in commandment. Exodus 25.22
Therefore the Priests used to ask Counsel of the Lord before the Ark, 1 Samuel
14.18
which is said to be before the Lord. Where the Ark was, there was a fit place
to offer Sacrifice: Judge. 20.26
And in solemn Prayer people used to fall down before the Ark. John 14.8, 9
This typifies Gods high account of Christ. John 1.18
Never was there such a Representation of the Father, as Christ his Son. All
the Oracles of God come to us from Christ: Heb. 13.15
And by him we are to offer up all our Sacrifices.

2. The Saints also had the Ark in high account: nothing was accounted more
dear and precious unto them: witness the zeal of David about it: 2 Samuel, 6.2
Nothing more grieved and pierced them, then the loss of it: 1 Samuel 4.13
Where the Ark of God was, 2 Samuel 6.12
a Blessing did accompany it: When the Israelites presumed to go to War against
the Canaanites without the Ark, they were overthrown. Phil. 3 7
So Gods People have Christ in high account: What joy was there at his Birth?
Luke 2.10. How was the Church pierced at his loss? Cant. 5.6. Ephesians. 1.3 Ephesians. 2.12
God blesses his with all spiritual Blessings in Christ: but they that are
without Christ, are without Hope.

6. There are three especial Wonders expressly set down to be wrought by the Ark.

1. The dividing of Jordan, till the Israelites passed over from the Wilderness
to Canaan, and then the returning of the Water to his course again: Heb. 10.20
Josh. chap. 3, and 4. So by Christ a Way is made through the Sea of this World
to the Heavenly Canaan.

2. The falling down of the Walls of Jericho: Josh. 6.12. So, by Christ, strong
and mighty Holds are cast down: 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 2.14. Col. 2.15.

3. The falling of Dagon before the Ark, 2 Samuel 5.4, 6
and Judgments executed upon the Philistims: So by Christ the Idols of the
World fall down, yea, Mark 3.11 Heb. 12.29
the very Devils themselves. Christ is a consuming fire to such as have him not
in due account.

7. After that the Ark had removed up and down from place to place, a place of
Rest was sought for it, 2 Samuel 7.2. and found for it, 1 King. 8.8. Thus Christ,
after his many Travels and Troubles on Earth, Hebr. 1.3*
found a Resting Place in Heaven.

Christ and Aarons Rod.
In Heb. 9. p. 319.
Of this hear Dr. Gouge. 1. Of what kind soever the Rod were, it is certain,
that it was cut from a Tree, very dry, past sprouting and springing, according
to the course of Nature; a dry stick, as we say. This typifies Christ, who came
from the stock of Man, but as a withered branch. The House of David was not
known in the World, when Christ sprang out of it: for Herod did what he could
to destroy that whole stock. The meanness and poverty of Joseph and Mary was a
means to keep them from the notice of Herod. Christ also in his own Person was
as a dry withered stick: from his Birth to the thirtieth year of his age he
lived in a private, low, and mean condition: yea, afterward (though he did
such Works, as might have made him famous, yet) he was exceedingly despised;
and, at the time of his death, apprehended as a Traitor, arraigned, scourged,
buffeted, and many other ways most vilely handled, and crucified between two
Thieves, dead and buried.

2. This Rod is said to be Aarons Rod: it is probable, that it was like to the
Rods of the Heads of the other Tribes, Number. 17.2
because their several Names were written upon them. Thus Christ, taking upon
him Man's nature, was as other men.

3. This Rod of Aaron budded, brought forth Buds, bloomed Blossoms, and yielded
Almonds. These typified the Glory of the Lord Jesus, who, notwithstanding his
foresaid meandness, was declared to be the promised Messiah, the King of
Israel.

4. The kind of fruit, that was brought forth, is said to be Almonds, which
are a sweet and pleasant fruit, yea, wholesome and medicinable. Most sure it
is, that the truth is so: Nothing more sweet and pleasant, nothing more
wholesome and medicinable, then the fruit of all manner of grace, that
sprouteth out of Christ.

5. By the foresaid fruit of Aarons rod, Number. 17.5
Aaron was manifested to be chosen the high Priest of God. So was Christ, by
his glorious works and manner of preaching, by his Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension, and gifts, that he gave, manifested to be appointed of God our high
Priest.

6. Number 17.10
After the foresaid evidence of Aarons being chosen of God by his rod, that rod
was set before the Testimony. So Christ, Heb. 8.1.
after the foresaid evidences of glory, is set in Heaven at Gods right hand.

Christ and the Mercy-seat.
Of this Dr. Gouge thus. 1. In Heb. 9. p. 322.
The Mercy-seat is an especial type of Christ for he is expressly a
propitiation, Romans 3.25. 1 John 2.2.

2. It was made of pure gold, Exodus 25.17
this typified the excellency, purity, and Eternity of Christ.

3. The Mercy-seat, was two cubits and an half in length, and a cubit and half
in breadth. The measure was just the same, that the Ark was of, Exodus 25.10,
17. It was a cover for the Ark, and therefore every way fit for it, of the same
size. This shows that Christ is every way fit for the purpose, to which he is
put.

Ex. 25.21
4. The Mercy-seat was put upon the Ark, for it was to be a cover unto it. This
shows, that the rigor of the Law, in accusing and condemning all that have not
perfectly fulfilled the same, is suppressed by the mediation of Christ, and the
atonement, which he has made for us. 1 John 2.2
Well, therefore is he called a propitiation for us. And hereupon the Apostle
says, Romans 8.1
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ.

Exodus 25.22
5. The end and use of the Mercy-seat is thus expressed by God. There will I
meet with thee, And I will commune with thee from above the Mercy-seat. So that
it was a place for God to manifest his presence, and to declare his will
thereat. This typified Christ to be the mean of Gods manifesting his presence
and declaring his will to us. Joh. 14.9, 10
Never was there so lively a representation of Gods presence, as in and by
Christ. Never was Gods will so fully and clearly made known, Joh. 1.18
as by Christ.

On Exodus 25.17. etc.
Ainsworth also ownes the comparison between Christ and the Mercy-seat in
several particulars.

Romans 3.25
1. This is (says he) applied by the Apostle unto Christ, who is called Gods
propitiatory through faith in his blood, to declare Gods justice for the
remission of sins, that are past: and so another Apostle says, 1 John 2.2
He is the propitiation for our sins. So this Mercy-seat on which God did sit
between the two Cherubims, was a figure of Christ, by whom our transgressions
of the Law are forgiven and covered.

2. Speaking of the Cherubims, he adds. These may diversely be applied unto
Christ, whose mediation was signified by the Mercy-seat, 2 King. 6.17 Psalm.
68.18 Heb. 1.6, 14
and to the ministers of God, both the Angels in Heaven, Gods fiery Chariots,
whose service he often uses for his Honor, and to attend upon Christ and upon
his Church, into whose mysteries they desire to look, 1 Pet. 1.12
and his Ministers also on earth: Ezekiel. 28.14 Rev. 4.6, 8 Ezekiel. 1.5, 6, 10.
for Kings are called by the name of Cherubs. And the four living creatures,
with eyes and wings (which were Cherubims, as appears by comparison with that
of the Prophet Ezekiel) are of them that are redeemed unto God by the blood of
Christ, Rev. 5.8, 9, 10 Rev. 5.11. Psalm. 45.5 Act. 9.15
and so distinguished from Heavenly Angels. These with heavenly affections,
looking into the Law, and Christ the Mercy-seat, are such as on whom he also
rides by the preaching of the Gospel. But the chief signification of the
Cherubs here respects Christ himself, the Mercy-seat. And to this glorious
seat, where Gods presence with his Church, was manifested, the throne of God is
answerable, in the Christian Church: in the presence of which throne his people
are, and serve him day and night in his Temple.

3. A little after he adds. This here being, as was foreshewed a figure of
Christ, the protecting Cherubs may signify his Kingdom: the Mercy-seat, which
they covered, his Priesthood: and the voice which spoke from the same, his
Prophecy.

CHAP. XX. Christ and the Red Heifer, Number. 19.
ST. Austin makes this parallel to hold thus. To. 4. Quaest. sup. Numer. q. 33.
The red Heifer (says he) signifies the flesh of Christ, Its the female sex in
regard of the infirmity of the flesh. It is red, Juvenca rufa carnem Christi
significat: Sexus foemineus est propter infirmitatem carnis. Rufa est, propter
ipsam cruentam passionem. Et juvenca haec sine vitio, quia caro Christi erat in
similitudine carnis peccati, at non erat peccati caro: nec habet in se vitium
haec juvenca, quia in se non habuit vitium caro Christi, in aliis autem habet,
qui sunt ejus membra. Et non est suppositum ei jugum: non enim subjugata
iniquitati, cui subjugatos in veniens liberabat. Et dabis came ad Eleazarem, non
ad Aaronem, ostendens, non ad tempus, quod tunc erat, sed ad posteros passionem
Domini perventuram. Et ejicient eam extra castra: sic ejectus est Christus
passurus extra civitatem. Et accident eum in conspectu ejus: occisa est caro
Christi in sconpectu little, qui jam futuri erant in novo Test. sacerdotes
Domini. Et asperget sanguinem ejus, testificans, Christum secundum scripturas,
sanguinem fudisse in remissionem peccatorum. Et cremabunt eam: haec concrematio
pertinet ad signum resurrectionis. Natura quippe ignis est, ut in superna
feratur. Idque in conspectu ejus, scil. sacerdotis, quia illis apparuit
resurrectio Christi, qui futuri erant regale sacerdotium. Et pellis ejus and
caro and sanguis cum stercore ejus comburetur, significans, quod non solum
substantia corporis Christi, sed and contumelia and abjectio populi, stercoris
nomine significata, converteretur in gloriam, quam combustionis flamma
significat. Et accipiet sacerdos, etc. Verse. 6. signum cedrinum spes est, quae
debet in supernis firmiter habitare: hyssopus fides est, quae cum sit humilis
herba, radicibus haeret in petra: coccinum charitas est quod fervorem spiritus
igneo color testatur. Haec tria mittere debemus in resurrectionem Christi,
tantum in medium combustionis illius, ut cum illo abscondita sit vita nostra.
Et lavabit, etc. Verse. 7. lavatio vestimentorum and corporis, quid est aliud,
quam mundatio interiorum and exteriorum? Et qui comburet, etc. Verse. 8. In eo
qui comburit eos figuratos arbitror, qui Christi carnem sepelierunt,
resurrectioni eum tanquam conflagrationi mandantes. Et congregavit, etc. Verse.
9. Quid juvencae cinis reliquiae scil illius combustionis, nisi fama, quae
consecuta est passionem and resurrectionem Christi? cinis inerat, quia, velut
mortuus, condemnabatur ab infidelibus, and tamen mundabat, quia and
resurrexisse creditur a fidelibus: Et quia haec fama maxim claruit apud eos,
qui in caeteris Gentibus erant, and non erant de consortio Judaeorum, ideo
dicitur, homo mundus congregabit, mundus, scil. ab interfectione Christi, quae
Judaeos reos fecerat. Et reponet, etc. i. e. honorabiliter tractabit, extra
castra; quia extra celebrationem Judaicae consuetudinis honor Evangelicus
claruit. Et erit Synagoge, etc Before declarat quomodo ex cinere isto fiebat
aqua aspersionis, qua mundabantur a contactu mortuorum, quod utique significat,
ab iniquitate hujus moribundae vitae. Et qui congregat, etc. Verse. 10. Quomodo
erit ex hoc immundus, qui mundus accesserat? nisi, quia and qui sibi mundi
videntur, in fide Christiana se agnoscant, quia omnes peccaverunt, etc.
justificati gratis per sanguinem Christi, Romans 3.23, 24. Hunc tamen vestimenta
lavare dixit, non etiam corpus, credo, quod illius cineris congregatione and
repositione in loco mundo vult intelligi jam intrinsecus mundatum, sicut
Cornelius, audiens and credens, quod praedicaverat Petrus, ita mundatus est ut
ante visibilem baptismum, cum suis, qui aderant, acciperet Spiritum Sanctum: at
nec contemni debet visibile Sacramentum, ut extrinsecus ablutus lavaret
vestimenta sua. Et erit filiis Israel, and Proselytis, etc. Ver. 10. Quid aliud
significatur nisi baptismum Christi quem significabat aqua aspersionis, Judaeis
and Gentibus profuturum? Quem autem non faciat intentum, quod post ablutionem,
dicitur, and immundus erit usque ad vesperam? ubi nescio utrum aliquid aliud
intelligi possit, nisi quod omnis homo, post remissionem plenissimam
peccatorum, manendo in hac vita, contrahit aliquid unde sit immundus, usque ad
ejusdem vitae finem, ubi ei dies iste quodammodo clauditur, quod significat
vespera. Quod autem dicit, hyssopum aqua aspersionis aspergi, qua herba fides
significatur, quid aliud occurrit, nisi quod scriptum est, fide mundans corda?
non enim prodest baptismus, si desit fides. A viro autem mundo hoc fieri dixit,
ubi significantur ministri portantes personam Domini sui, qui vere mundus est,
Verse. 18.
in regard of his bloody Passion. And the Heifer was without blemish, because
the flesh of Christ was in the similitude of sinful flesh, but it was not
sinful flesh: nor had this Heifer any blemish in it self, because the flesh of
Christ had no sin in it self, but he has in others that are his members. And
no yoke was ever laid upon it; for he was not subjugated to iniquity, but set
those free from it, whom he found subjugated to it. And thou shall give it to
Eleazar, not to Aaron; showing that the Passion of Christ should not be in the
time that then was, but in the time of their posterity. And they shall cast it
out of the Camp, so Christ, being to suffer, was carried out of the City. And
they shall kill it in his sight: So the flesh of Christ was killed in the sight
of them, who in the times of the New Testament were to be the Priests of the
Lord. And he shall sprinkle her blood, to testify that Christ, according to
the Scriptures, shed his blood for the remission of sins. And they shall burn
her. This burning is a sign of the resurrection: for its the nature of fire to
move upward. And that in his sight, namely in the sight of the Priest, because
the resurrection of Christ was to be manifested to them, who were to be the
Royal Priesthood. And her skin, flesh, and blood, with her dung, was to be
burnt, to signify that not only the substance of Christ's body, but also the
contumelies and the reproaches of the people against him, signified by the
dung, should be turned into glory, which the flame of the burning does
signify. And the Priest shall take, etc. The Cedarwood is Hope, which ought to
dwell firmly above: Faith is the Hyssope, which being a low-growing herb, is
yet firmly rooted in the rock. Charity is the scarlet, which by its fiery
color, shows the fervor of spirit. These three we are to cast into the
Resurrection of Christ, as into the middle of the burning, that our life may be
hid with him. And he shall wash, etc. Verse. 7. The washing of the clothes and
body, what is it other then the cleansing of that which is within, and that
which is without? And he that shall burn, etc. Verse. 8. By him that burns the
Heifer I conceive them to be understood, that buried the body of Christ,
commiting it to the Resurrection, as to the burning. And he shall gather the
ashes together, etc. Ver. 9. What is the ashes of the Heifer, namely, the
remainders of the burning, other then the fame and report that followed the
Passion and Resurrection of Christ. There was ashes, because Christ was
condemned by the unbelievers, as stark dead but yet had a power to cleanse
because he is believed by the faithful to be risen again. And, because this
report was more famous among the other nations, and them that were not Jews,
therefore its said, A man, that is clean, shall gather, etc. namely clean from
the killing of Christ, which had made the Jews unclean. And he shall lay them
up in a clean place; that is, he shall handle them respectively; yet without the
Camp, because the Gospel was most honored by them that used not the Jewish
Rites. And it shall be kept for the Congregation, etc. He does more fully
declare, that of the ashes of the Heifer should be made a water of separation,
to cleanse them from the touching of the dead, that is, from the sins of this
dying life. And he that shall gather the ashes, etc. Verse. 10. How shall he by
this action be unclean, that came to it clean, but because they that seem clean
to themselves, come by the Christian faith to acknowledge themselves, that all
have sinned and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his
blood, Romans 3.23.24. Yet it is said, that this man shall wash his clothes, not
his body, I believe, because he would give us to understand, that by the
gathering and laying up of the ashes, he is inwardly cleansed, as Cornelius,
hearing and believing the things that were preached by Peter, was so cleansed,
that even before the visible baptism, he with the rest that were present,
received the Holy Ghost. Yet neither should the visible Sacrament be despised,
that being also outwardly cleansed, he might also wash his clothes. And it
shall be to the children of Israel, and to the stranger, etc. This shows, that
the baptism of Christ, which it signified by the water of separation, should
profit both Jews and Gentiles. But who can forbear to observe, that even after
washing, its said, that he shall be unclean until the evening? by which I know
not, whether any other thing can be understood, then that, even after the most
full remission of sins, while a man remains in this life, he is prone to
contract something by means of which he should be unclean, until the end of
this life, where this day is shut up to him, in a manner, which the evening
does signify. But that which he says, Verse. 18. The hyssope shall be dipped
in the water; by which herb faith is signified, nothing else can be meant by
it, but that, which is written, purifying their Hearts by Faith, Act. 15.9.
Baptism profits not, if faith be wanting. Its said finally, that this is to be
done by a man that is clean, by whom are signified Ministers, representing the
person of their Lord, who is truly clean.

In Number. 19.
Ainsworth also notes this red Heifer to be a Type of Christ, and that in many
particulars.

1. The Heifer was taken of the people (says he) to show the interest that
they all had in it, and by faith in that, which it figured, Christ. And a
little after he adds, As other Sacrifices of beasts prefigured Christ, so
this, in special figured him.

1. The Heifer was red: so Christ, in his humane nature was red, Isa. 63.1, 2.
by the participation of our affliction.

Luke 1.35. 1 Pet. 2.22.
2. The Heifer was perfect and without blemish: so was Christ without blemish of
sin, both in his Person and Actions.

3. Never yoke came on this Heifer: so was Christ without yoke, as being free
from the bondage of sin and corruption, and from servitude to men in the
ordinances of men in religion, and as doing voluntarily the things that
pertained to our redemption.

4. This Heifer was to be brought to E'eazar the Priest; which figured that the
work of our redemption and purification from sin belonged to Christ's Priestly
Office. Heb. 9.9, 13, 14.
He, in performing the truth of this Type, was both Priest and Sacrifice.

Heb. 13.11, 12
5. This Heifer was carried without the Camp; which figured Christ's suffering
without the gates of Jerusalem; Lev. 14.14.
so without the Camp malefactors were to suffer death.

6. The Priest was to take of the blood with his finger, figuring the Finger,
that is, Heb. 9.22. 23, 24. and 10.19, 20, 22
the Spirit of our Priest, Christ Jesus, whereby he has sprinkled the way for
us into Heaven, and our Hearts from an evil Conscience, that we may have access
thither by his blood.

7. The blood was to be sprinkled directly before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, that is, toward the fore part, or door of the Tabernacle. The
Priest stood without the Camp, where the Heifer was slain, and there sprinkled
toward the Tabernacle seven times, which is a full and complete number. And,
that place being a figure of Heaven, Heb. 9.24
this sprinkling thitherward typed out, how Liberty should be procured for Gods
People, Heb. 10.19, 20
to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus, by the new and living Way,
which he has consecrated for us.

8. The Cedar Wood (the Cedar being one of the greatest and tallest Trees, and
durable Wood, that rotteth not) figures the perpetual efficacy of the Death of
Christ, who, by one Offering, Heb. 10.14
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.

9. Numb. 19
The Hysop was here to be burnt with the Heifer; and after, verse. 18. there was
a sprinkle to be made of it, figuring the virtue and odor of Christ's Death to
purge our sins, Heb. 1.3. and 10.22
and to sprinkle our Hearts from an evil Conscience.

10. Scarlet was to be added to the Cedar and Hysop; this bloody color
signifies sometimes sins: Isai. 1.18 1 John 1.7
and it is the Death and Blood of Christ, that cleanses from all sin.

11. The Priest was to wash his Clothes, which was a sign of Purification from
uncleanness: so it was for the man that burned the Heifer, verse. 8. and for the
clean man, that gathered up her ashes, verse. 9, 10. This showed the
imperfection of the Legal Priesthood, in that the Priests, which prepared the
means of Sanctification for the Church, were themselves polluted in the
preparing of them. The sin also of the Priests and others, that procured the
Death of Christ (though it were the Life of the World) seems to be signified
hereby.

12. As the burning of the Heifer signified the Sufferings of Christ, Heb.
13.11, 12
so the ashes are the monument of his most base and utmost Afflictions: for
ashes were used as the greatest signs of sorrow and misery; 2 Samuel 13.19 Job
30.19 Ezekiel. 28.18
and to be brought to ashes upon the face of the Earth, signifies the extremity
of Gods fiery Judgments. But the memorial of the most ignominious Death of
Christ is to be kept, as a most glorious monument of our Life, Justification,
and Sanctification through Faith in his Name.

13. The ashes of the Heifer must be laid up without the Camp, to signify,
that they that would have part in the Death of Christ, Heb. 13.13
must go forth unto him without the Camp, bearing his reproach.

14. They must be laid up in a clean place, figuring a clean Heart, and a pure
Conscience, in which only the monuments of Christ's death are kept, and
reserved by Faith.

CHAP. XXI.
Christ and the brazen Serpent.
OUr blessed Savior himself does clearly, in his discourse with Nicodemus,
make this a Type of himself, while he says, As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the Wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, John 3.14, 15
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.
And here the Parallel is noted in several Particulars.

1. The brazen Serpent was lifted up upon a Pole, and Christ was lifted up upon
the Cross.

2. The brazen Serpent was lifted up for the preserving of the Israelites from
Death, and for the healing of them that were stung by the fiery Serpents: And
Christ was lifted up on the Cross, to save them from perishing, that were stung
and wounded by Satan the old Serpent.

3. All they were healed, that were stung by the fiery Serpents, that did look
toward the brazen Serpent, though (either in regard of their distance from it,
or the weakness of their eyesight) they could hardly discern it, yea, though
they were never so dangerously wounded; whether they were high or low, whether
they were rich or poor. So all they have Salvation by Christ crucified, that
were wounded by the old Serpent, that do with the eye of Faith look unto
Christ, though they were before never so great sinners, though their Faith be
never so weak, be they rich or poor.

4. Only they of the Israelites, being stung by the fiery Serpents, were
healed, who did look toward the brazen Serpent: if any refused to look toward
it, being wounded, they perished. So, if any, wounded by Satan, refuses to lift
up the Eye of Faith to look toward Christ crucified, they certainly perish. So
says our Savior, Whosoever believes in him, John 3.15
they shall not perish, but have everlasting Life: therefore, whosoever
believes not, shall not have everlasting Life, but shall surely perish: for
those words imply both an extent, reaching it out to all Believers; and a
restraint, limiting it to Believers: And so says the holy Baptist, He that
believes on the Son of God, John 3.36
whosoever he be, has everlasting Life: He that believes not the Son, shall
not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him.

Serpens aeneus, vitae expers, qui, affixus ad summitatem ligni, sanabat
vulneratos (ille utique vitae expers Serpents vivos superabat) (...), typus
erat corporis Domini: corpus enim, quod accepit a Maria, exaltavit in cruce,
lignoque affixit, and ita corpus mortuum vicit Serpentem, qui vivebat and
reptabat in cord. Hom. 11.
Hear Macarius of Egypt: The brazen Serpent, which, being fastened to the top of
a Pole, healed those that were wounded, (for that Serpent, being void of life,
overcame the living Serpent) was a type of the Body of the Lord: for that Body,
which he took of Mary, he lifted up on, and fastened to the Cross; and so that
dead Body overcame that Serpent that lived and crept in the Heart.

Hear Saint Austin of the same. He moves the question, Cur non ex auro aut
argento Serpens ille, sed ex aere factus est? R. 1. Propter Divinitatem; quia
vasa aenea diutius durare solent. 2. Propter vocis claritatem, quia inter omnia
metalla, vasa aenea majorem tinnitum reddere and longius sonare solent.
Doctrina non in una tantum Judaeorum gente innotescere, sed in universum mundum
claro salutiferae praedicationis sono poterat pervenire. Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser.
101.
Why that Serpent was not made of Gold or Silver, but of Brass? And he gives a
double Reason of it: 1. To show the Divinity of Christ: for, of all metals,
Vessels of Brass use to last longest. 2. In regard of the clearness of the
Sound; because, of all metals, Vessels of Brass use to give a greater Sound,
and cause their Sound to be heard furthest off. So the Doctrine of the Gospel
was not known alone in one only Nation of the Jews, but was able also to come
abroad into the whole World by the shrill sound of saving Preaching.

Hear Saint Chrysostom also, who first moves the question to Moses: Tell me,
(...), etc. Dic mihi, O fidelissime Dei minister; Quod vetas, cur facis? qui
sancis, Non facies nec sculptile, nec fusile, fundis and sculpis Serpentem? R.
(...). Illas quidem Leges tuli, ut omnem impietatis materiam radicitus
extirparem, populumque istum ab omni simulachrorum cultu quam longissime
submoverem. (...), etc. Nunc autem Serpentem etiam fundo, ut imaginem
dispensationis crucis praefigurem, and viam, per quam Apostoli olim decurrant,
complanem, and sic ipse Dominus illam figuram de se interpretatur, Joh. 3.14,
15. To. 6. Ser. de aeneo Serpente.
O thou faithful Servant of God, Why do thou that which thou forbiddest? Thou
have made a Law, Thou shall not make any Image to thy self, and do thou make
a Serpent? And then he brings him in answering: I gave indeed those Laws, that
I might pull up by the roots all matter of impiety; and that I might keep that
People (as far as might be) from all worship of Images. But now I also make a
Serpent, that I might hereby typifie Christ's Death on the Cross, and make plain
the Way, in which the Apostles, in time to come, should run; and so our Lord
himself interprets this of himself, Joh. 3.14.

And then he descends to Particulars. (...). Sicut illa figura imaginem quidem
and speciem Serpentis praesentabat: sic and Servator in similitudine carnis
peccati apparuit, cum tamen extra omne peccatum esset. Ibid.

(...), etc. Sicut illic figura aliorum Serpentium, ille, qui nec momordit, nec
percussit, in crucem sublatus est: sic delicta and scelera aliorum hominum
innocens Jesus suo crucis supplicio erat expiaturus. Ibid.


As that figure did represent the shape and likeness of a Serpent: so our
Savior appeared in the similitude of sinful flesh, when yet he was free from
all sin.

He adds yet further: As there the figure of other Serpents, that Serpent,
which neither stung nor wounded any, was fastened to the Pole; so our innocent
Jesus, by his Death upon the Cross, was to expiate the sins and Transgressions
of other men.

He adds there one thing more: (...), etc. Sublatus est in crucem Serpens
aeneus, ut abolerentur morsus Draconum: and crucifixus est Christus, ut
Daemonum operationes abolerentur. Ibid.
The brazen Serpent (says he) was fastened to the Pole, to take away the Wounds
of the fiery Serpents: And Christ was crucified, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil.

Hear him elsewhere enlarging himself about this Parallel: You see (says he)
how the Type and the Truth agree. There the Israelites escaped Death, (...),
etc. Vides, ut figura veritati consentiat. Illic mortem fugerunt Judaei, sed
temporalem; hic sempiternam fideles. Illic ictus Serpentum Serpens suspensus
sanavit; hic incorporei Serpentis plagas Jesus cruci affixus curavit. Illic
corporeis oculis suspicientes corporis salutem; hic incorporeis omnium
peccatorum Remissionem consecuti sunt. Illic aes suspensum erat in Serpentis
effigiem; hic dominicum corpus a Spiritu formatum. Illic Serpens mordebat, and
Serpens sanabat; hic mors perdidit, and mors salvum fecit. Illic Serpens, qui
interimebat, veneno saeviebat; qui liberabat, nullo: ita and hic, mors, quae
perdebat, peccatum habebat, sicut Serpens venenum: Domini autem mors ab omni
immunis erat peccato, ut aeneus Serpens a veneno. 1 Pet. 2.22. In Joan. Hom. 26.
but temporal; here the Faithful escape Eternal Death. There the Serpent,
lifted up on the Pole, healed the Wounds of the fiery Serpents; here Jesus
crucified cured the Wounds given by the incorporeal Serpent. There the
Israelites, looking up with the eyes of their bodies, obtained bodily health;
here they, that look up with spiritual eyes, obtain forgiveness of all their
sins. There Brass was hung up in the shape of a Serpent; here the Body of the
Lord, formed by the Holy Ghost, was fastened to the Cross. There a Serpent did
wound, and a Serpent did heal; here Death destroyed, and Death heals. There the
Serpent, that killed, had poison; the Serpent that healed had none: So it is
here, the Death that destroyed had sin, as the Serpent had poison; but the
Lords Death was free from sin, as the brazen Serpent was from poison.

In Number. 21.8, 9
Ainsworth also takes notice of this brazen Serpent, as a figure of Christ, as
Christ himself has opened it, Joh. 3.14. As Moses, etc. For (says he) as this
had the similitude of a Serpent, but had no venom; so Christ had the
similitude of a sinful man, yet without sin, Hebr. 4.15. And a little after:
The seting up of the Serpent (says he) upon a Pole, was to them a figure of
Christ to be crucified, and preached unto the World for Salvation. And a little
after: As the Serpent, lifted up, was a Type of Christ; so the looking upon it
signified Faith in Christ; as it is written, At that day shall a man look unto
his Maker, Isai. 17.7
and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy one of Israel. And a little after:
By the continuance and recovery of natural life to the Israelites looking up to
the brazen Serpent, was figured Eternal Life to all that believed in Christ.
And a little after: As they that were bitten by these Serpents, if they looked
upon their Sores, and not to the Sign erected by God, they dyed: so they that
are bitten with Sin, if they fix their eyes thereon, though with Repentance,
and look not unto Christ, do despare and dye, Mat. 27.3, 4, 5
as it happened unto Judas: As they, if they sought to Chyrurgeons or
Physicians, or used Salves and Medicines of their own or others, perished; so
whosoever seeks to any but Christ, or endeavors by his own Works or Sufferings
to have Life with God, John 8.24 Galat. 5.4
dies in his sins. As the brazen Serpent was an unlikely thing in humane
Reason, to heal such deadly Wounds; so Christ crucified is to the Jews a
stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24
and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them that are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. He adds: A Serpent
of Brass; In Verse 9
which Metal, besides that it is of a fiery color, and so might resemble the
color of the Serpents, it is also strong and durable; and, in that respect,
might figure out the strength of Christ, who was enabled, by the power of the
Godhead, to endure and overcome all his Tribulations, otherwise then any man
could: whereupon Job says in his Sorrows, Is my strength the strength of
Stones? Job 6.12
or is my flesh of Brass? And a little after he adds: It was the work of Moses
to lift up the brazen Serpent on the Pole, whereupon it is said, John 3.14
As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness. And it signifies, how Moses
his Law was our Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3.24.
that we might be justified by Faith: By his Writings Christ is lifted up, as
an Ensign unto all People, John 5.46
for he wrote of Christ: and by the rigor of his Law, which urges satisfaction
for sin, and curses all Transgressors, Christ was lifted up upon the Cross.
Verse 7
Finally he adds: 'The Serpents were not taken away from the People, as they
desired, but continued still, as a chastisement, to nurture the disobedient
people; only God provides a remedy, to heal the repentant and believing
sinners: Wherefore also the brazen Serpent was not left standing in that place,
but they carried it along with them through the Wilderness to the Land of
Canaan, where it continued many years, even till the days of Hezekiah. 2 Kings
18.4
So neither are our Sins utterly taken from us in this Life, James 3.2 1 John
1.7, 8, 9, 10
but we have Forgiveness of them by the Blood of Christ; neither are our
Temptations and Afflictions wholly removed, though we beseech God therefore, but
we receive Grace from him, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.
which is sufficient for us, and his strength is made perfect in weakness.

Christ and the Temple.
Hear St. Chrysostom laying open the comparison between them. As in the Jewish
Temple (says he) some things were seen of all, (...), etc. Sicut in templo
illo, quaedam ab omnibus, quaeda^ aute^ a solo Pontifice summo conspici
poterant, sic and in oeconomia Christi, divina quidem ejus natura, and vis ejus
and efficacia, minime illa quidem cernitur, sed tamen agendo se palam exerit.
To. 6. sermon. de Christo pastore and ove.

(...). Sicut velum illud templi loco quidem medium, intercedebat, aspectumque
eorum, qui extra existebant, intersepiebant, ne rem divinam, quae ibi fiebat,
conspicere possent: ita corpus Domini velum erat divinae ejus naturae, quod
prohibebat, ne quis mortalibus oculis faciem illam immortalis constanter
intueri posset. Ibid.


some things could only be seen of the high Priest: so in Christ's economy and
dispensation, Christ's divine nature and the power and efficacy thereof, is not
seen of all, but yet by his works he shows them openly.

And a little after he adds. As that middle vail of the Temple did interpose
it self, and kept in the sight of them, that were without, from gazing upon the
divine business, that was done within. So the body of the Lord Christ was a
vail to his divine nature, which hindered least any man should be able with
Mortal eyes, to see that Face of him that is Immortal.

CHAP. XXII.
HItherto of the Types, which in the old Testament did prefigure Christ. Now
follow other resemblances, by which Christ is set forth either in the old or
new Testament, which shall be the subject of another Book.

But before I leave this business of the Types, I shall take notice of three
Corollaries, which here offer themselves to us.

CORAL. I.
Pietatis regula semper eadem.
From that which has been said, we may see that the Rule of Godliness has
been always the same: the same things always propounded to be believed by the
Fathers before Christ's coming, and by us since his incarnation. Its true, that
they were propounded more darkly to them, and more clearly unto us, as we shall
see afterward: but yet they were the same things for substance, whatsoever is
now taught in the writings of the new Testament, concerning the Birth, Offices,
Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical; concerning the Life, Doctrine, Miracles,
Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, etc. of Christ, we have had Types of them all,
either Personal or Real, in the old Testament. To this purpose St. Paul doubts
not to say, Ephesians. 4.5.
There is one faith: nor doubts St. Peter, in that Council at Jerusalem, to
say, We believe to be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 15.11
even as they. We, that is, they that lived after Christ; as they, that is,
they that lived and died before Christ's actual incarnation. Matthew. 1.22, and
2.15, 17, 22. and 4.14. Joh. 19.36, 37
And to this purpose is it that the Evangelists, especially St. Matthew and St.
John, do so frequently use that expression, (...), this or that was done, that
it might be fulfilled, that was spoken, etc. what is more plain from hence,
then that they were the same things, that were first said, that is, foretold by
the Prophets, and afterward affirmed by the Evangelists to be fulfilled in
Christ; and this is plainly attested by St. Austin. Their faith (namely theirs)
that dyed before Christ's incarnation, Eadem fides illorum and nostra: quia hoc
illi crediderunt futurum, quod nos credimus factum. Epist. 157. ad optat.


and ours, (that live since) is the same, because they believed, that that
should be, which we believe to be already effected. And again; Antiqui justi
non nisi per eandem fidem liberabantur, per quam liberamur and nos, fide
scilicet incarnationis Christi, quae illis praenunciabatur, sicut nobis facta
annunciatur. Epist. 89. ad Hilar.


the righteous persons of old (says he) were not saved by any other faith,
then by which we are saved, namely, the faith of the incarnation of Christ,
which was foretold to them, as it is preached to us already effected. And to
the same purpose speaks St. Gregory Nazianzen. (...), etc. Nemo eorum, qui ante
Christi adventu^ numeros omnes virtutis impleverunt, id citra fidem Christi
consecutus est. (...), etc. verbum enim suo postea tempore libere promulgatum
est, (...), etc. puris autem animis etiam ante innotuit. To. 1. orat. 22. In
laudem Macchab.

Vnam eandemque fidem Christianam and populus Judaicus in eadem fide
praecedens, and Gentilis subsequens confitentur. Ser. 4. in ramis palmarum.

Eadem est fides, and idem Testamentum sive foedus quantum ad interiorem
hominem attinet: perinde enim prisci illi uitebantur misericordia Dei per
promissum Christum, atque nos per exhibitum. Declar. de peccat. orig. ad Urban.
Rheg. inter Epist. Oecolamp. and Zuingl. fol. 61. B.


None of them (says he) who before the coming of Christ, rose to the highest
pitch of virtue, attained to it without the faith of Christ, for the word was
afterward in due time publicly preached, but it was also before made known to
pure minds. And whereas, as Christ entering Jerusalem, (Matthew. 21 9.) the
people, that went before, and that followed after, cried Hosanna, St. Bernard
makes this to be the Moral of it, That both the Jewish people, going before,
and the people of the Gentiles following after, do make confession of one and
the same Christian faith. So finally Zuinglius asserts this for truth. There is
the same faith, namely, of the Saints that lived before Christ, and of us that
live since Christ, and the same Testament and Covenant to and with both, so far
as concerns the inward man; for they did no less rest on the mercy of God
through Christ promised, then we do through Christ exhibited. And in this
respect it is, that the two Testaments are compared ordinarily to the two
Cherubims, which looked each to other, and both to the Mercy-seat.

Hence we may see the Antiquity of Christian Religion: It is true that the
Doctrine of Salvation by Christ, which is the sum of the Gospel, and of
Christian Religion, has been frequently charged with novelty, as a new and
upstart Doctrine. But how unjustly, may easily appear from that which has been
said: for if the rule of godliness has always been the same from the beginning,
how can it be agreeable to truth or equity, thus to impute novelty to it? And
(the more to discover the falsehood of this charge) hear we what the Scripture
says of the transcendent Antiquity of it: hear we our Savior equalizing for
Antiquity with all the holy Prophets. Joh. 5.39
Search the Scriptures, says he, for they testify of me. Here, by the
Scriptures, he means the Books of the old Testament, for then there were no
other Books of Scriptures: then Christian Religion must needs be as ancient, as
the Books of the old Testament. Act. 3.24.
Consonant to this is that of St. Peter. All the Prophets from Samuel, and
those that followed after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of
these days. And that in his Sermon to Cornelius, Act. 10.43
To him bear all the Prophets witness, that through his name, whosoever
believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. And what is more properly a
Doctrine of Christian Religion, then that mentioned by St. Peter? then must
Christian Religion needs be as Ancient as the Prophets, yea as Samuel. But our
Savior rises yet higher, while he says to the Jews, Joh. 5.46.
If ye had believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me;
then Christian Religion must needs be as ancient as Moses: of whose Antiquity
Justin Martyr bears witness, saying Moses, (...), Omnibus vestris sive
sapientientibus, sive Poetis, sive Philosophis, sive historicis and
legislatoribus antiquior fuit primus religionis nostrae Doctor, Moses. Cohort.
ad Graecos.
the first teacher of our Religion, was more ancient, then all your Wisemen, or
Poets, or Philosophers, or Historians and Lawgivers: how ancient then is
Christian Religion? And yet our Savior rises higher Abraham, says he, saw my
day a far off, and rejoiced: (Joh. 8.56.) then is our Christian as old as
Abraham. But I may go one step higher, and tell you that its as old as Adam,
for even to him did God utter that sentence, Genesis 3.15
The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: which is a main Doctrine
of the Gospel, and a groundwork of Christian Religion. But St. Paul goes a
step higher (and higher we cannot go) in that he says of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2.7
that its the wisdom of God in a Mystery, (...), which God ordained before the
world. Incomparable antiquity! And hear we St. Austin asserting the Antiquity
of Christian Religion. That very thing which is called Christian Religion,
says he, Res ipsa, quae nunc dicitur Christiana religio, erat and apua
antiquos, nec defuit ab initio humani generis, quousque Christus veniret in
carne: unde vera religio, quae jam erat coepit appellari Christiana. Retract.
l. 1.
was among the Ancients; neither was it wanting in the world from the first
rise of mankind till the coming of Christ, from which time it was first called
Christian. Irenaeus also affirms the same. Our faith, says he, Fides nostra
ante circumcisionem fuit in Abraham, and in reliquis justis, qui placuere Deo.
Adversus haereses. l. 4. c. 42.

(...), etc. Non ex quo tempore in carne apparuit Christus, Evangelium incepit,
sed multo ante in propheticis literis radices egit, tandemque Apostolorum
praedicatione effloruit. Tom. 6. sermon. de uno legislat.


was in Abraham before he was circumcised, and so in all other righteous
persons, that pleased God. And so St. Chrysostom. The Gospel, says he, had
not its beginning then when Christ came first in the flesh, but it had taken
root a great while before in the writings of the Prophets, and then at last it
flourished in the preaching of the Apostles. And elsewhere. The Apostle, says
not, The righteousness of God is given, Non dixit, Justitia data est, sed
manifestata, (...), etc. novitatis crimen amovens: quod enim manifestatum est
ut vetus and occultum manifestatur. Et ob hoc ipsum aettexuit, dum comprobatur
testimonio legis and prophetarum, q. d. (...), etc. Ne quia nunc data est,
tumultuenis, ne turberis, quasi res fit nova and peregrina: eam enim tum lex,
tum Prophetae jam inde ab initio praedixerunt. In Romans hom. 7. sc. in romans 3.21.
but its made manifest, that he might wipe off the crime of novelty: for that
which is made manifest, is made manifest as being ancient, and hidden: And
therefore he adds, Being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, as if he had
said, Be not troubled, because its now given, as if it were some new and
uncouth business, for both the Law and the Prophets even from the beginning,
have foretold it. Ye see then, of how great Antiquity the Gospel is, and
Christian Religion discovered in it, and consequently, how causelessely novelty
is objected to it.

CHAP. XXIII.
COROL. II.
HEnce also we see, that the Rule of Godliness (though it be always one and the
same for substance) is yet (suitable to several times) diversely administered.
Regula pietatis vary administrata.
It was first made known in some select Families to some select Persons, as to
Adam, Seth, etc. Noah, etc, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: and this was while the
Church was in familia, in the narrow bounds of a Family, namely, till the
children of Israel grew into a People; and so it was for the term of 2000,
years and somewhat more. In which time the Rule of Godliness was handed over
from Father to Son by Tradition, and dilivered by word of mouth without
writing. And in this time the Rule of Godliness, the Doctrine of Christ, was
still cleerer and cleerer: for first, its said, Genesis 3.15 Genesis 9.26 In loc.
that he should be the seed of the woman: Noah foretells, that he should be of
Shem: Blessed, says he, be the God of Shem, that is, says Ainsworth, Christ,
who came of Shem according to the flesh, Rom 9.5.
but is also God over all, blessed for ever, Amen. But because Shem had diverse
Sons, therefore God gives a clearer discovery to Abraham, while he tells him,
Genesis 12.3.
that in him all the Families of the Earth should be blessed: and afterward,
that in his seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed: Genesis 22.18
In which he tells him, that he, by whom blessedness should come to the world,
should be his seed, and come from him. But Abraham also had many sons, and
therefore to Isaac God gives a more particular assurance, Genesis 26.4
that in his seed should all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. But Isaac had
two sons, Esau and Jacob; from whether of them should Christ descend? God tells
Jacob, Genesis 28.14
that in his seed shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. But Jacob had
twelve Sons, from which of them should Christ come? God discovers it to Jacob,
and Jacob by the spirit of Prophesy tells us, that he was to come from Judah:
but when should he come? when the Scepter was departed from Judah. Genesis 49.10
And this was the cleerest light that was given to the world, while the Church
was in the bounds of a Family.

But afterward God made known this Rule of Godliness, the Doctrine of
Salvation, to a Select Nation, whom God chose out of all the world, to be their
God and that they should be his people, and now the Church was in populo
Israelitico, among the people of Israel; God having shut out all other Nations
by the Partition Wall of the Ceremonial Law: So that it was then true, Psalm 76.1
In Jury is God known, his name is great in Israel: of them God says, ye shall
be my peculiar people, though all the world be mine. Exodus 19.5
And, you only have I known of all the Families of the Earth. And so sings
that sweet singer of Israel. Psalm 147.19.20.
He has showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto
Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation: and as for his judgments, they
have not known them. And Moses, What Nation is there so great, Deuteronomy. 4.6
that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous as all this Law, which I set
before you this day? And thus it continued to be from that time, till Christ's
Ascension into Heaven: for even while Christ was upon the Earth he gave that
command unto his Disciples, when he sent them abroad, Matthew. 10.5, 6.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter
ye not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And when that
distressed Woman of Canaan came to our blessed Savior in behalf of her
daughter, that was vexed with a devil, Matthew. 15.22
at the first he answers her not a word, and when his Disciples became suitors
for her, he answers them, Verse. 24.
I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And the Woman
renewing her suit, receives this answer; Verse. 26.
Its not meet to take the childrens bread and to cast it to dogs. In this
compass of time, there was a more full discovery of the Rule of Godliness, of
the Doctrine of Christ. If ye well consider what has been said of the
comparison between Christ and the Types that went before of him, ye shall see,
that there is not any Branch of the Doctrine of Christ, which was not set
before them, whether of his Person in both Natures, Divine and Humane, or of
his Offices, Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical; or of his twofold estate of
Humiliation and Exaltation, or of the benefits that accrue unto us by him. But
how are these set out to them? In dark Types and obscure Prophesies: The old
Church had the Sun of Righteousness, but there was a Cloud of dark Types
between him and their eyes: there was a Vail between them and the Holy of
Holies, which kept even the ordinary Priests themselves from entering in to
behold the things that were therein. In this respect the Apostle calls it the
Mystery that has been kept secret since the World began: and elsewhere, Romans
16.25
Col. 1.26
The Mystery that has been kept hid from ages, and from generations.

But now at last God has made known this Rule of Godliness, this Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, to all Nations of the World, the Church being in populo
Catholico dispersed among all Nations. And this has been from the time of
Christ's Ascension to this day, and so shall be to the end of the World:
Therefore our Savior, being presently to ascend into Heaven, enlarged the
Commission of his Apostles, Matthew. 28.19 Mark 16.15
even to teach all Nations, and to preach the Gospel to every Creature. And
therefore, when Saint Peter doubted, whether he should go to Cornelius a
Gentile, he was taught in the Vision, not to call any thing common or unclean,
Acts 10
which God has sanctified: and so we find Churches planted, and the Faith of
Christ preached in all Countries of the Gentiles, as Saint Paul says, Romans
15.19 Col. 1.5, 6
from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum; yea (says he) the Word of the Truth
of the Gospel is in all the World: for God is not alone the God of the Jews,
but also of the Gentiles; Romans 3.29, 30
for it is one God that shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the
Uncircumcision through Faith: for Christ has broken down the middle Wall of
Partition, Ephesians. 2.14, 15
and so has made in himself of twain one new man. So that now it is most true,
that the same blessed Apostle says, That there is no difference between the
Jew and the Greek, Romans 10.12
but the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him. And to this
Church thus made Catholic, the Rule of Godliness, the Doctrine of Christ is
revealed and set out, not by dark Types, as in the Times of the Old Testament,
but in all plainness, so that (as Saint Paul says) we do with open face behold
the Glory of God: 2 Cor. 3.18
Nor is it set down to us in the Future Tense, as that which shall be in Times
to come (as it was in the Old Testament) but in the Present, or Preterperfect
Tense, as that which is already done: so we hear our blessed Savior crying out
on the Cross, John 19.30
Consummatum est, It Is finished: And Saint Paul can tell us, 2 Cor. 1.
That all the Promises of God are in him Yea, and in him Amen.

So that, by that which has been said (to sum up all briefly) we may see a
manifold variety in the administration of this Rule of Godliness.

1. That it was at the first delivered by word of mouth, and handed over by
Tradition from Father to Son, and afterward committed to Writing: God saw an
admirable expediency in both. It was not written at the first, for there was no
such danger of corruption, the Church being then in the compass of a Family,
and the Patriarchs, the Heads of those Families, being men of singular piety.
Nay, it was more expedient for the Church, as it then was, to be so used, as it
was; namely, they had frequent apparitions of the Son of God, they had God often
speaking to them by Angels, and the like; and this was far more convenient for
the Church at that season, then to have a written Word and no more. Think we,
Is it not much more persuasive, to have God himself speaking, then only to
read what is written from him? And who desires not more to see his Friend, and
to hear him speak, then to receive a Letter from him? And as for those godly
Persons, to whom the Son of God did not appear, they had yet their Ancestors,
that could tell them, I have seen the Lord; And, the Lord has spoken to me.
Yea, it was far more commodious for the Church, which was to enjoy the benefit
of the written Word, that the foregoing Church should thus be dealt withal by
Visions, Apparitions, etc. without a written Word, then to have had a written
Word from the beginning without these: for this was a mean to gain more credit
to the Scripture, which was to follow: as it appears by that speech of God to
Moses; Lo, I come unto thee in a thick Cloud, Exodus 19.9
that the People may hear when I speak unto thee, and believe thee for ever. In
which words God gives this, as a Reason, why the Israelites should hear God
speaking to Moses, before Moses should write any thing, namely, that they
should be moved to believe him for ever. And so is the case here. So that all
that space of time, which went before the Scripture, was to succeeding ages as
a preparative, to stir up the minds of men, to receive, read, and hear the
Scriptures (to be afterward delivered to the Church) with more reverence and
undoubted Faith.

But God would have the Word afterward committed to writing, because then it
was needful; for that the Church was then much enlarged into many Families: and
therefore there would have been great uncertainty in matters of Religion, and
much danger of corruption, unless God should still have appeared and spoken to
the Fathers of the several Families, or unless there were one Prophet in common
to teach them all; neither of which were or had been so convenient. So that
(had not this heavenly Doctrine been committed to writing) there would have
been (as has been said) much danger of corruption: yea, we see, that before,
even when the Church was in a narrower compass, there was corruption. Adam had
God revealing his Will to him immediately, Genesis 4. and 6.
and yet Cain his Son brought in corruption: yea, and afterward the Sons of
God corrupted Religion by their unlawful Marriages. God restored the purity of
Doctrine to Noah, and he teaches it to his Posterity; and (they being dispersed
over the face of the Earth) it was committed specially to the Posterity of
Shem, and yet (within the space of two hundred years) Terah, Josh. 24.2 Genesis 20
the Father of Abraham, serves other gods. God again restores the purity of
Doctrine to Abraham, and makes him a Prophet: Isaac succeeds him, and Jacob
him, who, dying, commends the keeping of it to his Posterity; and, it is
probable, it was kept pure, as long as the Sons of Jacob lived: but from the
death of Jacob's Sons, until their departure out of Egypt, there were not many
above an hundred years, and yet the Rule of Godliness was so worn out in that
short space of time, Ezekiel. 20.7, 8
that even those Israelites bred and born in Egypt forsook the Religion of
their Fathers, and took up the Customs of Egypt, and became Egyptian Idolaters.
Much greater danger there would have been of corruption afterward, if the Rule
of Godliness had not then been committed to Writing. And therefore it pleased
God, in his Wisdom and Mercy, that now at length the Rule of Godliness should
be written; both to prevent the Errors, which might otherwise have prevailed
against the Church; and also that the Church might have a Rule certain, and
certainly known, by which to try all Doctrines and Practices whatsoever:
According to that of the Prophet, To the Law, and to the Testimony: Isai. 8.20
If they speak not according to that Word, it is because there is no Light in
them.

Stand we still and wonder at the Goodness and Wisdom of our gracious God, so
providing for his Church, and answering her necessities; so managing his
Dispensations, as may be most suitable to the condition of the Church:
particularly in this, That he contents himself to deliver this Rule of
Godliness by word of mouth, when there was less danger of corruption; but then
committing it to Writing, when there was more danger in this kind: Fail we
not, Psalm 96.8
to give unto God the Glory due to his Name, even the Glory of his
incomprehensible Wisdom and unspeakable Mercy. But be we also careful to answer
Gods expectation herein: And, having this written Word, as a sure Rule by which
to try all Doctrines, Ephesians. 4.14
Let us not be as Children tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine: let
us not believe every spirit, but try the spirits, 1 John 4.1
whether they be of God, or not. If we be deceived, and led into Error, having
in our hands such a Rule of Trial, who shall pity us?

But Saint Chrysostom gives another Reason of this various Administration of
the Rule of Godliness. In the beginning God spoke to men by himself; so he spoke
to Adam, (...), etc. Ab initio per seipsum loquebatur hominibus Deus, secundum
quod audire eis erat possibile: Sic cum Adam, locutus refertur, sic cum Noe,
sic cum Abraham, etc. (...), etc. Vbi autem genus nostrum proclivius in
malitiam declinavit, and a Parente and Conditore suo, quasi longa quadam
peregrinatione discessit, confabulatione cessante, literis and epistolis ad
eos, tanquam long a se positos, utitur, quibus eos veteris cujusdam amicitiae
and familiaritatis admoneat. Tom. 2. in Genes. Ser. 1.
to Noah, to Abraham, etc. But when Mankind declined downwards to Wickedness,
and, as taking a long journey, departed from their Father and Maker, the
Confabulation ending, he uses Letters and Epistles to them, as being far absent
from him, by which he brings to their mind that Friendship and Familiarity,
which sometimes they had with him.

2. Another difference in this Administration of the Rule of Godliness, is, in
regard of the Persons to whom it was discovered: then to one Nation, now to all
Nations. Exo. 10.22, 23
As it was in the Plague of Darkness that was upon Egypt, all Egypt was in the
dark, only the Hebrews in Goshen had Light: so was it in the Times of the Old
Testament; That Light of saving Truth did then shine only among the Jews, all
the World besides was then in Darkness. It is the Confession that David made;
He has showed his Word unto Jacob, Psa. 147.19, 20
his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel: He has not so dealt with any other
Nation; and as for his Judgments, they have not known them. To this also Saint
Paul gives his Attestation; first of the Jews, to that question ( What
advantage has the Jew? Romans 3.1, 2
or, what profit is there of Circumcision?) he returns this Answer; Very much
every way: chiefly, because to them were committed the Oracles of God. But to
the Ephesians, as Gentiles, and consequently to all the Gentiles in them, he
says, At that time (namely, before they had received the Faith of Christ) ye
were without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12
and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no Hope, and without God in
the World. And in this respect he says to the Ephesians, Ye were Darkness, Ephesians.
5.8
namely, while they remained in their Gentilism. Thus it was once: but how is
it now? Hear the Apostle; Tit. 2.11
The Grace of God has appeared to all men: Romans 10.12
for there is now no difference in this respect of Jew and Greek, Gal. 3.28.
but Jew and Greek are all one in Christ Jesus. Or, if there be any difference
between them, it is this, That Blindness is in part happened to Israel, Romans
11.25
but the Gentiles have their eyes opened, Acts 26.18
and are brought from Darkness to Light: and therefore the Apostle says to the
Ephesians, Now are ye light in the Lord: Ephesians. 5.8
and to the Thessalonians, Ye are all the Children of the Light, 1 These. 5.5
and Children of the Day; we are not of the Night, nor of Darkness. So that,
that double sign given to Gideon is here accomplished: The knowledge of the Rule
of Godliness was given to the Jews, and denied to all the rest of the World, as
the dew fell on the fleece, Judge. 6.38
when all the floor was dry; but now it is granted to the Body of the Gentiles,
and denied to the Jews for the generality of them, as the whole floor was
filled with dew, and the fleece is dry. Verse 40
Saint Chrysostom takes notice of this difference. (...), etc. Vetus canticum
unius populi finibus circumscriptum erat; sed novum per omnem terram incedit,
and ab universo decantatur orb. To. 3. Hom. in Psalm. 96.
The old Song (says he) was confined in the bounds of one little Country,
namely, Palestine: but the new Song goes through the whole Earth, and is sung
by the whole World.

Let us Gentiles be sensible of the great Mercy of God showed unto us, in that
we who were far, are now brought nigh by the blood of Christ; We, that were
once strangers and foreigners, Ephesians. 2.13, 1^
are now made fellow Citizens of the Saints, and of the Household of God; We,
that once sat in darkness, Matthew. 4.16
and in the region of the shadow of death, have had the Light shining upon us:
How forlorn was our Condition before? how great is our Preferment now? Harken
we now to that Prophetical Exhortation of David; O praise the Lord, Psalm 117.1
all ye Nations; praise him all ye People. Time was, when the Jews justly
contended with us Gentiles for a sole interest in God; as the Servants of
Abimelech with the Servants of Isaac, about those two Wells, Genesis 26.20, 21
Esek and Situah, saying, The Wells are ours, and the Water is ours: so they
said, God is ours, and his Word is ours; what have ye Gentiles to do, to claim
an interest in either? Verse 22
At last Isaac's Servants found a Well, about which there was no contention,
and they called it Rehoboth, saying, God has made room for us in the Land: and
so may we Gentiles say, Now has God made room for us in the Church: and now we
have as deep an interest in God, and in his Word, as ever the Jews had: Fail we
not therefore to praise God for his Mercy unto us.

3. There is yet another difference in the Administration of this Rule of
Godliness, scil. That it is now more clearly revealed to us, then it was to the
Jews in the Time of the Old Testament. It was then propounded to them in dark
Types, and obscure Prophesies; but to us the Types are vanished, and the
shadows are fled away, so that we may with open face behold the Glory of God. 2
Cor. 3.18.
Saint Paul takes notice of this difference; To this day (says he) remains the
Vail untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament, Verse 14
which Vail is taken away in Christ. And this is noted, in that, The Vail of
the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, Matthew. 27.51
at the Death of Christ: and elsewhere he says; The Mystery was kept secret
since the World began, To. 16.25, 26
but is now made manifest, and made known to all Nations. And so Saint
Chrysostom: The Writings of the Prophets (says he) are like Riddles, (...),
etc. Aenigmatibus similes sunt prophetici libri, multisque difficultatibus
obseptum est vetus Testamentum, nec faciles intellectu sunt libri: facilius
autem and dilucidius est Novum. To. 3. de Prophetiar. obscurit. Homil. 1.

Gratia novi Testamenti in lege velabatur, in Evangelio revelatur. Tom. 8. in
Psalm. 144.

In Vetere Testamento novum latet, in nove vetus patet. To. 4. quaest. in Exodus
q. 73.

Testamenta eadem sunt in vetere and in novo: ibi obumbrata, hic revelata: ibi
praefigurata, hic manifestata, non solum enim sacramenta diversa sunt, sed and
promissa ibi videntur temporalia proponi, quibus spirituale praemium occulte
significatur, hic autem manifestissime proponuntur spiritualia and aeterna.
Tom. 4. super Numeros. q. 33.

Quae in Veteri Testamento minus perspicua sunt, jam nunc illustrata solvuntur,
and, quae umbris adhuc futurarum rerum opacabantur, jam factarum luce
manifestantur. To. 6. Cont. faust. l. 13. c. 10.


and the Old Testament is hemmed in with obscurity, and the Books of the Old
Testament are not easy to be understood; but the New Testament is more easy
and clear. And so Saint Austin: The Grace of the new Testament was veiled in
the Law, and is revealed in the Gospel. And again, In the old Testament the new
lies hid, in the new Testament the old is laid open. And again, The Testaments
are the same, says he, in the old and in the new: but there shadowed, here
revealed; there prefigured, here manifested: for not alone the Sacraments are
diverse, but also there temporal promises seem to be propounded, by which the
spiritual reward is in an hidden way signified, but here Spiritual and Eternal
rewards are most manifestly set forth. And again. 'The things which are less
Perspicuous in the old Testament, are illustrated and cleared now: and the
things that were darkened with the shadows of things to come, are manifested by
the light of the things already done.

To this, which has been said, as a ground of the foregoing difference, I
shall add.

4. Another, and that the last difference in the administration of this rule of
godliness, which is, that in the old Testament all things are spoken in the
future Tense, in the new Testament they are spoken of in the time past, as
things already done: And so the Fathers under the old Testament had the
Promises and the Predictions, but we, that live under the new Testament, have
the performances, and the accomplishments. In the old Testament its said. The
seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. Genesis 3.15.
In the new Testament its said: God has in the fullness of time sent his Son,
made of a woman. Gal. 4.4 Psalm. 132.11. Isa. 11.1
In the old Testament it was said. Of the fruit of thy body will I set on thy
throne: And, there shall come a rod out of the root of Jesse, and a branch
shall come out of his roots. In the new Testament St. Paul could say of David
in his learned Sermon at Antioch in Pisidia, Act. 13.23
Of this man's seed has God according to his promise raised up to Israel a
Savior Jesus In the old Testament it was said. Isa. 7.14
Behold a Virgin shall bear a Son, and ye shall call his name Immanuel. And in
the new Testament we read, Matthew. 1.
that the Virgin Mary did conceive and bring forth a Son. In the old Testament
the Prophet could say of Bethlehem, Out of thee shall he come, that shall feed
my people Israel. In the new Testament we read, Matthew. 2.1.
that Jesus was born in Bethlehem. And so in the rest: St. Austin takes notice
of this difference, What the Law and the Prophets, Quod lex and Prophetae
futurum esse praenunciaverunt, hoc redditum and completum in Evangelio
demonstratur. Tom. 4. de consensu Evangelist. l. 1.

Quod Prophetae praeviderunt and praedixerunt, hoc Apostoli viderunt and
praedicaverunt. Tom. 6 Orat. de 5. haeres. c. 5.

Quod Testamentum vetus de incarnatione Christi coepit Prophetando promittere,
hoc novum perfect repletum narrat. Tom. 2. in Ezekiel. hom. 6.


says he, foretold should be, that is manifested in the Gospel, given and
accomplished. And again, What says he, the Prophets did foresee, that did the
Apostles see and preach. Gregory the Great does also take knowledge of it. What
the old Testament, says he, began in a Prophetical way to promise concerning
the incarnation of Christ, that does the new Testament declare to be perfectly
done.

Oh! the high preferment of the Christian Church above the Jewish Synagogue; of
the Church of the new Testament above the Church of the old: for they had
promises and no more, we have performances: hear the Apostle speaking of this.
Heb. 11.39, 40
These all, meaning them that lived under the old Testament, having rereceived
a good Report by Faith receied not the Promise, namely, not the thing promised.
God having provided some better thing for us, namely, that the accomplishment
of the promise should be reserved for us, as our privilege above them: Oh high
preferment! In this respect is that said by our Savior, Matthew. 11.11.
Among all that are born of women, there has not risen a greater Prophet then
John the Baptist, namely, because they only foretold the things that concerned
Christ, but he had the happiness to see Christ born, and digito monstrare, to
point at him with the finger, Joh. 1.29
and to say, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. But
our Savior adds in the forementioned place, But he that is least in the
Kingdom of God, is greater then he: namely, because John the Baptist saw
Christ's incarnation, but lived not to see him dying and rising again, which is
the privilege of the meanest preacher of the Gospel, Romans 8.34.
for even the meanest may say as St. Paul, Its Christ that died, yea that is
risen again, and is even at the right hand of God, making intercession for us.
So that we enjoy a clearer manifestation of Christ, then any of them that lived
under the old Testament: The mystery, says the Apostle, Romans 16.25.26.
was kept secret since the world began, but is now made manifest. So that the
light, which was then, was but darkness in comparison of the light that shines
now: the Sun then under a cloud, which is now vanished: Oh the singular
goodness of God to us that live now, in comparison of them that lived under
the old Testament.

But what a shame is it, that we who live now, and enjoy so clear a revelation
of Christ, should suffer our selves to be outstript by them, that were in the
dark in comparison of our selves? who knows not, that a Master may justly, and
will certainly expect more and better work at the hands of a servant to whom he
affords the benefit of fire and candle light, then of another, to whom he
affords neither? and if such a servant, enjoying such helps, shall not answer
his masters expectation, who says not, he has cause to be ashamed, and that
his master has cause to be highly offended? And now, see we, is not this our
case? Such is the odds between us, that live now, above them that lived under
the old Testament: God affords us a cleerer light then to them: And yet we are
so far from outstripping them, that for the most part, we suffer our selves to
be out-stripped by them. Hear the Testimony, that our Savior gives to Abraham:
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, Joh. 8.56
and he saw it and rejoiced. Where is such joy now, though yet the day of
Christ is not now afar off to come, but really and actually present? See the
faith and obedience of Abraham. By faith Abraham, Heb. 11.8
when he was called to go out into a place, which he should afterward receive
for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went. And
again, Verse. 17, 18
By faith, Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he, that had the
Promises, offered up his only begotten Son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac
shall thy seed be called: where is the like now to be found? See the bounty and
forwardness of the Israelites toward the Tabernacle to be erected by Moses.
According to Gods order formerly given, Moses speaks to them. Take ye from
among you an offering unto the Lord, Exodus 35.59
whosoever is of a willing mind, let him bring it an offering of the Lord,
Verse. 21.
gold and silver and brass, etc. And they came every one whose heart stirred
them up, etc. and they brought the Lords offering to the work of the
Tabernacle, etc. yea, they brought in such abundance, Exodus 36.56.
that they which wrought all the work of the Sanctuary, came and said to Moses,
The people bring much more then enough for the service of the work, which the
Lord has commanded. And thereupon they were restrained from bringing. But on
the other side, how basely niggardly are men in these days? so far from
abounding in free-will-offerings for the service of God, that, what they are
tied to pay by the command of God, or man, or what they have by their own
promise bound themselves to contribute for the maintenance of the ministry
among them, they are hardly drawn to give; nay many altogether refuse, nay,
many pull away that which was voluntarily given by their Ancestors. See the
devotion of the old Church. Their service was costly and troublesome, and yet
the godly Jews were most diligent and devout in it. But how great is our want
of devotion? Gods service among us is easy and cheap, and yet men take no
delight, nor exercise any devotion in it. What delays are made in men's coming
to the Church? a gross abuse: how irreverent are men in prayer? while they
vouchsafe not to bow the knee, but sit on their seats: being worse then the
Camels, Genesis 24.11
which Abraham's servant taught to kneel, while he was at prayer. Finally, see
the devotion of those Jews, They were without, Luke 1.9, 10
while Zachary was burning incense in the Temple, and were not permitted to
enter, Verse. 11.12
and Zachary was detained longer then ordinary by reason of the vision, which
he saw: and though they wondered at his long stay, Verse. 21.
yet they waited for him, as not willing to depart without his blessing. But
now, though men are admitted into the places of Gods worship, and are coagents
with the ministers of God in the public services, yet are they hardly
persuaded to attend, but turn their backs upon God before the Sermon is ended,
if the Minister shall never so little exceed the limits of any hour. Let us be
ashamed of this, we enjoying so clear a revelation of Christ above the godly
Jews, to be outstripped by them, whose light in comparison of the light
shining upon us, was but as darkness, and let us for the time to come double
our diligence, and labor at least to come up to the most eminent among them.
We can readily say, that that Son is bound to do best, for whom, in his
education, his father has done most.

CHAP. XXIV.
COROL. III.
LAstly, hence we learn, that Christ indeed is the Messiah foretold by the
Prophets. Christus verus Messiah a Prophetis praedictas.
The words Messiah and Christ are the same in signification, though the one be
Hebrew and the other Greek: All the places of Scripture therefore that
acknowledge him to be the Messiah, or the Christ, serve for the proof of this
proposition. And now see we the Scriptures of the new Testament to abound in
attestations of this truth. Andrew says to his brother Peter, Joh. 1.41
We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. Philip
says to Nathaneel, Joh. 1.45
We have found him, of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus
of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. Hear our Savior himself making this
acknowledgment: Joh. 4.25, 26
for, the woman of Samaria having said, I know, that Messiah comes, that is
called Christ, when he comes he will tell us all things; our Savior presently
subjoynes his testimony, I that speak unto thee, am he. So some of the people
gave that testimony of him, Joh. 7.41 Joh. 11, 27
This is the Christ. Such was the confession of Martha, I believe that thou art
the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world. Joh. 6.68
This was the confession of St. Peter: We believe and are sure, that thou art
that Christ, the Son of the living God. So the sum of St. Paul's Doctrine at
Thessalonica was, Act. 17.3
That Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the dead, and that
this Jesus, whom he preached to them, is Christ. And its a strong argument to
prove it, because all the Types of the Messiah are accomplished in him, and all
the Prophesies concerning the Messiah are fulfilled in him: As for that which
concerns the Types, its plain by that which has been said of the parallels
between Christ and the Types, by which he was prefigured in the old Testament,
between which we have seen an exact agreement; so that I may well spare the
labor of speaking any more of them. As for the Prophesies that went before
concerning the Messiah, how they are all accomplished in him, who sees it not?
which of them are not fulfilled in him? Its a Prophesy of the Mssieas, Genesis 3.15
The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head: this is accomplished in
Christ: he is the seed of the woman, for God sent his Son made of a woman, Gal.
4.4
and he broke the head of the old serpent: for therefore (as the children were
partakers of flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14
so) he took part of the same, that by death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the Devil. And he spoiled principalities and powers.
Col. 2.15 Genesis 22.18
That also is a plain Prophesy of the Messiah. In thy seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed. And this is by the Apostle plainly applied to
Christ: where he observes, that its not said, And to thy seeds, as of many,
Gal. 3.16
but as of one, To thy seed, which is Christ. And to whom else can it agree
besides Christ, to be the Author of blessedness to all Nations? therefore
Christ alone is to be acknowledged to be the true Messiah, In a word (to avoid
tediousness) its foretold, that the Messiah should be born of a Virgin Isa.
7.14
in Bethlehem Mic. 5.2
when the Scepter should be taken from Judah Genesis 49.10
that he should suffer death for the sins of the people Isa. 53
even the death of the Cross Joh. 3.14
that his garments should be parted among them, and that they should cast lots
upon his Vesture Psalm. 22.18
that they should give him Gall and Vinegar to drink Psalm. 69.21
that he should suffer with malefactors Isa. 53.12
that his hands and feet should be pierced Psalm. 22.16
that he was betrayed to suffer all this by one of his own Psalm. 41.9
and that for thirty pieces of silver Zach. 11.12
that in suffering all this he should be silent and patient Isa. 53.7
that being to suffer all this, his Disciples should fly away Zach. 13.7
that he should be buried Isa. 53.9
that he should rise again Psalm. 16.10
that he should ascend into heaven Psalm. 68.19
that he should sit on his Fathers right hand Psalm. 110.1
that he should make intercession Isa. 53 12.
and many the like passages are foretold by the Prophets of the Messiah: and,
if we consult with the new Testament, we shall find that not any of these have
failed, but all have been fulfilled in this Jesus, whom they defend to be the
Messiah, nor shall any be able to find any other, of whom all these things are
true. And therefore it follows necessarily, that Jesus of Nazareth is the true
Messiah, and none other. Tertullian also proves Jesus to be the Messiah from
the conversion of the Gentiles: Behold, Aspice omnes Nationes de voragine
erroris humani exinde emergentes ad Deum Creatorem, ad Deum Christi, and, si
audes, nega Prophetatum, Psa. 2.8. Dabo tibi Gentes, etc. Isa. 42.6. In lucem
Gentium. Quae si per Christum eveniunt, non in alium erant prophetata, quam per
quem eveniunt. Contr. Marcion. l. 3.
says he, all Nations rising from the gulf of humane error to God the
Creator, to the God of Christ; and if you dare deny it to be Prophesied, I will
give thee the Heathen for thy Possession, etc. Psalm. 2.8. and Isa. 42.6. I will
give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles: which
things, if they come to pass by Christ, they are not foretold of any other,
then of him, by whom they come to pass. And a little after he proves it by an
Argument taken from Gods severity against the Jews: for having spoken of the
Evils that befell them, he infers: If these things happened to the Jews for
Christ, Si propter Christum haec acciderunt Judaeis, non potuit Creator ulcisci
nisi Christum suum; remuneraturus potius Judaeos, si adversarium Domini sui
peremissent. Certe, si nondum venerit Christus Creatoris, propter quem haec
passuri praedicantur, cum venerit ergo, patientur. Et ubi tunc filia Sion
derelinquenda, quae hodie nulla est? ubi civitates exurendae, quae jam in
tumulis? ubi Gentis dispersio, quae jam extorris? Read statum Judaeis, quem
Christus Creatoris inveniat, and contend alium venisse. Ibid.
the Creator could not avenge any, but his own Christ: he would rather have
rewarded the Jews, if they had slain the Adversary of their Lord. Certainly, if
the Christ of the Creator be not yet come, of whom it is foretold, that they
should suffer such things; therefore, when he shall come, they shall suffer
these things. And where shall there be a Daughter of Sion to be left, which at
this day is not? Where the Cities to be burnt, which are already in their
Graves? Where a Nation to be dispersed, which is already banished out of their
Country? Restore to the Jews a state, which the Creators Christ may find, and
then look for another Messiah. He does also prove it by another Argument taken
from the things that happened at the Death of Christ, related by the
Evangelist, Matthew. 27.45.51. Behold (says he) all the Elements are moved, Ecce
elementa concutiuntur, quia Dominus ipsorum patiebatur. Caeterum adversario
laeso, coelum luminibus floruisset, magis Sol radiis insultasset, magis dies
stetisset, libenter spectans in patibulo pendentem Christum Marcionis. Contr.
Marc. l. 4.
because their Lord suffered. But if it had been his Adversary that had
suffered, Heaven would have flourished with Lights, the Sun would rather have
insulted with his Beams, the Day would rather have stood at a stay, as willing
to behold Marcions Christ hanging on the Cross. Hear also, how Athanasius
argues the case: They (says he) that see the Works of the Messiah done by
Christ, Qui vident opera Messiae per Christum patrata, illum tamen Messiam
promissum fuisse negant, simile quiddam faciunt, acsi quis terram quidem a Sole
illuminatam videat, Solemn tamen terrae illuminatorem non videat. (...), etc.
Quid autem ille, qui apud ipsos in expectatione erat, cum veniret, facere
debuit? Vocare Gentes? at jam vocatae sunt: Facere, ut cessarent Rex,
Prophetae, Visio? at jam facta sunt: Idolorum superstitionem refutare? at jam
refutata sunt: Mortem abolere? at jam abolita est. (...); Quid ergo factum non
est, quod oportuit Christum facere? aut quid restat, quod non sit impletum? To.
1. de Incarn. Verbi.
and yet deny him to be the promised Messiah, do, as if a man should see the
Earth enlightened by the Sun, and yet not see the Sun the Enlightner of the
Earth. And what was he to do, who was expected by them to come as the Messiah,
when he shall come? To call the Gentiles? but they are already called: To cause
that the King, the Prophets, and the Vision should cease? but they are already
made to cease: To cast away the superstition of Idols? but it is already cast
away: To abolish Death? but it is already abolished. What therefore is not done,
which it behoved Christ to do? What remains yet to do, which is not done? Much
more might I add in this kind; but this, which I have said, may very well
suffice to prove it against all gainsayers, That Christ is the Messiah foretold
by the Prophets.

Oh then the fearful blindness of the Jews, yea, wilful blindness! Romans 3.2
They had the Oracles of God committed to them, even the Books of the Old
Testament, in which are contained many Types and many Prophesies of Christ; all
which are in him fulfilled, and yet they see not (namely, because they will not
see) this Christ to be the Messiah foretold by the Prophets: and who is so
blind as he that wilfully shuts his eyes? and so it happens to them, Isai. 6.10
that seeing, they see not, and hearing, they hear not, neither do they
understand, according to that Prophecy: and hence issue all those acts of
unkindness against our blessed Savior: He came to his own, and his own
received him not: John 1 11 Acts 3.15 Matthew. 27 1 Cor. 2.8
they killed the Prince of Life: they preferred Barrabas before him: they
crucified the Lord of Glory: they sent that message after him, We will not have
this man to reign over us: Luke 19
Oh unspeakable senslessness! hear how guilty they are: Saint Ambrose compares
them with the Centurion, preferring him before them: The Centurion (says he)
does acknowledge Christ, a stranger; Centurio agnoscit alienum: Levita non
recognoscit suum. Gentilis veneratur, Judaeus abjurat. To. 4. de interpell. l.
1. cap. 5.
the Priest acknowledges not Christ, being one of his own: A Gentile worships
him, the Jew abjures him. The same Father elsewhere compares them with the
Thief on the Cross, preferring him before them: Latro Christum in suppliciis
agnovit suis, quem isti in beneficiis non agnoverunt. In Psa. 40.
The Thief (says he) acknowledged Christ in his Evils which he suffered; they
acknowledged not Christ in the Benefits which they received from him. Hear
Saint Austin setting out the wilful blindness of the Jews in this respect: The
Jews (says he) hold the Law, they hold the Prophets, they read all, they sing
all; Tenent Judaei Legem, tenent Prophetas, legunt omnia, cantant omnia,
Prophetarum lumen ibi non vident, qui est Jesus Christus. To. 8. in Psa. 59.
but they see not there the Light of the Prophets, which is Jesus Christ. The
same Father elsewhere compares them with the Wisemen, preferring the Wise men
before the Jews. Magorum illuminatio magnum testimonium extitit Judaeorum
caecitatis. In terra eorum isti requirebant eum, quem illi in sua non
agnoscebant. Apud eos isti infantem invenerunt, quem illi apud se negaverunt.
In his terris isti peregrini puerum Christum nondum verba promentem
adoraverunt, ubi cives illi juvenem miracula facientem crucifixere: quasi plus
fuerit videre novam stellam in ejus nativitate fulgentem, quam Solemn ejus in
morte lugentem. To. 10. de Temp. Ser. 30.
The enlightening of the Wisemen (says he) is a clear argument of the
blindness of the Jews. They in the Jews Country sought him, whom these
acknowledged not in their own Country: They found the Infant among them, whom
these denied among themselves. In this Country they, being strangers, worshipped
Christ, being a Child, not yet speaking a word, where these Natives crucified
him, being a young man, and working Miracles: as if it were more, to see a new
Star shining in his Birth, then to see the Sun mourning at his Death. Saint
Chrysostom also compares them with the Ninevites, Illi quidem Barbari; hi autem
Judaei: hi prophetica doctrina instituti fuerant: illi ne fando quidem divina
Oracula audiverant. Ad illos Servus, ad hos Dominus venit: and ille quidem
excidium urbis denunciabat; his autem regnum coelorum evangelizabat: Ninevitis
autem credentibus, Judaei non crediderunt. To. 2. Ser. cont. Ignavia.
whom he prefers before the Jews. Those (says he) were Barbarians, these were
Jews: and these were instructed in the Doctrine of the Prophets: those had not
so much as heard the report of the Divine Oracles: And to them a Servant, to
these the Lord came: and the Servant threatened the downfall of the City; but
the Lord brought to these the joyful Tidings of the Kingdom of Heaven: and yet,
whereas the Ninevites believed, the Jews did not believe. Elsewhere also the
same Father compares the Jews with the Samaritans, in this respect preferring
the Samaritans before them. (...), etc. Samaritani quidem, mulieris testimonio
fide adhibita, nullo signo confirmati, Christo obviam fiunt, rogant, ut apud
ipsos moretur. (...), etc. Judaei autem, tot miraculis admoniti, non modo non
retinent, sed and expellere conantur. Eorum autem gratia in mundum venit, ipsi
tamen expulerunt; hi, ut maneat, petunt. In Joan. Hom. 34.
The Samaritans indeed (says he) giving credit to the testimony of the Woman,
not confirmed by any Miracle, go out to meet Christ, and desire him to abide
with them. But the Jews, warned by so many Miracles, not only keep him not,
but also strive to drive him away. And he came for their sakes into the World,
yet they drive him out; but these beseech him to abide with them. Oh the
fearful blindness and horrid ingratitude of the Jewish Nation! Who shall not
wonder at the grievous Evils that have befaln them? Who shall accuse God of
injustice for this? 1 These. 2.
The Wrath of God (says the Apostle) is come upon them to the utmost: and yet
we have cause to subscribe to that Confession of the Psalmist, Righteous art
thou, O Lord, Psa. 119.137
and just are thy judgments.

But let us pity the Jews: They are our elder Sister; how can we see them
enwrap'd in such misery, and not commiserate their condition? for, though they
themselves are mute, and say nothing, yet their case seems to cry out, as he
did in his distresses, Job 19.21
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my Friends. And, if they so well like
of their present condition, as to think, that they need no pity, we may say to
them, as Saint Bernard writes to one; If ye think that ye need not pity, Si
tibi minime videreris dolendus, ideo magis dolendus. Epist. 151.
ye are the more to be pityed. Though therefore they should in scorn laugh at
our pity, yet let us not fail to pity them: for so, if we have any sense of
humanity, we can pity and weep over a Friend, laboring under Phrenzy or
Madness, though he, as senseless of his distemper, laughs and sings, and shouts,
and skips about. But let not our pity be idle, but operative, showing it self
by serious endeavors for their Conversion to Christ. To that end (having
occasion to deal with them, or to converse among them) let us look to our
Conversation, 1 Pet. 2.12
that we do not in any kind cast a stumbling block before them, but make it
honest, (...), beautiful, that we may thereby draw them to a love and liking of
our Profession; that whereas they speak evil of us, as of evil doers, they may
glorify God, and Christ, in the day of their Visitation. And let us all pray
for their Conversion; pray we, that God would pour upon the House of David,
^^ch. 12.10
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Supplication,
that they may look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only Son, and be in bitterness for him, as one is in
bitterness for his firstborn. It Is an excellent saying that Beza makes to
Christ: Lord Jesus, thou do justly avenge the contempt of thee, Domine Jesu,
tu quidem just ulcisceris tui contemptum, and dignus est ingratus ille
populus, in quem severissime animadvertas; sed, Domine, memineris foederis tui,
and miseros respice propter nomen tuum. In Romans 11.18.
and this unthankful people is worthy to be punished with all severity; but,
Lord, remember thy Covenant, and look upon those miserable people for thy
Namesake.

And, for our own parts, let us be highly thankful to God for the Light that
shines upon us, whereby, by comparing together the Types and Prophesies of the
Messiah in the Old Testament, and the accomplishments of them all in Christ in
the New Testament, we may be able to see, and to be confirmed in this Truth,
That Christ is the true Messiah: How great is this Favor of God unto us?
especially, if we consider the fearful Blindness in which that People is, whom,
in the Old Testament, Amos 3.2
God alone knew of all the Families of the Earth: That they should now be under
a worse, then Egyptian Darkness; and we, who were once Darkness, Ephesians. 5.8
made Light in the Lord: who can sufficiently wonder at this? But let the issue
of this be a care to walk in this Light, to acknowledge Christ to be the
Messiah, and to carry our selves to him, as such.

And here it will be useful, briefly to give an account of this word Messiah.
It Is the same with the word Christ; as the notation of the words show: Messiah
of (...), Christ of (...); both which words signify to anoint. And so Jesus is
called Messiah, or Christ, both passively, because he is anointed, and
actively, because he anoints us. Christ was anointed, that is, he is ordained
to be the King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church; and he was furnished with
Gifts in his Humane Nature, whereby he might be fitted for the execution of his
Offices. Christ is ordained to be the King of his Church: so says God, I have
set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion: Psalm 2.6
And so the Prophet Isaiah calls him the King of Peace. Isai. 9.6
And the Prophet Zachariah can say of him, Zach. 9.9
Behold thy King comes. So Nathaneel, in the New Testament, could confess, Thou
art the Son of God, John 1.49
thou art the King of Israel. He is ordained to be the Prophet of the Church:
So Moses foretells it of him in the Old Testament; Deuteronomy. 18.15
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of
thy Brethren. And this both Saint Peter, and that blessed Protomartyr, Acts
3.22 and 7.37
Saint Steven, applies to Christ. He is ordained to be the Priest of the
Church: So says the Psalmist; Psalm 110.4
The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever, etc. And
so in the New Testament Saint Paul calls him the High Priest of our Profession.
Hebr. 3.1
He is furnished with Gifts, fitting him for the execution of these Offices:
Psalm 45.7
God thy God (says the Psalmist) has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness
above thy fellows: And the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 9.6
The Government shall be upon thy shoulders. The Government is a burden,
therefore he has shoulders given him, upon which to bear it. And the holy
Baptist can tell us, John 3.34
That God has given him the Spirit, not by measure. But this Name, Messiah, or
Christ, is also given him actively, because he makes us Partakers of this
Anointing: Psalm 45.7
Christ is anointed above his fellows, therefore his fellows also in their
measure were anointed. Psalm 133.2
So the precious ointment, poured on the head of Aaron, came down to the skirts
of his garment. 1 John 2.20
And so Saint John tells us, That we have received an Unction from that Holy
One. And this implies, both that He has made us Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6
and (...), 1 Pet. 2.9 Jude 20
a Royal or Kingly Priesthood, yea, and Prophets also, to edify one another in
our most holy Faith: and also, that from him, as the Giver of all Grace, we
have received in our measure, by which we may be fitted in our places, to honor
and serve God, and to be useful one to another: John 1.16
so says the Evangelist, Of his fullness we have received, and Grace for Grace.
And the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.7
To every one of us Grace is given, according to the measure of the Gift of
Christ.

Now therefore let us carry our selves to him, as such.

He is our King, therefore let us be obedient to the Laws of his Kingdom; let
us fly to him for Protection in time of danger: Submit we our selves to his
Punishments, receive we his Ambassadors, and their Embassies; pay the Taxes and
Impositions that he lays upon us; defend we his Honor, though with never so
much hazard and prejudice to our selves: count we it our Honor to serve him,
though in never so low a kind of service.

He is our Prophet, and the Prophet of his Church, therefore let us hear him;
let us yield to his Doctrine the Obedience of Faith and Practice. Matthew. 17.5.
This is my beloved Son, hear him, says God from Heaven at his Transfiguration:
And Moses, Unto him shall ye harken. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Deuteronomy. 18.19
And hear how he brings in God speaking, Whosoever will not harken to the
words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him; What is that?
hear St. Peter expounding it, Every soul, that will not hear that Prophet, Act.
3.23
shall be destroyed from among the people. And whom shall we hear, if not him,
that has the words of eternal life? Joh. 6.68


He is the high Priest of his Church, let us therefore rely upon his
Priesthood, rest upon the Satisfaction which he has made to the Law and
Justice by his death upon the Cross. If the question be, How we hope to have
pardon of sin, to be reconciled to God, and to come to everlasting life? let
our answer be, None but Christ, none but Christ; for to him in Scripture all
these are attributed. In whom, says the Apostle, we have remission of sins by
his blood. He has made us accepted in his beloved: Ephesians. 1.7 Ephesians. 1.6
We have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Eternal life is the gift
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. And in general, Romans 5.1 Romans 6.23
There is no name under heaven, by which we can be saved, but by the name of
Jesus. Act. 4.12
He that for the obtaining of any of these, looks to himself, or any other
besides Christ, is guilty of these two evils, Forsaking the fountain of living
waters, Jer. 2.13
and Digging to him self broken cisterns, cisterns that can hold no water. Rely
we upon his intercession, by him offering up our prayers and praises to God,
not doubting but that for his sake they shall be heard and accepted. Whatsoever
ye ask my father in my name, says our Savior, Joh. 16.34 Ephesians. 5.20
he will give it you. Giving thanks to God and the Father, says St. Paul, in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Yea the Apostle gives yet a further
injunction. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus. Col 3.17 1 Timothy 2.6.
Dote not on Saints and Angels, There is one Mediator, the Man Jesus Christ.
Its true, say the Romanists, Christ is the only Mediator of Redemption, but
the Saints are mediators of intercession. But hear we what St. Paul says, Romans
8.34
Christ is set on his fathers right hand, making intercession for us. And St.
John. We have, not Advocates, 1 John 2.2
as speaking of many, but an Advocate, as speaking of one, Jesus Christ the
righteous. And Calvin does excellently note the absurdity of this answer. As
if, says he, Christ having finished the temporary mediation, should leave the
eternal mediation, Quasi vero Christus, mediatione temporaria perfunctus,
aeternam ad servos suos rejecerit. Institut. l. 3. c. 20. s. 20.
namely of intercession, to his servants. But, say they, we may well hope the
better to speed in our prayers, when they are presented to God in the name of
Saints and Angels, who are more in favor with God then we can hope to be. But
then, what shall we need to look to any other besides Christ? for, as St.
Ambrose says well, Who is dearer to the Father, Quis charior Patri filio? de
quo ipse Pater dixit, Hic est filius meus dilectus, in quo mihi complacitum
est. In Romans 1.
then the Son, of whom the Father himself says, This is my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased? Who will make use of the mediation of any Courtier to the
King, when he has the Kings dearest Son to intercede for him?

He is fully and richest furnished in his humane nature with all gifts, by
which he is fitted for the execution of his threefold Office: what then should
hinder, but that we should fully rest upon his mediation? upon his Kingly
power, to defend us against all enemies? upon him, as a Prophet, to instruct us
in all things needful to be known, believed, and done, to salvation? upon him,
as a Priest, by his death on the Cross, to obtain pardon of sins,
reconciliation and peace with God, and finally everlasting salvation; and by
virtue of his intercession at his Fathers right hand, to speed in our prayers,
and to be accepted in our praises and thanksgivings, and in all acts of
Holiness and Righteousness, and Charity, which in obedience to his command we
endeavor to perform?

But further in this name Messiah or Christ, its implied, (as we have heard)
that he has made us Kings and Priests, and Prophets; let us therefore walk as
such; let us carry our selves as Kings, not giving way to our lusts, but
laboring to subdue them; as Kings strive to subdue Rebels rising against them,
Mortify, says the Apostle, your members on the earth. Col. 3 5 1 Pet. 2.5
Psalm. 141.2 Heb. 12.15 Heb. 13.16 Romans 12.1 Psalm. 51.17
Let us behave our selves, as Priests, offering up spiritual Sacrifices, the
Sacrifice of Prayer, the Sacrifice of Praise, the Sacrifice of Alms, the
Sacrifice of our Bodies, the Sacrifice of a broken and contrite Spirit. What
becomes Christians better, being spiritual Priests, then to offer up these
spiritual Sacrifices daily? finally, let us do the works of Prophets, Col.
3.16 Heb. 10.24 Heb. 3.13 1 Thessalonians 4.18 Jude Ver. 20
teaching and admonishing one another, considering one another to provoke to
love and good works, exhorting one another daily, comforting one another, and
in general, Edifying one another in our most holy faith.

Finally, As has been said, in this name Messiah or Christ, its implied, that
from him grace is conveyed unto every member of the Church, rendering them able
to serve and honor God and to be useful to others: Let us therefore, wanting
grace in any kind or measure, seek to Christ for it, and by an act of faith
draw from his fullness grace for grace. Having grace in any kind or degree, let
us be humble, not arrogating any praise to our selves for it, but giving the
glory of it to Christ, from whom we have received it, and saying with the
Psalmist, Not to us, Lord, not to us, Psalm. 115.1
but to thy name give the glory. And finally, having received from Christ,
whatsoever grace we have, in whatsoever proportion it be; let us employ it to
the advantage of Christ's honor, by using it to the benefit of others: for
there is reason that what we receive from Christ, we should use it to his
honor, from whom we have received it, and answer his expectation in the use of
it: now what his expectation is, 1 Cor. 12.7
the Apostle tells us, saying, That the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every one to profit withal. And thus using the grace, which is given us, we
shall provide for the honor of Christ, while we shall give them occasion to
bless Christ, that has given such gifts unto men. And now shall Christ say to
us at that great day, Matthew. 25.
Well done good and faithful servant.

PARALLELS. LIB. II.
CHAP. I.
HAving in the former Book dispatched the Parallels between Christ and the
Types, by which he was fore-shadowed in the Old Testament. I shall now, in this
Book, present you with the Parallels between him, and those other Resemblances,
by which he is set forth in the Old or in the New Testament: And, in laying
them down, I shall not stand upon any accurate Division, but only observe the
Alphabetical Order.

Christ compared with Bread and Wine.
Thus does our Savior set forth himself, and that in regard of his flesh and
blood: for so he says plainly, I am the Bread of Life: and then he adds, John
6.35, 48
The Bread that I will give, is my flesh, John 6.51
which I will give for the Life of the World. And therefore in the first
Institution of the blessed Eucharist, Our blessed Savior took Bread, Matthew.
26.26
and said of it, This is my Body: Not that it was properly his Body, for there
is a vast difference between them; nor that it was by Transubstantiation
changed into his Body; for even when it comes to the act of eating, it remains
still Bread: but the word [is] is as much as it signifies. And so Tertullian
expounds the words: Christ (says he) taking Bread, Christus acceptum panem, and
distributum Discipulis suis, corpus suum illum fecit, dicendo, Hoc est corpus
meum, i. e. figura corporis mei. Contr. Marc. l. 4.

Haec oblatio figura est corporis and sanguinis Christi. De Sacra. l. 4. c. 5.

Non dubitavit Dominus, dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis
sui. Tom. 6. contr. Adimant. c. 12.


and distributing it to his Disciples, made it his Body, saying, his is my
Body, that is, a figure of my Body. And so Saint Ambrose: This Oblation (says
he) is a figure of the Body and Blood of Christ. And so Saint Austin: The Lord
did not doubt to say, This is my Body, when he gave the sign of his Body. And
this was in regard of the excellent harmony between the Body of Christ and
Bread, between the Blood of Christ and Wine, which ye may see in sundry
Particulars.

I. In some common Things: As,

1. Bread and Wine are necessary things; there is no living without them: we
are taught to pray for Bread, as the staff of our lives: All Bread and no
Drink, or all Drink and no Bread, were either of them unkindly. Hear we what
the Psalmist says; Wine to cheer the heart of man, Psalm 104.15
and Bread to strengthen man's heart. All the Wealth of the World would do a man
small pleasure, if he were debarred of the use of either or both of these. So
the Body and Blood of Christ are of absolute necessity to a Christian: there is
no possibility of living eternally without these. It is most true, that our
Savior says; If any man eats of this Bread, John 6.51
he shall live for ever: and it is no less true of drinking his Blood: but yet
there is an absolute necessity of this Bread and Liquor of Life to Salvation;
so that without them, perishing is unavoydable. John 6.53
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man (says our Savior) and drink his
blood, ye have no Life in you.

2. There is (as an absolute, so) a continual necessity of these creatures of
Bread and Wine; Bread to be eaten, and something to be drunk: And in this
respect our Savior teaches us to make it our daily suit, Give us this day our
daily Bread: Matthew. 6
so there is a daily and continual necessity of Christ, that we should feed
upon his Body, and drink his Blood, and apply unto our selves the Merits of his
Death: For both it is true, There is no man that lives, and sins not; 2 Chro.
6.36 Iam. 3 2
and so the Apostle says, (...). In many things we offend all: and also there
is no day, in which the best man that is sins not: in which respect we have
daily need of Christ, and the Merits of his Death to be applied unto us.

3. Bread is so convenient and excellent food, that under it our blessed
Savior comprehends all things necessary for the body: As indeed, Matthew. 6
if a man have good Bread and good Drink, he may make a good shift to live,
though he has nothing else: So, if by a true and living Faith we lay hold upon
Christ, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, we shall want nothing that is
needful unto Salvation. Whosoever (says our Savior) shall drink of the Water
that I shall give him, Joh. 4.14
shall never thirst. And, I am the Bread of Life: John 6.35
He that comes unto me, shall never hunger; and he that believes in me, shall
never thirst. And no marvel; for, Col. 3.11
as the Apostle says, Christ is all, and in all.

4. There is nothing which, in the composition of it, does more resemble the
Body and Blood of Christ, then do these creatures of Bread and Wine. Consider
it a little: The Corn, which is the matter of Bread, is cut down with the
Sickle, hurried in the Cart, threshed with the Flail, fanned and winnowed in
the Wind, ground to powder in the Mill, kneaded with the Hand and strength of
the Arms, and finally must endure the heat of the Oven; and all this, before it
be Bread. The Clusters also of Grapes must be bruised, and trodden, and pressed,
that the Liquor may run out for us to drink. So our Lord Jesus Christ (before
his Body could be Bread of Life to feed us to Eternal Life, and his Blood Wine
for us to drink) was fain to pass through a World of Miseries. Hear that
Evangelical Prophet: Isai. 53.5
He was wounded, etc. He was bruised, etc. The chastisement of our Peace was
upon him, and by his stripes we are healed: Verse 7
He was oppressed, He was afflicted. Verse 3
He was despised and rejected of men, a man of Sorrows, and acquainted with
Griefs. Hear the Apostle: He made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7, 8
he took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of a man,
and, being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
to Death, even the Death of the Cross. He was incarnate, God becomes Man,
Infinite becomes Finite, 2 Cor. 8.9 Matthew. 4.2 John 19 Luke 22
Rich becomes Poor; He hungered, he thirsted, he was tempted; He suffered an
extreme Agony in the Garden, which made him to sweat drops of blood; He was
buffeted, scorned, scourged, spit upon, Mat. 26, and 27
crowned with Thorns, nailed to the Cross, Hand and Foot, where he trod the
Wine Press of his Fathers Displeasure, Matthew. 27 1 Cor. 2.8 Acts 3 Romans 9.5
Galat. 3.13
which made him to cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The God
of Glory was crucified, the Prince of Life was murdered: God blessed for ever
was made a u^se. Nay, after that he had given up the ghost, his side must be
pierced by the rude Soldiers Spear, John 19
and his precious Heart-blood must be let out, before he could be spiritual
nourishment unto us. See in all these the excellent analogy between bread and
wine, and the body and blood of Christ.

II. But see it further, in the particulars.

1. The Analogy between bread and the body of Christ.

1. The life of the body is sustained by the bread, which we eat, and so the
life of the soul by the body of Christ fed upon by faith: so says our Savior,
The bread of God is he that comes down from Heaven, Joh. 6.33
and gives life unto the world. And afterward in the same Chapter, I am the
living bread, etc. Verse. 51
if any man eats of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I
will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

2. Bread allaies hunger, so the body of Christ eaten by faith alaies the
hunger of the soul: Joh. 6.35.
He that comes to me, says Christ, shall never hunger: which is so to be
understood, as Rollock well explaines it, Not that we shall never hunger at
all, after this heavenly food is once given to us, Non quod non esuriemus
omnino, postquam semel nobis datus fuerit cibus ille caelestis, sed quod non
prius de siderabimus, quam accipiemus. Beati qui esuriunt and sitiunt
justitiam, quoniam ipsi saturabuntur, Matthew. 5.6. In loc.
but that we shall not sooner desire it, then we shall receive it, according to
that of our Savior, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

2. The analogy between wine and the blood of Christ.

1. Wine, as other liquor, has a power to assuage natural thirst, so the blood
of Christ, drank by faith the thirst of the soul.

Psalm. 104.
2. Wine cheeres and comforts a man, that is ready to droop through faintness
and weakness: so the blood of Christ has a cheering and a refreshing power:
how shall it not cheer and refresh the soul, weary and heavy laden with the
sense of sin, to know, that Christ has shed his precious blood, whereby he
has made infinite satisfaction to the justice of God for the sins of the
world? So its a comfort and cheering to a man, that is deeply indebted, for
which he is in danger of prison, to know that his friend and surety has paid
the debt, and satisfied the Creditor. Its true, that St. Paul says, Heb. 9.22.
without blood there is no remission: but its no less true, 1 John 1.7
that St. John says, the blood of Christ, shed upon the cross for us, does
cleanse us from all sin, though of a crimson or scarlet dye, Isa. 1.18.
from the guilt and punishment of them: A Creditor cannot without manifest
injustice, impute a debt to a man, nor cast him into prison for it; his friend
and surety having already discharged it. And now how shall not this blood of
Christ shed for us, (it being that, by which we obtain remission) comfort and
cheer the soul? for so we see that God, giving the Prophet a commission to
comfort his people, Isa. 40.1. Verse. 2.
instructs him also, by what argument to comfort them, Say unto Jerusalem, her
iniquity is pardoned. And so our Savior by the same argument, Son, Matthew. 9.2.
be of good cheer, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

3. Wine takes coldness from the body, and heates and warmes it, so the blood
of Christ drunk by faith, is a notable mean to take away the coldness of love
to God and to our brethren, and to make our love to both more fervent: for,
when we consider the great and ardent love of God to us, giving his Son to dye
and shed his blood for us, and of Christ actually and voluntarily dying and
shedding his blood for our benefit, how can it do other, then increase the heat
of our love to God, and to our brethren for his sake? for its most true that
our Savior says, Joh. 15.13.
Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friend. And now, if we have any spark of ingenuity, how can it be, but that we
shall thus argue? If God, if Christ, has showed such fervent love to me, as to
think nothing, no, not his only begotten Son, too good to give to us and for
us, what can I do less, then return fervent love to God and to Christ? what
shall I think too good for God, and for Christ? what shall I think too much or
too hard to do or to suffer for them? for, as the Apostle argues, We love him,
because he loved us first; 1 John 4.19.
so the serious thought of the fervency of the love of Christ, shedding his
blood for us, cannot but stir us up to fervency of love unto God, and to
Christ. And so for love to our brethren: If God, says the Apostle, has so
loved us, 1 John 4.11.
we ought also to love one another: And, if God, if Christ has born to us such
a fervent love, we ought also to love one another fervently. 1 Pet. 1.22.


4. Wine quickens the body, and makes it active, so the blood of Christ, being
received by faith, quickens us to all good works: Christ's shedding of his blood
for us, is (as has been said) a singular fruit and evidence of Christ's love
unto us: and now we hear, what the Apostle says, The love of Christ constrains
us. 2 Cor. 5.14.
Believing therefore that our dear Savior has, out of his immense love to us,
shed his precious blood for us, how shall it not make us active in all good
works? how shall not our hearts hereby be so enlarged, as to make us run the
way of Gods commandments, readily performing all duties, which God requires of
us?

5. Wine makes men bold and courageous: In praelia trudit in ermes. Horat.
The Poet will tell us, that it will thrust a man into the war, even naked and
without arms: and there are some, who being to perform some Scholastical
exercise, to embolden themselves, have taken a cup or two of wine. Of this use
is the blood of Christ in spiritual respects: namely, being received by faith,
it has a power to make us secure and confident in respect of God, and bold in
confession before men. Nor is there cause to wonder, that it is thus useful:
how shall it not be a just ground of holy security toward God, to know, that
(though by our sins we have incurred Gods just displeasure, and for them, might
justly expect the dreadful effects of it, yet) Christ has by his blood made an
atonement for us, having thereby fully satisfied his infinite Justice
infinitely offended by our sins? and how shall not the sense of Christ's love to
us in shedding his blood for us, make us bold to confess his name before men,
choosing rather to expose our selves to any hardship, to the extremest
torments, that the malice of men or devils can inflict upon us, then through
cowardice and faintheartednesse to betray the cause of Christ? This, this it
was, that led those triumphant Martyrs, under the Heathen or Arrian Emperors,
and under That man of Sin, through all their torments with so much courage and
resolution, that, Stetere torti torquentibus fortiores. Cypr. epist.
as it is in St. Cyprian, In their torments they stood with more courage, then
their tormentors: they thought they could never suffer too much, for his
honor, that had shed his blood for their salvation.

Meditate we of the great love of God unto us, giving us his Son, his flesh and
blood, to be spiritual nourishment to our souls, to nourish us unto
everlasting life: what nourishment is comparable to this? how then shall this
love be paralleled? we had perished for ever, had not God provided such
nourishment for us.

See the great and transcendent love of our dear Savior, in that for our good,
namely, to be such fit spiritual nourishment for our souls, he did voluntarily
submit him to be so humbled, to be incarnate, to be despised, yea, to dye, and
that such a death, so painful, so shameful, so accursed, and that for us
rebels and enemies to make us his friends, (...)! Oh depth! well might St.
Paul call it a love passing knowledge: Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
and an height, length, depth, and breadth: such as Zophar the Naamathite speaks
of (speaking of the knowledge of God) higher then heaven, deeper then hell, Job
11.8.9
longer then the earth, broader then the sea. Well may we be ravished with the
thought of it.

Let us seek for Christ: Cry we out as they, Lord, give us evermore of this
bread, Joh. 6.34
but we shall not need to seek far for him: he is offered unto us in the Word
and Sacraments; let us wait upon God in the use of these ordinances, and bring
hungring and thirsting desires after him, and so we shall be sure to have our
desires satisfied: Christ himself has given us assurance in this respect,
Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed (says he) are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for
they shall be satisfied. We shall not need many words to persuade an hungry
soul to accept of bread when its offered, or a thirsty soul of drink: why
should we need to use so many words to persuade men to accept of Christ? for he
is food of transcendent excellency, not for the body, but for the soul: and
hear what our Savior says, Joh. 6.49, 50
Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness and are dead: but this is the
bread which came down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not dye: yea,
he adds, he that eats of this bread, Verse. 51.
shall live for ever. Oh therefore receive this food, and feed upon it: but
what is this? our Saviors carnal hearers could object, Verse. 52.
how can this man give us his flesh to eat? But St. Austin well clears this
doubt. To eat Christ, Credere est manducare: ut quid paras dentem and ventrem?
creed and manducasti. To. 9. in Joan. Evang. tract. 25.
is to believe in Christ (says he) why do thou prepare thy teeth, and thy
stomach? believe and thou have fed on him.

Finally, hence see how it comes to pass, that we labor under so many
defects, and how we may cure them: whence comes it that even godly men many
times are so uncomfortable and disconsolate? whence is it that our love to God
and our brethren is so cold? whence is it that we are so indisposed to duties
of obedience? whence is it that we are so fearful and faint-hearted, so afraid
to confess Christ before men, especially in times of danger and persecution?
It is not, that God has been wanting to us in these respects: for he has
given us his own Son to shed his blood for us, thereby to obtain for us
remission of sins and reconciliation with God, wherein he has given us a
lively evidence of his unspeakable love to us: and this as I have showed
before, is of sufficient force to fence us against all these defects; The fault
is therefore in our selves, because having the remedy in our hands we make not
use of it, we do not by faith drink of this wine, the blood of Christ, we do
not stir up the act of our faith, to believe, that Christ shed his precious
blood for us, we do not seriously and frequently upon all occasions meditate of
his love to us manifested herein. And now, seeing the cause of these defects, we
may see the course how to cure them; let us not fail to take this course: find
we our selves disconsolate and uncomfortable? let us apprehend the blood of
Christ shed for us, and now we shall see cause to be comforted, in assurance
that Gods justice is infinitely satisfied, and pardon of sins procured for us;
how shall not this enable us to walk comfortably? for the Psalmist can tell us,
Psalm 32.1.
that the man is blessed, whose iniquities are forgiven: and what has power to
comfort us, if not to know, that our estate is blessed? find we our love to God
and to our brethren cold? let us remember the fervency of that love, which God
and Christ bear to us, and now we shall see, that nothing is more agreeable to
sound reason, then that we should answer the fervency of the love of God and of
Christ to us with fervent love to God, and to our brethren for their sake?
find we our selves heavy and indisposed to duties of obedience? let us quicken
our selves to the performace of them by a serious consideration of the great
love, which Christ has showed to us, not thinking it too much to shed his
blood, as a price of our redemption. Finally, do we find our selves fearful
and timorous, afraid to suffer afflictions for the cause of Christ, and in
that respect, afraid to confess Christ before men, when danger attends it?
let us have recourse to this remedy: look we at our blessed Savior suffering
all kinds of indignities, and at last laying down his life, and shedding his
precious blood for us: think we, What are we in comparison of Christ? if the
Lord has done this for his servants, yea for his enemies, why should we think
much to suffer any thing for him?

CHAP. II.
Christ and a branch.
WE see Christ often, in the old Testament, set out by this name, so speaks the
Prophet Jeremiah. Behold the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 23.5. Ier. 33.15.
that I will raise up unto David a righteous Branch. And elsewhere, In those
days will I cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto David. Zechar.
3.8
So the Prophet Zechariah does bring in God promising, Zechar. 6.12
I will bring forth my servant the Branch. And elsewhere, Behold the man whose
name is the Branch. The Septuagint, In Zach. 3.8.
as Pemble observes, renders the word (...) there uses, (...). And so R^bera
would have that place, Luke 1.78.
(where Christ is called the dayspring) to allude to that translation: but the
word (says he) properly signifies (...) or (...). And Christ, says he, is so
called, because out of the dry and with red stock of David's family, he sprang
forth on a sudden, as a branch or science out of a dry tree. Though that family
(says he) was now obscure, and all the glorious branches were cut off, yet a
remainder there was, and sap enough therein, which in due time should sprout
forth into this most glorious, and the last and greatest ornament of That
Kingly Family: or, as Winckl man observes, Germen dicitur, quia ipse ex Maria
Virgin, tanquam surculus, germinavit, and Ecclesia ejus etiam sub cruce
germinat. In Zechar. 3.8.
Because Christ as a Branch, sprung out from the Virgin Mary, and his Church
grows up even under the Cross.

Hence we may learn.

1. That Christ is a true man; for its certain, that homo hominem generat: A
man begets a man: the Father and the Son are both of the same nature. But David
was a man; and from David did Christ issue: and therefore he is often in the
Gospels called the Son of David; Matthew. 1.1.
and by the Prophets the name of David is given to him, Ezekiel. 34.24.
as in that saying, I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince
among them. Act. 13.23.
And so St. Paul says expressly of David: Of this man's seed has God raised up
to Israel a Savior Jesus: therefore he is true man.

2. See here the power of God, in most unlikely times, and by most unlikely and
improbable means, to bring his Purposes and Promises to pass: Behold this
famous Branch, our Lord Jesus Christ, is raised up to David, when that Royal
Family was most obscured, and that by means of a poor Virgin. So, when the
state of the Jewish Nation was brought so low, that they seemed to be, as so
many dry bones in a valley, and that they could say, Our bones are dried, Ezekiel.
37.11
our Hope is lost, and we are cut off for our part; then God undertakes to open
their Graves, Verse 12
and to cause them to come up out of their Graves, and to bring them into the
Land of Israel. Be not then disheartened, when ye see the state of the Church
hopeless, and the Recovery of the Church to her pristine Glory almost
impossible: know, That though with men it may be impossible, Matthew. 19.26
yet with God all things are possible. Nothing hinders this great Work, but our
Sins intervening: Gods Hand is not shortened, that it cannot help, says the
Prophet; Isai. 59.1, 2
but your sins have separated between God and you. It is an excellent passage
of Saint Chrysostom to this purpose: As the Refiner of Gold (says he) casting
Gold into the Fine, (...), etc. Sicue in conflatoriam fornacem aurifex aurum
injiciens, tamdiu sinit illud ab igne examinari, quousque purius viderit: Ita
and Deus tamdiu hominum animas malis probari permittit, quousque purae fiant,
and splendidae. To. 5. Ser. in Paralytic. etc.
continues the Fire so long, till he sees it come forth more pure. So God does
so long suffer the Souls of men to lie under Evils, till they be pure and
bright. If Evils then continue, thank we our selves, that we have not profited
by the Cross, under which we have layn: Let us but repent of our sins, and we
shall find God propitious to us, easing us of our pressures, Isai. 10.12
and rendering to our Enemies the fruit of their stout Hearts.

Christ and Christians.
The Scripture takes knowledge of an Agreement between them in many Particulars,
but of a Distance between them in many more.

1. Christ is the Son of God, and we are the Sons of God: John 20.17
I go (says our Savior) to my Father, and your Father. Matthew. 11.25
Christ calls God his Father: Father (says he) I thank thee, that thou have
hid, etc. and he teaches us to say, Matthew: 6.9
Our Father, which art in Heaven. Nathaneel can confess, John 1.49 Mat. 3.17.
and 15.5
Thou art the Son of God: yea, the Father from Heaven gives this Testimony of
him, This is my beloved Son: and of Christians the Evangelist says, To as many
as received him, John 1.12
he gave power to be called the Sons of God, even to as many as believe in his
Name. And Saint Paul, Ye are all the Children of God through Faith in Christ
Jesus. Gal. 3.26


2. Hebr. 1.2 Romans 8.17
Christ is said to be the Heir of all things: and the Apostle affirms us to be
Coheirs with Christ: and therefore the same Apostle can give us this assurance,
All things are yours. 1 Cor. 3 21


3. Christ was, and is at once, King, Priest, and Prophet of the Church; and
all godly Christians are Kings to rule over their Passions, and Priests to
offer up to God Spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9 Rev. 1.6
and Prophets to instruct and edify one another.

Acts 10.38 Psalm 45.7 Luke 2.9, 13 Matthew. 4.11 Luke 22.43 Matthew. 28.2 Acts
1.10 Matthew. 25.31 Heb. 1.14 Psalm 34.7 Luke 16.22
4. Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost: and we are also Partakers of the
same Unction.

5. Christ had the Angels ministering unto him, at his Birth, at his Combat
with the Devil, in his Agony in the Garden, at his Resurrection, at his
Ascension, and so shall have at his Return to Judgment. And we have the Angels
ministering unto us, in our Life, and at our Death.

6. It Is said of Christ, Heb. 2.10 Luke 24.26
The Prince of our Salvation was made perfect through Suffering; and that he
ought to suffer, and so to enter into Glory: And so of us it is said, That
through many Afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Acts 14.22


7. As Christ dying, rose again; so we dying, shall rise again: The Apostle
takes notice of this; 1 These. 4.14
If we believe (says he) that Jesus dying rose again, even so them also that
sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him.

8. Rev. 3.21
As Christ overcoming sat with his Father in his Throne; so we overcoming shall
sit with Christ in his Throne.

Thus there is an Agreement between Christ and Christians: but there is also a
vast difference between him and them.

1. He is the Son of God, and we are the Children of God: but here is a vast
disproportion between him and us: He, as God, is the Son of God by Eternal
Generation; and so God himself says, Thou art my Son, Psalm 2.7
this day have I begotten thee. And Christ-Man is the Son of God by virtue of
the Hypostatical Union: for God and Man making one Person in Christ, if
Christ-God be the Son of God, Christ-Man must be so no less by virtue of the
communication of properties; (...). Dial. 3.
of which Theodoret says, The things that are proper to each Nature severally,
are made common to the whole Person, by reason of the Unity of Person. But
Christ-Man is also the Son of God, by reason of his extraordinary Conception of
the Holy Ghost: so the Angel makes the inference in his speech to the blessed
Virgin: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High
shall overshadow thee; therefore that holy thing that shall be born of thee,
Luke 1.35
shall be called the Son of God. Thus was and is Christ the Son of God. But we
are the Sons of God, by the Grace of Adoption, and that through Christ: as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.5
Being predestined to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ: And by the
Grace of Regeneration; as the Evangelist, having said, That Believers are the
Children of God, John 1.12, 13
adds, Being born, not of blood, etc. but of God: So that Christ was the Son of
God from all Eternity; we become the Sons of God in Time: He was never other
then the Son of God; but time was, Joh. 8.44
when we were of our father the Devil, as our Savior says of the wicked Jews,
Ephesians. 2.3
and Children of Wrath, says Saint Paul: He was the Son of God at the first
hand, John 20.17
and then we through him; as our Savior intimates, in that he says, My Father,
and your Father; first mine, and then yours.

2. The like we may say of the next Particular: Christ is the Heir, and we are
Coheirs with him: but he first, and we through him, and by his means.

3. Christ is King, Priest, and Prophet: so are we, but in a great difference:
He is (...), that King, (...), Rev. 19.16 and 1.5
that Prophet, (...), that Priest: That King, even the King of Kings, and the
Lord of Lords, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: That Prophet (the
Honor, John 1.21
which Saint John Baptist would not take to himself) even the Lord of the
Prophets: Heb. 3.1
That Priest, The High Priest of our Profession, whose excellency in this
respect has been already showed in the Parallel between Christ and the High
Priest of the Old Testament: Lib. I
We in all respects are so far below him, that we are not worthy to be named
the same day with him: and for this, That we are Kings, Priests, and Prophets,
we are beholden to him, Rev. 1.6
who has made us Kings and Priests to God his Father.

4. Christ was anointed, and we are anointed: but here is a vast difference: He
at the first hand, we through him: 1 John 2.20
We have an Unction (says the Apostle) from the holy one; as the holy oil was
powered upon the head of Aaron, Psalm. 133.2
and from the head it came down to his beard, and to the skirts of his
garments. God, Joh. 3.34 Ephesians. 4.7
says the holy Baptist, has not given him the Spirit by measure: but to us,
says St. Paul, grace is given according to the measure of the gift of Christ,
that is, in such measure and proportion as it pleased Christ to bestow it upon
us. Hear St. Ambrose descanting on that Prophesy, Joel, 2 28. to this purpose.
He said not, I will power out my Spirit, but of my Spirit: for we cannot receive
the fullness of the Holy Ghost, Non spiritum dixit, sed de spiritu, nos enim
accipere non possumus plenitudinem S. Spiritus, sed tantum accipimus, quantum
de suo arbiter nostri pro sua voluntate diviserit. Supra nos ergo effusum est
de Spiritu: at supra Christum, cum in forma esset hominis, manebat Spiritus.
To. 2. de S. Sancto ad Gratiam. l. 1. c. 7.

(...), etc. habuit caro S. Sanctum, non partem donorum, sicut nos, cum uni
sapientia, alteri scientia datur, sed omnia habuit dona. In nobis dividuntur
dona, in Christo autem carne omnia dona fuere. Tom. 6. sermon. de S. Sancto.

(...). Ille plenitudinem accepit, nos de plenitudine. Ibid.

(...), etc. Non habet ipse donum participabile, sed est ipse sons and radix
donorum omnium, non in seipso continens bonorum divitias sed in universos
diffundens, quibus diffusis, plenus permanet, nec ex eo quod aliis suppeditat,
minuitur.

(...), etc. Quod autem ego fero, participabile est: ab alio enim id accepi:
and exigua pars totius est, and quasi gutta parva ad immensam abyssum, and
infinitum pelagus comparata. In Joan. Evang. hom. 13.


but we receive so much, as God divides to us. There is therefore powered on us
of the Spirit, but upon Christ, being in the form of man, the Holy Ghost abode.
And so St. Chrisostom. The Humane Nature of Christ had the Holy Ghost, not a
part of his gifts, as we have, when to one wisdom is given, and to another
knowledge. In us therefore the gifts of the Holy Ghost are divided: but all
were in Christ; all perfections meeting together in him, as lines from the
Circumference in the Center. And afterward in the same place, alluding to,
Joh. 1.16. He, says the Father, that is Christ, received the fullness, but we
of his fullness. Hear him again elsewhere noting this difference between Christ
and Christians. He, that is, Christ, has not the gift by participation, but He
is the Fountain and Root of all gifts, not keeping in himself the riches of
good things, but pouring them out upon all: which being powered out, he still
remains full, and is not diminished by that which he gives to all others. Thus
it is with Christ. But how is it with others? This he shows, speaking in his
own person. But, what I have is by participation, for I have Received it of
another (says he) and its a small part of the whole, and as it were, a small
drop in comparison of an unmeasurable depth, and a boundless Sea. And what he
speaks of himself, is true of all Christians; and to this Confession the best
of us may justly subscribe.

5. The Angels ministered unto Christ, and they minister unto us: but here is
also a vast difference; for they ministered to him, as to their Lord, even to
the Lord of Angels: To us, as to their fellow servants; for so the Angel
confessed to Saint John: Rev. 19.10 and 22.9
I am thy fellow servants, and of thy Brethren, that have the Testimony of
Jesus, and of them that keep the sayings of this Book: And that by the
appointment of our common Lord, and as a fruit of that Union that intercedes
between Christ and us, as between the Head and the Members.

6. Christ must suffer before he comes to Glory, and so must we: but here also
is a vast difference; as Saint Austin observes: We are not therefore equal with
Christ, Non propterea Christo pares sumus, si pro illo usque ad sanguinem
Martyrium duxerimus: potestatem ille habuit ponendi animam, and iterum sumendi
eam: nos nec, quantum volumus, vivimus, and morimur, et si nolimus. Ille
moriens in se occidit mortem; nos ejus morte liberamur a morte. Postremo, et si
frates pro fratribus moriantur, tamen in fraternorum peccatorum remissionem
nullius sanguis Martyris funditur, quod fecit ille pro nobis. In Joan. Tract.
84.
if we shed our blood for him: He had power to lay down his Life, and to take
it up again: We neither live as long as we would, and we die, though we would
not. He by his Death destroyed Death: We, by his Death, are freed from Death.
Lastly, though Brethren dye for Brethren, yet never any Martyrs blood was shed
for the Remission of their Brethrens sins, as Christ did for us. Saint Paul
disavows it for his own particular; Was Paul (says he) crucified for you? (1
Cor. 1.13.) q. d. At no hand, I abhor the thought of it. Indeed sometimes he
mentions his sufferings for the Body of Christ, Col. 1 24
that is, the Church: but he meant not, as if he suffered for the expiation of
the sins of the Church; but for the edification of the Church, as he says: The
things that have happened to me, Phil. 1.12, 14
have fallen out to the furtherance of the Gospel: Many of the Brethren, waxing
confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the Word without fear:
according to that known saying, Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae.
The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church: and that of Tertullian;
This Sect (says he, Non deficiet haec Secta, quam tunc magis aedificari scias,
cum caedi videtur. De Persec. ad Scapul.

(...). Non vides, quo plures sunt, qui suppliciis afficiunt, tanto majorem
numerum esse aliorum, sc. Christianorum. Ep. ad Diognet.


speaking of Christians) shall not fail, which know, that it is then more built
up, when it seems to be cut down. And that finally of Justin Martyr: See thou
not, that, by how much the number is increased of them that inflict torments,
by so much the more the number of Christians is increased.

7. Christ rose, and we shall rise, but with a great dissimilitude: Christ rose
the third day, and saw no corruption; but (according to the profession of
Martha concerning her brother Lazarus) we shall rise again at the last day:
Joh. 11.24
and in the mean time we see corruption: This difference the Apostle notes
between Christ and David: Act. 13.36, 37
David, having served his generation, says he, after the will of God, fell
asleep and was laid to his Fathers, and saw corruption: but he, whom God raised
again, saw no corruption. St. Austin observes this difference between Christ
and all Christians in general. His flesh, namely Christ's, Illius caro non vidit
corruptionem, nostra post corruptionem in fix seculi induet incorruptionem. In
Joan. Evang. tract. 84.
saw no corruption, our flesh, after it has been corrupted, shall put on
incorruption. And again, Christ rose by his own power: for so he says, Destroy
this Temple, Joh. 2.19
and in three days I will raise it up: And this he spoke, Ver. 21.
says the Evangelist, of the Temple of his body. But our bodies shall be
raised by the power of Christ, and by virtue of the union that is between
Christ and us: And therefore the Apostle ascribes this great work to Christ,
who, says the Apostle, shall change our vile bodies, Phil. 3.21
and make them like unto his glory us body. Gregory the great puts both these
together: Christ, says he, was not raised, as others are: Non, ut reliqui,
suscitatus est Christus: nostra enim resurrectio in finem seculi dilata est,
illius autem die tertio celebratur. Nos per illum resurgimus, ipse autem per
se. In Job l. 24. c. 2.
for our resurrection is deferred until the end of the world: Christ rose on
the third day: we shall be raised by Christ, he rose by his own power.

8. As for the last resemblance between Christ and us: Its true, Christ
overcoming, sat with his father on his throne: and we, overcoming, shall sit
with Christ on his Throne: but yet here is a great distance: The victory of
Christ over his and our enemies is of himself, by his own power: but our
victory is of God through Christ, We are more then conquerors, Romans 8.37
says the Apostle, through him, that has loved us. And, Blessed be God, 1
Cor. 15.57
that has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: And the
exaltation of Christ (it agreeing to Christ in regard of his humane nature) is
of Christ himself together with the Father and the Holy Ghost according to that
known saying. The works of the Trinity, toward the creature, are undivided;
Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, unitas essentiae cooperatio Elohim.
As there is one essence common to them all, so there is a co-working of the
three Persons. But our Exaltation is from Christ, as the Author of it. To him
that overcomes, will I give to sit with me, etc. And, Rev. 3.21. Rev. 2.10
Be thou faithful to the death and I will give thee the crown of life.

So that upon all these Particulars it is plain, That it is not without cause
that the Church says of her Husband, My welbeloved is white and ruddy, Cant.
5.10
the chiefest among ten thousand: upon which place Gregory the Great glosses
well. Candidus and rubicundus quia nullum omnino peccatum faciens, justitiae
pulchritudinem ex integro tenuit; and tamen, tanquam peccator esset, ad mortis
passionem accessit. Ex millibus electus est, quia ex totius generis humani
massa nullus sine peccato reperitur: ipse autem non solum sine peccato fuit,
sed and peccatores sua justitia and sanguine redemit. To. 2. in Cant. 5.10.
White and ruddy, because, having committed no sin, he kept the beauty of
Righteousness entire; and yet, as if he had been a sinner, he came to the
suffering of Death. The chiefest among ten thousand, because, of all the whole
mass of Mankind, there is none found without sin; but he, not only was
without sin, but also redeemed sinners by his Righteousness and Blood. And it is
an excellent passage that the same Father has: Wisdom [that is, Lumen
Sapientia: Joh. 8.12. Ego sum lux mundi. Lumen and servi sapientiae appellari
solent: Ephesians. 5.8. Est is lux in Domino: Sed ille lumen illuminans: Joan. 1.9.
Erat lux vera, quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum: isti
autem lumen illuminatum. In Job, lib. 19. cap. 33. and 35.

Nos etsi sancti efficimur, non tamen sancti nascimur, quia ipsa naturae
corruptibilis condition constringimur, and cum Propheta dicamus, Psalm. 51.5.
Ecce in iniquitatibus conceptus sum, and in peccato concepit me matter mea.
Christus autem solus veraciter sanctus natus est, qui, ut ipsam naturae
corruptibilis conditionem vinceret, ex commixtione carnalis copulae conceptus
non est.


Christ] is Light: Joh. 8.12. I am the Light of the World: And the Servants of
Wisdom use to be called Light: Ephesians. 5.8. Now ye are Light in the Lord: but he
is the enlightening Light: Joh. 1.9. That was the true Light that lightens
every man that comes into the World: but they are enlightened Light. And
afterward: 'Though (says he) we are made holy, yet we are not born holy; for
we are all bound together in the condition of corrupted Nature, and may say
with the Prophet, Psa. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
my mother conceive me. But Christ alone was born truly holy; who, that he might
overcome the condition of corrupt Nature, was not conceived by carnal
copulation, but by the Holy Ghost.

I shall add but one thing more, a passage out of Saint Chrysostom, his gloss
upon those words, Hebr. 2. verse. 11. He that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, Qui sanctificat, i. e. Christus: and qui sanctificantur, i. e. nos.
Vide, quantum intersit: Ille sanctificat, nos sanctificamur. Ex uno, scil. Deo,
ex quo omnia: and ille quidem ex Patre, tanquam verus and proprius filius: nos
autem, tanquam creatura, i. e. ex nihilo. In Hebr. Hom. 4.
are both of one. He that sanctifies, that is, Christ: and they that are
sanctified, that is, We. See the difference: Christ sanctifies, we are
sanctified. Of one, namely, of God, of whom are all things: And he, indeed, of
the Father, as a true and proper Son: We as a Creature, that is, out of nothing.

Now from this Parallel between Christ and Christians, we may learn two things.

I. The excellent condition of all godly Christians, that are Christians in
good earnest, and not only in name and show. I justly add this last clause;
for, Praeter nomen nihil.
many are Christians in name, that have nothing besides the name: and against
such Justin Martyr has a sad Passage: If any (says he) are found not to live
so as Christ has taught, (...). Defens. pro Christian. ad Antonin. Pium.
it is a certain argument, that they are not Christians, though with the Tongue
they profess the Doctrine of Christ: for Christ says, That not all that profess
his Name shall be saved, but they that by their Works make good their
profession. But, whosoever are Christians indeed and show it by a Christian
Conversation, let them know, that their condition is excellent: for here is
both Honor and Comfort.

1. Here is Honor, for they are the Children of God: and who knows not this to
be an unspeakable Honor and Preferment? David could say, 1 Samuel 18
Seems it to you a small matter, that I should be Son-in-law to a King? And is
it not a much greater preferment, That we, who were by Nature Children to the
Prince of Darkness, and Children of Wrath, should be made the Children of God,
who is the sole supreme King of the whole Universe, and so Brethren to Christ,
who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and joyntheirs with him, whom God
has made Heir of all things? Is it not an Honor, That the Angels, the glorious
Attendants of the Throne of God, should become Ministers to us? our Tutors and
Guardians? as it was an Honor done to Mordecai, That Haman, Esth. 6.10
the chief favorite of that great King Ahashu rosh, should be ordered to array
him, and to carry him on horseback through the streets of the City? Is it not
an high honor if a great King shall admit an ordinary subject to sit with him
on the throne? what an honor is it then, to sit with Christ on his Throne?
But, as we have heard, This Honor have all the Saints.

2. And what Comfort can be wanting here? If God be our Father, how can we want
any thing that is good for us? How can we want Protection against all Enemies?
How shall any wrong be done to us, which shall not be avenged to the full? And
why should we be afraid of Death? Our bodies shall in death be turned to ashes,
but they shall be raised again, and be clothed with incorruption? How shall it
be grievous to us, that we cannot come to Glory, but through many Afflictions?
It Is no otherwise with us in this respect, then it was with the Prince of our
Salvation, who was in like manner made perfect through suffering: and though
the Way be unpleasing, yet the End is highly desirable; as Christ did, so we
shall be sure, after we have suffered, to come to Rest and Glory.

But here is also Duty expected at our hands, even to be careful to walk
honorably, according to the Honor that God has put upon us. Sordid carriage
ill becomes honorable persons. The contrary is expected at our hands. Hear
Saint Paul: I beseech you to walk worthy of the Calling wherewith ye are
called. Ephesians. 4.1
And again: Ye were once Darkness, now are ye Light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8
walk as Children of Light. God so justly expecting this at our hands, let us
not frustrate his expectation.

II. See we here the superexcellency of our blessed Savior, even according to
his Humane Nature: so that the best of us all are nothing in comparison.
Consider the Particulars named before. And in this respect let us be enamored
on him, let us honor him: and, whatsoever we are, or have, that is good, let us
walk in a posture of Humility: Empty we our selves of all praise, and give to
Christ the praise of all the Excellencies that are in him; yea, of all that are
in us: let us lower our Topsails, and vail the Bonnet to Christ: confess we,
as that holy Baptist, Luke 3.16
That we are not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoes.

CHAP. III.
Christ, and a Door, or a Way.
OUr blessed Savior makes use of both of these Resemblances, whereby to set
forth himself to us: I am the Door of the Sheep, says he; John 10.7, 9 John 14.6
and a little after, I am the Door: and again, I am the Way. And the proportion
holds excellently: for as the Door gives entrance into the House, and the Way
brings to the place, to which we desire to come; so is it with Christ. As for
the former, Ferus observes, In loc.
That Christ does twice in the same place call himself the Door, and yet he
denies it to be a Tautology, or vain repetition; and therefore he gives a
threefold guess at the Reason of the Repetition.

He twice calls himself the Door, Bis se nominat ostium, ut ostenderet, se unum
eundemque esse, qui and antiquos pastores, Moysem and Prophet as dedit in ovile
Judaeorum, and nunc electione sua novos emittat Apostolos in ovile Gentium:
vel, quia Christus ostium est, quo bonus Pastor ad oves Ecclesiae intrat; est
and ostium, quo quisque fidelis ad Patrem intrat: vel ideo, quia and ad
praesentem gratiam, and ad futuram gloriam per eum solum pervenitur.
to show, That he is one and the same, who both gave the ancient Shepherds,
Moses and the Prophets, to the Sheepfold of the Jews; and the new Apostles, by
his election, to the Sheepfold of the Gentiles: Or, because Christ is the Door,
by which the good Shepherd enters to the Sheep of the Church, and by which
every faithful Christian enters to the Father: Or therefore, because by Christ
alone we come to Grace in this Life, and to the future Glory. And afterward,
coming to the second place, in which Christ calls himself the Door, he gives
this Reason, why Christ so styles himself, namely, Because Christ is the Door
to our Father, Quia ostium est ad Patrem, and ad bona paterna, quae sunt
justitia, salus, and vita aeterna.
and to our Fathers goods, which are Righteousness, Salvation, and Eternal
Life. And then he confirms this by Testimonies of Scripture. None knows the
Father but by the Son: Matthew. 11.27
for our Savior says, None knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the
Son will reveal him. And none can attain to Righteousness, Salvation, and
Eternal Life, but by Christ, who is the Righteousness of God, Salvation, and
Life everlasting: John 14.6 Acts 4.12
for Christ says, I am the Way. And Saint Peter says, There is none other Name
under Heaven, by which we can be saved, but by the Name of Jesus. And Saint
Paul says, Ephesians. 2.18
By him we have an access to the Father. Rollock, opening the first place, in
which Christ calls himself the Door of the Sheep, John. 10.7
gives this account of it: Christ indeed is here called a Door, Christus quidem
praecipue hic dicitur ostium, respectu pastorum qui ingrediuntur ad oves: verum
ostium est quoque, per quod ipsae oves ingrediuntur in ovile.
chiefly, in respect of the Shepherds, that go in unto the Sheep: but he is
also the Door, by which the Sheep themselves enter into the Sheepfold. And this
he confirms by those words of the Apostle: By whom (namely, by which Christ,
mentioned in the former Verse) we have access by Faith into this Grace wherein
we stand: and by those words, In whom (that is, Romans 5.2.
Ephesians. 3.12
by which Christ) we have access with confidence by the Faith of him. Then he
proceeds, to show, in respect of whom Christ is thus a Door; namely, That
Christ is only the Door, by which the Sheep enter into that Fold of those
Sheep which are known only to their Lord, namely, Tantum est ostium, per quod
oves ingrediuntur in illam caulam earum ovium, quae Domino suo tantum sunt
notae, h. e. in Ecclesiam invisibilem, and ad beneficia illa Christi,
remissionem peccatorum, and vitam aeternam, participanda. Fieri quidem potest,
ut oves quaedam larvatae, scil. hypocritae, ingrediantur in Ecclesiam istam
visibilem, suo tempore rursus ex ea ejiciendae: sed oves vera nullae
ingrediuntur in Ecclesiam invisibilem, nisi per ostium, Christum, h. e. per
Christum vera fide apprehensum.
into the invisible Church, and to partake of those benefits of Christ,
Forgiveness of sins, and Eternal Life. It may indeed come to pass, that some
counterfeit Sheep, namely, Hypocrites, may enter into the visible Church, to be
again in their time cast out of it: but no true Sheep enter into the invisible
Church, but by Christ, this Door; namely, by Christ apprehended by Faith. He
further makes enquiry, According to what nature it agrees to Christ to be this
Door? and he answers: Christ indeed, Christus quidem, ut Filius est Dei, ostium
est primum, sed non ea tantum ratione, verum etiam, ut homo est, ostium
vocatur. Ita enim decretum est ab aeterno, ut Christus, Deus and homo simul,
sit ostium. Ergo oportet quoque homo sit, nec id tantum, sed oportet quoque sit
homo crucifixus:
as he is the Son of God, is this Door at the first hand; but yet he is called
the Door, not in that respect only, but also as he is Man: for so it was
decreed from all Eternity, That Christ, God and Man together, should be this
Door. It was therefore necessary, that he should also be Man, and not that
only, but it was also necessary, that he should be Man crucified: He is
therefore this Door, Ergo ostium est, qua filius est Dei crucifixus in humana
natura.
as the Son of God, crucified in his Humane Nature. And this he confirms by
this Argument: Ira Dei in peccatum praeclusit nobis omnem aditum in coelos,
nosque conclusit sub peccato and damnatione. Crux autem Christi est, quae ita
satisfacit justitiae, ut etiam promereatur gratiam and misericordiam.
The Anger of God against Sin has shut up against us all entrance into
Heaven, and has shut us up under sin and damnation: but it is the Cross of
Christ (that is, his Death upon the Cross) which so satisfies the Justice of
God, that it also merits for us Grace and Mercy. Finally, whereas he had said
before, That Christ is here said to be the Door, chiefly in respect of the
Pastors, he now adds: There is no other passage into Christ's Sheepfold, Non est
alius in ovile Christi introitus, quam unicum hoc ostium: fieri quidem potest,
ut fures suffodiant sibi foramina, per quae subingrediantur in ovile, sed
ostium nullum aliud est in ovili, nec verus unquam Pastor per aliam viam
ingressus est, etc.
but this only Door: It Is possible indeed, that Thieves may dig holes into
this Sheepfold, and so steal in privily into it, but other Door in the
Sheepfold there is none; nor did ever any true Pastor enter by any other Way,
then by Christ alone. In which respect St. Paul says, And I, Brethren, when I
came unto you, 1 Cor. 2.1
came not in excellency of speech, or of wisdom: that is, I came not in privily
upon you, to steal away your minds, and to withdraw you from the sincerity of
the Cross of Christ: For I determined to know nothing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. And thence, finally, he infers: Ingreditur ergo per
ostium Pastor, cum nihil profitetur aut praedicat, nisi solum Christum, tumque
crucifixum.
The Pastor therefore enters in by the Door, when he professes and preaches
nothing, but Christ, and him crucified.

Jansenius thus renders the sense of this passage. I am the door of the sheep,
that is, I am he, by whom the sheep have an entrance to the fellowship of the
people of God, an access to the Father, Ego sum ostium ovium, i. e. is, per
quem oves aditum habent ad consortium populi Dei, accessum ad Patrem and
salutem veram, dum scilicet in me credunt, meisque praeceptis obtemperant, etc.
Concord. c. 79. Joh. 6.
and true salvation, namely, while they believe in me, and obey my praecepts:
for no man (says our Savior) comes to the Father, but by me.

Let the Ministers of God learn hence, how to come to the sheepfold, namely,
no otherwise then by Christ: that is, let us with St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2
determine to know nothing among them, save Christ, and him crucified, that we
may be able to say with him, 1. Cor. 1.23.
We preach Christ crucified. Thus we shall endear our selves to them in a due
and warrantable way, for thus shall we be indeed instruments of Gods gracious
providence for the building of them up, for the comforting of them, and the
furtherance of their everlasting happiness. There is no other way, whereby we
can more effectually comfort men, then when we thus bring them to Christ, as
the door of the sheep.

Let us all learn to make account of Christ, as the door of the sheep, and
promise not to our selves an access to God, nor to the good things of God
otherwise then by Christ: going to God by prayer, let us go to him by Christ,
praying to Him in the name of Christ: so we shall be sure to speed: our blessed
Savior himself has given us assurance in this kind. Whatsoever you ask the
father in my name, says he, Joh. 16.23
he will give it you. Expect we forgiveness of sin, righteousness, life
everlasting? Expect them all through Christ: through him they are all
attainable: In him we have redemption, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.7. Ephesians. 4.32
even remission of sins. God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, says the same
Apostle. Romans 6.23.
And again, Eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Dream we not of any other door, by which to have an entrance to God, or to the
obtaining of any good: Pray not to God in the name of any Saint or Angel: trust
not to the merits of our own good works, or the supererogatory works or
sufferings of others: Own we Christ as the only door: hear and believe the
encouragement, which our Savior gives us. I am the door, says he, by me if
any enters, Joh. 10.9
he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. See how he
allures us: he shall be saved, etc. that is (as Rollock well opens it:) he
shall find life, which life is described by two things. Servabitur, vitam
consequetur. Vita etiam ista praesens suavis est: quanto magis suavis est illa
altera: haec vita in duobus posita est. 1. Securitate, quod tuta sit vita. 2.
Vbertate and copia, quod omnibus bonis affluat: quod ad primum, Ingredietur and
egredietur, ait, id est, in tuto and secure aget. Phrasis haec est Hebraeorum
Scripturis familiaris qua significatur occupatio tuta and tranquilla: hic ergo
significatur occupatio tuta and tranquilla, sub ductu magni illius pastoris
ovium, Jesu Christi: quod ad secundum, Inveniet, ait, pascua, alludit ad pascua
ovium: quare in vita illa in sunt haec duo: primum, vita est secura and tuta,
nobis in coelis servata, deinde, vita est copiosa and abundans, opes scilicet
gloriae and haereditatis Dei. Rolloc. in locum.
1. By security that its a safe life. 2. By fullness and plenty, namely, that it
abounds in all good things, of the first he says, he shall go in and out. This
is a phrase very familiar with the Hebrews, by which is signified a safe and
quiet conversation: here therefore in like manner is signified a safe and quiet
course of life under the conduct of Jesus Christ, the great shepherd of the
sheep. Of the second he says, he shall find pasture: he alludes to the
pastures of the sheep. In this life therefore, of which our Savior speaks
here, are these two conveniences. 1. Its a safe and quiet life, reserved in
heaven for us. 2. That its a copious and abundant life, namely, the riches of
the glory of the inheritance of God: who is not in love with such a life? who
then would not easily be persuaded, by Christ, as by the door to enter into the
fold? that is, who needs many words to allure him to believe in Christ, and by
faith to rely upon Him?

Christ and an Eagle.
St. Hierome and St. Ambrose do jointly observe this Parallel between Christ
and the Eagle, speaking of that passage of Solomon, Prove. 30.19. the way of an
Eagle in the Air. By the Eagle we are here to understand Christ (say they
both) who, after His Resurrection, Aquilam hic Cristum debemus accipere, qui
post resurrectionem, velut aquila, revolavit ad Patrem, praedam suam referens
i. e. hominem, quem rapuerat de faucibus inimici. Aquila matter unius nidi est,
nec ad Procreandum sobolem aliud aliquando cubile perquiret: sic Christus
diligit unam Ecclesiam, quam ab aestu persecutionum alarm suarum defendit
umbraculo. Aquila pullos suos educit implumes, quos contra faciem fervidi solis
opponit, and qui aegram and invalidam corusco radiorum fulgori aciem submiserit
oculorum, materno damnatus judicio, dejicitur in terram. Sic Christus extra
Ecclesiam projicit eos, qui igneam Evangeliorum lucem far non possunt. Et ut
aquila serpents devorat, and eorum venena calore coquit interno: ita Christus,
percusso Dracone, i. e. lacerato Diabolo, dum hamanum sibi corpus assumit,
peccatum illud, quod hominem tenebat obnoxium, tanquam perniciosum virus,
extinxit: Et hoc est quod ait, vestigia aquilae volantis, etc. quia and ipse,
post Passionem and resurrectionem suam praesentibus Apostolis, Dominus noster
ascendit in coelum, nullius tamen hominis tantus and tam altus est sensus, ut
explicare possit, quomodo illa tanta Majestas e coelo venire dignata fuerit,
vel redire, cum hoc solum nobis scire licet, quod aut venit aut redit, etc.
Hieron. to. 1. de Salom. Ambros. To. 4. de Salomone.
did as an Eagle, fly back to his Father, carrying his Prey with him, even Man,
whom he had recovered out of the jaws of Satan. The Eagle is the mother of one
nest, and does not at any time seek another for the hatching of more young
ones. So Christ loves one Church, which he defends from the heat of Persecution
under the shadow of His Wings. The Eagle brings forth her young ones, being yet
unfeathered, and sets them against the hot Sun, and they of them, that cannot
abide the brightness of the Sun, are cast down to the earth, as not of a right
breed. So does Christ cast them out of the Church, which cannot endure the
fiery light of the Gospel. The Eagle devoures Serpents, and concocts the poison
of them with her internal heat, so Christ, having wounded the Dragon, the
Devil, while he assumed humane flesh, extinguished that sin, as deadly poison,
which held man under its power. And this is that, which he says, the way of
the Eagle flying in the Air, because our Lord himself after his Passion and
Resurrection in the presence of his Apostles, Ascended into Heaven: and yet the
understanding of no man is so great and deep, as that he should be able to
show, how that so great Majesty did vouchsafe to come from Heaven or returned
thither, seeing its only lawful for us to know, that he first came, and
afterward returned, etc. But I conceive, that it may justly be questioned
whether the Holy Ghost by Solomon intended that Passage of the Eagle to be in
relation to Christ, and therefore I shall follow it no further.

CHAP. IV. Christ and a Foundation.
THe Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament speak of Christ, as a
Foundation: hear the Prophet, bringing in God, saying, Behold, I lay in Sion,
Isa. 28.16.
for a Foundation, a stone, etc. a sure Foundation. And this is by St. Peter
applied unto our blessed Savior. And St. Paul says expressly, 1 Pet. 2.6
1 Cor. 3, 11
Other Foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ:
where the Apostle affirms Christ to be the Foundation; yea and the only
Foundation. And he is thus the Foundation in two respects. 1. He is the
Foundation of Salvation. 2. He is the Foundation of Faith or Doctrine. 1. He is
the Foundation of Salvation, in that He is the only meritorious cause of our
Salvation, and the Salvation of the Church is grounded upon Christ; namely,
upon the Merit and Efficacy of his Death and Passion: And in this respect not
any man, but God himself alone has laid this Foundation: so says the Prophet,
Thus says the Lord God, Isa. 28.16
Behold I lay for a Foundation, a stone, etc. And this God has done. 1. In
that in his Eternal Counsel He has preordained Christ to be this Foundation;
so says St. Peter of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.20
who was verily foreordained before the Foundation of the world. 2. In that he
did in the fullness of time, actually send Christ into the world to become man,
and so to suffer Death for our Redemption. 2. He is the Foundation of Faith or
Doctrine; and this is to be understood by a Metonymie of the subject for the
adjunct, Christ being put for the Doctrine of Christ, that is, the fundamental
Doctrine of Christ, which consists not of those Theological Conclusions,
needful to Divines for their peculiar Profession, Irenic. p. 149
but of those Catholic Articles, which concern the Catholic Faith, needful to
be known and believed of all to salvation, the ignorance of which is damnable,
and the obstinate and pertinatious denial of which makes an Heretic, as
Paraeus speaks learnedly: which Fundamental Doctrine is the entire and
incorrupt Doctrine of the Law and the Creed, contained in the Writings of the
Prophets and Apostles. And this Foundation Moses and the Prophets began to lay
in the old Testament, and the Apostles did perfect it in the new Testament by
their Preaching and Writings. In which respect the Church is said to be built
upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Ephesians. 2.20


And both ways the comparison holds well between Christ and a Foundation:
namely, in regard of the use of a Foundation, which is to uphold the Building,
making it to stand firm, and to keep it from ruin, so the house built upon the
Rock stands firm against all opposition: Matthew. 7.25
Let the rain descend, the stoods come, and the winds blow, yet the house
stands and is secured from falling. Of such use is our blessed Savior, and
that in both respects.

1. As a Foundation of Salvation, Christ sustaines the whole Church, by the
merit of his Death and Passion, by the power of his Divinity, and the efficacy
of his Intercession and Spirit; he Justifies, Sanctifies, and preserves it,
making it able to hold out against the gates of Hell: Matthew. 16. Psalm. 125.1.
so that it shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for
ever. Not all opposition of enemies shall hinder the Salvation of the Church. I
give my sheep, says our Savior, eternal life, Joh. 10.28.
and none shall be able to take them out of my hand.

2. As a Foundation of Faith or of Doctrine, all superstructures so far forth
hold good, as they hold correspondence with the Fundamental Doctrine of Christ:
but if any Doctrine cross and thwart the Doctrine of Christ taught by the
Prophets and Apostles, it presently falls to the ground, 2 Samuel 5.3, 4.
as Dagon before the Ark, And in this respect St. John, having given that
advise, 1 John 4.1
Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God, or no,
brings in the Doctrine of Christ, as the rule of trial, Verse. 2.
saying, Every spirit, that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is of God, and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, Verse. 3.
is not of God: and this is that spirit of Antichrist, etc.

But yet, Omne simile est etiam dissimile.
because no things are so like one to another, but that there is some
dissimilitude between them, know we therefore, that (though Christ resembles a
Foundation in regard of the main use of it, yet) Christ differs also from an
ordinary Foundation, and namely in this, that the Foundation of an earthly
building is lowest, but Christ, the Foundation of the Church, is on high and
above it. St. Austin takes notice of this difference and gives the reason of
it. He moves the question. How is Christ both the Foundation and the Head:
Quomodo Christus and fundamentum and caput est, cum fundamentum solet deorsum
esse, caput autem sursum? Resp. Ideo fundamentu^ domus deorsum ponitur, quia
pondere suo deorsu^ versus fertur, and nisi sit, quod sustineat, tota cadit,
quia tota ad terra^ vergit. Rebus ad ima tendentibus, in imo ponitur
fundamentum. Ecclesia autem Dei, in imo posita, tendit ad coelum: fundamentum
ergo nostrum ibi positum est. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 30.
seeing the Foundation uses to be below, and the Head above? To this he
answers. Therefore the Foundation of a house uses to be below, because by the
weight of it, it is carried downwards, and except it has something to bear it
up, it falls down, because it wholly verges toward the earth: for things that
tend downwards, the Foundation is laid below. But the Church of God, being here
below, tends to Heaven, and therefore there is our Foundation laid.

Hence we may learn many things.

1. See the sad condition of them, that do ground their hopes for salvation, on
any other besides Christ, either on themselves or on any other, on their own
merits or the supererogatory works or sufferings of others; we see that Christ
only is the Foundation of Salvation: how do they therefore at once dishonor
the Lord Jesus Christ, and prejudice themselves that shall build their hopes of
happiness upon any with neglect of him? they deprive him (as much as in them
lies) of the honor of being the only foundation of the Church: and their
hopes for Salvation must needs be as the house built upon the sand: no sooner
the rain descends, Matthew. 7.27.
the floods come, and the wind blows, but instantly that house falls: So these
may happily, for the present bear up well, but let Satan be set loose upon them,
and set upon them with his temptations, instantly their hopes will vanish and
come to nothing.

2. See the horrid blasphemy of the Church of Rome, making Saint Peter, and in
his right, the Pope, the Foundation of the Church: whereas we are taught in the
Scriptures, that Christ is the only Foundation, that is, or can be laid: how
then St. Peter, and consequently the Pope? for these are directly contrary each
to other: Again, the Church of the old and new Testament is but one Church, and
so can have but one and the same Foundation: but St. Peter cannot in reason be
said to be the Foundation of the Church of the old Testament, therefore neither
of the new: And if St Peter be the Foundation of the whole Church, then of
himself, which is most absurd: he is a part of the building, therefore not the
Foundation of the whole. Lastly, the Foundation of the Church must be
perpetual, not failing, else how shall the Church stand? but St. Peter is not
so, he is dead almost 1600 years since. They say, he is perpetual in his
Successors: but, 1. This is absurd, for they say, because its said to thee,
Matthew. 16.
and Thou, therefore it cannot include all the Apostles, but St. Peter only,
and yet shall these singular particles include so many Popes: 2. Its false: for
Saint Peter, as an Apostle, had no Successors; the Pope of Rome succeeds not
Saint Peter in his Apostleship: the Apostles had immediate Calling, as Saint
Paul says of himself, Paul an Apostle, not, etc. and universal Commission; Go,
Galat. 1.1 Matthew. 28.19
teach all Nations, says our Savior. No Pope of Rome is so: And, as Saint
Peter was a Minister of the Gospel, we all equally succeed all the Apostles.
And it is certain, That the Foundation of the Church is such, as against which
there can be no prevailing; but the Popes have been prevailed against, overrun
with horrid sins: some of them giving their Souls and Bodies to the Devil for
the obtaining to the Popedom, as their own Historians record it of Silvester
the second, and others. But I forbear to rake in that puddle any further. They
say, That our Savior gave to Peter the Honor to be the Foundation, while he
said to him, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church: Matthew.
16.16
But indeed no such thing appears in those words; for our Savior said not, Non
dixit, Tu es Petra, sed, Tu es Petrus: nec dixit, Super te, aut Super hunc
Petrum, sed, Super hanc petram.
Thou art the Rock, but, Thou art Peter: nor said he, Upon thee, or upon this
Peter; but, Upon this Rock, in reference to Christ himself, or to the
Confession made by Peter concerning Christ: And so the Fathers do generally
expound it. Hear Saint Austin: He said not, Thou art the Rock, but Thou art
Peter; Non dixit, Tu es Petra, sed, Tu es Petrus, Petra autem Christus.
Retract. l. 1. Simeoni, quia credebat in Christum petram, Petri nomen largitus
est. In loc.

Super hanc petram, i. e. (...), super hanc fidem and confessionem. In loc.


but the Rock is Christ. And so Saint Jerome: 'He gave to Simon the name of
Peter, because he believed in Christ the Rock. And so Saint Chrysostom: Upon
this Rock, that is, upon this Faith and Confession. And though sometimes the
Prophets and Apostles are said to be the Foundation, yet it is but with respect
to the Fundamental Doctrine of Christ, which they delivered in their Preaching
and Writings. And in this sense Saint Peter is sometimes by the Faithers said
to be a Foundation: and we deny it not; but it was no more then belonged to the
other Apostles, as Saint Cyprian says plainly: Hoc utique erant and caeteri
Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus. De Unit. Eccl.
This certainly were the other Apostles that Peter was. He adds indeed, The
Primacy was given to Peter; Primatus Petro datur. Ib.
but he speaks only, de primatu ordinis, non gradus, of the Primacy of Order,
not of Degree.

3. In that Christ is the only Foundation of the Church, hence we learn, That
the Fathers before Christ were also built upon the same Foundation together
with us; Acts 15.11
in that they were saved by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as we.
Christ was then preached unto them, and believed on by them. So says our
Savior, John 8.56 and 5.46 Acts 10.43
Abraham saw my day, and was glad. And again, Moses wrote of me. So says Saint
Peter, To him bear all the Prophets witness, etc. yea, He it is, that was the
Marrow and Substance of all the Rites of the Ceremonial Law; they pointed at
him, and he was figured by them: 1 Cor. 10.3, 4
so says the Apostle; They did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink of the same spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ:
and therefore when Christ came, they ceased. The difference between them and us
is only in the different manner of Administration; Lib. I. c. 23
as we have heard before. The Enemies then of Christian Religion have no cause
to object Novelty to it: nor shall the Jews need to be shy of receiving
Christian Religion concerning Salvation by Christ crucified, for fear of
leaving the Religion of their Forefathers: for their Religion was the same with
ours now; As Saint Austin plainly affirms it: Res ipsa, quae nunc dicitur
Christiana Religio, erat and apud antiquos, nec defuit ab initio generis
humani, quousque Christus veniret in carne, unde vera Religio, quae jam erat,
coepit appellari Christiana. Retract. l. 1.
The thing it self (says he) which is now called Christian Religion, was among
the Ancients; nor was it wanting from the beginning of Mankind till Christ came
in the flesh; whence the true Religion which then was, began to be called
Christian.

4. Hence we may see (in all the variety of Opinions that are in the World) who
do, and who do not hold the Foundation. And (to say nothing of Anabaptists,
Pelagians, and others) look we especially at the Controversy between us and
the Church of Rome, whether of us hold the Foundation: they say, they do; we
say, we do. But it will be fully cleared by the point in hand. The Doctrine of
Christ is the only Foundation; whethersoever therefore of us hold this
Doctrine sincere and incorrupt, they may truly be said to hold the Foundation.
Now, as for the Papists, it is sure, That they hold it not: for, howsoever, in
word, they profess the Creed and the Decalogue, yet, in deed, they overthrow
both. In Particulars it were easy to be infinite. They maintain the Worship of
Images against the direct letter of the Decalogue; they make some sins venial
in their own nature, without respect to the Mercy of God, and the Merits of
Christ: They brag of their own Merits, Perfection and Satisfactions: They deny
Christ's sole Oblation, while they offer him up daily in the Mass: They worship
the Pope as God, and Antichrist for Christ: They subject the Word of God to the
Power of the Pope. In a word, They so deprave the Worship of God, and the
Religion of Christ, that, if the Apostles should return again to the Earth,
they would find little among them, but mere illusions; and, for Christianity,
Paganism, covered over with the name of Christianity. And all this may with
much ease be made plain, by comparing the Tenets of the Council of Trent with
the several Branches of the Fundamental Doctrine of Christ, recorded by the
Prophets and Apostles in their several Writings. But I forbear. As for us
Protestants, it is also manifest, That, through the Mercy of God, we have kept,
and do keep the Foundation, the pure Voice of the Law, and the incorrupt
Doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ, Grace, and Faith, and the Worship of
God according to the Scriptures. It Is true, that there is among us a grievous
Rent: some are called Calvinists, some Lutherans; and (even on both sides) some
(giving way to immoderate heat, not becoming Brethren) have not spared to cast
Criminations and Aspersions each on other, as if, on the one or other side, the
Foundation had been left and forsaken, and as if the Questions agitated between
us were Fundamental. But the truth is (as some more moderate Divines, and among
the rest Paraeus, have made it plain) That, howsoever we differ one from
another in some of those Articles which he calls Theological Conclusions, the
sound and entire knowledge of which is necessary for Divines; yet, in the
Catholic Articles, there is full Agreement between the Divines on both sides,
and that herein we all hold together against the Romish Doctors. Take we the
very words of Paraeus: for, having distinguished the Articles of Religion into
Catholic and Theological (as also did Dr. Usher, that Learned and Reverend
Primate of Armagh, in a Sermon before the King, of the Universality of the
Church, and the Unity of the Faith professed therein) he adds these words: In
both kinds the Protestants are far separated from the Papists, In utroque
genere Evangelici omnes a Papist is sunt longissime separati, invicem autem in
articulis Catholicis conjuncti: in solis articulis Theologicis dissensiones
aliquae hactenus agitantur, quae nisi, ambitiose magis, quam consulto,
plebeiorum auribus inculcatae fuissent, ad tam infalix Schisma res nunquam
venisset. Irenic. p. 150.
consenting yet among themselves in the Catholic Articles; only in the
Theological Conclusions there are yet some Dissentions, which had they not
published to the common people, rather ambitiously, then wisely, we had never
fallen into such an unhappy Schism. So that it is manifest, both that we have just
cause to break off from Communion with the Church of Rome, because they have
broken off from the Foundation, and therefore that no Peace can upon safe terms
be had with Rome, so long as they do with so much obstinacy retain their
devilish Doctrines so contrary to the Foundation: And also on the other side,
That we, who are Protestants, shall do well to lay aside heat on both sides,
and to agree together, considering, that in Fundamentals we agree, and our
Differences are not greater then we see them to be. It Is the mind of that
learned and moderate Paraeus: De Theologicis conclusionibus lacerare velle
Ecclesia^, nen Christianae charitatis, sed Antichristiani est supercilii. Iren.
About Theological Conclusions to teer the Church in pieces, savors not of
Christian Charity, but of Antichristian Pride.

5. Let us labor for the knowledge of the Doctrine of Christ; for this is the
Foundation of Religion: wanting this knowledge, we shall be, as a man that
builds upon the Sand, without a Foundation; and so our Building will be
tottering, and subject to ruin. This is the Touchstone for the Trial of all
other Doctrines: without the knowledge of this Doctrine, how shall we make Trial
of other Doctrines? and without such Trial made, we shall be in danger to be
cheated by every Heretic and false Teacher, even to be cheated of our precious
Souls, then which what danger is or can be greater? yea, This is Life Eternal
(says our Savior) to know thee, John 17.3
and Jesus Christ. See Saint Paul's valuation of this Knowledge: I count all
things but loss for the excellent Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: Phil. 3.8
Upon which place Zanchy brings in Saint Ambrose, affirming, That the knowledge
of the Incarnation, Cognitio Incarnationis, Passionis and Resurrectionis
Christi, perfectio est vitae, and thesaurus sapientiae. Ambr. apud Zanch. in
loc.
Passion, and Resurrection of Christ, is the Perfection of Life, and the
Treasury of Wisdom. What things therefore soever they are, whereof we remain
ignorant, let us strive to be more and more acquainted with Christ, and to him
let us refer the knowledge of all other things, and let the knowledge of Christ
season all the rest: Knowledge of other things, without the knowledge of Christ,
is but Heathenish: This is the knowledge which is fit for a Christian. Let not
therefore the knowledge of other things shut out this; but so spend time for the
gaining of that knowledge, which concerns us in our particular Callings, or
that, in which we take special delight, as the knowledge of Physic, Law,
Music, Mathematics, etc. that we reserve time, and that in a good proportion,
for the study of Christ. Read other Books, John 5.39
but above all, Search the Scriptures, for (says our Savior) they testify of
me: and this was the care of that pious Eunuch, Acts 8.30
who, being in his Charet, in his return from Jerusalem to Ethiopia, gave
himself to the reading of the Scriptures.

6. Let us, for the Doctrine of Christ, contend with any, that dissent from us;
for this is the Fundamental Doctrine, therefore the Difference is Fundamental:
but, while others agree with us in this, let us keep discord from us, though
they differ in Judgment from us in other things: for this Doctrine of Christ is
the only Foundation, and therefore the Differences in other things will not be
Fundamental.

1. I say, contend for this, it deserves our contention, it is a business of
great moment, Jude 3
Fight together for the common Faith; we cannot be too eager: He cannot be
saved that is ignorant of this Doctrine, nor can he be other then an Heretic
that obstinately denies it: If any deny Christ to be God or to be Man, or to be
God and Man in one Person, or to be the only Savior of the World, or to be
the Messiah foretold by the Prophets, or to be the only King, Priest, and
Prophet of the Church; or to be conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of the
Virgin Mary, etc. He is an Antichrist, and to be withstood, and held accursed;
yea, though he be an Angel: If we (says Saint Paul) or an Angel from Heaven,
preach any other Gospel unto you, Gal. 1.8,
then that which ye have received, let him be accursed. Verse 9
He repeats it: As I said before, so say I now again, If any man preach unto
you any other Gospel, then that which ye have received, let him be accursed.
And so Saint John: Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ?
1 John 2.22
He is an Antichrist, who denies the Father and the Son. Hear him again: If
there come any other, 2 John 10
and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your House, neither bid him,
God speed. The ancient Fathers, therefore, are hereby to be justified in their
heat against Arians, Eunomians, Ebionites, Marcionites, Nestorians, Maniches,
etc. as (among the rest) Polycarpus in his heat against Marcion, who (when
Marcion, Eusebius. hist Eccl. l. 4. c. 14.
meeting him, called to him, saying, Know us) answered him tartly, I know, that
thou art the firstborn of Satan: Which was agreeable to that which is reported
of Saint John, who, meeting Cerinthus in a Bath, would stay no longer, lest the
Bath should fall upon them. And hereby we are in like manner to justify the
zeal of our Forefathers engaging themselves in that Quarrel against the Papists
so far, that against Transubstantiation, etc. they have contended even to the
death, not counting their own lives dear in comparison of those Fundamental
Truths concerning Christ, which have been overthrown, while those abominable
Errors have been maintained. Long may we tread in the steps of our Forefathers,
and imitate their zeal, never giving way to any more moderate Opinion of such
Errors, as wrench this Foundation. Long may we (enjoying the Peace of the
Gospel) believe, profess, preach, and write (as we have means and opportunity)
against such Fundamental Errors; and strive we for such strength of resolution,
as that we may willingly expose our selves to any hardship, yea, to the most
cruel death, rather then to give entertainment to any such Errors, as are
against this Foundation.

2. I say, If we agree in this Foundation, though there be dissent in other
things, let us keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace: We are
Brethren, and hope to be saved, all of us, by the same Grace of the same Lord
Jesus Christ, why should we fall out one with another? The excessive heat of
Contention about Questions, that is between the Calvinists and Lutherans, is as
great a Prejudice to our Cause, and as great an Advantage to the common Enemy,
as can be given. Let us then leave off such virulency, and not suffer our
Hearts any longer to be divided for such Differences among us; but, holding the
Foundation, let us give the right hand of Fellowship each to other, and embrace
one another as Brethren.

7. Let us be highly thankful to God for the Revelation of the Doctrine of
Christ: for this, as we have heard, is the main Fundamental Doctrine of
absolute necessity to be known and believed to Salvation: how miserable should
we have been without it: but now our happiness is great by means hereof;
therefore we have the greater and juster cause to be thankful to God, for he
has, in this regard preferred us before many Great and Potent Nations, to
which yet God has given abundance of earthly blessings: but we have cause to
count them all dung and dross in comparison of this excellent knowledge of
Christ, the means of which we enjoy. Let us not fail to be thankful for this
grace, and let it be our care to walk worthy of, and bring forth fruits
answerable to it, least it happen to us, as our Savior threatened against the
Jews, Matthew. 21.43
That the Kingdom of God be taken away from us, and, as against Capernaum,
that we be cast down to hell, Matthew. 11.23
as we have been lifted up to heaven.

8. Lastly, Christ being the only Foundation of Salvation, let us trust in
him, and build our hopes for Salvation upon him alone. Trust in any other,
whether our selves or any man, is to make flesh our arm, Jer. 17.5.
and they that do so, are accursed. Trusting in Christ we cannot miscarry: nor
shall our trust deceive us, being built upon such a sure Foundation, against
which no opposition can prevail.

CHAP. V. Christ and a grain of Mastardseed.
Luke 13.19
SAint Ambrose, handling the Parable of the grain of Mustardseed, does directly
apply it to Christ, The Lord himself (says he) is that grain of Mustardseed,
Ipse Dominus granum est synapis. Seminatur in horto: in horto enim captus est
and sepultus: in horto crevit, ubi etiam resurrexit: and arbor factus est,
Cant. 2.3. vis scire Christum granum and seminatum? Audi, Joan. 12.24. Est
autem and granum tritici, quia confirmat cor hominis and granum synapis, quia
cor hominis accendit. Sed si granum synapis Christus, quomodo minimus est and
crescit? Vis scire minimum? Audi: Isa. 53.2. Vis scire maximum? Audi, Psalm.
45.2. Ille enim, qui non habebat speciem aut decorem, excellentior factus est
Angelis, ultra omnem gloriam prophetarum. Semen est Christus minimum ex omnibus
seminibus, quia non venit in regno, non in divitiis. Subito autem, velut arbor
sublimem suae verticem potestatis effudit, ut dicamus, Cant. 2.3. sub cujus
frondentibus ramis volucres coeli. i. e. Sancti omnes, requieverunt, To. 4. In
Luc. l. 7.
he was sown in the garden, for in a garden he was taken, and buried; and in a
garden he grew, where also he rose again; and he became a tree, Cant. 2.3. As
the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the Sons.
Desire you to know Christ a grain, and sown? Hear what our Savior says:
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground, it remains alone, but if it dye,
it brings forth much fruit, (Joh. 12.24.) But he is both a grain of wheat,
because he strengthens man's heart, and a grain of Mustardseed, because he
heates the heart of man. But if Christ be a grain of Mustardseed, how is he the
least, and does grow? (for so St. Matthew, in laying down the same parable,
speaks of the Mustard Seed, which, says he, is the least of all seeds, but
when its grown, its the greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree, Matthew.
13.32.) Would you know him to be the least? hear the Prophet, He has no form
nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him, (Isa. 53.2.) Would you know him the greatest? hear the Psalmist:
Psalm. 45.2.
Thou art fairer then the children of men, for he that had no form nor
comeliness, is made more excellent then the Angels, transcending the glory of
the Prophets. He is therefore the least of all the seeds, because he came not
in a Kingdom, nor in riches: but suddenly, as a tree, he sent out his branches
that we might say, as the Spouse, Cant. 2.3
I sat under his shadow with great delight. In whose branches the fowls of
Heaven, that is, all the Saints, lodged.

But the word [Christ] has another acception, namely, not alone, for Jesus our
Redeemer, but also for Christ mystical, consisting of Christ the Head, and the
whole number of Christians as the Body, and particular Christians, as members
in particular: And so the word is used by the Apostle; where he says, As the
body is one, and has many members, 1 Cor. 12.12
and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body, so also is
Christ. And so Christ is here put for the Church. And so that Parable may be
applied and holds good. The grain of Mustardseed is little of it self at the
first, but in time it grows to be the greatest of herbs: so the Church was
little at the first, but by degrees it grows great in number: at the first it
was in the narrow bounds of a Family, in the Family of Adam, Seth, etc. of
Noah, Sem, etc. In familia.
of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: but afterward it grew into a People, but here first
it was in the narrow bounds of the Israeli^ish Nation: you only, says God, In
pop. Israel. Am 3.2 Exodus 19.5 In. pop. Catholico.
have I known of all the Families of the Earth: And ye shall be a peculiar
treasure to me above all people: but at last it comes to be much enlarged,
being dispersed over all Nations; Isa. 54.2, 3
according to that Prophecy. Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them spread
forth the curtains of thy habitation, spare not, lengthen thy cords, strengthen
thy stakes; for thou shall break forth, on thy right hand, and on thy left. And
so we find it to be with the Church of the new Testament in Particular, we read
their number to be an hundred and twenty; Act. 1.15 Act. 2.41. Verse. 47.
but what increase was there afterward? we find three thousand added to them;
and still God added to the Church daily such as should be saved. Act. 4.4
Afterward we find the number of them that believed to be about five
thousand. And yet further we read, Act. 6.7
that the number of Disciples was multiplied greatly in Jerusalem. But in
process of time we find many more added to the Church, not only in
Jerusalem, Act. 8.6, 12
but also in other places, as in Samaria: and afterward a great number
believed in Ph^nice, Cyprus and Antioch; Act. 11.19, 21
And no less in following times, Churches being planted at Rome, Corinth,
Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, etc. Thus is the resemblance good between a grain
of Mustard Seed, and Christ Mystical, that is, the Church, the beginning small,
the growth admirable.

But lastly, we find the word, Christ, in another acception, where the Apostle
says to the Galatians, Of whom I travel in birth, Gal. 4.19
till Christ be formed in you, scil. for the work of grace wrought in the
hearts of men: So Luther opens this expression, while he says. Of this form of
Christ he also speaks, De hac forma Christi loquitur etiam, ad Colos. 3.
Induite novum hominem, qui renovatur ad agnitionem, secundum imaginem ejus, qui
condidit illum. In loc.

Formatur Christus in nobis per fidem and regenerationis Sacramentum, ut juxta
illius vitae formam, dilectione and sanctis moribus versemur. In loc.


Col. 3.10. Put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image
of him that created him. So Sebastianus Meyer. (as Marlorate cites him in his
Ecclesical Exposition) Christ, says he, is formed in us by faith, and the
Sacrament of Regeneration, that according to the form of his life, we should
walk in love, and holy manners, Now this work of grace is not unlike, in this
respect, to the grain of Mustard Seed: for, as that is at the first little, and
by degrees rises up to greatness, so it is with grace: it is little at the
first, but its of a growing nature, and by degrees a man makes a progress to
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.14
So Faith in the Disciples was first (...), little faith, but at length it came
to be (...), strength of faith: So in the Church there are children, young men,
old men: And Christians are first, 1 John 2.13, 14 Heb. 5.12, 13
(...), babes, and in time prove (...), grown men. St. Paul himself was at the
first, (...), a child, 1 Cor. 13.11
but afterward he became (...), a man.

Learn hence many things.

1. See the great love of Christ, who being of himself the great God, as the
Apostle styles him, Tit. 2.13
stooped so low, by a voluntary dispensation, as to be like the Mustard Seed,
the least of all: He, Heb. 1.2
that was heir of all things, could with ease have commanded Riches, Honor,
Kingdoms, but, behold, Phil. 2.7
he made himself of no reputation, taking upon himself the form of a servant:
Matthew. 20.28 2 Cor. 8.9
The Lord of all came not to be ministered unto but to minister. He that was
rich, became poor, and that for our good, even to make us rich. Wonder we at
this grace of Christ.

2. This may arm us against the scandal of Christ's outward meandness and
poverty: its that, at which the Jews stumble; this hinders them from believing
in Christ, and resting upon him for salvation, they think it unreasonable to
accept him for the Messiah, whom they knew to be so outwardly mean and poor in
his Birth, in his Life, in his death: but far be it from us in this respect
to reject or refuse him: was he outwardly mean? it was no more then was
foretold of the Messiah by the Prophet: he had no form, nor comeliness, Isa.
53.2, 3
says he, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him, he is despised and rejected of men, etc. was he so outwardly mean? it was
for our advantage; 2 Cor. 8.9
He made himself poor, to make us rich; he subjected himself to abasement, to
make us glorious: he becomes the Son of man, that we through him might be made
the sons of God; He subjected himself to death, that we might live through him:
And how were not it the height of ingratitude, to reject him for that outward
meandness, to which he did voluntarily submit himself for our benefit?
Finally, was he so outwardly mean, as man for a time? yet, as God, he was and
is Infinitely and Eternally Great and Glorious, higher then the highest; and is
now as man, highly exalted, set at his Fathers right hand, Ephesians. 1.20, 21
in the heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and might,
and dominion, and every name, that is named, not only in this world, but also
in that, which is to come. These things considered, how were it not against all
reason to take such scandal at the external meandness, in which he lived on
the earth, as in this respect to refuse him.

3. As he for our sakes so far abased himself, as being in himself the
greatest of all, to become the least, so let us, by way of thankful
retribution, be content, to be abased, and to abase our selves for his honor:
what are we in comparison of him? what is the greatness of any of us in
comparison of his? what abasement therefore can befall us comparable to that
which befell him? why should we then stick at any abasement for him? the Lord
for the servants made himself of no reputation, and shall the servants stand
so much upon their own honor and credit, as to be unwilling to be abased for
their Lord? It was a pious resolution of St. Bernard. If one of the two, says
he, be necessary, I had rather that men should murmur against me, then against
God. Si necesse est, unum fieri e duobus, modo, in nos murmur hominum, quam in
Deum esse. Bonum mihi, si dignetur, me uti pro clypeo. Libent in me excipio
detrahentium linguas maledicas and venenata spicula blasphemorum, ut non ad
ipsum perveniant. Non recuso inglorius fieri, ut non irruatur in gloriam Dei.
De consid. ad Eugen. l. 2. c. 1.
Its good for me, if He vouchsafes to make use of me, as a shield. I am willing
to receive upon me the slanderous tongues of detractors, and the poisoned darts
of evil speakers, so that they may not reach unto God. I refuse not to become
inglorious, so that men rush not against the glory of God. In like manner, let
not us care, what men speak against us, what they are against us, let us not
care, how we be disparaged, nor what indignities we suffer, be it reproaches,
slanders, imprisonment, banishment, cruel and shameful deaths, so that God may
not suffer in the point of his honor: rather for the sake of Christ let us
suffer any or all of these, then for the avoiding of them to omit any duty, by
which we may in our places honor God, or to do any thing, by which God may
come to suffer in the point of his honor: To conclude, be we of the mind of
Saint Paul, who passed not, what befell him, Phil. 1.20
so Christ might be magnified in him by life or by death.

4. Let us not despise the day of small things. Zach. 4.10
See how small the Church was in the first beginning of it, and yet to what it
is come: fear not then, when we see the Church brought to the lowest ebb, and
the numbers of the Church to be never so much decreased: and the glory and
splendour of the Church never so much obscured, God is yet able to raise her
from her ruins, to increase her numbers, and to restore her to her pristine
glory, yea to make her more glorious then ever she was. Hear Gods undertakings
in these kinds laid down by the Prophets. Isa. 541, 3
Rejoice, O thou barren that bear not, says God, for thou shall break forth
on thy right hand and on thy left. Verse. 11.12
And again, O thou afflicted, etc. behold I will lay thy stones with fair
colors, and lay thy Foundations with Saphires, and I will make thy windows of
Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant Stones.
Isa. 51.3
And again. The Lord will comfort Sion, he will comfort all her waste places,
he will make her wilderness as Eden, and her deserts as the garden of the
Lord. Having therefore such promises, let us not fear, how low soever we see
the Church of God to be brought; for, what he has promised to do, Heb. 10.23.
he will perform: for he is faithful, that has promised. And, what He has
promised, he can perform: Isa. 59.1.
for his hand is not shortened, nor his power abated: what therefore He could
do, that He can do; and seeing He could bring the Church to such Height,
Numbers, and Glory, from such poor Beginnings, doubt not but He can do it
again; Verse. 2.
the only fear is, least our sins separate between God and us: let us then by
unfeigned repentance turn to God, from whom by sin we have departed, and then
let us certainly expect the accomplishment of Gods promises concerning the
restoration of the Church.

5. Let it not trouble any man, that being a beginner in Christianity, the work
of Grace is weak in him: Remember that the grain of Mustardseed, before it
comes to be the greatest of Herbs, was the least of all seeds: There is not the
tallest, nor the strongest among men, but he was once a Child: Even Goliath,
that Monster of the Philistims, who seemed to be a moving Rock, the sight of
whom struck such terror into the Hearts of the Israelites, was once in his
Swathing bands: The profoundest Scholar was once in his A B C. And the
strongest Christian was once a Child in Christianity: Rome is not built in a
day. And fear not, lest, because thou art weak in Grace, Christ should in this
respect disown and cast thee off: No, it is prophesied of him, That He should
not break the bruised Reed, Isai. 42.3
nor quench the smoking Flax: Matthew. 12.20
And this does the Evangelist apply to Christ. No, Phil. 1.6
Saint Paul is confident of this (and so be thou) That He that has begun a
good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. The tender
Mother is careful of all her Children, but she is most tender over that Child
which she sees most weak and sickly.

6. Nor let us proudly overlook, nor insult over weak Christians, because we
see them far behind us, and they cannot keep pace with us. The grain of
Mustardseed, that is the least of all Seeds, comes in time, growing to be the
greatest of Herbs. So they, that are for the present weak, may prove, in time,
eminent Christians. It Is a part of Humanity, being to travel with them that are
weak and slow-paced, not therefore to forsake them, because they cannot keep
pace with us, but to stay for them, and so to take them along with us. So let
us exercise meekness and patience toward them whom we perceive to be infirm
and weak; they cannot go so fast as we, stay for them with patience: They fall
ever and anon, let us endeavor to restore them with the spirit of meekness.
Gal. 6.1
Remember what our Savior says, The first shall be last, Matthew. 19.30
and the last shall be first: We that are before others, proudly despising or
insulting over them that are weak, may fall behind others; and they, that are
behind us, may possibly outstrip us in time, walking humbly with God: 1 Pet.
5.5
for He gives Grace to the humble.

7. As it is with the grain of Mustardseed, being the least of Seeds, it does
grow the greatest among Herbs; so let us endeavor that it may be with us:
Content not we our selves to be always weak, but strive we, growing, to become
strong. So Saint Paul exhorts; Be not Children in understanding, 1 Cor. 14.20
but Men: And Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 3.18
Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. This
is a sovereign Antidote against Apostasy; and, as such, it is enjoined by Saint
Peter in the forenamed place: for, having said, Beware, Verse 17
left, being led away with the error of the wicked, ye fall from your own
stedfastness; he adds in the next Verse, Grow, etc. But, if we shall still
remain Children, weak in Knowledge, weak in Judgment, weak in Resolution, we
shall be in danger (as the Apostle speaks) to be tossed to and fro, Ephesians. 4.14
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine. The whole Expression is an
Allegory, or continued Metaphor: false Doctrine being compared to the Wind, we,
remaining yet Children, to some light and empty Vessel on the Sea, not well
ballass'd; and the Seduction it self, expressed in two words, (...), tossed to
and fro, which comes of (...), which signifies a Wave, as it is proper to the
Waves to toss the Ship to and fro: the other word is, (...), carried about, an
act proper to the Wind, to carry and hurry such a Vessel about. And so the
comparison stands thus; As a light and empty Vessel on the Sea, not well
ballass'd, is in danger, by any Wind, arising and making the Sea tempestuous,
to be tossed to and fro, and to be driven about, and so in danger of wrack and
perishing: So weak and ungrounded Christians lie open to every unsound
Doctrine, though never so absurd, to be carried about with it, and to give
credit to it, and so shall be in danger of ruin and perishing, if God be not
the more merciful. And this is noted by the Apostle, where he tells of silly
women, laden with sins, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7
led about with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth: and these, he says, are led captive by them that creep
into houses; that is, by Seducers: And this we find to be so, by lamentable
experience of all Times, and these in particular: nor is this to be wondered
at; for both ungrounded Christians want that, by which they should be fenced
against false Teachers, namely, Knowledge and sound Judgment; and Seducers are
furnished with means to seduce, having (as the Apostle says in the forenamed
place) (...), a slight, and (...), cunning craftiness, Ephesians. 4.14
namely, to make the Errors plausible, which they would broach, and to turn and
wind Scripture to their own purposes; and by these means they lie in wait to
deceive, putting forth themselves to propagate their Heresies for the infecting
of others: and finally, such ungrounded Christians are they, whom Seducers
choose, to work upon them: Eccles. hist. l. 1. c. 19.
And so Arianism wrought it self first into esteem by Constantia, the Widow of
Licinius, the Sister of Constantine, being set upon and corrupted by an Arian
Priest, as Socrates testifies. How stands it us then in hand (to the end that
we be not removed from our stedfastness) not still to continue Children, but to
grow up in all things? etc. Ephesians. 4, 15
Finally, it is easy to observe, that Saint Paul (in the forenamed place) does
bring in this, as that which is expected at our hands, in regard of the
gracious provision that Christ has made for his Church: for, having told us of
the provision it self, Verse 17 1^
of the ends at which Christ aimed in it, and how long this was to last, Verse
13 14 15
and to be useful to the Church; at last he adds, That we henceforth be no more
Children, but grow up, etc. And indeed, what is more agreeable to Reason, then
that our blessed Savior having settled a Ministry in the Church, and we having
for any space of time lived under it, we should cease to be as Children, and
grow to be Men? It was the encouragement of the Heathen Orator to his Son
Marcus: It becomes thee, Te, Marce fili, annum jam audientem Cratippum, idque
Athenis, abundare oportet praeceptis Philosophiae. Offic. l. 1.
O Son Marcus, having heard Cratippus a whole year, and that at Athens, to
abound in the Precepts of Philosophy. But we have lived not one year, but many
years, and some of us scores of years, under the Teaching, not of a Cratippus,
an Heathen Philosopher, but of Christ; not at Athens, but in the Church: what a
shame then will it be to us, and how ill shall we answer Christ's expectation in
his care for us, if we shall still remain Novices, and not grow men in
understanding?

CHAP. VI. Christ and the Head.
IN this Comparison Christ is to be considered, not as God alone, nor as Man
alone, but as God and Man in one Person: for this is a Branch of the Glory of
Christ, expressed in the phrase of his sitting at his Fathers right hand: but
that agrees to Christ in regard of both his Natures. We see also, that the
Apostle calls Christ the Head of his Body, Col. 1.18
the Church, as he had before affirmed him to be the Image of the invisible
God: Col. 1.15
but this latter agrees to Christ in respect of both: finally, whereas there
are many properties of an Head, they are not all to be found in Christ, as he
is God alone, nor as he is Man alone; but some of them agree to him as he is
Man, others of them as he is God: As for example, That he be the Head of the
Church, it is necessary, that he have conformity of Nature with the Church, as
the Head of the natural Body has with the Body: but this is not to be found in
Christ as he is God; for so there is an infinite disproportion between Christ
and the Church, as between Spirit and Flesh, between Heaven and Earth: but, if
we look at Christ as Man, so we shall find this conformity of Nature: for,
Hebr. 2.14
because the Children (says Saint Paul) were partakers of flesh and blood, He
also took part of the same. On the other side, to the end that Christ be the
Head of the Church, it is necessary, that he be the Author of spiritual and
heavenly Life to the Church and all the Members of it, as the Head is the
Fountain of natural Life to all the Members of the natural Body: but Christ, as
Man alone, could not be so; Christ-Man is so, but not as Man. It Is manifest
therefore, That it agrees to Christ, as God and Man, to be the Head of the
Church. Nor will it be of any force to the contrary, if any shall object, That
this or that property of an Head, namely, conformity of Nature with the
Members, agrees not to Christ as God, therefore Christ, as God, cannot be the
Head of the Church; or, This or that property of an Head, namely, to give an
influence of spiritual Life to all his Members, cannot agree to Christ as Man,
therefore Christ, as Man, cannot be the Head of the Church: for, to this end,
That Christ should be the Head of the Church in both Natures, it is not
necessary, that all the properties of an Head should discover themselves in
either Nature severally; it suffices, that they are all to be found in the
whole Person, some in respect of one Nature, some in respect of the other.

And Christ is frequently called the Head of the Church: Ephesians. 1.22
And has given him (namely, Christ) to be the Head over all things to the
Church. And again: Grow up into him in all things, 4.15
who is the Head, even Christ. And again: 5.23
The Husband is the Head of his Wife, as Christ is the Head of his Church. 1.
Cor. 11.3 Colos. 1.18 2.19
And again: I would have you to know, That the Head of every man is Christ. And
again: He is the Head of his Body, the Church. And again: Not holding the Head;
whereby he understands Christ, as appears by that which follows.

And the Resemblance holds excellently between Christ, and the Head of the
natural Body, and that in sundry Particulars.

1. The Head has conformity of Nature with the Body, and the Members of it;
else it is a Monster. It were a strange sight, to see an Head and a Body, like
the Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his Dream: Dan. 2.32, 33
His Head of fine Gold, his Breast and Arms of Silver, his Belly and Thighs of
Brass, his Legs of Iron, his Feet, part of Iron, and part of Clay. It were
altogether ridiculous, to see a Painter to join an Horses Neck to a Man's Head.
Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam

Pictor si velit, etc. Horat. de art Poetica.


We see therefore, that it is always so; such an Head, such a Body; Head and
Body of the same nature. It is easy to see in Christ such conformity of Nature
with his Church; We are partakers of flesh and blood, Hebr. 2.14
and he partakes of the same: so that it is most true, even in this respect,
that the Apostle says, Verse 11 16
Both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one: for,
He took not the nature of Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham. Nor is it
otherwise with Christ now, since his Resurrection in this respect, then before
his Death: for, even after he was risen from the dead, he could say of himself,
Luke 24.39
Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my self; handle me, and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me to have. And as he took Humane
Nature into Unity of Person with himself, so he does in some sort communicate
unto us, and makes us partakers of his Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1.4
which is not so to be understood, as it the Divine Nature and Essence were
transfused into us, but that the manifold Gifts and Graces of God, which are in
God nothing but his Essence, are imparted unto us in our proportion. So Paraeus
expounds it: We are made Partakers of the Divine Nature, Non transformatione
naturae humanae in divinam, sed participatione donorum, quibus conformes
efficimur divinae naturae. In loc.
not by a Transformation of the Humane Nature into the Divine, but by a
Participation of Gifts, by which we are conformed to the Divine Nature. And so
Z^nchy: Id est, divinarum perfectionum, sapientiae, bonitatis, sanctitatis, and
similium, quibus donat electos Deus. De not. Dei, l. 2. c. 2. q. 1.
He has made us Partakers of the Divine Nature, that is, of those Divine
Perfections, of Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, and the like, which God gives to
his Elect. And this in both kinds the Ancients will have to be shadowed out by
that which befell Adam in the Creation of Eve, when God took a Rib out of Adam,
Genesis 2.21
and closed up the flesh in stead of it. Costa robur significat divinitatis,
caro infirmitatem humanae naturae.
The Rib (say they) signifies the strength of the Divinity, the Flesh the
infirmity of Humane Nature. So there is a conformity of Nature between Christ
and the Church, as there is between the Head and Members of the natural Body.

2. The Head has the same Soul with the Members, and not the Head one by it
self, and the Body another: one Soul quickens and enlivens Head and Members;
only the Head is the proper seat of it, and from thence it exercises all its
operations for the guidance and government of the whole Body, and all the
Members of it. As a King in his Kingdom, so is the Soul in the Body. The Kings
ordinary residence is in his chief City, the Metropolis of his Kingdom; but yet
he exercises his Authority, for Rule and Government, not there only, but also
throughout his whole Kingdom; sending out his Edicts and Proclamations from
thence through all the parts of his Dominions: So, though the Soul has the
Head for its special place of residence, yet the same Soul, that guides the
Head, guides the Hand also in working, and the Feet also in going. It Is so
here; The same Spirit that is given to Christ, is given also to Christians. See
what the Prophet says of Christ; Isai. 61.1
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: And Saint Paul says of all Christians,
We have received the Spirit that is of God. 1 Cor. 2.12
The same Holy Ghost, Matthew. 3.16
that descended upon Christ in his Baptism in the likeness of a Dove, descended
also on the Apostles in the day of Pentecost in the likeness of fiery cloven
Tongues; Acts 2.3, 4
and the same is given to all, even to the meanest Christians, Ephesians. 1.13, 14
and received by them, as the earnest of their inheritance. The Holy Ghost is
that Unction, 1 John 2.20 Psalm 45.7
which we have received from that Holy One; and that Oil of gladness, with
which himself was anointed; though herein Christ has a double pre-eminency: he
is in Christ first and principally, not in us, but at the second hand, Psalm
133.2
and by his means; as the holy Oil was first poured on the Head of Aaron, and
thence descended to his Beard, and so to the skirts of his garments. And to
Christ this Spirit is given not by measure: but to us in measure and in
different proportions according to our several stations in the Church; as the
Apostle says, To every one of us grace is given according to the measure of
the gift of Christ. So that its most true, Ephesians. 4.7
that the holy Psalmist sings Prophetically of Christ; and to him. God even thy
God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, for, it
pleased the Father, Joh. 1.16.
that in him all fullness should dwell, as befitting the head: and of his
fullness we have all received, as members from the head.

3. The head and members aim at the same end, the conservation of the whole
person: this the head plots for, and this the several members in their several
places endeavor and seek for. Its so here; the whole study of Christ and of
the whole Church is for the same end, which is the Eternal glory and happiness
of whole Christ Mystical, consisting of Christ and the whole Church. This was
the care of Christ the head. Those, which thou gave me, says he, I have
kept. Joh. 17.12
And again, Father, I will, that they may be with me, Ver. 24.
where I am. And to this end he sticks not at the enduring of any indignities,
but became obedient to death, Phil. 2.8
even the death of the Cross. And this no less is the care of every godly and
true-hearted Christian: See it in St. Paul, for himself, I press toward the
mark, says he, Phil. 3.14
for the price of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ. And so was he minded
in respect of others, Brethren, says he, my hearts desire and prayer to God
for Israel is, Romans 10.1
That they may be saved.

4. The head must be joined and united to the body: separate the head from the
body, and its no longer an head to that body: separate the members from the
head, and they are no longer members to that head. Now such an union there is
between Christ and his Church, the nearest that can be, so that Christ and all
godly Christians make one Christ mystical, as vine and branches, husband and
wife, as the building and the foundation. A true and real union it is, not
imaginary, Ephesians. 5.32
yet unexpressible: its (...), a great mystery. Its an union, finally,
indissoluble, nothing can prevail against it, no not death it self, which is
yet of force to part between friend and friend, between husband and wife, yea
between soul and body, but at no hand can it separate between Christ and a
Christian. When in the death of our blessed Savior, there was a separation
made between his soul and his body (the soul going to paradise, and the body to
the grave,) yet still the union remained firm between the Divine Nature, and
the Humane, the Divine Nature remaining in firm union with the soul in Heaven,
Lib. de fide
and with the body in the grave, as Damascen excellently. So is it here: when
in death there shall be a dissolution of our natures, yet the union remains
firm between Christ and a true believer: the soul is not by death severed from
Christ: nay, whereas in the time of this life, the soul enjoyes Christ only by
faith, after death it shall enjoy him fully, 1 Cor. 13.12
immediately and by sight. Now I see darkly, says the Apostle, as through a
glass, but then face to face. And this enjoying of Christ the Apostle makes to
be a consequent of his dissolution. Phil. 1.23
I desire, says he, to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; Yea, even the body
of the b liever, even in death, remains in union with Christ, therefore they
are said to be fallen asleep in Christ: 1 Co^. 15.18
and this is the ground of the raising of it up at the last day.

5. The head is set above the rest of the body, and all the members of the body
are under the head. It were a monster to see a body, wherein the head should
stand in the place of the feet, and the feet in the place of the head. Its so
here, Christ is set above all, and all subordinated to him: the Apostle can
tell us, That God has given him to be the head, (...), Ephesians. 1.22 Ephesians. 5.23, 24.
over all things to the Church. And again, Christ is the Head of the Church,
therefore the Church is subject to Christ. So that it belongs to Christ to rule
and bear sway, and to us to obey

6. The head conveys life and motion to all the members, and so does Christ to
the Church, and to all Christians: hear we our Savior speaking to this
purpose, Without me, says he, ye can do nothing: hear we St. Paul. Joh. 15.5
Gal. 2.20
Now I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life that I live, I
live by the faith of the Son of God. And again, Phil. 4.13
I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

Hence we may learn diverse things.

1. The dignity and excellency of the Church, and all the true members of it,
all godly Christians: we may sing with the Psalmist, Psalm. 87.3
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of God: for there is not any,
even the meanest member of the Church, even then when the Church is most
afflicted, but he is a member of Christ, united to him, and having communion
with him, as members of the natural body have with the head. And this is no
small honor and advancement, which is bestowed upon us in this respect: for
he, to whom, as to our head, we are thus united, is a most glorious person, God
over all, blessed for ever, Romans 9.5 Psalm. 93.1. Rev. 4.10, 11
clothed with majesty, as with a garment, before whom the Angels cover their
faces. And the twenty four Elders fall down before him, and cast their crowns
before his throne, and say, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor,
and power. On the other side, we of our selves, are poor creatures, dust and
ashes, as Abraham said of himself, Genesis 18 27 2 Samuel 9.^
dead dogs, as Mephibosheth said of himself: and in the account of men, 1 Cor.
4.
the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things. Wonderful odds
between Christ and us! and yet that we should be brought into so near an union
and communion with him, he to be our head, and we his members, who can
sufficiently wonder at such advancement? 1 Samuel 18.
well may we say, as David, Seems it to you a small thing, etc? If a King,
riding in his triumphant Chariot, in all state through the streets of his City,
should cast his eyes upon some malefactor, justly for some heinous offense
condemned to death, and now upon the hurdle drawing toward the place of
execution; if he should now stand still, cause him to rise from his hurdle,
pardon his offense, give him his life, appoint him to be clad in Royal apparel,
take him into his Chariot, and so make him sharer with him in his worldly
glory; would any slight it, as an ordinary passage? would it not ravish any
man? would not any man confess it to be rare and singular preferment? But all
this is nothing to this in hand: we were in as ill case, and as base by nature,
as any malefactor, living in a daily expectation of everlasting death: and all
the Kings of the earth are nothing to Christ, nor is their glory any thing in
comparison of his, they are finite creatures, he is the infinite Creator; their
glory is imaginary, transitory, finite; his is substantial, eternal, infinite.
And he is God, equal with his Father, and therefore though our union and
fellowship be at the first hand with his Humanity, yet its also at the second
hand with his Godhead, and consequently with the Father and Holy Ghost: Oh
rare honor! Oh excellent condition of believers! the luster of it would
certainly dazzle the eyes of worldlings, if it were external: but its inward and
spiritual, and covered often with a vail of weaknesses and external baseness,
and therefore the world knows it not, and therefore it despises and tramples
us under foot. But howsoever, its yet true that Solomon says, Prove. 12.16
the righteous man is more excellent then his neighbor. St. Paul with his iron
chains, in a better condition then Agrippa in all his Pomp; poor Lazarus lying
at the rich man's gate craving the scraps for his relief, then the rich glutton
himself faring deliciously every day, and clad in purple: The poorest Christian
slave serving in the Galleys, then the Grand Seigneur himself, attended with
his train of Janissaries. Let us then impute the contempt, which men cast upon
us, to their ignorance of us: and therefore let us slight it, and please our
selves (as well as we may) with that, which the Scripture tells us of the
honor done unto us in our fellowship with Christ, while he is given to us, to
be our head, and we to be his body and members in particular.

2. See how great the error of the Church of Rome is, making the Pope of Rome
the head of the Church, over all Churches, and all Bishops of all Churches
throughout the whole world, yea even over all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and
over all the Kings of the Earth in their several Kingdoms. That all this is
true of Christ, no true Christian can deny, and we show warrant for it: All
power, says our Savior, Matthew. 28.18 Rev. 11.15
is given to me both in Heaven and in Earth. The Kingdoms of this World, says
the Angel, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever. And, God has set him, says the Apostle, Ephesians.
1.21, 22
far above all principalities, etc, and has put all things under, etc. and
given him to be the head over all things to the Church. If the Pope will be a
Supreme visible Head over all Churches, as Christ is Invisible, let him show
his warrant, and so let them, that contend so earnestly for this his pretended
Monarchy. But this they can never be able to do. They indeed acknowledge Christ
alone to be the Supreme Head, but yet with them the Pope is a secundary Head,
as Christ's Vicar General, in whom must rest all the power to resolve all
doubts, to determine all Controversies, to frame new Articles of Faith, etc.
But where is their warrant? Its easy to observe, 1 Cor. 12.28 Ephesians. 4.11.
that among all the Orders of Ministers in the Church mentioned in Scripture,
there is not any the least intimation made of a Vicar General of Christ over
all the members of the whole Church in the world: and that its not an absolute
Government, but a mere Ministry, that is to be exercised by them. Nay, in all
the times of the Apostles themselves there was not the least show of a Monarchy
in the Church, but rather the contrary: for whatsoever controversies were to be
decided, or whatsoever affairs of the Church were to be ordered, we see all
done by the joint consent of the Apostles, Act. 1. and 6. and 15.
and the consent of the People. Besides, such a Monarchy of the Pope of Rome,
or any other Bishop over all Churches and Bishops is to no purpose, nor of any
use: for what need is there of a substitute, where the chief is present? but
Christ has promised that he, Matthew. 28.20
though ascended, will be with his Church to the end of the world. Yea, such an
absolute Monarchy in the Church is very dangerous, and may prove exceeding
hurtful, being in danger through man's corruption, to degenerate into a Tyranny,
as we see by woeful experience. But, say they, Monarchy is the best form of
Government in the Commonwealth, therefore it is so in the Church. Ans. It
follows not, there being a great difference between the state of the Church
and of the Commonwealth. In which respect, though a Monarchy be best for the
Commonwealth, yet its not so for the Church, if we respect the visible
Government, but if we respect Christ, the Government is Monarchical. But there
is, say they, such a Monarchy among the Angels in heaven, Lucifer once, and
Michael now, being the Supreme over all the rest, and all the rest subject to
them: therefore it should be so in the Church Militant. Ans. To say nothing of
the consequence, which is also unsound, the antecedent is all false, being
compact of dotages. Isa. 14.
Lucifer is Nebuchadnezzar; Michael is Christ. Angels do not acknowledge any
superior but Christ. But they say, Christ gave the Monarchy to Saint Peter
above all the Apostles, and consequently to his Successors above and over all
the successors of the other all Apostles: And St. Peter was Bishop of Rome, and
all the Bishops of Rome successively are his successors. Answ. All these things
are either false, or at least uncertain. That Christ gave to Saint Peter the
Monarchy over the whole Church, is false, and cannot be proved by Scripture,
but the contrary is manifest: where was St. Peter's Monarchy, when at that
Hierosolymitane Council, not Saint Peter, Act. 15.
but St. James gave the difinitive sentence? when he was fain to give account
to the Church of his affairs transacted with Cornelius? and finally, when
Saint Paul at Antioch, Act. 11.
withstood him to his face? Question is made, whether Saint Peter were ever at
Rome: false it is, that he was Bishop of Rome, Gal. 2.
and that the following Bishops of Rome were and are his Successors in that
Office, which he did execute. The more full prosecution of these particulars
would take up too much time.

3. See what comfort issues hence to all godly Christians, in that Christ is an
Head to and over us. He is Man, as we are, in all things like unto us, sin
only excepted; then he will be sure to love us, to tender us, to compassionate
us; for to this end he became man, and he took our nature into unity of person
with himself, Heb. 2.17
that he might be a merciful high Priest; and so the Scripture speaking of his
sympathizing with us, Isa. 63.9.
says, In all their afflictions he was afflicted. yea, he, that is our Head,
is God also, as well as man, therefore he is and will be with us, wheresoever
we are; for, as God, he is Infinite, without limits of Essence, therefore
Immense, without limits of quantity, therefore Omnipresent, without limits of
place. According to his promise then, Matthew. 28.20.
I will be with you unto the end of the world; he is still present with us, as
God, though his Manhood be taken away from us, according to that, which he
himself says, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, Matthew.
18.20.
there am I in the midst of them, namely, to help us by his Spirit, and to hear
us: what hopes then may we have of the acceptance of our prayers, and the
granting of our requests? If we be in the Fire, in the Dungeon, in the Desert,
in the Water, he is with us, to uphold us, to comfort us, to carry us through
all, to deliver us out of all. Yea, He that is our Head, is God, therefore
infinitely able to turn into folly all the Policies and Counsels of all the
greatest Achitophels or Machiavels in the world, and to take them in their own
craftiness. Yea, therefore he is infinite in strength, able to do what he will
for the preservation of his Church and the members of it, and for the
destruction and overthrow of all his Churches enemies: what comfort then can
they want, that have such an head? what calamity can come in the way so great,
against which this relation between Christ and us, as between head and members,
may not abundantly comfort us?

4. Let enemies of the Church be hereby admonished, not to go on any longer to
molest and afflict godly and conscientious Christians, to plot and act mischief
against them: They are Members of Christ, and Christ is their Head; and what ye
do against them, ye do against Christ. So when Saul (afterward blessed Paul)
went on, as a Wolf of the Evening, to trouble the Christians, our Savior
(though in his own Person out of the reach of his malice) cried out, Why do
thou persecute me? Acts 9.4
Saint Austin observes well upon that place, That our Savior said not, Non
dixit, Sanctos meos, aut Servos meos, sed, Quid me persequeris? i. e. membra
mea: caput pro membris clamabat. Vocem pedis suscipit lingua, quando forte in
turba pes contritus dolet, clamat lingua, Quid calcas me? non dicit, Pedem
meum; sed se calcari dicit, quam nemo tetigit; pes autem, qui calcatur, non
separatur a lingua. In Psalm. 31.
My Saints, or, My Servants; but, Why do thou persecute Me? that is, my
Members: the Head cried out for his Members: So the Tongue takes up the
complaint of the Foot; If the Foot, being by chance trod upon in a Crowd, be
put to pain, the Tongue complains, Why do you tread upon me? It says not, My
Foot, but Me, which no man touched; but the Foot, that is trod upon, is not
severed from the Tongue. And so your hostility is not terminated upon a mere
man, who, happily, is meek under the effects of your cruelty, and out of charity
prays for you, That your sin may not be laid to your charge; but it lights upon
a jealous and angry God, the Head of the Church, who takes it deeply to heart,
That his faithful Servants, the Members of his Mystical Body, should be so
infested and wronged: 2 These. 1.6
and with whom it is a righteous thing to recompense Tribulation to them that
trouble them. And he is able to do it; for he is, as Man, so God, and therefore
infinitely able to confound the stoutest of Enemies. And see in experience of
all Times, if it has not been so. See, if the proud and fierce Enemies of the
Church, while they have plotted and acted Cruelties against the Church, have
not done it to their own confusion, as not being able to stand against Christ,
the Head of the Church. Look upon Dioclesian, Maximinianus, Maxentius,
Licinius, Julian, etc. whom the Ecclesiastical Histories set forth, as cruel
Enemies against the Church: and in them all, we shall find it to be true,
Psalm. 34.21
that the Psalmist says, They that hate the righteous, shall be desolate. And
again: Confounded be all they that hate Sion: 129 4, 5
They shall be as the grass on the housetop, which withers before it grows up,
etc. Be advised therefore, as ye love your selves, to desist and proceed no
further.

5. Let all, that profess themselves Members of Christ, learn, so to carry
themselves to Christ, as to their Head, and that in three things.

1. Let us be obedient unto Christ, and subject to his Government, and guided
by him in all things. So are all the inferior Members of the natural Body
subject unto the Head, and guided and ordered by it. So ought we therefore to
be to Christ, who is our Head, and the Church his Body, and we all Members in
particular. Nor takes he this Honor unto himself, to be an Head to us, and over
us; but God has given him to be the Head over all things to the Church; Ephesians.
1.22
he has appointed him so to be: Yea, he, that is made our Head, is God as well
as Man; therefore he has right every way to rule and govern, and we have good
reason to be subject: He has the power of Life and Death, even of that which
is everlasting: Therefore let us be subject to him. Matthew. 17.5 Deuteronomy. 18.19
God requires this, Hear him. See that Threatening: Whosoever will not hear my
words, which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him; namely, by
punishment: and so the Septuagint renders it, I will take vengeance on him. And
so the Apostle expounds it: Acts 3.23
Every Soul, that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
People. And see we not this fulfilled in the Jewish Nation? They would not hear
Christ, nor be subject to him; nay, they said, We will not have this man to
rule over us: Luke 19.14 1 These. 2.16
and therefore (as the Apostle says) the Wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost. Be we wise to take warning by them: Let us acknowledge the Relation
between Christ and us, as between Head and Members, and accordingly render him
due obedience, and be subject to him in all things: What he forbids, let us
avoid, as death; what he commands us, let us readily put it in execution: and
let our Obedience be, not in some things only, as we our selves list, but in
every thing, suitably to the Order that he has prescribed to us. Nor let us
stand to consult with flesh and blood, but obey him readily, even in those
things which are most contrary to corrupt Reason and carnal Wisdom.

2. Christ being our Head, let us aim at his Glory in all things, and prefer it
before all things. We see, how chary the Members of the natural Body are of the
good and welfare of the Head: how are they all, in their places, to further it,
and to serve it? If one shall strike at the Head, we see the Hand held up for
the defense of it, ready to take the blow for the securing of it. Let us bear
the same affection to Christ our Head: let his Glory be dear and precious to
us, even above our Estates, Liberties, Lives. What is against the Glory of
Christ, let us set our selves against it with all our might; spare it not, how
dear soever, or how advantageous soever it may be unto us. Sin is that, which
in its own nature is most dishonorable to Christ, let us therefore set our
selves against it; Magistrates, to make Laws against it, and to punish for it;
Ministers, to cry it down, and every man for his own particular to avoid it; be
it the Sin of our Age, Calling, Mat. 5.29, 30 Galat. 5.24 Colos. 3.5
Constitution, though as our right Eye, as our right Hand, let us not make
dainty of it, crucify it, mortify it, pull it out, cut it off, cast it from
us. What we find to be for the Glory of Christ, let us promote and further it
to the utmost of our power. Only still let Order be observed: Let us not run
out of our places, nor forsake our stations, under a pretense of honoring
Christ, lest we dishonor Christ by that, by which another man may honor him,
doing that, which is within the compass of his Calling. But, so far as we may,
and keep our selves within our lists, so far (I say) let us, with our best
diligence, promote the Glory of Christ, how dear soever it may cost us.

3. Whatsoever degrees of spiritual Life we have, or whatsoever abilites to do
good, let us not take it to our selves, but ascribe all to Christ: for he is
our Head, from whom all spiritual Life and Motion is conveyed unto us, let us
therefore so acknowledge it. So does Saint Paul: Now I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me: Galat. 2.20
and the Life that I live, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. 1 Co^. 15.10
And again: I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the Grace
of God that was with me. And so let us. See we others to be spiritually dead,
while we live spiritually? See we others unable and insufficient for the least
and easiest, while we have ability for the greatest and most difficult Tasks of
Christianity? Let us not magnify our selves, nor sacrifice to our own Nets and
Yarns, but let us acknowledge our own Nothingness, and magnify Christ
confessing, That it is he alone, who by his Grace has thus differenced us from
others.

6. In the last place, Let this put us upon a Care, to walk (as the Apostle
exhorts) worthy of the Calling, Ephesians. 4.1
wherewith we are called. Being Members of such an Head, so glorious, so holy,
it becomes us not to walk as others do, who have no such relation to Christ.
It Is the counsel that Saint Austin gives: Yield your selves (says he) a Body
suitable to such an Head, Exhibete vos dignum corpus tali capite, dignam
sponsam tali sponso: Non enim potest habere caput illud, nisi condignum corpus,
nec ille vir tantus, nisi condignam, ducit uxorem. De temp. Sermon. 40.
a Spouse suitable to such an Husband: for that Head can have no other then a
suitable Body, nor does so great a Person marry other then a suitable Wife. Not
that he finds us suitable to himself, but, having made us his Body, and his
Spouse, he makes us suitable to himself, and expects that our Conversation
should be suitable to him: as, if a Person of quality should marry a Wife far
below himself, whose carriage therefore was suitable to that mean condition in
which she formerly lived, he yet expects, that becoming the Wife of such a
Person, her behavior should be suitable to the Honor, that he, by marrying her
to himself, has put upon her. This is Christ's expectation, let us not
frustrate it. So let us carry our selves, that by the conformity of our
behavior to his, we may show, to what Head we belong. So let us walk, as he
also walked. 1 John 2.6


Christ and an Hen. CHAP. VII.
OUr Savior himself makes use of this Resemblance, while he says to the Jews,
Matt. 23.37
How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as the Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings? And, therefore (says Saint Bernard) he compared
himself to the Hen, Ideo se gallinae comparavit, ut exprimatur incomparabilis
charitatis affectus: Nullum enim animal circa pullos suos tanta compassione
movetur, sicut gallina: fit enim toto corpore hispida, voce rauca, and omnibus
membris infirma, and usque ad summum defectum perveniens. De pass. Dom. c. 5.
to express his incomparable Love: for there is no creature, that is moved with
so much compassion toward her young ones, as the Hen: for her feathers stand
up, and she clocks mournfully, and is weak in all her members, and comes to
extreme faintness. So Saint Austin speaks of the Hen: This creature shows great
affection toward her young ones, Hoc genus animantis magnum affectum in filios
habet, ita ut eorum infirmitate affectu and ipsa infirmetur, and (quod
difficilius in aliis animantibus invenitur) alis suis filios protegens contra
milvum pugnat. Tom. 4. quaest. Evang l. 1. q. 36.
so that, being affected with their weakness, she also is made weak: and (which
is hardly found in any other creatures) covering her young ones under her
wings, she fights in their defense against the Kite, which would make a prey of
them. Sic matter nostra, sapientia Dei per susceptionem carnis, infirmata est,
quodammodo, protegit infirmitatem nostram, and Diabolo resistit, ne nos rapiat,
In qua defensione, quod illa contra milvum conatur affectu, haec contra
Diabolum perficit potestate. Ibid.
And in the same place he applies this unto our blessed Savior: So (says he)
our Mother, the Wisdom of God [he means, Christ] is in a manner made weak by
becoming Man, he defends our infirmity, and resists the Devil, lest he should
make a prey of us: In which defense, what the Hen strives to do out of her
affection to her young ones, that he does fully and actually perform by his
power.

So that in this Resemblance is excellently set forth the singular love, and
the tender affection, that our blessed Savior bears to all godly Christians,
especially weak Christians, as an Hen to her Chickens, as a Mother to her
Children: He gave great proof of it, while he lived on the face of the Earth:
How did he tender his weak Disciples? How did he bear with them, while they
bewrayed their ignorance, and weakness of Faith, and other infirmities? And
this it was that was prophesied of him: Isai. 42.
He shall not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax.

How may this comfort us in regard of our weaknesses and infirmities, and the
weakness of Faith and Grace in us! Let these humble us, and fence us against
pride and high-mindedness: but let us not in this respect despair, as if,
because of our weakness, Christ would disown and cast us off: The Hen casts not
off the care of her Chickens, because they are weak; nor the Mother the care of
her Children, because they are sickly and infirm: nay, the Hen sets and spreads
her wings over her young ones, and broods them: and the Mother most fosters and
tenders those of her Children that are weakest; she leads them by the hand, she
dandles them on her knees, she carries them in her arms: and how shall we think
the contrary, but that Christ, who puts this (...), this natural affection into
the creatures, will much more exercise this tender affection toward weak and
infirm Christians: Be of good cheer then; ye labor under much weakness and
manifold infirmities, but ye have a tenderhearted Savior, who will both pity
your weakness, and help you against it, and never leave, till he has brought
you to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; Ephesians. 4.13
that is, to that state and pitch of Perfection, which he has laid out for
you; as Christ at the time of his Death had attained to full age, strength and
stature.

And fear not Satan; ye are weak, and he is strong, and now ye think, how shall
we stand against him? how can it be avoided, but that he should devour us? but
fear not: The Kite has an aching tooth at the Chickens, seeking to make prey of
them, and the Kite is strong, the Chickens weak: but the Hen, perceiving the
danger, calls and gathers them under her wings, and is ready to fight for their
defense against the Kite: And such is the affection of Christ toward his
weaklings: he stands in defense of them, and he is able to defend them against
him; John 10.29
None (says our Savior) shall be able to take them out of my hand: for he is
not (...), a mean man only, flesh and blood, as we are; but (...), and
Immanuel, God and Man in one Person: Verse 29, 30
and as God, one with his Father, and that his Father, greater then all;
namely, greater in power: why then should we fear the worst that this Prince of
Darkness can do unto us? Fear so, as to be circumspect and watchful over our
selves, not to give him advantage against our selves: but fear not so, as to
despair of our safety: Christ is at once tender over us, and infinitely able to
shelter and defend us.

Much less shall we have need to fear visible Enemies, who are flesh and blood
as we are: if Christ be so able to defend us against the Devil, how shall he
not be able to safe guard us against his Imps? fly but to Christ, and get under
his wings, as the Chickens under the wings of the Hen, and we shall be safe;
let our Enemies be never so strong, never so watchful, never so malicious: and
there will be nothing to hinder, but that we may say with David; In the Lord I
have put my trust, Psalm 56.4
I will not be afraid what flesh can do unto me.

But, if Christ be so tender over us, and so tenderly careful of our safety and
welfare, as the Hen over her chickens, then it becomes us, by way of thankful
retribution, to be as tender of his honor: let us not then fail hereof: think,
what it is, by which he may be in danger to suffer in the point of his honor,
and let us study to prevent it, or remove it: Sin it is, that is such an enemy
to his honor; let us therefore set our selves against it to the utmost of our
power: and that both in others and in our selves. Spare not any that shall
venture by sin to act against his honor: it concerns the Magistrate, Romans 13.4
he must not bear the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger
to exercise wrath upon him, that does evil. It concerns the Preachers of Gods
word, to them the charge is given Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like
a trumpet, Isa. 58.1.
show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sin. It
concerns Masters of Families, to endeavor to keep the name of Christ from
being dishonored by the sins of those, that are under them, spare not to
chide, spare not to correct, and make them to feel smart, that are bold to
dishonor Christ by their sins. Because old Eli did forbear to exercise due
severity against his Sons, dishonouring God by their abominable wickedness, he
is deeply censured, 1 Samuel 2.29 1 Samuel 4.11, 18.
as honoring his Sons before God, and we see the severity that God exercised
both against his Sons, and against himself for it. Yea, it concerns us all,
seeing any friend or neighbor by Sin to dishonor Christ, not to spare them,
but to endeavor by seasonable reproof to take them off from their exorbitant
courses. Lev. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, says God, but thou shall
reprove him. Thus therefore let us show our chariness for the honor of Christ
in respect of others. But no less let us be thus affected in respect of our
selves. Let us, professing our selves Christians, take heed of sin, least
Christ be dishonored by it; for our sins, above the sins of all others, will
occasion dishonor to him. Through you, says the Apostle, Romans 2.24.
the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles. Salvian in this kind
excellently enlarges himself. Can it be said of the Hunnes, says he, behold
what manner of men they are, Numquid de Hunnis dici potest, Ecce, quales sunt,
qui Christiani esse dicuntur? Numquid propter Maurorum efferos mores lex
sacrosancta culpatur? Numquid de ullis istorum dici potest, ubi est lex
Catholica, quam credunt? uhi sunt pietatis and castitatis praecepta, quae
discunt? Evangelia legunt, and impudici sunt: Apostolos audivat and
inebriantur; Christum sequuntur, and rapiunt? Numquid haec de ulla istarum
gentium dici queunt? Non utique: de nobis quippe ista omnia dicuntur. In nobis
Christus patitur opprobrium: in nobis patitur lex Christiana maledictum. De
gubern. Dei. l. 4.
that are said to be Christians? Is the holy Religion blamed for the savage
manners of the Moors? Can it be said of any of them, where is the Catholic
Faith which they believe? where are the precepts of piety and chastity, which
they learn? they read the Gospels and are unchaste: they hear the Apostles, and
live in drunkenness; they follow Christ, and oppress? can these things be said
of any of these Nations? at no hand: but of us all these things are spoken. In
us Christ suffers reproach: In us Christian Religion is evil spoken of. Let us
then for Christ's honor sake look to our behavior, to abandon all sins, which
are so dishonorable to Christ: And, on the other side, let us be careful, not
to omit any duty, by which we may in our places, promote the glory of Christ,
nor let us stick at the undergoing of any hardship, so we may honor Christ
thereby: how shall we clear our selves from the guilt of horrid ingratitude if
we shall not be thus chary of the honor of Christ, who has been so tender of
our welfare, and safty?

Lastly, let us imitate our blessed Savior, and as he is tender and chary of
the good and welfare of us all, so let us be tender of the welfare and safety
each of other: whom can we study to resemble more safely, then him, of whom its
testified, (...), Mar. 7.37
he has done all things well? and whom ought we more to imitate, then him,
that is our head, that so there may be a conformity between him, the head, and
us the members? Let us therefore be tender and chary of the safety and welfare
of others. Let us do nothing that may be destructive to others: let us not
poison others by our evil example: let us not cast a stumbling block in the way
of others by the excessive use of our Christian Liberty, Romans 14.15
Destroy not him with thy meat, says the Apostle, for whom Christ died: Its
St. Paul's profession, If meat make my brother to offend, 1 Cor. ^, 13
I will eat no flesh, while the world stands, least I make my brother to
offend. In indifferent things, that are absolutely in our own power, let us not
so stand upon our terms, as to say, The thing is lawful, I may do it,
therefore I will do it: but remember that of the Apostle, All things are
lawful, 1 Cor. 10.23
but all things are not expedient; All things are lawful, but all things edify
not. Thus let us be careful not to do any thing, whereby we may hazard the
welfare of others. But be we also careful, not to be wanting in any thing,
whereby we may further their welfare: hearken to Saint Judes advise, Edify one
another in your most holy Faith; Jude, ver. 20 1 These. 5.14 Heb. 10.24
and Saint Paul's, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble-hearted,
support the weak: And again: Consider one another to provoke to love and good
works. And also the light of a good example shining forth to others. Shun the
sins, from which ye would dehort others: practice the duty to which ye would
exhort others. Its a true saying of St. Gregory Nyssen, Thou shall be found
guilty of Tyranny, (...) Saevae Tyrannidis reus deprehensus fueris, si hanc
tibi-ipsi potestatem vendices, ut quae in aliis prohibes, haec facere tibi soli
licere existimes, and quae ipse pro licentia audes, ab his alios arcere. Contr.
Eunom. l. 12.
if thou do challenge such power to thy self as to think that lawful for thy
self alone, which thou forbiddest to others, and to drive others from those
things, which thou take license to thy self to commit. And how shall thou not
hinder others from accepting of thy counsel, while they shall find thee thus
to Tyrannize over them. Add also thy prayers to God, that he would speak that
to the hearts of men, which you speak to the ear: for upon his blessing depends
the issue of all our endeavors for the spiritual and Eternal good of others:
It was the confession of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.6
I have planted, APollos watered, but God gives the increase. So then neither
is he that planteth, Verse. 7.
any thing, nor he that waters, but God, that gives the increase. So that its
most true, that St. Austin says, Cathedram in coelo habet, qui corda docet.
To. 9. in 1 Epist. Joan. tract. 3. 2 Timothy 4.2
He has his chair in Heaven, that teaches the hearts. And though we presently
see not the fruit of our endeavors, yet go on still in our endeavors: Exhort
with all long suffering: how have we seen the Hen often continuing long to clock
for her chickens, though they make no great haste to come to her, not giving
over, till they come? And in all that we do for the furtherance of the
spiritual and eternal good of others let us be affected with a spirit of pity
and compassion toward them: 2 Cor. 11.29
who is weak says the Apostle, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn
not? So let it be with us: would we comfort any under distresses bodily or
spiritual? See we them hardly receiving comfort? Would we reclaim others, whom
we see going astray, and see we them hardly reclaimed? Let us not be hardened
against them, but pity and bemoan their condition.

CHAP. VIII. Christ and an Husband.
THis resemblance is clearly intimated, in that argument, with which the
Apostle strengthens his exhortation, to wives to be subject to their husbands,
Ephesians. 5, 22, 24
because the Church is subject to Christ, which plainly implies that the Church
is the Wife and Spouse of Christ. And not less by the argument, by which he
enforces his exhortation to Husbands, to love their Wives, Ephesians. 5.25
because Christ loves his Church, which plainly implies, that Christ is an
Husband to the Church: else the argument on both sides were inconsequent, and
therefore invalid and weak, which God forbid that we should once imagine; St.
Paul, in making this consequence, being immediately guided by that unerring
spirit. But this resemblance between Christ and an Husband, and consequently
between the Church and a Spouse is frequently expressed in Scripture. Hear our
Savior owning the Church as his Spouse, and consequently professing himself as
an Husband to her, Cant. 4.8 Verse. 9. Verse. 10, 11
Come with me, says he, from Lebanon, my Spouse. Thou have ravished my heart,
my Sister, my Spouse. How fair is thy love, my Sister, my Spouse! Thy lips, O
my Spouse, drop as the honeycomb. I am come into my garden my Sister, Cant. 5.1
Isa. 54.5
my Spouse. Hear that Evangelical Prophet. The Lord (says he) thy maker, is
thine Husband. And again. As the Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, Isa. 62.5
so thy God rejoices over thee. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, Hos.
2.19, 20
says God by the Prophet, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, etc,
I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness. Hear our Savior in his
defense of his disciples for not fasting. Matthew 9.15
How can the children of the Bridechamber fast, while the Bridegroom is with
them, etc? In which place it is manifest, that he speaks of himself. Hear the
confession of that holy Baptist concerning Christ. Joh. 3.29
He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom, but the friend of the Bridegroom,
which stands and hears, rejoices greatly, because of the Bridegrooms voice:
this my joy therefore is fulfilled. Rev. 21.2
I John, says the holy Apostle, saw the holy City, coming down from God out of
Heaven, as a bride prepared for her Husband. And, come hither, says the Angel,
Rev. 21.9
I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs wife.

The marriage indeed is not fully consummated, till after death, but the
contract is made, and Christ and his Church are betrothed each to other: and
among men, we know, that after the contract, the parties, affianced one to the
other, are Husband and Wife, in the account of God.

And for the further clearing of this, we are to know, that (though, in some
things, there is a difference, yet) in many things there is a great similitude
between the marriage of man and wife, and that of Christ and the Church.

I. I say, there is a difference, between them in two particulars, in which the
marriage between Christ and the Church has the pre-eminency.

1. The marriage between man and wife stands in a carnal and bodily
conjunction, but this between Christ and his Church is mystical and spiritual.

2. Death breaks the bond between Husband and Wife: but it breaks not the
marriage knot between Christ and the Church: nay, its not fully finished till
after death; it is before death but as the state of a contract.

II. But yet, if we view it well, there is, and we shall find, at least in
substantials, a great similitude between them.

1. In marriage there must be a consent of both parties, and of the Parents on
both sides: and for want of this, as much sin and disorder has been committed,
so we have seen great inconveniences to follow: thus therefore we have seen it
to be in the first marriage, that ever was, namely, that between Adam, and Eve:
see full consent manifested on all sides: here is the common Father of both:
Genesis 2.22
for having made Eve of the rib taken out of man, he brought her to the man:
see the consent of the woman, for the original word translated, he brought,
signifies properly, he caused to come, she came then, and by coming signified
her consent: and Man manifested his consent by receiving her, and saying, Verse.
23.
this is now flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone. And this law we see
strictly observed in the marriage between Christ and his Church. Joh. 6.37
All that the father gives to me, behold the Fathers consent! shall come to me;
behold the Churches consent! And him, Genesis 2.22
that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out: behold Christ's consent.

2. In marriage there is a conjunction of two persons, One man and one woman;
one Adam and one Eve in the first marriage: he brought her, Genesis 2.24.
behold one Eve! to the man, behold one Adam! And see that law of marriage:
Therefore shall a man leave, Genesis 4.19
etc. and cleave to his wife, behold one of each: and they twain shall be one
flesh. Indeed Polygamy was brought in by Lamech, and practiced by, and
permitted, or at least winked at in them by God: but from the beginning it was
not so, Matthew. 19.8 Verse. 4.5 Mal. 2.15
says our Savior; but God made them male and female, namely, one of each, and
said, they twain shall be one flesh. And this is observed by the Prophet, Did
he not make one? a question implying a vehement affirmation: he did make one:
namely, one woman for one man. And so is it in this spiritual marriage between
Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6
and the Church: there is one Lord Jesus Christ: and one Catholic Church,
says the Nicene Creed. And so says our Savior, my dove, Cant. 6.9
my undefiled is but one. There are indeed many individual believers, and many
particular visible Churches, but all these make one body, one Catholic Church,
and one Spouse; as the Apostle says, The body is one, 1 Cor. 12.12
though the members many.

III. Marriage is to be between two fit persons. I will make him an help, Genesis
2.18
(says God) meet for him. And what fearful inconveniences have we known to
follow upon unequal Marriages? whether the inequality has been in Age, Estate,
or Religion. But what shall we say to this? Indeed, if we consider Christ in
himself, and us in our selves, the inequality is so great, that there is no
fitness, he God, we men; he Infinite, we finite, he Light, and we darkness;
he the wisdom of the Father, we fools; he purity it self, we all filthy and
uncleanness as the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 16.4
wallowing in blood, not washed at all, etc. he the mirror of Beauty, we black
dowdies; he infinitely glorious, we most base. But yet (that there might be
some meetnesse) he imparts something to us, in which we might be like unto him,
and in some things he partakes with us, in which he might be like unto us; he
partakes of our nature, Heb. 2 16 Verse. 16. 2 Pet. 1.4
namely, of flesh, and blood for he took the seed of Abraham; and he makes us
partakers of the Divine Nature, namely, by infusing into us by his spirit those
eminent perfections, according to our measure, which are in God nothing but God.

IV. There is a great similitude in regard of the ends of Marriage, which are
two:

1. It was not good for Man to be alone: Genesis 2.18
so neither was it convenient, that Christ should be without his Church, nor
the Church without Christ; as not the Head without the Body, nor the Body
without the Head: now Christ was from all Eternity appointed to be the Head of
the Church, and the Church to be his Body.

2. Marriage is for the increase of Mankind: so by the seed of Christ, that
is, by his Word and Spirit, and by the help and Ministry of the Church, there
is a great increase of that Seed, which is to inherit Heaven.

V. After Marriage the Woman leaves her own Name, and is called by the Name of
her Husband, and is interessed in his Estate and Honor: so is it in this
Marriage between Christ and the Church. 1 Cor. 12.12
So is Christ, says the Apostle: and so the Members of the Church are called
Christians, by which name they were called first at Antioch: Acts 11:26
and so they are Partakers of that anointing, in respect of which he is called
Christ: Psalm 45.7 1 John 2.20 Heb. 1.2
He was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows: And we have
received an Unction from the Holy One. So Christ was made Heir of all things;
and we are made Coheirs with Christ. Romans 8.17 John 20.17 Luke 1.35 2 Cor. 6.18
John 1.12
If God is Christ's Father, he is also our Father. If Christ be the Son of God,
we also are his Sons and Daughters, though in a different manner; he by Nature,
and we by Adoption; and this we have from and by Christ; Matthew. 4.11 Heb. 1.14
He has given us power to be called the Sons of God. If the Angels minister u
to Christ, they do also minister unto us. And, if he has a Throne of Glory, on
which he sits in Heaven, we shall also sit with him: so says our Savior, To
him that overcomes, Rev. 3.21
will I give to sit with me on my Throne.

Hence we may learn sundry things.

I. Hence see the great Honor of the Church, and the Members of it: Behold!
they are the Spouse and Wife of Christ, and he is their Husband; transcendent
Honor and Preferment! It could not be denied to be great Honor that was put
upon Esther, she a poor captivate Jewish Maid to be made the Wife of King
Ahashuerosh, that had the command of 127 Provinces: but how great then is the
Honor that is done to the Church, in that Christ vouchsafed to be an Husband to
her? for what is Ahashuerosh, or any the greatest Commander of the Earth, in
comparison of Christ? Behold! Psalm 24.7 1 Cor. 2.8 Acts 7.1 Rev. 19. and 1.5
Prove. 8.16
He is the King of Glory, the Lord of Glory, the God of Glory, the King of
Kings, and the Lord of Lords; the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: and,
finally, He, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. See your great
Honor arising from the Honor of your Husband: See his great Love to you in
raising you to so high Preferment?

II. See what comfort this point affords to all godly Christians, the Members
of the Church. If he be our Husband, and we his Spouse, then doubt not, but he
will strictly perform to us all the loving Offices, in a supereminent way,
which loving Husbands do, and all Husbands are bound to perform to their Wives.
So that the comfort reaches far. It Is comfort,

1. Against bodily and spiritual wants: be sure, ye shall not want any thing,
that is for your good and convenience, either for Soul or Body. The loving
Husband readily says to his beloved Wife, Thou shall not want any thing, so
long as I have a penny: So says Christ much more to his Church; be of good cheer
then: whatsoever the wants be, under which ye lie, do but by prayer acquaint
Christ with them, and he wants neither will nor power to supply them all: not
will, for his love to you is transcendent; not power, for all things are in his
hands to bestow.

2. Against our Sins: They are debts, but, repenting heartily of them, be not
afraid, lest they should be laid to our charge; our Husband will not fail to
discharge them all for us: and, he having discharged them, and satisfied Gods
Justice for them, doubt not, but that (though they be never so many, and never
so great) they shall be remitted to you for Christ's sake.

3. Against the Distresses, to which in this life we are subject, either from
Men, or Devils: The loving Husband, if he be able, will be sure to defend his
beloved Wife from all wrongs: much less shall ye sustain from any, if Christ
your Husband can do with all: and what cause have we to doubt of his power? for
God, the Father of Christ, is greater then all; Joh. 10.29, 30
and he and his Father are one.

4. Against all Enemies bodily or ghostly: Ye are ready to think, Our Enemies
are great for power, full of policy, many for number, how shall we, an handful
of impotent and silly men, be able to stand against them? but fear them not:
Our Enemies are Christ's Enemies, as the Wives Enemies are the Husbands Enemies:
and though they are more then our match, yet they are far inferior unto him:
and therefore, though we cannot, yet he can both shield us against them, Isai.
10.12
and render unto them the fruits of their stout hearts, and desperate malice.

5. Against our ignorance and simplicity: We are, in some particular or other,
puzzled, so that we know not what to do, nor what course to take: Yet be not
disheartened, the Husband that loves his Wife, will be ready to direct and
counsel his Wife, so far as he is able: Christ is such an Husband, as wants
neither will nor skill; he can direct us: for he is the Wisdom of the Father,
Col. 2.3
and in him are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; and there is no
question but he will do it: for, besides that he exceeds in love to his Church,
Isai. 9.6
it is his Office to be a Counselor to the Church, and to all godly Christians,
the Members of the Church: only seek his advice by prayer, and search the
Scriptures, and doubt not but that thou shall find full direction, as your
occasions require.

6. Against the base Opinion that the World has of you: They think of you (as
they of the Apostles) as the filth of the World, and the offscouring of all
things: 1 Cor. 4.13
and your condition, indeed, in the World, is mean and low, in which regard men
proudly overlook you: So that ye may take up the complaint of the Psalmist, We
are exceedingly filled with contempt, Psa. 123.3, 4
etc. but be of good cheer: See the Honor that Christ has put upon you, while
he becomes your Husband, and has made you his Spouse: and there is not the
meanest Christian, how much soever he is undervalued, but he has a share in
this Honor.

7. Against spiritual Desertions: Good Husbands will not forsake their Wives;
no Husband should do it, but ought to have one Bed and one Board with them:
then be sure, that Christ will not depart from thee; if he shall at any time
seem to depart, it is for thy good, and he will again return unto thee at the
last, and will show thee his favor; be comforted therefore. Saint Bernard has
a sweet Passage to this purpose: Ne timeas, O Sponsa, ne desperes; si paulisper
tibi subtrahit Sponsus faciem suam, omnia ista tibi cooperantur in bonum; and
de accessu, and de recessu, lucrum acquiris: tibi venit, tibi recedit: venit ad
consolationem, recedit ad cautelam, ne magnitudo consolationis extollat te, ne,
si semper apud te sit sponsus, contemneres sodales, and hanc continuam
visitationem non jam gratiae attribuas, sed naturae. Nimia familiaritas parit
contemptum: recedit ergo, ne, nimis assiduus, contemnatur, and ut, absens,
magis desideretur, desideratus, avidius quaeratur, and diu quaesitus, gratius
inveniatur. Praeterea, si nunquam deesset consolatio haec, quae, respectu
futurae gloriae, ex part est, putaremus forte hic habere civitatem manentem,
and minus inquireremus futuram: ne ergo exilium deputemus, and arrham pro
precii summa, venit Sponsus and recedit, nunc consolationem afferens, nunc
universum statum nostrum in infirmitatem commutans, paulisper permittens nos
gustare, quam suavis sit, and, antequam plene sentiamus, se subtrahit. De Scula
claustr. cap. 6.
Fear not, O Spouse (says he) despair not; If, for a little while, thy Husband
withdraws his face from thee, all this works together for thy good; both by his
coming, and by his departure, thou art a Gainer: He comes for thy good, and he
departs for thy good: He comes for thy comfort, and he departs for thy caution;
lest the greatness of the comfort should too much lift thee up; lest, if thy
Husband should be always with thee, thou should contemn thy Companions, and
should now attribute this continued Visitation, not to Grace, but to Nature.
Too much Familiarity breeds Contempt: He withdraws himself therefore, lest,
being too constantly with us, he should be contemned, and that, being absent,
he may be the more desired; and that, being desired, he might be sought with
more earnestness; and that, being long sought, he may be found with more
thankfulness. Besides, if we should never want this comfort (which yet, in
respect of the future Glory, is but something in part) we would happily think to
have here a continuing City, and the less look for that which is to come. Lest
therefore we should mistake the place of our Exile for our Country, the earnest
Penny for full Payment, our Husband comes and goes, one while bringing comforts,
and another while turning our whole state into weakness, suffering us, for a
little space, to taste how gracious he is; and, before we can have a full taste
of it, he is gone. This then is no small comfort to us against such Desertions.

III. Let wicked men learn hence, not to despise godly Christians, considering
the Honor that Christ has put upon them, in that he becomes their Husband, and
makes them his Spouse: How were it not against all Reason to lade them with
scorn and contempt, whom the King of Kings has so highly honored? as for any
of the Subjects, high or low, to have despised Esther, when Ahashuerosh had
made her his Wife, and Queen in stead of Vashti. Much more let not them offer
any wrong to such: for Christ is their Husband, and they are his Spouse: and
therefore how shall not the wrong done to them fall upon the head of the wrong
doer? As the Husband, that loves his Wife, will reckon any wrong done to her,
as done against himself, and will to his power avenge her quarrel: Esth. 7
(And this we see in the case of Esther; Haman had plotted the Destruction of
all the Jews in one day; and she, being a Jewess, had been in the same danger:
and now she had no sooner complained to Ahashuerosh of the wrong intended at
the Banquet of Wine, but instantly his wrath was incensed against Haman; nor
could his wrath be pacified, till Haman, his great Favorite, was hanged upon
the Gallows, which he had provided for Mordecai:) So and much more will Christ,
the Husband of the Church, be affected with any wrong done to the Church, or
any Members of it; he will own it, as done to himself, his wrath will be
kindled against them that do the wrong, and a full revenge will certainly be
taken upon them. As then ye love your selves, repent of, and desist from
wronging these.

IV. Let the godly learn, in this respect also, to look to their Conversation,
that it may be suitable to the Honor that Christ has put upon them; for so
honorable carriage becomes honorable and honored persons: It Is not for a Kings
Wife to give way to such behavior, as may yet be tolerable in Women of ordinary
rank; much more ought Christians, professing themselves to be so related to
Christ, to be choice of their demeanor, as Christ, in the point of Honor,
surpasses all the Grandees of the World.

V. Let them also learn to be thankful to Christ, who has so honored them,
becoming an Husband to them: consider we how great the Honor is, to be the Wife
or Spouse of the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: Think we, how unworthy we
are so great advancement: and so endeavor we to raise up our hearts to an high
pitch of thankfulness: And let us show it forth,

1. In words, by setting forth his Goodness, and sounding forth his Praises.

2. In Realities, studying to carry our selves to Christ, as to our Husband;
and that in sundry Particulars.

1. Let us have an high and reverent Opinion of him, and express it, both in
words, as the Church did, Cant. 5.10
while she said of him, My welbeloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten
thousands: and in gesture, as those twenty four Elders, falling down, and
casting their Crowns before the Throne, and saying, Rev. 4 10, 11
Thou art worthy, etc.

2. Let us be subject to him, to his Injunctions by Active Obedience; and, by
Passive, to all the Dispensations of his Providence.

3. Let us have common Friends and common Foes, common Contentments and common
Dislikes: He counts our Friends his, and the acts of Friendship done unto us,
he reckons as done to himself: It Is his voice, Matthew. 25.40
In as much as ye did it to one of these little ones, ye did it to me: He
counts our Foes his, and the acts of Friendship denied to, and the acts of
Hostility done against us, he holds, as denied to, or acted against himself.
Verse 45
Thus he says, In as much as ye did it not to one of these little ones, ye did
it not to me. And when Saul, afterward blessed Paul, goes on to persecute the
Christians, he hears it said to him from Heaven, Acts 9.4.
Saul, Saul, Why do thou persecute me? What then can we do less, then to
count his Friends ours, and his Enemies ours. And, seeing he takes content in
the things that make for our happiness, and dislikes the things that make
against us, what is more reasonable, then that we should take content in the
things that content him, and dislike and abominate the things that are
displeasing to him?

4. Let us be loyally affected unto him: let him have our love, all our love:
So ought the Wife to be affected unto her Husband; let us love nothing besides
him, but for him: love not any man, but either because he is Christ's, or that
by our love we may win him to be Christ's: let us not go a whoring after other
things, not love any thing, by which we may be in danger to be drawn from the
love of Christ; nay, in comparison of Christ, hate all. To this purpose is that
of our Savior; He that loves Father or Mother, Matthew. 10.37
Brother or Sister, more then me, is not worthy of me. Luke 14.26
Nay, If any man comes to me, and hates not his Father and Mother, Wife and
Children, Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple.

5. Let us delight in Christ and in communion with him: This is a duty of all
wives to their Husbands, and a property of every good wife. If they be absent
each from other, she is glad of a Letter from him, and she delights in reading
it over and over. If they be present, its her joy to eat and drink with him to
speak to him, and to hear him speaking to her. Let us not fail to be so
affected to Christ: he is, in regard of his body, absent from us: he in Heaven,
we on Earth, and the Scriptures are, as his Epistle written to us, let us
delight in them, and exercise our selves in the study of them: thus is the
blessed man described, his delight is in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
and in that Law he meditates day and night. In the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper we have opportunity to feast with Christ, let us readily lay hold on all
opportunities for the use of this ordinance in the season of it: let us
diligently hear the Word read and Preached: therein Christ speaks unto us. And
finally, let us frequently put up our prayers to Christ, therein we speak to
him.

6. Let us long for the time, when this marriage between Christ and his Church
shall be fully accomplished: for so a woman betrothed to an Husband longs for
the marriage day. Thus let it be with us: for, for the present, we are but
betrothed to him: the marriage shall not be fully accomplished, till the second
coming of Christ; then shall the whole Church and all the members of it, both
in soul and body, be brought unto Christ, and not till then, to enjoy him and
to be with him fully, immediately, and for ever. And so the Apostle brings this
in as a consequence of Christ's descending from Heaven with the voice of an
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, that we, namely, 1 These. 4.16, 17
the whole Church both in soul and body, shall be ever with the Lord; Oh
therefore let us long for that day, let us say, Rev. 22.20
even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly: this is frequently affirmed of the
godly, as of the Saints at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.7
that they waited, namely, with patience, yet with desire, for the coming of
the Lord Jesus. And so St. Paul testifies himself and all the godly, that they
looked for their Savior from heaven. Phil 3.20
And so by the same Apostle are the godly described, namely, that they are
such, 2 Timothy 48.
as love the appearing of Jesus Christ. Such therefore let us be.

CHAP. IX. Lib. I. c.
Christ and a Lamb.
WE have heard Christ and the Paschal Lamb compared before, and I intend not
now to touch upon that: but only shall take notice of the resemblance between
Christ and a Lamb in general: And frequently is our Savior set out under this
notion. So the holy Baptist says of Christ, Joh. 1.29
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. And a little
after, Behold the Lamb of God And so St. Peter, Verse 36. 1 Pet. 1.19
By the blood of Christ, as of a Lamb unspotted, and undefiled. And so Saint
John. Rev. 5.6 Verse. 8.
In the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb, as it had been slain: And again, the
twenty four E ders felt down before the Lamb. Verse. 12.
And again: Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to recieve power and riches,
etc. And again. Rev 6.16
Hide us from the wrath of the Lamb? And again. Rev. 19.9
Blessed are they, that are called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb: Rev. 21.9
And again. One of the Angels said, Come hither, and I will show thee the Bride
the Lambs wife: In all which places its plain, that Christ is spoken of. And
the resemblance between Christ and the Lamb holds in these 4. particulars.

1. Its an useful and profitable creature, the flesh, the skin, the wool, yea
all of it and about it is good for some use or other, for food, for clothing,
etc. And who sees not, how all this is true of Christ? useful he is for all
purposes, he is a King to govern us, a Prophet to teach us, a Priest to
Sacrifice and intercede for us; he is a Shepherd to lead us to the green
Pastures, a Physician to heal our Diseases, a Counselor to advise us, a Guide
to direct us, Isa. 55 1. Rev. 3.18
a Captain to fight for us: He is milk, wine, and honey; he is gold to enrich
us, garments to cloth us, eye salve to cure our blindness: yea he is all in
all to us; Col. 3.11
yea all about him is useful to us, the holiness of his conception to answer
for our natural uncleanness, the holiness of his life to answer for the
irregularities of our lives, his Death to satisfy the justice of God for us:
his Resurrection, to be a cause of our resurrection at the last day: His
Ascension into Heaven, to prepare Mansion-places for us, his sitting at his
Fathers right hand, to intercede for us; his coming again at the last day to
take us to himself, that we may be ever with him.

2. The Lamb is a contented creature, content with any pasture, though never so
poor, into which the shepherd shall put it: And who sees it not to have been so
with our Savior? If God will have him to be born of a poor Virgin, he disdains
it not. If to live in a mean condition, so as not to have where to lay his
head, he sticks not at it: he sought not greater things for himself then God
had laid out for him; nay when the people would have taken him by force to make
him a King, he would none of it, Joh. 6.15.
but departed into a mountain alone by himself.

3. The Lamb is a meek creature, bearing wrongs quietly, not studying revenge:
and herein, in an high degree, is it a fit resemblance of our dear Savior:
Therefore, says St Austin, is our Savior compared to a Lamb, Agnus, quia
mansuetus. Tom. 10. sermon. a Lovaniens. Edit sermon. 90.
because of his mildness. We hear that Evangelical Prophet in this respect
comparing Christ to a Lamb: Isa. 53.7
He is brought, says he as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before his
shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. But, will some say, did he not
open his mouth? when they came to apprehend him in the garden, Matthew. 26.55
said he not, Are ye come out as against a thief, with swords and staves, for
to take me? And when one of the Officers struck him with the palms of his
hand, Joh. 18.22, 23
said he not, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: if well, why
smitest thou me? how then is it true of him, that he opened not his mouth? Hear
Saint Peter clearing this scruple: he opened not his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.23
that is, when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not; he neither studied, nor exercised revenge, but meekly bore all;
he could have prayed to his Father, and he would have given him more then
twelve Legions of Angels; Isa. 37.36
and what revenge could they have wrought against them, when one Angel in one
night destroyed 185000. 2 King. 1.
in the Assyrian Host? At his word, as at the word of Elisha fire from Heaven
might have consumed them all; or the Earth would have opened her mouth, and
devoured them all, as it did Korah, and that rout of Rebels. But he forbore all
this, and quietly suffered all, committing his cause to him that judges
righteously. Numb. 16.


4. The Lamb is an innocent creature; The Lamb says Bullinger, is a symbol of
innocence. Agnus innocentiae symbolum. In Apoc. 5.
And was not this eminently seen in our blessed Savior? whom did he ever wrong
in word, in deed, in body, in goods, in good name? how justly might he say, as
Samuel in his apology? Whose Ox have I taken? 1 Samuel 12, 3
whose Ass have I taken? whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? etc.
The Apostle could say of him, such an high Priest it became us to have, who was
holy, harmless, Heb. 7.26. (...)
etc. Nay, he was so far from hurting any, that he abounded in the exercise
of beneficency: he took all occasions that offered themselves of doing good, yea
he sought opportunities, he went about, doing good, Act. 10.38
says Saint Peter. He went about all their Cities and Villages, Matthew. 9.35
says St. Matthew, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of
the Kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
Nor was there any sort of people, which tasted not of his beneficency: To the
woman of Samaria, that had scoffed at him, Joh. 4.9
as being a Jew, he gave a clear manifestation of himself, as the Messiah, I
that speak unto thee, am he, Verse. 26.
says our Savior to her. Matthew. 15.
The woman of Canaan by her importunity prevails at last to have the devil
cast out of her daughter. Malchus, that came among the rest to apprehend him,
having had his ear cut off by Peter's sword, had his ear cured by our Savior.
Luke 22.51
And when the Jews had exercised the height of cruelty against him, having
nailed him to the Cross, he forbeares not then to act for them, but making
intercession for them, says, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.
Luke 23.34


See here the horrid sin of the Jews, in plotting and acting against this our
dear Savior: he to be so qualified in all respects, as we have heard, so
useful to mankind, so contented with his mean condition for our sakes, so meek
under all their acts of unkindness against him: so innocent and harmless,
yea, so beneficent, notwithstanding all their unkindnesses against him; and
they to be carried with so much violence against him, so that nothing will
satisfy them but his blood: what horrid inhumanitie is this?

As for our selves, let us remember what Saint John says. 1 John 2.6
He that says, he abides in him, [namely, in Christ] ought also himself so to
walk, even as he walked. Let us therefore endeavor as in other particulars so
in these to imitate Christ.

1. As Christ was, so let us study to be useful in our places unto those among
whom we live, in the employment of those abilities, which we have received from
God: Romans 12.13 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
have we the wealth of the world? let us distribute to the necessities of
Saints: being rich in the world, be ye rich in good works, and ready to
distribute: have ye wisdom? be not backward to counsel and advise them that
stand in need of your help in this kind: 1 These. 5 11 Verse. 14. Heb. 3.13
Psalm. 122.6
and according to the gifts, that ye have received, Edify one another, warn
them, that are unruly, comfort the feeble minded, etc. Exhort one another
daily. If ye can do no more, having yet the spirit of prayer, Jam. 5.16
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, yea, pray ye one for another.

2. As Christ was, so let us be content with the meanest condition into which
it shall please God, our great shepherd to bring us; if he will have us to be
as poor, as Job, Psalm. 66.
if he lays afflictions on our loins, if he gives men leave to ride over our
heads, if he shall cast us upon the bed of languishing, be content with all,
God will have it so, why should we not be content? much more are we for the
cause of Christ, stripped of our wealth, cast into prisons, laden with
reproaches, banished out of our Country, made a Prey to Sword, to Fire, to
wild beasts? murmur not, but be content; Its for the honor of our Lord and
Master, who for our good, and everlasting happiness, was content, being God,
to become man, being the Lord of all, to become servant to all, being to be the
great Judge of the world, to be arraigned at the bar of Humane judgment,
being the Prince of life, to suffer death, being the Lord of glory, to be
crucified, being God blessed for ever to be made a curse. Think seriously of
this, and then think, what cause have we to be discontented with any the
saddest condition, the greatest degree of abasement, into which we can be
brought for his cause? for, what are we in comparison of him? Learn we
therefore, with St. Paul, how to be abased, and how to abound, both to be full
and to be hungry, Phil. 4.12
both to abound and to suffer need: and, as the Apostle exhorts us, to be
content with such things, as we have. Heb. 13.5


3. Let us be as he was, meek in undergoing all unkind usage, that we may meet
withal at the hands of men: though we be reproached, reviled, and slandered,
let us be as if we heard not; though real injuries be offered to us, let us be
as if we felt them not: let us not exercise nor meditate revenge: Its the
exhortation that the Apostles frequently give: Romans 12.19 1 Pet. 3.9
Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, says Saint Paul, Not
rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, says Saint Peter. Solomon in
the Old Testament can give the same advise. Say not thou, I will recompense
evil. And again, Prove. 20.22 Prove. 24.29
Say not thou, I will do so to him, as he has done to me. And we want not
eminent examples of this meekness both in the Old Testament and in the New. Of
Moses it was said, Numb. 12.3
that he was very meek above all that were in the Earth. Indeed, if God and his
honor be concerned, Exodus 32.
he can be hot to purpose: God is dishonored by the golden Calf: and now see,
how he lays about him. He is bringing in his hand the tables of the Covenant
written with Gods own hand, but upon the sight of their idolatry, Verse. 15
Verse. 19
judging them unworthy of so rare a testimony of Gods love, he casts them out
of his hand, Verse. 20
and breaks them beneath the Mount. As for the Calfe which they had made, he
burnt it in the fire, Verse. 20.
and ground it to powder, and strained it in the water, and made the Israelites
to drink of it: He spares not Aaron, but reproves him sharply, what did this
people to thee, Verse. 21.
says he, that thou have brought so great a sin upon them? And, proceeding
further, he arms the Levites against their brethren, so that there fell of
them three thousand men. Verse. 27, 28
Thus hot he is in a business, that concerned God: but if the business
concerns himself only, he is meek and calm to admiration. Numb. 12. 1, 2 Verse.
9, 10 Verse. 13.
Aaron and Miriam speak against him, because of the Ethiopian woman, whom he
had married, and he hears it: and when God would not bear it, but would have
righted him, and therefore had stricken her with Leprosy, he intercedes with
God for her. The like we see to be the carrriage of David to Saul. 1 Samuel
26.19, 20
What wrong Saul had done to him, ye may see by his expostulation with Saul:
and yet how meekly did David carry himself under all? far was he from revenge
Twice he had opportunity to have cried quit with him; 1 Samuel 24. and 26.
and he had those about him, that were earnest with him, to lay hold on the
opportunity and would have wrought the feat for him, but David stilled and
stayed them, Saul's life was dear to David: yea, when he fell in the war upon the
Mountains of Gilboa, how did he lament his death? Quae matter, sic defleret
filium, sicut hic deflevit inimicum? quis gratiae authorem tantis prosequatur
laudibus, quantis iste prosecutus est insidiatorem capitis sui. Offic. l. 3. c.
9.
how did he praise him? 2 Samuel 1. What mother, says St. Ambrose, could so
lament for her Son, as he lamented for his enemy? who could so praise his
Benefactor, as he praised him, that sought his life? Yea, when a pick-thank
Amalekite, hoping to have received a reward, 2 Samuel 1.
brought to David Saul's Crown and Bracelets, and told him, that he had killed
him, he caused him to be put to death: and he blesses the men of Jabesh-Gilead
for their kindness to their Master, 2 Samuel 2
Saul: 2 Samuel 5
and with what severity did he avenge the death of Ishbosheth, the Son of Saul,
upon Baanah and Rechab the Murderers? So meek was David under all the injuries
of Saul against him; so far from revenge. Other examples I might add, but these
may suffice. I will therefore content my self to put you in mind of the
meekness of our Savior, in which he was as a Lamb: and now remember we the
charge of our Savior, Learn of me, for I am meek; namely, Matthew. 11 29
that we should be meek, as he was. And fear not now the imputation of
cowardice. The Gallants indeed of the World reckon this Meekness so to be: but
the wisest of mere men tells us, on the other side, Prove. 16.32
That He that rules his spirit is better then he that takes a City. And we
shall deceive our selves, if we think that Law of Moses, Eye for eye, Deuteronomy.
19.21
etc. to favor the retaliation of wrongs: For, 1. That Law was not given to
private men, but to Magistrates, as to Gods Deputies, to whom he has committed
the Sword, to take vengeance on evil doers; and so, when they use their power
to this purpose, they revenge not, but God by their hand. 2. The end of that
Law (as Tertullian observes well) was not to permit a retaliation of wrongs by
way of revenge, Non hoc ad secundam injuriam talionis permittendam, sed ad
primam coercendam, ut unusquisque respiciens licentiam secundae injuriae, a
prima seipsum contineret. Contr. Marcion. l. 4.
but to restrain men from offering the first injury, that every man, looking at
the license of the second injury, might keep himself from the first: For, Nil
amarius, quam idipsum pati, quod alterifeceris. Contr. Marc. l. 2.
as the same Father says elsewhere, There is nothing more bitter, then to
suffer the same evil, which we have done unto others. 3. Quis facile contentus
est, tantum rependere vindictae, quantum accepit injuriae? videmus homines,
leviter laesos, moliri caedem, sitire sanguinem: huic immoderatae and injustae
vindictae modum justum figens, lex poenam talionis instituit: proinde, Oculum
pro oculo, non fomes, sed limes furoris est, non ut id, quod sopitum erat,
accenderetur; sed ne id, quod ardebat, ulterius extenderetur. To. 6. contr.
Faust. l. 19. c. 25.
The Answer is good that Saint Austin gives: Who does readily content himself
(says he) to proportion his revenge to the wrong which he has received? We see
men, lightly offended, to plot death, to thirst after blood. The Law therefore,
setting bounds to this immoderate and unjust revenge, appointed this
retaliation. That therefore, which Moses says, An Eye for an Eye, is not for
the fomenting, but for the restraining of Fury; not that that, which was laid
asleep, should be kindled again, but that the heat, that was, might not be
stretched out too far. Let us not therefore, either for fear to be counted
Cowards, or in hope to be born out by that Mosaical Law, study or exercise
revenge; but, after the Example of our blessed Savior, carry our selves meekly
in bearing injuries.

4. As Christ was, so let us be, harmless and innocent, not wronging any in
word, thought, or deed; in body, goods, or good name. If the Question be, Lord,
Psalm 15.1
who shall enter into thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? that
is, Who shall be saved? The Answer is, He that backbites not with his Tongue,
nor does Evil to his Neighbor, Verse 3
nor takes up a reproach against his Neighbor. It stands us then in hand, thus
to be harmless, as we desire Happiness. Ask your selves also, Could I take it
in good part to be wronged by another? If you could not, then wrong not
another: for this is the golden Rule of Equity laid down by our Savior; What
ye would that men should do to you, do ye the same to them: Matthew. 7.12
and consequently (which is the Dictate of Nature) What you would not suffer
from another, do it not to another: yea, there is no expecting, Quod tibi fieri
non vis, alteri ne feceris.
upon any just ground, to be free from receiving wrong, except ye be careful
not to wrong others: for so our Savior says, Matthew. 7.2
With what measure ye mete to others, it shall be measured to you again.
According to that also of the Prophet: Woe to thee that spoylest, Isai. 33.1
and thou wast not spoiled; when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled. And it is an excellent passage of the Prophet Joel against the Enemies
of Gods people: Joel 3.6, 7, 8
The Children of the Jews ye have sold to the Grecians, that ye might remove
them far from their border: Behold I will raise them out of the places whither
ye have sold them; and I will sell your Sons and Daughters into the hands of
the Children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far
off. As then you desire not to suffer wrong, forbear to do wrong. But
Christianity stands not all in Negatives: nor shall we answer our Pattern, if we
only do no hurt. Add therefore a care to do good, and to exercise beneficency,
as our Savior did: and here take the Rule, 1 These. 5.15
Ever follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men: and
that, Do good to all, Galat. 6.10
especially to them that are of the Household of Faith. If occasions of doing
good offer themselves to us, accept of them with joy and thankfulness: If they
seem to fly from us, 1 These. 5.15 (...).
pursue them with all earnestness; this is that following which Saint Paul
means: Thus did our Savior, who went about doing good.

CHAP. X. Christ and the Light.
CHrist is frequently set out by this Resemblance: The Evangelist says of John
the Baptist; The same came to bear witness of that Light: John 1.7
and who was it, to whom he came to bear witness, but Christ? He adds; Verse 8
He (namely, John the Baptist) was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness
of that Light. But how then says our Savior of this holy Baptist, John 5.35
He was a burning and a shining Light, and of his Apostles in general, Ye are
the Light of the World? Matthew. 5.14
The Answer is facile and easy: John was a Light, or as it were a Candle, or a
Torch, (...).
giving Light to men; but he was not that Light. The Apostles were said to be
the Light of the World; but Light enlightened, whereas Christ is the
enlightening Light, as the Evangelist proceeds to say concerning Christ, John
1.9
He is the true Light, that enlightens every man that comes into the World. So
was not John the Baptist, nor the Prophets, nor any other man, but Christ
alone. Therefore he alone takes it to, and says it of, John 8.12
himself, I am the Light of the World.

And this, as Jansenius well observes, agrees to Christ, both as God, and as
Man: For according to his Divine Nature he is the Light, Secundum divinam
naturam lux est, quia secundum eam hominum mentes occultis suis radiis
perstringit, suggerens, quae sunt justa and salutaria: Secundum humanam item
naturam lux est, quia, in assumpta humanitate, verbo simul and exemplo, fugatis
ignorantiae and peccatorum tenebris, docuit and demonstravit, quae sunt
justitiae and vertutis. Concord. Evang. cap. 77.
because in respect of it he dazles the minds of men with his hidden beams,
and suggests those things that are just and saving. And, in regard of his
Humane Nature, he is the Light, because in his assumed Humanity, both by word
and by example, driving away the darkness of Ignorance and sins, he has taught
and showed the things that belong to Justice and Virtue.

And the same Author further observes, Emphatice dicit, Ego sum lux mundi,
significans, praeter se, neminem esse lucem mundi, and, si quis sit, per ipsum
esse, participatione scilicet sui luminis, ratione cujus Apostolos dixit esse
lucem mundi. Neque ergo Mosen significat fuisse lucem mundi, ut qui parvam
mundi partem obscuro suo lumine, non veluti Sol, sed veluti lucerna,
illustravit. Nec rursus Philosophos Gentium, aut Pharisaeorum doctores, ut qui
mundo tenebras potius offuderint, quam ex eo fugaverint; sed se unum toti mundo
hoc esse spiritualiter, quod Sol visibile mundo corporaliter. Ibid.
That Christ did emphatically say, I am the Light of the World; signifying,
That, besides himself, none is the Light of the World; and that, if any other
be a Light to the World, he is so by him, namely, by partaking of his Light: in
which respect he said, that his Apostles are the Light of the World. He shows,
that Moses was not the Light of the World, as who enlightened only a small
part of the World, and only with a dim Light, not as a Sun, but as a Candle.
He notes also, that neither the Philosophers, the Teachers of the Gentiles, nor
the Pharisees, the Teachers of the Jews, were the Light of the World, as who
did rather cast darkness upon the World, then drive it away from the World; and
that he alone is that to the whole World in spiritual, which the visible Sun is
in bodily respects.

And the Resemblance holds in sundry Particulars.

1. The Light receives no pollution; though it shines on a dunghill, or on any
place most loathsome and filthy, yet it remains still pure and untainted. So our
Savior, though he came to a sinful World, as to a stinking dunghill, or a
Golgotha, a place of dead men's skulls, yet he retained his purity still; he
converses with Pharisees, with Publicans and Sinners, yet is not infected by
them: many of them were bettered by him, he not liable to be corrupted by any
of them.

2. Light is a common benefit; no people is there to whom it is appropriated;
no people excluded from the comfort of it: it shines upon all, there is no
Monopoly, no engrossing of it. So is Christ a common benefit to all Believers
of all Nations, of all ranks and degrees, to Jews, to Gentiles, to high, to
low, to rich, to poor, to Master, to Servants, to male, to female, to learned,
to unlearned. So says the Apostle: There is neither Jew nor Greek, Gal 3.28
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are
all one in Christ Jesus. Every man therefore is invited unto him, Isai. 55.1
with promise to receive benefit by him: Ho, every one that thirsts (says
Christ by the Prophet) come, buy of me Milk and Wine: Matthew. 11.28
Come unto me all that labor, and are heavy laden, John 7.37
and I will give you Rest. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Let
him that is a thirst come, Rev. 22.17
and whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely. See in all these
the Invitation general, and no sorts of persons excluded.

3. Light expels Darkness: so does Christ expel the darkness of Ignorance: When
Christ came into the World, he drove out the Darkness that was in the World
before, and brought in a clearer Manifestation of the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, then had been formerly in the World: Life and immortality is brought to
light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10
and that by Christ: for this Salvation, discovered in the Gospel, was first
preached by the Lord himself. Hebr. 2.3
And, when Christ comes first into the Soul, he finds all covered with a worse
then an Egyptian Darkness; and so Saint Paul says of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.18
That they had their understanding darkened: but he dispels this Darkness,
setting up, yea, being a Light in our Souls: In which respect St. Paul says to
the Ephesians, Ye were once Darkness, Ephesians. 5.8
now ye are Light in the Lord.

4. We hear what our Savior says: John 12.37
He that walks in Darkness does not know whither he goes. And again: If a man
walks in the night, he stumbles, John 11.10
because there is no Light in him: but he that walks in the day, Verse 9
stumbles not, because he sees the Light of the World. And, as it is for going,
so it is for action; In the dark a man knows not what he does, but Light
directs, as the Foot in walking, so the Hand in working. In this also Christ
resembles the Light. Saint Paul, while Saul, being a stranger from Christ, who
wonders to see him guilty of gross miscarriage? 1 Timothy 1.13 Gal. 1.23 Acts 9.1
Acts 8.3
A blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, destroying the Faith, breathing out
Threatenings against the Disciples of the Lord, making havoc of the Church,
and haling men and women to prisons. But Christ meets him in the way to
Damascus, and enters into his Soul; and now, having Communion with this Light,
he is directed to better courses; of a Wolf, he becomes a Sheep, yea, a careful
Shepherd; Gal. 1, 23
He preaches the Faith, which once he destroyed; He tenders the Flock of
Christ, of which formerly he had made havoc. And so we may see it to have been
with others.

5. Light is a pleasant thing: Eccles. 11.7
Truly the Light is sweet (says Solomon) and it is a pleasant thing for the Eye
to behold the Sun: And, Prove. 15.30
The Light of the Eyes rejoices the Heart, says he. And hence Light is put for
Joy: Light is sown for the righteous, Psalm 97.11
and Joy for the upright in Heart. And thus does Christ resemble the Light; as
Jansenius well observes: We shall (says he) rightly understand, That Christ
does call himself the Light of the World, Recte intellexerimus, Dominum se
vocare lucem mundi, quod per suum Evangelium, and salutiferum nuncium,
afflictas omnium mentes venerit exhilaraturus. Ibid.
because he came to exhilarate the afflicted minds of men by his Gospel, and
the Tidings of Salvation. And therefore the Angel bringing news to the
Shepherds of the Birth of Christ, calls it Tidings of great Joy, Luke 2.10, 11
John 14.16
which shall be to all Nations. And therefore, calling the Holy Ghost another
Comforter, he implies, That he himself is a Comforter. And indeed there is not
any affliction either of body or mind, under and against which we may not
find matter of comfort in Christ, as might be showed in Particulars.

Hence we may learn sundry things.

1. See the fearful folly, of which they are guilty that refuse to accept of
Christ, when he is offered, and offers himself to them in the Word and
Sacraments: it is thus with many: happily, might they have him upon their own
terms, might they keep him and the World together, might they keep him and
their sins together, they would be persuaded easily to accept of him: but the
case so standing, that they cannot keep both together, they bid adieu to
Christ: Oh the folly of these men! for now they, rejecting Christ, refuse to
accept of Light, and choose rather to live in the dark: and how shall they
avoid stumbling and falling? And when crosses and afflictions betide them,
where shall they find comfort to uphold them, while they refuse Christ, in
whom alone all comfort stands? who shall wonder, if such as these fall into
despair? who shall wonder, if such, in extremity of sorrow, offer violence to
Nature, and prove cruel to themselves?

2. See how comfortable the condition of them is, that have an interest in
Christ, that can say, as the Spouse, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is
mine: Cant. 2.16
see the great good, that accrews to them by him: for he is the light, and
therefore, Christ being yours, the light of the world is yours: he is yours, to
whom it belongs to expel the darkness of ignorance out of your minds: and
doubt not, but he will do it, not all at once, but by degrees. Having him ye
shall walk, surely, and safely, ye shall be secured against falling and
stumbling, ye shall be guided and directed by him in the ordering of your
steps. Having him ye shall be sure in him to find comfort against all
distresses, which may happen to you, whether in body or in mind: against
Satan, he has vanquished him in himself, and he will tread him under your feet:
against the world, Romans 16.20 Joh. 16.33
Christ has overcome it for you: against your sins: Christ has satisfied Gods
justice offended by them, and obtained your pardon, for He dyed, and is risen
again, Romans 3.34
and makes intercession for you at Gods right hand, against all breaches
between God and you: Romans 5.10
for Ye are reconciled to God by the death of his Son: against the curse of the
Law, for Christ has redeemed you from it, Gal. 3.13
being made a curse for you; against death; 1 Cor. 15.57
for through Christ ye have victory over it. And the like in all the rest: how
happy then is the condition of such?

3. Let us learn by Christ to keep our selves unspotted in the worst times, and
in the worst places: so did Christ; so let us do, or at least endeavor to do.
Genesis 6.9 Job. 1.1
It was the commendation of Noah, that he was an upright man in that
generation, when all flesh had corrupted their way; and of Job, that he feared
God, and eschewed evil, in the Land of Vz; thus were these men, as the fish
that remain fresh in the salt Sea, and as the Stars, that shine clearest in the
dark night, and thus let us endeavor that it may be with us, Phil. 2.15.
according to that exhortation of Saint Paul, Be blameless and harmless, the
Sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation.

4. Let us learn, not to contemn and despise Godly Christians, between whom and
us there is never so great distance in outward respects: though they be poor
and we rich, they despicable, we honorable, etc. yet despise them not, but own
them as brethren, and give them the right hand of fellowship: remembering, that
as the benefit of the light belongs in common to all creatures, so the benefit
of Christ to all Christians, Gal 3.28
and though in worldly respects, there be never so great difference between us
and them, yet in Jesus Christ we are all one.

5. Are we in our places Lights, communicating Light to others, instructing
them in the knowledge of God and of Christ, Joh. 1.9
guiding them by the light of our example? yet let us walk in all humility:
remember, that Christ alone is that true light, enlightening every man, that
comes into the world: and if we be Lights, we are but enlightened Lights: and
the light, which we impart unto others, we have it not of our selves, but from
Christ the light of the world: Why then should we be proud? 1. Cor. 4.7
Remember the argument of the Apostle: What have thou, says he, which thou
have not received? that is, nothing: and if thou have received it, namely all
that is good, why do thou boast?

6. If we want light, let us seek to Christ for it, who is this great light of
the world: find we darkness remaining in our minds? seek to Christ, and
desire him to dispel it, Psalm. 119.18
and to set up the light of knowledge in us, praying, as David, Open mine eyes
that I may see wondrous things out of thy Law: find we our selves to sit in the
darkness of affliction and sorrow? and desire we the light of joy and comfort?
whether shall we seek for it, but to Christ, the Fountain of Light? and here we
cannot miss of it? he wants neither power nor will to communicate this light
unto us: It was the comfortable assurance, wherewith the Church supports her
self in her sorrow, when I sit in darkness, Mic. 7.8
the Lord will be a light unto me.

7. As Christ being the light of the world, communicates his light unto us,
instructing and comforting us, so let us, having recieved light in any kind
from Christ, impart our light unto others for their benefit; having been taught
by Christ, and instructed in any truth, let us readily teach and instruct
others: be not we niggards of our knowledge, but readily communicate it to
others. Thus Andrew having found Christ, says to his brother Peter, Joh. 1 41.
We have found the Messiah: and Philip to Nathaneel, Verse. 45.
we have found him of whom Moses did write, etc. And the woman of Samaria to
her neighbors, Come see a man, Joh. 4.29
that has told me all things, that ever I did, is not this the Messiah? Thus
let us do; we shall loose nothing by it, nay we shall gain by it. That of
Solomon is verified here, There is that scatters, and is more increased; and
there is, Prove. 11.24, 25.
that withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty: the liberal soul
shall be made fat: and he that waters shall be watered also himself. Its a
true saying of Clemens Alexandrinus to this purpose. A man, teaching, learnes
more, and he that speaks, (...). Stromat. l. 1.
does often hear with them that hear him. And, having received from Christ the
light of comfort in any distress, let us be ready to comfort others lying
under any pressure; this says the Apostle, is expected at our hands, that we
should comfort others with the same comforts wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God.

CHAP. XI.
Christ and a Lilly.
Cant. 2.1
CHrist himself in his own words, resembles himself to a Lilly. I am (says he)
a Lilly of the Valleys: for so Tremellius makes the two first Verses of this
Chapter, to be the words of Christ concerning himself.

And St. Bernard notes the resemblance to stand in sundry particulars.

1. Agnosce Lilium Christum ex candore, qui mox in ipso exortu floris
pastoribus de nocte emicuit.
1. Acknowledge Christ to be a Lilly by his Whiteness, who presently in the
very springing of this flower, shined unto the shepherds by night.

2. Acknowledge him also to be a Lilly by his sweet smell, 2. Agnosce Lilium
and ex odore, quo and long positis inotuit Magis. Et quidem stella apparuit,
sed eum minime viri graves secuti fuissent, nisi intima quadam suaveolentia
orti floris traherentur.
by which he was made known to the wise men, who were far distant from him;
Its true, a star appeared to them; but those grave men had never followed it;
had they not been drawn by the inward sweet smell of that flower now sprung up.

3. Et vere Lilium veritas, cujus odor animat fidem, splendour intellectum
illuminat. Leva etiam oculos in personam Domini, qui de se dicit, Ego sum
veritas, and vide, quam competenter veritas Lilio comparetur.
3. And truth is truly a Lilly, the sweet smell of which animates faith, and the
brightness of which enlightens the understanding. And now lift up your eyes to
the person of the Lord, who says of himself. I am the Truth, and see, how
fitly truth is compared to a Lilly.

4 Si non advertisti, adverte de medio floris hujus, quasi virgulas aureas
prodeuntes, and cinctas candidissimo flore pulchre and decenter disposito in
coronam, and agnosce in Christo divinitatem humanae coronatam puritate naturae.
4. If thou have not observed it, mark as it were little golden rods, issuing
out of the midst of the flower, and compassed about with a most white flower,
excellently, and fitly disposed, as a crown, and acknowledge in Christ a Divine
Nature crowned with the purity of the Humane Nature.

5. And happily, 5. Et fortasse propterea ipse se Lilium appellavit, quia omnia,
quae ipsius sunt, Lilia sunt, conceptio, ortus, conversatio, eloquia, miracula,
passio, mors, Resurrectio, Ascentio: horum non candidum? quid non suavissime
redolens? in conceptione refulsit magna superni luminis claritas, de
supervenientis abundantia Spiritus: Ortum candidavit incorrupta Matris
Virginitas: conversationem, innocentia vitae, eloqula veritas, miracula puritas
cordis, Passionem patiendi voluntas, mortem libertas non moriendi,
Resurrectionem, Martyrum fortitudo, Ascensionem exhibitio. Quam bonus odor
fidei in his singulis, nostra quidem, qui candorem non vidimus, tempora and
viscera replens? In Cant. Sermon. 70.
for this cause He called himself a Lilly, because all things about him were
Lillies, his Conception, his Birth, his Conversation, his Words, his Miracles,
his Passion, his Death, his Resurrection, his Ascension: What of these was not
white? what of these sent not out a fragrant smell? In his Conception did shine
forth the great brightness of the Heavenly light, by the abundance of the Holy
Ghost coming on him: his Birth was made white by the untainted Virginity of his
mother: his Conversation, by the Innocence of his Life, his Speeches, by the
truth of them; his Miracles, by the purity of his heart; his Passion, by his
will to suffer; his Death, by his power not to dye; his Resurrection, by the
courage of the Martyrs; his Ascension, by the exhibition of the promises. He
adds by way of close. How good and pleasant is the scent and odor of Faith in
all these? filling indeed our times and hearts, who yet never saw his
whiteness. But because these words are by many Interpreters of note denied to
be the words of Christ concerning himself, and affirmed to be the words of the
Church concerning her self, I shall forbear to follow this resemblance any
further.

Only in a word, we may see, how amiable in all respects Christ is, and what
cause we have to be enamoured of him.

Christ and a Lion.
Our dear Savior is often in Scripture set out by this resemblance, as in Jacobs
Prophetical blessing of Judah. Genesis 49.9.
Judah, says he, is a Lions whelp: from the prey, my Son, thou art gone up: he
couched down, as a Lion, and as an old Lion: who shall rouse him up? And in
that Prophesy of Balaam, Numb 24 9. Rev. 5.5.
He couched and lay down, as a Lion and as a great Lion, who shall stir him up?
and he is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.

Saint Austin, taking knowledge of it, that Christ is called a Lion, and the
devil is called a Lion, makes the proportion in both to hold thus. Christ is
called a Lion, Christus leo, and diabolus leo, ille propter fortitudinem, ille
propter feritatem: ille ad vincendum, ille ad nocendum. To. 10. sermon. a
Lovaniens. edit. sermon. 46.

Christus leo dictus est, and agnus occisus est: leo propter fortitudinem,
agnus propter innocentiam: leo quia invictus; agnus, quia mansuetus. Sermon.
eorund. ser. 90.


and the devil is called a Lion; the one for his courage, the other for his
savage cruelty: the one to overcome, the other to hurt. And elsewhere, taking
knowledge of it, that Christ is called a Lion, and a Lamb slain, conceives thus
of the proportion: Christ is called a Lion, and a Lamb slain: a Lion for his
courage, a Lamb for his innocence: a Lion because unvanquisht, (...), etc.
Sicut leo, non solum vigilans, sed and dormiens, formidabilis est, sic and
Christus, non solum ante crucem, sed in cruce, formidabilis erat, magna enim
tunc miracula edidit; Solis cursum retro convertens, petras diffindens, terram
tremefaciens, velum templi conscindens. Tom. 5. ser. in Matthew. 26.39.
a Lamb, because he was meek.

Saint Chrysostom observes this resemblance between Christ and a Lion in this
particular. As a Lion, says he, is dreadful not only waking, but also
sleeping, so is Christ formidable not only living but also dying on the Cross:
for even then he wrought great Miracles, causing the Sun to be Eclipsed,
cleaving the Rocks asunder, (...), etc. Ratione potentiae, and quia terribilis
est, and regia majestate pollens, comparatur leoni Christus. Tom. 6. Ser. in
genesis 1.31.
making the earth to quake, and rending the vail of the Temple, etc. And
elsewhere, summing up much together, he says, In respect of his strength, and
because he is terrible, and is endued with Kingly Majesty, therefore is Christ
compared unto a Lion: for to the Lion all this agrees, he is the strongest of
all the beasts, he is terrible to them all: as the Prophet says, When the Lion
roareth, Am. 3.8.
all the beasts of the field tremble: and he is the King of all the beasts: but
in a much more eminent way do all these agree to Christ.

Rivetus in his Commentary upon Genesis, observes many things of the Lion. The
Lion (says he) is of a generous spirit, he uses magnanimity against fierce and
cruel beasts, Leoni innatus est animus generosus: magnanimitate utitur adversus
feras, and truculentas bestias: nec ex insidiis agit, sed aperte: a front
adoritur animalia reliqua, non a tergo. Parcere solet humilibus and abjectis.
Non multum dormit, and in ipso sopore oculos habet apertos. Exercit. 177.
withstanding them to their face, not coming behind them: he uses to spare the
humble and prostrate: he sleeps not much, and sleeps with his eyes open. Its
true that this Author applies those things to Magistrates, but they are
eminently true of Christ: Who is, or ever was courageous, if not Christ? yea,
all the courage of others in acting or suffering for the cause of God, from
whom is it, if not from Christ? for from his fullness we all receive, Joh 1.16
Romans 8.37
and grace for grace. And the Apostle will tell us, that we are more then
conquerors through him, that has loved us: the courage then of the Martyrs
must needs argue the courage of our Savior, as the effect argues the cause:
And indeed who shall not acknowledge Christ's courage, that considers his
dealing with his enemies? for we shall see, that he comes not as a coward
behind them, but meets them openly, and withstands them to their face. If he
will grapple with the Devil, he meets him upon his own ground, Matthew. 4.1
he comes into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. If he will deal with
Saul, Act. 9.
afterward blessed Paul, he meets him in the way to Damascus, stopping him
when he was in his full career, and casting him to the ground, overcame him to
his infinite advantage. Theodor. Hist. Eccl. l. c. 4.25.
If he will deal with Julian the Apostate, he takes the time, when he was
attended with a great Army in his expedition against the Persians, and then
gives him so fatal a stroke, that he is forced to acknowledge Christ the
Conqueror, though not without a name of reproach, crying out Vicisti Galilaee,
thou have overcome, ^d. Ib. c. 27.
O Galilean: yea, and the Christians at Antioch upon the report of his death,
could cry out Vicit Deus and Christus ejus, God and his Christ has overcome.
And for the second thing noted in the Lion, that he spares the humble and
prostrate: this gave occasion to that saying of the Poet, cited by Simson.
Simson Hierog. de ^eone.


Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse leoni.
Its the safest course to lie prostrate before a Lion
This is most true of Christ; If any continue in their pride to oppose Christ,
they shall feel by sad experience, whom they provoke against themselves,
witness the forenamed example of Julian: but if any submit and humble
themselves, they are spared, and received to favor: witness Saint Paul, who
(while he was Saul) was a bitter Enemy to Christ and Christians; and yet
afterward, submitting himself, and crying out, Lord, Acts 9.6
what will thou have me to do? he is spared, and his enmity pardoned, and he
receives great Grace from Christ, as himself confesses, saying, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14
I obtained Mercy, and the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant: And so
that is true of Christ, which the Apostle says; God resists the proud: the word
is emphatical, 1 Pet. 5.5 (...).
as if he had said, He sets himself in a warlike posture, and takes up Arms of
defiance, which he will not lay down, till he has approved himself to be the
Conqueror; but, on the other side, he gives Grace to the humble.

And, for the last, That the Lion sleeps little: Simson in his Heiroglyphicks
affirms it; The Lion (says he) takes the least sleep of all the Beasts; Leo est
paucissimi inter animalia somni: oculos habet magnos, palpebras perexiguas,
quibus vix queat oculos penitus obtegere. Hierogl. de leone.
he has great Eyes, and very little Eyelids, with which he can hardly cover
his Eyes: and this he does apply to Christ. So (says he) the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah, Leo de tribu Juda, qui Israelem protegit, nec dormit nec dormitat,
semper ejus bono invigilat. Id. Ib. Psalm. 121.4.
who keeps and protects Israel, neither slumbers nor sleeps, but always watches
over them for their good; both to keep off or remove Evils from them, and to
heap Blessings upon them, as their wants require.

Hence we may learn diverse things.

1. See the comfortable and safe condition of the Church, and the Members of
it: for we see, what a Defender we have; of great power, as a Lion; of great
watchfulness, as a Lion: why then should we fear any Enemies? 1 Pet. 5.8
The Devil indeed goes about, as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour:
And the Enemies of the Church, acted by Satan, are Lions for cruelty; 2 Timothy
4.17
I was delivered (says Saint Paul) out of the mouth of the Lion. And so says
David of his Enemies, They gaped upon me with their mouths, Psalm. 22.13
as a ravening and a roaring Lion. But be of good cheer, the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah is your Defender against all these: and what are they in comparison of
him? They are strong and powerful, they are watchful against you, seeking and
readily laying hold upon all opportunities to do you a mischief; but Christ is
infinite in power and in care for you: and therefore what can they do against
you? Trust in Christ therefore, and ye shall then be able to say with David,
Psalm. 56.11
I will not fear what men or devils can do against me.

2. See the sad and unsafe condition of all Christ's Enemies, going on proudly
in their hostility against him: Such are all they, that go on impenitently in
their wicked courses. John 14.15
If ye love me (says our Savior) keep my Commandments: then to go on in the
wilful violation of his sacred Laws, must needs render men Enemies of Christ;
for this is in effect to say, We will not have this man to reign over us: Luke
19
and them that said so, Verse 27
he held his Enemies; As for those my Enemies, that would not have me to reign
over them: and see there their doom, Bring them hither, and slay them before
me. Christ's Enemies also are Enemies of godly Christians, that make conscience
of their ways: 1 John 5.1
He that loves him that begets, must love them also that are begotten: He then
that hates them that are begotten, hates him that begets. Let all these then
see how unsafe their condition is: how can they expect other then to be
destroyed? and how shall they avoid it? for he is the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, a Lion for strength; as a Lion surpasses all creatures in strength, so
does Christ much more.

3. Let us then tremble at the Word of Christ, at his Threatenings of
Judgments: We hear what the Prophet says; If the Lion roars, Amos 3.8
all the Beasts of the field tremble. And shall Christ roar from Heaven in his
Threatenings, and we not tremble? Hear we what God says; To the man will I
look, namely, Isai. 66.2
with a gracious aspect, that trembles at my Word. As we then desire, That God
should look upon us with a favorable Eye, let us not slight and contemn Christ's
Threatenings, though uttered by men, subject to the same passions with our
selves, but tremble at them, and fear to go on in those sins, against which
such Threatenings are denounced.

4. Let us learn, having offended Christ by our sins, not to stand out at the
staves end, nor to hold up buckler against him, but come in, and humble our
selves before him: so, if we meet a Lion in the way, we will hold it our best
course to fall flat on the ground, and to lie prostrate on the ground: much
more will it be our wisdom so to carry our selves toward Christ.

CHAP. XII. Christ and a Physician.
OUr blessed Savior, for conversing with Publicans and Sinners, was excepted
against by the Pharisees: Matthew. 9.11
Why eats your Master (say they) with Publicans and Sinners? Our Savior
answers this Cavil diverse ways: His first Answer is taken from a similitude,
Verse 12
The whole need not the Physician, but the sick. His Argument stands thus; No
place is fitter for the Physician, but where men are that need his help, as
being sick: but I am a Physician, Sin is a sickness, these Publicans labor
under this sickness; therefore no place is fitter for me, then where these
Publicans and Sinners are: Therefore to cavil at me, for conversing with
Publicans and Sinners, is equally unreasonable, as if any should cavil at a
Physician for being with sick persons So that it is manifest, that here our
Savior speaks of himself, as a Physician.

And indeed the work of a Physician is done by Christ, therefore he does not
unfitly resemble himself to the Physician. The Antecedent is manifest; for what
work is more proper to the Physician, then to heal diseases, and to cure the
diseased? and this was done by Christ, as is manifest in the History of the
Evangelists; Matthew. 9 35 and 4.23, 24
He went about, healing every sickness and every disease among the people, says
Saint Matthew. And so it is prophesied of him, Mal. 4.2
The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing under his wings.

And the things that are required in a Physician are eminently to be found in
Christ: 1. Knowledge of the Diseases, of the Causes and Cure of them: and who
can deny but that this was transcendently in him? 2. Carefulness: and this was
in Christ in an eminent proportion. 3. Pity: Christ has a fellow-feeling of
our infirmities. 4. Painfulness: This was in Christ, as may appear by his
manifold Travels from one Town to another for this end.

But there is great difference between Christ and other Physicians: in all
which we shall see Christ to have the pre-eminency; so that it will easily
appear, that we may say (without prejudice to Galen, Hippocrates, or any other
Physician of the greatest note that ever have been) that Christ is The
Physician, by way of eminency, The incomparable Physician; in comparison of
whom, the greatest or most eminent of that profession may (without
disparagement to themselves) confess, that they are not worthy to carry his
Books after him; or, in the words of that holy Baptist, Luke 3.16
that they are not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoes.

1. Other Physicians cure only the Diseases of the Body: but he is the
Physician that cures the Diseases of the Body, and also of the Soul, to which
latter none of our Physicians do attain. Excellently Saint Bernard to this
purpose: Mankind (says he) labors under a threefold Disease, our Nativity,
Life, Triplici morbo laborat genus humanum, nativitate, vita, and morte:
nativitas immunda, vita perversa, mors periculosa. Venit Christus, and contra
triplicem hunc morbum triplex attulit remedium; natus est enim, and vixit, and
mortuus est: Ejus nativitas purgavit nostram; mors illius destruxit nostram,
and vita ejus instruxit nostram. Lib. sentent.
and Death: our Nativity unclean, our Life perverse, our Death dangerous:
Christ comes, and against this threefold Disease has brought a threefold
Remedy: for he was born, he lived, and he dyed: his Birth cleansed ours, his
Death destroyed our death, and his Life has instructed ours, and sets it
right. Then is Christ a complete Physician of our Souls. And to this, as no
Physician, so no man, nothing can lay any claim. See the Confession of Saint
Macarius: As that Woman, that was diseased with the issue of blood (says he)
truly believing, (...), etc. Sicut mulier, quae fluxum sanguinis patiebatur,
vere credens, postquam tetigit fimbriam vestimenti Domini, statim sanitatem est
adepta, and exiccatus est fluxus fontis sanguinis impuri: ita omnis anima,
percussa incurabili vulnere peccati, habensque fontem pravarum cogitationum, si
accesserit ad Christum, and vere credens, deprecata fuerit, sanitatem
consequitur ab incurabili affectionum font; and, deficiens, exiccatur fons
ille, qui cogitationes immundas producebat, per virtutem solius Jesu: nec est
in alterius cujuspiam facultate, ut hoc vulnus sanare possit. Hom. 20.

(...) etc. Sicut illa, cum omnia sua bona in Medicos erogasset, a nullo tamen
eorum sanata est, aonec accesserit ad Christum, and, vere credens, tetigit
fimbriam vestimenti Domini: sic and animam, vitiosarum cogitationum vulnere
incurabili sauciatam, ab initio nullus justorum Patrum, Prophetarum aut
Patriarcharum curare potuit. Venit quidem Moses, sed sanitatem confer non
potuit. Sacerdotes, munera, decimationes, Sabbatismi, neomeniae, oblationes,
sacrificia and holocausta, and universa reliqua justitia celebrabatur in lege;
nec tamen potuit anima sanari aut mundari, donec Salvator venit, verus Medicus,
qui curat gratis. Ibid.


after she had touched the Hem of the Lords garment, was presently healed, and
the issue of blood was stopped: so every Soul, smitten with the incurable wound
of sin, and having a fountain of impure thoughts, if it comes to Christ, and,
truly blieving, prays to him, obtains cure, from that otherwise incurable
fountain of lusts; and that fountain is dried up, and fails, which sent forth
those impure thoughts, by the power of Jesus alone; nor is it in the power of
any other to heal this wound. And a little after he adds: As the foresaid
Woman, when she had spent all her Goods upon Physicians, was not yet healed by
any of them, till she came to Christ, and, truly believing, touched the Hem of
his garment: so neither could any of the just Fathers, Prophets, or Patriarchs,
from the beginning, cure the Soul wounded with the incurable wound of evil
thoughts. Moses came, but he could not confer soundness. Priests, Gifts,
Tithes, Sabbaths, New Mons, Washings, Sacrifices, and Burnt-offerings, and all
the rest of that ceremonial righteousness was celebrated in the Law; and yet by
them all could not the Soul be healed or cleansed, till the Savior came, who
is the true Physician, and heals freely. And the same Truth is attested by him
in many other places. Hom. 30, 44, and 45
And now what a vast difference is this between Christ and other Physicians?
and how great is his eminency above them, in that he healed the Diseases of the
Body as well as they; and also the Diseases of the Soul, to the curing of
which, neither they, nor any other, can or ever could attain?

2. With respect to the Body, other Physicians can cure some Diseases, but some
are incurable Diseases, so called, because it passes the skill of any Physician
to cure them; many Diseases there be, that put the most able Physician to a
plunge, some ease they may give, but perfectly cure them they cannot with all
their skill; as we see in manifold experience: but there is no disease or
malady above the reach of this Grand Physician, which he was not able to cure;
Palsies, Leprosies, Lunacies, Blindness, Deafness, Dumbness, etc. He healed
them all: He gave them occasions to say, Matthew. 4.24 Mark 7. ult.
(...), He has done all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the
dumb to speak: of giving sight to one born blind, the man so restored to sight
could say, John 9.32
Since the World began was it not heard that any man opened the Eyes of one
that was born blind: Verse 6, 7
And yet he did it. A cure of so high a nature, that from it the Jews could
conclude, John 11.37
That he could have caused that Lazarus should not have dyed. Diseases of long
continuance have been cured by him; Mat. 9.20, 22
The Woman that had the issue of blood twelve years, was healed by him. Luke
13.11, 13
The Woman that was bowed together, so that she could not lift up her self,
eighteen years, was made straight by him. The man, that had been sick of the
Palsy thirty eight years, John 5.6, 7, 8.
was healed by him. And what wonder is it, that he could thus cure all kinds
of Diseases! for Death it self could not hold its purchase against him: Matthew.
9.25
he restored even the dead to life, as the Daughter of Jairus, dead, yet lying
upon her bed; Luke 7.14, 15
yea, the Widows Son at Naim, dead, and laid upon the Bier, carried out of the
house toward the place of burial; yea, and Lazarus himself, John 11.39, 43, 44
dead and buried four days, so that his Sister Martha could say, Lord, by this
time he stinketh; yet he was raised and restored to life. Nor is it any wonder
that he had such power against Death; for he had power over him that has the
power of Death, Heb. 2.14
even the Devil; casting him out of them, of whom he had taken possession;
whether one Devil, as out of the Daughter of the Woman of Canaan; Matthew. 15
Luke 8.2
or seven Devils, as out of Mary Magdalen; or a Legion of Devils, Verse. 27, 30,
33
as out of the man that wore no clothes, nor abode in any House, but in the
Tombs; yet they all could not make good their Tenure against Christ. An
incomparable Physician!

3. Physicians, healing Diseases, do it by the help of Herbs, and Drugs, and
Physic, prepared by themselves, or by Apothecaries, at their appointment: and
without such means they can do nothing, being but Instruments of Gods ordinary
Providence: But in the Cures wrought by our Savior there was no use of any
such means, but either he spoke the word, and the business was effected; He
said to the Leper, Matthew. 8.3
I will be thou clean, and presently he was cleansed: Luke 7.14, 15
and so in raising the dead, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise; and instantly
he was restored to life: and so in raising of Lazarus, Christ says, Lazarus,
arise: Joh. 11.
and presently he arose: or by his bare touch of them, and word together. So to
the man that was deaf and dumb, he put his finger into his ears, and he spit,
Mar. 7.33, 34, 35.
and touched his tongue, and streightway his ears were opened, and the string
of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke plain; or by the touch of the hemme of
his garment, Matthew. 9.
as in the woman that had the issue of blood: and so the Evangelist says, As
many, Mar. 6.56.
as touched the hemme of his garment were made whole. Who can so cure?

4. Physicians working cures, perfect them by degrees: a disease may be cured,
but weakness remains a long time after: a bone broken or dis-joynted is set,
but its not presently strong: a wound may be healed, and yet a scar remains.
But Christ's cures were perfected presently. Luke 4 38, 39
Peter's wives mother lay sick of a Fever, but no sooner did Christ touch her,
but instantly the fever left her, no weakness remaining, for she arose and
ministered to them. The Paralitick was brought to Christ in his bed, Mar. 2.3,
4, 11, 12
born of four, but instantly the cure was so perfected, that he was able to go
and to carry his bed.

5. Other Physicians are chargeable and costly, they will not ordinarily do any
thing without their fee, not speak a word, not write a line, not stir a foot
out of doors, though the necessity of the Patient be never so great: Its noted
of the woman, that bad the issue of blood twelve years, Luke 8.43.
that though she was never the better, yet she had spent all her substance upon
Physicians. But its far otherwise with our blessed Savior; whom he undertook
to cure, he certainly healed them, and yet its true of him that St. Macarius
says of him, Curat gratis, he beales freely, not expecting any fee, not taking
any reward, as its plain in the history of the Evangelists.

Hence we may learn diverse things.

1. See what a great benefit Christ is, how he serves for all uses. If we be
hungry, he is bread to nourish us: and so in the rest: And, for the particular
in hand. If we be sick or wounded, in soul or body; he is a Physician to heal
and cure all our maladies: how great is the love of God to us, in that he gives
Christ to us thus useful to all purposes?

2. Let us honor Christ, and have him in high esteem, admire him; respect and
honor is due to the Physician of the body. Eccles. 38.1
Honor a Physician with the honor, that is due to him, says the Son of
Sirack. Much more let us honor Christ and have him in high esteem; he is an
incomparable Physician, none is like unto him. Its the exhortation of Saint
Chrysostom. As we then admire the Physician, when we see him to restore to
former health men that labored under incurable diseases, (...), etc. Sicut
medicum tunc admiramur, cum vidimus eum homines, incurabilibus morbis
laborantes, depulsa infirmitate, pristinae sanitati restituere: Ita and
Christum mirare and obstupesce, quia homines, immedicabilibus morbis
obstrictos, potuit a malitia liberare, eosque coelorum dignos reddere, qui ad
summum improbitatis culmen ascenderant. Tom. 5. ser. in coernit. appellat.
and freeing them from their infirmity and weakness: so admire and stand
astonished at Christ, because he is able to free men from their sins, who
labored under incurable diseases, and to make them fit for the Kingdom of
Heaven, that had risen to the highest pitch of wickedness. And how can we deny
Christ to be worthy of all honor and esteem, whom we see to be a Physician of
such eminent note? let us not therefore fail to give him the honor that is so
transcendently due unto him.

3. Let us, laboring under any malady or disease, in soul or body, fly to
Christ by prayer, to be healed and cured of it: so in case of any disease in
the body, hearing of any Physician of more eminent note, then the rest (so well
we love our bodies, that) we spare no pains, no cost, to procure his counsel,
we use all means to have him come to us, or, if by any means we can, we go over
to him, that he may take us as his Patients, especially if we be informed, that
there is no other Physician comparable to him for insight into the Nature,
Causes, and Cure of the Diseases under which we labor: As for the diseases of
the soul, its Christ only that can heal them, and our souls of all other
things should be dear to us; why therefore should we need to use many words to
persuade men to fly to Christ by prayer for the cure of them? So Macarius,
lays down the ground, and then inferres upon it this conclusion. We have
received such a deadly wound, (...), etc. Vulnere usque adeo incurabili
sauciati sumus, quod solus Dominus curare potuit: hanc ob causam ille ipse
venit, (...), etc. quia nemo ex antiquis nec lex ipsae nec prophetae illud
curare petuerant. (...), etc. Suscipiamus ergo ipsum Deum and Dominum, Medicum
verum, qui solus, accedens, curare potest animas nostras, quique nostri causa
vehementer laboravit. hom. 30.
that only the Lord could cure it, and for this cause he came himself, because
none of the Ancients, nor the Law it self, nor the Prophets could cure it. Let
us therefore receive God himself, and the Lord, as the true Physician, who
only coming can heal our souls; and who for our sakes suffered so much. And as
for bodily diseases, Physicians are indeed the instruments of his providence
for the curing of them, but yet, without his good hand upon them, they can do
nothing, and therefore let us not rest in the care and skill of the Physician:
but pray unto Christ, the great Physician, that he would direct them, and give
success to their endeavors.

CHAP. XIII. Christ and a Shepherd.
OUr Savior speaks of himself, as such, and of the godly, as his sheep. I am
the good Shepherd, Joh. 10.11 Verse. 14.
says he, the good Shepherd gives his life for his Sheep. And again, I am the
good Shepherd, and know my Sheep. And so the Prophet Isaiah speaks of him. Isa.
40.11.
He shall feed his flock like a Shepherd. And so the Prophet Ezekiel brings him
in, saying, I will search my Sheep, Ezekiel. 34.11, 12, Heb. 13.20
and seek them out, as a Shepherd seeks out his Sheep. So does St. Paul speak
of him, The God of peace, that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus the
great Shepherd of the Sheep. And so Saint Peter speaks of him: 1 Pet 2.25. 1
Pet. 5.4.
now ye are returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. And again, When
the chief Shepherd shall appear, etc.

And the resemblance holds excellently between Christ and a Shepherd.

1. The Shepherd knows his own sheep from the sheep of other men: and to this
purpose is the marking of sheep: so is it with Christ: so says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.19.
The Lord knows who are his. And so says our Savior. I am the good Shepherd,
and I know my sheep: The good and bad are in this world mixed together, yet he
knows, who are the sheep belonging to him; yea, wheresoever they are, he does
know them, and their estates: he knew Jeremiah in the dungeon, the three
children in the fiery Furnace, Daniel in the Lions den, Paul and Silas in the
inner prison, he knew the Israelites in Egypt, the Jews in Babylon.

2. The Shepherd is careful in feeding and pasturing his sheep; he leads them
not out to rotten grounds, that may bane them, but into good and wholesome
pastures, on which they may thrive. Such care has Christ for his people, his
sheep: he feeds their bodies with material food, Exodus 16.4
See how he fed Israel in the Wilderness, because they wanted means of
Tillage, he fed them with Manna from Heaven: Exodus 17.6
and because it was a dry Wilderness, he gave them water out of the Rock. See
how he fed Eliah, 1 King. 17.6
when he was fain to fly from Ahab and Jezabel: the Ravens bring food to him,
and the brook Cherith furnishes him with drink: Verse. 9.
and when the waters of the Brook failed, he sends him to the widow of Sarepta,
Verse. 16.
the meal of whose barrel and the oil in her cruse he lengthens out, that it
might suffice for the support of the Prophet, the Widow and her Son, till he
sent rain on the earth: 1 King. 19.5, 6.
Afterward he made the Angels his Purveyors to provide food for him. And so
still he provides food for us, yea for all creatures. These all wait upon thee,
Psalm. 145.15
says the Psalmist, and thou give them their meat in due season. Much more
will Christ provide food for his people: see the promise. Psalm. 33.18, 19
The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, to keep them alive in famine.
So he feeds their souls with spiritual food, Word and Sacraments, and his
flesh and blood in both.

3. The Shepherd (knowing the straying nature of his sheep) is the more careful
and watchful over them to keep them together. Hear what Jacob said of himself,
Thus I was in the day, the drought consumed me, Genesis 31.40.
and the frost by night, and my sleep departed from my eyes. And so it is said
of those Shepherds, Luke 2.8
that they watched their flocks by night. Such is the care that Christ has for
his sheep, his people, to keep them from going astray: hence it is, that he
gives such frequent warnings against those sins and errors, by which they are
in danger to miscarry: such as that of the wise man, My Son, Prove. 1.10 Matthew.
7.15
if sinners entise thee, consent thou not; and that of our Savior, Beware of
false teachers, which come to you in sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly they are
ravening Wolves. Matthew. 23.2.3
And that: what they, the Scribes and Pharisees, sitting in Moses seat, bid you
observe, that observe and do, but do ye not after their works, for they say and
do not. Matthew. 24.4
And that. Take heed, that no man deceive you. And that of Saint Paul. Romans
16.17
Mark them that cause divisions among you and avoid them. And that, Beware
least any man spoil you through Philosophy, Col 2.8. 1 These. 5.21 1 John 4.1
and vain deceit, etc. And that, Try all things, and hold fast that which is
good. And that of Saint John. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they be of God or not. All these warnings show Christ's care over his
sheep, to keep them from going astray.

4. The shepherd is careful to defend his sheep against the incursions of
Wolves and other enemies: hear what David says of himself to Saul. Thy servant
kept his fathers sheep, 1 Samuel 19.34, 35.
and there came a Lion and a Bear, and took a Lamb out of the flock, And I went
out after him and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth. That of Saint
Austin (which he indeed turns to another purpose) is apt to this purpose. The
Wolf comes to the sheepfold, he seeks to seize on some sheep, Venit lupus ad
ovile ovium, quaerit invadere, jugulare, devorare: vigilant pastores, latrant
canes: nil poterit, non aufert, non occidit. To. 10. de Verb. Apost. ser. 19.
to kill, to devour it, but the shepherds are watching, and the dogs are
barking, and now the Wolf can do nothing, he takes not away, he kills not. Such
care has Christ for his sheep, for his people: he watches over them to defend
them against all enemies, bodily and Ghostly. Psalm. 121.3, 1
He that keeps thee, will not slumber, Behold, he that keeps Israel, will
neither slumber nor sleep.

5. The shepherd, if any of his sheep be weak and tender, how tenderly does he
care for them, and so for the young Lambs, so Christ for his people: Isa 40.11
He shall gather the Lambs with his arm, says the Prophet, and carry them in
his bosom, and gently lead those that are with young. The poor younglings he
will tenderly relieve and support them. So was it Prophesied of him. Isa. 42.3
The bruised reed he will not break, nor quench the smoking flax. Its a (...),
a diminutive speech, much more is intended, then is expressed. He will not break,
he will not quench, that is, he will encourage weak beginnings, he will foster
and nourish them, and carry them on to higher degrees, till the bruised reed
grows strong, Matthew. 12.20
till the smoking flax breaks out into a flame. And this is by the Evangelist
applied to our Savior.

6. The Shepherd, if any of his sheep go astray, takes course to bring them
home again, he uses his whistle, he sends out his dog. Such care has Christ
for his straying sheep: He calls to them in the ministry of his word, as to the
Israelites. Jer. 3.1 Verse. 22.
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return to me: and, Return,
ye backsliding children, and I will heal all your backslidings. And he makes
use of afflictions, as his dogs, with which he hunts his straying sheep to the
flock. Thus when Israel said, I will go after my lovers, Hos. 2.5 Verse. 6 Verse.
7. Hos. 5.15
God threatens to hedge up her way with thorns, etc. till she should say, I
will return to my first husband. And so he says, I will go and return to my
place, until they acknowledge their offenses, and seek my face, in their
afflictions they will seek me early. And so it followed, Come, said they, Hos.
6.1
let us return to the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us: he has
smitten and he will bind us up. And so David speaks in his own experience.
Psalm. 119 67
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word.

7. If any one sheep be missing and lost, how does the Shepherd, Luke 15.4, 5, 6
leaving the flock, seek after the lost sheep, till he finds it? and having
found it, how does he bring it home on his shoulder rejoicing? how does he
invite his friends and neighbors to rejoice with him? So is Christ affected in
this respect: and this he shows in the Parable of the Prodigal; When he came
to his Father, how lovingly was he received? Luke 15.20
for, when he was yet afar off, his Father saw him, Verse. 22.
and had compassion on him, and fell on his neck and kissed him: he said also
to his servant bring the best Robe and put it on him, Verse. 23.
and a Ring on his hand and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the fatted
Calf, and kill it: what joy was there at his entertainment? Verse. 25.
for there was music and dancing. And the Elder Brother, at his coming from
the field was offended at this: we see how the Father justified this his
rejoicing. Verse. 32.
It was meet, says he, that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again: he was lost and is found.

Most apt therefore is this resemblance of Christ to a Shepherd.

Hence we may learn diverse things.

I. See here the safe and secure estate of all godly Christians, having Christ
to be their Shepherd, who is so tender, and watchful over them, for now they
cannot possibly miscarry, as Saint Hierome speaks excellently. Sape vexatur
Ecclesia, nunquam tamen potest sustinere naufragium. To. 1. lib. de Solomone.
The Church, says he, is oftentimes vexed and disquieted, but it can never
suffer shipwreck.

II. See here the folly and wickedness of all the Enemies of godly Christians.
In vain, yea, wicked are all their endeavors against them: ye seek to hurt
them, whose protection God has undertaken, as the Shepherd of the Sheep: and
how can this be but vain? how can it be but sinful? It Is good admonition that
Saint Chrysostom gives in this kind: (...), etc. O homo, dirimito bellum, ne
tuum ipsius dissolvas robur; ne bellum inferas coelo. Hominem si oppugnas,
utique aut viceris, aut ipse vinceris. Si Ecclesiam oppugnas, scito, te art
nulla victoriam de ea reportaturum: Omnibus in immensum fortior est Deum. To.
4. Sermon. antequam iret in exilium.
O man (says he) do thou break off this War, lest thou weaken thy self; wage
not War against Heaven. If thou do oppose a man, either thou shall overcome,
or thou thy self shall be overcome: But, if thou do oppose the Church, know
thou, that thou shall not, by all thy skill, obtain the Victory over it: for
God is infinitely stronger then all. Remember that speech of Christ, It Is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks. Acts 9.4
It Is most true that Saint Chrysostom says upon these words: By kicking against
the pricks, thou do not blunt the pricks, (...). Sermon. praed.
but drawest blood from thy own feet. Take warning therefore to desist from
such hostility: who would labor in vain? but this is also for hurt: Evil
counsel entered into, is worst to the Counselor. (...).
No man can wrong the godly, but he wrongs himself first: They that hate the
righteous, shall be desolate, says the Psalmist. Psalm 34.21
And again: The wicked has drawn out his sword, Psalm. 37.14, 15
to slay such as are of upright Conversation; but their sword shall enter into
their own hearts.

III. Let the godly see what Comfort belongs to them in this respect.

1. Against the fear of want: why should we fear it, having such a Shepherd? He
is able to provide for us, Heb. 1.2
for He is made the Heir of all things: and, if the good Shepherd has a care
for the pasturing of his sheep, Christ cannot be wanting herein to his sheep:
There is therefore nothing to hinder, but that we may comfortably conclude with
David, Psalm 23.1
The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

2. Against the fear of Enemies bodily or ghostly: Fear them not; see what a
Shepherd ye have, the Lord Jesus Christ: your Enemies are strong, yet their
power is but finite, but Christ is infinite in strength: what can they do
against you, whose protection he has undertaken? Well may you comfort your
selves against all visible Enemies, as King Hezekiah comforted his Subjects; 2
Chro. 32.7, 8
There are more with us, then with them: with them is an arm of flesh, but with
us is the Lord our God to help us. As for your ghostly Enemies, they are
spirits, whereas ye are but flesh and blood, and therefore they are much more
then your match: but be of good cheer, He that is your Shepherd, is God as well
as Man, even the creating Spirit, whereas they are but created spirits: and
what shall the Creature be able to do against the Creator? and we have
assurance given us by the Apostle, Romans 16.20
That this our Shepherd, the God of Peace, shall trample Satan under our feet.
Our Enemies of all kinds are watchful against us, seeking all opportunities to
do us a mischief: but Christ, our great Shepherd, Psalm 121
is infinitely more watchful; He neither slumbereth, nor sleeps: Our Enemies
are great Politicians, but is not our Shepherd great in Counsel, and his Wisdom
incomprehensible? be not then afraid of any Enemies, having such a Shepherd.
How justly may we conceive that we hear our Savior speaking to us in those
words; Isai. 51.12, 13
I, even I, am he that comforts you: who art thou, that thou should be afraid
of a man, etc. and of a Son of man, etc. yea, of any creature, and forgettest
the Lord thy Maker, and thy Shepherd?

3. Against your weaknesses and infirmities: Ye are subject to go astray; but
ye have a careful Shepherd, who will not fail to seek you, not giving over till
he finds you, and has brought you home to the Fold: Ye are weak and infirm,
but think not that this your Shepherd will, in this respect, remit his care for
you; nay, he will the more tender you, and strengthen that which is weak in you.

IV. Let all those, to whom in Scripture the name of Shepherd is given, learn
to exercise care and providence toward and over them, who (as sheep) are
committed to their trust.

1. Magistrates in the Commonwealth: These are (...), as Homer calls them,
Shepherds of the people: Iliad. a.
and so, when God set David to rule Israel, Psalm 78.71 Verse 71
it is thus expressed; He brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance. And so it is added, So he fed them, that is, so he ruled them. So
that Magistrates set over people, are as Shepherds set over a flock of sheep.
Let them therefore be exhorted to take care for the people put under their
charge, as the Shepherds for their sheep; and that both their Souls and Bodies.
Mollerus does well set it forth, both in respect of their Souls, and in respect
of their Bodies. Let Kings and Princes feed their Subjects first with Heavenly
Doctrine; Pascant Reges and Principes suos subditos primum coelesti doctrina,
h. e. curent recte doceri Ecclesiam, prohibeant id^lolatriam, superstitiosos
cultus, extirpent errores in Ecclesia, and compescant blasphemos, conferant
opes ad conservationem Ministerii and studiorum necessarioru^. Deinde, curent
etiam subditorum corpora, prospiciant ipsis de victu, dent operam, ut in pace
exercere operas, and parare victum possint: Non deglubant oves, h. e. non
exhauriant eorum facultates injustis exactionibus, non moveant bella non
necessaria, quibus and Respublicae turbentur, and civium corpora and facultates
in discrimen adducantur, ipsi vero suum corpus and vitam pro salute populi in
discrimen adducant: pellant lupos, h. e. tyrannos, grassatores, latrones, and
injustos quaestores a suo grege: denique omnia agant, quae ad incolumitatem
subditorum pertinent. In Psalm. 78.71, 72.
that is, let them take care that the Church may be taught aright; let them
forbid Idolatry, superstitious Worships; let them root out Errors in the
Church, and bridle Blasphemers; let them bestow their riches for the
conservation of the Ministry, and of necessary studies. Further, let them take
care for the Bodies of their Subjects, let them provide for their food, let
them endeavor, that they may in peace follow their Callings, and so provide for
themselves: Let them not flea their sheep; that is, let them not exhaust the
Estates of their Subjects by unjust exactions; let them not unnecessarily wage
Wars, by which the Commonwealth may be disturbed, and the Bodies and Estates of
their Subjects may be hazarded; but let them rather venture their own Lives for
the Safety of their Subjects: Let them drive Wolves, that is, Tyrants, Thieves,
Robbers, and unjust Exactors, from the Flock: finally, let them do all things
that may conduce to the Safety of their Subjects.

2. The Ministers and Preachers of the Word are also called Shepherds in the
Old Testament: Woe to the Pastors, Jer. 23.1
says the Prophet. And again, Thus says the Lord against the Pastors that feed
this people. Verse 2 4.
And again, I will set up Shepherds that shall feed them. And again, Son of
man, Ezekiel. 34.2
prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel, and say, Thus says the Lord to the
Shepherds, Woe to the Shepherds of Israel, etc. In all which places it is
manifest, That the persons so styled were the Prophets of Israel. And so in the
New Testament, Ephesians. 4.11
Pastors and Teachers; where it is manifest, That Teachers are called Pastors
or Shepherds, the first word being Metaphorical, the second word the plain
English. And, since these are called Shepherds, let them imitate the care of
this great Shepherd.

1. Labor to know your Flock, and the state of it: Prove. 27.23
Be thou diligent (says the Wise man) to know the state of thy flock: Upon
which place Cartwright observes, That we are not too much to trust Servants,
Non nimium servis credendum esse, nec omnia illorum fidei esse committenda;
siquidem oculus Domini saginat equum, etc. In loc.
nor to commit all to their trust; for the Masters eye makes the Horse fat. But
then, arguing from the less to the greater, he infers, If so great care is to
be had of brute creatures, that, Quod si tanta brutorum cura habenda sit, ut,
ad eorum conservationem, tutum non sit in aliena cura acquiescere, quanto magis
cavendum est iis, qui ovibus Christi praeficiuntur, ne vicaria tantum in illis
pascendis, utantur opera. Ibid.
to the conservation of them, it is not safe to rest in the care of others: how
much more must they, that are set over the sheep of Christ, be wary, not only
to use the help of Substitutes in the feeding of them, but to mind the
business themselves. But yet, to the end, that Preachers of the Word may know
the estate of their flock, the sheep of Christ, that is, Christians, must
contribute their care, namely, to submit to their public Ministry, and to
admit private conversation with them: for how else shall your Pastors know you?

2. Be careful to feed the sheep of Christ, committed to your care, with sound
Doctrine, and wholesome Example: 1 Pet. 5.2 Ezekiel. 34:2
Feed the flock of Christ (says Saint Peter) which is among you. Should not the
Shepherds feed the flocks? says the Prophet. And, lest in stead of feeding, ye
poison them, follow the advice that Saint Paul gives to Timothy, Take heed to
thy self, 1 Timothy: 4:16
and to thy Doctrine.

3. Watch over them, to keep them from going astray: observe where they lie
most open to danger of going astray, and give your selves especially to take
care for them, to fence them against it; admonish them especially of those sins
and errors, to which ye may observe them to be especially inclinable.

4. Be tender over the weak and young ones: See we how careful Saint John was,
as of them whom he calls Fathers and young men, 1 John 2.12, 13
so even of them whom he calls little Children, writing, as to the one of them,
so to the other: Hear we our Savior giving charge to Saint Peter, and so to
all the Apostles, and in them to all Pastors in the several Times of the
Church, as to feed the Sheep, John 21.15, 16, 17
so in special to feed the Lambs. Cast not off weak Christians, because they
are weak, but tender them the more. They are of themselves most prone to
miscarry, therefore be the more tenderly careful of them, lest they should
miscarry. Satan and his underagents are ready to take advantage of their
weakness, the more eagerly to assail them, as having the more hope to prevail
against them; therefore be the more tenderly solicitous for them, to keep them
from becoming a prey to these Enemies.

5. If any of them be gone astray, seek to reduce and reclaim them: If Satan by
his under-agents have made a prey of any of them, leave them not in their
hands, but by all means seek to get them out of their clutches; 1 Samuel: 17.34, 33
as David did for his Fathers sheep, so do ye much more: how else shall we
answer it to God?

6. Having been so far blessed of God in our endeavors in this kind, as that
we have been made happy Instruments for the bringing back of any stray sheep,
let us rejoice in the return of any of them, and bless the Name of our good
God, by whose good hand upon us we have had such success.

V. Let us all answer Christ's care for us, let it not be in vain to us: He
feeds us, especially our Souls, by his Word and Sacraments, let us make use of
it; use these Ordinances in the season of them: He seeks to keep us from going
astray, let us take the benefit of his admonitions, to take heed of those fins,
of the danger of which he puts us in mind: Being gone astray, he seeks to
reclaim us, by his Word, and the invitations to Repentance, which we find
therein, let us by such invitations be prevailed withal; and by afflictions
and chastisements, which he inflicts upon us: Let us now harken to that of the
Prophet; Micah 6.9
Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it: and let us now return; Think what
small good has accrued to you by any sin: so shall there be joy in Heaven for
you, and admirable good will accrue unto you by it; therefore accept of that
counsel, which Saint Peter gave to the Jews, Repent, and be converted, Acts 3.19
that your sins may be blotted out.

CHAP. XIV. Christ and a Stone.
CHrist is thus frequently resembled in Scripture. Hear the Kingly Prophet thus
speaking of him: The Stone which the Builders refused, Psalm 118.22
is become the head stone of the corner. And we hear this by Saint Peter
applied unto Christ: This is the Stone, Acts 4.11
which was set at naught by you Builders, and is become the head of the corner.
Hear that Evangelical Prophet thus speaking of Christ: Thus says the Lord,
Isai. 28.16
Behold I lay in Sion for a foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious
corner Stone, a sure foundation, etc. And hear Saint Peter applying this to
Christ: Wherefore (says he) it is contained in the Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.6
Behold, I lay in Sion a chief Cornerstone, elect, precious. Isai. 8.14
Hear the same Prophet again: He shall be for a stone of stumbling, and a rock
of offense, to both the Houses of Israel. And this also is applied by Saint
Peter unto Christ: 1 Pet. 2.8
And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, even to them that stumble at
the Word. And so by Saint Paul; who, having said of the Jews, That they
stumbled at that stumbling stone, Romans 9.32 33
adds, As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and a rock of
offense. And we hear our Savior applying to himself that Prophecy of David,
Did ye never read in the Scripture, The Stone, which the Builders rejected, is
become the Head of the Corner? Mat. 21.42 44
And afterward he adds, And whosoever shall fall on this Stone, shall be
broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

Yet Christ is not called a Stone, as being like a stone in all things, as
neither is he in all things like to a Lion, or like a Lamb; but in some things
he is like to them all: He is not like to a Lion for cruelty, but for courage;
nor like a Lamb for weakness, but for meekness. And so, for the Particular in
hand, he is called a Stone, yet he is not like a stone for all things.

1. He is not liveless, as stones are: He can say of himself, John 14.6 11.25
5.26.
I am the Life, and I am the Resurrection and the Life. And, As the Father has
Life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have Life in himself. And, I am
he, that am alive, Rev. 1.18. 1 Pet. 2.4
and was dead; and behold I am alive for evermore. And Saint Peter calls him a
living Stone: yea, He is the Fountain of Life to all the Members of his
Mystical Body, both of spiritual Life in this World, and of everlasting Life in
Heaven: by him also we are made lively Stones. Verse 5


2. He is not senseless, as stones are: strike a stone, and it feels not, it
complains not, much less is it sensible of, or complains for the greatest
strokes, that are or can be given to any other stones. Its not so, but far
otherwise with our blessed Savior: he was sensible of all the wrongs and
indignities, that were offered to him in his Life, and in his Death, he could
say, My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death: he could say, Matthew. 26.38
Joh. 18.14
If I have spoken well, why do thou smite me? yea, even now in his glorified
condition, he is sensible of all the wrongs, that are offered to his Church and
the members of it: he cries out to Saul, persecuting the Saints, Saul, Saul,
why do thou persecute me? Act 9 4
The head in Heaven, out of the reach of his enemies, cries out for his members
on earth, yet liable to the effects of their malice. And this is no small
comfort to us, in the midst of all evils, to which we are subject, that we have
an Head, and High Priest, Heb. 2.18
so merciful and compassionate.

But yet he is called a stone because he is like a stone.

1. In general: for strength. Job 6.12
This is eminent in stones: and therefore holy Job could say, Have I the
strength of stones? much more is this eminent in our blessed Savior, he is
called by the Prophet, Isa. 9.6. Rev. 1.8
The Mighty God, and the Lord God Almighty; nothing could or can prevail
against him to hinder him from doing his pleasure either for the preservation
of his Church, or for the confounding of his enemies. Not in the time of his
greatest weakness, could any the greatest enemies, that he had, have done
ought against him without his leave: therefore he said, Joh. 10.18
No man takes away my life from me.

2. In Particular. I. There is lapis angularis, the corner stone, and that is
Christ: and besides the places already alleged, the Apostle plainly affirms
it. Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.20
says he, being the chief cornerstone. And this not without cause, if we
consider the use of a cornerstone, which is, that it joins together the two
sides of a building: so in and by Christ there is a conjunction of diverse
things.

1. In Christ there is a conjunction of Heaven and Earth, God and Man, Creator
and creature, finite and Infinite: these two so different are in Christ made
one Person, as by means of the corner the two sides of a building become one
building.

2. In the Church by means of Christ there is a conjunction of Jews and
Gentiles, both are made one and held together by Christ, as the Head of both,
they are in and by him made one Body, Ephesians. 4.4: 2.15. Verse. 19.21. Joh. 10.16
Matthew 7.75
one New Man, one City, one Temple, one Sheepfold under one Shepherd.

II. There is Lapis fundamenti, a stone for a Foundation, as a Rock, upon which
the House being built stands impregnable against all oposition of waves, winds,
Isa. 28.16 Matthew. 16.18
and rain. And so Christ is by the Prophet called a sure Foundation: and so
Christ says of himself, Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates
of Hell shall not prevail against it: where our Savior speaks of himself, the
subject of Saint Peter's confession: 1 Cor. 3.11
And Saint Paul acknowledges Christ the only Foundation, and justly, for as
the Foundation upholds the building, so Christ upholds the Church. And this is
one of the reasons given by the Author of that imperfect work upon Saint
Matthew, why Christ is called a stone, namely, Because Christ is to his a
strong Foundation, Quia suis fundamentum est forte, and nulla illecebrarum
seductione solvuntur, qui super illum consistunt, nec persecutionum
tempestatibus moventur. hom. 40
and they that rest upon him are not removed from their steadfastness by any
enticements, or by tempests of persecutions.

III. There is Lapis refugii, a stone of refuge: such is a Rock in the Sea, to
a man, that is in danger of drowning: he hastes to it, and gets upon it, and so
is safe against his danger: And such is Christ to all, that (being in danger to
be overborn with any temptation of Satan, and so to be overwhelmed in the Sea
of despair) do lay hold upon Christ by a true and lively faith: they find that
in Christ by which they are held up in hope of mercy, and so saved from the
danger of despair.

IV. There is lapis offensionis, and petra scandali a stone of offense, and a
Rock of scandal: as a Rock in the Sea, against which a ship dashes her self and
so is broken to pieces: or a stone in the street or high way, at which a man,
or horse, not seeing, or not minding it, stumbles and falls, and endangers
himself, or the horse himself, Isa. 8.15.16
and his rider: So is Christ as ye have heard, to all his enemies, Jews,
Pagans, Heretics, 1 Pet. 2.8
and all wicked livers among Christians: how have they found Christ to be such
unto them? Look upon the Histories of the Church, and we shall find plentiful
examples of this in all kinds: And this is another reason (which the Author
of that Imperfect work upon Saint Matthew gives) why Christ is called a stone,
namely, Because there is in Christ a great power to break to pieces all his
wicked enemies; Quia in Christo magna est iniquorum confractio: Sicut enim
omnis res, quae percutit lapidem, ipsa quidem colliditur, lapidem autem non
laedit: sic and omnis, qui Christianitatem persequitur, se quidem corrumpit,
Christianitati autem non nocet. Ibid.
for as every thing that strikes a stone, it hurts not the stone, but is it
self broken to pieces: so the enemies of Christian Religion cannot prevail so
far, as to hurt it, but they mainly hurt themselves.

Hence learn we diverse things

1. See here the difference between the Church of the old Testament, and the
Church of the New: or as Saint Austin speaks, between the Synagogue and the
Church. The former did consist of Jews only, the latter of Jews and Gentiles
together. of the former its said, Psalm. 76.1
In Jury is God known, his name is great in Israel: the Gentiles were then
excluded by the Partition-wal of the Ceremonial Law, Ephesians. 2.12
and then they were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, aliens from the
Covenants of Promise, without Christ, without hope, without God in the world:
In respect of this it is, that God said to the Jews, Am. 3.2
You only have I known of all the Families of the earth. Gal. 4.4 Ephesians 2.14
Psalm. 118.22
But in the fullness of Time God sent his Son, who by his death broke the
middle wall of Partition down, and rising again, is made the cornerstone,
making Jews and Gentiles one body, one new man, etc. And, whereas God is only
worshipped in the Church, the Prophesy of Malachy is now fulfilled, Mal^. 11
That from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same the Name of the
Lord is great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered up, and
a pure offering. So that now, Rom, 10.12
as the Apostle says, There is no difference between Jew and Greek, for the
same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him.

2. See the sad estate of all the enemies of Christ: such as there have been,
and are many in the world, Jews, Pagans, Heretics, ill-living Christians:
they kick and spurn against Christ, rejecting him, opposing his Religion,
persecuting his members, refusing to be ruled by his Laws: thus they do, but
what do they get by it? nothing but woe and ruin to themselves. So a ship
dash't against a Rock is broken to pieces; so a man violently kicking against a
stonewall gets nothing by it, but the wounding of his feet: Christ is a Rock,
they that kick and spurn against him, what can follow upon it but their own
ruin? we may see this in the experience of all times: And if any feel it not
here, but continue to prosper, while they continue to oppose Christ, most
fearful is the expectation of such hereafter; A time shall come, and is coming,
when (as they now say, Luke 19.
we will not have this man to reign over us, so) they shall hear it said to
them, As for those my enemies, Verse. 27.
that would not have me to rule over them, bring them hither and slay them
before me.

3. See what comfort belongs unto all godly Christians. Christ is the stone for
the Foundation, and a sure Foundation he is, to uphold the building: no cause
therefore have they that are built upon this Rock, to fear the opposition of
all the powers of hell, The gates of hell shall not prevail against them,
Matthew. 16.18
they may show their teeth, they may heave and shove against them, to cast down
this building: but all in vain, it shall stand, and all that are built upon
this sure Foundation, shall stand, maugre their malice. Christ is a stone of
Refuge: as a Rock in the Sea, saving a man from drowning, that gets upon it: Be
of good cheer therefore, ye that by a true and lively faith lay hold upon him:
the Devil seeks to drown you in the sea of despair, but he shall not prevail in
this his design: ye may find that in Christ, which may fence you against this
danger. Satan will set before you your manifold violations of Gods righteous
Law, and Gods infinite Justice, in respect of which he will suggest to you,
that it is impossible for you to be saved: but in Christ ye shall find your
debts discharged, and Gods Justice infinitely satisfied: so that though looking
at your selves in your selves, ye can see nothing but a necessity of perishing,
yet looking at Christ, ye may have a certainty of Salvation, ye casting your
selves upon Christ by faith, and heartily repenting of your sins, by which ye
have offended God. Finally, Christ is the cornerstone, making Jews and
Gentiles one body and one sheepfold, this may well comfort us Gentiles against
the insultations of the Jews: they insult over us, as having no interest in
God, because we are not of them: but let not this trouble us: though in former
times we were as without God, yet now Christ has made room for us in the
Church, and we believing, have as good an interest in God, as ever the Jews
had.

4. Let us learn hereafter not to oppose Christ, not in Himself, not in his
Religion, not in his Ordinances, not in his Members: If we do, such opposition
will cost us dear; no other then our ruin, can be the fruit of it: As we
therefore, love our selves, let us desist.

5. Let us cast our selves upon Christ for Salvation; so shall we be
impregnable against all opposition.

6. Let us Gentiles praise God for his mercy, giving his Son to dye for us, by
which he has taken away the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, and
so breaking down the middle wall of partition, and by his Resurrection making
him the chief cornerstone, by whom it comes, that we Gentiles, who were once
far off, are now made near, and become fellow-citizens of the Saints and of
the household of God.

CHAP. XV. Christ and the Sun.
CHrist our Savior is set forth to us under this notion: as in that Prophesy
of Malachi: unto you, Mal. 4.2
that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise. In which place (as
is acknowledged by all Interpreters) promise is made to the godly of the coming
of Christ in the flesh. And so Saint John sets out the Church as a woman
clothed with the Sun, that is, Rev. 12.1
with Christ.

And the resemblance holds in many particulars.

1. The Sun has no spots, though the moon may have: so the Church and the
members of it have impurity remaining in them: for the work of Sanctification
is only begun in this life, and the height of a Christian, while he lives in
this world, is only a progress toward perfection of Holiness. Of a
Christian, while he lives here its true, that the Apostle says, The flesh
lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17
and the Spirit against the flesh: therefore while we live here we have a
mixture of flesh and spirit, old and new man, corruption and grace, Genesis 25.
as Rebeccah had two contrary Nations in her womb: we must, so long as we live,
give our selves to the exercise of Mortification, Col. 3.5
Mortify your members that are on the Earth, that is, corruption. Therefore
there are remainders of impurity in the best men, which is the subject of this
mortification. And while we live here, we are tied to that precept, Grow in
Grace, 2 Pet. 3 18
therefore the work of Grace and Holiness is imperfect in us all: for
perfection and growth are inconsistent. Finally, its most true that Saint James
says, Jam. 3.2
In many things we offend all; therefore there are in us remainders of
impurity. Thus is it with the best men. But, with him its far otherwise. He
was and is holy, Heb. 7.26 1 Samuel 2.2
harmless, undefiled. Considered as God, he is infinitely holy, incomparably
holy, There is none holy, as the Lord. So its true of him that Saint John
says, 1 John 1.5
He is light and in him there is no darkness. Considered, as man, he is
perfectly Holy: the Holy Ghost Sanctified the womb of the Virgin, and stopped the
course of Original sin, that it should not diffuse it self to the Humane Nature
of Christ, therefore he is called That Holy thing: Luke 1.35
and hence it was, that His Life was sin-lesse, so that he could appeal to his
enemies, Which of you convinces me of sin?

2. The Sun drives away darkness, and enlightens the World: so does our
blessed Savior by his Gospel outwardly and by his Spirit inwardly, drive out
the darkness of ignorance, and enlighten our minds savingly to know God, and
the things that concern our everlasting happiness. Joh. 1.9
He is the true light, says Saint John, that enlightens every man that comes
into the world. And of him Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.10
who has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light by
the Gospel.

3. The Sun enlightening the world cheeres man, so does Christ, giving us the
knowledge of God, cheer and comfort us.

4. The Sun gives, as light, so heat and warmth to the creatures on the earth,
and so is an instrument, to further their growth: So Christ warmes our hearts
by the expressions of his love unto us. Who, that is so much as ingenuous,
hearing, or thinking, what Christ out of his love to us, has done or suffered
for us, has not his heart burning within him? who does not grow in love to
God, to Christ, to his Brethren in this respect? To be sure, this Love of
Christ has an aptness to produce these effects in us: We hear the inferences,
that that beloved Disciple made in this kind; We love him, 1 John 4.19
because he loved us first: And, If God has so loved us, Verse 11
we ought also to love one another. And Saint Paul's serious consideration of
Christ's Love so warmed his Heart, that he doubted not to pronounce that
dreadful sentence, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22
let him be Anathema Maranatha.

5. The Sun purges the Earth, Water, and Air, by exhaling and drawing up the
Mists and Fogs that are in them: so does Christ sanctify the Soul, and purge
the Heart: This is attributed to Christ; Ephesians. 5.26
That he might sanctify and cleanse it: He, that is, Christ; It, that is, the
Church. And again, Sanctified in Christ, that is, 1 Cor. 1.2
sanctified by Christ.

Hence we may learn sundry things.

1. That Christ is fit to be a Savior to us, and an High Priest for us, in
that he was and is so transcendently pure and unspoted: Heb. 7.26
for such an High Priest it became us to have, who was holy, harmless,
undefiled: had he been in any degree polluted with corruption, and defiled with
sin, he had been so far from having been a meet Savior for us, that he should
have needed some other to have been a Savior for him, or he should have needed
to have offered sacrifice first for his own sins, Verse 27
and then for the peoples, as it was with the Levitical Priests. Nor had he
been fit to have been a Sacrifice for us: for all the Creatures, that were to
be sacrificed under the Law, were to be without spot and blemish: But behold he
is transcendently pure! then was he an Alsufficient Savior, Priest, and
Sacrifice.

2. See what a Gift Christ is, surpassing all other Gifts that God gives to the
Sons of men: for behold the great conveniences that accrue to us by him: To
know God and Christ, how great a benefit is it? John 17.3
for this is Life Eternal. To have comfort under all the saddest accidents that
can befall us, how desirable is it? And to be made holy and pure, what a
convenience is it? for without it the beatifical Vision of God is not to be
expected; Without it (says the Apostle) we cannot see God; Heb. 12.14
and having it, we cannot miss of it: Matthew. 5.8
for, says our Savior, The pure in Heart shall see God. Behold! all these we
have from Christ, this Sun of Righteousness: How unparalleld a Gift then is He,
that comes so attended? How great the Love of God in bestowing such a Gift upon
us? How can we then be sufficiently thankful for such Love?

3. Whatsoever degree of Holiness any of us attain unto, let us yet vail the
Bonnet unto Christ, and acknowledge our own nothingness in comparison of him:
for, though we are never so much before others, yet we are infinitely behind
Christ: As for us, are we holy? yet we are many degrees short of that
perfection, to which we shall at last attain: Are we holy? yet the Holiness
which we have is not without some mixture of impurity, witness the blemishes of
our conversation: but the Holiness of Christ, even as Man, was perfect, and it
was pure, there was no spot in him. Entertain not therefore any high thoughts
of our selves, but be we ravished with an admiration of Christ; and, in
comparison of him, let us confess with John Baptist, Matthew. 3.11 Luke 3.16
That we are not worthy to bear his shoes, or to unloose the latchet of him.

4. Let us not rest in any degrees of Holiness, to which we have attained; nor
yet in any proportions, to which any others, have risen: If we consider our
selves, we shall find, That we have our spots: why should we stay here? If we
consider any others, we shall see, They have had their blemishes: So it was
with David, though a man after Gods own Heart: so with Asa, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, J^sias: they were men highly commended, yet they were all of them, in
some thing or other, liable to reproof: why therefore should we rest in their
proportions? But behold Christ an unparalleld Example! set we him before our
Eyes, and so long as we find our selves to come short of him, let us strive to
come up to his proportions, or at least strive to come as near him as we can,
and so still labor to grow in Holiness, having that always sounding in our Ears,
He that is holy, Rev. 22.11
let him be holy still.

5. Find we Darkness in any degree to remain in our minds? and would we have
it expelled, and Light to come in stead of it? Find we sadness in our Hearts
under any afflictions? and desire we a chearing? Finally, find we any
remainders of pollution in our Souls, and would we be purged from it? See now
what course we are to take: It belongs to Christ, as the Sun of Righteousness,
to do all this for us, therefore to him, in all these cases, let us have
recourse by prayer: whither shall we go for any of these, but to him that is
the Fountain of them all? And he is a Fountain that cannot be drawn dry; he
has still store enough to impart to us: for in him all fullness dwells; Col.
1.19
nor will he be slow to impart: He has ordered us to pray, and has promised
that we shall receive. Matthew. 7.7
And indeed the inference is good that Saint Austin makes: Hortatur ut petas:
numquid negabit quod petis? To. 10. de Verb. Dom. ser. 5.
He exhorts us to desire, and will he deny us what we desire? And Saint
Bernards to the same purpose: Quando negabit petentibus, quando and non
petentes provocat and hortatur ut petant? De temp. and sanctis, Sermon. in festo
S. Andreae.
When will he give a denial to them that ask, when as he provokes and exhorts
them to ask that ask not? As therefore we love our selves, and judge these
things desirable, let us not fail to seek to Christ for them, of whose power
and readiness to do them for us, we have such assurance: Who, that wants any
thing, will be backward to have recourse to his friend, of whom he has cause
to assure himself, that he can and will readily supply his want?

6. Find we the Darkness of Ignorance in any measure removed out of our
minds, and the Light of Knowledge brought in, in stead of it? Have we been
comforted in any sadness, and upheld under it? Find we corruption in any
degree purged away, and Holiness in any measure wrought in us? All this is done
by Christ, this Sun of Righteousness: Therefore by whatsoever instruments all
or any of these have been effected in and for us, let the praise of them be
given unto Christ, to whom alone it appertains.

CHAP. XVI. Christ and a Vine.
OUr blessed Savior himself sets forth himself by this Resemblance: John 15.1
I am the Vine (says he) and my Father is the Husbandman. And again I am the
Vine, and ye are the Branches.

Saint Bernard does largely note the Resemblance between Christ and a Vine.

I. This (says he) That the Vine is not sown, but planted, I. Quod plantari
solet vitis, non seminari, translata de vite sua, ad conceptionem Christi
pertinet: vitis enim primo nata de vite, est Deus de Deo genitus, Filius de
Patre. Sed, ut majorem afferat fructum, plantatus erat in terra, in virgin
Maria conceptus, factus quod non erat, manens quod erat. Tract. de pass.
Domini, super illud Joan. 15.1. cap. 1.
being translated out of its own Vine, belongs to, and notes, the Conception of
Christ: for the Vine from rising from the Vine, is God begotten of God, the Son
of the Father. But, that he might bring forth more fruit, he was planted in the
Earth, conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, made that which he was not,
[namely, Man,] and remaining that which he was [namely, God.]

II. II. Solet fructifera vitis praecidi: Et circumcisus fuit Jesus, non quod
hac circumcisione egeret, sed ne Legem, quam ipse dederat, videretur solvere.
Ibid. cap 2.
The fruitful Vine uses to be pruned: And Christ was circumcised, not that he
needed this Circumcision, but lest he should seem to break that Law which
himself had given.

And, before he goes any further, he notes here two things, as the Uses of it.

1. For Exhortation. That if at any time we suffer the punishment of sin, 1.
Nos oportere, non aegre far, si quando poenas peccati patimur, cum ipse
peccatorum purgator, non dedignatur, pro nobis subire peccatorum remedium.
we should not take it ill, but endure it patiently, seeing he, that is the
Purger of our sins, did not disdain for us to suffer the remedy of sins.

2. For Comfort. 2. Consolemur dolores nostros, qui nequaquam sine peccato
sumus, doloribus ipsius liberati, qui, non pro se, sed pro nobis, doluit and
vulneratus est, non pro se, sed ut nostris vulneribus mederetur. Ibid.
Let us (says he) comfort our selves in our pains, who at no hand are without
sin, and yet are set free by his pains, who suffered pain, and was wounded, not
for himself, but for us; not for himself, but that he might heal our wounds.

And then he adds:

Aliter etiam praeciditur vitis nostra: omnia enim ab eo praecisa dicamus,
quibus in hac vita caruit, cum ea tamen habere potuisset: Phil. 2.7. ipsa
exinanitio praecisio erat: sicut enim minuitur vitis, cum praeciditur, sic
Christus incarnatione minoratus, and infra omnes homines humiliatus est.
Amputata fuit in eo gloria cultro ignominiae, potentia cultro abjectionis,
voluptas cultro doloris, divitiae cultro paupertatis. Sic fuit abjectus, qui
fuit ipsa gloria, ut novissimus hominum reputaretur. Tanto dolori subjicitur,
ut ei competat illud, Lam. 1.12. Sic fuit pauper, ut, ipso Judice, vulpibus and
volucribus pauperior inveniatur: Mat. 8.20. Pauper in nativitate: natus enim
pastum habuit lac virgineum, tegmen pannos viles: Pauperior in vita, si enim
tegumentum habuit, saepius in victualibus defecit: Pauperrimus in cruce, ubi
and nudum invenies and fitientem. Postremo, timoris cultro amputati sunt ab eo
amici omnes, ut non esset, qui eum consolaretur. Quae vitis unquam tantum
praecisa fuit? Ibid.
And otherwise also was this our Vine pruned: for we may conceive all those
things pruned off from him, of which he was destitute in this life, when as yet
he might have had them. He made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. this very
exinanition was a pruning: for as the Vine is diminished when it is pruned, so
Christ by his Incarnation was made less then, and humbled below all men. Glory
was cut off in him by the Knife of Ignominy, Power by the Knife of Abasement,
Pleasure by the Knife of Pain, Riches by the Knife of Poverty. He, that was
Glory it self, is so abased, that he was reckoned the basest of men. He is
subjected to so great Pain, that he might say, as the Church, Behold, and see,
if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow: (Lament. 1.12.) He was so poor,
that, himself being Judge, he was found poorer then the very Foxes and Birds of
the Air: for he could say, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have
nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to rest his head: (Matthew. 8.20.) He
was poor in his Birth; for, being born, his food was the Virgins Milk, his
Covering vile Rags. He was poorer in his Life; for, if he had wherewith to
cover him, he was often short in his Victuals. He was most poor on the Cross,
where ye might have seen him naked, and thirsting. Lastly, By the Knife of Fear
all his Friends were cut off from him, so that he had none to comfort him. What
Vine was ever so pruned?

Oh the great Humiliation of our dear Savior! How great was his Love to us,
which drew him so voluntarily to submit himself to such and so great abasement
for our good? Why should we think much to stoop to any abasement for his Glory,
who first thus far humbled himself for us?

III. The Vine is dug about. This digging signifies the fraud of Enemies
laying snares to entrap: III. Circumfoditur vitis: Fossio haec insidiantium
frans intelligitur: Quasi enim foveam fodit, qui dolo machinatur aliquem
decipere: sic Christo fuit, Joan. 8.6. Circumfoderunt vitem nostram pessimi
agricolae, non ut facerent eam germinare, sed magis arescere; sed, fossa,
praeter eorum spem, fertilis magis facta est, and humorem misericordiae
distillans. Tandem vero, videntes, circumfossiones istas viti nostrae nil
nocere, ipsam vitem perfodere laborabant, ut sic saltem, ad modum aliarum
arborum, aeternam incurreret ariditatem; foderunt manus and pedes, and latus
furoris lancea. Ib. c. 3.
for he does, as it were, dig a pit, who seeks to deceive another with craft.
So was it done to our Vine, namely, Christ: Joh. 8.6. This they said (says the
Evangelist) tempting him, that they might have whereof to accuse him. These
wicked Husbandmen dug about our Vine, not to make it to flourish, but rather
to wither: But, being thus dug about, contrary to their expectation, it was
made more fertile, and distilled the juice of Mercy. But, seeing that their
diggings about did not hurt our Vine, they at last labored to dig through our
Vine, that it might, as it is with other Trees, wither for ever: They dug
his hands and Feet, and his side with the cruel Spear.

See the malice of Christ's Enemies against him: see we what things they acted
against him; they seek in his lifetime to ensnare him: and, toward the close
of his life, what did they not act against him? and yet they could not but see,
that he was more then a man: John 7.46
Never man (say the Servants of the Pharisees, that were sent to apprehend him)
spoke like this man: and the people, beholding his Miracles, could say, Mark
7.37
He has done all things well. And yet all this could not restrain, nor set
bounds to their malice. Why then should we wonder at the rage and malice of
Enemies against us? Luke 23.31
If these things (says our Savior) be done to the green Tree, what shall be
done to the dry? Matthew. 10.25
And, If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of the Household? And, if we feel the effects of Enemies
malice against us in any kind, let us comfort our selves with this, That it is
no otherwise with us, then it was with our Lord and Master; remembering what our
Savior says, Verse 24, 25
The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: It Is
enough for the Disciple to be as his Master, and for the Servant to be as his
Lord.

But see here also, how vain and impotent the malice of Christ's Enemies against
him was: They sought to entrap him in his words, but see, how, from time to
time, John 8
he escaped the danger; as, when the Pharisees brought the Woman to him, whom,
they said, they had taken in the act of Adultery: And when they, with the
Herodians, Mat. 22.15, 16
came to him with that question, Whether it is lawful to pay Tribute unto
Caesar? In the former Christ gave such an Answer, John 8.9
as made them go away ashamed, and, as it were, to steal away one by one: and
in the second, his answer made them to marvel, and so to leave him. Matthew. 22.22
And when at last they came to dig through this Vine, they apprehended him,
they brought him before the Tribunal Ecclesiastical, where he was condemned, as
worthy of death, as a blasphemer, and before the Civil State, where by their
importunity, they prevailed to have him crucified, and there to dye, now they
thought, they had made this Vine to wither for ever, but their hopes in all
these their designs were dashed, as Saint Bernard speaks excellently: Mors
corporalis vicit ad tempus, ut vinceretur in aeternum. Victa est mors, quia
resurrexit a mortuis. Ibid.
Bodily death (says he) prevailed for a time, that it might be overcome for
ever. Death was overcome, because he rose from the dead.

And as it was with the malice of Christ's enemies against him: so is it with
the malice of the enemies of Christians against them: that is also vain and
impotent: they threaten, they torment, they put to death, and now they hope to
strike fear into their hearts: but all in vain: so that its with them according
to that of the Poet: The plain Countryman, says he, expects when the River
should run it self dry, Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis: at ille labitur,
and labetur in omne volubilis aevum. Horat. epist. l. 1. ep. 3.

Torreantur Martyrs, rident: feriuntur and gaudent, occiduntur and ecce
triumphant, quia jamdudum mortui peccatis, mortui mundo, insensibiles facti,
nec minas, nec tormenta, nec mortem sentire potuerunt: and quid mirum? mortui
erant. Ibid.


but it continues still to run, and is never empty. And so it is here, as Saint
Bernard excellent-expresses it. Let them seek to terrify the Martyrs; they
laugh at them: they are stricken and rejoice: they are killed, and behold they
triumph, because, being long since dead to sin, and dead to the world, and so
being made insensible, they could not feel either threatenings, torments, or
death; and no marvel, for they were dead. Well may we therefore be comforted
against all the malice of enemies; considering it is so weak; and well may
enemies in this respect be ashamed to go on in such malicious courses, wherein
they shall but show their teeth, and all to no purpose.

IV. The Vine is bound, or tied up. 4. Ligatur Vitis. Quis vincula vitis
nostrae non videat? Primum obedientia fuit: factus obediens usque ad mortem,
Phil. 2.8. Erat subditus illis, Luc. 2.5. Ne eos scandalizemus, etc. da iis pro
me and te, Matthew. 17.27. Secundum, uterus Virginis. Tertium in praesepio fuit,
quando ejus membra pannis involuta virgo matter alligabat, and pedes, manus
cruraque stricta cingebat fascia. Quartum fuit funis, quo ligabatur, cum
caperetur, Joan. 18.11. Quintum fuit, quo ligabatur ad columnam, cum
flagellaretur. Nec^on and ipsa flagella, quae corpus ipsius circuibant, non
incongrue possumus vincula appellare. Sextum fuit corona ejus spinea, cum magna
amaritudine amabile illud caput amplectens. Septimum fuit, quo ligatus fuit in
cruce, nempe, ferreum. Ib. c. 4.
Who sees not the bonds of this our Vine? The first was obedience. He became
obedient, even to death, Phil. 2.8. He was subject to his Parents, Luke 2.51.
He was subject to Caesar, Matthew. 17.27. The second was the womb of the Virgin.
The third was in the Manger, when his Virgin Mother bound up his body wrapped
in clothes, and compassed in his feet, hands and legs with a swathing-band.
The fourth was the rope with which he was bound, when they took him in the
Garden. The fifth was that, with which he was tied to the Pillar when they
scourged him: and yet we may withal not unjustly call the scourges themselves,
which compassed his body, bonds. The sixth was the crown of thorns, with great
bitterness embracing that lovely Head. The seventh was that of iron, which
fastened him to the Cross, namely the nails.

See here the greatness of Christ's Humilation and consequently of his love,
which drew him to such a condescent. Most devout and pious is Saint Bernards
meditation on this particular, in which by an Apostrophe, turning his Speech to
Christ, he thus expresses himself. O King of Kings, what have thou to do with
bonds? O Rex Regum, quid tibi and vinculis! Ligantur vites, ne, si jaceant in
terra, aut minuantur, aut corrumpantur fructus earum. Incorruptibilis autem
fructus fuit tuus, and est, quare ergo ligaris? Been Rex quidam, cum, percussus
humana sagitta, peteretur, ut se ligare permitteret, donec excideretur, quia
levissimo motu mortem posset incurrere. Non decet, inquit, Regem vinciri,
libera sit Regis and semper salva potestas. O Deus Deorum, quantum ergo
derogatum fuit libertati and potentiae tuae? tu ligaris adeo vinculis, qui
solus ligandi and solvendi potestatem habes? Sed propter misericordiam tuam
ligatus es, ut nos a miseriis nostris faceres absolutos. Admiror Domini Jesu,
and admirando deficerem, nisi quod liquido cognosco, te prius in cord
charitatis nexibus fuisse constrictum qui ad deteriora vincula sufferenda te
leviter attrahere potuerunt. Gratia sit vinculis tuis, bone Jesu, quae nostra
tam potenter diruperunt. Ibid.
Vines are bound up, least, if they should lie on the ground, their fruits
should be diminished or marred. But thy fruit was and is incorruptible, and
therefore why art thou bound? A certain King, being wounded with an Arrow, when
he was desired, that he would suffer himself to be bound, till the head of the
Arrow might be cut out, because the least stirring would endanger his life,
returned this fitting answer, It becomes not a King to be bound; a Kings power
must be free and always entire. Therefore, O God of Gods, what'a derogation is
this to thy liberty and power? Thou art bound with so many bonds, who only
have the power to bind and loose. But it is for thy mercies sake, that thou art
bound, that thou may set us free from all our miseries. I wonder at it, O
Lord Jesus, and with wonder should faint, but that I certainly know that thou
wast first tied with the cords of love in thy heart, by which thou might
more easily be drawn to the enduring of these worser bonds. Thanks to thee, O
good Jesus for these thy bonds, which have so powerfully broken all ours.

And why should any of us think much to undergo bonds for the cause and glory
of Christ? seeing he has first, for our good and Salvation undergone so many
bonds: what are we in comparison of him? the Lord is bound for the servant, and
shall the servant think much to be bound for the Lord? he by his bonds has
sweetened all ours, and taken away the bitterness of them.

V. The whole body of the Vine seems more deformed then the high and strong
trees, 5. Totum corpus altis arboribus and robustis deformius invenitur, and
quasi penitus inutile videtur and abjectum, nec ipso aspectu amabile, aut usui
accomodatum. Sic fuit and in corpore Christi, secundum illud Prophetae, Isa.
53.2. Non est species ei, nec decor: and vidimus eum, and non erat conspectus,
etc. Quid apertius? Et vere talis erat in oculis carnalium, qui tantum carne
noverunt intueri. Et hoc probare possumus apertis rationibus, primo, per
compassionis affectum, dein per passionis defectum. Quis nesciat, hominem,
circa amicum periclitantem, tanto affectu moveri and dolor ut corporis sui
detrimentum in currat? Si hoc praestat homo homini, quantum Deum hominem Jesum
putas homini praestitisse? Si tu pro uno homine per compassionem corporale
periculum incurris, quid putas Dominum Jesum pro omnibus hominibus tolerasse?
etc. Sed ad passionis defectum veniamus. Passionem autem non unum illum diem
appellamus, sed totam vitam suam. Tota enim vita crux fuit and Martyrium. Vide,
quantae fuit parcitatis in abstinentia: quam assiduus in vigiliis? quam
frequens in orationibus? In labor and sudore vultus sui quam assiduus, cum
circuiret vicos et castella Evangelizans and curans undique? Et quam crebro
famem pertulit and sitim ille panis vivus, ille fons aquae sitientis in vitam
eternam? Videamus jejuniu^ illud 40. dieru^ et 40. noctium, et jam a deserto ad
homines red^unti occurramus, and vultum illius amabilem tantis iejuniis
consider^mus afflictum. Veniamus jam ad illum ultimae diei agonem, and causas
deformitatis corporis nequibimus ignorare. Vide, quomodo pavere and taedere
coepit: tristis fuit anima ejus usque ad mortem: sudo^ sanguineus orantis
corpus per fudit copiose, ita ut non solum distillaret, sed guttae guttatim
decurrerent in terram. Noctis etiam illius incommoda percurramus, quomodo
tentus, vinctus, tractus, trusus, coesus, consputus, alapis percussus, etc.
quis hic locus delitiarum? qualis hic decor speciei? quis in corpore si
tractato pulchritudinem quaerat? Veniamus ad finem: Nudatur bonus Jesus. Heu
mihi! qui vestivit coelos variis sideribus, ante crucem expoliatur, etc. Ibid.
c. 5.
and as it were altogether unprofitable and base, neither lovely to look upon,
nor fit for any use. So the Prophet speaks of the Vine. Ezekiel. 15.3. Shall wood
be taken thereof for any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel
thereon? Its a question that implies a vehement Negation. So was it also in the
body of Christ, according to that of the Prophet, Isa. 53.2. He has no form
nor comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty, that we should
desire him. What is more manifest? And he was truly such in the eyes of carnal
men, that could look no further then the flesh. And this we may prove by plain
reasons: first, by his compassion, then by his Passion. Who does not know, that
a man about his friend in danger, is moved with such affection, and grief that
he prejudices his own body? If a man does this for a man, what think we that
Jesus, God and man, does for man? If thou for one man endangerest thy self by
compassion, what think thou that the Jesus Lord endured for all men? But
come we now to his Passion. And we speak not now of the Passion of one day, in
which he suffered death, but of his whole life: for Christ's whole life was a
continued Cross and Martyrdom. See how he exceeded in Abstinence, in Watching,
in Prayer,: How assiduous in Labor and Sweating, when he went about their
Towns and Villages, preaching the Gospel and healing Diseases every where. And
how often did he suffer Hunger and Thirst, who is that Bread of Life, and that
Fountain of Water, springing up unto Eternal Life? Consider we that Fast of
forty days and forty nights, and let us now meet him returning to men from
the Desert, and consider his lovely countenance afflicted with such Fasting.
Come we now to that conflict of the last day of his Life, and we shall see
causes enough of the deformity of his body: see how he began to be amazed and
astonished: My soul (says he) is exceeding sorrowful unto the death. A bloody
sweat did in such plenty bedeaw his body, while he was praying, that it did not
alone distill, but also fell by drops to the earth. Let us breefely run over
the evils of that night, how he was apprehended, bound, drawn, thrust, beaten,
spit on and buffeted, etc. and now what place was here for delicacy? what
comeliness could be there? who could expect beauty in a body thus handled? Come
we to the close. Good Jesus is stripped stark naked; Woe is me! He that clothed
the Heavens with several Stars, being to be crucified, is spoiled of his
garments.

And now let us not be offended so far at the deformity of Christ in his
body. Its that to which he submitted himself for our good and Eternal
advantage, as Saint Bernard speaks well. From the deformity of our Redeemer
issued the price, De deformitate Redemptoris nostri manavit pretium eterni
decoris nostri. Ibid.
with which our Eternal comeliness was purchased. Why then shall we stumble at
that outward deformity to which for our advantage, he did voluntarily submit
himself? especially considering, that he is in himself, as the Psalmist
confesses, fairer then the children of men. Psalm. 45.


And let us be willing to be made deformed by suffering for Christ, and for his
honor, though it be never so much: stick not at any kind or degree of
deformity for Christ, who was made so deformed outwardly for our good. It is
the exhortation which Saint Bernard gives upon this ground. Let us be content
(says he) outwardly in our body to be made deformed, Deformemur and nos in
corpore extrinsecus cum Christo deformato, ut reformemur interius in anima cum
formoso Jesu: conformemur corpori vitis nostrae in corpore nostro; ut reformet
corpus humilitatis nostrae configuratum corpori claritatis suae Ibid.
with Christ deformed, that we may inwardly in our souls be reformed with fair
Jesus: Let us in our body be willingly conformed to the body of Christ our
Vine, that he may change our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious
body. The plain English is, let us partake of the sufferings of Christ, that we
may partake of his glory at last. The Apostle can tell us, that all the
afflictions of this present life, Romans 8.18
are not worthy of the glory that shall be reveiled. But there is no hope, that
we should attain to this glory except we be willing to suffer with him: for
this is the order, which the only wise God has set, as for Christ, that he
must first suffer, and then enter into glory, so for us, Luke 14.26.
that, suffering with him, Romans 8.17
we shall be glorified together.

VI. To all these I shall add one resemblance more, which our Savior himself
does clearly intimate, yea fully express in both parts of the comparison. As
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, Joh. 15 5
except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. And then he
adds, I am the Vine, and ye are the branches; Ver. 5
He, that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: and he
alone, for without me ye can do nothing, upon which words, Saint Austin
observes, that our Savior sais not, Non ait, sine me parum potestis facere,
sed nil potestis, sive ergo parum, sive multum, sine illo fieri non potest,
sine quo nil fieri potest. In Joan. Evang. tract. 81.
without me ye can do little, but without me ye can do nothing: Whether
therefore it be little or much, it cannot be done without him, without whom
nothing can be done.

Hence learn.

1. To cast away all proud thoughts of our selves, as if, of our selves we were
able to bring forth fruits pleasing to God: 2 Cor. 3.5
We cannot of our selves so much as think a good thought, says the Apostle:
and shall we think we can do good actions, supernaturally pleasing to God?
Phil. 2.13.
Its God, that gives us power to will good, and is it not of him also that we
have power to do? And (for the antecedent of this argument, its plainly
asserted by Saint Austin. Non potest homo aliquid boni velle nisi adjuvetur ab
illo, qui malum velle non potest. Contra 2 Epistolas Pelagian. l. 1. c. 4.
Man cannot will any good, except he be helped by him, that cannot will evil:
and that is God alone. And Saint Paul prays to God for the Philippians, that
they may be filled with the fruits of righteousness; Phil. 1.11 Col. 1.10
And for the Colossians, that they may be fruitful in every good work. And, as
he prayed for them, so it becomes us to pray for our selves: But what need were
there to beg this power of God, if we had it of our selves? St Austin doubts
not to affirm, That there is no greater folly, then to pray to God that thou
may do that, which thou have power of thy self to do. Quid stultius, quam
orare ut facias, quod in potestate habes. de not. and great. c. 18.

Irrisoria est petitio, quando id a Deo petitur, quod scitur, ipso non donante,
esse in hominis potestate: sicut and irrisoria est gratiarum actio, si ob id
gratiae aguntur Deo, quod ipse non donavit. De dono persev. c. 2.


And elsewhere the same Father doubts not to affirm, That we mock God, when we
beg that of God, which is known to be in man's power, whether God gives it or
no: as its a mocking of God to give thanks to him for that, which he has not
given; let us therefore abandon these proud thoughts. Hear the same Father
speaking to the Pelagians entertaining these high conceits. Its your voice,
says he, 'That man works righteousness of himself: Vox vestra est, quod homo
ex seipso facit justitiam: sed contradicit veritas, Palms non potest fructum
far a seipso, nisi manserit in vite. Quid vos sequatur, videte, and, si est
in vobis sensus, horrete. Qui a seipso se fructum far existimat, in vite non
est; qui in vite non est, in Christo non est; qui in Christo non est,
Christianus non est. In Joan. Evang. tract. 81.
But he that is the Truth contradicts it, saying, that the branch bears not
fruit of it self, except it abides in the Vine. And now see ye what follows,
and, if ye have any sense, tremble. He that thinks that he bears fruit of
himself, is not in the Vine: He that is not in the Vine, is not in Christ; and
he that is not in Christ, is no Christian.

2. Desiring or undertaking to do any good action, set not upon it, presuming
of our own strength, as if we were able to do it of our selves; but, in all
humility, going out of our selves, let us by prayer fly to Christ, and beg
ability from him for the doing of the good which we desire to perform, praying
in the words of Saint Austin, Lord, Da quod jubes, and jube quid vis.
give me power to do what thou do command, and then command what thou
please.

3. That we may be enabled to bring forth fruits pleasing to God, let us
maintain our Union with Christ: The Branch cut off from the Vine bears no
fruit, but dies and withers: so neither can we bear fruit, except we abide in
Christ the Vine: Our Union with Christ is by Faith; to the end therefore that
we may abide in Union with Christ, let us be chary of this divine Grace of
Faith; hear the Word, read it, meditate of it frequently, come to the holy
Communion in the seasons of it: These are means, which God has sanctified for
the strengthening of Faith, by which our Union with Christ is maintained. Be we
careful of this, remembering what Saint Austin says: The Branches of the Vine
(says he) are so much more contemptible if they do not remain in the Vine,
Ligna vitis tanto sunt contemptibiliora, si in vite non manserint, quanto sunt
gloriosiora, si manserint. In Joan. Evang. tract. 81.
by how much they are more glorious, if they do remain in it.

4. If we have done any good work, and so have brought forth any fruit of
Righteousness, let us not arrogate any thing to our selves, sacrificing to our
own nets and yarns; but, emptying our selves of all the praise, let us give it
all unto Christ, from whom we have received all power to perform any good
action, as the Vine-branches receive from the Vine all power to bring forth
fruit, and without whom we can do nothing, as the Vine-branches can bring forth
no fruit without the Vine. Whatsoever good therefore we have done, let us say
with the Psalmist, Not unto us, Lord; not unto us, but to thy Name give the
praise. As Saint Austin gives the advice, Let men understand, Intelligant
homines, si filii Dei sunt, Spiritu Dei se agi, ut quod agendum est agant, and
cum egerint, illi, a quo aguntur, gratias agant. De corrept. and great. c. 2.
if they be the Children of God, that they are led by the Spirit of God, that
they may do the good which is to be done by them, and therefore when they have
done it, let them give thanks to him by whom they are led. Such advice may I
give in this case: Let men understand, if they be Christians, that from Christ
they have received the power to do any good, and therefore, when they have done
any good, let them give the praise to him, from whom they have received the
ability to do it.

CHAP. XVII.
Christ and a Way.
SO does our Savior speak of himself, saying, John 14.6
I am the Way. But, for this, I may well refer you to the Parallel between
Christ and a Door; for, as the Way leads to the City, and as the Door leads
into the House; so Christ leads us to the heavenly Jerusalem, and his Fathers
House.

Christ and a Word.
So is our Savior spoken of: John 1.1
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, Verse 14
and the Word was God. And a little after: And the Word was made flesh.

And Divines, ancient and modern, have diversely noted the Resemblance between
Christ and our Word.

Saint Austin notes the Agreement in two things:

1. 1. Christus dicitur Verbum Patris, quia per eum Pater innotescit; sicut
ergo verbis nostris id agimus, cum verum loquimur, ut, quod secretum in cord
gerimus, per signa hujusmodi ad alterius cognitionem proferatur: sic illa
sapientia, quam Pater genuit, quia per ipsum innotescit animus secretissimus
Patris, Verbum ejus convenientissime nominatur. To. 3. lib. de fide and symb.
Christ is called the Word of his Father, because by him the Father is made
known unto us: for, as by our words (when we speak truth) our aim is, to bring
that to the knowledge of another, which we think secretly in our minds: So that
Wisdom, which the Father begot (because by him the secret mind of the Father
is made known to us) is most conveniently called his Word.

2. Christus dicitur Verbum Patris, quia potest esse verbum nostrum, quod non
sequitur opus: opus autem esse non potest, nisi praecedat verbum, verbum
scilicet cordis: sic and Verbum Dei potuit esse, nulla existente creatura;
creatura autem nulla potest esse, nisi per ipsum, per quod facta sunt omnia.
Tom. 3. de Trinit. l. 15.
2. Christ is called the Word of his Father, because our word may be, which the
work follows not; but the work cannot be, except the word goes before, namely,
the word of the Heart: So also the Word of God might be, though there were no
creature; but no creature could be, but by this Word, by which all things are
made.

(...), etc. Sicut men's nostra, sermonem vel verbum procreans, nulla id
perpessione facit, non enim secatur, aut fluit, nec quicquid earum rerum
patitur, quae rebus corporeis eveniunt, sic and omni perpessione vacua est
illa, quae nec mente quidem comprehendi potest divina generatio. Tom. 6. Sermon.
in Joan. 1.1.
Saint Chrysostom makes the comparison thus: As our mind (says he) procreating
speech, or a word, does it without any suffering; for neither is it cut, nor
does it flow, nor does it suffer any of those things, that happen to bodily
things: so that divine generation, which ca not be so much as comprehended by
the mind, is altogether void of all passion.

Saint Athanasius notes the Resemblance between Christ and our Word in four
Particulars.

1. (...), etc. Sicut sermo kominis duas habet generationes, unam ex anima,
alteram ex labiis: ita and Dei Verbum duas generationes habet, unam ex Deo and
Patre, quae prima generatio dicitur, alteram ex carne, quae dicitur generatio
secunda.
1. As the speech of man has a double generation, one of the Soul, and another
of the Lips: so the Word of God has a double generation, one of God the
Father, which is the first generation; and the other of flesh, which is called
the second generation.

2. Sicut sermo noster, quando nascitur secundum generatio nem primam ab anima
(quod fit cum quis cogitat quid dicere) obscurus est, and non aperitur, sed
manet potius post generationem in sinibus animalibus; ita and Deus Verbum,
quamvis ante secula a Deo and Patre natum est, non tamen hominibus
manifestabatur, manebat enim in sinibus paternis.
2. As our speech, when, according to the first generation, it is begotten of
the Soul (which is when one thinks what to say) is obscure, and is not opened,
but remains rather in the breast of the creature: so God the Word, though before
all Worlds he was begotten of God his Father, was not yet made manifest unto
men, for he remained in the Bosom of his Father.

3. As our Word, when we please, 3. Sicut sermo noster, cum volumus, nascitur
ex labiis nostris, iisque aperitur, quibuscum versamur: ita and Dei Verbum,
quando ei placuit, narum est ex ter castissima Maria, and tunc factum est
manifestum in toto mundo.
comes out of our Lips, and is opened unto them with whom we converse: so the
Word of God, when it pleased him, was born of the most chaste Virgin Mary, and
was then made manifest in the whole World.

4. As our speech, 4. Sicut sermo noster, natus ex labiis nostris, quando ex
labiis generatur, non relinquit animam, nec labia nostra, nec aures audientium,
sed est and in anima, and in labiis nostris, and in auribus audientium, and non
minuitur unquam, et si multa millia sermonem audiant, nec deficit, sed semper
in nobis plenissimus est: ita and Dei verbum, et si natum sit de virgin Maria,
non tamen a Patre discedit, nec a carne, nec ab omnibus hominibus, nec a tota
creatura, sed ubique praesto est, nec minutum est, sed plenissimum. To. 2
quaest. alia, q. 4.
when it comes out of our lips, leaves not our Soul, nor our lips, nor the ears
of the hearers, but is in our Soul, in our lips, and in the hearers ears, and
is never diminished, though many thousands hear the speech, nor fails, but is
ever most full in us: so the Word of God, though it be born of the Virgin Mary,
departs not yet from the Father, nor from the flesh, nor from all men, nor from
the whole creature, but is every where at hand, nor is it diminished, but
remains most full.

Saint Basil the Great, giving the Reasons why Christ is called the Word, does
note the similitude between Christ and our word, or speech. Why is he called
the Word? Cur Verbum? (...) ut ostendatur quia ex mente procedit. Cur Verbum?
(...) quia citra passionem genitum est. Cur Verbum? (...) quia est imago
genitoris, totum in se monstrans genitorem, nullam inde partem deducens; sicut
verbum nostrum, quod totius cogitationis nostrae imaginem refert: quae enim
secundum cor nostrum cognovimus, haec verbo proferimus; and id quod loquimur
exemplar habet ejus quod cord cogitamus: Estque cor nostrum velut fons quidam,
verbum autem emissum velut rivus ex hoc font profluens: and quale est id quod
occultum est, tale est etiam quod apparet. Verbum ergo dixit, ut passionis
expertem Patris generationem ostendat, and perfectam filii substantiam te
doceat, and conjunctionem sine tempore filii ad Patrem per haec demonstret.
(...), etc. nam and verbum nostrum, mentis foetus, sine passione generatur: nec
enim secatur, nec dividitur, nec fluit, sed manens tota men's in proprio statu,
verbum totum and continuum emittit, and procedens verbum omnem mentis
generantis virtutem in se complectitur. Tom. 1. Hom. 16. in Joan. 1.1.
To show, That he came from the mind, [namely, from the Father, as the speech
comes from the mind.] Why the Word? because he was begotten without passion:
Why the Word? because he is the image of his Father, showing in himself his
whole Father; as our speech, which shows the image of our whole thought: for
those things, which we know with our Heart, we express in our Words: and that
which we speak has the likeness of that which we think in our mind. And our
Heart is as a certain Fountain, and the speech which we utter is as a River
issuing from this Fountain: and look what that is that lies hid in our mind,
such is that which is expressed in our words. The Evangelist therefore calls
Christ the Word, that he might show thee the Fathers begetting his Son void of
passion, and the Sons perfect subsistence, and his eternal conjunction with his
Father: for so also our speech, the issue of the mind, is begotten without any
passion: for it is neither cut, nor divided, nor does it flow; but the whole
mind, remaining in its proper state, sends out the whole continued speech; and
the speech, issuing from it, contains in it the whole virtue of the mind,
begetting it.

Zanchius also, among our modern Divines, does frequently mention this
Comparison between Christ and our Word: Per nostrum sermonem occulta mentis
significantur and cognoscuntur; sic per Filium men's and voluntas Patris
cognoscitur. De trib. Eloh. l. 5. c. 7. p. 320.
By our speech (says he) the secrets of the mind are signified and understood:
and so by the Son the Mind and Will of the Father is known by us, and revealed
to us.

Elsewhere he adds other things, in which the Resemblance holds: As,

1. The Mind begets the Word naturally, Men's generat (...) suum naturaliter,
ita ut men's nunquam sit sine (...) sic Pater Filium natura sua, ita ut nunquam
fuerit Pater sine Filio.
so that the Mind is never without it: so the Father begets the Son by his own
nature, so that the Father is never without the Son.

2. Deinde men's gignit (...) sine passione and corruptione: ita Pater.
The Mind begets the Word without passion and corruption; so the Father the
Son.

3. Item, men's gignit intra se; ita Pater.
The Mind begets speech within it self; so the Father begets the Son.

4. Ad haec men's ita gignit intra se, ut res genita maneat in mente: sic Pater
Filium (...) Ideo dicitur, Erat apud Deum; and, Filius in sinu Patris est.
The Mind so begets within it self, that the thing begotten is always in the
Mind: So the Father begets his Son, the Word; and therefore it is said, The
Word was with God: and, The Son is in the bosom of the Father. (Joh. 1.1, 18.)

5. The Word, Denique, ut verbum, etsi genitum in mente, postea etiam vestitum
voce, exit in aures hominum, nunquam tamen a mente recedit: ita Filius, in
carne indutus, sese visendum exhibuit hominibus nunquam tamen Patrem deseruit.
Ibid. c. 8. p. 333.
though (begotten in the Mind, and afterward clothed with voice) it goes into
the ears of men, yet it never departs from the Mind; so the Son, clothed with
flesh, yielded himself to be seen of men, yet never did he forsake his Father.

Elsewhere also does the same learned Divine, from Saint Gregory Nazianzen,
observe three Particulars, in which the Resemblance holds between Christ and
our Word, or speech: Namely,

1. As our speech, that is, the conception of the Mind, 1. Sicut noster sermo,
i. e. conceptus mentis, a mente generatur, idque citra ullam generantis, vel
rei genitae passionem, sic Filius ex Patre Deo citra passionem genitus est.
is begotten of the Mind, and that without any passion of the Mind begetting,
or of the thing begotten; so the Son is begotten of the Father without passion.

2. Sicut noster conceptus manet in mente, and apud mentem, a qua genitus est,
ita ut, licet etiam for as exprimatur, nun quam tamen definat esse apud mentem.
Eundem ad modum Filius semper manet apud Patrem, inseparabilis a Patre.
2. As the conception of the Mind remains always in the Mind, and with the
Mind, so that, though it be expressed outwardly, yet it ceases not to be with
the Mind: so does the Son always remain with the Father, inseparable from the
Father.

3. Sicut per prolatum sermonem nostrae mentis consilium voluntasque patefit,
sic per Filium, Pater, Patrisque voluntas patefacta and revelata est. Ibid. l.
6. c. 2. p. 347.
3. As by our speech, brought forth, the counsel and will of our Mind is
brought to light: so, by the Son, the Father, and the Will of the Father, is
manifested, and revealed to us.

Thus ye have seen the similitude between Christ and a word and consequently
the reasons, why Christ is called (...), Omne simile est etiam dissimile.
the word: But yet (because there are no things so like, but they are unlike in
some things, therefore) it will not be amiss to take knowledge of the
Dissimilitude between Christ and our word. And of this also Divines have taken
knowleldge. And therefore Saint Basil the great gives this Caveat. When you
hear Christ called the Word, understand it, (...): audi verbum hoc, ut de Deo
condignum est. De unigenito enim disserens verbum ipsum appellavit, sicut illum
paulo post lucem and vitam vocabit. Et cum lucem audis, non hanc oculis
visibilem ex stimabis: nec, cum vitam audiveris, hanc communem putaveris, qua
and bruta vivant, Sic and verbum audiens, cave, ne, mentis imbecillita^e, ad
humiles and terrenas sententias deprimaris, sed verbi potestatem diligentius
investiga. Tom. 1. hom. 16. in Joan. 1.1.
as it becomes it to be understood of God, for the Evangelist, speaking of the
only begotten Son of God, called him the Word, as afterward he calls him the
light and the life. And, when you hear him called the Light, you are not to
imagine him that Light which the bodily eyes behold. Nor when you hear him
called the Life, think him to be that common Life, which agrees also to brute
creatures. So, when you hear him called the Word, take heed, least, through the
weakness of your mind, you be depressed to humble and earthly thouhgts, (...)
etc. Quomodo potest Filius verbum esse? aut verbum imago Dei? cum hominum
verbum syllabis constans, non sit nisi indicium mentis, nihilque agat, nisi
quod prodat voluntatem loquentis, quod ubi factum est, statim evanescit. (...),
etc. Si de homine quopiam loqui se credant, l^quantur de verbo Patris, quantum
libet, humano more. Si autem de Deo illis sermo est, hominum conditore, jam
mihi nil humani, sed ea, quae supra humanam naturam sunt, eos cogitare velim.
(...), etc. Qualis enim est genitor, tale id esse, quod genitum est,
necessarium est, and qualis est verbi pater, tale etiam fuerit verbum ejus. Et
paulo post addit (...). Hominum quidem verbum, ut syllabis constat, ita nec
vivit, nec vim agendi habet, sed solummodo est in loquente index mentis, and
statim uti enunciatu^ est, praeterit, nec ulterius apparet, quia nil erat
priusquam enunciaretur. (...), etc. Dei autem Verbum non est enuntiatorium, nec
sonus vocum, nec complexio dictionum, sed quale ex luce splendour, tale est
ipsum, and genitum quoddam, et perfectum ex perfecto, ac proinde Deus est, and
imago Dei. (...): Nec quaerendum est quare omnino non tale sit Verbum Dei,
quale est nostrum; cum Deus nequaquam talis sit, quales nos sumus. Et post
pauca ulterius addit, (...), etc. Hominibus multa and frequentia verba quotidie
enascuntur and praetereunt, quia priora non manent, sed evanescunt, (...), etc.
Verbum autem Dei unum est and idem, and, ut scriptum est, manet in aeternum
sine omni immutatione: conveniebat enim, unius Dei unam esse imaginem, unicum
verbum, unicam item sapientiam. Tom. 1. cont. Arianos orat. 3.
but diligently search out and labor to find out the power of the Word
Athanasius to the objection of the Arians: How can the Son be the Word, or that
Word the image of God? since the word of men, consisting of letters, is nothing
but the discovery of the mind, and does nothing, but discover the will of the
speaker, which being done, it instantly vanishes. To this objection, I say, he
returns this answer. If they think that they speak of an ordinary man, let them
speak of the Word of the Father, as much as they will after the manner of men:
But if they speak of God, the Creator of man, let them not entertain any humane
thought, but think such things, as are above humane nature: for, look, what the
begetter is, such is it necessary, that the thing begotten be: and, what an one
the Father of the Word is, such must his Word be. And a little after he adds
with respect to the particular in hand: The word of men as it consists of
syllables, so neither has it life nor power of acting, but is only in the
speaker a discovery of the mind, and as soon as its uttered, it instantly
passes away, because it was nothing, before it was uttered. But the Word of God
is not enunciatory, nor a sound of voices, nor a complexion of words: but look,
what is the brightness issuing from the light, such is it, and a certain thing
begotten, and that perfect out of a perfect, and therefore it is God, and the
Image of God. Nor are we here to enquire, why the Word of God is not such, as
our words are; seeing God is in no sort such as we are. And a little after he
adds a further dissimilitude between this Word of God and our words. Men (says
he) have many words, frequently, and daily springing up, and passing away,
because the former words continue not, but vanish a way. But the Word of God is
one and the same, and as it is written, remains for ever without any change:
for it is convenient that one God should have one only Image, one only Word,
one only Wisdom. Fulgentius also sets out the dissimilitude in few words,
while he says thus. Christ is a Word, not which being uttered, vanishes, but,
which being begotten remains: Christus est verbum, non quod desinit prolatum,
sed quod permanet natum: non transitorium, sed Eternum, non factum a Deo Patre,
sed genitum and unigenitum. Sermon. 2. de dupl. nativ. Christi.
not a transitory Word, but Eternal, not made of God his Father, but begotten,
and only begotten. And thus does Zanchius lay down the sum of the Doctrine of
the Church from the time of the Apostles till this day, That Christ is the Word
of God the Father, not a word spoken, Christum esse (...) Dei Patris, non
prolatitium and in aere evanescentem, sed substantialem, non in tempore
prolatum, sed ab omni aeternitate ex Patris substantia genitum. De trib. Eloh.
l. 6. c. 2. p. 346.
and so vanishing in the Air, but the substantial Word, not uttered in Time,
but from all Eternity begotten of the substance of the Father.

And the opening of this comparison is of excellent use.

I. To justify the practice of the Evangelist calling Christ the Word, in that
there is so great a likeness between Christ and our Word, or Speech.

II. To teach us many things concerning Christ, as.

1. That Christ is begotten of the Father: for so our words are the conceptions
of our mind: And so God says to his Son, This day have I begotten thee; Psalm.
2.2^
and so the Evangelist speaks of him, Joh. 1.14
as the only begotten Son of the Father.

2. That Christ had a double generation, one as God, of the Father, and the
other, as Man of the Virgin.

3. That Christ was begotten of the Father without any Passion.

4. That, though Christ was begotten of the Father from all Eternity, yet he
was not manifested to men till afterward.

5. That Christ was manifested to men in his own time, when it pleased himself.

6. That Christ is inseparable from his Father, yea, when he took Humane Nature
upon him, in which he was manifested to the World, even then he remained with
his Father, and his Father with him.

Heb. 1.3
7. That Christ is the express image of his Fathers person.

8. That Christ reveals to us his Father, and the Will and Counsel of his
Father: so the Evangelist says. Joh. 1.18
No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom
of the Father, he has declared him. Joh. 15, 15
And so our Savior says of himself, All things that I have heard of my
Father, I have made known unto you.

Oh the great benefit, that in this respect accrues unto us by Christ, to have
the knowledge of God, and of his Will and Counsel conveyed unto us? how
should we be thankful for him? how readily should we accept of him, being
offered unto us? yea readily should we part with all those things that are
dearest to us, so that we may enjoy him.

CHAP. XVIII. Christ and a Worm.
SO does the Prophet speak of himself, Psalm. 22.6 August. epist. 49. ad Deo
g^at. and, 120. ad Honorat. Ambros. To. 3. Conc. ad pop. Conc. 3. Hier. To. 4
Coment. in Psalm. In loc.
as a Type of Christ, I am a Worm, and no man.

Saint Hierome, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austin do jointly and unanimously note
two things, in which this resemblance holds.

1. In regard of the contemptiblenesse of this creature and the meandness of
it; no creature is more base and contemptible then a Worm; every one is ready
to tread upon it, and to trample it under foot; the poorest, the youngest dare
venture to offer wrong to it. So was it with our blessed Savior: and therefore
it is added in the forementioned scripture, Psalm 22.6
A reproach of men and despised of the people: he submitted himself to so mean
a condition, that he was easily despised and reproached at all hands: He became
poor: 2 Cor. 8.9
and who takes not liberty to despise the poor? No wonder then, that our
Savior met with so much scorn: and so its foretold of him by the Prophet. Isa.
53.3
He was despised and rejected of men. And, if we look into the Evangelical
History, we shall see it to have been so with him, namely, that he was coarsely
used: Luke 2.7
when he was to be born, no better place can be afforded him then the Stable
and the Manger. When he came to his Public Life, though he spoke so, Joh. 7.16
as never man spoke, and though, in regard of his miracles, they could say, we
never saw it so done in Israel. And, Mar. 2.12
He has done all things well: Mat. 7 37 6.3 Math. 13.35 Joh. 10.20
yet how scornfully did they use him? In words, Is not this the Carpenter? and,
Is not this the Carpenters Son? And, thou art mad and have a devil. Joh. 7.20
Luke 4.29
And no less in deeds: they lead him to the brow of the hill, thinking to cast
him down headlong: they cast stones at him: But especially in the close of his
Public Life, Joh. 8.59 Matthew. 26.50 Joh. 18.20 Matthew. 26.57
then they laid hands on him, they bind him, they hurry him about, first they
bring him to the High Priest, and there they spit upon him, they blindfold him,
Verse. 67, 68
and buffet him and then they say, Prophecy to us, who it is that smote thee:
they deliver him over to the Secular Power, Matthew. 27.2 Luke 23.7, 11
even to Pilate, he sends him to Herod, who mocks him, and sends him back again
to Pilate: here the Jews hire false Witnesses against Him, they prefer a
Murderer before him: Matthew. 27.21
the Soldiers plat a Crown of Thorns on his Head, they put on him a Purple
Robe, Verse. 29.
and put into his hand a Reed, and mockingly bow the knee to him, and cry; Hail
King of the Jews, Verse. 35.
they strip him of his clothes, and crucify him between two Thieves: Verse. 38.
And, being upon the Cross, Verse. 39, 40, etc. Verse. 44.
they revile him and wagg their heads, etc. yea, the very Thieves did cast the
same in his teeth. Justly therefore in this respect is he compared unto a Worm.

2. In regard of the breeding of the Worm. The Worm (says Saint Hierom) which
is bred in the Wood, Vermis, qui in ligno nascitur, non habet patrem nisi
matrem, and Christus ex maria natus est absque coitu viri. To. 4. In loc.

Cur totius creaturae Dominus vermiculo se voluerit comparare? Possumus hoc
humilitati assignire, sicut David publicem se memoravit. Sed magis hoc
accipiendum puto quod vermis nulla extrinsecus admixtione alieni corporis, sed
de sola and pura terra procreatur, ideo illum comparatum Domino, quia and ipse
salvator ex sola and pura Maria generatur. To. 3. conc. ad pop. conc. 3.


has no father, but only a mother: so Christ was born of a Virgin without
carnal copulation with a man. Saint Ambrose moves the question, Why the Lord of
the whole World would compare himself to a Worm? and he answers. We may ascribe
this to his humility, as David called himself a Flea: but I rather think it to
be, because the Worm is gendred of the sole and pure earth, without the mixture
of any other body, therefore I think him to be compared to our Lord, who also
was born of a sole and pure Virgin. Saint Austin in like manner, saving that in
the former of the places alleged, he brings in this latter resemblance, with a
Fortasse, an, It may be: And, Fortasse etiam propter Virgineum partum. ep. 49.
it may be because of his birth of a Virgin: as doubting, whether this were in
that passage of the Psalmist intended: As indeed he well might, in regard of
that which follows in that Verse, A reproach of men, and despised of the
people, which is added as an Exposition of the former clause, in which he had
said, I am a Worm. Howsoever, its a plain Article of our Christian Faith, not
to be denied, nor so much as questioned, but to be firmly believed: that Christ
our Savior was born of a Virgin.

In regard therefore of the first particular we have cause to meditate of the
great Humiliation of our dear Savior, and consequently of his surpassing love
to us, in that he vouchsafed, for our good, to stoop so low: not only he
becomes man, but also a Worm. Its an excellent and just meditation of Saint
Bernard to this purpose. O Vouchsafement to be justly admired! Thou, O
admiranda dignatio! Deus immensae gloriae vermis contemptibilis fieri non
despexisti. De pass. Dom.
that art the God of Infinite glory, did nor disdain to be made a
contemptible Worm. What Humiliation is comparable to this? Jon. 3.6
It was a great humiliation of the King of Nineveh, when rising from the Throne
he sat in Ashes, and putting off his Robe, he covered himself with Sackcloth.
But its nothing to this: as there is no comparison between the humiliation of
the one and of the other, and between the persons humbled: the one a King, the
other the King of Kings, the one a weak creature, the other the Infinite
Creator: how great then is that love, which drew our Savior to such abasement?

And now, why should it trouble us, if it does so happen, that we are in the
world, as Worms? Every man takes liberty to trample upon us, to insult over us,
to lade us with wrongs and injuries: but be of good cheer, it is no other wise
with us in this respect, then it was with our dear Savior: and he, by
undergoing it in his own person, has sanctified and sweetened it to us, so
that we may count it blessed contempt.

And let this love of Christ, submitting himself to such abasement for us, so
far prevail with us, as make us willing, to submit our selves to any
abasement for him, for his cause and honor. Choose we rather to have all men
to trample on us, and to be contemned and scorned at all hands, then to omit
any duty, by which in our places we may honor him, or to take any course that
may tend to his dishonor: Has the Lord suffered such contempt for the
servant? and shall the servant be unwilling to suffer contempt for his Lord and
Master? God forbid: Such contempt suffered for his honor will certainly bring
us to glory and honor everlasting; which God of his mercy grant us for the
merit of that contempt, which our dear Savior has undergone for us, to whom
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost be all Glory and Honor for ever. Amen.

PARALLELS. LIB. III.
CHAP. I.
IN the two former Books we have seen the Parallels that concern Christ the
Head and Husband of the Church: the Parallels between Christ and the Types by
which he was fore-signified to the Jewish Church, both Persons and Things, in
the first Book: and the Parallels between Christ, and the other Resemblances,
by which he is set forth in the Old and New Testament, in the second Book. And
now, because the Church is the Mystical Body, the Wife and Spouse of Christ,
they are therefore not to be divided: for our Savior has given that Edict;
Matthew. 19
Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Before therefore
I make an end, I shall, in this third Book, add the Parallels that concern the
Church. And here I shall observe the same method that I have observed in the
former, namely, first, to represent to your view the Parallels between the
Church, and those Types by which the Church was fore-signified in the Old
Testament, whether Things or Persons: and then the Parallels between the
Church, and other Resemblances, by which the Church is set forth in the Old or
New Testament.

I. The Parallels between the Church, and the Types, by which it was
fore-signified in the Old Testament. And of these Types I shall take knowledge
according to the order of Times, in which they were exhibited and given.

The Church and Noah's Ark.
The Fathers have, many of them, taken knowledge of the Parallel between these
two, and that in several respects.

I. In regard of the matter and structure of it. And here Saint Austin notes
the Resemblance in three things.

1. The Ark was made of Gopher Wood, 1. Arca fit ex ligno Gopher, vel, secundum
LXX. ex lignis quadratis: Et Ecclesia de Sanctis construitur ad omne opus bonum
semper paratis: quadratum enim, quocunque verteris, firmiter stat.
or, according to the Septuagint, of Square Wood: So the Church is built up of
Saints, prepared to every good work: for Wood that is squared, turn it which
way you will, stands firm. And of this Resemblance Gregory the Great does take
knowledge: Arca de lignis imputribilibus compingitur, and Ecclesia de omnibus in
bono suo perseverantibus componitur. To. 2. epist. l. 9. In dict. 4. ep. 40. ad
Isicium, epist. Hierosol.

2. Bitumine glutinantur arcae ligna intrinsecus and extrinsecus, ut in compage
unitatis, significetur tolerantia charitatis, ne solvatur vinculum pacis. To.
6. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 11. c. 14.

3. Aditus arcae fit a latere: and nemo intrat in Ecclesiam, nisi per
sacramentum remissionis peccatorum, and hoc a latere Christi aperte manavit.
Ibid. cap. 16.


The Ark (says he) was made of sound Wood, not putrified; and so the Church is
made up of all that persevere in Goodness.

2. The Ark was pitched within and without with pitch, to teach us, charitably
to bear one with another, that the bond of peace be not broken.

3. The Door of the Ark must be made in the side of the Ark; and none enters
into the Church otherwise then by the Sacrament of the Remission of sins, which
issued openly out of the side of Christ.

II. In regard of the creatures taken into the Ark: and here Saint Austin takes
notice of two Particulars.

1. Cuncta animalium genera, in arca clauduntur, sic omnes Gentes Ecclesia
continet. Ib. c. 14.
There were in it all sorts of creatures: so the Church contains all Nations.
And this, I conceive, to be further prefigured in the Ark, in that, not only
Sem, from whom the Jews descended, was in the Ark, but also Japhet, the Father
of the Gentiles. And Moses himself gives an hint of this, in that, having named
the Sons of Japhet, he adds, By these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in
their Lands, Genesis 10.5
etc. And this does Saint Paul clearly affirm: for, having asked the question,
Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also the God of the Gentiles? Romans
3.29, 30
He answers, Yea, of the Gentiles also, seeing it is the same God that shall
justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith. And
this also would God teach Saint Peter by that Sheet let down from Heaven to him
being in a Trance, Acts 10.10, 11 12
wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the Earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping things, and fowls of the Air; as there were in Noah's Ark.

2. That there were clean creatures and unclean in the Ark: Munda and immunda
ibi erant animalia, sicut in Ecclesiae sacramentis boni and mali versantur.
Ibid.
so both good and bad converse together in the Sacraments of the Church: for
such a mixture there has been always in the Militant Church, Matthew. 13
as of Wheat and Tares in the field, of Grain and Chaff in the floor, 2 Timothy 2
of good fish and bad in the net, of Vessels of honor and dishonor in the great
House. Even when the Church was in the narrow bounds of a Family, such a
mixture there was: We find a Cain in Adams Family, a Cham in Noah's Family, an
Ishmael in Abraham's Family, an Esau in Isaacs Family: much more easy it is to
find such mixture; yea, it is impossible not to find it, when the bounds of
the Church were more enlarged, namely, into a People: Of the Jews, God says by
the Prophet, You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth: Amos 3.2
yet among them that there was such a mixture, Ezekiel. 22 Hosea 4.1, 2 Jer. 5.1,
etc.
it is manifest by the Prophets reproving them for the abominable sins and
wickedness, of which they were guilty. Much more is there such a mixture in the
Church, coming to be Catholic, dispersed in all Nations.

III. Saint Austin yet further compares them in another Particular: Out of the
Ark, all flesh, which the Earth did bear, perished in the Flood; Praeter arcam,
omnis caro, quam terra sustentabat, diluvio consumpta est; and praeter
Ecclesiae societatem, aqua baptismi, quamvis eadem sit, non ad salutem valet,
sed potius ad interitum. Ibid. c. 17.

Sicut arca Noe, naufragante mundo, cunctos, quos suscepit, incolumes servabat;
ita Ecclesia, conflagrante seculo, omnes, quos amplectitur, representabit
illaesos. To. 3. Conc. ad popul. Conc. 11.


so out of the Society of the Church, the Water of Baptism is not of force to
Salvation, but rather to Perdition. Saint Ambrose expresses it otherwise: As
the Ark of Noah, the World suffering wrack, kept those safe that were in it; so
the Church, when the whole World shall be on a flaming fire, shall present all
those that are in her, free from danger. And Gregory the Great, to the same
purpose: In the time of the Flood, all Mankind out of the Ark died; Diluvii
tempore humanum genus extra arcam moritur, ad vitam autem in arca servatur: sic
infideles quosque extra Ecclesiam peccati sui unda perimit; fideles autem suos
in fide and charitate Ecclesiae unitas, quasi arcae compago, custodit. To. 2.
epist. l. 8. Indict. 4. ep. 40.
but all within the Ark were saved alive: So, as for all Infidels out of the
Church, the flood of their own sin kills them; but the Church, as the Ark,
keeps her faithful ones in Faith and Charity.

IV. Gregory the Great notes yet another Particular, in which the Church
resembles the Ark: The Flood ceasing (says he) the Ark rested upon a Mountain:
Cessante diluvio, arca in monte requievit: sic hujus vitae corruptione
cessante, cum malorum operum fluctus transierint, in coelesti patria, in
excelso requiescet Ecclesia monte. Ibid.
so the corruption of this Life ceasing, when the Waves of evil Works shall
pass away, the Church shall rest on an high Mountain in the Heavenly Country.

V. I shall add but one more: Let the Waters rise never so high, yet the Ark is
still above it: so let the floods of Persecution rise never so high, and
increase never so much, yet the Church sinks not under it, but is still above
them: Exodus 1.12
The more the Israelites were oppressed by the Egyptians, the more they
multiplied. And so says Justin Martyr: See thou not, (...); Epist. ad Diognet.
that the more the Persecutors are, by so much the rest (that is, the
Christians) are multiplied? Yea, as Fire burns most fiercely in coldest Weather
by an Antiperistasis; so the Christians, by the harsh usage of them, grow more
confident, and are more courageous to defend and persevere in their Religion;
yea, and to suffer the hardest that can befall them: so that it is most true
that some Confessors said to Saint Cyprian: Stetere torti torquentibus
fortiores. Inter Epist. Cypriani Epist.
The tortured Christians stood with more courage, then the Tormentors
themselves. And so it is with the Church, as with the Palm Tree, that spreads
the more, by how much the heavier weight is laid upon it; and as with the
Camomile, that grows the more by being trodden upon.

But Saint Chrysostom observes one thing, in which the Church is more excellent
then the Ark of Noah: for so he says, A man may say, and not err, (...), etc.
Non aberrarit quis, si dicat, Ecclesiam arca ista esse praestantiorem. Arca
enim and excipiebat animalia bruta, and conservabat: Ecclesia autem semel
suscepta animalia immutat: e. g. ingressus illo est milvus, and egressus est
milvus; introit lupus, exiit lupus: hucne ingressus est milvus? egreditur
columba: Introiit lupus? exiit ovis: non quidem immutata natura, sed explosa
malitia. To. 4. de poenit. Hom. 3.
That the Church is more excellent then the Ark: For the Ark received brute
creatures, and kept them such; but whom the Church receives, she changes: As
for example; A Kite went into the Ark, and it came forth a Kite; a Wolf entered,
and came out a Wolf: But has a Kite entered into the Church? it comes forth a
Dove: Has a Wolf entered? it comes out a sheep: not indeed the nature altered,
but the wickedness exploded, and put away. Saul, afterward blessed Paul,
entering into the Church, remains the same individual person that he was
before; but yet, having entered, of a Wolf he becomes a sheep, yea, a faithful
shepherd of the sheep; preaching, yea, suffering for the Faith which once he
destroyed.

Hence learn sundry things.

1. Let us be prepared and disposed to every good work, and firm in our
resolutions for it, that we may be fit matter for the Building of the Church,
and may answer the Gopher Wood, of which the Ark was made.

2. See here the Church of the New Testament to be Catholic, containing in it
all Nations, as the Ark had in it all kinds of Creatures; and, as there were
in the Ark, as Sem the Father of the Jews, so Japhet, the Father of the
Gentiles.

3. Let us not so far take offense at the mixture of good and bad in the
Church, as for this cause to depart from, and to forsake it: Behold! in the Ark
there were Creatures clean and unclean: and among the Persons (though but eight
in number, yet) there was one Cham: There shall be a division indeed, and a
separation made; He shall (says our Savior, Matthew. 25.32
to whom it shall belong to do) divide between the Sheep and the Goats; but
this shall not be done, till in the end of the World; Verse 31
He shall come in Glory, and his holy Angels with him, etc. The Wheat and the
Tares shall be severed; Mat. 13.30
The Tares bound in bundles to be burnt, and the Wheat to be put into the Barn:
But when shall this be? In the Harvest; which Harvest is the End of the World.
And, till that time, Verse 39 30
it is the Will of God, that they should grow together. Expect not therefore,
That that should be done now, which God has appointed to be done in the End of
the World; but be content, That God should do his own Work in his own Time: Nor
in this respect let us forsake the Communion of the Church, because there is
such mixture in it of Wheat and Tares: Hear that Apostolical Advice, Not
forsaking the assembling of your selves together, Heb. 10.25
as the manner of some is. This is the heady madness of Separatists: but let us
be more sober-minded: Consider we, that Christ had only twelve in his Family,
and yet among them one was a Thief, and a Devil; and He knew from the beginning,
who it was that should betray him, and yet He tolerated him in his company: And
what greater folly were there, then cast away the Gold for some dross that is
mixed with it? Hear rather that excellent saying of Saint Austin: The good are
not to be forsaken for the bad that are among them; Non propter malos boni
deserendi, sed propter bonos mali tolerandi sunt. Tom. 2. Epist. 48.
but, for the sake of the good, the bad are to be tolerated. And a little after
he adds: We suffer some evil men among us, Nonnullos toleramus malos, quos
corrigere aut punire non possumus, nec propter paleam relinquimus aream Domini,
nec propter pisces malos rumpimus retia Domini; nec propter hoedos, in fine
segregandos, deserimus gregem Domini; nec propter vasa, in contumeliam facta
migramus de domo Domini. Ibid.
whom we can neither mend, nor punish: nor leave we the Lords floor for the
chaff that is on it; nor, because of the evil fish that is in it, do we break
the Lords nets; nor, because of the Goats, which shall be separated in the end,
do we forsake the Lords Flock; nor, because of the Vessels made to dishonor, do
we depart out of the Lords House. Oh that men were of this modest temper! and
why should we not? What though there be wicked men in the Church? what hurt
will that be to us? We shall not answer for their sins, nor fare the worse in
this respect; nor shall the Ordinances of God be the worse, nor of less
efficacy to us, for the sake of the wicked, that join with us in the use of
them. Vbicunque cum bonis mali fuerint, bonis non obsunt, sicut non obest palea
frumento. To. 7. part. 1. contr. epist. Parmen. l. 2. c. 2.
Its a true saying of Saint Austin. Wheresoever the bad are with the good, they
hurt not the good, as the chaff hurts not the good grain. And this he elsewhere
clears in many instances. Vbi erant Moses and Aaron, ibi erant Sacrilegi
murmurantes: ubi erat Caiphas, ibi Simeon and Zacharias: ubi Isaias, Jeremias,
Ezechiel and Daniel, ibi sacerdotes and populi mali: ubi Saul ibi David; sed
sarcinam suam quisque portabat. Ibid. c. 6.
Where Moses and Aaron were, there were Sacrilegious murmurers: where Caiaphas
was, there were Simeon and Zacharias: where Isaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel and Daniel
were, there were wicked Priests and People: Where Saul was, there was David;
but every one did bear his own burden. And this does the Apostle affirm in the
general, Every one shall bear his own burden. Gal. 6.5
And with respect to the Ordinances of God, we hear what the same Apostle
says. 1 Cor. 11.2^
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself.
Mark that, to himself alone, and not to others. But will any of you yet, for
this cause leave the Church, and depart from it? ye may grieve the Church by
your unkind separation, but the worst will be your own in the conclusion. Its
a terrible speech of Saint Austin, but I fear it will, in the close, be found
true by woeful experience, if they repent not. Whosoever separates himself from
the Catholic Church (how praiseworthy soever he seems to himself to live,
Quisquis ab Ecclesia Catholica fuerit separatus, quantumlibet laudabiliter
vivere se existimet, hoc solo scelere, quod a Christi unitate disjunctus est,
non habebit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eum. To. 2. epist. 152.
yet) for this very sin, that he is disjoined from the unity of Christ, he
shall not have life, but the wrath of God abides upon him. Be exhorted
therefore to take heed of such practice, and to accept of Saint Austins advise,
Eia cives Jerusalem, qui intra retia estis, and boni pisces estis, tolerate
malos, retia nolite rumpere. Cum illis eritis in mari, non cum illis eritis in
vasis. To. 8. In Psalm. 65.
for its consonant to Scripture: O ye Citizens of Jerusalem, who are within the
nets, and are good fishes, endure the bad, and break not the nets, ye shall be
with them in the Sea, ye shall not be with them in the Vessels: especially
considering, that as all they, that were in the Ark, were saved from perishing
by the flood, so they that remain in communion with the Church, have hope of
Salvation; but as all that were out of the Ark perished, so Salvation cannot
upon any good ground be hoped for by them, that are out of the Church.

4. See what little cause we have to fear, and what cause we have to be
comforted against all persecutions raised against the Church: for

1. As the Ark was still above the waters of the flood, how high soever they
did rise: so, let persecutions rise up to never so great an height, and let
Persecutors rage never so much against the Church, yet the Church shall be
still above them: they may rage, but not prevail against her.

2. As, the flood ceasing, the Ark rested upon the Mountain of Ararat, so
persecution ceasing, we shall have a rest in Gods Holy Hill: having suffered,
we shall receive the promise of Eternal Life.

CHAP. II. The Church and the Tabernacle.
THe Tabernacle, says Ainsworth, In Exodus 26. Exodus 26.1
which was for the Ark, Table and Shewbread, and Candlestick to be kept in, was
a figure of the Church, wherein God does dwell with his people, and enlightens
them with his Law, and the seven Spirits, that are before his Throne.

The Curtains were to be made of fine Linen, Verse. 1.
and Blue and Purple, and Scarlet. These Colors, says the same Author,
represented the blood of Christ, and this fine Linen, his Justice, and so the
variety of Graces, wherewith the Church is adorned and made glorious.

They were made with Cherubims, signifying, Verse. 1.
says he, heavenly affections in the Church, and the Angels, ministering to and
about them.

The Curtains of the Tabernacle were coupled one to another: This says he,
Verse. 3.
notes the union of Persons and Graces in the Church by the Spirit: in which
respect its called the unity of the Spirit: for, Ephesians. 4.3 Ephesians. 2.21
in Christ the whole building fitly coupled together, grows into an holy
Temple in the Lord.

The Tabernacle was one, and the Tent one. Verse. 6, 11
As the golden Tachs clasped in the blew Loopes, made the Ten Curtains one
Tabernacle, one Tent: so by Love and Faith in Christ, the Saints are fastened,
and builded together for an habitation of God by the Spirit. Ephesians. 2.22


Over and above the foresaid Curtains, Verse. 7.
there was a covering of Goats hair: and another of Rams skins died red.
Verse. 14.
And these three kinds of Coverings served for the safety of the Tent, and the
things in it, from the injuries of the weather: and also by these Covers the
people were kept from beholding the Isa. 4.5, 6.
Upon all the glory (says the Prophet) there shall be a defense, and there
shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a
cover from storm and from rain: Isa. 25.4
And again; Thou have been, says the same Prophet, A strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat: Psalm. 27.5
And so says David; In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavillion.
And the state of Thus far Ainsworth.

In Exodus 26.
Rivetus makes the Parallel between the Church and the Tabernacle to stand in
sundry particulars.

1. Sicut tabernacula transferuntur de loco in locum, ita Ecclesia in his
terris non habet certas and stabiles seeds, sed subinde cogitur eas mutare,
quia vita piorum est perpetua peregrinatio.
1. As Tabernacles are removed from place to place: so the Church on Earth has
no certain or stable places of abode, but is ever and anon forced to change
them, because the life of the godly is a perpetual Pilgrimage.

2. Tabernacula non sunt munita vallo aut aggere ullo, quia ad mutationes
subitas figuntur and refiguntur, ita Ecclesia foris non habet praesidia humana;
sed tamen, ut sub tuguriolis defenduntur ut cunque corpora nostra adversus
solis aestum and injurias tempestatum, ita sub alis Dei expansis, tanquam sub
clypeo aliquo tutissimo Ecclesia secura est ab ignitis Diaboli telis, quamvis
vicinam habeat omni ex part (...). Oves meas, ait Dominus, nemo rapiet e manu
mea. Joan. 10.28. portae inferorum non praevalebunt adversus eam. Matthew. 16.18.
2. Tabernacles are not fenced with any Bulwark or Trench, because they are
often to remove; so the Church has not from without any humane defense: but
yet, as under the meanest Cottages our bodies are defended against the heat of
the Sun, and the injuries of Tempests; so under the wings of God spread abroad,
as under some safe shield, the Church is secured against the fiery darts of the
Devil, though it be never so near utter ruin. None, says our Savior, shall
take my sheep cut of my hand, Joh. 10.18. The gates of hell shall not prevail
against it, Matthew. 16. Verse. 18.

3. 3. Tabernaculi parts, per veli interpositionem distinctae, non fuerunt duo
contigua domicilia, sed unum opus continuum, ut intellegeremus, Ecclesiam
Judaeorum and Christianorum in unum aedificium spirituale aptari, and populum
utrumque in unam Ecclesiam coalescere, ipso Christo facto angulari lapide.
Velum tamen quoddam interpositum erat, quod illius temporis ratio postulabat,
ut vetus illa Ecclesia, multis legalibus ceremoniis, tanquam maceria aliqua
interposita, a gentibus distingueretur. At vero postquam affulsit Sol justitiae
Christus, umbratilibus ceremoniis dissipatis, scissum fuit velum, Luc. 23.45.
and interstitium maceriae dirutum, Ephesians. 2.14.
The parts of the Tabernacle (distinguished each from other by the interposition
of a vail) were not two contiguous houses, but one continued house; to teach
us, that the Jewish and Christian Church, are joined into one spiritual
building, and both People to grow into one Church: yet there was a certain vail
interposed, because the respect of that time did require, that the Ancient
Church, by many Legal Ceremonies, as by a middle Wall of Partition, should be
distinguished from the Gentiles. But after that Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness shined out to the World, the shadowing Ceremonies being
dissipated, the Vail of the Temple was rent, ( Luke 23.45.) and the middle Wall
of Partition broken down. ( Ephesians. 2.14.)

Hence learn diverse things.

1. Learn here, that in the Church God dwells among us, as with the children of
Israel in the Tabernacle: and therefore let us be circumspect and careful of
our Conversation, that we do nothing unbeseeming his presence, least we provoke
him to displeasure against us and move him in displeasure to depart away from
us, as by the sins of the Israelites God was moved in displeasure to forsake
them: so shy are we, and careful to shun any thing that may drive away any
useful friend from us, whose presence and abode with us we have cause to desire.

2. See here the Church to be one, as the Tabernacle was one: Ephesians. 4.3
and therefore let us Endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace: let us take heed of disunion: Let us hearken to Saint Paul, We beseech
you brethren in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.10
that there be no divisions among you, but be ye perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment. Its Saint Paul, that makes the
request to us, who was the Apostle of the Gentiles, that did so much, and
suffered so much for our behoof: good cause therefore have we to hearken to
him: he might command in a business of this nature, but he rather beseeches
us: yea, he beseeches us in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of what
weight should his name be with us? And as for the thing it self, Its laid down,
1. Negatively, let there be no divisions among you: and why should we not
hearken to him herein? for, who knows not of what dangerous consequence
divisions are in the Church? we hear what our Savior says, Matthew. 12.
An house or Kingdom divided cannot stand. The Dutch devise is a good one, of
two Vessels floating on the Sea, with this Motto, We are broken to pieces,
Frangimur, Si collidimur.
if we dash one against another. As then we tender the safety of the Church,
let us take heed of divisions. 2. Its laid down affirmatively, be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment: that is, keep
unity and maintain peace: this we shall find to be of singular convenience. 2
Cor. 13.11
Live in peace (says the Apostle) and the God of love and peace shall be with
you.

3. See the gracious care of God for his Church to preserve it against and from
all dangers; as God provided for the safety of the Tabernacle a double Covering
besides the Curtains, namely, that of the Goates-hair, and that of Ram-skins
died red: why then should we be afraid of any dangers, having the wings of Gods
protection spread over us? David, knowing, that the Lord sustained him, Psalm.
3.5, 6
resolves not to be afraid of ten Thousands of people, that set themselves
against him round about. Psalm. 23.
And knowing that God was with him, he resolves, to fear no evil though he
walked through the Valley of the shadow of death. If therefore we lie open to
any danger, fly to God by prayer, and then fear not.

4. See how we are preferred before the People of God under the old Testament:
they had the Types, we have the Truth: they had the Shadows, we have the Body:
they had a threefold covering of the Tabernacle, that hindered them from seeing
the very Types that were in it: yea there was a Vail that hindered the very
ordinary Priests from beholding the things that were in the Holy of Holies,
which yet were but Types of good things to come: but its otherewise with us,
the Vail is rent, and now we may with open face behold the substance of all
those Types: Oh what preferment is this? Romans 16.
The mystery was kept secret from the beginning, but now its made manifest: how
shall we answer it to God, if, having so clear a revelation we suffer our
selves to be outstripped by them?

5. Let us Gentiles praise God for his goodness to us: we are admitted into
and made one Church with the Jews: we were once shut out of the Commonwealth
of Israel by the middle Wall of Partition, even the Legal Ceremonies: but now
that Partition Wall is broken down, and so we are now become Fellow-Citizens of
the Saints: As the Holy and most Holy Place, though distinguished by a Vail
interposed, were yet one Tent, one Tabernacle, so believers of Jews and
Gentiles are become one Church, and one sheepfold under one shepherd.
Remembering therefore, what once we were, and what now we are by the grace of
God, let us not fail to praise God for this happy change and high preferment,
and his unspeakable mercy expressed therein.

CHAP. III. The Church and the golden Candlestick.
In Heb. 9.
DOctor Gouge makes the Church to answer to the golden Candlestick, as that
which was Typified by it: Rev. 1.20
and he justifies his application by this, that the seven Churches are called
the seven golden Candlesticks; upon which place Brightman observes, that this
similitude is taken from the Candlestick, Petita est haec similitudo ex
candelabro Tabernaculi. In loc.
that was in the Tabernacle erected by Moses.

And the resemblance between these, the forenamed Doctor observes to hold in
sundry Particulars.

1. In general: that the use of the Candlestick is, to hold out the light to
others. And so our Savior speaks. No man lights a candle and puts it under a
Bushel, Matthew. 5.15
but in a Candlestick, and it gives Light to all that are in the House. So the
Church holds out the Light of Gods Word to all that are in it. In which respect
the Apostle calls the Church the pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15 Exercit. divin.
Exer. 9. Way to the true Church, p. 80
because she holds out the Truth to be seen, says Weemse; The Expression being
taken from the Custom of many Nations, who were used to write their Laws in
Tables, and so to hang them upon Pillars of stone, that the people, whom it
concerned to know them, might see and read them; as, among us, Curs. theol.
part. 2. col. 324
Proclamations are nailed to Posts in Market Towns, says Dr. John White, and so
Scharpius the like.

Now the Church, being the true Church, holds out the Light (says my Author)
two ways.

1. By teaching and instructing others, which, for the public, belongs to the
Ministers of the Gospel, who are called, and set a part by Calling, for this
great Work: but, in private, it belongs also to Masters of Families, to teach
and instruct their Children and Servants; yea, and one Christian another,
communicating to others the knowledge which they have.

2. By walking and conversing as Children of Light, adorning the Faith, which
they profess, by Holiness and Righteousness of Life, Phil. 2.15
so shining as Lights in the World, as Saint Paul testifies of the Christians
at Philippi.

Let it be the care of us all thus to resemble the Candlestick in the
Tabernacle; as that held out the Light to others, so let us hold out the Light
of Truth unto others: and that both these ways:

1. By teaching and instructing others in the Truth of Religion: In public
let the Ministers of the Gospel acquaint the people, committed to their care
and trust, with the Truths of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.2
preaching to them in season, and out of season: In this especially stands the
feeding of Christ's Sheep and Lambs, which our Savior enjoins to Saint Peter,
as an evidence of his love unto him: John 21.15 16, 17
Peter, love thou me? (says our Savior) Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. If we
would show our unfeigned love to our Savior, let us not fail to do our duty in
this kind.

And in private, let this be the care of Heads of Families, thus to instruct
and teach their Children and Servants: We hear how God speaks of Abraham; I
know that he will teach and command his Children and Household after him to keep
the Way of the Lord: Genesis 18.19
and thereupon God resolves, not to hide from Abraham the thing which he was
about to do, namely, about Sodom and Gomorrha. Verse 17


Yea, let this be the care of all private Christians: what they know concerning
God, concerning Christ, whereof they find others to be ignorant, be ye ready
to communicate it unto them; Jude v. 20
and so edify one another in your most holy Faith: Docendo, disces.
By teaching another, thou shall learn. Here it holds most true that Solomon
says: Prove. 11.25
The liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be watered also
himself. To know, Scire, ut scias, turpis est curiositas: scire, ut sciaris,
turpis est vanitas: scire, ut scientiam vendas, turpis est quaestus: scire, ut
aedifices, charitas est. In Cant. ser.
that you may know, is filthy curiosity (says Saint Bernard:) To know, that you
may be known (namely, to be a man of knowledge) is filthy vanity: To know, that
you may make sale of your knowledge, is filthy gain: But to know, that you may
edify, this is Charity.

2. By living as Children of Light: let us all be careful of this; let the
Ministers of the Gospel harken to Saint Paul, laying this injunction upon his
Scholar Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.16
Take heed to thy self, and to thy Doctrine: To thy Doctrine, but to thy self
first; lest we be like to the Pharisees, of whom our Savior says, They say,
and do not; they bind heavy burdens, Mat. 23.3, 4
and lay them upon other men's shoulders, but themselves will not touch them
with one of their fingers: yea, lest (as Paul says) when we have preached to
others, 1 Cor. 9.27
we our selves should be castaways.

Yea, let us all harken to the in junction of our Savior, Let your Light shine
before men: Mat. 5.16 Ephesians. 5.8
and of Saint Paul, Walk as Children of the Light: and so let us give Light to
others, as the Candlestick did in the Tabernacle.

II. Particularly; The Parallel between the Church and the Candlestick in the
Tabernacle in three things: In the Matter, in the Parts, and in the
Appurtenances.

I. In the Matter: It was made of Gold, and of pure Gold.

1. The Candlestick is made of Gold: Gold is precious in the eyes and account
of men; and so is the Church precious in the sight of God, and in his account:
Exodus 19.5, 6
Ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, a Kingdom of Priests
(says God) and an holy Nation: yea, Psalm. 105.13, 14
When they wandered from one people to another Nation, he suffered no man to do
them wrong, but reproved Kings for their sakes. Yea, hear what God says by the
Prophet; Isai. 43.4
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee; therefore I will give men for thee, and people for thy life: And so
speaks Saint Peter of godly Christians in the New Testament; Ye are a chosen
Generation, 1 Pet. 2.8
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. And the Expression of
the Prophet is remarkable to this purpose: They shall be mine, says the Lord
God of hosts, Mal. 3.17
in that day, when I shall make up my jewels. And who can doubt of the high
account and preciousness of the Church in the sight of God? for, behold! with
what a price God has purchased it; Not with corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1.18
as Silver and Gold; but with the blood of Christ, Acts 20, 28
as of a Lamb unspotted and undefiled; and indeed (as Saint Paul speaks) with
the blood of God.

Let this comfort and encourage us against the vile account, and the base
esteem, in which the World has us: How base soever we are in the eyes of the
World, we are yet precious in Gods eyes: The World holds us as the filth of the
World, and the offscouring of all things, Lam. 4.2
but God counts us as his jewels: They judge of us, as of earthen pitchers, the
work of the hands of the Potter; God holds us comparable to fine Gold: They
esteem of us, as of men not worthy to live on the Earth, or to breathe in the
Air, when God holds us, as men of whom the World is not worthy: Heb. 11.38
They despise us, as men of no account, Jam. 2.5, 6
but God has chosen us rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom. And whom shall
not the high esteem, which the only wise God has of us, comfort against the
base esteem of blind men, that cannot discern of colors, and foolish men,
that have not skill to discern of things that differ, and to prefer the most
excellent?

And let us learn to imitate God in the high esteem which he has of the
Church, even of all godly Christians; and, as he does, so let us account highly
of them: This will be our wisdom, to conform our judgment to the judgment of
the only wise God. Thus did David: hear we his profession; I am (says he) a
companion to all them that fear thee, Psa. 119.63
and keep thy Testimonies. Psa. 16.2
And again: My goodness extends to the Saints, and to them that excel in
virtue, in whom is all my delight. Thus let us do, having godly persons in high
esteem, giving our votes to them, delighting in their familiarity, and
preferring them in the exercise of our beneficency: as the Apostle advises; Do
good to all, but especially to the Household of Faith: Gal. 6.10
This will be to us a comfortable evidence for our future Happiness. If the
Question be, Lord, Psalm 15.1
who shall enter into thy Tabernacle? and who shall dwell in thy holy Hill?
Verse 4
The Answer in part is, He in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he
honors them that fear the Lord.

2. As Gold, so pure Gold is the Matter of this Candlestick; so the Church is
holy: so we profess in the Creed to believe the Holy Church: and so we see the
Apostle in his Epistles describing the Church; To all that be at Rome, called
to be Saints. And again: Romans 1.7
To the Church of God which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints. And again:
To the Saints that are at Ephesus, Ephesians. 1.1 Phil. 1.1
and faithful in Christ Jesus. And again: To all the Saints in Christ Jesus,
which are at Philippi. And again: Col. 1 2
To all the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ that are at Coloss. All
these places do plainly show, That the Church of God is, and all the true
Members of it are holy. And seeing the Church of the living God is the House of
God, 1 Timothy 3.15
how shall it not be holy? Psalm 93.5
for (says the Psalmist) Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord, for ever. And
seeing the Church is the Mystical Body of Christ, who, as God, is infinitely
holy, and, as Man, perfectly holy, how shall not the Church be holy? And indeed
(as the Apostle says) Christ gave himself for the Church, Ephesians. 5.25, 25
that he might sanctify it.

Woe then to all that are void of Holiness, that trade in wickedness, that
wallow in the mire of their sins: These may live in the visible Church, but
they are not true Members of the Church: None can be Members of the Church, but
they are withal Members of Christ; and no such unholy persons can be Members
of Christ, therefore neither can they be Members of the Church: The distinction
of true Members, Membra vera, and membra viva.
and living Members, will not help them; for these are inseparable: none can be
true Members, except they be living Members. Woe to them then. Admirable are the
privileges of the Church, Communion of Saints, Forgiveness of Sins,
Resurrection of the Body, and Life everlasting: but to them, that by their
wickedness are manifested not to be Members of the Church, these privileges do
not appertain: How sad then is their condition!

But here is comfort to all that are truly holy, renewed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God, hating and mortifying the remainders of corruption, striving to
further degrees of Perfection, laboring to abound more and more in fruits of
Righteousness and Obedience. Such as these may and do lie open to mocks and
scoffs in the World; but yet let them be of good cheer: for this Work of
Holiness, wrought in them, argues them to be true Members of the Church: and
from hence they may assure themselves, That all the privileges of the Church
do belong to them; namely, Communion of Saints, by which, among other
conveniences, they have a share in all the Prayers of the Churches of God
throughout the World; and Forgiveness of Sins, Psalm 32.1
a Blessing so great, that Happiness is affirmed to stand in it, and
Resurrection of the Body, and Life everlasting; namely, Resurrection to
everlasting Life: And what Comfort is, or can be comparable unto this?

True, says the poor Christian, here were great comfort for me, if I could
find the Work of Holiness in me in truth, but I fear it is not so with me, for
I find in my self much corruption, and I sin frequently in many things; how
then shall I say, that the Work of Holiness is wrought in me? To such I answer,
That the Work of Holiness may stand with remainders of corruption, and with
many sins in our life: for it is not Perfection, but Truth of Holiness, that is
required: else where should we find any man in the World, that has the Work
of Holiness in him? for Solomon could say, Who is he that lives, and sins not?
2 Chro. 6.36 James 3.2
and Saint James confesses, In many things we offend all: And Saint John could
say, If any man says, 1 John 1.8
he has no sin, he deceives himself. Thou complainest therefore of remainders
of corruption, and of many strayings in thy Life; but know, if ye grieve for
them, and mourn under them, and strive against them, and repent of them, this
is the state and condition of the Work of Holiness that is in the best men
living on the face of the Earth.

As therefore we desire to have a comfortable evidence to our selves, That we
are indeed Members of the Church, and that the forenamed privileges of the
Church do belong to us, let us labor to find in our selves the Work of
Holiness in Truth; and let us (as the Apostle advises) be holy in all manner of
conversation, in work, in word, in thought, in affection. 1 Pet. 1.15
And as for that corruption that cleaves to us, let us mourn under it, and
endeavor to mortify it, and repent daily of our daily slips, and so make after
further degrees of Holiness continually, till we come to a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

II. The Parts of this Candlestick, which are of two sorts: some were for Use,
and some were for Ornament.

1. The parts that were for Use, were the seven Lamps: Thou shall make the
seven Lamps thereof. Exodus 25.37
These (says my Author) typified the manifold Graces of the Spirit of God, the
number seven being a number of Perfection. In loc.
And thus also does Ainsworth open it, and makes good the Application by that
of Saint John: Rev. 4.5
There were seven Lamps burning before the Throne, which are the seven Spirits
of God.

Be we thankful to God for his great Mercy, furnishing us with those Heavenly
Graces, as pledges of the Spirit of God dwelling in us, as the Lamps were
seated in the Branches of the golden Candlestick. And as the Lamps were put in
them to give Light, so let it be our care to exercise these Graces, and so to
give Light to them among whom we live.

2. The parts that were for Ornament, were Knops, Flowers, etc. And these did
typifie the Care of God (says my Author) in beautifying and adorning his
Church, and particular Christians, the Members of it, with several Graces. For
so the Graces of Gods Spirit are of use, both for necessity, to fit us for the
several duties which God requires of it; and also for ornament, to adorn our
Souls, and to make them amiable in the sight of God.

Let us therefore be so much the more thankful for these Graces of the Spirit
of God, which render us so acceptable unto God.

III. The Appurtenances of this Candlestick.

1. The Prophet makes mention of certain golden Pipes, Zach. 4.12
which emptied Oil out of themselves into the Lamps, Wherein (says my Author)
the Prophet has reference to the golden Candlestick in the Tabernacle. And
this (says he) typifies a continual supply of Grace to the Church.

Admire we the goodness of God, thus giving to the Church, and to particular
Christians, the Members of the Church, a continual supply of Grace, as the
occasions and necessities of the Church do require.

2. Moses mentions other appurtenances, namely, Tongs and Snuff-dishes. Exodus
25.38
And these (says my Author) Typified Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government,
which is necessary to the Church, to preserve the pure light of it.

Pray we to God for the settling of Church Government, that by means of it,
Heresies and Schisms may be restrained, which so much abound, while the
Government and Discipline of the Church is suspended.

CHAP. IV. The Church and Ruth.
SAint Chysostome takes knowledge of Ruth, as a Type of the Church, for so he
says, The things that were done in and about Ruth, (...), etc. Quae in Ruth
facta sunt, nostri figura erant. In N. Test. To. 1. In Matthew. hom. 3.
were a Type and figure of us, namely of the Church of the New Testament: and
then he lays open the Parallel in two Particulars.

1. She was of a strange Nation, 1. (...), etc. Haec alienigena erat, and in
extremam delapsa pauperiem. Videns autem eam Boaz, nec ob ipsius paupertatem
despexit, nec ob impietatem gentis exhorruit: Sic et Christus Ecclesia^
suscipiens and alienigenam, and multa laborantem egestate bonorum, suo
consortio copulavit.
and fallen into extreme poverty: yet Boaz, seeing her, neither despised her
for her poverty nor abhorred her for the impiety of her Nation: so also Christ,
receiving the Church, both a stranger, and laboring under great want of all
good things, joined her in marriage unto himself.

2. As she, except she had first forsaken her Parents, 2. (...), etc. Sicut
haec alienigena, nisi prius deseruisset parents, domum, gentem, patriam and
cognatos, nunquam tali nobilitata fuisset connubio; ita and Ecclesia non ante
amabilis efficitur sponso, quam priorem conversationem relinquet. Psalm. 45,
10.11. Ibid.
House, Nation, Country and Kindred; had never been ennobled with such a
Marriage; so the Church is not made lovely unto her husband, before she leaves
off her old conversation. And therefore is that advise given to the Church.
Harken O daughter, etc. forsake also thy own people, and thy fathers house, and
then its added, Psalm. 45.10, 11
So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty, and not otherwise.

Here then is that which may humble the Church: Let her see her Original: she
was once a stranger, and destitute of all spiritual good; in this respect, as
poor, as ever Job, or Lazarus was in outward respects: What though she now be
highly preferred to be fellow Citizen of the Saints and of the household of God?
What though she be blessed with great Spiritual Riches, and transcendent
Privileges? from the beginning it was not so, but quite contrary: good cause
have we then that are believers of the Gentiles, remembering our former basensse
and vileness, to harken to that counsel of the Apostle, Be not high-minded.
Romans 11.20


See here also the transcendent love of Christ to us Gentiles, in that he
looked upon us in our low condition, that though we were so mean, yet he was
pleased so far to have respect to us, as to espouse us unto himself: what a
dignation was it of King Ahashuerosh, to set his affection upon Esther a poor
Captive Jewish maid, Est. 2.
to make her his Wife and Queen in stead of Vashti? but that is nothing to this
in hand, in respect of the infinite difference between Christ and all the
Grandies and Magnies of the World: We see, how God commends his love to the
Jews under this notion, in that, though their father was an Amorite, Ezekiel.
16.2, 3, etc. to Verse. 12
and their mother an Hittite, yet even then (when they were in their blood,
their navel not cut, nor they washed in water to supple them nor swadled at all,
but were cast out into the open field, to the loathing of their person) even
then, he spread his skirt over her, and covered her nakedness, and swear to
her, and entered into a Covenant with her, and washed her with water, anointed
her with oil, and clothed her with embroydered work, and shod her with
badgers skin, and girded her about with fine linen, and covered her with silk,
and decked her with ornaments, and put bracelets on her hand, and a chain on
her neck, and a jewel on her forehead, and earrings on her ears, and a
beautiful crown on her head. This is the plain case of us Gentiles, and the
gracious dignation of Christ toward us: what then more equal, then that we
should break forth into expressions of joy and thankfulness, as that blessed
Virgin did? Luke 1.46, 47, 48.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, for
he has regarded the low estate of his hand-maiden: yea and we may add
concerning the Jews and our selves, as the Virgin in her Song: Verse. 52, 53
He has put down the mighty from their seats, and has exalted the lowly and
meek: he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent
empty away. The Jews were mighty, but he -- has put them down; us Gentiles
being low, he has exalted: -- us, being poor and hungry, he has filled with
good things: The Jews that formerly were rich, he has sent empty away: And so
(according to the twofold sign given to Gideon) whereas in the old Testament
the dew was only upon the fleece, and the whole floor was dry, now, in the
times of the New Testament the dew is upon the whole floor, and the fleece is
dry: Admire we this gracious dispensation of God to us Gentiles, and in this
respect fail not to obey that Prophetical exhortation: Psalm. 117.1, 2
O praise the Lord, all ye nations, praise him all ye people: for his merciful
kindness is great toward us.

Let us learn (since Christ was not ashamed of us in our low condition,
therefore) not to be ashamed of Christ because of that low estate, to which he
voluntarily submitted himself, and in which (as man) he was for a while, but
believe in him and glory in the profession of his name. Let Jews, Turks, and
Pagans, object it to us never so much, that we trust in a crucified Savior,
yet let us not be moved at it, but go on so to do: hear we how Saint Paul
stands affected in this respect. 1 Cor. 2.2
I desire, says he, to know nothing, but Christ and him crucified: And
speaking of his ministry, 1 Cor. 1.23
he glories in this, We preach Christ crucified. And in opposition to the false
Apostles, who desired to have the Galathians circumcised, Gal. 6 13 Verse. 14.
that they might glory in their flesh, he adds, But, as for me, God forbid that
I should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
this mind let us bear.

Learn we, in imitation of our blessed Savior, not to despise any, because of
their external meannesse, as he did not despise us Gentiles for this, but
notwithstanding it, has espoused us to himself: In whom we find any thing of
Christ, let us love them, though never so mean, and bestow our endeavors to
draw others to Christ, though, in any respect, they be never so mean, never so
wicked.

Lastly, as we desire to render our selves amiable in the eyes of Christ, our
Boaz, let us forsake our Country and Kindred, our Fathers house, even our
dearest and nearest relations; the things and persons that are dearest unto us,
especially our darling sins, to which we have been most addicted, in the
committing of which we have formerly taken most content: yet also all other
things, wealth, honor, life, parents, brethren, Sisters, friends, if it shall
happen, that there shall be a competition between Christ and them; if they
shall at any time seek to draw us away from Christ, in this case forget them,
forsake them, abandon them. Now shall Christ our husband count us lovely, take
content in us, otherwise not: Luke 14.26
hear we our Savior saying as much; If any man comes to me and hates not
father, mother, wife, children, brethren, yea, and his own life also, he cannot
be my disciple.

Hitherto we have seen the Types of the Church.

CHAP. V.
NOw follow other resemblances, by which the Church is set forth in the
Scriptures of the old or new Testament, and these I shall propound to you in an
Alphabetical order.

The Church and a Body.
We have the Church frequently in Scripture spoken of as a Body; as where its
said, There is one Body: Ephesians. 4.4 Verse. 12. Verse. 16.
and again, For the edification of the Body of Christ. And again, From whom the
whole body, etc.

And the resemblance between the Church and a Body stands in sundry things.

1. In the unity of the whole. 1 Cor. 12.12
The members of the natural body are many and diverse, and their offices diverse,
yet they all make but one body, being all knit together by sinews, joints,
nerves. So the members of the Church are many and diverse in sundry respects,
yet they make only one body, one Church, they being all knit together in one
(as by sinews and nerves) by sundry bands, the band of one Faith, the band of
Charity, the band of Baptism and the Lords Supper, the band of their several
Vocations, by which they serve one another; and these are properly Religious
bands, Church-bands, by means of which this Mystical body is one, Ephesians. 4.4.
and the Church one, as our Savior says, My dove, my undefiled is but one.
Cant. 6.9 Ecclesia^ unam.
And so is it taught in the Nicene Creed to believe one Church. Nor does the
multitude and variety of members hinder the unity of this body. In the Divine
Essence there are three Persons really distinct, yet but one God. In the Person
of Christ there are two Natures, Humane and Divine, as different as Heaven and
Earth, Infinite and Finite, and yet but one Christ. And, to come lower there
are many Sunbeams, yet but one Sun, one Light: many branches and arms of a
tree, yet but one tree: so in the Church there are many members, yet but one
body.

2. In the multitude and variety of members: though the body be but one, yet it
has many members; the body is not all eye, nor all ear, but there be eyes,
ears, hands, feet, etc. And these are greatly different, each from other; some
are more honorable, others less: some stronger, others weaker; some have more
excellent abilities, and serve for more noble uses then others: So is it in the
Church: the body of the Church is but one, but the particular members of it are
many, and they greatly different: some are set in higher place, nearer to
Christ the head, others lower, at a greater distance, and more remote from him.
Accordingly, some are furnished with more excellent gifts, and laid out for more
noble employments then others. As in a great Family there are diverse members
greatly different, some nearer to the Master of the Family, some more remote,
there are Children nearer then any Servant: and among the Servants, one is
Steward, and another is a Scullion in the Kitchen. And in an Army, the Army is
one, yet there are Multitudes and several Companies of Soldiers, and they
different in Use and Honor one from another; there are Captains, Lievtenants,
Sergeants, and common Soldiers, some nearer in place to the General of the
Army, and some more remote. So in the Church it is, according to the wise
disposition of God: hear Saint Paul; Romans 12.6
Having gifts different according to the grace that is given to us. And again,
1 Cor. 7.7
Every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and another
after that. Yea, hear him largely disputing of this subject. 1 Cor. 12.4 Verse.
5. Verse. 6 Verse. 8, 9, 10, 11.
There are diversities of gifts, There are diversities of Administrations,
There are diversities of operations: To one is given the word of wisdom, to
another the word of knowledge, to another faith, etc. All this concerns the
variety of gifts, which arises from, and is according to, the variety of
members: of which he adds; Verse. 17.18
If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? and if all were
hearing, where were the smelling? But now God has placed the members, every
one of them, in the body, as it has pleased him. And finally, (in the
application of the comparison) he speaks more plainly. Now ye (says he to the
Christians at Corinth) are the body of Christ, and members in particular. Verse.
27.28, 29.
And God has set some in the Church; First Apostles, secondarily prophets,
etc. Are all Apostles? etc.

3. The resemblance holds in the usefulness of the members. There is not any
the least member of the natural body, Natura nil facit frustra.
which has not its use; its made for some purpose or other: Nature does
nothing in vain, much less the God of Nature. To say nothing of the eyes and
ears, the very feet are useful to the body, and so is any other member, that
may be least of all set by: hear we the Apostle confessing as much. The eye
cannot say to the hand, Verse. 21.22
I have no need of you; nor the head to the foot, I have no need of you: Nay
much more those members of the body that are more feeble, are necessary. In the
Commonwealth the greatest cannot miss the meanest; there is not the Noblest
Personage, to whom the meanest day-labourer, or Artificer is not useful. In the
Army the Common Soldier is of use to the General: so in the Church, the
meanest Christian is of use to the Church, and to the most eminent members of
it; he is useful, not as the eye or ear, yet at least as the foot to the
natural body: the poorest member of the Church has received some ability or
other, in some measure or other, by which in some way or other he may be
useful, not by Preaching, not by Ruling, yet by his pious Examples, or fervent
Prayers for the Church and the principal members of it: the poor Mouse may be
useful to the Lion, being bound with cords, by gnawing the cords asunder and
setting him at liberty: so may the Christian of least account in the Church be
beneficial to them of highest Note and Place, by his prayers procuring at the
hands of God his enlargement from distresses, into which he may be brought, as
did those Christians assembled for Saint Peter, Act 12. Romans 15.30.31. Ephesians 6 19
1 Thessalonians. 5.25 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2
or fitness for and blessing and success in his great and important affairs.
St. Paul, acknowledging this does frequently and earnestly desire the help of
the Churches in their prayers to God for him.

4. The Resemblance holds further in the point of sympathizing. The Members of
the natural Body sympathize each with other, both in good and evil: Of this the
Apostle says; Whether one member suffers, 1 Cor. 12.26
all the members suffer with it; or whether one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it. If the Foot be foul, the Hand wipes it: if one treads
on the Toe, not the Toe, but the Tongue cries out, Why do you tread on me? but,
if any notorious wrong be offered to the Body, or any Member of it, ye shall
have the Voice lamenting, the Eye weeping, the Heart sighing, the Hands
pleading, the Head hanging down, and every part compassionate. No less is there
a sympathizing between the Members of the Body, in respect of any good betiding
the whole Body, or any Member of it: Has any sick man obtained health? ye
shall have every Member expressing joy in it is own way for the health of the
Body so restored. No less is it so in the Church of God. The prosperity of the
Church, or of any Member of it, affects every true and living Member of the
Church, and puts joy into him, as if it were his own prosperity: The dejected
and afflicted estate of the Church does no less fill them with sorrow and
heaviness. This we see required by the Apostle, Rejoice with them that rejoice,
Romans 12.1^
mourn with them that mourn: And so we see it often practiced. Look upon
Nehemiah that godly Courtier; it fared well with him, he was Cup Bearer to the
great King Artaxerxes, he wanted no convenience for his own particular, and
yet, Neh. 1.3, 4
When report was made to him of the distresses of Jerusalem, he sat down, and
wept, and mourned certain days; and fasted, and prayed before the God of
Heaven. And when the King asked him, Why is thy countenance sad, 2.2^ 3
seeing thou art not sick? mark his Answer: Why should not my countenance be
sad, when the City, the place of my Fathers sepulchers, lies waste, and the
gates thereof are consumed with fire? This was the affection of the godly Jews:
By the Rivers of Babylon we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Sion,
Psalm 137.1, 2, 3
we hanged our Harps upon the Willows; and when they that led us Captives,
required of us to sing one of the Songs of Sion, we answered, How shall we sing
the Lords Songs in a strange Land? And then they add, Verse 5, 6
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning: If I do
not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer
not Jerusalem above my chief joy. Acts 7.58, 59 and 8. 2 Acts 12.5
Saint Steven is stoned, and the whole Church made lamentation. Saint Peter is
imprisoned, and the Church prays. On the other side, the Gentiles obtained
mercy, Acts 11.18
and the Saints at Jerusalem glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the
Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life. So they were affected with Saint Paul's
Conversion: They heard (says the Apostle) that he which persecuted us in times
past, G^l. 1.22, 23
now preaches the Faith, which once he destroyed: and they glorified God in me.

Let us then learn to carry our selves toward our Fellow Christians, as to our
Fellow Members.

1. We all make one Body, under one Head, Christ; therefore let us take heed of
Schism and Disunion, and endeavor to keep Unity. The Apostle urges it upon this
ground, Endeavoring (says he) to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace, Ephesians. 4 3, 4
for there is one Body: and the sequel is good: We are all of us one Body, and
shall we rend our selves one from another? God forbid: Harken we rather to
Saint Paul, Beseeching us in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, That there be
no Divisions among us, 1 Gen 1.10
but that we be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. The counsel is good for us to take, which Joseph gave to his
Brethren, Genesis 45.24
See that ye fall not out by the way. It Is good for every one of us to say one
to another, as Abraham to Lot: Genesis 13.8
Let there be no contention between me and thee, etc. for we are Brethren; yea,
for we are all of us one Body of Christ, and every one of us Members one of
another. Remember we, That God, whom we call Father, 2 Cor. 13.11
is the God of Love and Peace; and Christ, whose Members we profess our selves
to be, is the Prince of Peace, Isai. 9.6 Heb. 7.1
and the King of Salem, the King of Peace: and the Gospel, which we profess,
the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6.15 Col. 3.15
and that we are called unto Peace in one Body: What then will better become
us, then the study of Peace? Remember, that our mutual Jars will make our
Enemies sport, and our concord will, not a little, vex them: for by it we shall
put them out of hope of prevailing against us; Insuperabiles, si inseparabiles.
we shall be invincible, if we be inseparable. A single Arrow is soon broken,
not so a bunch of Arrows fast bound together; and only our mutual
disagreements will put them in hope to spoil and mischieve us one after
another: Let Moab, Edom, 2 Chronicles. 20
and Ammon rise each against other, and they overthrow one another; Jehosaphat
shall not need to strike a stroke. It Is a received Maxim of Enemies, Divide
them, Divide and impera.
and so get the upper hand of them. Let us not then give them so great
advantage against us, but rather (as the Apostle advises us) Let us mind the
things that make for Peace: Romans 14.19
Let us not be ready to do wrong, but be ready to put up wrongs, and, for peace
sake, part with our Rights; in apparent injuries, forgive; in doubtful things
make the fairest constructions, and listen not to Tale-bearers; Romans 16.17
and (as the Apostle advises) Mark them that cause Divisions, and avoid them:
Thus let us do, 2 Cor. 13.1^
and the God of Love and Peace shall be with us.

2. Let us be profitable and serviceable one to another in the faithful
employment of the Talents which we have received. So are the Members of the
natural Body: so let us be. Having the Wealth of the World, let us be ready to
distribute: Having Wisdom, be we ready to give advice and counsel to others,
that need and crave our help this way: So (according to our abilities) let us
warn them that are unruly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14
comfort the feeble-hearted, and support the weak: Let us consider one another
to provoke to Love and good Works. Heb. 10.24
Can we do no more? yet, at least, having the Spirit of Prayer, let us employ
it for the behoof of the whole Church, and of one another: Pray for the Peace
of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122.6
Remember, That (as the Eye has a faculty of Seeing, the Ear of Hearing, the
Hand of Working, the Tongue of Speaking, the Feet of Walking, not for
themselves alone, but for the good of the whole Body, and each of other; So)
the Gifts, that God has bestowed on us, he has given, not for ostentation,
nor for our own private use only, 1 Cor. 12.7
but to profit withal; therefore so let us use them: Thus shall we honor
Christ our Head, and God our Father. We hear what the Apostle says of
Alms-deeds; The Ministration of this Service abounds by many Thanksgivings to
God: and this holds equally true of the employment of our several Abilities for
the profit of others: And so we shall provide for our own Comfort; for, as to
that unprofitable Servant, that hid his Talent in a Napkin, Mat. 25.28, 30
it is said, Take the Talent from him, and Cast him into outer darkness; so to
any one, that is faithful in the employment of his Talent for the good of
others, it shall be said, Well done good and faithful Servant, Verse 23
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

3. Let those Members of the Church, that are of highest note, learn, not to
despise, but to have in good esteem, their Brethren and Fellow Christians,
though they be not so richly gifted, or laid out to so noble employments, as
themselves: for there is not the meanest, but has his Gift in his measure; and
so not the meanest, but is profitable in his way: It Is so in the natural Body;
It is so much more in the Church: Hear the Apostle; The Eye cannot say to the
Hand, I have no need of thee; 1 Cor. 12.21 22
nor the Head to the Foot, I have no need of thee: Nay, much more those Members
of the Body, that seem to be more feeble, are necessary. Therefore let not the
rich despise the poor, nor the strong the weak, nor the ablest Minister the
meanest Hearer: but if we see in them the Evidences of Faith and Holiness,
whatsoever they are in other respects, let us embrace them, and give them the
right Hand of Fellowship: God is not ashamed to be called their Father, even
their Souls are redeemed with Christ's precious Blood; they have the Spirit
comforting them, and the Angels ministering unto them; let not us contemn them.
It Is burden enough to them, That worldly and wicked men despise them, either
for their Poverty, or for their Piety; let not us, by despising them also,
increase their burden: They are weak, but they are Christians, and their
weakness calls for Pity, not for Contempt: They are less honorable, yet they
are useful: Let us take heed, lest God punish our proud despising of them by
bringing us into such straights, as that we should be enforced to crave the
help of those, whom, in respect of their weakness, or mean place in the Church,
we have formerly so much slighted.

4. Let those Members, that are of least note in the Church, not either be
disheartened in themselves, or envy others, whom they see to be better gifted,
or set in more eminent place in the Church, then themselves: Have they not this
or that Gift? yet they have others: Have they not so high and eminent a place
in the Church? yet a place they have, and Members they are: and this may
comfort and uphold them. Let us hear the Apostle speaking to this purpose: If
the Foot shall say, because I am not the Hand, 1 Cor. 12.15, 16, 17
I am not of the Body, is it therefore not of the Body? And if the Ear shall
say, because I am not the Eye, I am not of the Body, is it therefore not of the
Body? If the whole Body were an Eye, where were the Hearing? And if the whole
were Hearing, where were the Smelling? If they have not so excellent Gifts, or
in so great a proportion, as others have, yet they have those Gifts, and that
proportion of Gifts, which God saw fit to furnish them withal: for all these
gives the self-same Spirit, dividing to every one severally as he will. Verse 11
They are not set out for such noble employments, nor have they so high a place
in the Church as others; yet they have such place, as God saw fit to allot unto
them: for God has placed the Members, Verse 18
every one of them in the Body, even as it pleases him: Therefore be content
and humble, though you see your self to come never so much behind others. The
Lord General of the Army has power to dispose of his Soldiers to several
Offices, stations, and employments, as he sees fit: and the Master of the
Family his Servants to their several Offices: and shall this power be denied to
God in and over his Church? yea, has another more excellent Gifts, then thou
have, for kind or measure? know. That the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every one to profit withal. Verse 7
As the King puts his Alms into the hands of his Almoner, that he may
distribute them to the poor; and as some great personage puts a stock of Money
into his Stewards hand for the uses of the Family: As therefore the poor have
an interest in the Kings Alms put into his Almoners hands; and as all in the
Family have an interest in the stock of Money committed to the Steward: so the
whole Church is, and thou in particular art, interessed in all the Abilities
which God has given to any others. Why then should thou envy any, whom thou
see to be so preferred? Rather thank God, who has so admirably furnished
others for thy benefit, and for the good of the whole Church.

5. Let us all sympathize with the Church, and the several Members of it: 1
Cor. 12.26
So do the Members of the natural Body, as the Apostle tells us: And so let us,
both in good and evil. Romans 12.5
This is required of us, Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep. Hear we, or know we ought of the Desolations of the Church abroad?
Let not us be like to them, of whom the Prophet complains, That they did lie
upon Beds of Ivory, Amos 6.4, 5, 6
and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the
Flocks, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall; and chanted to the sound
of the Viol, and invented to themselves Instruments of Music, like David; and
drunk Wine in Bowls, and anointed themselves with the chief Ointments; but they
were not grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph. Too many such there be: but let
such, as are guilty, take knowledge of, and tremble at, the Threatening there
annexed; Therefore shall they go captive with the first that go captive, Verse 7
and the Banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed. Rather
therefore let us imitate that godly Courtier Nehemiah, of whom we heard before.
Or, hear we of the prosperous estate of the Church? Though we our selves (for
our own particulars) lie under the Cross never so much, yet let the knowledge of
the Churches prosperity make us (in a manner) to forget our own sorrow.

CHAP. VI. The Church, and a City built on an Hill.
OUr Savior, speaking of the Church, makes use of this Resemblance: A City
(says he) set upon an Hill cannot be hid. Matthew. 5.14
I grant, that there our Savior has respect especially to some chief Members
of the Church; that is, the Preachers of the Word, and the Teachers of his
People; yet so, that it is true, in some sort, of the whole Church, that it is a
City, and a City on an Hill: And the Author of that imperfect Work upon Saint
Matthews Gospel, among Saint Chrysostoms Works, observes this Resemblance to
hold in sundry Particulars.

Civitas est Ecclesia Sanctorum.
The City (says he) is the Church of Saints.

1. A City consists of Citizens: And the Citizens of this City are all the
Faithful: Cives omnes fideles:

Turres ejus Prophetae: sicut enim de turribus jacula contra omnes hosts
jactantur, sic de libris propheticis, contra vanas Gentilium fabulas, and
contra insanas haeriticorum disputationes, salutaria veritatis proponuntur
exempla.

Portae ejus sunt Apostoli, quia per illos totus populus intrat ad fidem.

Muri ejus sunt doctores, de quibus dicit propheta, Isa. 60.10. filii
alienigenarum aedificabunt muros tuos: quia ex Gentibus vocati, facti sunt
sacerdotes, and Ecclesiae gubernatores. Sicut muri enim, omnem Gentilium and
haereticorum impetum ipsi suscipiunt, qui tanquam arietibus quibusdam, sic
assiduis persecutionibus, feriunt clerum, i. e. murum Ecclesiae.

Haec ergo civitas posita est super montem: i. e. Apostoli, prophetae,
caeterique doctores and fideles aedificati in Christo. Mons enim Christus est:
de quo propheta dicit, Dan. 2.35 implevit universam terram. Chrysostom. Comment.
in N. Test. To. 2. hom. 10.


and so Saint Paul of the Ephesians, having embraced the faith of Christ,
says, that they were fellow-Citizens of the Saints. Ephesians. 2. Verse. 19. Citizens
then they are.

2. A City has Towers: and the Towers of this City, the Church, are the
Prophets: for, as from the Towers Darts are shot against all enemies, so from
the books of the Prophets examples of truth are set forth against the vain
fables of the Heathen, and against the wild and unsound disputes of Heretics.

3. A City has gates: And these gates of the Church are the Apostles, because
(as by the gates men enter into the Cities, so) 'by the ministry of the
Apostles the whole people (namely of Jews and Gentiles) enters into the faith
of Christ.

4. A City has Walls: and these Walls are the Doctors of the Church, of which
the Prophet says, The Sons of strangers shall build thy Walls: because, being
called from among the Gentiles, they were made Priests or ministers, and
Governors of the Church: for (as the Walls of a City, so) these undergo the
violence of Heathens and Heretics, who, by frequent presecutions, as by so
many battering-rams, batter the Clergy, these Walls of this City, the Church.

To which add,

5. A City has Privileges and Immunities, which are common to all, and belong
only to them that are free of the City. And no less has the Church her
Privileges and Immunities, which equally and alike belong to all the members
of the Church, Act. 10.34.
be they Jews or Gentiles, high or low, rich or poor, male or female, bond or
free, for God is no accepter of persons, and are proper and peculiar to them:
If any be strangers from the Church, they have nothing to do with any of these
Privileges.

Would any know, what these Privileges are? Let him consult with the Apostles
Creed, and there shall he find these recorded.

1. Communion of Saints: of holy men and Angels with God, and of holy men and
Angels mutually among themselves: by virtue of our Communion with God, we have
liberty to Pray to God, and by prayer to receive from God all needful blessings
for soul and body in this life: and no less by this Communion with God have we
hope to live for ever with God in glory and happiness everlasting. By virtue of
our Communion with the Angels we share in the benefits of their ministration in
all kinds in this life, and hereafter we shall be like the Angels, sharing
with them in the glory of Heaven. By virtue of our Communion with holy men, we
have an interest in their prayers, and in all the abilities, with which God
has furnished them, and shall live together with them in Heaven. A rare
privilege.

2. Remission of sins, by which, upon our unfeigned repentance, we are freely,
for Christ's sake, absolved and acquitted from the guilt and punishment of all
our sins, though never so many, though never so great. A rare Privilege: happy
is he that has it: for so says the Psalmist; blessed is he, Psalm. 32.1
whose iniquity is forgiven, etc.

3. Resurrection of the body and Life Everlasting: Resurrection to Life
Everlasting: though the body falls in death, yet it shall be raised again:
though in death the soul takes leave of the body for a time, yet they shall
meet again and be reunited, And not only so: for this shall be common to all
men, the bodies of all shall be raised, and in all there shall be a reunion of
soul and body: but whereas to some there shall be a Resurrection of Damnation,
Joh. 5.29
to the Church it shall be a Resurrection to Life, whereas some shall rise to
shame and everlasting contempt, all the true members of the Church shall awake
to everlasting Life. Dan. 12.2


Lastly, its observed here by the forenamed Author, that this City is set upon
an hill, that is, the Apostles, Prophets and all other Doctors of, and
Faithful, in the Church are built upon Christ, who is the only Foundation: for
Christ is that Mountain, of which the Prophet says, Dan. 2.35
That it filled the whole Earth. And this sense is pious.

But yet I conceive another thing rather to be intended by our blessed Savior
in this place, namely, that as a City built upon an Hill cannot be hid, but is
conspicuous and seen a far off, so neither can the Conversation and Actions
of the Church and the members of it be so secretly carried, but that it will
come to the cognizance and knowledge of others, so that, if it be pious, God
shall be honored by it; and from any sinful and scandalous behavior of the
members of the Church, it cannot be but that God shall be dishonored by it, as
Saint Paul says, Through you is the name of God blasphemed among the Gentiles.
Romans 2.24


See the high preferment of all Godly Christians, in that they are made members
of the Church, and so free Denizons of this great City of God: who counts it
not a great matter to be a Freeman of some great City in the World? so it was
counted to be a Citizen of Rome: they that were so, gloried not a little in it:
they that were not so, thought it not much to purchase it with a great sum of
money: much more is it an honor, to be members of the Church: for what City in
the World has Privileges and Immunities comparable to the Privileges of the
Church named before? Bless God for this high Honor and Preferment, and, as he
has honored you, so be ye careful to honor him, and fearful to do any thing,
that may tend to His dishonor, avoid all scandalous sins especially, Phil 1.27
and Let your conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel: and as our Savior
enjoynes us, Let your Lights so shine before men, that they seeing your good
Works, Matthew. 5.16
may glorify your Father that is in Heaven.

CHAP. VII. The Church and a Dove.
SO our Savior speaks to his Church. Open to me, Cant. 5.2
my sister, my love, my Dove, my undefiled. So he speaks of her, My Dove, my
undefiled is but one, Cant. 6 9
she is the only one of her Mother.

Saint Bernard observes two particulars in which the Church resembles a Dove
The Church, says he, Ecclesia columba est, quia innocens est, quia gemens est.
In Cant. ser. 62.
is a Dove.

1. Because the Dove is innocent, and harmless: and indeed, this to be eminent
in the Dove, appears by that passage of our Savior; Be innocent as Doves,
Matthew. 10.16
which implies, that the Dove is eminently innocent, as the Serpent is the
wisest of the beasts of the field, Genesis 3.1
whom our Savior wills his hearers to be like in wisdom: so is the Church, so
are all godly Christians, the members of the Church, innocent and harmless:
they can find in their hearts to suffer wrongs, to put up injuries, but they
cannot with patience think of wronging others: This is one thing, by which
David describes a member of the Church: the question being, Lord, who shall
enter into thy Tabernacle, Psalm. 15.1 Verse. 3.
etc. the answer is in part, he, that does no evil to his neighbor. David
could not with patience think of hurting Saul, though bear injuries he could
with admirable meekness.

Many are of quite contrary strain: if wrong be offered to them, they cannot,
they will not bear it, they are presently moved to impatiency, yea, they
presently meditate revenge: but they readily take liberty to themselves, to
wrong others, they care not whom, they care not how: does any man slander or
censure them? they judge it an evil unsupportable: but to censure or slander
others, they make no bones of it: If any man oppress them they hold it
intolerable, but they care not how they oppress others. These show themselves
to be not like Doves, but like birds of prey

But let us be otherwise minded, let us resemble the Doves, and learn by them
to bear wrongs meekly, but at any hand do no wrong to any: to be wronged is
only an inconveniency, but to do wrong is actually sin: and whether of these
is to be chosen, may easily be seen, for the inconveniency lights upon the
outward man, but sin tends to the prejudice of our precious souls.

2. Because the Dove is a mourning creature: Hear to this purpose the
expression of King Hezekiah. Isa. 38.14.
I mourned as a Dove. And so it is with godly Christians, the true members of
the Church; they are constant, or at least frequent mourners: they are sensible
of their own sins, and these fill their hearts with sorrow: Psalm. 38.18 Verse. 6.
it was David's profession, I will be sorry for my sin: yea, I go mourning all
the day long: yea, all the night I make my bed to swim, Psalm. 6.6.
I water my couch with my tears. Saint Peter having denied his Lord and Master,
Matthew. 26. ult.
wept bitterly, yea the sins of others fetch tears from their eyes, out of a
sense of Gods dishonor by them, and of the hurt which their souls receive
thereby, My eyes (says David) gush out with rivers of tears, Psalm. 119.136,
158. Jer. 13.17
because men keep not thy Law. And again, I beheld transgressors, and was
grieved: especially their obstinacy in their sins will so deeply affect them:
If ye will not hear (says the Prophet) my soul shall weep in secret places for
your pride, and my eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears. Nor can they
remember or see the desolations of the Church without expressions of sorrow,
Psalm. 137.1, 2
We wept (say they) in remembrance of Sion, and hanged up our harpes upon the
Willows. Nay, even the foresight of it, thus works upon them: Oh that my head
were waters (says the Prophet) and my eyes a fountain of tears, Jer. 9.1
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.
Thus our Savior, foreseeing and foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem by
the Roman Army, wept over it. Luke 19.41, 43


But of how contrary a temper are many among us? for they are not found in the
number of these mourners, but they spend their days in mirth and jollity:
being like unto them, of whom the Prophet complained, that In the day, Isa.
22.12, 13
in which God called to mourning and weeping, etc. behold there was joy and
gladness, etc. their own sins draw not tears from their eyes, nay they are
tickled with joy at the remembrance and mention of them: much less are they
grieved for the sins of others. The afflictions of the Church move them not,
yea some rejoice in them, and triumph over the Church afflicted. Let them fear,
least that woe denounced by our Savior, fall upon them: Luke 6.25
Woe to them that laugh now, for they shall howl and weep.

As for us, let us put our selves into the number of mourners, mourn we for our
own sins, mourn we for the sins of others, mourn we for the afflictions of the
Church: such mourning will end in joy. Matthew. 5.4
Blessed are they that mourn, (says our Savior) for they shall be comforted.
And the Psalmist, They, that sow in Tears, Psalm. 126.4
shall reap in joy.

Brightman, handling those words, Cant. 1.15
Thou have Doves eyes, adds another particular, Columbarum oculi sunt casti and
pudici, qui non ad novos conconquirendos amores huc illuc non vagantur: qualis
castitas est Ecclesiae, dum uno Deo contenta, suos oculos ad idola non adjicit,
vel alios commentitios cultus. In Cant. 1.15
in which the resemblance holds between the Church and a Dove. The Doves eyes
(says he) are chaste and modest, while, content with their own mates they
wander not abroad to seek new loves. Such as is the chastity of the Church,
while, content with one God, she sets not her mind upon idols nor upon
new-devised worships.

Many there are in the world of a contrary temper, not contenting themselves
with the only true God, but linger after, and make to themselves other gods,
in that they give the worship, which the only true God challenges, as his
peculiar, to other things, besides the true God.

And the Romanists (to say nothing of them that are without, as Turks and
Pagans) may well go in the forefront, who have so multiplied Deities to
themselves, that the Poet had just cause to say of them, -- nes turba Deorum
Talis, ut est hodie --
that the number of Gods now is multiplied above the number of the Gods of the
Heathen: for, whereas God says, Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15 4.10
And Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, its
manifest how Adoration and Invocation is among them given to Angels, and Saints
departed, yea, to dumb Idols, and to Crosses. Their own Rosaries and books of
Devotion make this manifest, and that not only the people led by their blind
superstition do this, but that they are taught so to do; and this practice is
by their great Champions, Bellarmine and others, defended as lawful and
warrantable; and Anathema's and curses denounced by the Fathers of the
Tridentine Council against all that condemn it, as unwarrantable: where is that
Chastity, which is required to be in the true Church? And how justly may we say
of them in the words of the Prophet, How is the faithful City become an Harlot?
Isai. 1.21


And yet among our selves also many are liable to reproof for the want of this
Chastity: even as many as give the Worship of the Soul to others besides God.
God says by the Penmen of Scripture, Psalm 31.23 Phil. 4.4 Isai. 26.4 Deuteronomy.
Love the Lord all ye Saints; and, Rejoice in the Lord always; and, Trust ye in
the Lord for ever; and, Let God be your fear, etc. But behold! the covetous
Mammonist makes his Mammon his God; the ambitious Person makes his Honor his
God; the voluptuous Person makes his Belly his God: for by all these is that
Love, Joy, Desire, etc. which God requires to be placed on himself alone, set
upon other things besides God; so that, as the Apostle says, That Covetousness
is Idolatry, Col. 3.5 Ephesians. 5.5
and the covetous person an Idolater; so may it be said of the rest. So that
even among our selves this Chastity of the Dove is much wanting: the more is
our shame.

But, Though Israel play the harlot, let not Judah sin; Hosea 4.15
though most men in the World be so vain, as to hunt after other Lovers, yet
let it be our wisdom to rest content with God alone, and cleave fast unto him:
Give to him alone the Worship that is due to him, impart it not to any besides
him; Pray to him alone, do Adoration to him alone, love him alone, and none
else, except it be in him, and for him: Love not the World, 1 John 2.25
nor the things of the World: rejoice in him alone, let our desires be only
after him; Matthew. 10.28
Fear not him that can kill the Body, but fear him who is able to destroy Soul
and Body: Trust in the Lord with all thy Heart; Prove. 3.5 Exodus 15.11
and so in the rest: Who (says Moses) is like to thee, O Lord, among the gods?
And plainly, Deuteronomy. 33.20
There is none like to the God of Jesurun. None therefore so well deserves, or
can lay so just claim to the Worship of the Soul, as this great God? And, think
not now of dividing the Heart between God and any Creature: He says, My Son,
give me thy Heart; Prove. 23.26
not a part of it, bigger or lesser, but thy whole Heart. A King can endure no
Partner in his Kingdom, nor an Husband in the Love of his Wife, nor God in our
Hearts. If we say of our Hearts to God, as David to Mephibosheth concerning his
Lands, Thou and Ziba divide the Lands, 2 Samuel 19.29 30
God will not fail generously to answer as Mephibosheth did, Nay, let him take
all: By thoughts of dividing the Soul, and the Worship of it between God and
the Creature, we shall quite exclude him.

CHAP. VIII. The Church and an Hill.
THe Church is frequently in Scripture set forth by Mount Sion: and the
Resemblance holds between the Church and an Hill in these Particulars.

I. In respect of the firmness of the Church: Saint Chrysostom takes knowledge
of this Particular. (...), etc. Merito mons est Ecclesia, quod sit firma and
stabilis, nec possit conquassari. Sicut enim non potest mons labefactari, ita
nec Dei Ecclesia. To. 3. in Psa. 9.
Deservedly (says he) is the Church likened to an Hill, because it is firm and
stable, and cannot be broken to pieces. As an Hill cannot be cast down, so
neither the Church of God. No power of men, nor yet of Hell, can so far
prevail. Mat. 16.18
It Is the assurance of our Savior: The gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it.

Particular visible Churches may be prevailed against, and so may fail; as we
have seen by sad experience of many famous Churches in Asia, Africa, and other
places: but the whole Church never failed.

The glory and splendour of the Church may be much eclipsed, and the numbers of
it much decreased, yet still a Church has been. When the Arian Heresy
prevailed most, in so much that the whole World lamented, that it was turned
Arian; yet there were some Catholic Bishops, and Catholic Christians, that
held the Faith of the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, and these
were the Church. And in the Times of the Roman Apostasy, when it prevailed most
in the World, even then were some, that did profess and maintain the Faith of
Christ, and the purity of Gods Worship against the Heresies and Idolatries of
the Church of Rome, and sealed the Truth of God with their blood; and these
were the Church then.

The grounds of this stability of the Church are two.

1. The Power of God, the Builder and Founder of the Church: for, what Men or
Devils, being of finite power, can prevail to throw down the Building of this
God, whose Power is infinite? for, Job 9.4
who ever strengthened himself against God, and prospered?

2. The strength of the Foundation upon which the Church is built, Christ a
Rock: Matthew. 16.18
upon this Rock I will build my Church, says our Savior; that is, upon Christ,
the Rock, the subject of Saint Peter's Confession, and thereupon he infers;
therefore, Mat. 7.24
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: for so the House built on the
Rock stood impregnably against all assaults of rain, and floods, and winds; and
the reason is given, Verse 25
because it was built on a Rock.

This affords great comfort to the Church against all her Enemies. Thou, O
Church of God, have many Enemies, Satan, that Prince of Darkness, and his
under-agents; Heretics on the one side, and Schismatics on the other side,
and many wicked and profane men in the World: Psalm 137.7
and these are cruelly bent, and full of malice against thee, crying, Raze it,
raze it, even to the Foundation thereof: and 83.4
Their aim and endeavor is, That the Name of Israel may no more be had in
remembrance: and often they are armed with great secular power: but yet fear not,
God is with thee: he that built thee, will uphold thee; and, as Hezekiah said
for the comfort of his Subjects against the Assyrian Army, 2 Chro. 32.7, 8
There are more with thee, then with them: with them is an arm of flesh, but
with thee is the Lord thy God. And thou art built upon Christ the Foundation;
therefore all opposition made against thee, to remove thee out of thy place,
shall never prevail against thee.

And let all Enemies, upon this ground, be advised to desist from their cruel
attempts against the Church: Who would undertake to wash the Black-moor, or any
other labor in vain? Such will your endeavors be in this kind, as if a man
should undertake to remove an Hill out of its place: for so is the Church an
Hill, firm and stable: it shall stand and remain, when ye have done the worst
that ye can do: yea, your endeavors are against God, who has founded this
Hill, the Church; and against Christ, the Rock, upon whom it is founded; and
consequently against your selves; and ye can expect no other issue of your
attempts in this way, but ruin to your selves. Desist therefore in time, if ye
love your selves.

II. In respect of propinquity and nearness to Heaven: as the Hills, in regard
of their height, are nearer to Heaven, then other lower parts of the Earth; so
is the Church, so are godly Christians, the Members of the Church, nearer to
God, then any other people under Heaven, and God nearer to them, Ephesians. 2.13
then to any others: The Apostle, speaking of the Ephesians as they were
Gentiles, before they were converted to the Faith of Christ, says, They were
far off; but, speaking of them after their Conversion, he says, Verse 19
They were made nigh. And, a little after, Ye are no longer (says he) strangers
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens of the Saints, and of the Household of God.
And, Psalm 145.18
The Lord (says the Psalmist) is near to all them that call upon him in Truth:
They have a free and ready access to God by Prayer, with hope of audience.
Through him (says the Apostle) that is, through Christ, we both, that is, Ephesians.
2.18
Believers both among Jews and Gentiles, have an access to the Father. But, as
for wicked men, they are far off, they have no liberty of access to God by
Prayer, no hope of prevailing with God in Prayer; nay, to the wicked God says,
Though ye make many prayers, I will not hear: Isai. 1.15
yea (which is more) God says of them, When they fast, I will not hear their
cry; Jer. 14.12
and when they offer burnt-sacrifice and an oblation, I will not accept them.
And yet further, the Church and the Members of it, all godly Christians, are
near to God, as having an open entrance into Heaven, to enjoy God, and live
with him in Glory and Happiness for ever: 1 Cor. 2.9 Matthew. 20 James 1.12 Heb.
10.23
God has prepared it for them; and it shall be given to them, for whom it is
prepared: God has promised it to them, and faithful is He that has promised:
Yea, Christ has purchased it for them, and therefore they cannot miss of it:
but, as for the wicked, God will know them afar off; there shall be no
entrance for them. 1 Cor. 6.9
No unrighteous person (says the Apostle) shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And
Saint John says of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27
There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles, nor whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie.

See the difference between the Church and the Members of it, and all wicked
men that are strangers from it: great is the preferment and Happiness of the
one; most sad is the condition of the other: let wicked men be humbled and cast
down, let the godly be comforted, and be thankful to God for this, That they
are so preferred.

CHAP. IX. The Church and an House.
THis Resemblance is frequently used in Scripture. Saint Paul calls the Church
of God, 1 Timothy 3.15 Heb. 3.6
the House of the living God. And again: Whose House (says he) ye are, if ye
hold fast the Confidence, and the rejoicing of the Hope to the End. 1 Pet. 4.17
And Saint Peter: The time is now come, that Judgment must begin at the House
of God; that is, at the Church of God.

Sermon. of the Churches Visitation.
And, as Dr. Sibs well observes, an House is sometimes put for the Family, and
sometimes for the structure, or Building it self: and both ways the Resemblance
holds between the Church and an House.

I. As the House is put for a Family; so the Resemblance holds in these things.

2 Timothy 2.20
1. In a great House there are Vessels of Gold, Silver, Wood and Earth, some to
honor, some to dishonor: So in the Church there is a mixture of good and bad,
Elect and Reprobate; as in the Field there is a mixture of Wheat and Tares, and
in the Floor, of Grain and Chaff.

Wonder not then, nor take such offense at the Church, as to forsake the
Communion of it, because all are not right and straight, nor such as you would
have them to be: There was never any Church so exact, but that there has been
such a mixture in it: Let this comfort you, That a time will come, in which
there shall be a Separation made between the Sheep and the Goats, between the
Wheat and the Tares, between the Grain and the Chaff: then all things, that
offend, shall be taken and cast out; and, as in the Garner there shall be only
good Grain; so then there shall be only a Congregation of righteous men, Psalm
1.5 Heb. 12
and spirits made perfect: Wait till that time, and expect not that now, which
God intends to be then: separate we our selves from the corrupt manners of the
wicked, and imitate not their sinful exorbitances, and then let it not trouble
us that wicked men are mixed with us: their sins shall hurt them, not us: Gal.
6.5 Romans 14.12
Every man shall bear his own burden: Every one of us shall give account of
himself unto God. And, if any, being admitted to the Lords Table, shall eat and
drink unworthily, he shall not prejudice any of us, who study to prepare our
selves for the use of it, 1 Cor. 11.29
but shall eat and drink judgment to himself alone.

2. In a great Family there are persons of different ages, of different
strength, of different relations to the Master of the Family, of different
employments: so in the Church of God there are little Children, 1 John 2.12,
13, 14
young men, and Fathers; there are weaker and stronger Christians, some that
stand in need of milk, some that are fit for stronger meat; some that need to
be led, or carried in arms; some that can go of themselves, and walk strongly:
some that are Teachers and Rulers of others, and some that are taught and ruled
by others.

Let not then weak Christians be too much cast down, because of their weakness;
nor they that are laid out for less noble employments, as if in this respect
they were not of Gods Family: The weakest Child is a Member of the Family, as
well as the strongest; and they that stand in need of milk, as well as they
that are most fit for the strongest meat: and they that need to be carried in
arms, as well as they that are able to go most strongly: yea, know for your
comfort, That as the weakest Child may in time grow to be a strong Man; so ye,
that are weak for the present, may in time prove strong, if ye be not wanting
to your selves.

Nor let stronger Christians despise the weaker: for even these are Members of
Gods Family as well as your selves: and therefore to despise them, were
intolerable pride, and God knows how to increase their strength, and to abate
yours, so that ye may come to stand in need of the help of them, whom, for the
present, you despise, because of their weakness.

Sermon. of the Churches Visitation.
3. There is yet another Particular (which Dr. Sibs observes) in which this
Resemblance holds; namely, That the Master of the Family has a Care to provide
for his Family: yea, and he that does it not, has denied the Faith, 1 Timothy 5.8
and is worse then an Infidel: yea, the very Dragons and Ostriches, the worst
of all the Creatures, have some care of their young ones: So, nay much more,
God, the Master of this great Family, will provide for all the Members of his
Church: Mat. 6.26, 28, 29, 30
yea, He feeds the Fowls of the Air, and clothes the Lilies of the Field, much
more will he feed and clothe you: He wants not will to do it: for he has given
that assurance, That they which fear God, Psalm 34.10 24.1
shall not want any thing that is good for them: and he wants not power, for
the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

Let this comfort you against the fear of want: though never so poor, though
thy estate be never so scanty, yet fear not: God knows how to provide for
thee: he can lengthen out thy scanty portion, as he did the handful of meal in
the barrel, 1 King. 17.12 14.15 2 King. 4, 1.7
and the little oil in the cruse of that Zareptan widow, or as he did that oil
of the poor Prophets widow: or he can lessen thy charge, or, if it be a time of
dearth, he can suddenly send plenty, as he did to Samaria: 6.25
where ere while the famine was so great, that an Asses head was sold for
fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a cab of Doves dung for five
pieces of silver, and soon after the plenty was so great, 7.16
that a measure of fine flower was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley
for a shekel: or at least, Exodus 17.6 1 King. 17.6
he that commanded the rock to furnish the Israelites with water, and the
ravens to bring meat to Eliah, is able to enlarge the heart, and to open the
hand of the most hard hearted man to refresh you with the fruits of their
bounty: trust in God then, only use the means which God has appointed, but
take no indirect courses to feed thy body: And if now thy heart shall suggest
such thoughts to thee, as these: but then how shall I be provided for? Genesis 22.8
answer thy distrustful soul, as Abraham his Son Isaac. My Son, my soul, God
will provide.

4. The same Author in the same place adds yet another particular, namely this,
as a master of a Family has a care to defend his Family, to the utmost of his
power against all enemies, that would do them wrong: he promises to defend
Jerusalem against the Forces of Senacherib: he defended the Hebrews in Egypt
against the rage of Pharaoh: he defended the three Children against the fire,
and Daniel against the Lions, and Jeremy against the Princes and false
Prophets, and Eliah against Ahab and Jezebel, and so others. So still its true,
that the Psalmist has, As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, Psalm. 125.2
so the Lord is round about his people, as a wall of fire, and a defense.

This affords comfort to the Church and the members of it against all enemies
bodily and ghostly, men or devils: they indeed plot and act against all, and
seek to do you all mischief possibly: but fear them not: compare together your
enemies and your defender: your enemies are Creatures, your defender is the
infinite Creator; and how shall the finite creature be able to prevail against
the infinite Creator? Isa. 51.12, 13.
hear now what God says, Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a
man, that shall dye, and of the Son of man, that shall be made as the grass,
and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that stretched out the Heavens and laid the
foundations of the Earth? consider this and be comforted.

And well may enemies from hence learn this point of wisdom, to desist from
their cruel plotting and acting against the Church, and against godly
Christians, the members of the Church: what do ye but plot and act against the
Family, the protection of which God has undertaken, and consequently against
God their defender? and now how can ye hope to prevail in these your designs?
yea, what do ye other, then act against your selves, and bring ruin upon your
selves? for thus has it happened to all enemies of the Church in former times:
Pharaoh, Saul, Senacherib, Herod, and with all the Heathen, and Arian Emperors:
As therefore ye love your selves, desist, hands off.

II. As the House is put for the Fabric: so the Church is like unto an House
in these particulars. Heb. 3 4


1. Every house (says the Apostle) is built by some man. Every house has a
builder, and so has the Church, and the builder is God, and Christ: Opus ad
extra indivisum.
for the building of the Church is a work toward the creatur^, and therefore
common to all the three Persons: and so our Savior says, I will build my
Church: Matthew. 16.18
and so Saint Paul says, ye are Gods building, namely, built by God. 1 Cor 3.9


Then must the Church needs be firm and stable, and stand impregnable against
all opposition: for how is it possible, that any opposition should prevail
against Gods building.

2. In the building of any house there is as one chief builder, so other
under-workmen: so in the building of the Church, as God is the chief builder,
so there are under-builders, and they are the ministers of the Gospel, of whose
ministry God is pleased to make use for the building of the Church, whether
they be extraordinary, called and sent of God immediately, not of man, nor by
men, as Apostles, Prophets, Gal. 1.1 Ephesians. 4.11
Evangelists, or ordinary ministers, called of God by men, in the way of the
Church, as Pastors, and Teachers, or Pastors, that is, Teachers, the former
word being Metaphorical, the latter the plain word: for all these the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 4.12
they were given for the edification of the body of Christ, that is, for the
building up of the Church: 1 Cor. 3.10
of which the Apostles laid the Foundation, others, scil. the ordinary
ministers, in the several times of the Church build thereupon.

See the honor of the ministerial function, and the high preferment of those
whom God immediately, or mediatly by the Church, lays out for, and calls to,
this Sacred function: for, behold! whereas God is the great Architect these
also are builders of the Church: and so workers together with God. 1 Cor. 3.9
How ill do they, that cast scorn and contempt upon them, whom God has so
preferred? how shall they answer it? let them know, what our Savior says: He
that despises you, Luke 10.16 1 Thessalonians. 4.8
despises me, and him that sent me. And Saint Paul in the like manner, He that
despises, despises not man, but God: and yet there are many, who undervalue
them, as useless and unnecessary, but their sin is great: As for us, we may
well scorn in an holy manner such contempt, and say with the Apostle, seeing we
have received this, 2 Cor. 4.1 (...) for (...) honos and onus.
that is, such a ministry, therefore we faint not, neither for the difficulty
of the work, nor for the scorn which men cast upon us.

And, seeing honor and burden (as the Latin words have great likeness) go
together, let the honor which God has put upon us, move us with all
willingness to undergo the burden, and cheerfully to set our selves to the
work. We are builders by our office, let us be building up the house of God,
and let it not discourage us, that there is great opposition made and like to
be made against this building: but accept we of that encouragement, Up and be
doing, and the Lord shall be with you.

3. Every house well built has a Foundation: and so has the Church its
Foundation: and that is Christ. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Other Foundation, says the Apostle, can no man lay, then that which is laid,
which is Jesus Christ.

But of this before.

In aedificio lapis lapidem portat, quia lapis super lapidem ponitur, and, qui
portat alium, portatur ab altero. Sic in sancta Ecclesia unusquisque and portat
alium, and portatur ab alio. Super Ezech. l. 2. hom. 13.
4. In a Building (as Gregory the great well observes) one stone bears another,
because one stone is laid upon another, and that stone which bears one is born
of another. So in the holy Church every one both bears another and is born of
another. As then we desire to approve our selves to be indeed parts of this
spiritual Fabric, let us thus carry our selves according to that charge of the
Apostle, bear ye one another burden: Gal. 6.2
wherein we are stronger then others, let us bear the infirmities of the weak:
if we have more knowledge then others, bear with their ignorance: if we be more
settled in a right and sound judgment, bear with them, who are in any error,
through seduction: if we have more command of our Passions, bear with the
frowardness and waywardness of others: not to let them alone in their
infirmities to be mastered by them: but seek to recover them, yet not dealing
rigidly with them, G l. 6.1
nor condemning and censuring them as castawaies, but with a spirit of
meekness: having compassion of them, as the Apostle advises: yea, hear we the
Apostle, Jude 22.
we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, he does not
speak of it as a business of convenience, Romans 15.1
but as of a duty of absolute necessity. There was a time, when we our selves
were as weak as any others, and then others were fain to bear with us; being
therefore become strong, let us now bear with the infirmities of the weak: yea,
as strong, as any of us are, we are yet prone now and then to bewray such
weakness, that we shall stand in need to desire others to bear with us,
therefore we are also to bear with the infirmites of others: for this is the
law of equity propounded by our Savior. What ye would that others should do to
you, Matthew. 7.12
do ye also the same to them, yea, as the Apostle says, thus doing we shall
fulfill the law of Christ, Gal. 6.2
even the law of charity: for of this the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.4, 7
that it suffers long, and bears all things.

5. The resemblance between the Church and an house, holds in the use of both.
An house is built, for some man to dwell in: and the Church is built for God to
dwell in it: ye are built (says the Apostle) for an habitation of God by his
spirit. Ephesians. 3.22 Psalm. 132.13, 14.
And so says the Psalmist of Sion: The Lord has chosen Sion and has desired
it for his habitation: This is my rest for ever, here I will dwell, etc.

See here the great dignity of the Church, and of all godly Christians, the
members of the Church, in that they are built up to be an habitation for God to
dwell in, who is infinitely greater for glory and majesty, then all the
greatest Potentates of the earth: And yet in the entertainment of one of them,
were it but for a day, yea, for an hour, we would judge our houses not a little
graced: how then are we graced, in that the great God, who is higher then the
highest, has made choice of us, to be his dwelling place, in which he will
delight to abide for ever? Jerusalem was the glory of the world in regard of
that famous Temple, in which God himself was specially present: and no less
are Christians glorious creatures, in whom God dwells so constantly. It was the
glory of Benjamin, Deuteronomy. 33.12
that the God of glory dwelt between his shoulders: how then is it the glory of
Christians, that this glorious God dwells in their hearts? It must needs then be
granted, that Christians are glorious creatures, and that it may truly be said
of them, as the Psalmist says of Sion: Psalm. 37 3
Glorious things are spoken of thee.

See here also, how ill the enemies of the Church provide for themselves: for
it is the dwelling place of the great God, and shall they go unpunisht think
we, that act violence against it? A King being resident in his Palace, if any
shall presume to cast dirt on the walls of it, or throw stones at the windows
of it, to break them; its like to cost them dear, if they be known: how much
more will this God avenge the quarrel and right the wrongs done to his Church?
We hear, what Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 3.17
If any man defiles the Temple of God, him will God destroy: and no marvel; for
the same Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
Its a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you. And Joshua could say to Achan, Josh. 7.26
Why have thou troubled us? God shall trouble thee. Nor let any such think to
pass hood-winked, and so to carry the business, as if the wrong done or the
wrong-doer should be unknown: for the Psalmist can say to God, Psalm. 10.14
Thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand: Heb 4.13.
And the Apostle can say, All things are naked and open to the eyes of him,
with whom we have to do. Ezekiel. 25.12, 13.
If Edom speaks against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid waste,
they are given me to consume, God says, I have heard them. And its no less
true of acts of violence and the actors of them against the Church, that God
sees them.

And hence we may see and learn our duty in three particulars.

1. Let us prepare our selves for the receiving of this holy God to dwell in
our hearts: Accept of the counsel of the Prophet to Jerusalem, Jer. 4.14.
Wash thy heart from wickedness. God is incomparably holy, 1 Samuel 2.2
There is none holy, as the Lord: He is glorious in holiness. Exodus 15.11.
Therefore its most true that the Psalmist says: Holiness becomes thy house O
Lord, for ever. A sober man, cannot endure to enter into a Brothel-house, nor a
neat man to come into a filthy house, and can we think, that God will be
received into an heart uncleansed? Hear we, how Saint Austin urges this duty.
If I, says he, a mean frail man, should promise to come to your house, Si ego
qualiscunque fragilis homo, me venturum ad domum vestram, promitterem sine
dubio eam mundares: Deus ad cor tuum venire vult, and piger es, ei domum
mundare? De Temp. ser. 175.
without doubt you would make it clean: God will come to your heart to dwell
there, and are you slothful, by purging to prepare the house for his reception?
And again. Thou pullest up out of thy field the roots of Thorns, De agro tuo
extirpas radicem spinarum, and de cord non extirpas radicem malarum
cupiditatum? purgas agrum tuum, unde capiat fructum venture tuus, and non purgas
cor tuum, ubi habitet Deus tuus? De Temp. ser. 205.
and do thou not pull up out of thy heart the roots of evil lusts? Thou
cleansest thy field, whence thou may get food for thy belly; and do thou
not purge thy heart, that thy God may take content to dwell there? oh make that
high account of God, as to prepare and cleanse thy soul, that God may dwell
there with delight.

2. Let God rule and bear sway in us: for he dwells in us, and we are his House
and Habitation: and we can readily confess, That it is agreeable to Reason, that
every one should have his pleasure in his own House: The Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.4.
giving Rules to Bishops, gives them power to rule in their own Houses. And
Ahashuerosh, upon occasion of Vashti's disobedience, Esth. 1.22
made that Law, That every man should bear rule in his own House. Much less
must this power be denied to God: but we are all of us Gods House and
Habitation, as we are Christians, let us therefore be willing to be ordered and
ruled by him, and all within us; let us be at his beck and appointment: Will he
lift us up? or will he cast us down? Will he continue Life and Health? or will
he send Sickness first, and Death afterward? Let us submit, and be content,
that God should honor himself in and upon us in any of these ways. Eminent was
the Example of David in this kind: when, being sain, because of Absalom's
unnatural insurrection, to fly from Jerusalem, the Priests had brought out the
Ark with him, he sends it back with this pious submission; If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back, and show me both it, 2 Samuel 15.25 26
and his Habitation: but if he thus say, I have no pleasure in thee; behold,
here I am, let h m do to me as seems good unto him. God has absolute power
over us, as the Master of the House has to dispose of the several rooms to
what uses he pleases, which to make his Hall, Parlor, and which his Kitchen,
Buttery, etc. And he is a God of infinite Wisdom, best knowing which way it is
best for his glory, and for our good, to dispose of us. Says he, Go? let us go:
Says he, Abide here? let us abide: Says he, Come to me, my Spouse, out of
Lebanon? Cant. 4.8 and 1.4
let us, follow him readily, saying with the Church, Draw us, and we will run
after thee. Finally, and especially, Commands he this or that? or forbids he
this or that? Harken to him, and yield him ready obedience: in all let us
readily give our selves to be ordered by him, that it may be with us, as the
Centurion testified of those that were under him; I say to this man, Go, and he
goes; Matthew. 8.9
to this man, Come, and he comes; to my Servant, Do this, and he does it.

3. Being built up an Habitation for God, let us reserve our selves wholly for
his use, for his entertainment. Can we entertain an Indweller more honorable
then he is? for he it is, by whom Kings reign, Prove. 8.16
and Princes decree Justice; He it is, that sets up one, and pulls down
another: He it is, Psalm. 104.1, 2
that is clothed with majesty, as with a garment: He it is, Isai. 66.1
to whom Heaven is a Throne, and Earth a Footstool. Can we entertain an
Indweller more commodious and beneficial then he is? for what is it, in which
he is not useful unto us? for, both for Soul and Body, he daily lades us with
benefits. Psalm 68.20
But, were it possible, that an Indweller could be found that were more
honorable, or more beneficial, yet Reason requires, That the House should be
for the reception and entertainment of him that is the right Owner and Master
of it, except he shall resign his right, and appoint it for the entertainment
of some other. Behold! we are built an Habitation for God, nor find we that he
has resigned up his right to any other. Let us therefore, as Equity requires
it, keep our selves free from all others for the use of God himself. The most
men are quite contrary, in stead of God, harboring their several lusts; one
Covetousness, another Pride, another Voluptuousness and Intemperancy, another
Malice and Envy, etc. and consequently Satan in all these lusts: Foolish men in
the highest degree! rejecting the glorious God for an accursed Creature; the
God that made us, and has every way done us good, for our sworn Enemy, that
has vowed, and every day seeks our ruin: for this is he, 1 Pet. 5.8
who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And, as for
our lusts, in the harboring of which we harbor Satan, howsoever they may seem,
some way or other, advantageous to us, yet they fight against our Souls, 2.11
though secretly, yet in this respect so much the more dangerously. Besides
that, herein they are notoriously unjust against God himself, putting him out
of his palace to receive Satan in his room; as it were, to put a man out of his
own dwelling House, and to put a stranger, or his Enemy, into the possession of
it. Let the guilty consider it, and be humbled, and let us all carefully avoid
it. Keeping our selves altogether for the Lords use, and for his reception, let
us not suffer any vile lust willingly to nestle in any corner of our Souls: It
may happily seem hard to us so to do, as it did to Abraham, Genesis 21
to cast out the Bondwoman, and her Son; but we must do it, if we desire that
God should take delight to dwell in us. God and the Devil will not dwell under
the same roof: nor will he dwell in that Soul, in any corner of which any vile
lust is harbored with content.

CHAP. X. The Church and the Moon.
BY this Resemblance does Christ set forth his Church, when he says of her,
Cant. 6.10
She is fair as the Moon. And this Resemblance holds in these Particulars.

1. The Moon has her Light from the Sun: and so Saint Austin makes the
Comparison to hold between the Church and the Moon. Some say (says he) that the
Moon has no Light of her own, Alii dicunt, Lunam suum non habere lumen
proprium, sed a Sole illustrari: Et sic Luna intelligitur Ecclesia, quod suum
lumen non habeat, sed a Christo illustretur, qui in scriptura Sol appellatur.
In Psalm. 11.
but receives her Light from the Sun: and so by the Moon we are to understand
the Church, because she has no Light of her own, but is illustrated and
enlightened by Christ, who in scripture is called the Sun. And so Sadeel, from
Saint Ambrose, Vt Luna non propria, sed, ut quidam dicebat, luce lucet aliena;
quandoquidem, a Solis radiis accensa, totam inde suam lucem accepit; ita
Ecclesia lucet, non suo, sed Christi fulgore, and summis ejus dotibus and
beneficiis illustrata. De legit, ministr. vocat. page 39.
makes the Comparison between them: As the Moon shines, not with her own, but
another Light, because, being lighted by the Sunbeams, she receives all her
Light from thence: so the Church shines, not with her own Light, but as
enlightened with the brightness of Christ, and with his singular gifts and
benefits. And thus also Weemse makes the Comparison: Of the Cerem. Law, Exerc.
22
As the Moon (says he) has her Light from the Sun; so has the Church her
Light from Christ. The Sun gives Light, and receives none; the Moon both gives
Light, and receives.

Let not then the Church, and the Members of it, be puffed up with pride for the
Light which they give to others, but carry themselves in all humility and
lowliness of mind: Thou have Light, and thou give Light, whether by word of
Doctrine, or by example of Life; but be not proud: This Light thou have not in
and of thy self, but from Christ the Sun of Righteousness: why should you
behave your self proudly? Thus does the Apostle argue: What have thou that thou
have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7
and if thou have received it, why do thou boast? etc. Arrogate nothing to
thy self, but give all the glory to Christ, from whom thou receivedst it.

2. The Moon, when she shines brightest, has her spots: so there is no Church
so pure, but she has her blemishes, nor any Christian so exactly perfect, but
he has his imperfections, under which he labors, and his sins, by which he
offends God. As for Churches, look we upon them that were planted by the
Apostles, and we shall see, that they had their blemishes: The Church of
Coriath was a famous Church of God, enriched by him in all utterance, 1 Cor.
1.5, 7
and in all knowledge, so that ye come behind in no gift. And yet behold what
blemishes were in that Church: Verse 11 12
It Is reported to me (says he) that there are contentions among you. This
therefore I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, 1
Cor. 11.18
etc. And again: When ye meet together in the Church, I hear there are
divisions among you, and I partly believe it. Verse 21
And again in the same place: When ye come together to eat, every one eats
before other his own supper, and one is hungry, and another is drunken. And
again: How say some among you, 1 Cor. 15.12
That there is no Resurrection of the dead? Who can deny these to be great
blemishes? and yet these are found in an Apostolical Church: It were needless
to go over all: Look, for a close, upon the Epistles written to those famous
Lights, the seven Churches of Asia, and we shall find it so to be: To the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, and in him to the whole Church, he says, I have
somewhat against you, Rev. 2.4
because you have lost your first love: So to the Church of Pergamos; I have a
few things against thee, Verse 14
because thou have there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam: 15
So have thou them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate. So to the Church of Thyatira he says, 20
I have a few things against thee, that thou suffer the woman Jezabel. And
to the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1
Thou have a Name that thou live, and art dead. And how deeply did he charge
the Church of Laodicea with lukewarmness, That they were neither hot nor cold.
Verse 15
And if these Primitive Churches, and that in the Apostles times, had so soon
contracted such Sullies, who shall wonder, that all the following Churches have
had, and have their blemishes?

And no less holds it true in respect of particular godly Christians, That as
the Moon has her spots, so they have their blemishes, even the best of mere
men: That of Solomon holds universally true, 2 Chro. 6.36
There is no man which sins not. Consonant to this is the confession of Saint
James, In many things we offend all; James 3.2
in which he also includes himself. And Saint John is peremptory (including
also himself) If we say, 1 John 1.8
we have no sin, we deceive our self, and the Truth is not in us. And again: If
we say, we have no sin, Verse 10
we make him a liar, and his Word is not in us. And who of all the Saints, who
are most commended in Scripture, have not cause to subscribe this Truth? God
makes his boast of Job, Job 1.8
That there was none like to him on the Earth; yea, he could in his Apology
make his Appeal to God, 10.7
Lord, thou know that I am not wicked; and yet we have his confession, 7.20
I have sinned, what shall I do to thee, O thou Preserver of men? David was a
man after Gods own Heart, 2 Samuel 12.13 Psalm 38.4 40.12
yet he confesses, I have sinned against the Lord; yea, My sins are gone over
my head; yea, They are more then the hairs of my head. Daniel was a man greatly
beloved; and yet we have his Confession, in the first person plural, including
himself, Dan 9.5
We have sinned, we have committed iniquity.

Thus then, in this particular, the Resemblance holds good between the Church
and the Moon, That the Moon has her spots, and the Church, and godly
Christians, the Members of the Church, have their blemishes, while they live on
this Earth.

Hence learn many things:

1. Then absolute Perfection is not to be expected in the Church in this World,
nor is any visible Church to be abandoned, nor the Communion and Fellowship of
it to be forsaken by us, for some blemishes, for some disorders, which, happily,
we may see in it, so long as it enjoys the Ordinances of God, the tokens of his
presence: Whither shall we travel, to find a Church so refined, that it should
have no dross, so reformed, that nothing should be out of order, so exactly
accomplished, that it should have no blemish? Christ sends not a Bill of
Divorce to any Church for every thing amiss, nor for every Error in Doctrine,
except it be fundamental, and universally received, and held with obstinacy;
therefore neither let us, except it be thus with any Church, forsake the
Communion of it. Let us be sensible of any thing amiss, and pray to God, and do
our best endeavors in our way to have all things set in right order; but let us
not unkindly depart from the Church, so long as we see our Savior present with
it. It Is true, that there will be a time when the Church shall be without spot
or wrinkle; but to expect it in the time of this life, Ephesians. 5.27
and to quarrel at the Church, because it is not so now, were folly in an high
degree, and great uncharitableness.

2. The like is to be said of particular Christians: Expect not Angelical
Perfection at their hands, living on the face of the Earth; nor, because we see
some blemishes in their lives, let us therefore cast them off as wicked
Reprobates; but so long as we can discern any thing in them, with respect to
which we may in charity judge them to be God's, let us give them the right hand
of fellowship, and own them as Brethren: and, if we see them to miscarry in any
kind, disown them not, as past hope of being reclaimed, but study to restore
them with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1
considering our selves, lest we also be tempted. Have they blemishes? so have
the best of us: and would we not take it unkindly, to be for this cause
discarded by others? then deal not so unkindly with others, as to discard them
for this cause: for this is the golden Rule of Equity, propounded by our
Savior as the sum of the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7.12
Whatsoever ye would that others should do to you, do ye even the same to them:
and so, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.
on the other side, Do not that to another, which thou would not that another
should do to thee.

3. Wonder not at the fruits of Gods severity exercised against the Church of
God, and against particular godly Christians, the Members of the Church: They
have their blemishes, their spots, their sins, by which they also offend God:
and where sin goes before, who can wonder, if punishment and chastisement
follows after? What is more just, then that it should be so? Yea, the Love of
God to, and his Fatherly Care for, the Church, and the Members of it, requires
it: Rev. 3.19
As many (says Christ) as I love, I rebuke and chasten. And, When ye are judged
(says the Apostle) ye are chastened of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.32
that ye should not be condemned with the World.

4 In this respect how necessary is it, that the ministers of God should direct
reproves to the Church, and to godly Christians in the Church? have ye your
spots? and would not ye be cleansed? have ye your sins? and would ye not be
reproved? how unreasonable is this? yea how do ye in this act against your
precious souls? for nothing is more conducing to your happiness, then faithful
and seasonable reproof, by which we endeavor to keep sin from seizing on you,
and making a prey of your souls. Say not, think not, that we speak against
you, and seek to disgrace you: Its nothing so, for while we reprove your sins,
we speak for you against your sins which act against you; nor seek we to
disgrace you to others, but to disgrace your sins to you, and to make you out
of love with them, and to draw you off from them, which otherwise will ruin
you: Take heed therefore of such misprisions, and as you would do in a journey,
take it in good part, to be told, that you are out of the way: Take it as ye
will, we must do it, a necessity is laid upon us: for God has given the
commandment, Isai. 58.1
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their
transgression, and the house of Jacob their sin: And now woe will be to us, if,
for fear of your displeasure, we do it not: fear not their faces, Jer. 1.17
says God to the Prophet, least I confound thee before them.

5. This may be of great force to take us off from the excessive love of this
present life, and willingly to accept of the motion of death: for while we live
here below, as the moon has her spots, so we have our blemishes, lying under a
necessity of sining, in regard of that body of sin which we bear about us: from
this necessity of sining death shall exempt us: for then holiness shall be
made in us complete and perfect, and the body of sin shall be altogether wasted
out of us, then we shall sin no more, nor sorrow more: now we are like the
moon, Matthew. 13.43.
having spots, but then we shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of our
Father. And what wise man, that intends his own good, would content himself to
remain in a state of imperfection, when he may be brought to a state of
absolute perfection? This change is effected by death: why should we dread it?
why should we not embrace it with both arms? Cry not, as the Disciples at the
Transfiguration, Its good for us to be here, Matthew. 17.
but rather with old Simeon, Lord, Luke 2.29 Phil. 1.23
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, and with Saint Paul, I desire to
be dissolved: yet let us not make more haste then good speed. Our life is a
Warfare, and its not for Soldiers to leave their stations, but at the will of
the General: but if God shall say to us, as to Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50.
Go up to Mount Nebo and dye, let us readily obey and go up and dye. Let us so
make use of our lives, that we may be fit to dye, and then there will need no
more words about this bargain.

6. The Moon has her various Aspects, sometimes she is in the Full, and
sometimes in the Wane: sometimes she shines more gloriously, sometimes less,
and yet still she has a being. So is it with the Church. Sadeel does
excellently set forth this comparison: As the Moon (says he) does not always
show her light in her full Orb, Quemadmodum non semper Luna pleno orb lumen
suum nobis ostentat, sed aliquando ita decrescit, ut nobis illa non amplius
superesse videatur, nec tamen unquam propterea radiis solis destituitur,
quamvis humanis sensibus secus appareat: ita Ecclesia non semper plenum
fulgorem emittit, sed aliquando ita obscuratur, ut nostris oculis non pateat,
and nihil^minus certum est, eam semper esse, semperque a suo sole, id est, a
Christo illustrari. De legit. ministr. vocat. p. 39.
but she does sometimes so decrease, that she seems to us not to be any more,
and yet never is she destitute of the Sun beams, though it seems otherwise to
our senses. So the Church does not always send forth a full brightness, but is
sometime so obscured that she appears not to our eyes, and yet its certain,
that the Church has always a being, and is always enlightened by Christ her Sun.

So says Whitaker against Campian. Think thou, that thou can persuade us,
An tu te posse putes nobis persuadere, eum esse Ecclesiae statum, ut obscurari
nequeat, ut nil perfidia, nil hosts, nil Antichristus valeat? Delere hi quidem
Ecclesiam nunquam possunt; in angustias compingere, and compellere in latebras
possunt. Ecclesiam Augustinus lunae similem esse dixit, quae nunc tota lucet,
solis incensa radiis, nunc luminis magna part privatur, nunc lumen omnino
nullum ostendit. Ita Ecclesia interdum lumine clarissimo illustratur, interdum
obscurior apparet, interdum vix apparet quidem. Ad Campian. ra^. 3.
that the state of the Church is such, that it cannot be obscured, so that the
perfidiousness of enemies and Antichrist can do nothing against it? They cannot
indeed destroy the Church, but they can bring it into a narrow compass, and
drive it into holes. Augustine says, the Church is like the Moon, which
sometimes shines wholely, being enlightened with the Sunbeams, sometimes is
deprived of a great part of her light, and sometimes shows no light at all. So
the Church shines sometimes more gloriously, sometimes its more obscured, and
sometime it hardly appears at all. He proceeds to make it manifest by example.
The face of the Jewish Church (says he) was glorious under David and Solomon:
Si Ecclesiae illius tanta vastitas esse potuit, ut ex omni illo piorum numero
nullus omnino reliquus esse videretur (etsi reliqui erant re permulti) mirum
esse non potest, in regno Antichristi, qui omnes Achabos and Jezabelas
immanitate superat, ita fuisse direptam Ecclesiam, ut mira esset fidelium
solitudo. Nec tamen in ista Ecclesiae vastatione efficere potuit Antichristus,
quin multae (...) sanctorum remanserint, qui genua nunquam bestiae flexerint,
nec signum ejus inuri permiserint. Ibid.
but under Ahab it was so obscured that Eliah complained, that besides himself
there was none left. And thence he infers. 'If that Church could be so wasted,
that of all that number of godly men, none seemed to be left, (though indeed
many were left, seven thousand, says God) it is no wonder, if in the Kingdom
of Antichrist, who exceeds all Ahabs and Jezabels in cruelty, the Church was so
laid waste, that there was so great a solitude of the faithful: Yet neither was
Antichrist able, in that devastation of the Church, to prevail, but that there
remained thousands of Saints, which bowed not the knee to the Beast, nor
received his mark.

Hence we may frame an answer to the Romanists, frequently assailing us, with
that question, Where was your Church before Luther? for this is the confident
assertion of Campian the Jesuit of us, That for fifteen Ages we cannot find
any one Town, or Village, or House, Quindecim seculis, non oppidum, non villam,
non domum reperire possumus imbutum doctrina nostra. rat. 3.
holding our Religion, namely, till the time of Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin.
But learned Whitaker does justly deny it. Id falsissimum est, Campiane.
Temporibus enim Apostolicis, omnes Ecclesiae, omnes, urbes, omnia oppida,
familiae omnes eandem fidem and religionem coluerunt, quam nos profitemur. Ibid.
This is most false (says he) for in the times of the Apostles, all Churches,
all Cities, all Towns, all Families held the same faith, which we profess, he
means all Cities, Towns, and Families, in which the Church was planted by the
Apostles. And the truth of this may with ease be manifested by comparing the
particulars of our Religion professed by the Reformed Churches with the
Religion of those Apostolical Churches: but that would take up too much time.
Its true, that sometimes the Church has been much obscured and kept under the
hatches, yet still there has been a Church, that has maintained the faith of
Christ against heresies springing up. When Arianisme prevailed most under the
Emperors, Constantius and Valens: there wanted not those that maintained the
faith of the (...), the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father. And when
Heathenisme had the upper hand under the Emperors that were before Constantine
the great, and under Julian, that infamous Apostate, who succeeded Constantius,
still there were such as professed the Christian faith and defended it against
the heathen, resisting for it even unto blood. And so in the times, when as the
Church lay under the greatest darkness by reason of the Apostasy and Tyranny of
the Roman Synagogue, even in all Ages there have been such as have professed
and defended even unto death the faith of Christ received from the Apostles,
against the Heresies and abominable Superstitions of Rome: witness the glorious
Martyrs, that have suffered death for the cause of Religion in all those times,
both at home and abroad. So that to this question of the Romanists we may
justly answer, that our Church was before Luther, though not always equally
appearing, but sometimes as some grains of corn covered over with chaff in the
floor, and as fire on the hearth in the nightime covered over with ashes.

CHAP. XI. The Church and a Mother.
SAint Paul makes use of this resemblance, while he says; That Jerusalem, Gal.
4.16
which is above is the mother of us all: on which place hear Luther. This
Jerusalem (says he) which is above, is the Church, Est illa Jerusalem
coelestis, quae sursum est, Ecclesia, id est, credentes per totum orbem, qui
idem evangelium, eandem fidem in Christum, eundem Spiritum Sanctum, and eadem
Sacramenta habent. Ideo sursum non intellige de Ecclesia triumphante in coelis,
sed de militante in terris. In loc.
that is, believers dispersed through the whole World, which have the same
Gospel, the same faith in Christ, the same holy Ghost, and the same Sacraments.
Understand this therefore, that its here said above not of the
Church-triumphant in Heaven, but of the Church Militant on Earth. And this
Church is the mother of us all, that is, of all believers, both Jews and
Gentiles both high and low, both rich and poor: for toward us all she does
perform all the offices of a mother, as Saint Austin speaks excellently. The
mother, Matter Ecclesia matter est Patris tui, matrisque tuae, haec nos ex
Christo concepit, haec martyrum sanguine parturivit, haec in sempiternam lucem
peperit, haec fidei lacte nutrivit and nutrit. Ep. 38. ad Laetum.
the Church (says he) is the mother of thy Father and of thy Mother; she has
conceived thee of Christ; she has traveled of thee by the blood of the
Martyrs, she has brought thee forth to the everlasting light; she has
nourished, and does nourish thee with the milk of faith, etc. And Luther to the
same purpose, Ea docet, fovet, gestat in utero, gremio and ulnis, fingit and
perficit nos ad formam Christi, donec crescamus in virum perfectum, etc. Ibid.
though in other words: She does teach us, foster us, bear us in her womb, in
her lap, in her arms, she frames and fashions us to the likeness of Christ,
until we come to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ: Justly therefore is the Church compared to a Mother.

I. If the Church be our mother, let us carry our selves to her, as children
ought, and ingenuous children will, carry themselves to their mothers.

1. Let us yield obedience to her commands, seconding the commands of God our
heavenly Father: but obey also those her commands, which are not Cross to his
commands: for such obedience children owe to their mothers.

2. Let us be deeply affected with the miseries and afflictions of the Church:
though we our selves, for our own parts, enjoy never so great prosperity: what
ingenuous child lays it not sadly to heart, to see his mother under great
affliction? The Jews in Babylon wept in remembrance of Sion. Psalm. 137.1 Neh.
2.
Nehemiah, though Cup Bearer to the great King Artaxerxes, thought he had just
cause of a sad countenance, hearing of the distresses of Jerusalem.

3. Let us not grieve the Church our mother by an unkind departure from her and
her communion for some things amiss in her, or because we see in the Church a
mixture of good and bad: how unnatural a Son were he, that should disdain and
abominate his mother, because she comes short of her wonted comeliness? how
heinously (and that how justly) would any mother take it at the hand of any
child, to be so used? yet thus has the Church been dealt withal by many, that
have sometime been held, as her children: as by the Donatists of old, so by
many in later times: the more is the pity and the greater is their sin: But let
not us follow the example of such, but own and acknowledge the Church our
mother, but praying to God to amend, what is amiss, remain steadfastly in the
fellowship of the Church.

II. If the Church be the mother of us all, even of all believers, whether
Jews or Gentiles, high or low, rich or poor, then let all believers
(whatsoever the difference may be in other respects) own themselves mutually as
brethren of the nearest kind: not only children of the same father, as all
Jacobs twelve Sons were, but also of the same mother, as were Joseph and
Benjamin: And let this consideration keep us off from all things, that are
contrary to love; envy, malice, contention, etc. and provoke us the more to do
all offices of love each to other. Its observable, what difference Joseph did
put between Benjamin and his other brethren. They were all his brethren by his
fathers side, therefore he entertained them all, Genesis 43.34
and sent to every one of them messes from before him: but Benjamin was his
brother both by Father and Mother, therefore his mess was five times so much as
any of theirs. And at their return to his Father Jacob, Genesis 45.22
he gave to each of them changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three
hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment. We cannot put this
difference between believers, as if some had only the same father with us,
namely, God, and others had also the same mother, the Church, for Saint Cyprian
says most truly: He, Qui non habet Ecclesiam matrem, non habet Deum Patrem. De
unit. Eccl. s.
that has not the Church for his mother, has not God for his Father. But
seeing we are thus brethren of the nearest kind, having all God for our
Father, and the Church for our mother, let our love be entire each to other,
and let us manifest our love by doing good, one to another, as we are able, and
as out mutual necessities shall require.

CHAP. XII. The Church and a Ship.
Matthew. 4.19
OUr blessed Savior, promising to make his disciples fishers of men, gives an
hint of this resemblance: for thus the companion holds. As the fisherman
casting his net out of the ship into the Sea, takes up fishes, and brings them
into the ship: so the Apostles and their successors casting the net of the
Gospel out of the ship of the Church, takes up men, as fishes out of the sea of
the World, and brings them into the ship of the Church: And so the comparison
holds, as between the ministers of the Word and fishermen, between the net and
the Gospel, between the Sea and the World, between fishes and men, so between
the ship and the Church.

And the resemblance holds excellently.

Navis diversissimi generis and gentis vectore suscepto, subjecta est omnibus
and ventorum flatibus and maris motibus. Atque ita illa, scil. Ecclesia, and
seculi and immundorum. Spirituum vexatur incursibus. Comment. in Matthew. col.
496.
1. Hear Hilarious Pictaviensis. A ship (says he) having taken in Passengers of
diverse kinds, of diverse Nations, is subject to all blowings of the winds, and
to all ragings of the Sea: so the Church is vexed with the incursions of the
World, and of unclean spirits.

To which I add.

2. It Is truly said, (...).
A common ship has common dangers: all the passengers in the same ship are
liable to the same dangers, to the same storms and tempests, and to the same
Pirates. Jon. 1.
Let Jonah and the Mariners be in the same ship, though the storm arose for
Jonah's sake, yet the Mariners were all in danger by means of it. Let Saint
Paul, and other Prisoners, Soldiers, Acts 27
and Mariners, be in the same ship together, they are all equally concerned in
the tempest. Let there be in the same ship a Prince going to receive a Crown,
and a Malefactor going to receive Punishment, according to the nature of his
offense; yet, while they are in the ship together, they are subject to the same
storms, to be tossed alike, to be Sea-sick together, and to the same Pirates, to
be alike ransacked, and spoiled by them: Neither Winds, Sea, nor Pirates, know
to put a difference between the one and the other. It Is so in the Church. Let
Enemies come, let Persecutions arise against it, there is no sorts of men that
can promise to themselves an exemption from their violence: But, as it was with
the Jewish Church, when Nebuchadnezzar came against them, no sorts of men
escaped the fury of the Chaldeans, but both Prophets and Priests, Nobles, Kings
Children, and the King himself, they were all cruelly used: So is it in
Persecutions raised up against the Church, no sorts of men escaped, but (though
some particular men have escaped, God either hiding them, Jer. 36.26
as he did Jeremiah and Baruch, or making a way for them to escape by a
voluntary Exile, and so to reserve themselves for better times, yet) some of
all sorts have undergone the effects of their malice, as we may easily see in
those ten Persecutions against the Primitive Church, in the Persecutions raised
by the Arians under Constantius and Valens against the Orthodox Christians, and
by the Heathens under Julian: and (to forbear the mentioning of the rest) in
the Persecutions against the Protestants in those Marian days, and so still. So
that it is most true, and universally true, that Saint Paul and Barnabas told
the Churches, Acts 14.22
That through many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and
that the Apostle told Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.12
That they that will live a godly Life in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
Persecution.

Reckon then, not to pass to Heaven any other way, then by taking part in the
afflictions of the Church: What were it other then folly, for a man that enters
into a ship, to expect exemption from storms, when yet storms shall arise
against the ship, in which he is a Passenger? Heb. 2.10
The Prince of our Salvation was made perfect through suffering, says the
Apostle; and shall we think to be made perfect in an easier way? The same
afflictions (says Saint Peter) are accomplished in the rest of our Brethren
that are in the World; 1 Pet. 5.9
and shall we promise our selves an immunity from them? The Pirates, that invade
this ship of the Church, are common Enemies to all in the ship; and shall we be
so foolish, as to expect that they should deal more favorably with us, then
with the rest? Then Evils fall heavy, when we say with the Fool, Non putaram.
I thought not that such Evils would have happened to me, but the expectation
of Evils alleviates them. Expect them then; and then, if they come, we shall
have cause to say, I thank God, it is no worse then I looked for; and if they
come, we shall say, Blessed be God, that has made my way to Heaven easier then
I expected.

And wonder not at it, nor let it be an offense to us, to hear of, or to see
great afflictions befalling godly men, men of whom the World is not worthy.
Heb. 11.38
Who wonders to see or hear of a ship setting to Sea, to be subject to storms
and tempests? and meeting with such, that the best or the greatest in it to be
tossed up and down, and to be Sea-sick? This is the case here; for the Church
is a ship upon the Sea of the World, and the best in the Church is a Passenger
in this ship.

And, expecting afflictions, let us provide aforehand to be fore-armed against
them, Praemonitus, praemunitus.
as we are forewarned of them. The Mariner, setting out to Sea, expecting
storms and Pirates, furnishes himself aforehand with those things that may be of
use to him against the one and the other, judging it an high point of folly to
have them then to seek, when he should use them: What is more useful to us
against Afflictions, then the Grace of Patience? Ye had need of Patience, Heb.
10.38 Luke 21.19
says the Apostle: And so our Savior speaks, In Patience possess your Souls.
Let it be our wisdom therefore to work our Hearts aforehand to a Resolution to
bear Afflictions patiently.

3. The Resemblance between a ship and the Church holds in the means of the
safety of a ship, and so of the Church: as Saint Jerome has it in these words;
God the Father sits in the hinder part of this ship, In puppe Pater residet
gubernator, proram Paracletus servat Spiritus. To. 1. lib. de Salomone.
as the Master and Governor of it, to guide its course; and the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter, keeps the Fore-ship. And moreover, for an Anchor (necessary also to
the safety of a ship) God has given us that blessed Grace of Hope, even the
Hope of Salvation, Heb. 6.19
which (says the Apostle) we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast; of special use to make us steadfast, to stand impregnable against, and
in the midst of all the storms of Persecution raised up against us in the World.

Oh what Comfort is this to us? What assurance shall it not give us of safety
against all the opposition, which Satan and his Imps make against us and the
Church. The safety of a ship depends much, under God, upon the care and
vigilance, the skill and courage of the Master: Behold! the Master and Governor
of this ship of the Church is God, and his blessed Spirit, or God by his
Spirit: and who is comparable to him for any of these? Of his care and
vigilance hear what the Psalmist says, Psalm 121
He that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep: As for his skill and
wisdom, the Apostle doubts not to call him the only wise God: 1 Timothy 1.17
and the Prophet says of him, Jer. 32.19
That he is great in counsel, and mighty in work: and how shall courage be
wanting to him, to set himself, and to defend his ship the Church, against all
that threaten the ruin of it? It Is he (says the Psalmist) which stills the
noise of the Sea, Psalm 65.7
the noise of their Waves, and the tumults of the People. And as for Satan,
that Arch-Pirat, seeking to take or sink this ship (though he be a Spirit, and
therefore of great power against us, who are but flesh and blood, yet) he is
nothing to God, who is the creating Spirit: That which is said of the Behemoth,
is no less true of him; Job 40.18
He that made him, can make his Sword to approach unto him. Let therefore the
power and malice of our Enemies be never so great, and their opposition against
us never so fierce, yet we may comfortably rest upon the assurance which our
dear Savior gives us, Matthew. 16.1
That the gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church, much less any
power on Earth.

And see the great Mercy of God, That (whereas the Church in this World is like
to a ship on the Sea, and therefore subject to storms and tempests) he has
given us that blessed Grace of Hope, the Hope of Salvation, whereby we may be
kept steady, and not be hurried up and down, and driven upon Rocks and Sands,
to our ruin and wrack: And it is not, as other Anchors, cast down on the Earth,
to take hold of that, but upwards to God, It enters within the Vail, Heb. 6.19
says the Apostle; it fastens upon God and Christ, upon his Power, his Mercy,
his Promise and Faithfulness; and therefore it is a steadfast Hope, and a sure
Anchor, which cannot fail us, as not that God, on whom it fastens: Oh be
thankful for such gracious provision. Only now let not this Grace of God be in
vain toward us, but keep this Anchor charily, Heb. 3.6
and hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of this Hope unto the end. And if
ye find this Hope fading in you, endeavor to strengthen it, by a frequent
Meditation of Gods Power and Mercy, and the Faithfulness of his Promises, and
by the Experience of his Dealings with his Church in former Times: and so shall
ye find it of singular use to uphold you against all the opposition, which
Satan and the World shall make against you.

CHAP. XIII. The Church and the Threshing-floor, or Wine Press.
SAint Austin, following the Translation of the Septuagint (as, for the most
part, in the New Testament, where any Testimony of the Old Testament is
alleged, that Translation is followed) renders the Title of the eighth Psalm,
Pro tercularibus super Gittith.
For the Winepresses upon Gittith: and so he takes knowledge of the Comparison
between the Church and the Winepresses, or the Threshing-floor; for thus he
says: By the Wine Press, and also by the Threshing-floor, Torcularia possumus
accipere Ecclesiam sicut aream: Sive enim in area, sive in torculari, nil aliud
agitur, nisi ut fructus ab integumentis purgentur; quae necessaria erant, and
ut nascerentur, and ut crescerent, and ut ad maturitatem messis vel vindemiae
pervenirent. Hi^ integumentis, i. e. palcis in area frumenta, and vinaciis in
torcularibus vina exuuntur: Sicut in Ecclesia a multitudine secularium hominum,
quae simul cum bonis congregatur, quibus, ut nascerentur, necessaria erat illa
multitudo, id agitur, ut spiritali amore, per operationem ministrorum Dei,
separentur. Agitur autem, ut non loco, sed affectu, separentur boni a malis,
quamvis simul in Ecclesiis, quantum attinet ad corporalem praesentiam,
conversentur: aliud autem erit tempus, quo vel frumenta in horrea, vel vina in
cellas segregentur. In Psalm. 8.
we may understand the Church: For, whether in the Threshing-floor, or in the
Wine Press, the main business is to sever the Fruit from the Coverings, which
yet were necessary, that they might be, and that they might grow, and come to
ripeness for Harvest and Vintage: From these Covers they are severed, that is,
the Grain from the Chaff in the Threshing-floor, and the Wine from the skins
and kernels of the Grapes in the Wine Press. So in the Church, this is the main
business, That, from the multitude of worldly men, which is mixed together with
the good (to whom yet, that they might be born, that multitude was necessary)
the good might be severed, by spiritual Love, by the Labors of the Ministers of
God. But the meaning is, That the good should be separated from the bad, not in
place, but in affection, although (in regard of bodily presence) they converse
together in the Church: but there shall be another Time, in which the good
Grain shall be set apart from the Chaff into the Garners, and the Wine from the
Dregs into the Cellars.

And here are many Things to be observed.

I. That the Church has a mixture in it of good and bad, of Elect and
Reprobate, as in the Threshing-floor the Wheat and Chaff are together, and the
Wine and Dregs in the Wine Press: the Church Militant in this World never was
without such mixture.

II. That this mixture of the good and bad is necessary and useful to the good,
namely, says the Father, That the godly may be born, and brought into the
World: for thus it often pleases God, That from wicked Parents have sprung godly
Children, as from Korah, Numb. 16
the Ringleader in that Faction against Moses and Aaron, did issue Sons, that
were (if not Penners of some of the Psalms, Psalm 42. tit.
yet at least) employed in the singing of them: From wicked Ahaz a godly
Hezekiah; from idolatrous Amon a tenderhearted Josiah; and from Jeroboam, that
made Israel to sin, did issue a Son, in whom was found some good toward the
Lord God of Israel, 1 King. 14.13
who alone therefore, of all the House of Jeroboam, was buried, and mourned for.

But further also this mixture of good and bad in the Church is expedient:

1. To let the godly see the Mercy of God to themselves, doing them good by his
sacred Ordinances, while the wicked live so unprofitably under them.

2. To aggravate the sins of the wicked, and to heighten their judgment, while
(living under the same means of Grace, by which the godly are enabled to bring
forth the fruits of Righteousness to the Glory of God) they either use them
not, or abuse them, abounding in all wickedness to Gods dishonor.

III. That living in the Church with the wicked, we must separate our selves
from them in affection and practice, not running with them to the same excess
of riot, not delighting in sin, as they do, but to be as contrary to them, as
possibly we can, in our Conversation: according to the advice of the Apostle,
Ephesians. 5.11
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove
them. They trade in wickedness, 1 Pet. 1.15
it is for us to endeavor to be holy in all manner of Conversation. And no less
must we be contrary to them in our affection: They love sin, we must hate it,
Psalm 97.10 38.18
as David advises us; Ye that love the Lord, hate the thing that is evil: They
joy in their sins, we must say, as David, I will be sorry for my sins: They
delight in the sins of others, we must be affected as David, 119.136
who could say of himself, My eyes gush down with rivers of tears, because men
keep not thy Law.

And, being thus contrary to them,

IV. There is no need that we should make a local separation from the wicked,
nor forsake the communion of the Church, because we see some wicked men in it:
the sins of the wicked shall hurt themselves, not us, separating our selves
from their sins. So says the Wiseman, Prove. 5.22
His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, not others, that estrange
themselves from them.

V. Yet there shall come a time, when there shall be a full and perfect
separation between the good and the bad: the godly, the sheep, set on Christ's
right hand, Matthew. 25.33
and the wicked, the Goats, on his left hand: These, the wicked, shall go into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. verse 46. Psalm. 1.5
There shall then be a congregation of righteous men, and no wicked men among
them: wait with patience till the time comes, in which God will bring it so to
pass, but expect not such a bodily separation here in the time of this life,
least our expectation be: frustrated. It is enough for us, that it shall once
be: the husbandman waits for the harvest; and let us wait till the end of this
world, then shall the harvest be, and let us not quarrel at the Church, nor, as
malcontents, depart from the fellowship of the Church, because this
separation is not made just when we would have it: Let it suffice us, that
Christ has taught us, that it shall not be until the harvest in the end of the
world, and therefore let us be so wise, Matthew. 13.
as not to look for it sooner. Let it be enough for us, that God, whose decrees
are, as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, has appointed this
separation to be made, and the Agents, by whom it is to be made, the Reapers,
the Angels, and the time, when it shall be made, the Harvest in the end of the
world: and therefore let us not fail to expect it in the season of it; and let
this expectation comfort us against the present mixture that is in the Church,
and against the inconveniences, which seem to attend it. Consider, 2 Timothy 2.
what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

Thus I have by the help of God, fulfilled the task, which I undertook of
Parallels in three Books. In the first ye have seen the Parallels between the
Lord Jesus Christ and the foresignifying Types of him, both Persons and things.
In the second, ye have seen the agreement between Christ and those other
resemblances, by which he is set forth either in the old or new Testament. In
the third, the agreement between the Church and the Types, by which it was
foresignified, and other resemblances, by which its set forth in Scriptures.
The issue of all is, that we all learn to carry our selves in a due manner, to
God, to our dear Savior, to the Church, and to our brethren, the members of
the Church, according to the particulars expressed severally in these three Books.

And now to God alone, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Three in One, and One in
Three, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, Dominion and Might, for ever and ever,
Amen.

FINIS.
Faults amended in the Book.
PAge 26 line 32. r. humane nature Moses. p. 37 26. r. sins, for ever sat. p.
40. l. 25. r. Heb. 7. p. 77. l. 25. r. Bucanus p. 81. l. 30. r. to the meek the
acceptable p. 72. l. 10. r. Merchant p. 93, l. 14 r. relish, p. 94. l. 10. r.
is offered, p. 97. l. 34. r. one, p. 115. l. 18. for it r. is, p. 128. l 17. r.
equalizing it for. p. 129. 10 r. Christian Religion, p 154. l. 13. r. prayer,
p. 156. l. 15. r. received grace, p. 157. l. 10. r. justice of God, p. 188. l.
21. r. into, p 201. l. 21. r. tear, p. 212. ult. r. among, p. 273. l. 33. r.
sent, p. 313. l. 7. r. first. p. 359. l. 13. r. stands in, p. 367. l. 1. r.
Magnifico's, p. 402. l. 24. r. how great, p. 404. 35. r. Priest.

Faults amended in the margin.

Page 21. l. 18. r. flecteretur, p. 19. l. 1. r. Pharaoni, p. 38. l. 1. r.
(...). p. 66. l. 5. r. mittitur, p. 67. antepen. r. ejiciendus p. 68. ver. fin.
r. Deo gratias Presbyt. p. 73. l. 13. r. De trib. p. 78. l. 16. r. similis, p.
79. l. 5. r. meritis, p. 80. l. 20. r. consolata sunt me, p. 94. l. 14. r.
colligi, p. 113. l. 9. r. lignum, l. 17. r. tanquam, l. 29. r. congregabit, p.
177. l. 19. r. Christi, l. 25. r. (...). p. 211. l. 2. r. malo, 114. l. 12. r.
Synagogae, p. 249. l. 24. r. deputemus pro patria and, p. 265. l. 22. r.
visibilis, p. 273. l. 12, 13. r. ascensio: quid horum, p. 293. l. 11. r. est
Deus, p. 319. l. 10. r. ligari, p. 320. l. 13. r. carnem, p. 321. l. 17. r.
salientis, p. l. 31. r. perfudit, p. 338, l. 9. r. assignare, l. 9, 10. r.
pulicem, p. 353. l. 15. r. intelligeremus, p. 381. l. 7. r. haereticorum.


