VERSES IN HONOR OF THE Reverend and Learned Judge of the Law, IVDGE IENKIN;
The sole Author of his Sovereigns Rights, Englands Laws, and the peoples
Liberty.

Written by a Loyal Subject of his Majesty's.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

Upon Judge Ienkin, and his Plea before the Speakers of the two Houses of
Parliament, Lord of Manchester, William Lenthall Esquire, at the Chancery
Bar, Feb. 14. 1647.
HAve you e're seen a sullen Rock, disdain
The high-swolne Billows of the enraged Main?
And in pure Indignation, defy
Neptune, and all his curled Artillery?
Just so stood JENKIN! like a well-fix'd Rock
Built on a Base, (that never feared the shock
Of Rage, or Tempest) Justice, and the Law;
Which by a Lovely, yet Majestic Awe,
Bounded, and blessed Us; till these savage Bores
Broke it upon Her, and cast out of Doors,
Law, and Religion, Mercy, Discipline,
Sense, and Civillity, and what e're's Divine
Or decent, and in lieu of them, did bring
Geneva's Sluttery, and (that cursed Thing)
The Hell bred Covenant, amongst us, to ensnare.
And cheat poor Israel with Gibeons Ware:
Could any but this Parliament and Hell,
Ere teach the very Law for to Rebel?
And implead Loyalty, call it Criminous,
Nay Treason, (worst of crimes) yet even thus
Great Strafford, Reverend Laud, and Burley fell;
Whose Martyrdomes when after-ages tell
Posterity will stand aghast, and swear
That Rebel Typhons, and not Men dwelt here:
Unpolitick Miscreants! to un-hinge a State,
And leave it is Emendation unto Fate,
Or Fortune! Prudence being banish quite,
Which the Learned Bude calls, Reasons Favorite;
Did not that Lord Brook in his speech against Bishops, Anno 1642. or 43.
Sophie Senator once cry
(We came not here to build) let us Destroy!
Thus down fell D gon-Bishops! who had stood
Full fourteen hundred years before his blood
Did speak him Gentleman; admit that he
Were of no posterne, but true Pedigree:
But straight as those The Bishops.
Bright Stars were all unspher'd,
The Dunghill Exhalations appeard,
The House of Commons, and began to strive
For Parity at least, and boldly give
The Lords check-mate; (how wise, how just is God,
To pay degenerous Peers, with their own Rod!)
Yet boast not (Feet of Clay!) against the Head
Of Gold; Your Kingdom too is numbered;
For all your Bramble-Grandeur, Greg does vow
To be supreme, when you do hang below:
And when your Rebell-soules do fry in Hell,
(Infecting with your Names our Chronicle)
Then JENKIN shall be Canonized in Story,
His KINGS Defender, and his Kingdoms Glory!
Another Copy of Verses on the Reverend Judge Jenkins.
BRave Limb of Law, great Englands Statute prop,
Whom Tyrants neither can make stoop or stop:
Against their Ord'nance, thou thy Cannon bring'st,
They un-king Charles, and Him again Thou King'st.
For Laws and Statutes Humane and Divine
Thy knowledge makes thy true allegiance shine:
And it is more easy for thy foes to be
Three Kingdoms ruin, then to conquer thee.
Stout heart of Oak, whom no false private end
Corrupts, but dares to break, but not to bend.
Afflictions fire has burnished bright thy fame,
All Britain is embrodered with thy name:
And Wales, thy Honor, no Eclipse can shade,
Because thou did produce so brave a Blade:
Grave Reverend Jenkin, that with pen and word
Support'st true Justice Balance, and her sword
Will never hurt thee: If in justice dares
Draw forth her hanger, thou art cleared of cares:
If Foes judge thee to death, they do no more
Then Nature, Nature doomd thy death before:
The more thy sufferings are, the more thy praise,
They may take minutes from thee, hours, and days,
Weeks they may rob thee of, but there is no fear
That they will steal thy Climactericall year.
Thou art Laws Line, whose Level is dispatch,
Thou art Laws Lark, whose unseeld eyes keep watch,
Laws Lamp, whose light shows justice what is right
Laws Loome, whose list cannot be swayd by might,
Law is the Helm, that steeres the ship of State,
The cheerful Star which early shines and late;
The staff whose stay supports the languishing;
The Spring whose stream is ever flourishing:
Straight line, bright lamp, sweet Lark, strong Loome choice List,
Guide, shine, shield, guard, and live Truths Martialist:
Rare Helm, straight staff, pure stream, illustrious Star
Steeres, cheeres, directs, supports, in Peace and War:
Clear Light, pure Lamp, rich stream of truth and life,
Justices Throane, to cool the heat of strife,
Whose spotless current, runs a crystal course,
By curbing Awe with Law, with censures force,
By making every wronger render right,
By being blind, and yet have clearest sight.
This is just Law, and he a Lawyer is
Who rightly knows, and practices all this:
And such art thou grave, Judge, even thou art he,
The Magazine of Laws Integrity,
Long may thou live, since thy good life does give
Justice new breath, and make her ever live.
It Is not by Law that thou a Prisoner art,
But for thy taking Law, and Justice part;
Opressions weight, thy mind cannot deject
Thou protect'st Law, and Law will thee protect:
The courage of a Martyr, is his cause,
Who suffers for his God, and Countries Laws.
If thou fall for thy King and Kingdoms sake,
The Cause will thee, a glorious Martyr make.
Courage brave Patriot, to thy tacklin stand,
Thou art supported by the Almighties hand;
Thy fame and name shall live with the Eternal,
When as thy foes shall fry in flames Infernal.
T. I.

In Honor of the Reverend Father of the Law, Judge Jenkin.
1 A Sophy politic, that slights all charms The Argument.
2 A Rock that bears a House against all storms, 3 Moses and's Serpents Rod,
4 A nimble Cat, 5 One of the lean Kine that devoured the fat. 6 A British
Lawyer, well beloved and known, 7 Judge Jenkin, (wise, grave, just) is such a
one.
STate Lawyers, you that make the Laws your spells, 1 A Sophy.

And charm the Truth, (dissembling Machiavils)
Well may you charm with Law-tearms (doubtful words)
And feed with Chafe (in stead of corn) young Birds,
Jenkins (too old for you) he spies your nets,
He tells us where, and how, and who them sets.
Send out your storms floods, gusts, tempestuous rain, 2 Rock.

You beat upon this house (his corpse) in vain:
You storm at him, he cares not for it a louse,
His God's his Rock, that props Him and his House.
Beat not against this Rock; this if you spurn,
To powder, yea to Atoms ye shall turn.
Ye Egyptian Jugglers, show your Serpent sticks, 3 Moses and his serpent.

(Statutes misconstru'd) show your shuffling tricks
To blind your Pharaoh, (your grand Parliament)
God (out of Cambria) has a Moses sent,
His Serpent Will devour yours, every crumme,
He Will spoil your pleading, strike you all quite dumb.
You toss and tumble him; 4 A nimble Cat.
but what of that?
He lights still on his feet, as does a Cat:
And in good time may scratch out all your eyes
That on King Charles are false rebellious spies.
You Have made him lean, 5 One of the 7 loan King.
you Basan Bulls are fat,
He is much better, you much worse for that:
His Chyrograph (as on Belshazers Wall)
Will (on a sudden) make your courage fall.
And in my Genius, I am much mistook,
If each of you have not a hanging look:
Rebellion and Witchcraft are alike,
God hates them both, his vengeance both shall strike.
Your fat is turned to lean, your reign is done,
And you (each one) a bare State-skelleton:
Your wealth shall waste away, and all your parts
Shall be turned rotten, as are now your hearts.
A British Lawyer, 6 A British Lawyer, etc.
(in the Laws well grounded)
By lawless madmen in a Jayle impounded;
Beloved, not having any good man's hate,
A well known Champion'gainst th'usurping State.
He was no Clotho to spin out a cause,
And grind poor Clients with oppressions jaws.
He was no Lachefis to reele out suits
With fine put-offs, demurres, or vain disputes:
But he was Atropos to cut the thread,
To stifle strife, and strike contention dead.
Long live (thou learned preserver of the Law)
Traitors to curb, and Rebels keep in a we.
And when Death brings this good man to his grave, 7 A Judge, etc.

You that love Truth, and Law, his Parchments save,
That they may be such terror unto some,
As once was Ziska's skin upon a Drum. G. W. Basileophilos.
When force of Arms could not one jot prevail,
To make resistance'gainst the Dragons tail,
That Giant monster called a multitude,
Which with a raging fury did intrude
Upon the ^^acefull quiet of the Land,
Then (like Gamaliel) in the gap did stand
Judge Jenkins; he with Law and Eloquence,
Hammered the fencelesse people into sense
Of all illegal ills which they have done
Against the King in this rebellion.
He tells the Army and the Parliament,
What Byas ways they run in government?
How Leg slative power and close Committee
Must needs destroy the Country and this City.
How Perjury, and Blood, and Sacrilege,
Are Hell and Treasons cursed privilege.
Let Cedunt Arma Togae be his praise,
His head be crowned with Stars in stead of Bays.
The conquest with the pen to him we grant
In spite of Directory or Covenant.
There Is many Writers that can jeere and jybe,
And wittily do gall Rebellions Kybe,
Who every week do dare to write what is true,
Call Martin Traitor, and Miles Corbet Jew:
And now and then (a fancy by the way)
They mention Pembroke, or the zealous Say,
The man (Man-devill) mighty Manchester:
And diverse others in particular;
These have done well in some things they have written,
And Englands foes (by them) have been Flea-bitten:
These are but squibs, and crackers (at the best)
For though they write plain truth, it is read in jest.
But Noble Jenkins (without fear or flattry)
With Common Law (thy Cannon) make such battry,
Whereby the Levellers shall leveld be,
And thy reward blessed immortallity.
To the reverend and learned supporter of the Law, Judge DAVID JENKYNS.
Anagramma. KAINS DID ENVY.
A Crew of Kains, and Kains accursed seed,
In covenant (with Death and Hell) agreed,
That every Abel they would kill and slay,
Who would not be of their rebellious way.
Kains won the day, poor Abels were not able
To Oppose so damnable a R^ut and Rabble.
Murder was Kains delightful recreation,
Imprisonment, exile, and sequestration,
Oppressions, taxes, plundrings, polls, extortions,
Swords, halters, axes, were poor Abels portions.
The King himself is also used thus,
Strong guarded by a whelp of Cerberus:
These lawless miseries (the land o're-flowing)
And law and justice held scarce worth the knowing.
Then thou (grave Judge) with courage and with skill,
Did take in hand the right supporting quill,
Of Englands down-trod Statutes, and dejection,
Which thou have raised up to new resurrection:
Thy pen cuts deeply, and more sharply strikes
Then does a hundred thousand swords and pikes.
And for thy loyal writing true and free,
The cursed Kains did Envy and hate thee.
This Parliament has Lawyers who are members,
But they have raked their law up in the embers.
They know it, but not show it, Sergeant Wild,
Saint John, and Seldom, these are past a child's,
And sure Miles Corbet is not such a sot,
But that he knows what is law, and what is not.
But those men are not tortured by the Kains,
Nor have they feeling of poor Abels pains;
And though they know all is unlawful done,
They let all law, and right to ruin run
Because injustice is their precious jem,
And chiefest treasure that enricheth them.
But Jenkins still dares call a spade a spade,
To speak and write truth is his only trade:
Fine smooth-tongu'd flattry, he will still abhor it,
Though Kains did Envy him, he cares not for it.
FINIS.

