Babylons Beauty: OR THE ROMISH-CATHOLICKS SWEETHEART.

Containing a most lively and lovely Description of Romes Cardinal Virtues and
rarest Endowments, with her Apostolical Benedictions on Kings and Kingdoms,
under her tyrannical Subjection; briefly and bravely depainted, in their
Native-splendour.

A work most seasonably composed for the revived eternal shame of all the
mad-Maintainers and Idolizers of Romes great Diana, so cried-up and fought for,
now a days, by Papists, Atheists, and formal Malignant Protestants.

By John Vicars.

REVEL. 17. 2, 3, 4. And I saw a Woman sit upon a scarlet colored Beast, full
of names of Blasphemy. And the Woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and
decked with gold and precious-stones and pearls. With whom the Kings of the
Earth had committed fornication, and the Inhabitants of the Earth had been
drunk with the wine of her fornication. Imprimatur:

James Cranford.



London, Printed by G. M.for Ralph Rounthwait. M. DC. XLIV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lady Rebeccah Wollaston, Lady Majoresse of the
most famous and renowned City of London, and to the Right Worshipful the Lady
Anne Sprignall, Two most eminent Patronesses and Patterns of Virtue and Piety:
J: V. ever prays all increase of Grace here, and fullness of Glory hereafter.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful:
THe many deep ties and fast-binding Ligaments of obliged Gratitude, which
have long time tied me in all sincere observances to both your good Ladyships;
do extraordinarily induce, nay enforce me to most serious study and resolution
to lay happy hold on all opportunities (though but in any small measure, rather
than to incur the least suspect of black Ingratitude, hateful to God and men)
to manifest the integrity of my most grateful Heart, in any, in all my sincere
Services and best abilities. And having now composed and compiled this little
Treatise, entitled, Babylons Beauty, or The Romish-Catholickes Sweetheart;
Even a brief Description of that impudent and audacious Whore of Rome, the
Great Diana of these back sliding days. Me thought I could not possibly pitch
upon more fit Patrons thereof, than your good Ladyships, my ever worthily most
honored good Friends, whom I know by most happy experience to be two most
eminently gracious and grave Matrons in this our Israel; two most fruitful and
faithful Professors and practisers of true Piety and Holiness; yea, I say, two
most hearty and heroic haters and contemners of this Romish-Strumpet, and all
her most detestable Idolatries and abominable superstitious fooleries and
mimicall fopperies in Religion, mere baubles of Babel to mock and cheat the
children of error and disobedience. Accept then ( Right Honorable and Right
Worshipful) I humbly pray you, this small Symboll and true Testimony of my
most grateful heart, and ever, every way, bounden best services (for many most
immerited sweet favors) truly and duly devoted to both your good Ladyships.
Which singular favor and accustomed Christian Candor will (and that most
meritoriously) extraordinarily add unto, and mightily augment the, already,
deep endeerments of

Your good Honors and Worships in his Prayers, his Best, ever to be commanded,
John Vicars.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader:
HAving, very lately, compiled and published a little Treatise, entitled, A
Looking-glass for Malignants; and finding that it has been entertained with
much love and candid approbation: I have been thereby greatly encouraged again
to put my pen to paper, and here, now, to present unto thee a Beautiful Object
to look-upon, even a lively (but scarce lovely) picture of the Pope of Rome and
her most pregnant Proselites, the Papists; which I have, Ironically, entitled,
Babylons Beauty. I remember, that I have read, it was a custom among the
Lacedaemonians, that to make their children the more to hate that filthy sin of
Drunkenness, they would bring them into the sight and presence of stark
Drunkards; that, thus, seeing with their own eyes, the base and beastly
behaviors of those Swinish Drunkards, that most filthy sin might appear the
more odious and detestable to their children: So, I, seriously considering with
my self, the most strange, foolish and faithless doting disposition and most
mad humor of very many sottish and senseless men and women, Protestants
(forsooth) of the largest size (as well as bewitched Papists) so extremely to
admire and adore the filthy and rotten Strumpet of Rome, in all her most
abominable Babylonish Beauty, or rather (and most rightly) stupendous
deformity; I doubt not but in zeal to my God, and Christian love, and pity to
my country men's poor perishing souls, desire (with those ancient
Lacedaemonians) to set before their eyes (if they will not wilfully and
obstinately blind them) a most true and exact description, even, Ad amussim
and propriis ^c genuinis coloribus, of the main and most material
abominations and intoxications of the most audacious and shameless Whore of
Rome, who with the cup of her poisonous fornications has made the Prince and
people of the earth mad-drunke, even to execrable loathing. That hereby (if it
be possible) I might make them loath, hate and abhor the same in the serious
sight thereof; And now especially, in these our base backsliding and impiously
apostatizing times from truth and holiness, wherein men and women do so
degenerously look-back at, and like and long for the stinking Garlic and
Onions of Romish Egypt, even to the eternal hazarding of all they have, of all
they are, both bodies and souls. And, this (good Reader) I have the rather now
done; first, because of the conveniencie of this work, to these present times,
whereby I have a most just occasion to cast a little of her own dung into the
face of that impudent Whore of Rome, yea now, I say, when she is so sottishly
adored, admired and desired, by many Malignant or Atheistical Protestants,
forsooth, and all under the specious vizard of any beggarly Peace, Unity and
Conformity. Secondly, to ease the Reader of much pains to see and search out
these things in other Authors, both ancient and modern, which are both
various and voluminous, and, so, very hard to be found by them without much
tediousness and trouble. Thirdly, to ease poor men's purses and expenses
hereabout, who cannot be at the charge (if at least they have a desire to see
or know these things) to buy or procure the great volumes wherein these matters
are scatteringly contained. Far much more, I acknowledge, may be said on this
subject, even enough to fill great volumes and to tire and terrify the most
patient inquisition for them; but this may suffice, I hope, to stop the mouths
of pernicious Papists and their left-hand-Brothers our mischievous Malignants,
profane Protestants at large, whom any Religion, or no Religion, will better
content, than the true Religion, which so presses the practice of the power of
Godliness, the main thing they so mightily malign and desperately despise,
scorn and scoff at. Whom, therefore, leaving to their great and most
righteous Master, to whom they must either stand or fall; hoping these few and
faithful collections will give much seasonable content and satisfaction to all
truly religious Christians and pious Protestants, I rest,

Thine in the Lord John Vicars.

BABYLONS BEAVTIE.
OR, The Romish-Catholicks Sweetheart.
THis faithless, faultring and backsliding world, has now for about 14 or
1500 years been haulting and staggering between not only 2 but many distracted
opinions, both touching the true God, as it was between the heathens and
primitive Christians; and also (as now it is and long has been between
Protestants, Papists and other Sectaries) Concerning the pure and sincere
worship of the true God, whether Christ or Antichrist, Simple, plain and pure
worship, or miserably mixed idolatry and superstition should stand or fall, be
loved or disliked. And from this ground and bottom, Christendomes
grand-quarrell.
have all the flames of Contention and bloody broils, over the whole Christian
World (even for these many hundred years) been raised and blazed abroad, even
to the utter depopulation and ruin of many Countries and Kingdoms. And
although the Lord God of Heaven and Earth may be said to have taken that most
wise Course, Whither God or Baal, Christ or Antichrist shall reign. 1 King.
18. 24.
which once he himself dictated and directed to his Zealous and pious prophet
Elijah (inspired with heavenly wisdom and Courage) to prove and clearly
demonstrate, to his apostatizing faithless and faultring Israelites, in wicked
Ahabs time, the true God from false and abusive Baall, even by miraculous fire
from heaven; And as the false god Baal was most notably discovered by his
false-prophets (notwithstanding their vehement calling and crying on their
blockish god, yea and that with cuttings and slashings of their flesh, to move
him to hear them and to answer them by fire also, which he could not) to be a
false-god or indeed no god at all: Even so, I say, our most wise God, the only
true God, has after a certain manner taken the same course, even by the true
heavenly and supernatural fire of sound Faith which works by Love, Zeal and
true holiness of life and conversation in his Saints and Servants; from time
to time, most abundantly and evidently has manifested to the world in all
ages, that as he is the only true God, Joh. 4. 23, 24.
and a most pure and incomprehensible Spirit, so he will be worshipped in
plain Simplicity, in Spirit and truth of all his true worshippers. And that
Antichrict and all his foolish and faithless (not praying, but) prating
Priests, and babbling Baalists, mumbling and muttering over so many Paternosters
and Ave-Maries together with all their Good frydayes whipping-cheer, lashing
and gashing their flesh, just like Baals Priests, are but very liars, and
abominable impostures and deceivers, and that God hates and abhorrs all their
rotten painted and polluted idolatry and Superstition, which Antichrist, that
most audacious and brazen-faced Whore of Rome, has by her Ignatian and truly
igneous flaming Jesuits and Popish proselites, endeavored and strenuously
striven with fire and sword, with juglings and delusions to uphould and
maintain, but all in vain to this present time, though I must confess, with
much misery, ruin and desolation to Gods Church and Children, in all those
foresaid many hundred years, even ever since Antichrist the Baal and Belial of
Rome grew up to such an ungodly growth and pernicious power, by the too great
lenity, indulgence and over-honest affection and favor which the primitive
Christian Emperors Constantine, and others exhibited to those Patriarchs and
Popes of their times, who afterward, in short time, most grossly abused their
honest love and liberality, unto extreme and excessive pride and insolency,
even till, at last, they grew to that highth, that they proved not only
intolerable, but untameable to posterity all along.

Now although, as I touched before, our most wise and patient God had from time
to time, in all Antichrists insulting and usurped authority and tyranny, let
the world see (if at least it would have seen) that his will and worship,
revealed only in his Word (not Antichrists unwritten rotten trash and
traditious Decrees and Decretals) was the old way and the good way to be walked
in; yet, such has been the unexpressible knaverie, impostures and juglings,
together with unsufferable cruelties and tyrannies exercised on Gods people by
the Popes and their most nefariously pestilent and pernicious Jesuits, Friars
and liars, those croaking Froggs ascending out of the foggie fumes and black
smoke of the bottomless pit of hell, that either by force or fraud, they have
wonderfully wrought upon the spirits of men to be misled by them, and sillily
and sottishly driven or drawn them to believe and embrace Romes either lying
wonders, or frying furies and cruelties.

Now, The ground of all Europes intestine contentions.
then, I say, this being the maine and mighty ground, and most bainfull
bottom of all the wars and jarrs that are now in the Christian world,
namely, whither Romes usurped rule and regiment, or Christ's evangelicall Truth
and Testament shall stand and prevail, whither Christ's pure and precious
Comeliness, or Romes inwardly rotten (though outwardly specious and painted)
Beauty, (or rather Bauderie) is fittest to be followed and affected. In short,
whither Christ or Antichrist shall be King, and sole Lord and Sovereign. I
have, therefore in this short Treatise undertaken to set forth in her proper
and most genuine and native deepe-died colors in grain, the great Diana of
Rome, so cryed-up, admired and adored, by almost, the whole world (at least of
sottish and senseless, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
only nominall Christians and perishing sons of disobedience, who give
themselves up to believe lies, that they all may be damned, who will not
receive the love of the truth in righteousness, as the Apostle Paul most
notably shows) yea and to limn and delineat Romes most lively picture and
fair (or rather infamous) figure and feature, most unquestionably known (to
all knowing and ingenuous Christians) to be most properly and peculiarly hers,
and only or mainly hers, as all Ecclesiastical Histories and Historiographers
both ancient and modern, besides the sensible experience of pristine and
present suffering Christians in all ages, have and do decipher and set her
forth, and without all cause of controversy, most faithfully prove and
testify.

And because all these things which I now intend in this Treatise to deliver
(and that with all historical fidelity and convenient brevitie) are so well
known to all learned and intelligent Christians, I have resolved (for the
avoiding of tediousness and intricate prolixitie, to the ordinary sort of
Readers, who are like to be the greatest number) to set down most succinctly
the Histories themselves, barely and plainly, without much (or almost any)
marginall notes or quotations of authors, that so my honest and plain Readers
may with more full delight and content, see and seeing admire and admiring be
amazed at the egregious madness and stupid sottishness of our Popish admirers
and adorers (both Princes and people) of such a rotten ramish Whore, and most
bold and brazen-faced a painted Strumpet, Who dares so audaciously abuse and
intoxicate them with such deep drafts of her golden-cup of mortiferous poison
of Romish fornications, to the fatal and final ruin and perdition (without
timely and true repentance) of their fair estates and more precious bodies and
souls.

Here, The method of this work.
then, I desire, in the first place briefly, to acquaint the Reader with the
whole Method and Module of this mine intended Description following. 1. Pride
and Insolency.
Namely, first to speak of and relate, some special pieces and passages
(among very many other (of all sorts) to be found recorded in Popish and
Ecclesiastical Histories) of Babylons Beauty, in the intolerable Pride and
Insolency of the Popes of Rome. 2. Covetousness and Avarice.
Secondly, to show and set forth Romes insatiable and most greedy
Covetousness and Avarice, making sale of all, yea souls and bodies too, for
gold and gain. 3. Incontinencie and uncleannes.
Thirdly, to delineate and lay open Romes whorish Incontinencie and
uncleanness, whereby she is, indeed, most fitly called and counted the whore
of Rome. Fourthly, to blazon-out their abominable Blasphemies and devilish
Impieties, 4. Blasphemies and impieties.
whereby they are far more real Atheists than Christians, which name they
(just Judas like) use only as a cloak to cover and conceal their
abominations. Fifthly, 5. Tyranny and cruelty.
to limne-out (even to the life) the deadly and most desperate Tyranny and
cruelty of these accursed Popish and inhumane Canibals, enough to make any
Christian heart to quake and tremble at the very perusal thereof. 6. A fair
frame for this picture
Sixthly, and lastly, to fit and compose a fair frame to hang up this
Beautifull-Picture (into conspicuous and open view) of Romes so radiant luster
and glistring Beauty; in an exact Parallel or Antithesis of the ancient
doctrine of Christ and the diametrally opposite new doctrine of Antichrist, In
an exact parallel or Antithesis of the ancient doctrine of Christ; and the
opposite new doctrine of Antichrist. And a Hortatory Epilogue.
in diverse most material fundamentals; And so having thus completed this our
picture; to shut up and conclude all, with a succinct hortatory Epilogue to
Papists and formal faultring and paultring Protestants (whose Religion is yet
to choose) by a just and serious reflection and rumination on all the weighty
premises, to hate and abhominate so impious and odious, so detestable,
dangerous, yea damnable a religion, and such intolerably juggling and
dissembling White-devils and Romish hypocrites, the fathers and fautours of
such exorbitant abominations. And now to come to the intended matter.

The first Romish figure and feature of the Pope of Rome, whereby Babylons
Beauty will be most lively and lustrously set forth, 1. Pride and Insolency.
shall be in the excessive and transcendently unsufferable Pride of this
Romish-whore, which may first most manifestly appear in Pope Hildebrand that
most abominable firebrand of hell, testified by Cardinal Bennon, who lived
about the year, 1080. Which said Hildebrand (upon discontent and distaste at
some petty disgust offered to him (at least as this proud Pope conceived) by
Henry the fourth, The Pope proudly casts the Sacrament into the fire.
then Emperor of Rome) demanding an answer from the Sacrament (for you must
note, by the way, he was also a notorious Nigromancer) against the said
Emperor, and it not answering, he most proudly and blasphemously, cast the
Sacrament into the fire and there burnt it; If Popes be so proud and audacious
to use their god, their Creator thus, what wonder is it, if they use the
creature so coursly and cruelly. The Pope deposed the Emperor Henry the
fourth.
Yet here he stayed not, but shortly after, excommunicated the said Emperor,
deprived and deposed him from his Empire, and by his own insolent and usurped
power, nominated Rodulph Duke of Suevia, Emperor in his stead; and sent this
verse to his new made Emperor.

PETRA DEDIT PETRO, PETRUS DIADEMA RODULPHO,
Christ gave to Peter Crowns, Peter to us;
We, then th'Emperiall Crown give Rodulph, thus.
Henry the foresaid Emperor, hearing thereof and much disquieted thereat,
divested himself of his imperial ornaments, and with his wife and little
son, in the midst of Winter, came to Canusium, the Popes palace, clothed in
linen and bare footed, being there made a spectacle (as writes the said
Cardinal Bennon) to angels and men; and thus the good Emperor fasting from
morning to night, remained at the Popes gate, humbly craving the Popes mercy
and admittance into his presence, The Emperor enforced to wait at the proud
Popes gate 3 days together.
but was forced thus to stand and wait full three days together, being only
still answered; The Bishop was busy; and could not yet be spoken with. But, at
last, at the request and mediation of the Countes Mathilda (whom the Pope
greatly loved) and some others, the Pope commanded (mark this pride) he should
enter. Being entered he again most humbly craved the Popes pardon and gave the
Pope his Crown; but the Pope would not, for all this, either pardon or absolve
him from his Excommunication, till he had promised to purge himself in the
Council, with other unlawful and most unseemly conditions, all which, though
the Emperor promised to perform, yet he would not restore him to his Empire.
Whereupon, Henry, this Emperor, afterward in battle vanquished the said
Rodulph, whom the Pope had made Emperor, as before said. Yet, this Rodulph
being dead, the Pope made Emperor one Herman, Count of Lucenburg, whom also a
woman, after it, slew with a Stone; and yet for all this, The Popes extreme
pride and malice toward the Emperor.
this most malicious and proud Pope did not cease to vex and reject the good
Emperor Henry, but nominated a third Emperor against him, who also being
newly made Emperor was miserably slain by the Imperialists. And was not here
a Luciferian Pope indeed, as full of Pride, as a Toad is of poison?

Boniface also the 8th, was such a proud and arrogant Beast, that his very
Cardinals could not endure him, for his extreme pride and ambition; This is he
of whom 'twas written, The rare praise of Boniface the 8th.
that he entered like a Fox, lived like a Lion and died like a Dog. Besides,
about the year, 1159. Frederick then Emperor, going to Rome, Pope Adrian the
fourth, and his Clergy, met the Emperor at Sutrio, where the Emperor
alighting from his horse, led the Popes horse by the bridle, and held his left
stirop for the Pope to alight; The Pope proudly jeeres the Emperor for not
holding his stirop right.
whereupon the Pope derided the Emperor, because he held not the right stirop,
with which derision the Emperor being displeased, only with a smile answered,
That he never had been a horse-boy. But, surely, had a daring wise man seen
this, he might have told his Majesty, herein he showed himself little better
then an horse-boy, for (as the Relation goes on) the day following, the Pope
came to the Emperors Camp, and there the Emperor mindful of the Popes
former reproof, better performed his office now, This proud Pope choked with
a fly.
and held the Popes right stirop for him. This proud Pope Adrian afterward was
choked with a poor little fly, which he suddenly swallowed and died thereof.
A remarkable testimony of Gods wrath for so high swollen pride, in making such
a poor despicable creature his confusion. About the year also, 1180, Alexander
the third, Pope of Rome, being mightily puft-up with the mountanous tympanie of
pride and arrogancy, The most excessive pride of Pope Alexander the third.
by reason of a great victory he had obtained, compelled Frederick then
Emperor of Rome to come (on a day appointed by the said Pope) to S. Marks in
Venice, and there before all the people, he commanded the Emperor to prostrate
himself flat on the ground before the Pope, and so to crave his mercy and
pardon, which the Emperor accordingly did; whereupon the Pope like self-flated
Nebuchadnezzar, The Pope treads, yea stamps, on the Emperors neck. Psalm. 91.
13.
or indeed, most like Lucifer himself, trod with his foot on the Emperors
neck, and with his proud heart and mouth, most blasphemously abused that
Scripture, Thou shall go upon the Aspe and Basiliske, and upon the Lion and
the Dragon shall thou tread. O intolerable impudence and monstrous pride and
blasphemy! The beslaved Emperor, herewith ashamed made answer (with his neck
still on the ground) Not to thee but to Peter. Whereat, the Pope stamping
again contemptuously upon the Emperors neck, said, Both to me and to Peter.
Herewith the poor Emperor was forced to be content and silent, and so was
absolved from his Excommunication by the Pope. Yea, and this very same Pope (as
Robert Mortensis, Two Kings lead the Popes horse by the bridle on foot, and the
Pope on horseback
an Historian testifies) made Lewis King of France, and Henry King of England
go on foot, as his Lackeyes, and hold the bridle of his horse, whereon the
Pope rod, the one on the right, and the other on the left hand, and thus in
great pomp and Satanicall pride, they led him through the City of Boyancie,
which borders on the river Lucra. And of Pope Sistus the fourth, it is
recorded, The Popes most costly Utensils.
that he made no reckoning to go up and down in his house, clothed with the
richest cloth of gold, the covering of his beds, being also of cloth of gold,
the basins also wherein he did his necessaries were of pure silver, and that he
caused the shoes of his friend Tereza to be covered with very rich and
precious stones. 2. Romes covetousness and avarice.
And thus, I think, I have briefly and bravely painted out the diabolical
Pride and insolency being the first part of Babylons Beauty, the rare
effigies of this dissembled Apostolical humble Servant of Servants, but
indeed, most arrogant and supercilious Lord of Lords, and King of kings. And
now the next conspicuous color which so illustrates the Beauty of Babylon
shall be her accursed Covetousness, her infatiated griping and greedy
avarice, hungring and thirsting, like a bottomless whirlpoole, after gold and
gain, ex re qualibet, by hook or by crook, by Simony or Sodomie, as these
following examples will make most clear, and evident to any unblinded eye in
the world. A Pope sold his popedom.


Benet the 9th, Pope of Rome sold away his Popedom to Gregory the 6th, for a
1500 lb. in gold. And Frederick the 2d Emperor of Rome, Indulgences dearly
bought.
paid for but one absolution or pardon to Pope Gregory the 9th, an 125000
ounces of gold, as it is recorded in the Romish Pontifical; and those other
Writers, Naucleer, Pineda, and others who speak with the least thereof,
confess an 120. thousand ounces to have been paid to the Pope as aforesaid.
Yea the King of Spain (as Josephus Angles testifies) was forced to pay an
100000 Ducats for one indulgence or pardon to the Pope. And, for money the
Popes of Rome allow public Stews, both in Italy, Spain and Rome it self,
even under the Popes nose, insomuch that as the Writers of Romes rare acts,
Rich revenews for whorish Stews.
do testify, the yearly rent and revenew which now of later times came to the
Pope for the allowance of those public Stews, came to full 40000 Ducats,
which was constantly paid in by the Curtizans or Whores. And in particular Pope
Paul, the third, enjoyed the rent of above 40000 Whores which were in Rome, the
rent being a julio or Spanish-royall, every week, which came to a mighty
mass of money in the year. And it is recorded of Pope Boniface the ninth, The
Popes devotion at their holy Mass.
that in the time of his hearing mass (such was their papal devotion, or
rather devotation) he used to sell Benefices for large sums of money. And in
special to come nearer home, our Kingdom of England has been so miserably
exhausted by the yearly taxations imposed on it and extracted from it, by those
skillful, but most hateful gold- Alchymists of Rome, that indeed Rome proved a
most devouring bottomless gulf to our State, supping-up and swallowing down
into her insatiable paunch the cream and fat of the whole kingdom, England
called and justly counted the Popes Ass.
so as the Popes prey and spoils in this kingdom, were by credible Writers
accounted equal, very near, to the Kings of Englands own yearly revenewes.
Insomuch that England was commonly styled the " Popes Ass; And the writers of
those times compared this our kingdom to a fruitful Vineyard spoiled by every
one that passed by, and rooted up by the wild Boar of the wood, the Pope of
Rome. By reason of which Romes horrible rapine and unlimitable covetousness,
Mantuan, an ancient Writer of Romes rarities, has given Rome, and that, most
rightly, this title and inscription. Venalia, Romae,
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae;
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, Deusque.
That is, At Rome, We, Priesthood, Churches, sell for pelf;
Prayers, Altars, Crowns, Mass, Fires, Heaven, God himself.


And thus, as you have had a summary sight of Babylons Beauty in this pale and
whitely color of Covetousness, 3. Roms whorish Incontinencie.
and most excessive griping Avarice; So I shall now desire the Reader to cast
his modest eyes, (if he can endure it) a little while, on Romes ramish and
right whorish Incontinencie and most unchaste painted Braverie, or rather
Bawderie. And here in the first place, I shall give you one undeniable cause of
incontinencie in the Priests of Rome, from the top to the toe, An undeniable
cause of Romes Incontinency.
from the Pope their holy Father himself, to the most base and beggarly
inferior Friars and hedge-priests of Rome (besides the public toleration of
Stews, as aforesaid, a most stinking stream from a most filthy fountain)
namely the Popes most horribly pernicious Decree to make it unlawful for any
of their Priests or Ecclesiastics to marry; by which means in the days of
Pope Gregory (who first forbad Priests marriage) this said Pope, 6000 sculs of
little infants found in one of the Popes fish ponds at one time.
afterward, causing a fish pond of his to be fished and sewed, in the cleansing
of the pond they found to the number of 6000. sculs of little Infants (in that
one pond) which had been begot in that unchaste condition of Priests about him,
and had been murdered and cast into this the Popes pond.

Pope Joan, Pope Joan, a right Whore of Rome, indeed, as Platina a famous
Romish Writer, Pero Mexia, and others do testify
alias Pope John, the eighth, an English-Woman, a right Whore of Rome, indeed,
without figure or Allegory; In the time of her Papacy, even whiles she was
Popesse, committed real and carnal Whoredom with a slave which she kept and
put much trust in, for such filthy and loathsome secrets; with whom she used
much (yea it seems too much) familiarity in this kind, and by whom she prooved
with child; yet so secretly was it carried, that none but they two knew it,
till it pleased God, (the great Explorator and discoverer of all secrets) to
bring it to open knowledge and shame in the very streets, Pope Joan delivered of
a child in the open streets, as she went in pompous procession
as she past along, in accustomed Papal pomp, to visit (forsooth) St John de
Lateran, being come to a certain place in Rome, between the Church of St
Clement and the Theater, with sudden and extreme pain, she (there) brought
forth a creature to the wonderful amazement of all that were present, and
therewithal she immediately died. O was not here a brave breach of their loud
and lying brag of an uninterrupted succession of Popes and Bishops of Rome?
Pope Benedict the 8th, a most notorious fornicatour was strangled to death by
the devil.
And yet so impudent are they to cry out unto us to this day of their lineall
succession, as a maine mark of their Apostolical (but indeed Apostaticall)
Church. Pope Benedict the eighth also, being he that was forementioned that
sold away his Popedom to Gregory the sixth, for a 1500. lb. was a most
notorious fornicatour and adulterer, and such an horrid Nigromancer and
sorcerer, that at last he was most hideously strangled to death, Pope John the
13th, a most notorious fornicator and adulterer, was stabd to death in the very
act
by the devil himself, as their own Popish Historians testify. Pope John
the thirteenth, also, was a most filthy and lustful man, and condemned of
many gross enormities, especially for his Incontinencie, being accused before
the Emperor Otho the fourth, in a Synod at Rome, that he had committed incest
with two of his own Sisters, that he had destored maidens, turned his sacred
palace (forsooth) into a stinking Stews, that he had lain with one Stephana,
his fathers Concubine, and with the widow Reynera, and with another widow
called Anna, and with his niece, and (at last) he was stabbed to death by the
husband of one that found him in the act of adultery with his wife.

Pope Hildebrand, Pope Hildebrand a notorius adulterer; yet forbad priests to
marry.
also (that brand of hell of whom we made mention before for his monstrous
pride and insolency) was also a most notorious and filthy adulterer, yet most
stiffely and desperately forbad Priests marriage; O most abominable and
monstrous hypocrite: This devilish Beast was also a most wicked Nigromancer
and Inchanter.

Honorius the 2d Pope of Rome, sent into England, one John of Crema, Cardinal
of S. Grison, his Legate; which Cardinal, in a Council by him held in London,
Pope Hildebrand and the Cardinal of Grison, two most notorious hypocrites.
condemned all married Priests; and the very night following, he himself was
taken (to give you the very expression of my Historian) with the theft in his
hand, was taken in bed with a wicked woman in the very act of adultery; And was
not here another egregious Romish hypocrite? And Pope Innocent (rather Nocent)
the eighth, had eight sons and eight daughters, An unmarried Pope had 16 Sons
and Daughters.
yet never was married. And might not they all (most properly) indeed say unto
him, O Papa, O Father, but most improperly and injuriously, most holy Father.
And (which was most extreme impudence in the Popes of Rome) they most of them
having many bastards, both before and after they came to be Popes, were so
far from being ashamed thereof, that they let the world see how fatherlike
care they had of them, that they made some of them Kings, Dukes, Popes,
Cardinals, Archbishops, Queens and Countesses, and lifted them up to such
like princely preferments. And finally, so horribly wicked was John Archbishop
of Benevent, and deane of the Apostolick-chamber (for sooth) and Nuncio to Pope
Julius the 3d, that he compiled a book in commendation and praise of the
abominable sin, not fit to be once named, which said book was printed at
Venice. And do not all these most odiously and infamously show what a pure and
chaste Spouse of Christ, this Vicar (forsooth) of Christ and head of his
Church, O what a chaste Spouse of Christ is the Pope of Rome.
this beastly Whore of Babylon is? who thus frequently and filthily prostitutes
soul and body both in her self and proselites, to such more than belluine
abominations? And is not here a deep dyed color even in grain of this most
audacious brazen faced Strumpets Babylonish Beauty. Ezekiel 8. 8, 9, 10, etc.
And yet though (as the Lord bad the Prophet Ezekiel) we have thus far dug
into the wall and seen (within) thus many of Romes secret abominations. Yet, I
say, I must desire the good Readers Christian patience, and I shall (as the
Lord again and again bad the said holy Prophet) go yet farther into the Temple
(at Rome) and show you yet greater abominations (if it may be) than all these
before specified, in now delivering and observing in the next place the most
accursed and Atheistical Blasphemies and other impieties of this most vicious
Vicar (forsooth) of Christ of this spurious Successor of pious Peter, 4. Romes
Blasphemy and Impiety. The Popes blasphemy, in playing at dice
and wherein we shall show you how patly he follows the pattern and imitation
of Christ and his Apostles, in their pure Apostolical virtues and graces. And
first I shall instance in that Pope John the 13th, fore mentioned and branded
as then with most black marks of infamy for his abominable lust and
incontinencie; so now also again with the hellish coal of diabolical
blasphemy. For this Pope in playing at dice for no small sums of money (ye
may believe) invocated the devil to get the games; Healths drunk to the devil
by the Pope.
And in his cups would drink healths to the devil; as Luithprandus, an
ancient Historian testifies.

Pope Sylvester the 2d, The Pope gives his body and soul to the devil for
worldly dignities.
also, from his youth gave himself extremely to Enchantments and Witchcraft,
and (as Platina writes of him) he contracted and covenanted with the devil in
his youth, to give him both his body and soul, conditionally that he might, by
his means, attain to great worldly pomp and dignities. Which the devil
accordingly performed for him (being as the Scripture calls him, the Prince of
this world, The Popes private copper head.
yet, but by Gods permission, and that, only in the sons of disobedience) who
afterward ascending up to the Popes Chair, and being, by the devils assistance
made Pope of Rome, he had a Copper-head, which he kept secret, which always
gave him an answer of what, from time to time, he demanded of the devil. At
last, he was desirous to know of the devil, how long he should be Pope; Who
(as his custom always was, even in the oracles at Delphos, and else where)
doubtfully answering, told him he should not die, until he had said Mass in
Jerusalem. Hereat Pope Sylvester much rejoiced, resolving and purposing with
himself, never to go to the City of Jerusalem. But it was a custom in Rome,
that on a certain fixed day in Lent, the Popes of Rome must say Mass in the
Church of the holy-Crosse, called also Jerusalem; Where and when, Sylvester,
being forgetful of the devils deceit, celebrated Mass there and was
instantly taken with a great burning fever. The devil cheates the Pope.
The Pope, then (Says Petrus Premostratensis and Bennon, two ancient writers)
Knowing by the roaring of the devils that his end was near, and being in
extreme sorrows, The Popes fearful death.
besought those about him, to cut off his hands and tongue (giving them the
reasons of his desire therein) and so shortly after died. See here then, O
blind Roman Catholics (as ye like to be called and counted) and tell me, can
your holy father the Pope of Rome, err or not? Where now was his pretended
spirit of infallibility, so inseperably inherent (as ye most lyingly prate) to
the Papal Chair? And it is frequently reported and testified by their
Historians, that all the Popes, from this Pope Sylvester the 2d, to Gregory
the 7th (a notorious villain for his life, and a great Inchanter) which were
18 of them successively immediately one after another) were notorious
Inchanters and Nigromancers, a sweet brood hatched up in so sacred and scelerous
a nest, as the Popes-Chaire? But, to goe-on.

Victor the third (made Pope of Rome, by Maud an infamously famous Whore in the
City of Rome, and an adultresse to Gregory the 7th) was poisoned by his
Subdeacon, The Pope poisoned by poison cast into the Sacramental Wine. An
Emperor also so poisoned.
who cast poison into the Challice, in saying Mass, which this said Pope
drinking off, immediately died thereof. And, one Bernardus de monte Policiano,
an accursed dominican-Fryer, put also poison into the Sacramental wine, and
gave it to the Emperor Henry the 4th, of Lucenburg, which the said Emperor
drank and instantly died thereof.

John, also, the 25th, was (as Platina testifies) such a notorious villain
(these I assure thee, One Pope poisons another to be made Pope.
Reader, are the very terms and titles the Romish Historians give their Popes)
that he not only poisoned Pope Alexander the 5th his Predecessor to be Pope
himself, but was accused and condemned of more then 40 heinous offenses, viz.
that he was a murderer, an heretic, a Symonist, a notorious liar, an
hypocrite, a Witch, a gamester, an adulterer, a sodomite, etc. And was not this
a more than seven-headed monstrous Beast of Rome indeed?

Pope Sistus the fourth, allowed a book to be published, which justified that
Alanus de Rupe, Notorious blasphemy, touching the virgin Marie.
a dominick-Fryer (a great friend to the Popish Rosarie) was most familiar with
the Virgin Marie, and that she on a time, entered into his cell (the doors
thereof being fast shut) and took some of the hair from her head, and thereof
made a little ring with which she was married to this Friar Alanus; Friar
Alanus married to the virgin Marie. A blasphemous mocking of our Saviors
sufferings.
that she kissed him, and caused him to handle her naked duggs, and was every
way as familiar with him, as a wife with a husband. O abominable and beastly
blasphemy. And Pope Paul the 3d, granted indulgence or pardon of all sins for
56000 years to all that should pray that foresaid Rosarie; and was not this a
notorious mockery to Christ's meritorious death and sufferings. But it may here
be justly objected; But what if the said party die the next week after,
Object.
what good will his 56000 years pardon do him? Answ.
To which they will easily answer (as I my self have read it to be their
opinion) yes, say they, very much good, for he may bequeath those remainder of
years, before he dies, to whomsoever he pleases. And is not here most
abominable abusing of poor silly idiots that believe them? But to go on.

Pope Alexander the 6th, Alexander the 6th sels himself to the devil to be
made Pope.
made a Covenant with the Devil, and gave and delivered himself wholly to
him, on this only condition, that by his means he might attain to be Pope,
which the Devil having accordingly effected; So holily and obediently to Pluto
his Patron, this atheistical Pope ordered his life, that he never attempted to
do any thing of moment, but first he consulted thereof with the Devil.

Pope Leo also the 10th, Most hideous and fearful blasphemy.
was a most damnable and hellish Atheist; for, he held opinion that there was
neither a heaven nor hell; And of him it is recorded, that Cardinal Bembus
alleging to him, upon occasion, a passage out of the Gospel; He answered,
What infinite profit this Fable of Christ has brought to us and our company,
all the world knows full well. At last he died with extreme laughing for joy
to hear that the Imperialists were vanquished and driven out of Italy by the
French, which was done by his assistance and instigation.

Pope Paul the third, also aforementioned, was a most accursed Atheist, Pope
Paul the (...) a most horribly impious Pope.
and the writers of his time say of him, that if they should endeavor to
recount all his enormities and horrible vices, his murders, robberies,
witcherics, treasons, tyrannies, incests and wicked whoredoms, they knew not
when to make an end thereof; he had many bastards (as so the most of the Popes
had, as was fore-specified) and mightily preferred them; he poisoned his own
Mother and two of his Sisters, This Pope poisoned his own Mother and 2 of his
Sisters having been naught with one of them.
with one of whom he was filthy and naught, and this was that Pope, that
enjoyed the rent of 40000 Whores or Curtizans which were allowed in Rome, as
has been already declared. And in this Popes time, began that abominable and
most rank rabble of the Jesuiticall incendiaries, to be known and advanced
into a most scelerous Societi c Ano. 1545.

Finally, Pope Julius the third, extraordinarily affecting Peacocks, and
Swines-flesh (which is bad for the gout, wherewith he was troubled, and his
Physicians therefore ordering that none thereof should be set on his table at
meals) This said Pope missing his porke, demanded of his officers about him,
The Pope blasphemes for want of his porke.
what was become of his porke, and his Steward answering that the Physicians
had commanded not to set it on the Table; he fell a cursing and blaspheming
with such execrable blasphemies as are not fit to be uttered. Another time also
(as touching his peacocks) a roasted peacock having been brought to his table at
dinner, but (by reason of the other various superfluity of dainties) not then
touched, the Pope bad it should be reserved for him till Supper; but at supper,
he not seeing the cold peacocke (though this unholy Heliogabulus had then also
hot peacocks, The Pope blasphemes for want of a cold peacock at supper.
he was terribly enraged and burst out into blaspheming for this, as he used to
do, and a Cardinal then supping with him, said, Let not your holiness
(forsooth) be so angry for so small a thing. To whom this Satanicall Julius
answered most blasphemously, If God was so angry with Adam for an Apple, that
he cast our first Parents out of Paradise for it; why shall it not be lawful
for me who am his Vicar (and a most vicious one too) to be angry for my
peacocke, which is a thing of more worth than an apple If this be not
blasphemy, in a most high measure judge, even, ye Romish Catholics, your
selves.

And if these and the rest of Romes abominations do not declare an extreme
rotten ripeness of impieties at Rome, This Pope Julius was also an abominable
Sodomite.
let all (though but mere rational) Christians consider and judge; This
Iebusite Julius aforesaid, was also (as Histories testify) a most abominable
Sodomite. And thus I think, I have sufficiently set out the Beauty of this
Babylonish Baud, and as impudent, as impious Strumpet of Rome. Now therefore I
shall proceed to a fifth fair and most facinorous color and more than bestiall
Braverie or rather Knaverie of this odious and audacious Whore of Rome; 5.
Romes Tyranny and cruelty*
which is and may be most apparently conspicuous to the whole world in her,
even, unexpressible Treacheries, Tyrannies and barbarous Cruelties toward all,
of what Sex or Sect, of what dignity or degree and condition so ever; if they
opposed, complained, or but once muttered against the thus holy Apostolical
Sea of Rome.

And first I shall begin with the treacherous wrath and impious cruelty of that
horrid and hideously wicked Pope Hildebrand, Pope Hildebrands treachery against
the Emperor.
that furious and outrageous firebrand of hell, as he is most justly entitled;
testified by the forementioned Cardinal Bennon. Which said Pope, upon some
petty offense committed by Henry the 4th, then Emperor of Rome, against this
Pope, He understanding that the said Emperor used to pray in St Mary's Church,
in Mount Aventine in Rome, Caused the said place to be marked, and then
procured a certain skillful Mason or Stone-Cutter to Convey and place, A base
and barbarous villainy, intended by the Pope.
secretly, certain great Stones over the beams of the temple, right over the
Emperors praying-place, that so they might fall from on high upon the head of
the Emperor so praying, and thus bruise him to pieces; which villainy, as the
said Mason was busy to order and effect; and endeavoring to place a stone of
very great poyse and weight over the said beam, Perillus first boiled in his
own Bull.
the Stone, by reason of its unweildy-waight, fell backward, at the same time,
upon the Mason himself, and both the Stone and Mason (by Gods Just judgment)
fell from the top, to the store of the Church, and crushed the Mason quite in
pieces; and thus Perrillus was first boiled in his own Bull, made by him at
the tyrant Phalaris Command; had the Pope himself been in the wretched Masons
stead; it had been right indeed, but thus the Emperor escaped the Popes malice
and mischief, at that time.

And now in the next place I shall show you the most accursed Extreme rags and
revenge of one Pope against another.
Cruelties and barbarous revenge-fullnesse of one Pope against another. So
desperately and devillishly were they addicted to wrath and revenge, that
Sergius, the third, being Pope was so furiously and even madly vindicative on
Pope Formosus his predecessor, for some affronts offered to the said Sergius
in Formosus life time, that Sergius when he was Pope, Pope Sergius dug up
the dead body of Pope Formosus, buried 8 years to be revenged on him.
caused Formosus his dead carcass to be dig'd out of his grave, having been
buried about 8 years, and having him forth, made expressions that he would kill
him, were he alive; but yet being thus dead, he cut off the other three fingers
on his right hand (Pope Stephen the sixth, having most basely also, before, cut
off the other two fingers on his said right hand, wherewith Priests use to
consecrate in their Popish Mass, and cast them into the river Tyber) and so
this Sergius, I say, cut off the other three fingers left on the hand of that
dead Pope, and in detestable hatred, cast them also into the said river Tiber.
Pope Bonisace his monstrous cruelty to Pope John.


Pope Boniface the seventh also was such a cruel wretch, that, by money
getting the Popedom from Pope John the 15th, Boniface laid hold on his said
Predecessor, John, cast him into prison, pulled out both his eyes, and then and
there famished and starved him to death. And about the year of our Lord, 1045.
no less than six Popes successively one after another (within the space of 13
years) poisoned each other, ^ Popes poisoned one another to be Pope
by themselves, or their Agents and instruments, to get the Popedom one from
another, viz. Clement 2. Damasus 2. Leo 9. Victor 2. Stephen 9. and Nicolas 2.
And since I now speak of poison, I assure the Reader, that searching and
examining the lives and deaths of all the Popes of Rome, 25 or 27 of the Popes
of Rome died by poison
I have found at least 26. or 27. of them that died by poison and so others
thereby succeeding them. And as they dealt with blessed Bucer, that godly and
learned man, in untombing him being dead and buried, and burning his dead
body, as an heretic: So dealt these Popes no less cruelly with one another;
for, Pope Paschall the second, One Pope digs up another Popes dead body and
burns it.
out of wrath and most barbarous rage to Pope Clement the 3d, caused the said
Pope Clement the 3d, his predecessors dead body to be dug up and burned,
at his command. Yea and this foresaid malicious Paschall 2. was so devillishly
cruel, that he incited the Emperor Henry the fifth against his own father,
Henry the 4th, at that time Emperor (an only son against his father) who,
with cruel war persecuted his said father, by deceit, took him prisoner, A
most barbarous act of a Pope, by inciting an only son against his father, both
of them Emperors
and suffered him to die, a miserable death in prison; and yet, though the
fathers death was thus procured (and all by the said Pope Paschals means and
procurements) the Pope, I say, not satisfied with this inhumane rage and
cruelty, after the said Emperor, Henry the 4th was so dead and buried, the
Pope caused the Emperors dead corpse to be taken out of his grave, cast it out
of the Church, and denying it Christian burial, caused it to remain above
ground, unburied for the space of five years after.

I might here also tell you of the abominable cruelty of Pope Urban (O most
notorious hypocrites in giving themselves such smooth and sugared names, 5
Cardinals put into 5 several Sacks, and cast a live into the Sea and so
drowned all at one time, by the Pope.
and yet be of so base and barbarous Natures) who might fitlier have been
called Pope Turban; who was so full of cruelty, rage and revenge, that being
Pope, he caused 5 of his Cardinals (who had stiffly opposed him from being made
Pope) to be shut up a live into five several sacks and so cast into the Sea,
where they were all five drowned. Yea and I might here also tell you of the
bloody disposition of Pope Julius, the 2d, whom Paul's sword pleased better then
Peter's Keys, and so being a great warrior, was within the space of 6 or 7
years, Paul's Sword better then Peter's Keys to the Pope. 200000 slain within a
small space by the Popes means.
the cause of the death of at least 200000 Christians slain by the sword
through his intolerable tyranny and cruelty: But what talk I of 200000 slain
within the space of 6 or 7 years, when we now in our own most sad and
sorrowful days can speak of far more beastlike cruelty in the Romish Sons of
these rammish Harlots even almost 200000 poor Protestants massacred and
murdered by them in less then a years, witness (yet) poor bleeding, if not
dying Ireland. I might go on, ad infinitum, in these like examples, of the
devilish cruelty of these holy fathers themselves: But now let us (as briefly
as may be) descend to more modern times, and see whither that of the prophet be
not, in this case, too true, Like Priests, Hosea. 4. 9.
like People, in the devilish disciples of such damned Doctors, whither the
Sons of these unholy fathers, do not most exquisitely even Passibus aequis
patrizare? imitate their flagicious fathers in any their most base and
barbarous crueltyes, and more than Turkish tyranny, if not outstrip and
transcend them? The Spanish Inquisition.
To pass by the most unexpressible miseries and terrible tortures of the
Spanish Inquisition, that most Sanguineous and gorey slaughterhouse of Gods
precious Saints of all sorts, ages and sexes, and the infinite numbers
murdered therein by most exquisite torments, whereof Vergerius Confessed that
in the space of 30 years at least an 150000 perished therein by most intolerable
tortures, The Massacre at Paris, in France*
under the hands of those horrid and hideously unholy Inquisitors. To pass by
also that most perfidious and bloody Massacre at Paris plotted and contrived by
the King and Queen of France together with the acccursed Duke of Guise and
their treacherous crew of Romish Bloodhounds, wherein there perished at least
50000 innocent peaceful Protestants, and that which was most diabolical
indeed, therein, all this under a pretext and color of peace and piety and
semingly confirmed with most deep protestations and vows of King and Queen (as
it is now a days) but all most perjuriously and perfidiously broken in streams
of blood. Let us look a little also into Flanders upon one of the most
inhumane Sons of those unnatural and unreasonable Popes of Rome, who may,
indeed, be, Instar omnium, I mean that Duke, Duke D' Alva, in Flanders, his
most (...) n^ble cruelty.
or rather Devil, D' Alva, who himself publicly professed that he had
destroyed and killed, by torments, 180 80* of the reformed Protestants in
Flanders, in the space of 6 years, merely for the cause of Religion: Yea, who
caused women with child to have their bellies ripped open and their innocent
infants to be slain; the men to be flead, and their skins to head drums; Some
to be burned with gentle fires, which would hardly burn, thereby to lengthen out
and strengthen their pains and miseries; Unparalleled cruelties.
made others to be torn in pieces with glowing fiery-tongs; and the very
carcases of dead Protestants (lust as you heard of their Satanicall Sires the
forementioned Popes) to be dug out of their graves and hanged on gallows,
and was not here a devil of hell indeed only covered with flesh in a man's
shape? Vnpatern'd cruelties in West phalia, in Germany.
In Westphalia also in Germany, the Infants were by the Romish bloud-bounds
there, torn out of the wombs of great bellied women, cut in pieces and so
bound to the mouths of their Mothers; (o unpatern'd and unparalleled Monsters of
men, the like hellish hearts never heard of) men forced, there, by famine to
feed on the flesh of their own children; and tender infants of about 2 years
old (twice more barbarous than bloody Herod) were enclosed again in their
mothers bodies, and so strangled in their mothers blood; Blush s heaven at this
transcending Turkish tyranny.
yea and the men (which is as shameless as savage) were hanged up by their
privy-members; if ever Turks or Jews or any other most inhumane and godles
Canibals or Heathens whomsoever, could execute more savage and odious
barbarities to mortals, An 100000 Albigenses slain by Pope Innocent the 3d.
Almost 900000 Protestants were slain in Christendom, in 30 years.
let any, either Protestant or Papist be judge. Besides let us here call to
mind (which I had almost forgot and omitted) the 100000 Christian and godly
Albigenses who perished at the word and by the sword of Pope Innocent the 3d;
and, that from the beginning of the Jesuits Society, to 1580 (being the space
of 30 years) almost 900000 Protestants were put to death, in France, England,
Spain, Italy, Germany, and other countries and parts of Christendom; nay in
France alone an 100000 Protestants or Hugonets (as there they term them) were
shamefully murdered in a short season. Bartholomew de Case also, did witness
with his tongue and pen (who saw it with his eyes) that, within the space of 40
years, 15 millions of the poor West-indians destroyed and killed by the most
bloody Papisticall Spaniards in the space of 40 years.
the Spaniards (those bloody sons of their bloody and barbarous fathers the
Popes of Rome) had killed and destroyed by most hideous and horrible ways and
devices of tortures to destruction, not less than 15 millions of the poor
West-Indians, who^ they conquered, and then so cruelly destroyed, that the very
poor Heathens themselves, at last hearing of a heaven and a hell after this
life, and of the eternal happiness of the one and everlasting horror of the
other, and demanding, Whither the Spaniards went, when they were dead, and it
being answered, to Heaven; O, said they, then we will never go thither where
the Spaniards are to be. What excellent Pastors Popes and Papists are to feed
souls and bodies in such pastures.
Say now then, good Reader, who ever thou art, are not these Popes excellent
Pastors? And are not such Popish Swords and torments precious Pastures, to
feed and breed up poor conquered and captivated wretches bodies and souls, in
their most accursed pinfolds? And think not, I desire thee, that these
relations are untruths and fictious effects of my spleen and wrath to Rome and
Romanists; but, if thou please to enquire, thou shall find all I have writ
justified by authentic authors, both Popish themselves and others also; and
especially these latter and most lamentable barbarities testified for most true
by a witness without exception, Proofs of all these foresaid relations.
being a strange and strong friend and favourer of Papists and Popery, yea so
far their friend, as not to be afraid nor ashamed, in his pulpit, publikly to
preach and profess, that Papists in England and Ireland were the Kings best
friends and most loyal and loving Subjects, though he himself had formerly
both preached and printed these fearful relations of them, John Squire Priest.
I mean that abominable apostate John Squire, late priest of Shorditch, in
his Sermons on 2 Thessalonians. 2. preached in Paul's Church and extant in print; with
many others, I say, both modern and ancient Writers, whom, for brevitie sake,
I have all along, purposely, pretermitted; but to go-on. Besides those
ineffable cruelties forementioned, thus done to the bodies of poor
Christians; o the hellish impieties done to the poor souls of those that
survived, The misery of all such poor surviving souls so captivated by Romes
conquering sword.
and were enforced, by captivity and conquering thraldom, to live in the
spiritually burning brick-kils of such terrible soule-taske-masters, to live, I
say, under their spiritual whoredoms and Romish fornications to the most
fearful and final damnation of both their bodies and souls, at last, a misery
far beyond all forespoken! And were not these, then monstrous and mighty
Nimrods, indeed, Popish Nimrods and most furious soul-hunters. Genesis 10. 9.
hunters, I say, not of beasts, but of men's bodies and souls, and that, even
before the Lord too, most impiously and impudently careless and fearlesse of
Gods all-seeing eye, or revengfull hand against them? But to proceed, I might
here, in the last place call to the Readers remembrance (for the finishing of
this 5th piece of Babylons Beauty and bloody Braverie, the fiery flames,
mixed with much precious blood of Gods dear Saints and Martyrs in those Popish
Marian days in this Kingdom of England, wherein so many hundreds of holy and
heavenly servants and soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, The Marian flames of
Popish persecutions in this kingdom of England.
of both sexes, and all sorts and ages (by the accursed cruelty and tyranny of
Popish Prelates and other Antichristians, right bloody sons of the fearlet
Whore of Rome) gave their bodies most willingly and cheerfully, to be tortured
and burned to ashes, only for the name of the Lord Jesus and his most pure and
precious Truth and Gospel.

Yea I might here also call to just remembrance the furious rage and wrath of
the Spanish Antichristian sons of the Romish Strumpet, those White-boys of
their murderous Mother Babylon, The intended Invasion of England by the Spanish
Armado, an 1588.
in their formidable, and (but blessed be our good God) falsely called and
counted Invincible Armado or fleet of mighty ships by sea, in an. 1588. set out
with all the engines and accoutrements of malice and mischief to invade and
ruinate, to over-runne and overthrow this our kingdom of England, and our most
precious Lady and Sovereign Qn. Elizabeth, that most fair Phoenix, and famous
paragon of her time and crown of her Sex, a Princess of ever most blessed and
precious memory; And when they saw that this (by Gods mighty power and most
merciful providence) prevailed not; O the many plots and conspiracies, which
the pernicious Pope of Rome, Spain and their hellish Jebusites contrived and
attempted against the sole and sacred person of that precious Princess to The
many plots and conspiracies against the person of ever to be renowned Qu.
Elizabeth.
bring her and her Protestant people and kingdom to ruin and destruction. As
has been fully and exactly related in a book lately published, entitled,
Plots, Conspiracies and Attempts of Domestic and Foreign Enemies of the
Romish Religion, against England, Scotland and Ireland, since the Reformation
in Qu* Elizabeth's days; very worthy to be read for fuller satisfaction in this
kind.

I might here also promp my country-mens dull memories (and O shame, yea most
extrem shame for us that we should already want jogging at the elbow, that we
should so soon, so slightly, and so ungratefully forget such a matchles mercy)
concerning that mighty deliverance, the Popish pouder-Plot. (Upon occasion of
the licensing of my history whereof, that base, backsliding Apostate of our
late days, Dr Baker, one of the Arch-Prelate Lauds white-boys of those times
was not ashamed most impiously and audaciously to say, that we were not now
a-daies so angry with the Papists (these bloody hel-hounds) as they were 20 or
30 years before, so forward and hopeful, it seems, was the reconciliation of
England to Rome.) Even that hell batch'd bloody and most barbarous conjuration
and exorbitant treason, invented, contrived and attempted too, by those Romish
Wolves in sheeps-skins, by that Jesuit Priest Garnet, The Popish Pouder-Plot
by the Papists. 1605.
the Arch traitor and his twelve Apostles, or rather devils incarnate, I mean
that most horrid and hellish Popish Gunpowder Plot, to have blown up into the
air, and miserably torn in pieces, the bodies of our King, Queen, Prince, and
both the whole-Houses of Parliament, then full fraught with the entire cream
of the Kingdom, of Peers and Commons, all these at one most furious and
sulphurious blow, as one time, in the twinkling of an eye, besides the most
bloody miseries thereof (had it taken intended effect) which certainly are
unexpressible by any man's most dexterious pen and ingenie.

All these, yea, any one of these, should, me thinks, be enough, and far too
much to make that abominable Whore of Rome to blush and be ashamed, if it were
possible, and that she had not too evidently put on such a brazen browe and
brawny Whores forehead, that nothing can make her blush or be one jot ashamed.
And finally I might here call to mind (and yet me thinks, I should not need,
it is so fresh in our present memory, being so late and lamentable) as a last,
but not least piece of glistering varnish to set off and set home, to the
purpose, this Whore of Babylons Romish-rotten Beauty and bloody Braverie, The
late and still lasting miseries and desolations of our poor sister Germany,
by Popish cruelty.
in telling the Christian Reader of the late and long, and still lasting
matchless miseries and unpattern'd and unparalleled calamities of our poor
distressed and desolate sister Germany, now for the space of 23 or 24 years,
made (of the most flourishing fair and famous garden of Europe) a most
lamentable Chaos and Golgotha of blood and slaughtered carcasses, a rude,
ruinated and forlorn Wilderness, the particular and personal sorrows and
sufferings of which people, men, women and children of all conditions, ages and
both sexes to relate, would make both the Writers and Readers hair to stand an
end, and their hearts and hands to quake and tremble, Germanies tears.
to faint and fail them, exactly to express and set them forth: but it being
already done to our hands in a fearful manner in a book, entitled Germanies
Tears, I shall refer the farther sight and knowledge thereof, if any desire
it, to the said Book; And all this also being most perniciously perpetrated
and acted on the persons, estates and habitations of that pitifully
depopulated Country, by the most insatiable rage and merciless* matchless,
accursed cruelty of the bloud-sucking Wolf, Tiger, Monster (what can I fitly
call her) of Rome, and her inhumane, roaring, raging and all ruining sons and
nurssings.

And to conclude and shut up all, with that which is equal (if not
transcendent) to all or any of the general or particular barbarities and
matchless immunities of those wild Bears and Boares of Rome, Irelands
present most piteous condition by the whorish sons of Rome.
I mean, the mavelous miseries and deep-died distresses of our dearer,
because nearer Sister, bleeding, nay even dying Ireland, at this present and
hitherto for above a 12 months space (wherein also I may not unduly intermix the
present pitious, sad and bad plight and condition of our own English, being
both embarked, tossed and tumbled at this time in one and the same Ocean of
distress and bloody broils, though not yet (ever glorified be our God for it,
And Englands also, intermixed therein, as we find and feel by sad experience.
not in Irelands height and universalitie) tragically acted and perpetrated
also by her own most unnatural viperous natives, those beastly, basely and
matchlesly murderous Irish-rogues and Rebels of that forlorn kingdom, even
those right black and bloody sons of their monstrous-Mother the Whore of Rome;
whom, to make and set up, as their bloudie-god, they have so dealt with all
Gods English Protestant people (there) whom they could reach and catch into
their foul Harpeian fingers and vulturous claws and tallons, that, truly, I
dare not for fear and trembling undertake to set forth and decipher the
particulars, they are so sad and bad, so bitter and terrible, but must and will
(for brevity sake also) refer the Reader that desires to hear or know them,
to two other books extant also in print, the one entitled Irelands
Lamentation; the other Irelands Remonstrance. Irelands Lamentation, and the
Irish-Remonstrance.
Where he may sadly see how those too-apt Scholars of Rome, have even
transcended their teachers (which is most admirable, and one would have
thought, till now, impossible) in their exquisitest and deepest Lectures,
patterns and presidents of damnable and detestable cruelties, most hellish
villainies, and blasphemies, to the intolerable terror of those that do but
read them; Ah poor souls, what was it then, to those that suffered and
endured them.

And thus, I think, I have sufficiently set forth and blazoned the 5th part or
piece of Babylons Beauty, and painted out this sanguine color of cruelty,
tyranny and treachery of this Scarlet strumpet of Rome and of her most
scelerous sons and pernicious Popish proselites and Jesuitical monsters, the
horrid and hideous incendiaries and bloud-suckers of the whole Christian world.

Now, therefore, in the 6th and last place, I shall briefly endeavor to set
this picture of the Pope and his pestilent progeny into a fair frame, A frame
for the Popes picture.
and so, fit it to be hung up to the most conspicuous view and visible
aspection of all that will but bring their equal and impartial eyes and fight
along with them, that so this most famous or rather infamous Harlot of Rome may
be seen, the more clearly, to be the Antichrist indeed, even the grand
Adversary of the Lord Jesus Christ, not only by most abominable carriage and
conversation in life (as now you have seen set forth to the life) but also in
corrupt and counterfeit Doctrine too, most faithlesly and falsely perverting and
abusing the most sacred Scriptures, whereby Rome and all her Popish rabble of
Trentine Romanists most apparently precipitate and cast themselves headlong
both souls and bodies into everlasting perdition (without true and timely
repentance) as is most clear by the infallible testimony of the Spirit of God,
the most faithful author of Sacred Writ. And that the Reader may see this
horrible presumption and audacious and blasphemous arrogance of the Pope and
his damned Tridentine Doctors, I shall give thee a most exact Ocular-paralell
in certain brief Antitheses or opposite tenets and most evident differences
and contrarieties between Christ the pure fountain of Truth, yea Truth it
self and Antichrist, the muddy puddle of error and heresy, yea error it
self in the abstract, which are as follow.

Jer. Quod antiquissimum; id, vera, verissimum.
6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand in ways and behold and ask for the old way,
which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls:
But, they ( the Romanists) said, we will not walk therein.

Christ.
1. The ancient Doctrine of God, teaches that the holy Scripture has
sufficient authority of it self; and contains all necessary doctrine to piety
and salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. 2. The ancient Doctrine of God teaches
that ignorance of Gods word is the mother of errors: and therefore bids all
Christians to read and search the Scriptures. Mat. 22. 19. Ioh. 5. 39. 3. The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that many deceivers and fals-prophets are gone
out into the world; that therefore the faithful are to prove the spirits
whither they be of God, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. and that the holy Scripture is the touch
to try the^, Act. 17. 11. So that all doctrine whatsoever contrary to it ought
to be rejected, Gal. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 3. 1 Pet. 4. 11. 4. The ancient Doctrine
of God teaches that we ought to worship and serve God alone, who is the
Creator and Governor of all the world; following herein the doctrine of Christ,
Mat. 4. ^0. 5. The ancient Doctrine of God teaches that the lawful worship of
God is founded on the holy Scriptures and that God will be served according to
his own will and word in spirit and truth, Ioh. 4. 24. and not after the
opinions and traditions of men, Ezekiel. 20. 18. Mat. 15. 9. 6. The ancient
Doctrine of God teaches that the worship of images is an abominable thing,
Deuteronomy. 27. 15. and expressly forbidden in the 2 Commandment, Exo. 20. 4. and
that the holy Spirit calls images, teachers of lies and vanities, Ier. 10 8. and
therefore not to be allowed in Churches, Gal. 4. 1. 7. The ancient Doctrine of
God teaches that Christians ought to imitate the faith, godliness and good
doctrine of Saints, as they imitated Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. But not to invocate
them or put any confidence in them, Isa. 48. 11. Revel. 19. 10. 8. The ancient
Doctrine of God teaches that Jesus Christ being true God and man is the only
and perfect Savior of the world, Isa. 63. 3. And the only Mediator 'twixt God
and man, Act. 4. 12. Mat. 11. 28. 9. The ancient Doctrine of God teaches that
Jesus Christ, by the perfect sacrifice of him, (...) once offered on the
cross, has reconciled all the faithful to God, and that there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 9. 12. and 26. and c. 10. 12, 18. 10. The ancient
Doctrine of God teaches that we are justified only by faith in Jesus Christ
without the works of the law, To. 3. 24. Gal. 2. 16. Romans 4. 23, 24. 11. The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that faith is not doubtful, but assured of
salvation which it has by Christ, and that true faith is not barren, but full
of good works, the fruits thereof, Heb. 11. 1. Gal. 5. 6. Phil 1 11. 12. The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that Jesus Christ is the head and Spouse of
the Church, which he governs and teaches by Word and Spirit, and that the
duty of the Church is to hear and obey the voice of her Spouse, Mat. 17. 5.
John 10 27. 13. The ancient Doctrine of God teaches that the use of strange
tongues is unprofitable in the Church of God to the ignorant auditory but all
things in the Church must be for edification, 1 Cor. 14. 3, 6 7, 8 14 The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that Jesus Christ in the institution of the
holy Supper brake the bread and gave it to his disciples, and afterward the
wine, saying, drink ye all of this, making no difference at all. 1 Cor. 11.
23. 15. The ancient Doctrine of God teaches that Matrimony is honorable among
all men, Heb. 13. 4. And that it is better to marry than to burn, 1 Cor. 7. 9.
And that to forbid marriage is a doctrine of devils. 1 Timothy 4. 3. 16. The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that that which enters into the mouth
defiles not the man, Mat. 15. 11. And that all meats are clean to the
faithful and sanctified to them by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 4. Tit. 1.
15. 17. The ancient Doctrine of God teaches that it is the duty of all men
that are godly, to speak the truth, keep their faith and promise to all; yea
though to their hinderance. Psalm. 15. 2. 4. Zach. 1. 16. Ephesians. 4. 25. 18. The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that every soul ought to be subject to the
higher Powers, which are the Magistrates, Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 2. 23. 19. The
ancient Doctrine of God teaches that Antichrist, as God, sits in the temple of
God, attributing to himself that which is proper only to God, 2 These. 2. 4. and
that the place of his sitting is the great City, which has 7 mountains, and which
reigned over the kings of the earth, as Rome does, Re. 17. 9 18 20. The ancient
Doctrine of God teaches that for all souls departing this life there remain
but 2 places, heaven and hell, Joh. 5. 14. Joh. 3. 36. Luke 16. 22, 23.
Antichrist.
The new Doctrine of Rome teaches that the word of God has no authority of it
self and that it is imperfect and unsufficient to piety and salvation without
the approbation of the Church and unwritten traditions. Bell. de verb. Dei (...)
scrip. l. 4. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that ignorance is the mother of
devotion, and that it is safest to keep Laymen from reading the Scriptures,
as being the causes of many errors and heresies. Bell. de verb. Dei. The new
doctrine of Rome teaches that whosoever contradict the Pope and his decrees
and humane traditions be false-teachers; and that the Pope has authority to
judge all controversies of faith and to give the true sense of the Scriptures;
and that from him there is no lawful appeal. Bell. de verb. Dei interp l. 3.
cap. 3. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that we ought not to serve God alone,
but also Saints and Angels, as patrons of kingdoms, cities, people, societies
and infirmities. Bell. de sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 12. The new doctrine of Rome
teaches that in Gods worship the traditions and ceremonies of the Church of
Rome ought to be observed and that her Canon laws and constitutions are equal
in value to the Gospel, and that it is most necessary to keep them. Did.
15. cap sicut. and Did. 19. cap in Can. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that
the worship of images is well-pleasing to God, and very necessary and
profitable to the Church and are Laymens books; and that therefore, he which
teaches the contrary is accursed and anathematized. Con. Trid. Sess. 9. The
new doctrine of Rome teaches that Christians ought to invocate the Saints
departed, to be aided by their intercession to God as being Gods familiars; and
that it is a false and wicked opinion to teach or believe the contrary and that
be which so teaches or believes is accursed. Con. Trid. Sess. 9. The new
doctrine of Rome teaches that Christ is not a perfect Savior, as dying only
for original sin, not actual sins; and that therefore masses, indulgences and
purgatories must cleanese the rest. Lib. 4. Sam. Did. 17, 18 and that Saints
and Angels do and must mediate for us, Lib. 4. Sent, Did. 45. The new doctrine
of Rome teaches that the Mass is also a sacrifice for the remission of
sins, both of the quick and the dead, Con. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 2. The new
doctrine of Rome teaches that not faith only, but works also do justify us.
Conc Trid. Sess 6. Can. 11. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that the
particular justification of men, and much more their salvation is very
uncertain, so that men must always doubt of their salvation, and that the
contrary is mere presumption. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Can. 13. Cens. Colon. fol.
96. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that the Pope is the head and spouse of
the Church and vicar of Christ upon earth; and having the keys of heaven and
hell can save and damn; and therefore all his decrees ought to be obeyed by all
men. In exorium. Tom. 22. Tit. 5. etc. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that
in the worship of God, we must use the Latin tongue. Bell. de verb. Dei. l. 2.
c. 15. 14. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper ought to be given and dispersed in bread and wine to the Priests only;
and to the Laity in the bread only. Council. Trid Sess 5. The new doctrine of
Rome teaches that matrimony is a carnal estate, and to be forbidden to the
Clergy; and that it is better for Prelates and Priests to live in fornication
than lawfully to marry, Bell. de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 34. The new doctrine of
Rome teaches that it is not lawful for Christians (under pain of mortal sin)
to eat all sorts of meats at all times, and on all days alike, Distin. 4 Ca.
statuimus, etc. The new doctrine of Rome teaches that faith ought not to be
kept with heretics, and that it is lawful to violate oaths and promises for
the Catholics Cause. As it was concluded in the Council at Constance. The new
doctrine of Rome teaches, that Ecclesiastical men are not subject to the
secular powers, but to the Pope only. Lib. Decret. Gregor. Tit. 33. The new
doctrine of Rome teaches that Antichrist is yet to come, of the race of the
Jews, of the Tribe of Dan. and that the place of his kingdom or seat shall be
at Jerusalem. Bell. de Roman. Pontif. lib. 3. c. 12. and 13. The new doctrine of
Rome teaches that there are many places for the souls departed, to wit,
heaven, hell, limbos patru^, limbos infantium, Purgatorte, and another place
more honorable, joining to Purgatory Bell de pu^ 2. c. 6, 7.


And finally to sum up all in one Apothegme. We are (says Bozius, a great
Popish Writer) obliged to obey the Pope, even as Christ; nay they have another
sentence, one degree beyond this. The Pope permits one Canon to be in his
Decretals, which says, That St Paul himself did speak against all truth and
reason. Can. hac. Rat. Causa 31. qu. 1. See here good Reader, did ever any dare
so directly and audaciously to oppose Christ and his Gospel of Truth? No
certainly, never any other in the world.

And what say thou now, good Reader, have I not represented to thine eyes
and thoughts a strange picture of a most strange strumpet, set out and adorned
with all the lustrous colors of her most base Babylonish Beauty? The Popes
picture set in a frame fit to be hung up to the view of the whole world.
And fitted it with a fair frame of so many of Romes damnable doctrines, fit
now to be seen and shown to the whole world, to Romes and all Romanists
eternal shame and indelible infamy? And may I not now (think thou) truly
say to all Papists, yea and to all formal Protest (...) large too, as once
Pilate said (though in another sense) Ecce homo, yea, Ecce homines, behold the
man and his impious Imps, whom thus ye strive and struggle to make your god;
Ecce Homo.
See, I say, what a goodly god, ye have gotten, what a King ye have made unto
you? What a brave Baal of your own inventing and devising. And since ye will
needs have another King of your own making, and have rejected King Jesus, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12, etc.
who is and ought to be your right and sole sovereign: I have now therefore
with the holy Prophet Samuel shown and described to you and to all men, what a
king ye have gotten, and what he will (as he hitherto has done) do unto you,
and how he will tyrannize over you. Which being seriously considered and set
home to the heart and soul of any intelligent and but meer-naturally seeing,
either Papist or formal Protestant (for, truly these also are Romes 100 dear
and near friends and favorers) that is well in his wits, and then, tell me,
Judges. 6. 3^. Will you plead for Baal,
(for I must expostulate with you, as Joash, Gideons father did with the
idolatrous men of his City) will ye, can ye, dare ye, now, plead for this so
abominable Baal of Rome? Can ye save him from Gods resolved wrath and revenge
on him? Will ye thus spend and waste your goods and lands, and destroy your
Country, King, and 3 famous and once flourishing kingdoms, yea your lives and
bodies and souls too, for the propping and supporting of such a rotten pained
(or rather putrified) Whore, on whom the Lord God is now (as he has foretold
long since) about to pour out the full viols of his fury, Revel. 16.1, ^.
yea the very lees and dreggs of his wrath and indignation. And why? Why the
Spirit of God there tells us, v. 6. Because she has shed the blood of the
Saints and Prophets of the Lord, therefore God will now give her blood to
drink, for she is worthy, even for this; and for all her false and filthy
fornications and abominations wherewith she has abused, besotted and
intoxicated the kings and kingdoms of the earth? Have ye not yet seen and
known enough, by all these admirable demonstrations and fearful descriptions
of this juggling Baal of Rome, both in the pristine and present pieces of her
Babylonish Beauty, that she is but a most impious and audacious destructive
Deluder and impostor, a most pestilent and poisonous lying lover, not to be
delighted in, but contrariwise to be most detestably disliked and loathed: But
if ye will blindly and blockishly persist (maugre all that can be said or
shown unto you) in this your gross folly, Romae amentes haud amantes.
do ye not manifest to the whole world that ye are Romae amentes haud amantes,
not only stark fools, but Romes mere madmen, who will bestow your love on
such a lovelesse and ^^^thsome stinking strumpet. Isa. 44. 16.
Yea in thus doing and doting, are ye not like those idolatrous sots mentioned
by the Prophet, who having cut down their Cedar trees and chopped and chipt
them, and with part thereof made them a wooden god, and with the other part
thereof made them a fire and warmed themselves thereat, The extreme folly and
gross idiotisme of idolaters described.
saying, Aha, we are warm and have seen the fire, made of a part of the, same
Cedars, whereof we have made our gods which we worship, (O gross absurdity) in
their so doing whereof (I say) may not all wise hearted and godly Christians
fitly turn that sottish Aha, into a just Haha of laughter, scorn and derision
to see and observe (with those idolatrous Hebrews) the Romish sots and idiots
of ours, and former times, call and account, admire and adore, such Romish
Beasts, such stupendiously execrable Strumpets of spiritual fornication and
idolatry (most worthy of all contempt and hatred) their gods and their
Saviors. Flee from Rome as from a poysonoustinging Serpent. 1 King. 18. 21.
For shame, for shame, fly from them, hate and abhor them, as most noy some,
loathsome poisonous stinging Serpents, as the bitter bane and mortiferous
Henbane of your estates, bodies and souls. And as Elijah said to the
slaggering Israelites of his times; so say I to you all, both Papists and
formal wavering Protestants (as I touched this passage at the beginning of
this Treatise) if the Lord be God, Idols never do good, but most and worst hurt.
follow him, and him only: But if Baal be God (the contrary whereof, I think
has been abundantly proved) then follow him. O why halt ye thus between 2
opinions? Or rather, why join ye your selves so closely to such false-gods,
such lying vanities, which do you infinitely more hurt than good and nay who
never did you any good at all, but always did you the worst and bitterest
evil, both to body and soul that is possibly able to befall you, even the
damning of them both to infinite and endless misery. O how happy were it for
you, if once it would please the Lord to open your eyes and mollify and
rectify your hearts, to see and consider what ye have done, whence ye are
fallen, and whither you are headlong tumbling; Pia and Christiana crudelitas.
Deu. 13. 6, etc.
and then seriously and sincerely to resolve on that, Piam and Christianam
crudelitatem, that holy and Christian cruelty (as I may, me thinks, fitly call
it) mentioned by the Spirit of God himself, namely, That if thy dearest
Brother, the son of thy Mother, thy sin or thy daughter, or the wife of thy
bosom; yea, or thy nearest and dearest friend, who is unto thee as thine own
soul, should secretly entice thee, or openly endeavor to allure thee to go a
whoring after idoll-gods: By all means be so far from consenting to them,
as, contrariwise, not to suffer thine eyes to pity or spare them (like that
most noble and renowned Christian convert, Galeacius Caracciolua, Marquess of
Vice, a most famous and constant convert from Popery.
famous Galeacius Caracciolus, Marquess of Vice) but to throw them from thee,
to trample and tread on them, and to cause thine own hand to be first upon
them, even to stone or kill them, because they sought and wrought to thrust and
draw thee from the Lord thy God, to idolatry: That thus by thine example (as
the holy Spirit of God goes on there) others of the same superstitious and
idolatrous rank and rabble, may see, and hear, and fear, and do no more such
wickedness, as this is among you. And for a close of all, and with which I
will conclude; O that all idolatrous Papists would seasonably and seriously
consider, how close (that fearful sentence and peremptory malediction Psalm.
^7. 7.
of the pious Prophet David) comes to the heart and stings the soul of all the
obstinate and desperate idolaters of Rome (who so flashily and foolishly glory
in that badge of the Beast, the title and appellation of Romish Catholics, A
most fearful sentence and positive execration on all Papists.
forsooth) who, I say breaks out against them all, in this most emphaticall
and plain and positive execration: Confounded be all they that worship or
serve graven images, and that boast themselves of Idols and fals-gods. O
therefore, who ever thou art that belongest to God (for I am not so
uncharitable, but to believe, God has some, yet blinded, ignorant and
captivated souls, even in Spain and Rome it self, whom he will timely take
out from among them) lay this, I say, as close to thy heart, as it comes close
unto thee, and most nearly concerns thee: And readily and speedily embrace
that gracious invitation of thy most sweet Savior and only precious Redeemer
and efficatious Intercessour the Lord Jesus Christ, Who, having already
peremptorily declared and foreshowne the certain ruin and confusion of the red
Dragon, the Scarlet Whore, the Antichrist of Rome, with such indubitable
assertions and asseverations thereof, Revel. 18. ^, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
as is clear, Revel. 18. 2. as if it were already done, in these words,
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen (see what a serious asseveration, is
here, with an ingemination in the present tense) and is become the habitation
of devils, the hold of unclean spirits, and a very cage of all unclean and
ravenous hateful birds, as I think, has been abundantly seen and shown, to
the purpose, in this little Treatise. Therefore, I say, in regard her ruin is
so certain, the Lord Jesus Christ, Christ's gracious invitation to his Children
to come out of Babylon.
most graciously invites all his poor people (whom though mixed among the
Romish Babylonians, he has a purpose to save and preserve) to come out of
Babylon unto him, saying, ver. 4. Come out of her, my people, come out of her,
that ye be not partakers of her sins; and so consequently, that ye may not
receive of her plagues: Which, now, without all controversy, the Lord is
pouring out upon her, Gods serious and certain resolution to be revenged on
Babylon.
and resolving, ver. 6. to reward her, as she has rewarded Gods Saints, and to
double unto her double, according to all her abominable works, and in the Cup
which she has filled to others to fill her double. Even so, Come Lord Jesus
come quickly to revenge the precious blood of thy slaughtered Saints, hasten
thy coming, and (for thine Elects sake, as thou have promised) shorten the
days of their sorrow, Amen and Amen.

Omnis Gloria solius est Domini.
FINIS.

