A CHARGE AGAINST THE JEWS, and the Christian WORLD, for not coming to CHRIST,
who would have freely given them Eternal Life.

DELIVERED IN A ^^RMON, before the Right ^^norable the House of PEERS,

In the Abbey Church at Westminster, on May 26. 1647. Being the Day of their
Public Fast.

By THOMAS VALENTINE, one of the Assembly of Divines, and Minister of Chalfont
in the County of Bucks.

Nullum magis pestiferum venenum, quam socordia illa quam in nobis generat aut
terrenae faelicitatis, aut justitiae propriae falsa and fallax opinio. Calv.
LONDON: Printed by M S. for John Rothwell at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE House of LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable:
WHen I was called to Preach before Your Lordships, there was not in our view
either Adversary, or evil occurrent; we thought we had Peace in our hands, and
that all was well: but since that time our Distractions did on the sudden grow
great and dangerous. We stand in need of the goodness of God to come in
seasonablie to our Rescue, and it will require the wisdom and diligence of your
Lordships, and all others to compose these Differences, that they rise no
higher, nor end ill. We may look upon them with sadness, and sorrow of heart,
and fear lest Gods anger is not turned away from us; We have need to second our
Fasts with doing all things answerable, lest if we contradict our prayers by
looseness of life, God give us an Answer contrary to our expectation. It is
high time to lay down our provocations against God, and bitterness of spirit
one against another; our contentions have been so hot, that we have departed
one from another; let us take heed of endeavoring to root out one another, and
to avoid rancor and virulencie of spirit. Next to the directions and examples
of Scripture, I could wish we had cast our eyes upon some part of the
Carthaginian Story, and see what was the issue of the dissension between them
and the Romans; Amilchar used to say his 4. sons that he did Alere quatuor
catulos leoni nos in perniciem and exterminium Romani imperii, but it proved
contrary.

Hannibal primogenitus ejus aetatis c^to annorum accedens ad sacrificium
juravit quod quum primum esset adultae aetatis foret atrocissimus hostis
Romanorum qui dum excitasset pulveres cum pedibus, ait, tunc erit pax inter
Carthaginenses and Romanos quando altera istarum civitatum erit in pulverem
redacta.


the Carthaginians could never be persuaded to have any peace with Rome, though
some of their Nobility much endeavored it. Amilcar when he went out in an
expedition did offer sacrifice, and Hanniball the great, his eldest Son, being
present at the solemnity with his Father when he was but young, had received in
such principles of War and opposition, that he vowed to second his Fathers
designs, and said there should be peace be^ween Carthage and Rome, when one of
those Cities should be as that dust which he then spurned up with his foot; it
proved fatal to that side which was resolved to destroy the other. For though
Hanniball was the bravest Commander that ever Carthage bred, and had many
Victories, and great success, for sixteen years together, yet shortly after
Carthage was fiered by the Romans, and was upon a flame 17. days together,
and consumed into dust and ashes. Let there be no such spirit in the parties
that oppose one another; let all sides-taking be laid aside and the names that
intimate division be extinguished: let there be a calm temper, and a wise
Accommodation, lest both sides be pulled down one after the other: that Your
Lordships may be the happy Instruments to prevent so great an evil, and
effect so great a good, is the Prayer of him who rests,

Your Lordships to be commanded in the service of the Gospel, THO: VALENTINE.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable House of LORDS.
JOH. 5.40. And ye will not come to me that ye might have life.


JEsus Christ was so amiable in his life, and admirable in all his speeches, so
holy in his conversation, so wise in all his answers to his cavilling
adversaries, so meek in teaching the ignorant, so ready to cure diseases and
infirmities: that one would have thought all men would be taken with him, and
have come unto him. But nothing less, they that came to him were ready to
leave him, and others would not come at all; which makes him take it unkindly
(for so these words are to be understood) you will not come to me. Deceivers
speak to you, Satan and the world invite you, and you go to them; I call and
persuade you, but you will not come to me: they will bring you to misery and
death; I would give you happiness and life, but you will not come to me.

The ill carriage of men toward Christ, was answered sometimes with
indignation.

1. As that message to Herod, Go tell that Fox, Behold, Luke 13.32.
I cast out devils, and will heal to day and to morrow, and the third day I
shall be perfected.

2. Sometimes with detestation of their sinfulness, Man. 23.27.
Woe to you Scribes Pharisees, hypocrites; you are like painted tombs, and
whited sepulchers.

3. Sometimes with compassion to them, and grief to himself; as that in John,
Will you also go away? And here in the text, Ioh 6.67.
You will not come to me.

This whole Chapter is a defense of Christ against the cavilling Jews, which
found fault with his cure done upon the impotent man that lay by the Pool of
Bethesda, and had an infirmity 38. years, and was so impotent that others
prevented him, and got into the pool upon the moving of the waters; and thus he
continued till Christ came up to the Feast at Jerusalem: and finding him there,
takes pity upon him, and cures him, as you see in ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. And it being
the Sabbath day they find fault with the fact, and also because he took up his
bed; and question with the man, inquiring who it was that did it, from ver. 10.
to 13. But he not knowing who it was, could make no answer, till afterward
Christ finding him in the Temple makes himself known unto him, and gives him an
admonition to sin no more, lest a worse thing befall him: v. 14. Then the man
told the Jews it was Jesus that made him whole, which moved them to persecute
him, v. 15, 16. Then begins our Savior to make his defense, from v. 17. to the
end; wherein he affirms his Divinity, and his equality with his Father, which
made the Jews to be more enraged against him, v. 18. But he goes on to show
that what he did, his Father did: My Father works hitherto, and I work: I can
do nothing of my self. The Father has life in himself, and so has the Son;
and the Father has committed all judgment to the Son. And if you begin at v.
31. and read on, you may find that he lays aside his own testimony, and
insists on five more, every one of which were sufficient to convince them that
he was the Son of God, and that they ought to come unto him. 1. The testimony
of his Father, ver. 32.37. There is another which bears witness of me, and
who that is, v. 37. shows, The Father himself which has sent me, bears
witness of me. 2. The testimony of John the Baptist, v. 33. And ye rejoiced
in him, and he bare witness of me. 3. His works and miracles, v. 36. The works
that the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear
witness of me, that the Father has sent me. 4. The Scriptures, v. 39. Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me. 5. The last testimony alleged is that of Moses, v. 46.
Had ye believed Moses you would have believed me, for he wrote of me. The sum
of all is, I have the testimony of my Father, and of John the Baptist, and of
my works and miracles, and of the Scriptures, an of Moses: but none of these
will convince you, you will not come to me, and therefore your sin is great.

In the text you have, 1. the illation or inference [and] which according to
the sense was formerly translated; but (...) being often put for (...), as Beza
observes.

2. There is the sin reproved in the Jews, You will not come.

3. The person to whom they should have come, but did not, [me.]

4. The end which they might have attained, but did not, That ye might have
life.

[And] must not be understood as a copulative, The sense of the text.
but discretive, therefore in the sense it is but You will not come to me. It
shows the wicked and obstinate nature of the Jews, though they had so many
clear testimonies of Christ, yet they would not embrace him, you Jews will not
come, therefore your sin is the greater; the Gentiles have no knowledge of me,
it cannot be expected, that they should come: but you Jews that have knowledge
of the prophesies, and promises, and of the Law, that are a light to them that
sit in darkness, teachers of the unlearned, instructers of them that lack
discretion, you offend the more in not coming to me.

You [will not] our Savior says not, you cannot, but, (...).

Non dicit non venitis sed non vultis venire and cum cos nolle dicit
ignorantiae and caeritatis causam pravitati and contumatiae assignat. Muscul.


you will not come: the wilfulness of their spirits is set out, there are
three distinct degrees.

1. Men do not come. 2. They cannot come. 3. They will not come to Christ. The
first is their carelessness and negligence, the second is their weakness and
impotencie, the third is their wilfulness and great wickedness; and the last
is the result of all, men do not come to Christ, because they will not come:
and they cannot come, because they will not: their wills must be subdued, and
the rebellion thereof must be removed, else they neither can nor will come to
Christ.

[Not come] You will not believe in me; that is the sin, but with an
aggravation, you will not so much as come unto me; they would not vouchsafe him
any respect, they would not frequent his company, nor willingly be in his
presence.

[That ye might have life.] We must not imagine that they were out of love with
life, for that is desirable by all, and it cannot fall upon the reasonable
creature simply to desire not to live; so as the reason of their not coming
was not because he did not offer them that which was pleasing and amiable, but
they were so far out of love with him, and so much prejudiced against him, that
they would not come unto him, though they might have life.

Or else they would not come unto him for a right end, that they might have
life. Ye will come to me for the loafes that I might feed you, and for by-ends;
if I came like a conquering Alexander, with an Army to deliver you from the
power of the Roman Monarchy, and to repair the glory of your decayed kingdom,
you would come unto me: but to have life, and to obtain salvation, ye will not
come unto me.

The words briefly thus explained afford two several Propositions.

1. The great condemning sin, which will be charged upon the Jews, and the
Christian world, is that they would not come to Christ.

2 That Jesus Christ will freely give eternal life, to them that come unto him.

To come to Christ is not any local motion, or change of place; for go all the
world over and you cannot find him; he is ascended into heaven, and whither he,
is gone ye cannot come. When this was spoken it was spiritually to be
understood, if a man had been in Christ's presence, and stayed long with him,
nay if he had taken him into his arms, if he had not received him into his
heart by faith, it would not have availed. Therefore understand it thus.

1: To come to Christ, is to have recourse unto him, and acknowledge him worthy
of all respect: all that came unto him d d not believe in him; but these will
vouchsafe him no honor, they disdain him, and cast scorn and contempt upon him
in not coming to him.

Four things move us to come to an other, the command of one in authority, the
Centurion says to me, Go, and he goes: Matthew. 8 9.
to another, Come, and he comes; Christ was a King, Psalm. 2.6.
for God set his King upon his holy hill of Sion, and all power in heaven and
earth was given him. Kings have power, Honorant ut Regem, adorant ut Deum,
vident enim hominem, and agnoscunt Deum.
but not all power, they have a conditional, temporary, external power,
derived from Christ. But he has an absolute, eternal, primative power, which
all men should acknowledge and stoop unto; the wise men (the first fruits of
the Gentiles) they came unto Christ, and they did acknowledge him, and ask
boldly, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? this might justly shame the
Jews, they came to him while he was a young Infant, and found him in a mean
condition, Adorant magi, and offerunt munera adhuc lact^nti matris ubera.

Bern.

Parvulum non honorassent nec adorassent si parvulum tantummodo credidissent.


sucking of his mothers breasts, they came from far and present him with gold
franckincense, and mirrhe; gold because he was a King, frankincense as he was
God, for that was used in the offerings, and mirrhe as he was man, hereby they
honored him much, and were ready to tender their homage to him: but the Jews
would not come unto him.

2. Necessity might have made them come unto him, for he was the only remedy
that God appointed for their atonement, the only sacrifice that was
propitiatory, they might have known that all the sacrifices under the Law d d
look at him, they had their life from him, and also their death from him; for
when he offered up himself, Magna pars mundi, accedere ideo negligit quia
necessitatis suae sensu non tangitur.

Christum non curant hipocritae, quia ebrii justitit propria gratiam ejus non
si^iunt.

ex innumera pereuntium turba pauci se perire sentium Calv.


they were to surcease; their Priests, especially their high Priests did
typifie him, and all the legal services and sacrifices without him were
nothing. Had they known their necessity they would have come unto him, pain and
apprehension of the danger of a disease, will quickly convince the sick, that
there is a necessity of having recourse to a Physician, but these Jews were
ignorant, and insensible of their misery, and though Christ was the only
Physician, yet they will not come unto him.

3. Love makes us to come to friends, and often visit them; and had they known
the good things that Christ brought to man, and the goodness that was in
himself, they would have been taken with him, he honored our nature, and
brought salvation to our souls, he honored man in that he was made man, he
honored the Jews in that he was of the seed of Abraham; he is our great
benefactor, he brings us into favor with God, who were children of wrath, he
repaires lost man with an augmentation of glory; he sets us into a right of an
heavenly Paradise that lost an earthly. one in Adam, he (like Jonathan to
David, puts his own robe of righteousness upon us, which is a more glorious
covering then Angels have: and had the Jews known these things they would have
given him more respect, and as he is good to man, so he is most sweet and
gracious in himself, observe his carriage (when you read the History of his life
and death in the Gospel,) what it was to all (save to those egregious
hypocrites) the Pharisees and you will find in him the sweetest temper, the
strangest meekness, the richest mercy, the greatest excellency every way. If
you look upon the beauty of his graces, Inter iras placida inter mimicitias
benefica.
his holiness and wisdom, etc. You may wonder that he was no more esteemed
among men, but the Jews not knowing his worth, nor being well affected to him
will not come at him.

4. Eminency in Christ might have drawn them to him; Solomon's wisdom drew many
to him, the Queen of Shebah came from far to hear him, Mat. 12.42. Ezekiel. 33.31.
and Ezekiels skillful and pleasant prophesying made the people come and sit
before him; but the wisdom and skill of Christ much prefer him above them.
Moses was eminent among the Jews, so were the Prophets; but Christ much more
then they, for he was the Prince of Prophets, he was the King of glory, and
they his Ambassadors, he the Angel of the Co^^nant; he was not only above
Saints, and Prophets, and Apostles, and Angels, as a King above his subjects,
but so above them that they must adore and worship him, what ever light came to
the minds of holy men in visions and raptures it came from Christ, it was but
a beam from this Sun, and the same argument that moved them to honor Moses,
and credit the writings of the Old Testament, might have convinced them to have
regarded Christ; but we will stay no longer with the unbeleiving Jew, to
discourse of his neglect of Christ, we will further explain the duty of coming
to Christ, and open the nature of the contrary sin, as it concerns all that
live in the Christian world.

2. To come to Christ presupposes a man to receive power from him, inabling
him to come unto him, Mat. 14 28.
it being a spiritual action, must have a supernatural power, we may see it
plainly in that command given to Peter upon his own motion, if it be thou,
says he to Christ, bid me come unto thee on the water; if Christ had not given
out a power as well as a command to Peter, he had sunk when he set his foot upon
the sea, and if another had adventured (not having the like power) he could not
have come, he would have miscarried by the way; The great command of the Gospel
is gone out from Christ into the world and it is come unto me, Mat. 11.28.
and the greatest part comes not; the reason is they have not power given them
to come, we must have virtue from Christ to come, as well as to be healed when
we come: The dark minds of men must be enlightened to know Christ, and their
rebellious wills must be conquered and mastered, or else they will not come unto
him; for all Gospel truths are more then those of the Law, above man's
understanding, and contrary to his will, and if we receive them it is given us
from above, No man can come to me, says Christ, except the Father draw him;
Ioh 6.44.
there is a violence offered to the corruption of the will, Psalm. 65.4.
but none to the will it self, and the Psalmist has the like expression,
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and causest to come unto thee; Christ
does invite us, and inables us to come, and the honor of both belongs to him.

3. To come to Christ is not only to have recourse to him, and judge him
worthy of all respects and to receive power from him, to enable us to come, but
to go on and not stay till we receive some saving benefits from him. Some stay
in the beginnings, or in preparations, and sit down too soon, and loose the
benefit of their former labor, but we must come on and not sit down till we
get to the jorneyes end: To come to Christ, is either the the first motion of a
new convert, or else it is a continual recourse to Christ for increase of all
saving graces, it will not be accepted to go once, or twice, and then to stay
as the Jews did, Ier. 2.31.
we are Lords we will come no more unto thee, this were abominable pride and
contempt, let us a little consider this action of coming to Christ, and in the
beginning; at first it is sad and uncomfortable, in the end joyful and
glorious.

At first when we come we labor and are heavy laden, the sinner in his
sinful course has a labor, and it will weary him, Mat, 11.28.
the penitent sinner in his conversion has a labor, and the combatant in his
fight against sin has a labor, and there is no such toil as this is, no
burden so heavy as that of sin; it causes an universal pain, it is upon the
conscience indeed, but extends to the whole man, and makes him weary of
himself; Ier. 7.12.
for it has in it the vengeance of an angry God, the torments of a flaming
hell, the power of a just Law, and the greatest sinners that are most sensible
of their misery will come most humbly, and in much poverty of spirit; no
creature so wild as a sinner in his jollitie, who is as the wild Ass in the
wilderness that runs up and down at pleasure, none so tame as the penitent
sinner that is taken in his month, God has humbled him, and taken down the
pride of his spirit, he stood in his way as the Angel in Balaams; he threatened
him he had his bow in his hand and his arrow on the string, Psalm. 7.12.
and the sinner not giving back, he shot at him and wounded him, and left the
arrow sticking in his heart: Psalm. 38.2.
and now this wounded man, he mourns inwardly, and makes his moan to God,
Thine arrows stick fast in me, is willing to come to Christ to be healed, and
to have the arrow plucked out, and the wound cured.

Necessity at first brings us unto Christ, afterward we apprehend goodness,
and his divine perfections, and we come in love to him, we cannot stay away; a
poor man at the door that has scarce a ragge to cover his nakedness, not a
piece of bread to satisfy nature, he comes to ask for the Master, not to be
acquainted with him, that were boldness, but to be releived in his
necessities: so Christ is sought unto as a Savior, to take away our guilt, to
give a pardon, to supply our wants, and when we are sensible of our misery, we
are easily induced to come to Christ.

But when we are justified, and accepted, and find the sweetness of fellowship
and communion with Christ, then we are delighted in him; and if there were no
necessity compelling us, if no weakness in our faith, no want in our souls,
yet we should desire to come to him; they that have seen God in any ordinance,
are restless till they see him again. Psalm. 63.2.
David could bear well enough his banishment from the Court, yet he much
desired to come to the place of Gods public worship, that he might see his
power and glory, as formerly he had seen them in the sanctuary.

4. To come to Christ, is to believe in him; and when he complains of the Jews
not coming, he charge them with unbelief. He that comes to God must believe
that he is, Credere est actus intellectus assertientis veritati divinae ex
imperio voluntatis motae a Deo per gratiam. Aqui.
and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him: The Jews believed no such
thing of Christ, they did not think him to be God, nor that he would reward
them that come to him: they gave no assent to what he spoke; they did not
credit him. Faith has a double act, one more common and general, and that is
to give a firm assent to all Divine truth revealed in the Scripture; Faith
gives God the honor of his truth, as love and hope do give him the honor of
his goodness and bounty; And truth is equally spread over all the Scriptures,
I believe as verily that Isaac was the son of Abraham, as that Christ is the
Son of God; because Scripture affirms both, and one thing cannot be more or
less true then another; one is more useful then another, Fides ambiguum non
habet, si habet, non est fides.
and conduces more to my good, and in this general act of faith I am to
consider of one more then another, but both are equally true, but there should
be, nay there is no doubtihg, though some men have doubted, whether this or
that part of the Bible were Scripture, yet a believer must not doubt whether
Scripture be true, that were to doubt whether God be true.

The truth which faith believes comes by divine revelation; if I can prove by
reason that all things that are, Haereticus dubitens de uno articulo fidei
opinionem habet de reliquis. Biel. Genesis 1.
were made by him that has an absolute being, and is the first cause of all, I
do not believe it, because I can prove it, but because Scripture says it; for
in the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The Scriptures of the
Old Testament held out clearly the Messiah, and by those prophesies and
promises (wherein the Jews were very well verst) they might know that he was the
Christ, and yet they did believe neither those Scriptures, nor any thing
himself spoke or did And then no wonder if they fail in the second act of
faith, which is to rely and rest with confidence on Christ the Savior; Mar.
15.31.
they were so far from this that they upbraid him at his death, saying, He
could not save himself, and therefore it was in vain to expect salvation from
him. Notitia assensus and fiducia are made parts of Faith: but two of them
being in the understanding, the 3 in the Will, it may be doubted how one such
grace can be in two faculties. Schoolmen generally to salve this doubt, make
gne faculty subordinate to the other, saying, Faith is Actus imperatus a
voluntate, elicitus ab intellectu. It is in the will ut in primo motivo, in
intellectu ut in proximo subjecto. But the doubt is, when they say it is ex
imperio voluntatis, they seem to give the precedencie to the will, to shun such
disputes we may rather call them acts in the believer, then parts of Faith.
But we have in these days all the means necessary to work in us all the
particulars required to a saving faith, we have knowledge of him, we question
not his Divinity, we believe he came with a commission from heaven, we give a
full and firm assent to whatsoever he spoke, as being undoubtedly true; we
would cast our selves with confidence into his arms that is able to save us, we
believe that God is reconciliable, that sin is pardonable; and this we do upon
the hearing of the glad tidings of the Gospel, and afterward we grow up into a
greater confidence and assurance of the pardon of our sins purchased by his
blood.

But those that do not believe shall have this great sin charged upon them, and
that we may clear Gods justice in punishing men that live in the Christian
world for their infidelity, it will be needful to inquire where the power of
believing lies; for if they cannot believe, how is God just to require that of
them which they have not power to do?

I answer. Adam in his innocence had a kind of legal faith, whereby he was
to depend upon God for the performance of his promise; for God promised him
life as a reward of his obedience, and he was to look for it: Now what ever he
had, being a public person, we may be said to have it, and must be accountable
for it so as in him we had power to believe, and therefore may be punished for
unbelief. And this Answer is given by many Reverend Divines, and let it go as
far as it may to the removing of the Objection.

But the question is, whether Adam had power to believe in Christ crucified. He
did believe in God, and his faith was joined with his obedience; for he obeying
the voice of God was to believe that God would make good his promise to him,
but his power was to the things of the Law written, in his heart, it was within
that compass and latitude, but not in the way of the Gospel which supposes
man to be fallen, and quite over-turned; and how faith in Christ, which is the
condition of the Covenant of grace, should be commanded in the Law given to
Adam in his innocence, I do not understand. And though he did believe in God,
yet he might not have power to believe in Christ dying for sinners. But suppose
God had revealed to Adam (while he stood) the event of things, and imagine he
had said to him, Adam, I have made thee wise and righteous, I have enstamped
mine Image upon thee, I have given thee a just Law, and power to keep it, and
for thy reward I will give thee life; I have put thee into a pleasant Paradise,
where thou have all things for necessity and delight; but thou will disobey my
voice, and loose thy self, and forfeit all that I have given thee; yet neither
thou, nor all thy posterity shall perish, I will send my Son into the world, to
take man's nature, and dye for sin; and life and happiness shall come by faith
in him.

The question is, whether Adam could have believed upon such a Revelation?

I answer: That he could and would have credited God, and believed the truth of
this relation made unto him by his Creator: but to believe in Christ, and cast
himself upon a Savior, must presuppose him to be cast away, and lost.

But could not Adam have promised to believe in Christ upon the former
Revelation?

I answer: If he had, it had not been available: for it is all one, as if a
rich man worth many thousand pounds should promise, and give his Bond to pay me
an 100 li. when he is broken, and not worth a groat.

But it is very true, that men have more power, then they put out for faith and
obedience, and it is as true, that infidelity is in their power, and they
willingly remain in unbelief. The Answer that men return to the invitations of
Christ are the same which the Jews made unto him, How often would I have
gathered thee together, as the hen her chickens, Matthew. 23.
and ye would not.

1. Further, to clear the point in hand, we may safely affirm, that all men in
Adam stand guilty of disobedience, and God may justly punish them for that sin.

I^h 3 36 (...). Non dicit, ira Dei veniet super eum, sed ira Dei manet super
cum, quamvis naturaliter damnati jam sint reprobi sua tamen infidelitate novam
sibi mortem accersunt.
2. That Christ being offered to them to deliver them from curse and
condemnation, and they wilfully rejecting him, they aggravate their sins, and
bring upon them the condemnation of the Gospel; so that the Law and the Gospel
both condemn them, the wrath of God, that formerly was upon them by the
sentence of the Law, abides upon them, and new wrath is kindled against them,
because they believe not in Christ the Son of God, and so comes the great
condemnation often mentioned, Joh. 3.19. And to set out the cause of man's
misery, take it in this comparison: A man lies sick of a fever, he is told by
the Physician, unless he bleed or purge, and take other Physic, he will dye;
he is distempered, and will not be ruled, he dies. The question is, what this
man dyed of? I answer: He dyed of a Fever, that was originally the cause of
his death. And then in the second place, he dyed of wilfulness, because he
would not follow advice. In the great day of judgment men shall be condemned
for their disobedience; and next, which is the great aggravation of their sin
for infidelity, because they believed not in Christ.



Four aggravations of the sin of infidelity
1. The last and best words that ever God spoke, were by Jesus Christ; and to
contemn them were a greater sin: he that despises Moses Law did sin in a high
degree, but what will betide him that despises the glorious truths of the
Gospel uttered by Christ, to honor him and the truths he revealed, the
sweetest expressions were made that ever we heard of, Luke 2.14.
Glory to be to God on high, Peace on earth, and good will toward men, the
Jews could not be ignorant of those glorious manifestations, and might have
bin convinced by them, we all do believe the doctrine of the Gospel, and we
receive them, and are ready to come unto him, in the use of his Ordinances.
But with our faith we must join all other graces, and the practice of al
duties, we must do every thing answerable to the profession of the Faith, or
else we are in some measure guilty of the sin of the Jews.

2. There is no such impediments to hinder us, as was to the Jews, they might
have said, the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and the people must seek
the Law at their mouths, and they say, that Christ is a deceiver, a Samaritan,
and has a Devil, these might stumble the Jews, and keep them from coming
to Christ; but there is no such let to us, the Gospel is countenanced, Christ
is received. In the Primitive times they were feign to sell all, in Queen
Mary's days, they went through the flames, or else they could not have Christ,
these were great trials, they fall not upon us, and therefore our sin is the
greater, if we do not embrace him.

3. We must give a reason why we did not come to Christ, why we did not believe
in him, why we did not accept of him when he was offered unto us, with all his
Excellencies, he came to us, and brought with him righteousness, life, pardon,
heaven and the glory of it, and would have freely given us them, if we would
willingly and freely have accepted him for our Savior; but those that have
rejected him, shall see with sorrow the fruits of their infidelity, and cry
out against themselves for loosing so great joys, and pulling so great
torments upon themselves, and as Malefactors in the day of their execution,
lament their folly and obstinacy, in that they would not be ruled, and that
brought them to their miserable end, so the unbeleever in the day of judgment
shall have it charged upon him, and he shall repeat these words in the dolor
of his trembling heart, I dye and am condemned, eternally, because I would not
come to Christ, who would have given me life.

Fourthly and lastly, such as refuse to come to Christ, and to be guided by the
doctrine of faith, may come to make an open defiance against him and his Gospel,
the^e is a great differancs between the wants of faith, and a con^rarietie to
the faith, Aug. in Ioh. 15 Magnum quoddam peccatum sub generali nomine vult
intelligi.
where this later is in the height of it, men come to dissent from the truth,
to deny it, and in time to defy it; and Christ the author of it; the believer
he honors Christ by acknowledging him by assenting to his truth, and casting
his confidence and affiance upon him: but the wilful unbeleever does the
contrary, and offers much dishonor to Christ by his denial, his dissent, his
diffidence, and defiance. Aqui. 2. 2 dae. q 10. Artic. 3. Infidelitas est
maximum peccatum.
Therefore some (nay almost all) do judge infidelity to be a very great sin,
and others argue and indeaver to prove it to be the greatest sin of all.

We come to the Second point formerly propounded, which is, That Jesus Christ
will freely give life eternal to them that come unto him.

It is clear that he understands eternal life, by his expression elsewhere, I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish: Ioh. 10.28.
and such as speak to Christ about life, mention eternal life, as the ruler
that followed after Christ said, Good Master, Luke 18.18.
What shall I do to inherit eternal life? so that the life which Christ
offered, and the people sought for, was eternal life, and it was freely to be
given them.

Life is the best kind of being, and presupposes a cause of life remaining in
and working upon a Subject capable of life, all things that are, yet live not;
there is a being inferior to life, and those that live, live not all a like,
beasts and plants live, yet not such a life as man lives, for as the soul is,
so is their life; beasts have souls, and yet have but sense, and somewhat like
reason; men have understanding, and utter by speech what they conceive, for
they have a reasonable soul, and a more noble then beasts, and if all
difference come from the act of the form upon the matter, then the soul of
man more noble will still work, (as we see it does upon the body) to fashion
it into more excellent parts, and to make the house and rooms for it is own
use, and therefore this life in man, coming from a more excellent principle,
is above the life of beasts. Among men some have the Spirit of Life in them,
who were dead by nature in sins, 2 Cor. 3.
they being quickened, have a more noble principle of life, and have in them the
beginning of life eternal; such as are alive to God, and have union with
Christ, they live in another kind then natural men do; for in the spiritual
life, the Spirit of God works on the soul, as the soul does on the body, but
first, the soul is a mere patient, which in the natural life is the sole
agent, the soul is under the power of Gods Spirit, and as far as Gods Spirit
is above the spirit of man, so far is this life of grace above that of nature;
therefore the Apostle magnifies this life in the regenerate, above the life of
reason, not so much as mentioning it, In that I now live, Gal. 2.20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Life is spread over the whole man, yet first and principally it is in the
soul, and diffused through every faculty, and if we stand not too nicely upon
the distinction of life, and the actions of life, we may say, that faculty
lives when it is able to do the works that belong to it, as the mind lives
when it knows God, and is dead while it remains ignorant; the heart lives
when it loves God, and reposeth trust in him; the affections live when they joy
in God, and make fit expressions of that joy toward him; as we perceive the
hand to live when it can stir and work, and when this life of grace continues
beyond time, it becomes life eternal, eternity to life in the world to come,
is but as time in this world; This is life eternal to know thee: and he that
believes has everlasting life. Faith in Christ, and knowledge of him, Ioh.
17.3. Ioh. 3.36.
are made the beginings of life eternal, and because it is propounded as a
reward in heaven, therefore life eternal includes the beginnings of the life
of grace, and the perfection of it hereafter, it is the altering of our
natural lives, for all our infirmities and griefs shall be remooved, and for
the spiritual life, all the graces that in heaven shall be of use, shall be
perfected.

Life eternal includes all things essentially necessary to make us happy, and
also all additions and attendants to make it complete: honor, and glory, and
immortality are in it, for such as by continuance in well doing seek for
these, shall find them in eternal life. But because the life of glory which
Saints have in heaven, Romans 2.7.
is the strongest motive that might have persuaded them to come to Christ,
therefore we must more fully explain that unto you, the life of glory will be
in the whole man, but principally in the soul, and most in the chiefest
faculties which are the understanding and will, to the understanding refer the
blessed vision, to the will, the fruition of God, these two are the principal
parts of the life of glory.

Vide Wendelium qui scripsit upple. Biel. distinct 49. conclus. 4. qu. 2.
I am not ignorant that many writers make the vision of God, in glory to
comprehend all the happiness which the soul has from him, but there is
reason, and authority, sufficiently to propound them distinctly.

1. In the life of glory, the mind shall see God, that is, fully and perfectly
know him: for seeing is put for knowing, Now ye say, you see. John. 9.41. N^w
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face: now I know in part, ^ut
then shall I know even as I am known. 1 Cor. 13.12. every one in heaven shall
with their own mind understand all things, and know all persons so fully, as
may any way conduce to their happiness, and to the end it may be so, all
weaknesses, and imperfections of the mind shall be remooved, no simplicity, no
shallowness shall be upon any, Idiots and men of weak abilities, may have so
much knowledge of Christ, as to bring them to heaven; but when they are there,
they shall have sharpness of wit, Prove: 1.4.
for full conformity with God in his Image, Col. 3.10.
is a chief thing in life eternal, and knowledge is a principal part of Gods
Image, as the Apostle plainly affirms, Having put on the new man which after
God is renewed in knowledge.

3. The mind shall so clearly understand as that it shall not need the help of
faith, as it is now of use unto us, when we hear of the Trinity of persons, of
the union of the two natures in Christ, of election, and of the resurrection,
we take them upon trust, building by faith upon the truth of him that relates
them in the Scripture; but in heaven we shall perfectly know, and understand all
things which are now dark and obscure, all controversies shall be decided, all
doubts shall be removed, and surely our fight will be very clear, when we
shall not need the help and use of our better eye, Now we walk by faith, and
not by sight; but then by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.
and not by faith.

4. To make us see the glorious things of heaven, there shall be no outward
means, such as have been of use on earth, no preaching of the Word, no
Sacraments, no visions, dreams or apparitions in bodily shapes; as sometimes
God has made himself known to his servants in former times, to Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles.

5. The means shall be the light of glory, which shines in heaven above all the
brightness that ever man did see; Col. 1.12.
he has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. This light would dazzle the eye of man, and dim it; for if the glorious
body of the same would hurt the eye of a man, what would the light of heaven
do? it being such as none can approach unto. In this frail condition we cannot
see God and live; when God or but an Angel appeared, 1 Timothy 6.16. Lumen gloriae
corroborat, intellectum ad perfectam Dei visionem eliciendam.
how were men affrighted? and if that terror had remained, it would have
overwhelmed them; but in heaven the spirits of men will be elevated, and
enabled, to see with joy those things that there will be manifested.

6. In that light of glory, we shall not only see the attributes of God, his
mercy, justice, truth, and wisdom, Whether the light of glory be habituale
lumen in intellectu, see it disputed at large by Greg. de Valent. To 1. part 3.
p. 227. Number. 24.17.
and (which we are apt now to question) but the very simple pure essence of God
(which yet we must not separate from his attributes) we shall see and know God,
so fully as our natures are capable of. In heaven there will be a clear vision
on our part, and a clear manifestation on Gods part; but both are from God, to
make us able to see him, and to be willing to be seen of us: he will show
himself not darkly, and obscurely as to the Church in former times, not
terribly as on Mount Sinai, not a far off as to Balaam; not for a short time,
as in his transfiguration; but we shall dwell upon the contemplation of him; we
shall have time enough to take a full view of him; yet this vision is such as
we are capable of, our finite, scant souls, can never comprehend the infinite
excellencies of the eternal God, In heaven there is Visio clara, but not
comprehensiva.
but we shall see and understand so much as may any way conduce to our
happiness.

But seeing we have begun with vision, and it is taken from sense, it may be
demanded what our bodily eyes shall see in heaven?

Matthew. 17.2.
1. I answer. 1. The glorious manifestations of the presence of God in some such
sort as was on the Mount, where we find mentioned a bright Cloud, his clothes
were white as the light, and his face did shine. When God appeared in the
Temple at Solomon's prayer, the glory of the Lord filled the House, that the
Priests could not enter, and it was a visible glory; some such but far more
excellent is in heaven.

2. The glorified bodies of the blessed Saints full of beauty and brightness,
at the day of judgment we shall see a company of glorious creatures, those on
the left hand shall be an ugly company, and many of them deformed: for if we
credit Durandus, and others, their sins not being taken away, the fruits of sin
will remain upon them; the lame, the blind, the maimed, Gods soul will more
abhor them then David's. But all comeliness and excellency will appear in the
Saints, Mal. 3.17.
for they shall be as Jewels made up; a Jewel must be cut and polished, it must
have a luster set upon it that it may shine; and it must be set in gold: their
souls and bodies are not yet so glorious as they shall be, now they are jewels,
but they are rough and unpolished, much corruption remains, and those graces
they have are not set in gold.

3. We shall see the glorified body of our blessed Savior, which will be a
joyful sight; we shall see him that is dearer then all our friends; we shall
see him that dyed for our sins; we shall see him that was crowned with thorns,
the side, and feet, and hands that were pierced, we shall see him not in
humility and meannesse, but in the brightness of his glory. And if the sight
of Joseph was so welcome to Jacob, and that because he thought he had been
dead, and did see him alive and in honor also: the like and much more is here,
we shall see Christ alive whom the Jews supposed to be dead; and in honor
also, whom they imagined to be as they sent him out of the world, a crucified
Christ: but they shall see him whom they pierced to their sorrow and shame: but
we shall see him to our endless comfort, for we shall see his gracious
countenance looking toward his own with much joy in his face, and expressing
it in some such manner as this: You have long looked for this day, you have
mourned under many calamities, and most of all for your sins; now the day
expected is come, and now an end of all your sorrows, all tears I wipe away;
you have depended upon me for salvation, I am come to save you; you have
received me, I am come to reward you, enter into your Masters joy. And touching
this sight of Christ, it may be demanded whether it will be more pleasant for
us to see him, or for him to see all his elect together?

For answer know, first who loves most, will most rejoice.

But evil men, if in that black darkness they can see any thing, it shall be
to their terror and vexation; for they shall see many wretched persons like
themselves, from whom they can reap no comfort, and to whom they can yield no
release, they shall see a company of persons that when they come out of their
graves, shall look with trembling countenances like Cain, horror shall appear
in their faces, they shall be as so many prisoners that come out of the Goal
to go to execution, and with ghastly looks they shall behold Jesus Christ whom
they have not honored, whose Gospel they have not believed, to whom they have
not sued nor sought, but have vilified, and slighted the offer of grace made
by him in the preaching of the Gospel. But the Saints shall have all joy and
comfort in that which they shall see, and not only in forenamed particulars,
but in all the ornaments of heaven arising from the sweetness of the
situation of the place, and all those excellencies which the wisdom of God
will cause to be there for the joy of the faithful. And if the skill of man
can frame delightful sights which the world affects, and runs after, as Masks
and Shows, what kind of sights do you think will be in heaven? they shall be
delightful, and without vanity; they shall please in a solid and serious
manner, and shall infinitely excel all the delights that ever your eyes have
seen, or your ears have hard of: and that, 1. in respect of the party seeing
this glory who shall be made glorious, and every way both within and without:
here on earth a poor despised man may see others in glory, and himself never
the better for it. Our Savior would not have prayed that those which were
given him might be where he is, and see his glory, but with a purpose to make
them happy in seeing it.

2. There is a perfection in regard of the generality, such as far goes beyond
the glory of this world: For in the Kings Court there are some that are poor,
or despised, or discontented; some that are sick, or in distress, or in some
ill case or other; and i^ either the King see a beggar, whom he is bound to
pity, or the beggar see the King, whom Nature may move to envy, here is no
perfection. But in heaven we shall see all glorious, the King glorious, the
Subjects glorious all of them, the place glorious, none to be pitied, none to
be prayed for, none to be envied, nothing shall detract from your happiness;
happy are those eyes that shall see this glorious sight, and happy those ears
that hear of it if you be moved to desire it, and follow hard after it, and in
comparison of it to despise the glory of the world. And let it be the care of
all that hope to come to have this sight, to take heed and not suffer their
eyes to look after vanity, or to be eyes full of adultery; but rather let them
be used in beholding the works of God, and reading the Scriptures; and those
senses that are taken up in any such holy action, God will crown and honor.

In the next place we come to that part of life eternal, which is in the will,
and that is the enjoyment or fruition of God, which is in some measure on
earth, but fully and completely in the state of glory; and though the fruition
of God be in the whole man, yet we may refer it in special manner to the will,
for that desires and longs after it, and the faculty that labors most shall be
Crowned. Upon the more full knowledge of God in the clear vision, if any
distance of time were between that and the enjoyment of God, the heart would
more earnestly desire it; and in a short time be much perplexed for the want of
it: the mind now doubts of many things, and is ready to dispute the case
whether God be merciful, or just, whether there be a Providence, then all will
be cleared, and the soul will be taken with the excellency of God far above
that which now it is. 1 These. 4.15.


The fruition of God no man explaines it that I have met with, neither can it
be expressed, Paul tells us that the dead and also those which are alive, shall
meet the Lord at his second coming, and shall be ever with him, as friends that
are together and see one another, and by speaking communicate their thoughts do
enjoy one another; Bonum est quo habito complete been est hab^ali. Biel.
so and in a far higher way shall we enjoy God, not in hope, nor in title, nor
by faith, nor by his word and promise, but really, internally, immediately,
fully, completely, and this properly makes a man happy. And this proves God to
be the chiefest good, for in having him it will be completely well with the
possessor, and the will of man will not quiet it self, till it have God it will
be restless and unquiet, putting it self out in desire; but in heaven it will
be satisfied, and shall have as much as it can contain; and therefore shall
desire no more, because it would be in vain, not being able to contain any
more. If God will quiet himself in his love to the Church, Zeph 3.17.
much more may she quiet her self in the fruition of God. But when we say the
Will will be quiet, we must not conceive any weariness in it, or any lothing
society as in the things of this world; we on earth, like children, desire that
to day which anon we are weary of, it is not so here, we shall have no cessation
of joy, which in worldly things is caused first, by weakening the active power
of the Will; and it is a true Position, the will is not wearied unless the
active power be weakened and wasted. In this frail estate of nature, Voluntas
non fatigatur ^isi potentia activa d minuatur.
we spend our spirits in laughing, in rejoicing, in recreations, but in the
enjoying of God, we shall have our spirits revived; and when we have been a
long time in heaven, yet we shall have still more joy: If those that wait upon
the Lord here on earth renew their strength, then much more is it true in
heaven, Isa. 40 31.
that those that attend him there, shall have their joy and strength renewed.

2. We are weary of a thing when we come to epsy any vanity in it, and
therefore men have tired out themselves in seeking content in temporal things,
and they all come to say with Solomon, All is vanity, there is an emptiness in
the things, and vexation of spirit, namely to the spirit of him that looks for
better; but in God no such things, for the more we know him, the better we
shall like him, and shall still be enamored with him.

Beatus non est qui non fruitur quod amat. Deus plus diligitur quam
intelligitur.
In this world we cannot be fully happy, because we have not what we love; It
is a misery to a man, if he have not what he loves, or loves not what he has;
the soul lives in hope to enjoy God, the will of man goes further in her art
then any other faculty, sense looks at the outside of a thing, viz. color;
reason has an idea or notion of it; but will desires the thing it self: the
heart of man is set upon God himself; Charitas intrat scientia foris stat. Biel,
and as in heaven we shall know God more, so we shall love him more, and enjoy
him more, and none can tell what affections he shall have in heaven; the soul
shall have a wide capacity and receive in much of God, which may appear by
these two particulars.

1. God is sweet in the use of his creatures, as meat to the hungry, clothes
to the naked, sleep to the weary, fire to them that are cold, these are very
welcome; but if God be tasted in them, they are sweeter then ordinary.

2. In the Ordinances, God is more to the believing heart, when the troubled
conscience can find rest no where, if it hear of the mercy of God in Christ it
is revived, the soul that groans under the burden of sin, if it be put in
hope of pardon, it begins to look up, which before was quite down, and utterly
dejected.

But what need I to speak how sweet God is in his Ordinances? I appeal to all
those hearts that ever have received good by his word, whether it has not been
more then their appointed food, and far above all the comforts of this world;
but in heaven we shall enjoy God, not in his creatures, nor in his Ordinances,
but in himself; and we shall find the variety of all comforts to meet in him,
we shall need no Sun to shine upon us, no wine to make our hearts glad, no oil
to make our faces shine, nay we shall need no Sacraments, no preaching of the
word, but God in himself, and from himself, will communicate the fullness of
joy, and it shall continue without interruption, without any mixture of sorrow,
or sinfulness; no devil shall be there to tempt, no deceitfulness in our
hearts to betray us, no worldly occasion to entangle or trouble us; our hearts
shall be lifted up and never fall again, our affections warm and never cool
again, our minds settled in the full assurance of Gods favor and never doubt
again; our natures shall be perfectly holy and never sin again, all our
thoughts and desires shall be set on God and nothing else; and for conclusion
of this point, we shall be happy, and there will be no danger, no possibility
of loosing it again: lo, thus shall it be done to the man whom God will honor.

And now that I have explained what life eternal is, I come to the latter part
which is to show you that Christ will confer upon you this life by way of gift;
Romans 6.23.
he will freely give it to you, The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. And this aggravates the sin of the Jews that they might have
so great a blessing in such a free way of gift, and yet would not come unto
him; and not only the Jews, in the days of Christ were to be blamed, but even
in these days the Papists will not come to him to have life in this way of
gift, they will merit it, else they will not have it; they will not have a
heaven that costs them nothing. To meet with both these, I shall briefly show
you that Christ will freely give you life if you come to him, and that you must
have it this way, or not at all.

Christ purchased it, and meritoriously procured it, and it is freely given by
him to us; he bought it, as if it had been freely given, and it is freely given
as if it had not been bought, it is Christ's purchase, but our inheritance;
Christ is given who bought it; the Word that works faith to apply it is given,
the Spirit that inables us to believe, and to look after life eternal is
given; And therefore the grace of God is made the cause of salvation in
general, Ephe 2.8. Romans 3.24. Ephe. 1.6, 7.
and also ascribed to the particulars of justification, adoption, remission of
sins, and glorification. And as God intended his glory should arise out of the
manifestation of his several attributes: so he purposed several works wherein
they were to shine, and more eminently to appear; as his power in the Creation,
the invisible things of him, Romans 1.20.
that is, his eternal power and Godhead are seen in the Creation; Wisdom and
Providence are chiefly seen in the government of the world; He made the Earth
by his power, he established the world by his wisdom, and stretched out the
Heavens by his discretion. Ier 10.12.
Justice is seen in the condemnation of the wicked; and Gods free grace in the
salvation of the elect. Yet we must not imagine that nothing else but power,
and wisdom, and justice, and grace, appear in these works, but these are more
eminent and perspicuous; and the Attributes of God though they be not
subordinate or inferior one to another, yet they give way one to another; as
the Mayor and Aldermen in a Corporation, they give honor to him whose turn it
is to have the chief place: so here, all give way to power in Creation, none
did so much appear as that; and all give way to Gods free grace in our
salvation: and from those words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.6.
we were adopted to the praise of the glory of his grace. We may infer the
like, he made the world for the praise of the glory of his power, he governs it
for the praise of the glory of his wisdom, he condemns wicked men for the
praise of the glory of his Justice; and saves his own for the praise of his
glorious grace: And how dare any show themselves enemies to the grace of God?
or go about to obscure it, or derogate from the goodness of Christ, who does
freely offer life to them that come unto him?

That we may vindicate the grace of God against the Papist and others, and show
that life eternal is not merited or deserved by man; we will pick out an
Argument or two, such ^s see^ to have most strength in them, and answer them;
yet so as to deliver the positive truth, rather then meddle much with the
controversy.

There are two things alleged against this truth, one by ancient Writers, the
other by Modern Papists; which seem to prove, that we are not to look for life
at Christ's hand of free gift. I will put them both together thus. If the holy
actions, and services of believers come from the Spirit of grace inabling them
thereto, and shall be rewarded not of grace and favor, but of justice, then
they are meritorious, and consequently life eternal comes not by free gift,
but is due to the Saints. But both the former are true, Ergo. The first is
urged by Biell, and Greg. de Valentia, Biel li 2. did. 29.
and most Schoolmen that write of that subject. And they amplify it thus: The
nobleness of the cause argues the nobility of the effect; the Spirit of God
works in us, and by his grace we are what we are; our actions are not ours but
Christ's, which by his Spirit produces them in us therefore.

The second, viz, that these actions shall be rewarded not of grace, but in
justice, Bellarmine urges, 2 Timothy 4.8.
and quoteth the words of Paul; From henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give to me, and not
only to me, but to all that love his appearing; here he triumphs, for here is
(says he) justice or righteousness both in the Judge that gives the reward,
and in the Crown that is given, and Justice gives every one their due, and if
it be of due debt, it is merited. And he urges the like phrase, If we confess
our sins, God is just to forgive them: 1 Ioh. 1.9. God would have wrought in
Adam per generalem influentiam; he works in us per sperialem inspirationem quod
munus nostrum minus merit^ium.
of all the arguments that I have met with, this seems to be one of the
strongest.

For answer to the first branch, it must be acknowledged that the actions of a
man regenerate, are more noble then Adams could have been if he stood in his
integrity; for his obedience had come from the liberty of his will, and from
his own spirit: but now under the Covenant of grace, we have a more glorious
spirit, the Spirit of Christ that works in us not by a general influence; but
a special operation, quickening, inspiring, acting and eliciting, every thing
that is good in us. But though our actions are more noble, yet less
meritorious, because they are less ours then Adams would have been.

For the second branch, that God of justice, not of favor and mercy, is to
give the reward. I answer: that justice is either in sayings or in deeds. The
former is truth and fidelity which stands in keeping of promises, of which John
speaks, he has promised pardon to them that make confession of their sins; and
therefore if you do it, he is just and faithful, (says the text) one explains
the other, and you shall be sure to have the pardon of your sins. Justice in
actions is either legal, rigid, strict justice: or else Evangelicall,
tempered, allayed justice, whereby God condescends as low as may be, parts
with as much right as possibly he can, and so gives man a reward; which appears
by the Apostles mentioning a throne of grace; a throne is a place of Justice,
yet this throne in which God sits is a throne of grace, erected upon the merits
of Christ, where strict justice is moderated, and tempered, Job 9.15.
else it were a vain thing for Job to supplicate his Judge. We may have
eternal life from this justice, and yet it is neither merited nor due.

Debetur personae non operi.
and yet hold it as a free gift coming from Gods bounty; It is due to the
person by reason of his sonship and adoption, not due to him in regard of any
perfection in his service and obedience to the heir. The inheritance is due
(says the Cardinal) we grant it, but how came he to be a son and heir? was it
not free grace that made him so? yes doubtless.

Debitorem se fecit Deus non accipiendo sed promittendo.
but by his own free engagement to us; and what moved him to make us such a
promise? It was his free grace and goodness to us.

or to deny that which is purchased for us. But let us leave this point, I
suppose it is clear to them that desire to see the truth.

You hear there is eternal life which Christ will freely give you; and herein
you have a view of his bounty:

For direction, if you remember what was said in the beginning, life eternal
is begun in this life, you must be made alive here, or else you cannot live
eternally: and if you live by faith, and are quickened who were dead in sins, I
can assure you, you shall live eternally: Bend then your thoughts to consider
whether you are alive or no, which will appear.

First, by a desire to preserve the life of grace: natural life shine there or
no? will you live in dark cellars or dungeons? or will you endure any
unwholesome air? and such are the places where the Gospel is not preached.

Romans 12.11. (...), the word signifies heat, and we would have our friends hot
in our cause; we would not have a Counselor that should plead coldly, or
indifferently, and shall we be indifferent in the service of God? far be it
from us.





And for further enlarging of this point, think what a misery it would be for
a man to marry a dead woman, to have her laid in his bed, carried to his
board, to be with her continually, it would be irksome and unpleasing. You see
Abraham would fain bury his wife Sarah out of his fight, for the face of death
is irksome and uncomfortable: And is it not the case of many a man that lives
with a dead wife, and the wife with a dead husband? if it be no sorrow to you,
it is so much the worse with you, for then you your selves are dead. A woman
goes with grief, and is daily in sorrow, if she think her child is dead in her
womb, she has no joy to think of the time of her deliverance. O what is it to
carry about with you a dead heart, a dead soul! And it is so if you be not
moved in pity to such as converse with you, of whose life in Religion you have
no warrantable nor well grounded hope.

But all you that by these or the like signs, can suppose and conclude to your
selves, that you are now alive, I dare be bold to assure you that you shall
still live and live eternally in heaven; many things may in this world trouble
you, and molest the comfort of your lives, but nothing shall cut it off,
therefore with patience wait until you enjoy a better life then you now have,
bear with patience sickliness of body, troubles of mind, the reproaches and
crosses of this life in hope of eternal life. And the consideration hereof
should make us willing to undergo any difficulties, because we hope to live
happily, and that happiness to remain eternally. And surely there is great
reason why the servants of God should wait patiently, and cheerfully expect the
accomplishment of their hope, for of all men in the world they are in the way
to the greatest preferment, and by faith they see already the bounty of God,
which shall hereafter be manifested toward them.

It may be of reproof justly to tax and challenge the most part of Christians,
but all of them intimate matter of reproof. First men that are not assured of
a better estate, are loath to leave that which they have in possession, a poor
man tha^ ^ives in a cold house and has never a good room, yet if he knows
not whither to go, he will not wil^lingly go out though it be never so cold; so
is it with many men that are miserable and poor, they have no assurance of a
better estate and therefore they are loath to leave this.

David, he had a promise of the Kingdom, and his heart was set on the service
he meant to do, when he came to the Kingdom; this may be in the mind, and
hinder the more earnest desires of heaven.

Paul that had visions and revelations was elevated higher than ordinary; he
was full of heavenly desires.

FINIS.
Die Jovis 27 May. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Valentine one of the
Assembly of Divines, is hereby thanked for his great pains taken in his Sermon
Preached yesterday before their Lordships in the Abbey Church Westminster: And
he is hereby desired to cause the same to be Printed, and published; Which is
to be done only by Authority under his own Hand.

Jo: Brown Cler: Parl'.
I Appoint Joh: Rothwell to Print my Sermon.

Tho: Valentime.




