Some of Mr. Phillip Francis misdemeanors, and Sir Alexander Caryes
treacheries discovered.
The Answer of Charles Vaghan, to the preamble of the Answer of Mr. Phillip
Francis of Plymouth, to the exceptions to the account of the said Mr. Francis
given to the Accomptants of the Kingdom.

November: 19. 1644
FIrst the said Charles Vaghan says (as in his former Answer in writing under
his hand to the Honorable Committee for Plymouth is expressed;) That about
February 1643. the Committee for sequestrations in Plymouth ( having a quantity
of Pearl in their custody, which was sequestered of the Lord of Marleboroughs,
and having great necessity of money for the payment of the garrisons in the Fort
and Island) took up 200 l. of Mr. Peter Keckwich, and delivered him the Pearl
to be carried to London, to be sold by himself, Mr. Nicholas Gould and me, who
am one of the Committee and Treasurer of the Sequestrations of that County.

About May 1644. Mr. Keckwich returning to Plymouth left the Pearl with me,
taking my receipt of them under my hand to dispose them as aforesaid, to be
sold for the greatest benefit of the State, so as Mr. Keckwich might be paid
his 200 l. and the rest that should be made of them, might be returned to
Plymouth, for the use of the Garrison as was directed by the Sequestrators
there who sent them to London.

After which time I received a Letter from the Lord Admiral (who claims an
Interest in the said Pearl) willing me to keep them till his Lordship should
come up.

The 24. of August 1644. a warrant was brought from the Committee of Plymouth
to me to deliver the Pearl to Mr. Francis, whereupon I then went unto the said
Committee, and humbly desired that the 200 l. might be had to satisfy Mr.
Keckwich, that so I might have up my scourity which he has, and that I might
(by order of the House,) be freed from the claim of the Lord Admiral, or
that the Pearl might remain with me till the business should be reconciled, or
that the Lords and Commons for Sequestrations might determine thereof, which (I
then conceived) the said Committee for Plymouth (upon hearing thereof) thought
reasonable, and which is all that I desire, which I also desired before Mr.
Keckwich his said return to Plymouth, when I acquainted the said Committee
therewith whilst he was in London, and therefore it is no new pretense by me (as
Mr. Francis suggests) and I am confident that Mr. Keckwich did lay out the 200
l. for so it appears by a Letter of Colonel William Goulds to his uncle, Mr.
Nicholas Gould of London Merchant, wherein he writes thus, viz. Sir, The great
necessity for moneys for the payment of the Garrisons in the Fort and Island,
has induced me to take up two hundred pounds of Mr. Peter Keckwich giving him
bills on you payable at 8. days sight, which bills I hope he will not have
occasion to make use of, but if he have I shall desire you to make satisfaction
of them, he depositing some or all the Pearls in your hand for your
indemnity, which money being not paid by Mr. Gould, the Pearl was left with
me by Mr. Keckwich, as aforesaid, and I have heard many Merchants of London,
and men of great worth account Mr. Keckwich to to be a very honest man, and he
has done very much for the Parliament, and therefore Mr. Francis might have
done better to accuse him when he was present to answer it. As for Mr. Francis
suggestions, that Mr. Keckwich concealed the Pearl 10. weeks after he came to
London. He was absent (being sent to Sir John Meldrum in the North) as the
Committee for Plymouth know well, but its true, we were entreated from the
sequestrators in Plymouth not to speak of it, to prevent exceptions by any
that might pretend claim to them, and so retard the supply of Plymouth which
was in great want, and so I diverse times told the Committee for Plymouth,
neither was it thought fit to trouble them with it, seeing all sequestrators in
England, (by Ordinance of Parliament) have power to dispose of things
sequestered by them.

And whereas Mr. Francis scandalously says, that Mr. Keckwich and I got the
Pearl to be prized at a very low value. I was not present nor acquainted with
it till after, but after I understood that Mr. Keckwich caused them to be
valued, by Mr. Thomas Smithes, Mr. Iervis Andrews, and Mr. William Markham
Goldsmiths of London, who are very honest men, and have very good knowledge in
such things, and I always endeavored to have them sold for the greatest
benefit of the State, as all know with whom I have had to do therein, and that
the benefit might go to Plymouth, which has brought me much trouble by Mr.
Francis his means, who may justly be suspected ever to have intended to get
the Pearl for himself, for when the Sequestrators in Plymouth would have had
the Pearl from him to be disposed, for the payment of the Garrison (which
were in great want) he refused to be examined by them to discover where they
were, and some of his family being examined swore very desperately, only one
Wood dealt ingeniously, so that by degrees it was discovered that some thing
wrapped up in Canvas, and sealed up was delivered out of Mr. Francis house over
the wall of his yard to a Cooper (his next neighbor) and brought back again
into the house, whereupon the Cooper being examined upon oath, confessed that
the box of Pearl, was delivered to him over the wall, and the same day fetched
from him again, and after the same day brought back to him again, and remained
in his custody. This double was made (as the Sequestrators understood)
purposely to delude them upon the examinations, for so the rest (who were privy
to it) did upon the examinations discover. Neither can Mr. Francis justly say
(as he pretends) that I am incensed against him out of malice, for I never
indevoured any benefit therein to my self, and there was never any difference
between him and me, but only in this: for that I endeavored that the benefit
of the Pearl might be for the Garrison of Plymouth, as the sequestrators
directed; But Mr. Francis gave out as if part of the Pearl were imbezelled by
that Noble, industrious, faithful, vigilant, and valiant Colonel Gould, (who
is now with the Lord) who (under God) was the chief preserver of Plymouth, and
thereupon Mr Francis got an Order from the Committee of Plymouth, for himself,
and Mr. Thomas Viner Goldsmith to compare the first Inventory which was taken
of the Pearl, with the Inventory which the said Colonel Gould and the rest of
the sequestrators of Plymouth sent up of them under their hands and seals,
which being diligently compared by them, they certified under their hands to
the Committee of Plymouth. That they found the Pearl to agree with both the
said Inventories; A coppie whereof I have under their hands, and the Pearl was
after valued by some who were appointed by the Committee of Plymouth, and
diverse others, and yet they all valued them under the value, which they were
valued by those who were entreated to value them by Mr. Keckwich.

The Reply of Charles Vaghan, to the Answer of Phillip Francis, to the
exceptions of the said Charles Vaghan to his Account.
WHerein I desire it may be observed, that he mis-recites all my exceptions, to
his account, by adding, altering, or leaving out part, as by comparing them,
will appear, some of which are very material, and so makes answer to
exceptions of his own. To instance only in some, for I desire that neither my
exceptions, nor his answer, may be believed, but that it may be examined upon
oath.

First, he leaves out the word (at least) and for which he is liable, they
being in custody, and freed by him. Now the word (at least) is very material,
for the truth is, that Mr. Kelland, Mr. Yard, Mr. Hody, and Mr. Giles Lowman,
were first assest by the Commissioners 2220 l. (being all Malignants) and since
Mr. Kelland has been a Commissioner, and Mr. Hody, and Mr. Yard Captains for
the Enemy, (and yet are) which yet after upon full debate of the Commissioners,
was brought down to 1720 l. at least, and it was resolved that that should
stand, without any more abatement, who after being taken by Dartmouth Troopers,
and brought to Plymouth, Mr. Francis refused to join with the rest of the
Commissioners, in the committing of them, and without, yea contrary to the
liking of the rest of the Commissioners, (after they were committed by the
rest) he labored to remove them, to some friends house in the Town, but not
prevailing therein, then he labored with the Commissioners to accept of 500 l.
from them all, but they holding it unreasonable to accept of the hundredth part
from those men (being Malignants) and to take the twentieth part of honest men
who are our friends, at length Mr. Francis accepted 800 l. and set them free
out of the Town, of which money Dartmouth (with great importunity) obtained
300 l. the rest he detained, and though there were no money at all in Mr.
Gewens hand (who was appointed by the Commissioners in Exeter, and my self to
be my deputy Treasurer for Plymouth,) left to pay the soldiers, yet he would
not part with any penny of that money to pay them.

And whereas he says the Council of war conceived it fit to compound with
them for 800 l. Quere. Whether it was thought sit, at a general Council of
War? Or whether he did not solicit some of them in private (who were his
friends) to yield to his desire therein?

And 2. Whether they had any such authority, for by the Ordinance of Parliament
dated 17. of January 1642. None has authority to set any assesments, or to
abate any but only three or more of the Commissioners thereunto appointed by
the said ordinance.

And whereas Mr. Francis says, that the Town was necessitated for money to pay
the soldiers, truly that was a reason rather that they should have taken
more, for they were badly paid, when such Malignants as they, were freed for
less then half, that which was due, and the burden lay upon the well affected
to the Parliament. And if there were such great want of money (as Mr. Francis
says, and as indeed there was) why then did he refuse (as he did) to join
with the Commissioners for the raising of moneys by assesment

But let Mr. Francis tell the truth, whether the reason, why he so freed Mr.
Kelland, was not, because his friend Mr. John Cawsse of Plymouth was indebted
to M. Kelland about 300 l. by bills and bonds (which the Commissioners would
willingly have had to pay the soldiers he being a Malignant) and whether Mr.
Francis were not himself indebted to him, and howsoever Mr. Francis says that
the money was paid to Mr. Alsop, yet it was thought fit by the Commissioners
that Mr. Francis should be responsible for the full sum assest upon those
men, seeing he discharged them so illegally, as aforesaid without the rest of
the Commissioners.

My 14. Exception is, that he craves allowance for 14. several other men's
accounts, and for the use of the money 2023 l, 5 s. 11 d. whereas those several
persons ought to give in their own accounts themselves upon their oaths, to
which and diverse other things, (which are not fit to be allowed) he subscribes
thus, Phillip Francis errors accepted, and so he swears unto it, so as he may
swear truly, and yet his account be false.

This exception he smothers much, reciting it only thus The last exception is
to his subscription (viz errors excepted.

To which he answers that he concludes his account as all merchants do, and
that if Mr. Vaghan knew as well to account for the money he receives, as he
does to receive it, he would not take this exception. And whenever he will
give in his account for 80000 l. or there abouts which he has received of the
states money and given no account for the same, on pretense that he has lost
his accounts, it is wished that there be no greater errors found therein, so
that the said Phillip Francis rests assured, that this will give satisfaction
to all honest men that his account is just and true.

Now whereas he answers, that he concludes his account as all merchants do. 1.
To this I reply, that though Merchants may so conclude their accounts in
tradings between Merchant and Merchant yet when their accounts are to be
questioned in the Chancery, or any other Court, I hope such a subscription,
answer and oath that it is true (errors accepted) will not be allowed, for if
such a gap should be opened, then it would be too little purpose that the
accounts of the Kingdom should be taken, nay why then should not Mr. Francis
bring in all the accounts of Devon, and consequently of all the Kingdom (as
well as those many which he endeavored to huddell up in his own account, had
not the just accountants of the Kingdom given farther order to examine them)
and then (if he would have favored me so much) he might have brought in my
account also, yea he might so have made a very short and easy business of all
the accounts of the Kingdom, if it would have been allowed him so to bring in
all accounts (as he endeavored to do those) and to subscribe his name unto
them, and swear, that they were true errors excepted.

2. Whereas he says that I have received 80000 l. of the states money or there
about I have not received half so much money, for he knows I received not the
money that was paid upon assesments, in Dartmouth, Plymouth, and Barnestable,
but it was received and paid there by order of the rest of the Commissioners
for the maintenance of the Garrisons in those parts, and all the money that was
assest in Exeter (during the last siege) was (by order of the Council of
war, and with the consent of the Commissioners there) paid to Nicholas Leach
Esquire, who was appointed Commissary, and during that time, paid the Garrison
there, So that its well, that Mr. Francis put in the word 80000 l. or there
about.

3. Whereas in his answer he says that he charged 200 l. only for Interest. By
his account (of which I have a coppie) it appears that he craves allowance for
14 several other men's accounts, and for the use of the money, at least 2023 l.
5 s, 11 d. as my exception is.

4. Whereas he says that I have given no account for the same on pretense I
have lost my accounts.

To this I answer, that it is too true that my books of account, which I left
as safe as my own books and evidence (of great importance,) were also taken
by the enemy, after Exeter was yielded up, (as the party from whom they were
taken) and diverse others of worth and credit (who are here) cantestifie: and
before I came a mile out of Exceter the Enemy robbed me of all the money I had,
and took away my man's horse and cloke-bag and all that was therein, so that
had I brought away the said books of account they had bin taken from me also,
which Mr. Francis could not be ignorant of, and therefore he did not well to set
out in print, that I have given no account for the money that I have received,
on pretense, that I have lost my accounts.

But to manifest my unfeigned desire to have my accounts again; about 3. months
since I made my petition proposing, a means (prejudicial to none but those who
have my accounts) only to enforce them to restore them, which by the favor of
the Honorable Committee of Plymouth, I hope to obtain, and then let Mr.
Francis accept thereunto if he can; I desire no favor from him, nor any
therein, for the more it is questioned the more my faithfulness to the
Parliament will appear. Besides it is well known what I have done for the
Parliament, and that I also stand bound and engaged for them above 4000 l. and
there is also much money due to me upon my account, as I can sufficiently
prove, besides many arms which I provided for the Parliament, which Mr.
Francis had, and has given no account of them.

Now in the conclusion of my exceptions to Mr. Francis account, I say thus,
(besides diverse other things which may be excepted against in his account)
whereby I intended to keep (a Reserve) if he should show any cause to avoid
any of my exceptions, so that notwithstanding his Answer, I conclude as before;
That by his own account he acknowledges that he has received 2553 l. 19 s. 9
d. so that (the foresaid exceptions being allowed) there is 750 l. 2 s. 9 d.
due from him to the Parliament, besides diverse other things which may be
excepted against in his account, and yet he demands 6000 l. 7 s. 6 d. as due to
him from the Parliament, and would have the foresaid Pearl in part of
satisfaction thereof, which being for the public benefit, I thought it my
duty to acquaint the Honorable House of Parliament therewith.

Now its true that Mr. Francis (in the beginning of his Majoralty held with the
right side, which bred a good opinion of him both in the Country and here yet
after, when he heard of Sir William Wallers blow at the Vizes, etc. he fell off
to Sir Alexander Carye, and that knot of Vtrusques who look only to their own
preferment and estates, and from that time became a great friend to those whom
before he accounted enemies and the more the West grew to be lost, the more he
stuck to that side, and still does, but by reason of his former carriage, and
some friends, he was so represented, that all after well doings were ascribed
to him, and it was so carried by him, that it was believed by many worthy men,
(though he were no way guilty of it) for instance.

The keeping of the Island, or rather the recovery of it was attributed unto
him whereas in truth he deserved to be punished for his neglect in that
business; for the truth is, there were plain discoveryes of Sir Alexander
Caryes intention, to revolt before it was done. As

First, by his secret intelligence and correspondence with Mr. Edgecombe, and
others of the enemies side in Cornwall.

Secondly, by his going over secretly to Mount Edgecombe to confer with them.

Thirdly, the contents of a letter written by him, wherein he promised upon the
procurement of his pardon, and security of his estate (which pardon was
accordingly procured, and his stock marked with Mr. Edgecombes mark, to
preserve them for him) to perform what he had promised to them.

Fourthly, Overtures made to the soldiers in the Island to take his part, and
to make their peace with the enemy, and diverse other things of this kind, and
all this made known to Mr. Francis with tender of proof upon Oath, and
withal he was diverse times urged, and pressed by some of the most
considerable honest men of the town (when Sir Alexander was in the town) to
have stayed him there, and secured his person, for prevention of the treachery,
or at leastwise to have suffered them to do it, yet he would not be persuaded
thereunto, but showed his dislike to those who brought such information, and
solicited him therein, until in truth the Island was lost, and by a miraculous
providence of God recovered again without any help of his.

But it may be demanded, why I did not discover this, concerning Sir Alexander
Carry and Mr. Francis till now.

To which I answer, that Collonell Gould, and others at Plymouth, did send up
Articles against Mr. Francis wherein this was complained, and many other foul
misdemeanors against him, and Mr. Throtell was sent up by them to prosecute
it, which he accordingly did, and retained Mr Prin, who (as I heard) desired a
Commission to prove the Articles, because many of the witnesses were Officers
and Soldiers in Plymouth, and therefore could not come to London, but it
seems that by reason of Mr. Throtells neglect to prosecute further, the
business was not proceeded in, which being understood by those at Plymouth (who
sent up the said Articles) they were displeased with Mr. Throtell, and (as I
heard) purposed to send up some other to prosecute therein, which I daily
expected, and therefore thought fit to leave it to them, who much better know
the business then I do.

Much more might be said, and this might (by a more skillful pen) much better
be expressed, but I have so much endeavored to be breife, as I have omitted
diverse material things, desiring to be believed in nothing, but what I have
under the hands or from the testimony of men worthy to be credited, and shall
be proved by oath, if it may be examined, by such most godly Ministers and
Gentlemen whose doings and sufferings have made them appear to be most
faithful to the Parliament.

Charles Vaghan.

FINIS.

