A TRUE BREVIATE OF THE Great Oppressions and Injuries done to EVAN VAUGHAN
Postmaster of IRELAND; By EDMOND PRIDEAUX, Esquire Attorney General, And
Postmaster of ENGLAND, since March, 1648.

I. THe said Evan Vaughan having been for fifteen years last past Postmaster
of Dublin, by the appointment of Mr. Witherings, formerly Post-Master-General
of England, afterward by Mr. Burlamachi; which place in the year 1642. was
confirmed to him, by the said Mr. Prideaux upon certain Articles. In the year
1646. the aforesaid Vaughan was forced to come for England, having lost all his
means in Ireland, for subsisting; but in May 1647. Colonel Michael Jones, and
the rest of the Commissioners for Ireland went over, with whom the said Vaughan
went from London, upon the former Articles with Master Prideaux, as Postmaster
of Dublin, and continued so till April, 1649. At which time, the said Mr.
Prideaux unjustly discharged him of his said Employment, because he would not
abate him Twenty shillings a week of his Sallary, formerly allowed him by Mr.
Witherings, and Mr. Burlamachi, and granted him upon the said Articles by the
said Mr. Prideaux; which is ready to be produced under his Hand and Seal.

II. The said Mr. Prideaux in pursuance of his covetous ends which the said
Vaughan would not submit unto, did out of Spleen to the said Vaughan,
maliciously suggest to his Excellency the Lord General, then Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, many false things to the said Vaughans disadvantage; endeavoring to
destroy him in his good name, and thereby to deprive him not only of his then
place and livelihood, but also of his Excellencies favor, to obtain any other
way to live; knowing that being done, he could ruin him at his pleasure: And
in order thereunto, did contrary to his own knowledge, and the Certificates of
Col. Jones, and diverse other Officers of the Army in Ireland, and Merchants of
Dublin, on the said Vaughans behalf, charge the said Vaughan with
unfaithfulness in the management of his trust, making use of that pretense to
out the said Vaughan, in regard he would not yield to his covetous desire, to
abate the said Twenty shillings a week of his Sallary; Notwithstanding, the
said Mr. Prideaux comings-in then, was above Four thousand pounds a year raised
for him, by the industry and labor of the said Evan Vaughan, and the rest of
the Post-Masters of England, whom he also assured by his promise, That every
man should reap the benefit of his own labor, and to be their protector
against all wrongful opposers on that behalf.

III. The said Evan Vaughan having, though to his great expenses in many
journeys, cleared himself of those scandals, and confirmed his Excellencies
favor toward him, by evidencing the Equity of his Complaint, and making appear
his Innocence, as to those things laid to his charge: His Excellency thereupon
promised to procure him his place again, with all profits thereto belonging.
Whereupon the said Evan Vaughan came to London again, in order to obtain Mr.
Prideaux good will therein, that he might be free from further vexations, and
presented him with an account of 36 pounds and 18 shillings, or-thereabouts,
due to him for service upon account, according to the aforesaid Articles, which
he denied to accept of; and told him, if he would give him such an account, as
he would approve of, he would accept of it, and would let the said Vaughan
enjoy his place again, according to the former Articles, saying, I see you have
the Lord Lieutenants good will: Upon which account, to buy Mr. Prideaux favor,
the said Vaughan was forced to make himself debtor to him Forty pound and nine
shillings; so he gave him near Eighty pound to keep himself out of his place,
as it did afterward appear: For when he came to Dublin, another had a
Commission from Mr. Prideaux for executing his Office or place in Dublin
aforesaid.

IV. Afterward the said Vaughan, by Petition made his case known to the Lord
General, then at Cork, whereupon His Excellency granted him a Commission to be
Postmaster General of Ireland; being fully satisfied of his Fidelity and
Abillity to discharge that place, and wrote a Letter to that purpose, in his
behalf, to the Council of State, who did also approve of, and confirmed his
said Commission.

V. The said Master Prideaux upon an Order from the Council of State, did
Article with the said Vaughan for maintaining two Post Barques to be employed
between Milford-Haven and Ireland; and then declared before the Committee, that
he would defray and pay the charge of the Post Barques, so long as he should
continue Postmaster, and promised to advance the said Vaughan a Hundred pound:
But afterward, Mr. Prideaux being confirmed by the Council in his place, would
not let the said Vaughan have a penny, unless he would give him a Bond and
Security; who being ready to leave the Town, and wanting money, he was forced
to do; but after the Bond was sealed, he gave him only a Note to receive Nine
and fifty pound eleven shillings, and stopped the Forty pound and nine shillings,
which he pretended he owed him; notwithstanding, he had kept the said Vaughan
most injuriously out of his place, and put him to the expense of many journeys,
to the hazard of his life, both by Sea and Land, and to the impoverishing of
Himself, Wife, and Family.

VI. Having been forced to yield to his Oppression, in that particular, the
said Vaughan nevertheless went cheerfully about the States business, and settled
the two Post Barques at Milford, and returned Certificates of the same to the
Committee of Scotch and Irish Affairs; which service was well approved of by
them; and when he arrived in Ireland, did settle what stages he could in
Munster: And afterward got leave to go from the Head quarters to Dublin,
purposely to settle that place in order to the Lord Deputy Iretons command; but
when he came thither, the said Mr. Prideaux, contrary to his word and assurance
given him, had Articled with Major Swift for his place there; so that he was
forced to return as he came to the Headquarters. And Four months after, the
said Vaughan being commanded by the Lord Deputy to settle Stages between Dublin
and Londonderry, he did the same upon his own charges; as also went into
Scotland with a Packet to the Lord General; and there presented his Excellency
with a Petition, setting forth the Wrongs and Injuries done to him, by the said
Mr. Prideaux: Whereupon his Excellency granted him another Commission,
expressing, That none should be employed in Dublin as Post Master, but the said
Vaughan, or his Deputy.

VII. The said Vaughan having by Virtue of the last recited Commission, settled
a Deputy at Dublin, and being commanded with a Packet from the Commissioners
of Parliament for England, he came again to London, and then desired Mr.
Prideaux to pay what was due for the Post-Barques service, but he refused to
pay their wages; by which means he was forced to Petition the Council of State
for their pay; and Master Prideaux after Three months attendance was ordered
to pay him the same, being Two hundred pounds, after abating of near Fifty
pound in the account: Which Order being issued to him, he refused to observe,
but lent only Seventy pound to the said Vaughan, and then desired him to
settle Stages in South Wales, which he did: Notwithstanding all these
discouragements, hoping, That his observance of Master Prideaux will, would in
some measure diminish his cruelty, and rigor, and incite him to do him right.
Whereupon the said Mr. Prideaux wrote a Letter to his Agent at Dublin to
discharge him, well approving of the said Vaughans Commissions, and promised to
give him satisfaction for his journey, when he should come back from
South Wales, and endeavor payment of the money the Council of State had ordered
him; but upon the said Vaughans coming to London, he was forced to Petition
again; and though he obtained the second Order, the said Mr. Prideaux delayed
the payment thereof so long, that during his attendance on him, he was Arrested
for money that he had taken up to perform the States service; which, the said
Two hundred pound the Council had ordered him, was to discharge; and then Mr.
Prideaux hearing of his troubles, would not pay him a penny: But thinking that
he could never come out of prison, most unjustly did write a second Letter to
his Agent at Dublin, letting him understand, That if he was in the employment,
he might continue in it still; for he thought Mr. Vaughan would not trouble him
any more. A lively expression of his cruelty, and desire of revenge.

VIII. After the said Vaughan had made means to come out of prison, he went to
Mr. Prideaux, and desired the rest of his money that was behind, which the
Council had ordered him to pay, and what was then due for the Post Barques
hire; for Mr. Prideaux had paid some out of the money, which the Council had
ordered him, upon the said Vaughans Bills to Mr. Peter's, and to one Cap.
Thomas, about One hundred and fifteen pound: But Master Prideaux would neither
pay him any money, nor deliver his Bond for the Seventy pound, nor give him any
satisfaction for his journey, but very scornfully bid him take his course;
knowing very well he might by his power and interest over-sway, and persuade
many persons then in power against him; as the said Vaughan had found it, by
Mr. Bond, to whom Mr. Prideaux had promised to speak in his behalf; but on the
contrary, told him many things against him, which were made appear to be false,
before Master Prideaux at the Committee, when the said Two hundred pound was
ordered him.

IX. The aforesaid Vaughan did then again Petition the Council of State, which
Petition was referred to the Committee for Irish Affairs, who was to hear his
further agrievances, and Master Prideaux defense, and to report back the same
to the Council: To which end, a day being appointed, and Master Prideaux
desired to be there; the first day he sent word, that he could not attend; and
the second sitting he came, and through his subtilty, and other advantages,
persuaded the Committee not to do any thing in the business.

X. The aforesaid Vaughan finding that he could have no Justice against him,
in relation to his own Complaints, appeared in the behalf of one he had engaged
in the States service; to wit, Master White of Milford, and desired, That the
said Mr. White might have satisfaction from Mr. Prideaux, out of the moneys
which he could make appear to be due unto him from Mr. Prideaux; but he could
have no redress therein; notwithstanding, many Noble Persons did endeavor it on
his behalf, by which means, he was left in a sad condition, and not able to pay
Mr. White, who is not yet satisfied.

This is but a short Recapitulation of the most obvious Injuries, which the
said Vaughan has suffered by the injustice and oppression of the said Master
Prideaux, which if it be looked upon with an Impartial eye, will sufficiently
plead for the said Vaughan, and from the hands of Justice require a
Compensation answerable to his great loss and damages, amounting to above two
thousand pounds, sustained since Master Prideaux had any thing to do with the
Post Office. All these being but one Instance of the said Master Prideaux
Spleen, Covetousness, and desire of Revenge, to all which he prostituted his
power, as many others besides the said Vaughan, have been dearly sensible of,
and now hopes for and expects satisfaction.

All which, and much more will be justified upon Oath.

Evan Vaughan.

FINIS.

