THE SCHISMATIC SIFTED. OR, The Picture of INDEPENDENTS, Freshly and Fairly
Washt-over again. Wherein, the Sectaries of these Times (I mean, the principal
Seducers to that dangerous and subtle Schism of Independency) are with their
own proper Pensils, and Self-mixed Colors, most lively set forth to be a
Generation of notorious Dissemblers and fly Deceivers.

Collected (for the most part) from undeniable Testimonies under their own
Hands, in Print; for the more fair and full satisfaction, and undeceiving of
moderate and much misled Christians; especially by the outward appearance of
their Piety of Life, and a pretense of their Preaching sound-Doctrine.

By JOHN VICARS.

For Sions sake, I cannot hold my peace. ISAIAH, 62. 1. Now I beseech you,
Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For, These, that are Such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; And by good words and fair
speeches, Deceive the Simple. ROMANS 16. 17, 18. London: Printed for Nathanael
Webb, and William Grantham, at the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the Right Honorable, and most worthily to be highly honored THOMAS ADAMS,
Esquire; Lord Major of the most famous and renowned City of LONDON; I. V.
prays all increase of Gracious Honor, here and of Glorious Happiness,
hereafter.
Right Honorable:
IT was the sad and unhappy complaint of the Prophet Jeremy in his days, and
in that ungracious and ungrateful City, Jerusalem; That no man among them was
valiant for the Truth. Jer. 9. 3. Nay, the Lord himself, by the same Prophet,
seeming to be, as it were, transported with holy indignation and just jealousy
of neglect of his honor, and worship, bids them Run to and fro through the
streets of Jerusalem, to see and seek if they could find any one man that loved
the Truth. Jer. 5. 1. Yea, this penury of pious men was not only among the poor
and mean men, Ver. 4. But even among the Great Men and Rulers of Jerusalem,
ver. 5 But, o the honor and happiness of this most famous, faithful and ever
renowned City of London! This City of our God, of which (most justly) so many
glorious Things are, and may, and must be spoken, to the Glory of God, and
honor thereof! Over which, such a renowned and religious, such a valiant and
virtuous Governor is set (verifying that of the Prophet, Nah. 2. 3. (though
there, Iconfess, spoken in another sense:) That our valiant men are in Scarlet,
even your good Lordship, who have bin, as it were, purposely placed and
appointed by God himself for these times; and who are so valiant and
courageous for the Truth of your God, and the glorious work of Gospel
Reformation, as cannot be dampt or daunted with any vaporous and seeming
Eclipsing Clouds of unworthy Disgusts raised by the selfish and elfish Envy of
Schismatic spirits, which of late have, only, passed over the fair face and
clear Sunshine of your Honors Piety and Integrity; For with unvanquishable
Valor and Vigor of Zeal for God and his Truth, (like a pious Patriot, indeed)
your Honor has most gravely and graciously dispelled them all, standing
still, like an immovable, invincible, and impregnable Rock; or rather running
on, like the active Sun in the Firmament with so much the more resplendent
Beauty, and radiant Luster, in a sweet and swift course of Constant Piety and
Magnanimity, for the advancement of the immaculate Cause of your God, and the
Commonwealth, to the high honor of God, and singular joy and comfort of all
the true Presbyterian Saints and Sons of our English Sion, both in City and
Country. Ride on prosperously, then, (my most honorable good Lord,) in the
Cause of Truth and Righteousness, backed with the sacred Suffrages and
faithful Affections of very many thousands of most peaceable honest-hearted
and God-honouring Covenanters, both in City and Country, yea, even of a whole
Nation of loyal and loving Scottish-Brethren, who, with us, most justly look
for and long for the happy and holy consummating of a glorious Reformation of
the Kingdoms Grievances, and establishment of a blessed Church Discipline,
according to the Mind of our great Master Christ Jesus, and the plain literal
meaning of our sacred solemn Covenant. And hence (my honorable good Lord) I
have bin humbly bold (emboldened by your Honors much experienced candor and
courtesy toward me, the meanest and most unworthy of all your Lordships
Votaries) to dedicate this little, but, I hope, very necessary and useful
Treatise (considering these seducing staggering and unstable-times) as a small
Symbol, and though poor and plain, yet true Tessera of my bounden Gratitude,
to your Honors pious Patronage: Thus, I say, both, to take fit occasion to
manifest my obliged hearts Thankfulness for your Lordships many most free and
friendly favors; As also, by this, though succinct, yet sincere discovery of
the sly and subtle Dissemblers and Deceivers of our days, and consequently
the mayn molesters and disturbers of the happy settlement of a godly
Church Government among us; As also thus to add, at least, one small stick to
increase the flame (though I am confident I need not) of your good Lordships
godly zeal in this glorious work, so much and so maliciously opposed by the
impious and impudent Sectaries of these most sadly distracted Times. Which,
humbly hoping your Honor will with accustomed Christian candor, and exuberant
friendly favor, heartily accept; The continued, yea perpetuated Increase of
all Honor and Happiness to your good Lordship, in this your renowned
Majoralty, and to the period of your pious Pilgrimage, shall be the daily
devoted prayers of

Your Honors most humble and eve^ to be commanded, observant Servant in the
Lord, John Vicars.

To the godly and impartial READER.
THe great dishonor (good Reader) which I have frequently observed to be done
to my God, in the abuse of his Truth; and the strange cockering of Errors and
Schisms, by Truths too violent and virulent Adversaries and Antagonists:
Together with the familiar vilifying and extreme undervaluing of Truths loyal
Presbyterian Propugnators, and the most unreasonable high esteem and loud and
lofty Elogies which the foolish World falsely and fondly blatters forth in
praise of Schismatic Independents, and the rest of these Times most
seditious and dangerous Sectaries, whose great (and yet most just) unhappiness
it is, that they cannot mayntain any thing (for the most part) of what they
schismatically profess, but by gross untruths, brainsick Enthusiasmes,
fictitious New-Lights, alias, old-blasphemous Errors, and too often by
down-right-lyes. All these respects, I say, have made me (the meanest and most
unworthy of ten thousand of my godly Presbyterian-Brethren) in fervent Zeal to
God and his Truth, and in pure love and loyalty to her faithful Presbyterian
Friends, thus (according to my Talent) to set Pen to paper, and (with as much
faithfulness as resolved freedom) with their own hands to stop the mouths,
and with their own Pens to give a check to the untrue Tongues of these so high
Pretenders to such soundness in Doctrine, and Integrity of Life and
Conversation, as they themselves and their Schismatic Scycophants do most
frothily and falsely brag and boast them to be. And although I do (as I must)
make account, herein, to pass through bad report, as well as good report for
this my Pains: yet, so I may bring any honor to God, and his most precious
Truth, and add (though but a mite of Zeal) toward the just vindication (which
I have in some measure, in this Treatise endeavored) of my reverend good
Friend, because Truths fast Friend, I mean, learned and religious Mr. Edwards,
in his Christian faithfulness and godly fervor (especially in his learned and
elaborate Antapologie, That invincible weapon, which has given our Independent
Sectaries such an incurable wound as they will never be able to claw off or
heal up) against these Truths most crafty and calumniating Adversaries; yet
notwithstanding, I say, I pass or care not (having, I praise my God, that
Murum aheneum, the testimony of a good conscience within me) for all the false
and flashy slanders, that Any, or All of them can strugle to asperse and
spatter me with. However, beseeching the Lord that this my poor and honest
labor may produce so much good, as either to open the eyes of some pious and
plain-hearted Seduced-ones (as, many such, I am verily persuaded, are among
them, who heartily desire to know and love the Truth) if it be the Lords good
pleasure; or, at last to stablish and confirm the hearts of those that
already, really and cordially love the Truth and Peace, and heartily hate
Schism and disorderly Confusion, I rest,

Thine to serve thee in the Lord Jesus; JOHN VICARS.

The Names of the five pious Apologists, principally mentioned in this Treatise.

Master
Thomas Goodwin. Philip Nigh. William Bridge. Jeremiah Buroughs. Sidrach
Simpson.
The Names of the seven religious Remonstrants, mainly also mentioned, in this
Work.

Master
William Greenhill. Thomas Goodwin- Philip Nigh. William Bridge. Jeremiah
Buroughs. Sydrach Simpson. William Carter.
Together with diverse other Heads of the Independent Faction.

THE SCHISMATIC SIFTED.
HAving, not long since, dilucidated and plainly painted forth, to the sight of
All (in my Picture of Independency) the Basis or Ground of that, as unhappy, as
unholy- Schism of Independency, to be Spirituall-Pride, Self-Seeking, and most
gross Ingratitude to God and Man: And having of late, and long time indeed,
had many sad and serious thoughts, What should be the reason of the so constant
and great growth of all-Sorts of Sectaries among us, which, as the
Superstructure, on that triple-foundation, have (according to our old Proverb,
too true at this time, Ill weeds grow apace.
Ill weeds grow apace) mightily increased, and grown mavelous rife and rank
in the Garden of God (for want of serious and seasonable Weeding) to the great
endangering, choking and stifling of the holy and wholesome Herbs and Flowers of
Unity, true Peace and Piety; Want of weeding of Gods Garden, the Church.
At last I found by sad and bad experience, that beside the great want of care
and sedulity in the Gardiners and Guardians (under God) of his Garden, the
Church, faithfully and effectually to weed and dress it, I mean, through the
strange impunity and intolerable Toleration of Sectaries and Schismatics, so
out-facingly to flourish and sprout out among us) beside this, I say, Satan
that old Serpentine-seducer, had made use of an old sly Stratagem of his,
herein, to wit; That those pernicious weeds should grow-up, and shoot-forth
exceeding like unto most sweet and fragrant Flowers and wholesome Herbs,
whereas, indeed, upon proof and experience, being used and smelt unto, they
were nothing so, but, contrariwise, exceeding bitter, bad, poisonous and
unwholesome. But, to speak Plain-English (for, Plain-English.
since They so crave and cry-out for Liberty of Conscience, to do what they
list, unjustly: I hope it is much-more lawful for me to desire Liberty or
Freedom of speech, (to speak nothing but truth plainly and honestly) and to
leave allegorical expressions, and (if it be lawful in these doubling days)
to call a Spade a Spade, which I am resolved to do, yet with all possible
Christian moderation and godly temper that may be, considering the subject I
write of; I find, I say, that the two mayn Stratagems which Satan uses, at
this time, to cheat and deceive the world, 1 Pretended Piety and holiness of
life one great cause of the growth of Independencie.
yea, even many of the truly godly-Party; indeed, and to cause all sorts of
Schisms and Errors thus to increase and multiply among us, I mean,
especially, that most sly and subtle (and therefore the most dangerous)
Schism of Independency; The two mayn Stratagems, I say, for the more
uncontrollable propagation hereof, are; first, a popular appearance and outward
habit of Holiness, (if there be any more, I beseech them to let us see it by
integer practice) of Life and conversation; for, come and talk with any of our
moderate (if not neutrall) or tender-conscienced even Presbyterians, who (many
of them) stand, as it were, on tip-toe, wavering which way to stand or fall,
and ask them how it comes to pass, and possibly can be, that seeing these
Independents, Anabaptists, etc. broach, and preach and practice such dangerous
opinions and unwarranted Church-ways (as they call them) to the great
distraction and disturbance of the godly Peace and tranquillity both of Church
and State, 2 Pretense of Preaching Sound Doctrine another Cause of Independents
growth among us.
when we have given them clear Demonstrations from the fountain of Truth it
self, that their ways and opinions are not according to Christ and
Scripture-Grounds; yet, still, there answer is, O, I dare not but think and
speak well of them, and hold them to be good Christians, because they walk so
holtly and religiously; And also (say they, in the second place) because they
preach and teach as sound Doctrines as any of our Presbyterian-Ministers. And
thus, I say, upon these two hinges turns the door of Independents growing hopes
of impunity, and a continued good opinion, even, I say, among our own
Presbyterian Party, whereby, doubtless, they are greatly mistaken in them,
and, I fear, grossly gulled by them, and, so, wrong the Truth, in countenancing
and encouraging her Enemies, and retarding the work of Reformation. For a
brief answer to both which; though I intend not to enter into a Polemicall
Dispute of these things (which, I know would prove as endless as fruitless,
especially with them who are familiarly known to love to live, Schismatics are
like Salamanders.
Salamander-like, in the fire of hot and heady Disputes) yet, I trust, by Gods
gracious assistance to give the godly, judicious and impartial Readers such
pregnant proofs and Demonstrative and real testimonies (and that briefly too)
of the exceedingly to be feared falsity and great mistake of both these, in our
Independents and their Brother-Sectaries, that they must in conscience,
certainly, confess the invalidity and weakness of their opinions and
assertions of them, and see and say, that they are, surely, mistaken in them,
and palpably deceived by them. 1 Pretense of Preaching sound Doctrine a cause
of Independents growth.
To begin, then with the last of these first; Whereas it is pretended by some
of our own, that they dare not but speak and think well of Independents,
because (as they say) they preach as sound-doctrines as any of the best-
Presbyterians do: Hereunto I answer, first, in general; That although I deny
not, but that oftentimes they preach sound-Doctrine; yet, they frequently
intermix much of their own unsavory and unfound leven of false-Opinions,
together with the sound-Doctrines, which they deliver. Witness, That vehement,
pernicious, yea even most damnable plea for a Toleration of all Opinions and
Liberty of Conscience, the highway to ruinate and destroy all Religion and
Conscience; Together with their most ungodly inveighing against, both in
Pulpits and Presses, that godly Church Discipline, which is regulated, as near
as may be, by Gods sacred Word, and the pattern of the best and most purely
Reformed Churches in Europe; Sound-Doctrine overthrown by our Independents.
and only crying-up a most licentious, unlimited and Independent-destructive
Government of their own ungrounded invention; Whereby (by a clear and
undeniable necessary-Consequence) they most undiscreetly, yea,
irreligiously-endevour to overthrow and utterly, I say, to ruinate all
sound-Doctrine and pure Truth it self.

For, A pregnant S^^^le.
as it cannot be denied by any that the Word of God soundly preached, and the
Sacraments purely administered, are Gods Field of Corn, his precious Vineyard,
his Garden of fragrant Flowers and wholesome Herbs; The Word and Sacraments are
the Vineyard or Garden of the Lord.
And, as, a wise Gardener, or provident Husbandman or Vine-dresser, when he
has planted a Garden or Vineyard, or sown a Corn-field, presently takes care
to build a wall, or make a strong Fence or Hedge about the same, to preserve
them from hurtful Beasts; which otherwise would break-in, destroy the Flowers
or Grapes, and root up and utterly spoil the good Corn: So (although in the
first place, it must be most justly granted, as I said before, that
sound-doctrines, and the Sacraments rightly administered, are the Garden of God,
and do contein the Body and substance of Soul-saving-Truth, as being the
Fountain and Foundation thereof; yet) it is as true, that godly-order, and
Scripture-Discipline, or Church Government is the Hedge, Godly Government or
Scripturall Church Discipline is the Wall or Fence about it.
Wall, or strong-Fence, which God, the most prudent and provident Gardener or
Husbandman, of this his precious, Garden, Vineyard, or Field of Corn, has
planted and built round about the same, both to keep in safety and security the
specious and precious Flowers, Herbs, Corn, and Grapes, for the pious
Professors of his Word and Truth to be nourisht, cherisht and fed by them to
eternall-life; and thus to keep out the noisome and hurtful wild-beasts and
Boars of the Forest, (I mean, all sorts of tyrannizing Misbelievers,
Heretics, Papists, and profane Atheists) and all crafty Foxes, yea, even the
little-Foxes (I mean, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Independents, Seekers, and such
like Libertines,) who, otherwise, all of them (this Wall, Hedge, or Fence being
plucked up or taken away) would soon run in, ruinate and root up and destroy the
precious Corn, fragrant Flowers, and tender Grapes thereof; even utterly
overthrow the Fountain and Foundation of sound-Doctrine, and put in poison of
Errors, and blasphemous and most dangerous, yea, damnable Opinions and
Heresies among them, I say to the utter undoing and overthrow of the Foundation
or Fountain, even of sound-doctrine and Truth it self. This, I conceive, is a
most faithful and undeniable Truth; and (though I know all sorts of Sectaries
will carp, snap and snarl at it) shall therefore satisfy me, and may also, (I
think) satisfy all other godly and moderate Christians, who desire to be wise
with sobriety; But, if it will not, then to come to particulars, and so more
closely to the point in hand. Is not, to broach and preach that most wicked and
accursed doctrine of Toleration of all Religions (as I touched before) yea, of
all Heresies, Fals-doctrines preached and broached by Independents and other
Sectaries.
Errors, Sects and Schisms, under that sly, subtle, ungrounded and most
ungodly pretext of Liberty of Conscience, forsooth, is not this, I say, a
preaching of false-Doctrine? Is not the broaching and preaching of the
Scripture, not to be the Word of God? Of the performance of holy Duties and
expression of godly sorrow for sin, and penitent praying for forgiveness of
sin; yea, and the performance of all these with an honest, humble, self-denying
and Christ-seeking broken-soul, to be called or counted no better than casting
dirt (as it were) into Gods face? Are not all these, my Brethren, together with
exceeding many more such like, yea, some far worse (if it may be) blasphemous
and damnable Doctrines and enormous Opinions, set forth at large by reverend
Master Edwards, in his Gangraena, are not all these, I say, palpable Preaching
and broaching of false-doctrines? and, if not all of them, yet many of them
preached by our so admired Independents; and either few or none of all the
rest, are at any time preached against (nay are they not countenanced and
encouraged) by them? Wherefore, Object.
if any shall, still, object and say, That those forementioned dangerous
Opinions, and the rest related by Master Edwards are not the Opinions of the
more solid and temperate Independents; but, Answ.
are the Anabaptists, Antinomians, and such like: I answer, They are moderate
and most seeming solid Independents which plead and Preach mightily for
Toleration, Toleration and Liberty of Conscience the only Inlets for all other
abominable Opinions.
and Liberty of Conscience, which, most directly are the Inlets, open sluices,
and wide-gaps for all the rest to rush and gush in amongst us; And therefore,
distinguish them as you please: and call them what you will, hereof I am most
confident; That though our most moderate and supposed most discreet
Independents may seem only in some things to differ and vary, and in their
Heads or Brains (as I may say) to be somewhat distant from some of the rest of
the dangerous Sectaries; Judges 15. 3, 4.
yet are they all like Sampsons Foxes) fast tied by their Tayls, Independents
and all other Sectaries compared most fitly to Sampsons Foxes.
with destructive Firebrands of Dissension, Division, and Confusion between
them, to destroy (as much as in them is) the good-corn of Gods-field, by their
most ungodly struglings, studies, plots, and calumnies, to ruinate the Wall,
and pluckup the Hedge or safe Fence, I mean (as we all too sensibly feel at
this day) to hinder and oppose with all might and malice, power and policy, the
Settlement of the godly Government and Scripturall-Discipline of our pious and
peaceful Presbyterians. And are these, now, the sound and orthodox men, that
are so highly commended and blazoned abroad for their sincerity and soundness
in Doctrine? Who, thus dare, so boldly (yet craftily, I confess) broach abroad
such false Doctrines, and thus preach and prate against Gods most pure and
soul-saving Truths? Certainly, then, am I mightily mistaken.

But, now, to come to the second or other main part of our own Presbyterian
friends Common-plea for Independents, and the other cause of their great growth
amongst us, viz. their Holiness of life, which we have great ground and cause to
fear, 2 Pretended Piety a second Cause of Independents growth among us.
(and more than to fear) is but pretended and in appearance; which, indeed,
is, I say, the main thing I here intend to insist on, and principally to prove
against them (as I have promised) and that, under their own Hands, by most
undeniable testimonies. And, herein, I shall first desire briefly to premise
thus much by way of introduction to what is to follow; namely, that this has
ever been (even in all ages and times) Satan's old-Cloke, too well known to be
almost worn quite threadbare, by frequent and familiar use among Deceivers.
For if we look back to bypast times, and read Ecclesiastical Histories, we
shall most truly know, and unquestionably understand that those grand and
gross Heretics, and Ringleaders to dangerous and damnable Heresies, Errors,
and Schisms in the Church of God, The seeming Holiness of Heretics of the
Primitive Church.
especially in the Primitive Churches, and former times, as Arrius, Pelagius,
Arminius etc. were all of them, men of extraordinary outward holy lives, and
(to see to) of most integer conversation, even to general admiration and
approbation for their parts and piety, and to the singular love and liking of
all the people among whom they then lived; And yet they were, all of them, most
notorious, dangerous, yea damnable Heretics. And look up also, The outward
seeming Holy Lives of the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors time.
even to our most blessed Saviors time, and there we shall find the Scribes
and Pharisees to be outwardly, such demurely seeming Saints* such pure and holy
persons to see to, that it was an universally received opinion, among all the
common people, the Jews of those times, That if any two men in the world should
go to heaven and be saved, it was a Scribe and a Pharisee; And yet, by our
Saviors own Testimony, These were most notorious dissemblers, deceivers, and
horrible hypocrites; And, indeed, one main foul fault among them also, was, a
most vile perverting of the Law, to their own ayms and ends; and teaching
false-doctrines, and their own false glosses and intentions, in stead of
sound-doctrine, which very thing made our blessed Savior himself to inveigh
most bitterly against them as notorious hypocrites; as is most evident in all
the four Evangelists.

The experience whereof also made the blessed Apostle Paul say (having found
false Apostles in his times also, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
deceitfull-workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ) That
it was no marvail, for, Satan, himself (says he) is transformed into an Angel
of light. And indeed there is very great politic reason hereof; for, should
not Heretics and Schismatics, first, put-on that brave embrodred-cloke of
seeming holiness, to dazzle the eyes and understanding of their honest,
innocent Proselites (as I believe many of these to be) Who I pray that had any
light and sight of reason and Religion, would so easily have received their so
dangerous Opinions, or damnable Doctrines? If Satan should at first show his
cloven-foot, and the horns on his head (as fools, formerly, were made to
believe the Devil had such, Mark this, o all ye honest and plain hearted
Christians, that are apt to be deceived and seduced.
to be frighted by them) who, I say, would not, then fly from him, as, easily
discerning him to be a Devil? So, I say, if Heretical, Erroneous, and
Schismatical Deceivers should at the very first show the inside-danger and
poison of their aims, plots, self-interests and designs intended by their
Heresies, errors, and Schisms, who would so easily and instantly entertain
them, and be so misled and abused by them? Therefore, dear Christians take
heed, for Gods sake, of being taken with painted pretenses of holiness of
life, in any man whatsoever he be: swallow not down, so easily, such
gilded-pils; or catching fish-hooks, which are only covered-over with
deceitful baits to catch and undo your poor plain-meaning souls. Believe it,
my Christian friends, you try your mettalls by a very false and deceitful
touchstone, Holiness of Life is a false Touchstone to try Sound men by.
if you look so on men's holy-lives and conversations alone; nay, rather read,
sound, and try men mainly and most especially by their soundness of Doctrine;
for, if this fails, all is naught, I Will warrant you. And that you may see it is
not mine, but the blessed Apostle Paul's judgment, and right rule of trial,
which cannot deceive, mark what he says, in two most pertinent places to this
purpose. 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. No farther, or, no
otherwise than I follow the Lord Jesus Christ in sound Doctrine and holiness;
Soundness in Doctrine is a true Touchstone to try a sound man by Gal. 1. 7, 8.
first and principally sound Doctrine, and then holiness: and to strengthen
and back this to be his true meaning, indeed; observe what this same blessed
Apostle, and faithful servant of the Lord says farther. There be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But if either We (even any
of us Apostles, though ever so holy) or an ANGEL from heaven (for seeming
sanctity or holiness) preach any other Gospel (or pretended truths) than that
which we have preached to you, let him be accursed to you. See here a time
Touchstone, indeed, my friends, see first, to soundness of Doctrine, without
which, believe not nay, abominate, the seeming holiest men or Angels, even
Angelicall-men that may pretend the greatest parts and piety that may be; But
having first, seen, by the right-rule, Gods Word, their Doctrine to be sound,
then, on Gods name, search and see into their Sanctimonie and integrity in life
and conversation, and then you take the right way indeed, cordially to love and
like, to follow, affect and imitate them. Nay, I will be bold to say and
assure, Soundness in doctrine though accompanied with humane infirmities is a
safer way to try men, than seeming-exact walking accompanied with errors in
doctrine.
and dare undertake to prove and justify, by Gods assistance, that, There is
far more safety and sweetness for the soul to love and like, to follow and
imitate, a Christian or Pastor, that is most Sound and Orthodox in Doctrine and
Judgment, though subject to weakness: and humane infirmities: Than him that
seems to be most exact and strict in his outward walking and conversation, if
he premeditately and invincibly (against all persuasions and Scripturall
convictions) go on in the public profession of Errors and Schisms*
destructive to the peace and edification of Gods Church and Sound Doctrine.

But now without any farther digression (having Thus laid down these most
necessary and pertinent premises) I will by Gods assistance come up close to
the promised point, even our present main matter, touching the much boasted
Holiness of Life, The main promised point, now, proved.
of our Independent Sectaries, and show how near they come-up to downright
Deceivers in their real practice, testified, I say, by their own undeniable
hand-writings. And, here, give me leave, good Reader, in the first place for
the better making fair way, and that, most briefly, for what follows) to give
unto Thee, and from Scripture it self, The perfect Character, Cognizance and
Description of a truly Godly-man, a sure, pure Saint, indeed, and sacred
Citizen of the New-Jerusalem; especially, in these two or three remarkable
marks of him among diverse others, The certain Characters of a truly Godlyman.
viz. He is such an One as speaks the Truth from his heart; And having thus
spoken, promised, or sworn, keeps his promise, though to his own prejudice;
Psalm. 15. 24, 4.
Both These being fully and fairly connected and bound up together, in our
blessed Saviors most Royall-Law, and Golden-Rule: Whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, Matthew. 7. 12.
do ye even so unto them: And then also, do but consider herewith, what the
Spirit of the Lord says, Revel. 22. 15.
concerning the contrary practisers. He that loves or makes a lie, shall be
shut out of the New Jerusalem among Dogs, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers,
and Idolaters. Now, then, I say, if our Independents be found (and that by
testimonies under their own hands) to be such as speak not the Truth from their
hearts; and when they have promised and covenanted, break their promise and
violate their Covenant (witnessed, I say, by their own hands against
themselves) yea, and that when as it could be no prejudice to their livelihood,
or estates, save only (perhaps) to their ungodly private ends; And such as do
That to others, which they would not be content should be done to themselves:
Then can any truly-gracious or impartial Good Man choose but, at least,
greatly fear that they are not so holy-Saints and godly men as they should be,
or as the World too vulgarly and easily takes them to be? Truly, me thinks,
they cannot.

Thus, then, now, to come to the try all hereof; And, here, I will, by way of
preamble, tell the Reader one pretty passage, not altogether impertinent to our
present purpose, touching Master Peter's and my-self, which briefly was this, I
being occasionally (about-half-ayeer since) at Westminster Hall, A pretty
passage concerning M. Peter's.
was there encountered by Master Peter's, that most Pragmaticall Quicquid in
Buccam, etc. of whom I will only say this by the way, That, Whosoever loves to
laugh at a Sermon (which is Satan's Music) let him go hear Master Peter's
preach. This Gentleman seeing me singly walking in the Hall, and being my old
acquaintance, came unto me, together with his Independent Brother, Master
Bachiler, who heard our conference all the while, which was this. O, Master
Vicars (says Master Peter's) certainly, a great deal of repentance must needs
lie upon your soul. Why, Master Peter's (said I) what is the matter, what have I
done? O (says he) in sadding and grieving the hearts of Gods Saints, as you
have done in your Book, which you call the Picture of Independency. Why Sir,
(said I) pray tell me what is amiss in it? Truly Master Vicars (says he) it is
naught all over, ( just, like my self, he might have added) Naught all over. Is
it naught all over, Master Peter's, said I? then, I hope you have read it all
over; and if so; then, I beseech you said I) since, you know, Dolosus versatur
in generalibus, The Deceiver loves to deal in Generals, show so much candor
and ingenuity toward me, as to tell me one particular passage therein, which
you can make evident to be false or naught, and I assure you (said I) I will
yield you all the rest to be naught without any farther controversy;
whereunto, here was all his reply; Alas, Master Vicars it is naught all over,
naught all over; which words he uttering in his old, quick blustering manner,
instantly ran away swiftly from me, All, which, his brother Bachiler can
testify (if he will speak the truth) to be most true, who stood by, and heard
and saw all I have related, from the first to the last. And was not here,
think you, a brave Independent Champion, fit to find fault with other men's
Works, and then run away, when he should give account of his slanderous words?
But, now, to come to some more serious and sollid matter, and fully to make
good and confirm what I have promised and affirmed, in the Frontispice of this
Treatise, namely, That Independents (I mean very many of the best and bravest
of them) are a Generation of notorious Dissemblers, Independents a Generation
of notorious Dissemblers and sly Deceivers.
and sly Deceivers. Most sorry I am, the Lord knows, that I can so truly
(indeed too truly) say and assure these things against them; but in regard of
their so elated and selfe-flated conceit of themselves and others too-too high
opinions of them; and also the great injury which Gods Cause receives thereby,
many ways, Therefore, for Sions sake I cannot hold my peace, Isaiah 62. 1.
and for Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof (and
the unquestionable innocence and integrity of her Presbyterians) go forth as
Brightness. And for this end to add my poor Mite of Zeal (what in me is) to
help to vindicate Gods abused Churches honor, against these her close and
subtle enemies, who have made their great and gross untruths as so many
Satanicall stratagems and staulking horses, to abuse and disgrace even the
godliest party of the most innocent Presbyterians, by thus suggesting and
protesting their palpable untruths to the more moderate, indifferent, and too
credulous Presbyterians among us, whereas, themselves (the Lord knows) are the
main (if not only) offensive and destructiue-partie, and all this, only to
uphold (for ought that can, to this day, be discerned, to the contrary)
maintain and enlarge their too apparent spirituall-pride, and selfe-aymes and
ends, which I conceive to be most vile and ungodly in them. And because Master
John Goodwin, Cretensis, p. 5.
in his late supercilious and unsavorie Treatise, Entitled Cretensis, page 5.
says, That Master Edwards (in his Sectarystinging Gangraena) judges, so and
so, only of some few (at least, as he would have it) of those that are the
Retrimentitious-Party or dregs of the Independents and other Sectaries (to use
his own words and expression) as if (says he) a man should judge of
Cheap Side, M. John Goodwins Retrimentitious-Party of Sectaries.
by the dirtie-channel that runs in the midst of it. I therefore, here
(omitting, purposely, the most notorious juggling of M. J. G. himself most
properly and fitly termed Cretensis (that is to say a liar) both by himself,
and by reverend M. Edwards in his second part of his excellent Gangraena; and
pretermitting also the most unworthy double-dealing of those two Grandees of
the Independents, Master Buroughs and Master Greenhill (and these are none,
sure, of Master Goodwins retrimentitious party) in their unfaithful dealing
with Master Edwards, as he has most fully manifested to the world, against
all these three, in his said second part of the Gangraena, page 86, 87, 88,
etc.) to omit these I say, as being so fully set forth as aforesaid, I will
here in the first place show to the godly and impartial Reader, diverse
notable passages of some of the most eminent and highest prized Independents,
The five famous Apologists.
even of the five famous Apologists, most clearly setting forth, and that
under their own hands, their most unfaithful and deceitful dealings with God
and the world, and with their Presbyterian-Brethren. Which I have extracted,
and briefly culled-out from their so mightily magnified, and broadly bosted of
Apologeticall Narration, The Apologeticall Narration intended by the
Independents for their credit, proved far otherwise.
attested and avouched under their own hands, of purpose (as they, certainly,
conceived and we have justly deemed) to paint out their own Piety, and
unspotted Integrity to the World: Whereas, contrariwise they have, thereby,
even with their own pensils, blazoned abroad their own shame, and most
unfaithful double-dealing. First, then, I will begin with that poor delusive
trick of theirs, of their pretended (falsely so called) Exile or Banishment out
of England, which they themselves set forth In prima front libelli, in the
very front and face of their Apology, to make the world take notice of that
first and fair piece of their Martyrdom, and to believe what rare
suffering-Saints and Martyrs they were, The Apologists are Gods poor Exiles;
and How.
insuffering, so sorely, for their tender-conscience sake. This you shall see
Apol. Nar. page 2 and 3 Where they tell you of their pitteous banishment,
forsooth; But, withal, fairly confess it was a spontaneous or voluntary
banishment, a banishment of their own choice and election, both for Time,
Place, and Company, (and I may add, as easily undergone as undertaken) for,
they went into the choicest and fattest parts of all beautiful Holland, no way
pincht in body or purse; Antapol. p. 190 191.
for (as reverend Master Edwards notes in his learned Antapologie, and at
large, most notably sets forth) they were able (some of them) to spend two or
three hundred pounds a year, and to do other expensive acts besides. They
went, I say, in their own time, were fitted with all conveniences for
themselves and their families; had brave company with them, Gentlefolke of none
of the meanest rank and quality; and yet These call themselves Gods poor
Exiles, Apol. Nar. p. 22.
or poor despicable, banished creatures: Which, how fairly and fitly, let any
godly judicious. Christian, or even mere rational creature which knows what
Banishment is, speak and judge by those forementioned premises. And now tell
me, good Reader, whither these our Independents be such fair dealers and truth
speakers as the world deems them, and as the Spirit of God would have them to
be, according to the forementioned Characters of the true Saints and Citizens
of the New Jeruselem.

Again, Apol. Nar. p. 5. and 6.
In their foresaid Apologeticall Narration, page 5 and 6, they have these very
words. For the Congregations in England ( where, we were by the grace of Christ
converted, (mark this) and long exercised our Ministry) both in our own, and
multitudes of the Assemblies and Parochiall-Congregations thereof (mark again
those words good Reader) we make this sincere profession before God and all the
world (mark here again I beseech thee) that notwithstanding all the defilements
which we conceived to cleave to the true worship of God in them, or of the
unwarranted power in Church Government exercised therein; yet we ever esteemed
and held this opinion of them, That they were the true Churches and Body of
Christ, and that the Ministers thereof were true Ministers, much less did it
ever enter into our hearts to judge them Antichristian: yea, we always have
protested that in these times (pray mark these words well) when the Churches
of England were most actually overspread with defilements, and in the greatest
danger thereof, We both did and would hold a communion with them, as the
Churches of Christ, and baptized our Children, and administered the Lords Supper
in their Parochial Congregations, and all this both before and since our
return from our foresaid exile. Now, then, from all these premises, see and
consider seriously, good Reader, The Independents most unjust and injurious
Separation from us, even under their own hands testified, and by such a deep
and seeming-serious Protestation, to God and the whole World protested against
themselves; wonderful strange it is (me thinks) that truly, holy, and godly
men should dare to deal thus, in so sacred and serions things; nay those
premises, touching our Churches or Congregations and Ministers, being so
granted by themselves, how most ungodlily and ungroundedly do they now, See
here the most strange and unblushing false dealing of the Independents with
Presbyterians, contrary to their own words and protestations.
and long time have forsaken our Assemblies, as Antichristian, and creep into
corners, shops and chambers, and now adays also some of their Schismatic
brethren are not ashamed most impiously and most unjustly to preach, print, and
prate against us and our Assemblies directly under such notions, even as if we
were abominable Babylonians and Antichristians. Now truly my Brethren, if this
be to deal ingenuously, and to speak the truth from the heart, as becomes the
truly godly Saints and Citizens of the New-Jerusalem specified before to be
David's Character of a godly man, let any impartial Christian judge and
determine.

Again, In the same Apologeticall Narration, page 24 and 25, Those five
Apologists and Grandees of the Independent faction, Another notable and
undeniable false dealing of the Independents with the Presbyterians.
Yea, those high-grown Saul's that are taller then any of their
PresbyterianBrethren, by head and shoulders in parts and piety (if we would
believe the loud boasts of their Sycophanticall Proselites) have these very
words, in that foresaid place, evident to all that have eyes and understanding
and wills, to see and read the same, viz. We call God and men to witness,
(see how they here begin again with a deep asseveration) that through the grace
of Christ, our spirits are, and have been so remote from a spirit of faction,
division, pride, and singularity (which are the usual grounds of all Schisms)
that we have expressed our constant forbearance, either to publish our opinions
by preaching (although we had the pulpit free) or to print any thing of our
own or others for the vindication of our selves (although the Presses also were
more free than the pulpits.) Mark good Reader, I beseech thee, these their own
words, and yet consider, how that most insolent and proud-spirited man Mr.
Lilburn, in his most flashy and foul-mouthed Letter, to ever to be honored Mr.
Prinne, complains of the restraint of Printers-presses, as a piece of their
persecution forsooth, page 2 of his said Letter) or to act for our selves, or
for our way. All these foresaid particular branches of their protested
forbearance, were, indeed, by them, and the Presbyterian City Ministers
mutually covenanted to be done on both sides, but how faithfully, religiously
and conscienciously they have kept and observed the same, (yea, notwithstanding
their protesting before GOD and men, neither to write, preach, dispute, or any
way to act for themselves or their Church Way, and all this, thus promised,
since their last return into England, from their forementioned pretty piece
of Banishment) now we will see and discover, I say, how faithfully and fairly
they have kept their word and engagement herein. Antapolo. p. 213
Although, it is most true that learned and religious Master Edwards has in his
elaborate Antapologie given his impartial and unprejudiced Reader abundant
satisfaction touching these things, and I might here multiply many testimonies
from thence of our Independents self-condemnation touching the premises: yet
because I maynly endeavor brevity in this little Treatise, I will content my
self with these few following most true and undeniable self-confutations extant
there in Print under their own hands; namely, that, even, not all these
Apologists (who have thus protested, as ye have heard) have not, according to
their so deep Protestation before God and Men, forborne to Preach or Print any
thing of their own in the behalf of their Church Way. First, then, take Master
Buroughs his self-conviction herein; See here also how most unblushingly the
Independents deal falsely with the Presbyterians.
Who, in his Sermons and Expositions on the three first Chapters of Hosea, has
Preached and Printed several things about and for their Church Way. As, for
example; In his first Lecture on Hosea the second, at, 1, 2 p. 224, 225. And
the seventh Lecture, Hos. 1, at, 11, p. 173. And thirteenth Lecture on Hos. 2,
15. Together with many other places in those his Lectures, now extant, in
Print. Secondly, Master Simpson, another of these so deep Protesters, as
aforesaid; In his Sermon called Reformations Preservation, on Isaiah 4, 5. And
on Proverbs 8. 15, 16. has, there, many things for their Church Way, and for a
Toleration, p. 25, 26. 27. of those Sermons. Thirdly, also, Master Bridge,
another of them, in his Sermons, Printed and published and entitled, Babylons
Downfall; And, that on Zech. 1, at 18, 19, 20, and 21. Together with many
other, to be seen, in Master Edwards his most excellent Antapol. aforesaid;
But this Truth being thus confirmed under the hands of three such eminent
proofs and testimonies I think, it may give sufficient satisfaction herein;
Besides, the very many other Books and Pamphlets. Printed and reprinted for
their Church Way, since this Parl. began, and since there Covenant made to the
Contrary, all which for brevities sake, I say, and to avoid tediousnes, I
willingly pretermit, and will not so much as mention, as, indeed, I need not,
they being so notoriously known (or may be known) abroad to all that know ought
herein. And as for their other kinds of acting, by themselves and others, in
and for their Church-ways advantage and advancement, I shall, I say, to avoid
prolixity refer the Reader, to the learned Antapologie, p. 220, 221, etc.
very worthy the reading for abundant clear satisfaction in these premises. Only
I cannot forbear to give thee one particular instance more hereof, which may
(me thinks) be Instar omnium, to show to the World their faithless craft and
subtilty, yea, and most palpable Double-Dealing with their single-hearted
Presbyterian Brethren, and thus, according to my promise, to let all men see
(that will not obstinately shut their eyes against such clear and known truths)
what a godly-party and what holy-Saints these Independents are. The thing in
brief, is this.

About the beginning of the second year of the sitting of the Parliament, The
Presbyterian Pastors, in London, and the Independents, met together, at
reverend and religious Master Calamies House in Aldermanbury, where, with
mutual consent, they all entered into an engagement one party to the other, A
notable passage of fallacy, in the Independents acted by Mr. Phil^p Nigh, one of
their grand Politicians.
That (for advancing of the public Cause of a happy Reformation) neither side
should Preach, Print, or Dispute, or otherwise act against others way; And this
to continue til both sides, in a full meeting, did declare the contrary, and by
mutual consent set each other at liberty, touching these things. And for the
confirmation of this agreement, a Writing or Instrument was drawn, with full
and clear desire and assent of all, and also by all, there and then present, it
was subscribed with every man's name; And, this so done, was with a general
consent to be left, and so to abide, with Master Calamy, at his House, there to
be seen at any time, by any of them that would have recourse unto it, to show
and see their agreement, all which was accordingly done, and this Writing or
Instrument was left in Master Calamies custody. Here, now, let me hint this to
the Reader, by the way; That, notwithstanding this Writing or Instrument of
this their so solemn agreement; no, nor their own forementioned Protestation
of their own voluntary forbearance, so deeply (but deceitfully) professed and
protested, in their Apology, to be so sacred unto them, and to be kept so
strictly by them, with such deep silence (for, these are their very words) All
these, I say, notwithstanding, they, in the interim, immediately after, A
remarkable discovery of the Independents notorious subtilty and Double-dealing.
went on, in a too evident contrary practice, as has bin before sufficiently
declared; and all these their Protestations proved the most advantageous Piece
of Policy, on their side, of any one that was, or could be done by them for the
increasing of a Party for them. Just like the Declarations set forth by King
CHARLES (by means of the crafty Bishops, in their late flourishing and
domineering times) that their should be no Disputes, no Preaching or Printing
on either side, for or against the Arminian-points, which then were in great
controversy: Which Declarations and Inhibitions, being observed by many
Ministers, but not so, by the Arminian-faction, was a mighty means to increase
them, and to suppress Orthodox-Doctrines. Even so, I say, it fell out, here,
for, by this means of the Agreement, nothing was Preached or Printed, or any
way acted against their way, according to the foresaid agreement to hinder the
growth of Independents, on our side, Ours making conscience most honestly and
tenderly of their engagement. But, in the mean time, I say, many things were
both Preached and Printed for it, as I have touched before; which, if it were
not apparent unfaithfulness and plain Double-dealing, I know not what is.

But now to come to this notable trick of theirs, acted by Master Philip Nigh,
that notable Independent-Politician, and nimble-Agent for their Schismatic
Church Way, which was this. The forementioned Writing or Instrument of the
mutual Agreement between the Presbyterian and Independent parties, being as
aforesaid, left in the hands of reverend Master Calamy, by him to be kept and
shown and seen as occasion was offered; Mr. Nigh palpably coozens Mr. Calamy of
the Writing or Instrument that tied the Independents to be honest.
It so fell out, that Master Nigh came, one day, to Master Calamy, and pretended
some reasons for his desire to see and borrow this Writing of him for a little
while; whereupon, good Master Calamie, in his courtesy and singleness of
heart, suspecting nothing amiss, but thinking he meant fairly, and would bring
it again presently, as he had promised, let him have it. But he, after he had
it, carried it away with him into Yorkshire, that so upon any complaints of
the breach of the agreement when ours should have consulted with that writing,
or shown it against them, and brought their own hands subscribed thereunto, the
Writing was gone, and nothing now to show against them; As for conscience, they
(as it seemed) cared not a rush for it (no marvel, then, that they so cry out
and plead for ( Liberty of conscience) for, this Master Nigh has ever since
kept away this Writing, and having been often entreated to restore it, his
answer still has been, that he left it at Hull among his other papers. This
Truth, is also fully related by reverend and faithful Master Edwards, in his
learned and most excellent Independent frighting Antapologie, Antapol. p. 243
and is backed also by the unquestionable testimony of our most grave and godly
Assembly of Divines, in their most excellent Answer to the seven Independents
most false and scandalous Remonstrance, lately printed and published by the
Independents for the honor, forsooth of those seven Authors thereof; but
which in the issue turned to their most just eternal, indelible dishonor. And
are not these, then (my dear Presbyterian friends) most soul blots and
blemishes in so godly apartie, so gracious and holy Saints, so cryed-up, rare
Christians, as Independents are now a days hugely boasted to be? Do these
their practices, in word and deed answer to the Characters of David's holy
Citizens of the New-Jerusalem, To speak the truth from their hearts, and to
keep their promise though to their prejudice? Or, are they like our blessed
Saviors plain-dealing honest men, indeed, Doing unto others, as they would be
done unto? I know not, truly I cannot think they are.

But to go on, and to make their unfaithful dealings, yet more evident and
apparent to the whole world, and that, still, even under their own hands; I
shall now therefore, here, briefly add some few passages of their most gross
double-dealing and unblushing slandering of the reverend and religious Assembly
of Divines, The most shameless and slanderous Remonstrance against the
Assembly of Divines owned and subscribed by seven of the most eminent
Independents.
in a most scandalous Remo^strance of theirs touching a promised model of their
New Church way, most marvellously bragged and boasted of, to be Christ's only
true and pure way of governing his Church, and for the answerable production
whereof they had been exceeding often and most earnestly urged and entreated,
both by the reverend Assembly, and by the religious Pastors of London; but,
wherein all along from the first to this day they dealt most doubly, falsely and
fallaciously. For even as at the first, when this often and urgent motion was
made to them to bring in a Model of their Church Government in Writing to the
Assembly, and they accordingly promised it; The Independents Double-dealing
about their Apolog. Narration.
They were so far from faithful performance hereof, first, that they secretly
and sedulously had prepared Printed, published and dedicated to the Parliament
their most proud, self-praysing (and yet false) Apologetic all Narration, never
acquainting the Assembly beforehand therewith, or tendering any Writing of
their Church Government, to the Assembly as they had promised, and in
conscience ought to have done: Just so, secondly, here, they again dealt with
the Reverend Assembly; The strange and most urgent and earnest importunity of
the Presbyterians to procure a Model of the Independents Church Government.
for, whereas, still the Assembly earnestly moved them again and again (for the
surer and speedier composing of differences between them, and happier
settlement of a blessed Church Government, so long and earnestly desired, as
was hoped at least, by all) that they would yet bring forth their Model of
Church Government; yea, and since that also they had been earnestly importuned
thereunto by Master Dury, a Reverend, Learned and godly Minister of the Hague
in Holland, (as has been testified by Himself in a Letter of his, sent to our
Assembly of Divines, from the Hague, March the seventh, 1643, and extant in
Print, the substance whereof was to this effect. Answer to the Remonstrance
That he had often required and entreated of these dissenting Brethren, but never
could obtein, to know the true points is difference, betwixt them and the other
Reformed Churches. The like also had our London-Ministers often desired but,
could never, to this day, obtein their desire. But, now at length (to come to
the point) with much fresh importunity, even almost beyond the bounds of
modesty, they being thus urged, as it were, on all sides and not knowing how,
with any credit, any longer to evade, they seemed (now at last, I say) to
condescend to the thing; Mr. Tho: Goodwin, at last, chosen, by the Independents
to frame their new-Modell of their Church Way.
And made choice of M. Thomas Goodwin to be the man that should manage the
whole work of their promised Model; to which purpose, he also (having
undertaken the thing) had for the space of at least six months, sequestered
himself a part from his attendance on the Assembly, and from his public
Ministry, into the Country, for his more convenience to the work; In which
interim, o what vaunts, brags and boasts had we up and down by all their
Independent Proselytes, what a rare New-modell was making, by M. Thomas
Goodwin, and shortly to come forth, and all these brags, at least, three
months before the famous upshot of all, and therefore great expectation was of
it, on both sides, especially by all that were apt credulously to believe it,
and all stood, as it were, gaping and gazing triumphantly, to see it. At last,
about the end of the faid six months great and wonderful expectation, That
was rightly fulfilled, Parturiunt Montes nascitur ridiculus Mus.
Parturinnt Montes nascitur ridiculus Mus. For, in the issue of all, no Model
could be produced, but instead thereof, they durst most ungodlily (because most
falsely) and without all fear, or wit, or honesty (as it may be feared) exhibit
to the Assembly, a most absurd and scandalous Apology or Remonstrance, owned
and subscribed by seven of their most eminent Dissenting-Brethren, A most
shameless and slanderous Remonstrance against the Assembly exhibited to the
Assembly (instead of their New-Modell) by seven of the most eminent
Independents.
which was afterward impudently Printed and published (and most craftily
pretended to be so published clandestinely without the Authors privity or
consent) under the name of a Remonstrance; Both (as they hoped) to prop-up, if
it be might be, the said Authors cracked credit; and also even perfidiously to
dishonor and disgrace the whole right reverend Assembly, if, I say, it had bin
possible for them. In all this notwithstanding, both in their Apologeticall
Narration, and in this their Remonstrance, they seem most seriously to
profess and protest (like cunning Deceivers, indeed) their integer carriage
and honest meaning, in all the business, and their willingness and
forwardness, The perfect practice of Deceives.
always to make known what ever they held in Church Government, together with
their Reasons, why, (now, in the upshot of all) they have not given in a Model
of their Church Government, laying the whole load (just as our Grandfather Adam
laid his offense upon God himself) and the foul-fault of the only cause of
their failing therein, upon the Assembly of Divines; most shamelesly and falsely
aspersing and bespattering the said Reverend Assembly, even all over (in that
Remonstrance) with very many intolerable slanderous accusations and
imputations, false, I say, in every point and parcel of them; As in the
Assemblies most excellent and abundantly satisfactory Answer to the said
Remonstrance (or reasons forsooth, An Answer of the Assembly of Divines to the
Remonstrance of the Independents
of the Independents or Dissenting Brethren) lately set forth by authority of
the honorable Lords in Parliament, may and does most truly and abundantly
appear. Wherein page 4. they first prove the notorious unwillingnesse of these
Independents to make known what they hold in Church Government, both from their
own confession, in the forementioned Apolog. Narration, page penned and
published by themselves, and also by the testimony of reverend Master Durie
aforesaid, as also of reverend and religious Master Apollonins, a learned
Divine of Walachria, who also sent to the Independents in London, an express
Letter, desiring them to inform him what their opinion was in those points, in
difference betwixt them and the Presbyterian-partie, that so he might not
mistake them (he being then appointed by the Classis of Walachria to set down
the judgment of those Reformed Churches, concerning these controversies, now
agitated with us in England) but yet notwithstanding he could not obtain it
from them, as himself has complained, and as they themselves too well know,
is most true against them. In brief, who ever desires most fully and exactly to
see the falsity and notorious halting of that whole Remonstrance and Apology
of the Independents, even all over, acapite ad calcem; let him seriously peruse
that most full and fair Answer of our learned, reverend, and religious
Assembly, and he shall receive abundant and most luculent satisfaction, both
touching the Assemblies most tender, fair and faithful dealings with them all
along; and also touching the unquestionable Truth of what I have herein writ of
these unhappie Independents, viz. Their most unreasonable and irreligious
slandering of the Assembly, all along, in that Remonstrance, not having
delivered the Truth from their heart, in any part thereof, but altogether
spoken deceitfully or falsely in every of their assertions, or aspersions
(rather) laid upon the^. And now, say* good reader, Are these dealings of these
prime Independent-Remonstrants, the practices of precious Saints? are these fit
actions think you, for the Heads of a Godly-Party, so bigly boasted of, and
most mightily blazed abroad in the world by the trump of flying (I had almost
said lying) fame? Certainly then am I extremely mistaken in my poor judgment
and knowledge in Piety and Probity. Concerning which their most injurious
molesting of the peace of Gods Church, and their unbridled endeavors to
obtrude ways and rules of governing Gods Church after their own conceited
opinions, not having any ground out of Gods Word for the same; I shall here
desire to mind them of a most pertinent passage, very fit for this our present
purpose, In Mr. Burton in his Sermon; For God and the King, p. 109.
related by my reverend friend M. Burton in his Sermon entitled, For God and
the King. Where he writes thus. Were it a Law in England as once it was among
the Loctians; that whosoever would propound a new Law, should come with a
halter about his neck, that if it pleased not the Senate, the Hangman, being
ready, should do his office on him. This passage Master Burton, then, applied
(and I confess most fitly) to the Prelates of his time, for their illegal
innovations, and this passage (I verily believe) I may as properly apply to our
Schismatic Independents and the rest and best of their fraternity of
Sectaries, A fair tale told by the Sectaries for themselves.
who so strive and struggle to introduce (by their new lights forsooth) such
new Laws or ways of a Church Government, which so justly may, and do displease
our honorable Senate, and molest the whole Kingdom, because they cannot prove
or justify them from Gods Word, If therefore that Law were on foot and in
force among us, at this time, and that these our Sectaries should be made to
come with halters about their necks, on that condition; what a case, these our
Independents, together with their waspish-brethren, the Anabaptists, and the
rest of their rabble: of Sectaries, Still, more notorious double dealing, under
the Independents own hands.
would be in, let all wise men judge?

Again, see yet farther, I pray thee, good Reader, more of their palpable and
apparent halting and Double-dealing, still manifested under their own hands,
against themselves, For, heretofore Mr. John Goodwin, in his Innocencies
Triumph, his Theomachia. page 48, 49, 50. and diverse others of his late
Pamphlets; Mr. John Goodwin.
Mr. Burton also (my old entirely beloved friend, Mr. Burton.
for whom my soul mournes in secret, to see him so fallen off from his former
faithful principles) in his vindication, Christ upon his Throne.
page 49, 50, 51. and page 68, 69, etc. Christ upon his Throne, Master Lilburn,
Mr. John Lilburn.
also, in his frothie and most scurrilous Letter, to ever to be honored M.
Prinne; The Jesuiticall Author or Authors of The Arraignment of Mr.
Persecution, Arraignment of Mr. Persesecution.
together with very many others, too tedious to recite, and to whose own
abusive words, in their own writings, in high derogation of the Parliaments
honor and authority in Ecclesiastical affairs, for brevittes sake I refer the
Reader. All these Independents and Sectaries, I say, and many others of them
did heretofore in those times of their then writings (and, Rebus sic stantibus)
when their fears were exceeding strong that the Parliament would certainly
establish the Presbyterian-Government, The notorious Double-dealing of
Independents touching the power of Parliaments in Church Government and matters
of Religion.
and their hopes extreme weak and flat of having their Independent Church Way
set up, or so much as a Toleration tolerated to them: O then I say, how was the
power of Parliaments in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or matters of Religion,
cried down, abased and abused by M. Goodwin, and the rest? Alas, for the
Parliament to take upon it the ordering of Church Government, or Church
discipline, O this was a most high and intolerable presumption in them, this
was a most bold intrenching upon Christ's royal prerogative, with many such
like terrible taxations, and heavy imputations of wrongful usurping an
Antichristian Legislative power and authority over the consciences (forsooth)
of Christ's free born Holy-ones: But now adays, of late, the case is altered,
since the election of New-Members of Parliament in the House of Commons,
whereby they begin to dream, (and I trust in God they do but dream) that their
hopes are now upon the wing, and raised up to a high-flown pitch of conceit
that the Presbyterian-Government shall either quite down, and not be
established at all, or else so clogged and clipped with Commissioners, and such
like supposed yokes, curbs and restrictions, as shall like Pharao's Chariots in
the Red Sea, take off the wheels, and make it drive on so heavily, that
Independents, Anabaptists, and the rest, shall have fit and fair oportunities
mightily to advance and hurrie on their own designs, their crafty ayms and
ends, and in time bring them to perfection, and for the present enjoy a full
allowance of that cursed cause of the ruin of all sound Religion and sincere
holiness, Liberty of conscience for all damnable Sects and Schisms
whatsoever. O, now, therefore, I say, how is the power of Parliament in matters
of Religion and settling of Church Government, cryed-up and magnified, yea, and
wholly and only, (as it were) appropriated to them as the main master builders
of Gods House, his Church? And as for the Assembly of Divines, they have
nothing to do therein, but so far only as the Parliament pleases to use or
refuse them. Witness, first, The Peacemaker, lately printed and published,
which now so struggles to uphold a peaceable-union between the Parliament and
the City of London, especially, The Peacemaker, page 3. etc.
(wherein he does well, if that were all) But why, Ipray, is this design so
fairly pressed and put on? O, because we in the City may assure our selves
(says this Peacemaker) if through our disunions the Parliament should
miscarry in the main cause in hand, not all our most professed friends in the
World can preserve us from perishing. Mark these words well, good Reader, The
main Cause in hand, and consider the times, now, and certainly the Peacemaker
must needs mean Religion and Church Government (not the business of War) to be
the main Cause in hand, and then take special notice also of his so zealously
maintaining of the Parliamentarie-Covenant, but with this proviso, The
Protestation protested.
that it be in his sense, and with his gloss set upon it, which I should
wonder how this Author dares thus to do (but that I now see they dare to do
any thing) since as he well knows what a most deadly danger the Author of The
Protestation Protested was in, in former days, for putting his sense, as the
Parliaments sense, upon that Parliamentarie-Protestation. Besides, how does
this Peacemaker agree with that crafty Caution-contriver, Mr. I. G. in his 12.
serious.
Mr. I. G. in his twelve Cautions against the Hot-pressers of Reformation?
Cautions, etc.
(as he flashingly terms the pious Presbyterians) who cannot endure a
Parliamentary-Covenant-Reformation of Religion, or rather, as I may say, a
Covenanting-preparative to the work of Reformation of Religion, as in those
his twelve serious Cautions, he most subtilely and stily (like himself)
insinuates, and therein paddles, and pleases his own contentious humor,
pretending indeed only piety, but aiming (as is most easy there to be
understood) at his own most dangerous and factious ends, his principal
practice and trade for these many years.

Besides this Peacemaker, we have also one M. Walwin, a most egregiously
Pharisaicall Whisperer, Pharisaicall, I say; For, in his frothy Whisper in M.
Edwards his Ear, page 4. he takes occasion (just as his Independent Masters,
the five Apologists did also, in their Apolog. Nar. of themselves, so he) to
magnify himself, not whispering (now) but blowing a Trumpet of his own high
praises, with a long-breath, and a lowd-Stentorian-voice, about two pages long
in quarto, and all to paint out his own person to be such a Seraphicall and
Angelicall-Saint, yea, as it were, of such an immaculate, and sublimely refined
nature and celestiall-temper, as if there were Nihil humani, in the man; In so
much, that, truly for my part, I profess sincerely I never read or heard of
such a notorious Self-flatterer in all my life; yea, Luke 18. 11, 12.
certainly far transcending the proud Pharisee mentioned in the the Gospel.
This Pharisaicall Whisperer, I say, being, now, turned like a Weathercock, with
the wind of temporizing-policy has these words in that piece of his
Whispering-stuff, page 4. As far as it can, in this Nation (there is a juggle) I
am certain, it belongs only to the Parliament to judge what is agreeable to
the Word of God, and not unto the Assembly of Divines. Ah, Sir, is the case
thus altered, now? must the Parliament only be judge in matters of Religion?
Whereas, heretofore, neither Parliament, nor Assembly (by our Sectaries
familiar sentence) had any such power. Nay, see how he goes on. And God (says
he) has blessed all their undertakings, in a wonderful manner, by the hands
of conscientious people, because of their just and tender regard unto freedom
in Religion, notwithstanding all importunity to the contrary; meaning, in
suffering all sorts of Sectaries to do what they list, notwithstanding all
honest endeavors of pious Presbyterians, against licentious Libertines and
Independents. Thus this Whisperer. But, to go on; See, again, the strange
boldness of these our Independents, set forth yet farther, by that most
audacious Jesuiticall-Independent, the most seditious, yea, traiterous Author
of The last Warning to London. The Last Warning to London.
How, first, he most impudently quarrels at all Government, both Regal, Civil
and Ecclesiastical, and then scornfully contends with a Government established
by the Parliament, in these words, page 3. 4, and 5. Others (meaning of the
Presbyterian party) are troubled with another as unreasonable a humor
concerning Ecclesiastical Government who are undone, ruined, and torn in
pieces with rents and divisions if all the people may not be compelled to
worship God as they do, or in one uniforme way by the State established. Yet
(says he) p. 5. These are they that frame Oaths and Covenants for you in such
ambiguous expressions (like Delphian-Oracles) that you shall seem to be bound
to do any thing they shall desire, be it ever so absurd or wicked. Here, now,
you see, this impudent Independent will not endure a worship established by the
State, when he feared the fall of his own party, thereby: But look upon him a
little farther, and see how notoriously he plays the jugler, and palpable
Impostor, page 7. in these very words. Mind your own good (this he also speaks
to the City of London) and cleave fast to the House of Commons; Let no Sorcerie
or Sophistry divide you from them, be not importunate with them for
Church Government, but leave it to their wisdoms to measure-out unto the
Clergy, what may be for the quiet and profit of the people. See here now how
the case is altered with this Independent; now, all must be left to the State,
to the wisdom of the House of Commons, now you see a Parliamentary Church
Government is the best. But, see again, how this Satanicall-deceiver goes about
most audaciously and sediciously to make a rent and division between the two
Houses of Parliament. The Lords (says he) are not to go before the Commons in
determining what concerns the Nations, Their large Answer to your last
City-Petition for Church Government and suppression of Conventicles, insinuates
they would allure you from the Commons, therefore observe them watchfully, and
trust them accordingly, and let not any of these estrange you from that your
faithful Council, the House of Commons. This is now adays, their tone and
tune; now, I say, that they suppose (but most falsely I hope) that the House of
Commons will either curb, or cast down the Presbyterian-Government, or at least
grant a Toleration to the Independent-Church way. But, in the mean season,
judge o my godly Brethren, is not this a most Satanicall dissembler, and
abominable Traitor too, to Peace and Truth? And are not all these men brave and
bold conscientious time-servers and time-observers for their own ayms and
interests? Certainly, I think they are, or else I am still mightily mistaken.

Nay yet again, Our holy Covenant made an ensnaring dangerous Dilemma to our
consciences by the Independents subtilties.
what a strange trick have they now of late taken up to abuse us withal? even
to make our solemn League and most sacred Covenant that happy and heavenly tie
upon our consciences to Almighty God himself to be if possibly it may be) a
mayn snare and most dangerous Dilemma (or nose of wax) to undo us all (in
making us abominable and nauseous Covenant-breakers) by their false wrested
Comments and fallacious Glosses and Interpretations set upon it, for the surer
and subtiller advance of their own wicked aims and ends; Telling us that the
Parliament intended not the sense and acceptance of it, thus and thus,
according to the Letter of it, as we the Presbyterians take it, and
undiscreetly would have it; neither for Conformity to the Church of Scotland,
The Peacemaker.
or other Reformed Churches; As my old dear, but (...) unhappy friend M.
Burton in his forementioned Peacemaker seems to come too near to such an
interpretation of that branch of our Covenant, when he says; And why not
rather to the Churches of New England, and yet he sees (or may if he please)
the very Church of Scotland nominatim, expressed plainly in the Covenant: But
the Letter (they say) must not stand for good (but an, etc.) sense, like the
Bishops oath. Much, also, to this purpose, speaks that most wicked and
seditious, yea, apparently Jesuiticall Last warning to London; And Walwin also
that Whisperer, and self-flated-flatterer, before more fully mentioned.

And thus this godly party, these precious Saints, willingly forget (as I
touched before) or are now adays (without fear or piety) most careless and
fearlesse of the great danger of their lives, or, at least, of some severe
corporal punishment, as the Author of the Protestation Protested, once was in
(as I touched before) for daring to wrest the sense of the Covenants, Orders or
Edicts of our wise and honorable Parliamentarie Senators, to their own private
and most pernicious aims and ends O tempora! O mores! If ever certainly, now,
is that of the Prophet Jeremiah most truly and clearly fulfilled, and too
manifest in these our Independents: Ierem. 9. 4.
Take ye heed, everyone, of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother;
for, every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will walk with
slanders.

And for a most particular ratification of this Scripture, I shall here give
the Reader a clear example in an eminent Independent Past^r, now and long
resident in this City, and well known to almost all in the City, viz. Doctor
Homes, who succeeded reverend and religious Master Faucet, who being a sickly
Gentleman, and finding he could not have his health well in the City,
contracted with Doctor Homes about exchange of their livings, the one for the
City, the other for the Country in case of consent of the Inhabitants of each
place. An Independent juggling trick played by Doctor Homes with his
Parishioners.
Master Faucets Parishioners out of their good respect and love to him, and for
his desired accommodation, consented thereunto, and the rather also, as knowing
the Doctor to be a man of able parts, and persuaded he would live lovingly, and
deal honestly and conscienciously with them, as a godly and faithful Pastor
ought with his own people. After which consent the Doctor procured a
presentation from the (then) Lord Keeper to the Bishop, and the next thing to
be done was to have an induction from the Bishop, but there the Doctor made a
stand, and desired conference with the parishioners about it* to whom he
declared the tenderness of his conscience, and that he could not digest such an
Induction, he holding it Antichristian, and yet without which he could not have
the living, as the case then stood. Whereupon the Parishioners having very good
thoughts of the Doctor in those days, and hoping for much good by his Ministry
amongst them, were all of them willing to accept of him for their Pastor,
though he was not (as the manner then was) legally possessed of the living
provided, that the Doctor should enter into bond to save the parish harmless
from the next Incumbent, for delapidations or any thing else that might befall
them in that respect of the living, he not being proper Incumbent. To this the
Doctor consented, sealed the Parish a Bond, for the purposes aforesaid, and so
the Parishioners thought all was well between them, and thus it continued some
few months, the Doctor constantly preaching and officiating in his Ministry
amongst them; But now at last, the Doctor began to flag, and to be
discontented, and would neither preach, nor do ought else among his people as
their Minister, or but very seldom and discontentedly, and told the
parishioners he was troubled in mind, and bound in his Spirit, and could not
go on comfortably with them, and desired therefore a conference with them All
together, whereupon a meeting there was, and he then declared to them that he
was much troubled in mind by reason of his engagement, and that it was a great
hinderance to his studies, and to his other contentments, and that he could not
go on in preaching to them, till his engagement was taken off from him, making
this a great Argument therein, namely, that he had a wife, and that if God
should take him away from her, his wife would then beliable to make good what
he was bound to, but, that she was utterly unfit to deal in businesses of such
a nature, and therefore, I say, he desired he might have in his bond again, or
else he could not go on comfortably in his Ministry, And that if they would
thus far favor and respect him, they should see how highly he should value
their love therein, and how he would study and strive to deserve it of them,
bidding them trust him upon his word and promise, which accordingly they most
freely and lovingly did, and gave him in the bond presently, and ever since
that, they have paid soundly for it, for very shortly after he began boldly to
play reexs, to stand upon terms on tiptoe, as it were, with his Parishioners,
gathered an Independent congregation, excluding all his foresaid loving
Parishioners from Christian Communion in their own Parish Church, except they
would enter into a Covenant with him, to walk according to his rule, which
they not willing to yield unto he having got the keys of the Church from their
clerk, keeps all the Parishioners out, and will not administer the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper to any of them, not baptize any of their children, nor do
any act of a Minister or Pastor to his people, save what he would do to a very
Turk or Pagan, unless they will dance after his Independent pipe; And thus
now the Parishioners wander as sheep without a sheepherd, glad to run into
others pastures, and this they have gotten by trusting to a grave Independents
bare promise. And are not now the Prophets words before recited, here too truly
verified and confirmed? The truth of all which though not extant in print under
the Doctors own hands (as for shame is not like to be) yet I am able to
justify by the testimony of diverse of the honest, able, religious, and
understanding parishioners or Inhabitants of that place, to full satisfaction.

Again who ever looks upon that piece of Changeable taffatie, for I confess
it is finely spun (as so are all his) and yet interwoven with sablesilke, that
is, much black-slander and jettie-jeers, I mean Mr. John Goodwins twelve
serious considerable Cautions about Reformation, together with his soft and
smooth Probationer thereof, his Independent brother Master John Bachiler; O
what pretty tinkling and tampering shall he there find (to abuse and
blindfold the understanding of their most willingly deceived and abused
Independent Proselytes) between the Licenser and the Licentious Author, Ier. 9.
4.
both upon the serious perusal of the crafty Cautions themselves, Mr. John
Bachilers approbation of a company of most pernicicious and schismatic
Pamphlets, yet pretends all to be pious, sound and good.
and the Licensers sly protestations (there) that he sees nothing therein
contrary to sound Doctrine and good manners; And thus, in effect, he also
deals by his full approbation of my late friend Mr. Saltmarsh his most foggie
and suffocating or choking Smoke of the Temple, Touching which, I think,
learned, grave and godly Mr. Ley, a reverend Divine of the Assembly has
sufficiently shown him his gross failings and weaknesses, to say no more; And
also his Groans for liberty out of Smectymnius, in neither of which also can
Mr. Bachiler see any thing contrary to sound Doctrine nor good manners though
they be full fraught (especially, the Groans for Liberty) with very false,
falacious, and grossly misapplyed parallels, and unsavorie comparisons,
between the cases or conditions and times of the dommeering Prelates, over the
truly tender consciences of the (then) truly godly Nonconfommists, and our
(now) pious Presbyterians in their gracious and most moderate desire of unity
and uniformity in sound Doctrine, and Scripturall discipline, with his
Schismatic Sectaries, in their most ungodly and ungrounded groans, or rather
grunts, for abominable, yea damnable Liberty of conscience, forsooth. Nor can
this tender conscienced Licenser, to his dear Independent Authors, see ought
amiss in Master Sal^marshes subtle and deceitful Treatise of Free Grace, the
glorious and specious deep-promising Title whereof (as learned and reverend
Master Gatakar truly says, in his learned Answer to that Book of M.
Salimarshes) on the very Frontispeece, were bush enough of it self, to invite
and entice (guests) to taste of such pretended precious liquor; yet very much
dangerous drink of error to be found therein, as Mr. Gatakar, I say, in that
his learned and pious reply clearly discovers, together also with Master
Saltmarshes most injurious exceptions and discontents at reverend and religious
Master Edwards his Gangraena, Of whom (I mean Master Edwards) I can say thus
much, from Master Saltmarshes own mouth, on mine own particular knowledge, That
I having got Master Saltmarsh both to hear Master Edwards preach in
Christ-Church, and afterward to have much particular conference with him at my
house, I and others have heard Master Saltmarsh give Master Edwards such high
and honorable Testimony both for his godly, M. Saltmarsh his singular
testimony of M. Edwards his Preaching and conference.
sound, and satisfactory preaching, and also for his gravity, solidity, and
sweetly tempered moderation in conference, as that I am confident, he is not
able to give more or better testimony and commendation of any Independent or
Sectarie, whatsoever: yea, and he added these words unto me. I profess, Sir
(says he to my self) had I not thus heard M. Edwards my self, I could not have
believed the half thereof; But, I am now glad I have, thus heard him, and
conferred with him, that now I may (as I will) on all occasions, vindicate his
reputation and honor, when ever I hear him traduced or ill-spoken of. Or
words full, to this effect. And all this, I say, I can most faithfully witness
and testify and so can others) on mine own particular knowledge. Truly,
therefore, me thinks, had I said no more, in these respects, than what that
worthy Author (who ever he was) of that, though succinct, yet most solid
piece, entitled Toichoructa, or Independents razing their own foundation.
Toichoructa, or, Independents razing their own foundation.
Wherein, he most singularly deciphers how near the spirit of Independents
comes to Remish Jesuits, in their Deceits and Dissimulations, stretching their
Consciences beyond the the line of all fair-dealing; Had I, therefore, I say,
said no more, me thinks, I had spoken enough to convince them of deep impiety
and most foul iniquity, in the very way of their destructive Schism among us.
Nay, yet farther, take special notice, I beseech thee good Reader, of one more
even unparalleled piece of impiety, A remarkable piece of Independents impiety.
and (doubtless) of unpattern'd palpable iniquity most worthily mentioned to
their eternal and indelible shame and infamy by the foresaid Author of that
Toichoructa, which you shall find exactly set down, in that notable piece,
page 4, 5, 6. Wherein he shows how notoriously dissemblingly and unconscionably
the Independents of the Assembly at Westminster dealt with their Presbyterian
Brethren, there, about Commissioners to judge of sins not ennmerated in the
Ordinance touching admitting or not admitting to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. Against which, when our Presbyterian-Divines desired their
Dissenting-Brethren of the Independent faction to join in a Petition with them
to the House of Commons; And although it is a thing which Independents cannot
according to their principles allow of; yet, now, upon this just desire of
their Presbyterian-Brethren, they answered; The thing the Assembly desired was
good, yet they could not join with them therein because it might be a
hinderance to a greater good which themselves desired. Here Is policy to the
purpose, indeed. And (as the same Author goes on) whether the Independents
have not had their hands deep in the promoting the business of Commissioners
and obstructing those ways which might have prevented it I appeal to their
own consciences. Now, if any one ask (as well as wonder) upon what principles,
the Indep^ndents can, in conscience, consent and approve of, yea, promote and
farther (as it is too evident they have) the laying on of such burdens upon
other men's shoulders, as themselves cannot in conscience submit unto? I answer,
on what principles of conscience they thus proceed, I know not, but their
prin^iples of policy, are diverse and deep; as first, Themselves never meant to
be under such bonds, but either hoped to get a formal Toleration for their
way, and exemption from such a rule, or at least, resolved to practice
Toleration in their separated Congregations, whether the Magistrate tolerate it
or not, unto them; And therefore cared not how straight and pirching those or
any bonds were made for others. Thus and more, to this purpose, this worthy
Author. Now if all these be not pretty Independent tricks to play fast and
loose with their Brethren, I know not what belongs to Fair play above board.
And all these things being so evident and apparent to all truly pious and
impartial Christians, that are not wilfully blind, and so conspicuous under
their own hands (for the most part) even all I have hither^o written of them, I
cannot but exceedingly wonder how it should come to pass, that men's eyes and
understanding (especially too many even of the intelligent Presbyterian party)
should be so blinded or rather besotted, and that their reason should be so
gulled and del^ded, as to believe these and such like pernicious and perfidious
pr^ctices to be consonant and agreeable to such pious-men and precious-Saints
(I mean, I say, the Heads and Ringleaders of them especially) as the world
calls and conceives them to be; and therefore, they say, they dare not speak
against them, or think evil of them; Considering I say in the first place (as
a sure ground to build their judgment on) These Scripture-marks and Characters
of a truly holy-Saint and gracious Citizen of the New-Jerusalem; and how
D^ame^rally opposite thereunto, these Independent Sectaries walk, and how
egregiously discrepant and remote they are from them. Mat. 18. 16.
And, since, as our blessed Savior says, In the mouth, or testimony of two or
three witnesses, every word or truth shall be established. I hope, this cloud
of unquestionable self-condemning-testimonies, even as it were out of their own
mouths, and under their own hands (the most of them) may be abundantly
sufficient, for the future, to stop the mouths of our Independent Antagonists,
and to satisfy the false conceits of any Neutrall Gainsayers, yea, and to make
(if it be possible) the boldest of them to blush and hold their tongues, or
hide their faces for shame of themselves and their deceitful and wicked way.

And yet, I must confess, I may seem, herein, to be much mistaken (especially
in the opinion of Independents, A pretty Independent evasion of all hitherto
urged against independents.
and a fine back-do^e of evasion to get out at, from all these censures and
surmises of Presbyterians touching all these the Independents seeming
miscarriages; namely, that all this which I have hitherto urged against them,
as subtilties and deceivable Errors, Schisms or Enormities, they finely and
fairly call and count Glorious New-Lights, New-Lights.
and rare-Revelations. And, hence it is (they will assure you) that at the
first they told us (in their Apologeticall Narration) that they would
positively determine nothing in their Church way or Church Government, but
forsooth, wait in expectation (still) of New-Light, and so keep a Reserve, to
help themselves at a dead lift, Vindication p. 58. Donec ad Triarios
redieritres.
for so are Mr. Burtons own words in his Vindication. But hereunto, I answer,
Is not this a clear Jesuiticall juggle, and most like unto the Popish
Equivocation, whereby the Jesuits, Seminarie-Priests, and all Jesuited Papists
did familiarly use to help themselves at a dead lift, Mental reservation or
equivocation to help themselves, Independents empty New-lights, and Popish
equivocation compared together.
I say, and thereby did they the more cunningly deceive the most acute
Argumentators and interrogating Disputans that came against them? And would not
our Independents, now adays, by this their fine-trick of New-lights, forsooth,
befool our faith, and make us believe they do all now, by rare Revelations?
Herein, I say, dealing with us, just as the Jesuits did with their Proselytes
and Opposites too, in the point of Transubstantiation, labor to make them
believe that the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, were truly; really, and
corporally transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ even the
very same which suffered and was shed on the cross in all respects, though
there was no visible change (either to sight or sense) in the Bread or Wine,
but they still remained the same which they were before they were consecrated,
whereof, when they were told so, they presently answered that it was so
tra^sinutated or changed by a Miracle, forsooth, which indeed was a ridiculous
and absurd answer; for we never read of any miracle wrought either by any of
the Prophets, Christ himself, or his Apostles, but it was real, evident, and
visible, both to sight and sense to be a miracle indeed: Even so I say to out
Independents, concerning their Reserve or New-lights, Tell them of any of their
new and upstart errors, or vaporous Enthusiasmes, or Newly-revived-Opinions or
conceits, but indeed mere old errors (call them what you please) raked out of
the rotten ashes of ancient Heretics and Schismatics, presently their smooth
and deceivable Answer is; O Sir, these are not Errors but New-Lights, newly
and rarely revealed to us by some sudden and secret inspiration, and when we
demand or desire to have it made out unto us by Gods written Word, that they
are real and demonstrative, New-Lights indeed, that we may evidently discern
them to be such, by that truest Tonch-stone, the Word of God, and not to be
empty Meteors and crotchets of their own brains; Then, alas, either through
ignorance and deceivablenesse they cannot, or else with as much impertinencie
as obstinacy, they will foolishly and falsely urge that of the Prophet Joel,
And it shall come to pass, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. and your young men shall see
visions. Joel 2. 18.
Whereas this Prophecy of Joel (as the Apostle Peter told the Jews) was
clearly prophesied of, and mainly fulfilled in those times of the Apostles,
Acts 2. 16, 17.
and then after our Savior Christ's ascension (which were called those
Last-dayes, as all the learned observe) the Lord indeed poured out his spirit
on all flesh, on young and old, male and female, and gave them power of
admirably doing miracles and wonders, and then I say (as the Apostle Peter, in
that forecited Scripture said) was this Prophecy of Joel most apparently
fulfilled, and so continued all the time of the Apostles lives, and some of
their holy Disciples, even to about the time of the destruction of Jerusalem.
But what is this to our times, The extreme impiety, folly, and absurdity of the
audacious Sectaries both man and wom^n of our times, under a pretense of
New-Light, from the Prophecy of Joel.
wherein (and long time before) miracles are ceased? Can any of us dare to
assume the extraordinary power of the Spirit of God, to do miracles, and work
wonders? Is it a miracle or a wonder (indeed, I confess it may be, to see such
intolerable impudence) to see young saucie Boys (in comparison) bold botching
Tailors, and other most audacious illiterate mechanics, to run rudely and
rashly (and unsent for too) out of their shops into a Pulpit; To see bold
impudent huswives, without al womanly modesty, to take upon them (in the
natural volubility of their tongues, and quick wits, or strong memories only)
to prate (not preach or Prophecy) after a narrative or discoursing manner, 1
Cor. 14. 34
an hour or more, and that most directly contrary to the Apostles inhibition;
1 Timothy 2 11, 12 and 1 Pet. 2. 15.
But where, I say, is their extraordinary spirit poured out upon them, either
in the gift of tongues (except it be the lying and the slanderous tongues,
which are rather the gifts of the evil Spirit, Iam. 13, 14, 15.
as the Apostle James testifies) in gifts of miraculous healing the sick and
sore, and such like? where, I say, are any of these in our old or young
Tradesmen, or bold Beatriceses of the female sex? And does not the Apostle
Peter most punctually come up to this very thing of our Independents, even to
show us this most notable dissembling and fallacious trick of New-Lights, and
fained Revelations, which he foresaw would follow his departure out of his
Earthly-Tabernacle,, and therefore forewarns the people of God to beware of
them, telling them, Verse 16. That he and the rest of the faithful Apostles
used not cunningly devised fables (or new inventions of their own or other men's
brains) when they made known the power and coming of the Lord Jesus unto them.
Adding at length this most immovable and infalible rule for them to walk by,
and to be guided with, Here is an old Light, and a true light indred.
ver. 19. But we have a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto you do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, till the day
dawn, and the day star (of truth) arise in your hearts. Away, then, with this
notorious deceitful trick of New-Lights (for shame) and of your rare
Revelations; cheat not the people of God and your own souls, especially, with
these deceivable devices of your own brains, and Schismatic spirits. But,
this, most certainly, is the Independent way, now adays, among us, to the
great disturbance of the peace and comfort of the people of the Lord, and when
we justly tell them of their unfaithful dealing, and down right deceiving, by
this their trick of New-lights; O then, just as the Jesuits and Popish Priests,
in Queen Mary's days, and of later times, called those that would not believe
their Popish trick of Transubstantiation to be a miracle, they called and
counted them, I say, Heretics: so these our Independents (if we will not, and
cannot in our consciences, nor by any of their demonstrations, believe their
trick of New-Lights to be a Scripture Revelation of some rare Truth of God not
formerly known but a mere conceit, yea, a plain deceit) o then presently, I
say, our Independents call and count us (as my self heard Master Buroughs
deliver such an expression in one of his Lectures at Michaels in Cornhill)
Carnal and profane Presbyterians, Grievers and despisers of the Saints and
Godly party, forsooth, and contemners of the gifts of the Spirit, whereas
indeed there is no such thing in them, but they most palpable and impudent
impostors. And thus, the Lord knows, they go about deceiving and being
deceived, and truly, Hinc illae lachrima, Here Is the source, the rice and
original of all these unhappie and unholy jars and divisions between us; They
are so nimble and quick-sighted in apprehension of New-Lights, and we are so
dull and obtuse (if they will have it so) and hard of belief to be led, or
rather misled by them, as not being able to discern so much out of Gods Word,
Till when, we shall ever question and quarrel at this novell and vain device
of theirs.

But again, our Independents have one trick more, at least to put us
objurgations with them, and accusations of them, concerning their most
dangerous and damnable errors, now adays broacht by them, The Independent
Saints infirmities must not be meddled with.
and bragged of among them, viz. That we are too uncharitable in thus
upbraiding the Saints with their infirmities, forsooth; yea, and (as I touched
before) in laying the failings and slips of only the Retrimentitious* Party
(as Master John Goodwin terms them, as before) that is, in plain English the
excrements or dregs of Sectaries, Independents, Anabaptists, and such like.
Where first John Goodwin confesses, there is a Retrimentitious or
Excrementall-Partie among his Saints. Cretensis, p. 4.
Secondly, That he calls and counts their dangerous, damnable, and blasphemous
Errors, with the rest of their foul impieties, but sins of infirmity. But more
particularly to the first, I briefly answer, That as I have sufficiently made
it clear, all along in this Treatise, Not only the Retrimentitious-party, but
the gravest Grandees of the Independent-party.
they are not only the Retrimentitious-Partie of their Independent Saints,
that deal thus dangerously and deceitfully with us, but the very best and
bravest, yea, seemingly, gravest Grandees of them all. Secondly, Is not Master
John Goodwin, or any of the rest of them ashamed, to call such abusive and
abominable Errors and such foul and frequent facts of impiety (as they are too
justly taxed with, and found guilty of) Sins only of infirmity? Can he or they
make us believe that they know not how to distinguish between Sins of weakness
or infirmity, Sins of Infirmity briefly described.
and Reigning-sins, Church-disgracing and conscience-wounding abominations? For
my part I conceive (under correction) sins of infirmity are such as are
committed either ignorantly, or if knowingly, yet) fearfully, and with much
reluctation of spirit, seldom, and that with much vehement repentance and godly
sorrow after conviction, with purpose and bent of heart (by Gods grace) to be
more watch full against them for the future, and such like. Ragining sins
briefly described.
As for Reigning-sins, I conceive them to be, sins committed or acted
knowingly, affectedly, promeditately, resolutely, constantly, or frequently and
familiarly against all evidences of conviction or exhortation against them,
yea, and so far from repentance for them, as to justify them and rejoice and
boast in them; together with such like other sad symptoms thereof. Now,
whether very many of our professed Independents embrace or act their dangerous
Errors, lying, double dealing, and the like, as aforesaid, in the former or in
the latter capacity or condition, as sins of weakness or of wilfulness, and
affected obstinacy, I leave themselves to judge and faithfully to examine their
own hearts and consciences (for, to their own Master they stand or fall) And to
all others also, who impartially observe and take notice of their carriage and
conversation; especially, upon serious consideration of those Characters of a
true Saint, which I have faithfully forementioned to them; all that I will,
for my part, say herein, is, to tell you my strong fears, that, in regard of
the premises, I cannot but greatly suspect and doubt, in the latter capacity (I
say, very many of them) so proud, so pragmaticall, so insolent and obstinate
are they in a most ungrounded defense of their evils and errors; And on these
grounds, I must confess I cannot judge more tenderly of them. And again, No
error into be accounted a small sin.
I say, in yet more full answer to this Objection; How dare any of them call or
account any the (seeming) least of their Errors, small-sins or no-sins, being
against the eternal truth, of our most pure The Independents tax the
Presbyterians with piety for writing against their errors openly.
and tax us, not only of want of charity, but asperse us with plain impiety,
for urging against them, and accusing them openly or inprint, of their foul
offenses, and openly taught and maintained dangerous Errors, Schisms, and
Enormities, and of their damnable Doctrines and Opinions: I say, and will
avouch and maintain it, That our work and way herein, is both holy, honest, and
warrantable from the word it self; And particularly from that of the Apostle
Paul, Who When Peter ( who at that time seemed a Pillar of Gods house, Galat.
2. 11. Ibid. 2. 9.
the Church) did that which was worthy of blame, and that, openly, to the
prejudice and so and all of Gods people and Cause: This blessed Apostle, I say,
tells us, That he withstood Peter and rebuked him, even to his face for his
dissimulation, and for being a means (thereby to ensnare Barnabas also into the
same foul fault with him; Even the very same, whereof I now here complain in
our Independents and their Schismatic brethren, namely, Dissimulation or
Double-dealing. Yea, Titus 1. 13.
and (as the same blessed, wise, and holy Apostle said) They are most worthy to
be even most sharply rebuked, and also openly, in regard they have offended and
dissembled so openly, even in print, therefore are, I say, to be reproved in
paint, whereas, indeed, had they offended but in private, God forbid, but we
should tenderly have dealt in private with them. And this indeed has been a
main ground of the quarrel between reverend Master Edwards, and his
Independent Antagonists, who have most injuriously abused him with slanders,
only, or mainly for his zealous opposing, and sharp reproving the open
Errors, Schisms, and scandalous miscarriages of these men, who can be content
to dishonor God and his Truth, but cannot endure to be taxt and told of it,
though the Apostle tells them they are worthy to be blamed for it, and therefore
in this respect, though (according to that old Axiom, Amicus Socrates, amicus
Plato, magic tamen amica veritas, though such an one is my friend, and such an
one is my old acquaintance and friend, yet, by Gods grace, Truth is and shall
be my best friend, yea, and I say as my blessed Lord and Master Christ Jesus
said, John 18 37.
To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness (with the rest of Gods faithful ones) to the truth; and
fully and faithfully to speak and declare the Truth with all holiness, godly
zeal, courage and impartiality against whomsoever, in this case neither
regarding the favors or frowns of any, but only aiming at the glory of my
God, which, I say, was the main end of my creation. But to conclude and shut up
all I have now to say, it is most probable that our Independents, and the rest
of their Schismatic fraternity (for as I have formerly touched, I make
account all the rest of the Sectaries, are for certain Independents) Edwards,
or I, call Errors or Schisms, are Schisms or sins, but (as New-Lights, and
New-revealed Truths. Whereunto I Answer, with sorrow of soul for their sakes,
I easily, indeed, believe they will say so, and I cannot much marvel at it,
Since (as those Demetrians said) By this craft they have got much gain. Acts
19. 25.
And since I see this is their obstinate and inflexible resolution, thus,
still, to say and hold, and that they are before hand resolved (for private
interests and self-aymes sake) that no clearest demonstrative reasons or
argumentations (no though from apparent Scripture, or Scripture-consequences)
shall beat them off, or dissuade them from these Satan's strong stratagems of
New-Light, New-Revelations, Keeping Reserves, and Liberty of Conscience; I
therefore will say no more unto them, but with the Spirit of the Lord, said to
obstinate and incorrigible Ones; He that is unjust, Revel. 22. 11.
let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be filthy still; and
he that is righteous, o let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let
him be holy still? Only, I herein may comfortably say to mine own heart,
Liberavi animam meam: Yet, as the Religious bonds of piety and charity bind
me) from my soul I shall unfainedly pray (as the Lord knows I daily do) that
God would in the riches of his grace in Christ Jesus open their eyes and speak
to their hearts, show them the evil of their ways, and the great danger of
their destructive errors, to the ruin of the whole Kingdom, yea, of the three
whole Kingdoms, if they do not timely retract and repent of those great and
gangrene evils and blasphemous errors, which have enflamed almost the whole
Kingdom (by their New-lights) as so many firebrands to set on fire three whole
Kingdoms, I say, if the Lord in mercy (by the wisdom, piety, and
impartiallity of our Parliament) quench not the flame in time, and graciously
reconcile us not together by godly peace, unity, and unanimity of spirit, which
the Lord in much mercy grant unto us for his sake, who is the Prince of Peace,
Truth, and Love, and of all godly order, even the Lord Christ the Righteous, to
whom be all honor, praise, dominion, with holy and hearty universal
obedience, for ever,

AMEN.
The opinion and advice (as it is deemed) of Monsieur de MOULIN, Professor of
Divinity, in the University of SEDAN, in FRANCE; Concerning the opinion of
those who are named Independents, in ENGLAND.
Wherein, the Inconcinnity and unreasonablenesse, if not apparent impiety of
Independents, in the mayn point of Classicall-Discipline, is most evidently
discovered, by this eminently Reverend and Learned Divine, to the shame and
silence of our obstinate Independents.
SIR,
A Certain friend of mine, an honest religious man has given me notice, that
certain persons do find fault with the Order and Discipline established in
our Church; In which, the Consistory are subject to the Colloquies, and the
Colloquies to the Provincial Synod; and the Provincial to the National
Synod. And their desire is to have every particular Consistory or Congregation
of one and the same absolute authority, independent from any Superior
authority or Assembly whatsoever. Upon which, my said friend earnestly desired
to have my opinion or judgment on the matter; which, being of such a nature
and importance, I could not any way decline, or deny his request, which, I have
here set down, and is as follows.

I say, that those which propound this opinion ought in no manner or wise to be
hearkened unto; For if in case this their opinion were followed, there could
nothing else ensue but the certain ruin of the Church, and an extreme
confusion, for the several reasons, here following.

First, It happens often times, that two Ministers of one Parish

Secondly, The Church or Congregation has but one Minister, Colloquies or
Synods, who have power to depose and appoint such Ministers (or such a
Minister) if there be but one) as they shall think fit, and they or he desiring
to be deposes? Who shall depose him, the Elders only of the Consistory, or
the whole Congregation or Assembly? Shall they give sentence against them or
him?

Thirdly, If any one of the Congregation be unjustly suspended

If any new Heresies happen to be raised in any Church, and that Dort remedied
this evil, the Arminianisme was spreading it self over that whole Country,
and had unavoidably prevailed. For in case that every Consistory or Parish had
been absolute of themselves and Independent, they might have refused the
resolution of the said Synod, alleging that they were not subject to Synods,
but had an absolute authority within themselves.











neither of these two Churches can be judge in their own cause, and of
necessity there must be relief by a superior authority, else all will be
naught between them,

I will not believe (though I confess there is cause of jealousy) that those
that desire this Independencie have any intelligence with the enemy, and that
thereby they seek (under pretense of Reformation) to bring us into a
confusion, or at least to expose us to the laughter of our enemies, though, I
say, I fear this, by many Symptoms thereof, I rather will (in charity) believe
they err through want of experience, and knowledge of what is profitable for
the Church of God.

The end of every good Christian and Commonwealths man, is to glorify God in
maintaining his true Religion, to serve the King in the preservation of his
royal person and dignity, and to procure the Common good in maintaining
justice, and liberty of the Subject and Kingdom.

All these (though three branches) arise and spring from one root, and have the
same essense and being: But it is impossible that any man should truly affect
the King or Commonwealth that is slight and negligent in Religion, nor can any
man fully discharge his duty to God, that is not careful of King and
Commonwealth,

See then o Independents, by this foresaid solid judgment, how feeble and
false, yea, how dangerous and destructive your Independent Church Way is. The
Lord open your eyes to see it, and give you hearts affected with much sorrow
for your obstinacy in it, and in his good time, graciously convert you from
it, to embrace Peace and Truth with your Presbyterian Brethren, thus prays.

Yours, J. V.

FINIS.

