A BRIEF RELATION OF THE Strange and Unnatural PRACTICES OF WESSEL GOODWIN,
MEHETABELL JONES the wife of EDWARD JONES, and ELIZABETH PIGEON the wife of
JOHN PIGEON.

Prove. 2. 16, 17. To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the
stranger that flatters with her words.

Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God.

Prove. 30. 15. The Horseleech has two Daughters, that cry Give, Give. Printed
in the Year, 1654.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Here present thee with a most stupenatous Relation of a father, formerly
loving his children even to doting, and now without any just provocation
abhorring his own flesh: of two sisters that heretofore were transcendent in
the profession of Saintship, and now apostatized into Libertine and unnatural
practices: the Apostle says, he that provides not for his family has denied
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel: here shall thou see a father so far
from providing for his dutiful children, that he strips them of all that which
God has given him, and gives it to strangers; the Apostle says of these
latter days, that there shall be seducers, that shall creep into houses, and
lead captive filly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts: here
behold seducing women cunning in wickedness, creeping into a silly man's house,
and leading him captive to their wicked purposes, and to his own and his
families utter ruin. Stories make mention of certain Sea Monsters whose upper
parts are the resemblance of beautiful women, and the nether parts of an ugly
fish, who by their melodious voices entise the unwary passengers to attention,
and then suddenly seize and devour them; here behold two Land Sirens or
monsters, being neither maids, wives, nor widows, having only the shape of
women, charming with the music of their fained speeches, a silly old man, and
suddenly seizing and devouring both him and all his family. I do profess in
the presence of God; I am not conscious to have set down one passage that I
scruple the truth of it; to most of them I have been an Ocular witness. That
which is most remote from my own knowledge has several times been related to
me by their own husbands. My intention in this publication is not to defame
the parties herein concerned, but to discover the truth which by their feigned
pretenses and foul practices has been grievously defamed: I have also
considered, that happily this narrative may light into the hands of old Mr.
Goodwin, and who can tell but when he shall see in this true glass his whole
shape at once, and behold what a deformed Creature his sinful converse with
these women has made him; who can tell I say, but he that hitherto has stood
out against all the reproves and admonitions of godly friends, and Ministers,
professing that he valued their reproves no more then the dirt under his feet,
by the powerful assistance of the Spirit of God his secret thoughts may
rebound within him, his heart throb, his bowels be moved, and he may smite
upon the thigh, and say, what have I done? Reader, here thou will see a
Land-wrack, where there are in these perilous times more rocks and quick sands
then in the great Ocean, and all for want of minding the Compass. Let it teach
thee to keep to the rule of Gods word, to grow in Grace, and to stand fast in
sound principles, to stand amassed at thy own vileness and Gods goodness, so
will thou be humble and thankful, and be preserved from the snares of seducers.

Farewell.
MAster Wessell Goodwin, one of the principal subjects of this relation, was
borne in the Borough of Southwark, where yet he lives, bred up in the mystery
of a Dier; of whose Descent and parentage I will not mention one word, that I
may contract my discourse, keeping close to the subject I have undertaken.
About the twenty sixth of his age, he married Mistress Ellenor Armestrong a
Liecester shire Gentlewoman of an ancient honorable Family, a woman of the
most excellent frame of spirit that I ever met with, judicious, sober,
virtuous, and above all, religious, a Charitable heart, that would seldom send
away the poor without a double Alms, relief for the body, and good counsel
for the soul; that in some things seemed parsimonious, that on just occasions
she might be the more liberal; that could finely divert her Husband from his
follies, and yet give him all due respect; by her he has four children, three
sonns, one daughter, all handsomely educated: for many years they continued in
good correspondency of affection, till toward her latter days, that his folly
would admit of no restraint.

Amongst other extravagancies, he was ever strangely given to music, to which
he had a ravenous appetite; five pounds for pricking out two or three lessons,
which when he had, he understood like Arabic; thirty pounds for a Lute, of
which he had with other sorts of fiddles, a whole room full; and which is the
wonder, can ply of none, only admires them, ten pounds at a time to a music
Master for a months teaching (or rather playing to him.) And as at Virginia
Tobacco, and at the Barbados Sugar is put in the place of money, so many
hundred weight for a field or a Cow, so does he fondly thinks music to be that
which answers all things. I Will give but one instance from an hundred, coming
one day to see his Daughter Vernon, he used these words to her Husband, Son,
quoth he, I am sorry I cannot do for you as I would, I see you have a great
charge, and trading is bad, which I do consider, and therefore will bestow
upon my daughter a suite of Mr. Rogers his new lesons. I am sorry to spoil
paper with such fooleries; but there is a necessity that the sequent truth may
the better appear. I might add his training up all his children to music, and
so far as they gave way to his musickal distemper, so far they were dutiful
and obedient; so far as they slighted music, wicked and rebellious; for
instance, his second son being intended (through his Mothers importunity for a
Prentice) accordingly he was put to an able writer to perfect his hand; but
still he plies him to have a great care of his Lute, and would needs have
brought him a music Master to the house where he boarded; and when by the
youth and his son Vernon he was told he had music enough, and could not now so
unseasonably atend so much music, he fell into a great rage against his said
son Vernon, telling him he had Corrupted his son with his counsel, but should
corrupt no more of his children.

About the 58 year of his age, his virtuous wife fell sick of a painful
disease contracted by melancholy, of which in a few months she died. I should
not mention any of the private unkindnesses with which she long strugled, and
at last sunk under, only this particular I may not omit.

When she drew near her death, some few days before her departure,
overhearing the music which was daily in the next room, she desired one of
her sons to call in their father, to whom with a broken sad voice she said,
Husband, you well know what a burden this Excess of music has been to me
all my life; must that which has been so much affliction to me in my life, be
brought to my death bed? may I not dye out of the noise of it? pray forbear, I
have not many hours to live, and then you may have your fill of music. To
which he replied not one word, but went out in discontent and so fell to his
music again.

The third day after, she departed this life; a little before her death she
called to her her son in Law and daughter Vernon, desiring them amongst other
requests to see to the Education of her two younget sons, the Eldest being a
little before married to a virtuous maid of an honest and Religious Neighbor
family, for which she much rejoiced, hoping that her eldest son now taken
into partnership with his Father, and matched with a stayed discreet wife, the
Old man would the more delight himself in his children and condition and take
himself off from his extravagant music. To which purpose she then also
desired her children to labor by all fair ways to take him off from that
company, especially from the frequentation of Mr. Edward Jones; and that not so
much out of dislike to him as to his wife, whom she saw to be a subtle
undermining woman, that would be ready to make her own advantage of old Mr.
Goodwins weakness.

I told you before, that the eldest son, Andrew Goodwin, was upon his marriage
taken into partnership with his father, into a Stock of Eighteen hundred
pounds, of which two thirds are the fathers, and one third the sons, as by
Indenture appears: which partnership is to continue eighteen years: a little
before Mr. Goodwin had cast up his estate, and found his neat stock to be two
and twenty hundred pounds, a fine competency; though nothing to what he might
have honestly raised out of his Trade (which for the quantity, I verily believe
to be one of the best Dyers trades in England.) In this partnership it was
agreed that Andrew Goodwin, being the better accomptant, should keep the books,
and cash, and look after the street business, and old Mr. Goodwin to follow
the trade within doors; and so they began very comfortably together. About
three months after Mrs. Goodwins death, Mr. Goodwin going to see his son in Law
and daughter Vernon, after some abrupt passages, he began to tell them that his
house wanted aguide, and he had found a Godly woman that would be a fit wife
for him; this he pretends to desire with much passion, when (as it now
appears) he was sent by Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Pigeon her sister to act this
cheat to delude the world: which is plain by what Mr. Pigeon has affirmed
under his hand and seal. Which attestation of Mr. Pigeons lies deposited in the
hands of Mr. Cooper Minister, and the Elders of the Parish of Olaves
Southwarke; by which writing he affirms that long before, even in the life time
of Mrs. Goodwin deceased, Mr. Goowdin had engaged to marry Mistress Jones.

But this pretended passion lasts not long, for within ten days after Mr.
Goodwin returns again to the house of his said son in Law, tells them, that he
saw now that God had not appointed this match for him, but that God had
provided for him a wife so eminent in Piety and wisdom, that his former wife
deserved not to be named the same day. And when he was entreated by his said
children to discover who this rare woman was, he utterly refused to reveal it;
yet his daily converse and familiarity with Mrs Jones put them in strange
thoughts; but still the business was to them but tanquam Nubibus, very dark,
till time the Mother of truth has made it more apparent and notorious, as by
this ensuing discourse appears.

Let the Reader note, that Mr. Goodwin is a member of Mr. Coopers Congregation,
Mrs. Jones a member of Mr. Kiffins Church, and Mrs Pigeon of Mr. Hansard
Knowles.

Now because Mrs. Pigeon is the chief agent and contriver in these sinful
projects, I shall give this brief description of her: She is one that can
transform her self into an Angel of light, and having her tongue tipped with
Scripture, can with tears, sighs, gesture at command, set off what she would
have believed, as Gospel, though very false, thereby to ensure such as hearken
to her Charms; no sport to her like catching credulous persons with her fair
Saint-like expressions, making sure prey of all that she can thus draw into her
toils; and so implacabe, that when she has once got an advantage, nothing
shall satisfy her but the utmost rigor, which she will rise at midnight to
prosecure. This finely qualified Gentlewoman was wife to Mr. Starkey an
Apothecarie; but she soon (as is believed) woried him out of the world with
her wicked imperious usage; She had by him (as is thought) one child, and a
fair estate. After a while she marries with second husband, one Mr. Pigeon, a
Lieutenant in the then Lieutenant General Cromwells regiment. Shortly after
her marriage with Mr. Pigeon, she returns to her old imperious carriage, as
will appear by this story. She asks Mr. Pigeon what he would do with his
estate, if he should die? he says, he hopes to have children by her; she
replies, she hopes he loves her so well that he will trust her with his
children, and presses him to promise, that if he dye he will give her all: he
endeavors in a loving way to divert her; but she insists peremptorily in her
resolution to make him swear to give her all; which he still refusing, she
absolutely refuses to admit him as a husband: and yet to work him to her
purpose, did behave her self very amorously toward him, and besides her
personal allurements did many times urge him to drink aqua coelestis, vinum
viperatum compounded with provocative drugs, and many other provocative meats
and drinks for many days together, promising him that if he would swear as
aforesaid, she would be to him according to his own heart: yet did he for good
reasons still refuse to consent, and she still pursues him, till one morning
practicing the very height of amorous behavior toward him, and yet
peremptorily refusing him, unless he would swear, he fell into such a passion,
and was so transported, that he became altogether senseless, feeble and
irrational, so that she feared he would never return to his reason again; in
which condition she then besought him for Christ's sake to speak to her as
formerly: but all in vain, for he was no ways sensible of what he said or
did. She now much affrighted at this strange accident, applies her self to one
Doctor Burges a Physician, who coming to him in that condition, gave him two
vomits in one day, which through excessive straining brought him even to the
point of death: yet after being a little recovered, and his understanding
somewhat returning, he besought God that he might regaine his understanding;
which it pleased God to restore him, though he remained a good space very
feeble. In this condition he said one day these words to her, Sweet heart, thou
have often told me that thy love to me was greater then to thy former husband?
did thou ever deal by him after this manner? she then terrified in
conscience, said indeed she served him so once, restraining him her company so
long till he committed a sin, for which he was tormented in his conscience, and
fell into such an agony that as she then said, she thought he would have dyed.
She then promised the said Mr. Pigeon never to do the like again: she said,
that by this carriage of hers she procured of Mr. Starky to give her all his
estate except some trifling legacies, and made no provision for his child: yet
at his death he framed a new Will, wherein he otherwise disposed of his estate;
which last Will she found means to nullify, by pleading that he dyed Non
compos mentis.

Notwithstanding all this, she after a while returns to her old practices, and
so wrought with Mr. Pigeon at the last, to part with his estate to her, as is
well known, and did yet after this run away from him, and then again after a
while returned; and thus would she frequently do according as the dictates of
her unconstant mind and her projects led her.

Now we must return to Mistress Jones, whose turn must now be served. She must
be freed from her husband, that so she may be free for old Mr. Goodwin, who is
now so taken with her, that he can enjoy himself no where but in her company:
scarce one day in the week but he is at her house, spending his time in
dalliance with her. And Mr. Pigeon affirms, that about the year 1646. sojorning
then in the house of his Brother Jones, he set himself to observe their
carriage, and at one time he saw Mistress Jones take Mr. Goodwin about the neck
and kiss him: at another time, being (as they thought) in private, he saw her
take Mr. Goodwins hand, and putting it under her apron, holding it against the
bottom of her belly, with many repeated mutual kisses, she saying, oh my dear
Love! At which Mr. Pigeon being much scandalized to see his Sister Jones so
behave her self to Mr. Goodwin, she being a married woman, and her husband in
the house, went presently and told his wife what he had seen, and that he would
tarry there no longer, for that he believed the house was a Bawdy house, and
that her Sister Jones was Mr. Goodwins whore. Mistress Pigeon perceiving they
were discovered to her husband, told him then that indeed Mr. Goodwin was a
Suitor to her Sister Jones, and that she would make it a match. She then also
told him that Mr. Jones was no longer her sisters husband before God, but had
forfeited his right in her: she then affirmed to him also, that Mr. Goodwin of
a long time had been a great friend to her sister, and had given her several
sums of money, thirty pounds at a time: All which passages Mr. Pigeon in
presence of good witnesses has offered to make oath of before any Magistrate.

Now the Lute and the Lute Master is quite laid aside, Mr. Goodwin speaks not
one word more of music; he has found another manner of Lute that is easier to
play on, which he had been long before a turning; And Mr. Pigeon having with
his estate divested himself of his authority, must now seem to like of all
his projecting wife does, that so at any rate he may buy his peace. He is (as I
said) entertained, and with Mr. Knowles, called to counsel: Mr. Jones must now
be turned off, and to that purpose a writing is drawn by Knowles; and having
notice that Mr. Jones is at the Ram Inn in Smithfield teaching a scholar on
the Lute, Knowles comes up, asks him if he be the man; which being
acknowledged, he shows him the bill of Divorce, and after that he had briefly
informed him that he has forfeited his interest in his wife, bids him without
more ado set his hand and seal to the bill of Divorce. Where note, that Mr.
Jones, having lived 16 or 18 years in lawful wedlock with his wife, by whom
he has five children alive, yet upon the sole information of his wife, without
any judicial examination or process, must be divorced. Mr. Jones astonished
at this strange greeting, asks him by what authority he could make divorces
between man and wife? but Mr. Knowles would not debate the matter, but
peremptorily bids him sign, or he would fetch authority from the Counsel of
State to compel him. Mr. Jones moved at this insolent language, tells him he
would not subscribe; and that if he departed not speedily, he would kick him
down stayres: away runs M. Knowles in a great fright to acquaint his Clients
with his success. Mr. Jones returning home, Mrs. Pigeon falls to threatening of
him. Mr. Jones, that could not endure to be so abused in his own house, bids
her depart his house; she replies with insolent language, and he replies to her
with kicks in the breech, and by force turns her out of doors presently. She
finds out Mr. Pigeon, who to be out of the sight of the wickedness he daily
saw at his brother Jones his house, had taken a chamber in Woodstreet, where he
had often desired his wife to remain with him; but she refused, and commands
were now out of season. Mrs. Pigeon coming as aforesaid to her husband,
aggravates with all her cunning the violence Mr. Jones had done her. Mr.
Pigeon, that was now thoroughly sensible of his wives insolent behavior, and
his brother Jones his being most injuriously dealt withal, and all to gratify
a silly old man, and a covetous naughty woman, tells his wife that he would not
meddle in the business, and that he had often warned her to depart her brother
Jones his house, where there was no reason she should abide against his
consent, to make breach between man and wife. Away she flings in a rage, and to
be brief, enters an action against her brother Jones in her husbands name,
though without his consent and knowledge, of 500l. and never rests until she
have lodged Mr. Jones in the Counter: and this not only for revenge, but to
mortify him, and make him fit to set his hand to the bill of Divorce, which at
last he submits to, or to something equivalent.

About this time, whether for plotting or rejoicing I know not, but there was a
merry meeting at Mr. Pigeons. chamber, Mrs. Pigeon and her good sister Jones
are come, and all wait for Mr. Goodwin to pass away the time, Mrs. Pigeon
falls a jeering of her husband, who discontented at these doings was walking
too and fro in the chamber: sister (quoth Mrs. Pigeon) does not my husband
look a little like my brother Jones? yes indeed does he, quoth she; he prays
them to forbear, and in the mean time up comes old Mr. Goodwin with a fine
white capon under his arm: as he enters the room, Mrs. Jones flies to him,
throwing her self into his arms, saying, Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Jones and I am now
parted for ever, and you must keep me. The poor deluded old man being
overjoyed, takes her in his arms, tells her, it was the best news to him that
ever came to town, and that he would provide for her, with more to that
purpose. Mr. Pigeon stands in admiration at these doings; at the last breaks
out into these words; Now quoth he, I see the cause my brother Jones was put
into the Counter: when Mrs. Pigeon, enraged at her husbands plain dealing,
tells him he is as bad as his brother Jones, and therefore takes his part;
saying, you are, you are, many times over. Mrs. Jones, in imitation of her
sister, and Mr. Goodwin in imitation of his sweetheart Mrs. Jones, join with
her in the same expressions, with their fists bent against his face. Mr. Pigeon
overcome with their uncivil revilings, after several admonitions to no
purpose, was feign with some blows to correct their folly, and thrust them all
down stairs headlong. Mr. Goodwin coming home to his house, where he had now
been a long time missing, and being by his neighbors demanded where he got his
black face, tells them, it was only a violent fit of the tooth ach; when as
for some years before he had not one tooth in his head, at least visible. And
as mischiefs seldom come alone, shortly after this combat, as Mr. Goodwin is
coming from Mrs. Jones house to his own, in the dead of the night, he is
again assaulted in Bartholmew lane, and grievously beaten: some say, it was
Mr. Jones, some say Mr. Pigeon; but by whom is not perfectly known: as soon as
he got quit of his enemy, in stead of going home to his own family, he
returns back to Mrs. Jones, well knowing in whose quarrel he had received
those sore buffetings: it was fit she should see what a martyr he was for her
sake. There he lay about ten days in a sad condition, but the joy of Mrs.
Jones company made him forget his pain, and speeded the cure, which else might
have been dangerous. Amongst them, (to salve his reputation) they give out,
that a horse had thrown him down, and trampled upon him.

Mr. Jones being now released prison, it is first agreed between him and his
late wife, that she shall depart the house and leave him with the children and
goods; she departs for a fortnight into the country, at her return (knowing
his hours of absence) when he was abroad teaching his scholars, she comes
privily in with her maid, a bold wench for her turn, and secretly carries away
all the best linen and goods of value, leaving the poor man with all his
children in an empty house, and all this still she did to bring him to her own
conditions; which were, that he should depart the City, and so leave her free
to the embraces of old Mr. Goodwin. She long before, with her sister Pigeon,
often solicited him to go beyond seas, alleging to him how bravely he might
live there, and what money he might get by his faculty of playing on the Lute;
which he would not hearken to then, but is now compeld to depart the City,
stripped of wife, children, estate, carrying away nothing but the bare clothes on
his back, and all to give place to an old man's lust, and a naughty woman's
covetousness.

Before his departure, he in private expostulates the matter with Mr. Goodwin,
asks him what wrong he had ever done him, that he should deal so perfidiously
by him, to draw his wife out of his bosom? and with what conscience, and by
what law he could contract himself to his wife, he being yet alive? at the
first the seduced old man denies it, but having proved to him how he had sundry
times found him kissing her, and at one time with his hand under her apron, and
that he had also by Will given her all, or the greatest part of his estate,
which he could prove by the party that drew the Will, the old man at last
convinced, confesses the Will, and the contract, adding, he might lawfully do
so, Mr. Jones having ( as he affirmed) forfeited his right as a husband to her.

Here I must make a short digression, to inform the Reader, what ground Mrs.
Jones alleges for her separation from her husband, which I received from Mr.
Jones his mouth.

Coming home one day, and finding his wife very fine, ready to go abroad, he
asks her whither she was going? she tells him to see such a friend: He
replies, wife, you know I would not have you converse with that woman. She
tells him violently she would go; he tells her, if she go, he will never come
in bed with her more, and this with some rash asseveration.

Away she goes, the poor man in much trouble, goes abroad again amongst his
scholars, and coming home at night, finds his wife very strange: when bed time
came on, thinking to go to bed with his wife, she bids him remember his vow,
which she would take order he should never break: and so to this day would
never more admit him as a husband. Since she gives out, that he has committed
folly, which she pretends she can prove: for my part, I believe it a scandal
devised, the better to accomplish her wicked project with Mr. Goodwin.

But to return; away goes Mr. Jones to Norwich, where he has ever since
remained in very honest repute lamented of all that hear his sad story.

I told you before, that at his departure he left her all his estate; amongst
other, he had a Lease of some houses in St. John's street, worth about 25l. per
annum; he tells her, that in respect she keeps the children, he is content she
should receive this rent toward their maintenance; and accordingly being now
at Norwich, sends the acquittances quarterly to one Mr. Fletcher, a discreet
friend of his, to deliver them to Mrs. Jones: but she refuses them, goes to the
tenants with old Mr. Goodwin, and in her own name demands the rent, offering
her acquittance for their discharge; which they refuse as insufficient: yet at
last yield to pay her, she mentioning in their acquittance, For the use of my
husband Edward Jones: but she rather then by such acquittances she should
acknowledge Mr. Jones her husband, from whom she now accounts her self
divorced, refuses; and so the rent for this four years has layen dead in
the tenants hands. Indeed she has often threatened them, but when that would
not prevail, she let it rest, well knowing Mr. Goodwin has enough, whose
purse is free to her use.

Immediately before that Mr. Jones went away, that she might have a sure
intelligencer at Mr. Goodwins house, she puts her son, of about 14. years of
age, under the color of a prentice to Mr. Goodwin, utterly against his fathers
consent, who was very desirous to have put the boy to some trade suitable to
his strength, being a weak limbed child: but she was violent, and would not
neglect any means that might carry on her project; she and her sister Pigeon
were resolved to come in after themselves, and therefore it was needful (as
theives usually do) to thrust in a little theife at the window to make way for
the great ones. This boy (being a fly youth) serves for a little Mercury, to
carry messages, appoint meetings, betray the young man, and is frequently
found behind the door listening what passages pass between the old man and
his children, who persuade him against these women, and desire him not to
entertain this boy, that was unserviceable for his trade? but all in vain,
for Mrs. Jones her will is a Law, and now is Mr. Goodwin at her house night and
day, at rack and manger; all the town rings of their scandalous converse: but
he is so bewitched with her, that as it is reported of leprous persons, into
whose flesh you may thrust needles to the head, and they feel nothing; so
though reproof, admonitions, prayers, from children, neighbors, Justices,
Ministers, assault him daily, yet he is insensible of all.

His own Minister Mr. Cooper, a judicious, learned, tenderhearted Christian,
labors much with him, sets the scandal notably before him; and at last
thinking thereby to awaken him (all other means having proved uneffectuall)
with the consent of the Eldership suspends him from the Sacrament, which he
values so little, that to this day he so continues, without so much as once
desiring to be restored, professing his conscience is clear, and that he
values the reproofs of Ministers no more then the dirt under his feet: Thus he
goes on from bad to worse, and when he wants money to supply Mrs. Jones and his
own irregular expenses, he goes to the merchants, takes up several sums of
money, 100l. at a time, never acquaints his son, whose business it was to
receive the debts, and so brings him into confusion in his accounts: at other
times takes up stuffes upon credit, wherewith he clothes Mrs. Jones and all her
children, carries them in coach out of the town, there they revell for whole
weeks together, Mr. Goodwin pays all. Now these good sisters possess him at
their pleasure, and plye him daily to beware of his children, tell him what a
shame it were for so wise a man as he is to take counsel of his cradle, these
are their very words; and that his children would govern him as if he were a
very child, when as they affirm to him, that there has not lived a wiser man
then he since King Solomon.

Thus they cajole and inveagle a most pitiful weak man, who is so taken with
these dissembling women, that he accounts it his greatest preferment to wait
upon them up and down the town like a halfe-penny serving man, and when he
comes near them, can scarce speak for joy, and seldom comes to them without
some present for back or belly.

A discreet friend of mine affirmed to me that he saw one evening Mr. Goodwin
going into Paul's ally; and that as soon as he was entered, he saw the
transported old man fall a dancing, and capering, that he protested he thought
he had been distraught: The neighbors that have daily seen him come into the
ally, observe, that as soon as he is entered, he falls a smiling; nor have they
been wanting to reprove them to their faces, telling Mrs. Jones, that it was a
shame they should converse so scandalously; but that the truth was, he loved
her for her smooth flesh, and she him for his full purse: the very children
have taken notice of their behavior. A little girl of about four years of
age, daughter to one Mr. Cherry, is sent by her mother to Mrs. Jones of an
errand; at her return she tells her mother, old Mr. Goodwin is there, and that
she saw him put up his hand under her smock sleeve up to her shoulders, playing
and tickling her, when as modest Mrs. Jones cries, Away Mr. Goodwin, take away
your hand, or I will make you no more pye-ale: a maid servant to Mr. Wright
told me, that there was a voice heard in their house, saying, Mary Mason, my
sister and I intend to lie abed to morrow all the forenoone, if any body come,
let in no body into my chamber unless it be honest Mr. Goodwin.

Now Mrs. Jones, that licks her lips at profit, not at the withered old-mans
kisses, casts about how she may make all yet surer; now she accounts all the
old man's estate hers, and therefore plots how she may improve it, and prevent
any disappointment from his children; she causes Mr. Goodwin to send frequently
to her his chief journyman, one Anthony Rawlins, that all along had been Pimpe
major to this villainy; he gives her account of the trade and custom, how it
is, and how it might be managed: for these services the old man lets him filch
what vailes he will: This knave seconds the old man's report, that his son is an
ill husband, that will bring all to ruin: this allarmes Mrs. Jones, who has
now no visible subsistence but Mr. Goodwins estate; she was, for some years
before her husbands departure a schoolemistris, teaching needle works, but he
once gone, all that was presently laid aside.

Here observe, that Mrs. Jones and her sister have by this time made all Mr.
Goodwins family of their confederacy excepting the young man, and his wife, and
one Roger Crey, the eldest prentise, an honest, religious, sober fellow, that
had often spoken freely and heartily against their practices, professing that
these women would ruin the family.

It pleased God that this fellow fell sick, when presently the two sisters are
sent for, they physic him, he grows worse; young Mr. Goodwin intereats his
father that some able Physician might be advised withal; the old man refuses
to give his consent, boasting highly of the great skill of those two she.
Doctors: in Conclusion, the young man doubting some false play, privately
carries his water to an able Physician, Doctor Burnet; at the first sight of
the water he tells him, the party was a dead man, past all recovery; and that
if good help had been sought in time, in all probability he might have done
well. Mr. Clarke a skillful Apothecary on the Bridge is also consulted, and he
affirms the same. Still these women plye him with their druggs, telling his
Mr. there was no danger; though he lies raging in the violence of a burning
fever, in all probability caused by the contrary medicines they had
administered to him. The evening before his death, the two sisters come in their
hackney coach and make new applications to the poor departing man, who so long
as he had his senses, had earnestly begged of his Mr. that he might take nothing
that came from them, well knowing how they hated him; yet never could obtain
any succor but what came from their hands: which what it was I leave to God
and their own consciences. In the best construction that can be made, they did
very wickedly, to trifle away a man's life, being ignorant of his disease; and
in that consideration, if no other, are guilty of his blood, which God will one
day make inquisition for, and avenge. That night they sat up in the hall with
a good fire and ale, to see what would become of him, and about three of the
clock he departed: when, whether terrified with the guilt of what they had
done, or what other consideration, but presently they took coach and departed,
though in the dead of the night. Some month after young Mrs. Goodwin dyed, a
virtuous young woman, whose sickness occasioned more visits from these good
Ladies, and might have done more physic; but they were now out of credit, and
her parents watc'ht diligently that she should take nothing that came from
them. It is generally believed that she dyed of grief, having her heart broke
by the occasion of the practices of these women. In my hearing she has often
made bitter complaints, saying, these women had disgraced the family, and would
be the ruin both of her husband and father in law.

Now the project thrives apace, two of their great opposers are by death
removed out of the way, there remains only the young man to be dispossessed,
and then all is their own: in order to which, they first order the old man to
tell his son, that his family wants a guide, and that he is resolved to bring
Mrs. Jones to take charge of his family. The young man in a great deal of
distraction acquaints his friends with this news, and according to their
advice, endeavors to persuade his father by fair means not to disgrace the
family by bringing in a woman that was reported to be his whore; and seeing his
father persist, that he would bring her in, tells him plainly that he has an
interest both in the stock and trade, as well as his father, and that seeing her
coming in tends to the ruin of both, he is resolved to oppose it, and if she
comes, to thrust her out by head and shoulders. This the old man reports back
again, and they are for the present at a loss.

You may wonder that active Mrs. Pigeon has been so little mentioned all this
while; but she is not idle but has her irons in the fire, she sees how
successefully her sister Jones with a little of her help, has rid her self of
her husband, and therefore now she plots how to shake off also her shackles of
matrimony. You may remember that Mr. Pigeon, to satisfy her violent
importunity, had made over to her all his estate, which was very great; well
thinking by such an unparalleld act of love to bind her to him in duty and
affection for ever; but what can oblige such savage natures? she returns to
her old disobedience as before you have in part heard. It was a common practice
with her, if at any time he refused to act her wicked projects, to run away
from him sometime for a week, sometime for a month: amongst other of her
devices, it being immediately after the late Kings death, she makes show of
much discontent against the actings of the present Governors; she projects to
her husband to draw up a declaration against them, and their proceedings, which
he must subscribe and avow, and then he should be her dear husband, and she
vows to stand by him to the last in it. Let others think their pleasure, for
my part, I believe this was a plot laid to have destroyed Mr. Pigeon; but he
wisely refused to act in it, reproving her pragmatical spirit, for which she
vows to be revenged of him: then Mr. Knowles is sent for, who according to her
instructions had framed a bill of divorce, which he then persuaded Mr. Pigeon
to subscribe, alleging he might lawfully in the sight of God do it, and at
last did prevail with him to subscribe. Not long after Mr. Pigeon is again
reconciled to his wife, and Mrs. Pigeon did then also subscribe two writings
with her hand and seal, which Mr. Pigeon has still by him, wherein she
covenants to forget all former discord, and to be to him a loving and dutiful
wife; yet after this she ran away several times, and began now to fall into
intimate acquaintance with a merchant living at Clapham, from whose company to
this day Mr. Pigeon could never reclaim her: Sometime she would come and stay
a week, and then to this Merchant again, and though Mr. Pigeon did before good
witness upon the Exchange admonish the said Merchant to abandon her company,
and gave him reasons which did induce him to think that she was the said
Merchants whore, yet they still persist in their familiarity: now Mr. Pigeon
being commanded into the Isle of Jarsey, at his return, his wife being lately
delivered, they were again with much ado reconciled, yet was her old project
still on foot; for Mr. Pigeon having one night got cold by his careful tending
of the child, he said to her, Sweetheart, I fear I shall have the Gout, for I
have a pain in my wrist that shoots into my finger; she presently with
violence affirms, that it was the Pox: he persuades her, and she opposes, and
at last resolves to send for Mr. Knowles to be advised by him. Mr. Pigeon the
next day meeting casually Mr. Knowles, acquaints him with their difference,
tells him if he will come and endeavor to persuade his wife to reason, he
would take it kindly: Mr. Knowles replies, it was Mrs. Pigeons custom first
to resolve upon things, and then to ask counsel; and further said to Mr.
Pigeon, that he need not think Mrs. Pigeon spent his money upon him, for he
had never received but five pounds for himself, and five shillings for the
poor of their Congregation; he said, if Mr. Pigeon would be at home that
evening, he would come and endeavor to persuade her; which accordingly he did.
Mrs. Pigeon conducts him into an upper chamber from her husband, where they
were together about half an hour, and then came down together into the room
where he remained; and she then began to make grievous complaints, insisting
chiefly on two heads, viz. that he had the Pox, and that she was in fear of
her life. He then asked her what ground she had for it, and if he had threatened
her since he came home? she replied, he had not, but that he had a pain in his
arm, which she knew was the Pox. Mr. Knowles said, that he had a pain in his
arm, and she might as well say so by him; and added, that she was his wife, or
else she was a whore. She still insists; she was afraid, and could not be
satisfied. Mr. Pigeon mildely said thus to Mr. Knowles, Sir, you hold my wife
too hard, she pretends I have the Pox; if you think fit, we will presently
send for two able Physicians, and I will submit to a search. Mr. Knowles
replies, he spoke fairly: yet seeing this would not satisfy, Mr. Knowles
frames a speech in this manner, Mr. Pigeon, pray take my advice, and go from
your wife, and I will warrant you she will send for you again. Mr. Pigeon
amazed at this advice, replies, God has given me counsel in his word, that
every man should have his own wife, and every woman her own husband, to avoid
evil; and I cannot leave Gods counsel to take yours. He replies, in some
cases a man might leave his wife: Mr. Pigeon answers again, there must be a
joint consent of both parties, and he being the chief cannot consent. Mr.
Knowles again and again presses him to go from her. Mr. Pigeon tells him, I
will not leave Gods counsel to take yours: and if this be your counsel, pray
depart the house.

Mr. Knowles presently in discontent goes down the stayres. Mrs. Pigeon
endeavors to run after him, crying out, Mr. Knowles, Take him with you, Take
him with you. Mr. Pigeon takes hold of his wifes skirt, and entreats her with
all gentleness to be ruled; Mr. Knowles comes up the stairs again, lays
violent hold of Mr. Pigeon, wringing him by the finger to make him let go his
wise: but not so prevailing, (there having not as yet past one blow) he lays
down his Claoke, and running to Mr. Pigeon, catches him by the throat, stirkes
twice at his face with his fist, calling him base unworthy fellow; and still
sorely pincht his throat. Then Mr. Pigeon by violence throws off Mr. Knowles,
who feeling him too strong for him, runs down the stairs, calling to his
assistance many rude persons, who violently laid hold of the said Mr. Pigeon,
his wife taking part against him: Being thus invaded, he had no other way but
by violence; many strokes lighted upon his wife: and he professes that he was
so transported by this strange provocation, that he can scarce give account of
what he did, until he had quitted the room of these people: amongst the rest,
in this medly, Mrs. Pigeon has got a strange black face, which by her art she
yet makes more visible, and then with Mr. Knowles and several other persons,
she applies her self to the then Lord General, screwing her wits to the utmost
to work revenge: and in fine, so endeavored with her smooth tongue, that she
procured to have her said husband dismissed the Army: since which time she has
lived in constant separation from her husband.

Now is Mistress Pigeons work done, and she at leisure to act in her sister
Jones business, who (as I told you) was at a plunge, by reason of the
short-answer young Mr. Goodwin had given his Father. But Mrs. Pigeon, (to whom
no villainy is difficult) relieves her: they presently conclude upon this plot,
Mr. Goodwin has a younger Son, James Goodwin, a weak headed child, about
seventeen years of age; him they get into their Circle; and first they be
labor the simple boy with their sophisticated arguments, and gain him a
proselite to their tennents: now he is maillable. In brief, they presently clap
up a Match between this boy, that a little before was intended for a prentice,
and Mistress Jones her daughter, a girl of about fifteen years old, but so
small, that she looked more like one of eight or nine at the most. After short
wooing, they are married together. This was a strong subtle device, worth
Mistress Pigeons Invention. By this match Mr. Goodwin and his concubine are
become brothers and sisters, and who can find fault at decent familiarity
between such? By this the women have got an interest in the estate and family,
that they dare own to the world, which they durst not before: This brings them
boldly into the house to reside; Mrs. Jones pretending that because her
daughter is such a child, she has the more need of a guide. In a word, this
device draws a fair skin over a great many scabby places at once; and so they
without any more Ceremony all enter the house, bringing all their children and
retinue with them.

Mrs. Pigeon is so taken with her policy, that at her first arrival, walking
alone up and down the yard, she was heard to say to her self aloud, So, now I
have broke the ice. And now seeing the game so fair before her, she resolves to
have share her self: and therefore whereas before Mr. Goodwin had by Will given
Mrs. Jones 1000l. Mr. Goodwin directed to Mr. Colborn, Mrs. Pigeons Secretary
and fast friend, when a new Will is framed, by which he only gives her 500l.

Now they are settled with their families, and Mr. Goodwin is so ravished, that
he has got his brace of Mandlins so near him, that no ground can hold him.
The only thing that yet hinders, is, that Mr. Goodwins eldest son and partner
is still in the house, and has a clear interest in the Estate and Tarde, and
they have resolved that nothing less then all shall satisfy their wicked
appetites; in order to whose casting out, they had therefore some months before
appointed the old man to set an Accomptant of their own at work, to make up all
accounts between father and son, who by the instructions given him, had brought
in the balance or net stock, all debts paid, to be 1516l. of which, as they
order it, there is coming to Andrew Goodwin for his third part, only 150l. They
give out that by his ill husbandry he has brought the estate to this; and that
there was more assigned him by the account then his due. Whereas it is
constantly believed by all the friends and neighbors, that for one shilling
the son has wasted, the father has wasted three; who could not be accused of
any other vice or unthriftinesse, but that when he saw his father would not be
reclaimed from converse with these wicked women, on whom he visibly spent his
own and his sons estate; when he saw that his father by taking up money and
wares in a disorderly way had brought him into confusion in his accounts, and
that his father in all places where he came was so evil spoken of for his
shameful scandalous frequentation of these wicked women, unable to bear up
under such a burden, he gave up himself to melancholy and careless
stupidity, that he let his books run into some disorder; of which (as you
shall see) they make notable advantage.

And therefore now Mrs. Pigeon assisted with Mr. Goodwin, draws up a note;
which before witness she delivers to young Mr. Goodwin, therewith charging him
within fourteen days to depart the house: which when he had perused, he
demanded of her, by what authority she could war him out of his house? She
replied, it would be his best way to depart without dispute, for as she then
told him, she had never yet undertaken any design but she brought it to
perfection.

Presently (in the young man's absence) she causes the old man (who did nothing
but by her order) to bring in a Smith; him she in old Mr. Goodwins name
commands to break open the young man's counting house, takes away all his papers
and moneys: from thence they ascend to his chamber, break open his trunk, take
away what they please, and while the young man amazed, is considering what to
do, the fourteen days expire. They presently in the old man's name enter an
action against him, and at one of the clock after midnight they send forth
their property James Goodwin to fetch two bayliffes of the Borough, and two
Sergeants which they had prepared, and bring them over the ditch as thieves
into the house, where they find the unnatural old man with these women
waiting, who presently set them to work: The poor young man not dreaming of
such barbarous villainy* was fast asleep in his bed. Having furnished them with
an iron crow, they all ascend, and presently fall to forcing open his chamber
door: the young man awakened with the noise, thinks no other but that it was
thieves breaking in to murder him, flies to the window, cries out murder, and
then presently sets agreat chest against the door: which when they could not
force, the bailiffs being at a stand, Mrs. Pigeon, (that gives all directions)
Cries, Mr. Goodwin, it is your own house, you may bid them break down the wall:
which the simple old wretch bid them do. The young man in amazement,
perceiving they had made a breach in the wall, and having no weapon to defend
himself, and now seeing they were Officers, suffers them to enter, and so they
seize him, violently haling him away in the dead of the night. Which was those
subtle women's policy, fearing in the day time, had they done this Divelish
action, they might have been by the neighbors thrown into the ditch headlong.

Away goes the old man with Mrs. Pigeon to the Bridge foot, where with the City
Sergeants they wait the bailiffs, who had promised to deliver him at the Bridge
foot: But the bailiffs, sensible that they had done that already which they
could not Justify, would gratify them no further, but carry him prisoner to
St. Margarets Hill.

Young Mr. Goodwin in this distress, seeing all tending to ruin, and that
these women were resolved to cozen father, children, and creditors of all,
bethinks himself of one Mr. Henry Cross, to whom he owed 500l; to him he
confesses a Judgment, which Mr. Cross presently executes, enters the house,
seizes the goods, and carries away to the value of about 1000l. to St.
Margarets Hill.

Now these cunning women are again at a plunge, but Mr. Colborne their sure
friend rescues them: by his advice they procure two Appraisers, who are
instructed, and appraise these goods but at 403l. which money Mr. Colborne
lays down, being indeed Mrs. Pigeons money, having the managing of all her
estate. This money paid into the bayliffes hands, the goods are released, and
returned to Mr. Goodwins possession. And now being attentive to all advantages,
finding they had been surprised by this Judgment, to stop all gaps for the
future, they fall upon a new design to make all sure for ever. The old man
must confess a Judgment for all that he has in the world; but to whom? This
monster could not be brought forth by women; Mr. Colborne must be the man
midwife; in short, Mr. Goodwin confesses a judgment, and Mrs. Pigeon having
first turned the old man and all his servants out of doors, she before witness
seized of all for the use of Mr. Henry Colborne formally, and for her self and
Sister Jones virtually.

And now all is secure, and the plot they had been seven years hatching is now
perfected: as for the 403l deposited in the bayliffes hands, they find means
by Mr. Colbornes help to procure that: in regard young Mr. Goodwin has but a
third share in the stock, therefore Mr. Cross the Creditor shall receive but
the third of the 403l. seized, and so by order of Court Mr. Cross receives his
third, 134l, and the two thirds return to Mr. Colborne.

Thus are Mr. Goodwin, Father and Son, brought to a morsel of bread, neither
having one penny left. But Mr. Goodwin the father is taken into his late house,
as a poor jorneyman to Mr. Colborne; and which is to amazement, so far from
being sensible of what he has done, that he proclaims to all comers that he
had rather be Mrs. Pigeons Journyman, then to be Master of all without his two
women.

The young man's children being in the house, are turned out of doors, and old
Mr. Goodwin (by order of Mrs. Pigeon) forbids all his children (the young
traitor James Goodwin excepted) to come upon the ground: His daughter Vernon
coming one day to see him, by Mrs. Pigeons command, he takes her by the arm,
and thrusts her out of doors: and now they insult and vaunt beyond measure. Old
Mr. Goodwins children seeing all ruined, and that their father is now
captivated more then ever to these women, they jointly present a petition to
the Justices of the County and Borough of South-wark, representing therein
their sad condition; from whom they obtain a warrant to bring these women
before them to St Margarets Hill; where the business being debated, Mr. Goodwin
was seriously reproved and admonished to forsake the scandalous company of
these women: but the debate growing long, and it being late, the Justices
adjourned the meeting, and hearing of this business to the next week after.
When being again met, and some new Justices that had not heard the former
debate, amongst the rest, Mr. Gold of Clapham appears, and is very eager in
the vindication of these women, especially of Mrs. Pigeon, whom he says was a
most Angelical woman, and that she could discourse to admiration: and he said
that this prosecution of Mr. Goodwins children was but a rage of jealousy for
matter of estate, and that the whole army of England should maintain the
reputation of these Gentlewomen: these were his words. Some other of the
Justices insisted to have Mr. Goodwins children produce their proofs of what
they had alleged in their petition: to which they replied, their witnesses
were ready, but would not appear, unless they were summoned by order of Law,
left they should incurr trouble from these Litigious women; the Justices upon
debate finding the witnesses living for the most part in Red Cross Street, out
of their Jurisdiction to summon them, they dismissed the business with only an
admonition to old Mr. Goodwin, to forsake the company of these women so
prejudicial to his reputation.

Thus in all they prospered: only the several Churches to which they are
related, that knew their shifts, which were now become very scandalous to their
Congregations, after several admonitions to them to forsake this scandalous
society, and all in vain, they cast them out of their Churches and all
communion with them. Since which time I cannot learn that they own any Church
at all, but for the most part spend the Sabbath at the Dye house.

A POSTSCRIPT to old Mr. GOODWIN.
BEfore I conclude, I would lay a few considerations before you; though I have
very little encouragement, you have with so much scorn rejected the
admonitions of godly Ministers and others, that it will be no wonder if all I
can say make no impression. Yet who knows not that the Instrument as well as
the season is in Gods hand? And therefore I will now speak my whole heart to
you, and I pray God set it home to your thoughts. You are now arrived at old
age, about sixty three, as I guess; the holy Ghost says, Gray hairs are a
Crown, if they be found in the ways of righteousness: and on the contrary,
that a sinner of an hundred years old shall not escape unpunished; consider
then first, what God has done for you, what a wife did he bless you withal,
a woman for piety, wisdom, fidelity, frugality (I am confident) hardly to be
matched, though your Dalilahs have sought to asperse her; but they do but heave
stones in the air, which will fall on their own heads: for while her body
lies rotting in the ground, her name yields a sweet savor in the hearts of all
Gods people that knew her, while these stink above ground. And she came not to
you empty handed, but brought you a good estate, when you had little or
nothing to take to; by her God has given you four dutiful children, and so
they appear to all that know them, though you most unworthily call them wicked
Chams and rebels:

For your daughter Vernon, name the time that ever she disobeyed your lawful
commands; how many times has she upon her knees begged of you to forsake the
company of these women, whose evil fame has blasted your former good name?
how many hours has she spent on her knees in begging of God to open your eyes?

For your son Andrew, how many men would have bin proud of such a son; though
there were no more then his outward shape? and never could be taxed for any
miscarriage till you gave up your self wholly to company with these women, who
with all their art and malice have daily exasperated you against him: which
behooved them to do, well knowing that he being your partner in Trade, there
would be the less hopes for them, while there remained any good Correspondence
between him and you: and when you were thus whetted, you would come home and
revile him with most unmanly terms before all the boys, enough to break a
stronger tempered spirit then his; and when you had so far dulled and sotted
him with this usage, that you thought your project ripe, then on the sudden you
take him by the throat like a fellon or murderer: oh Mr. Goodwin, are these
things true or no? I appeal to your own conscience; where were the bowels of a
father, when you let in the Marshals men at midnight, furnished them with iron
bars, and accompanied with your women, broke in upon him in his chamber, and
scarce allowing him time to put on his clothes, dragd him to the jaile in the
dead of a cold winters night?

For your second son Thomas, an honest plain hearted man, beloved of all that
know him; and yet because he will not justify you in your sin against his own
conscience, but has in a dutiful manner begged of you to forsake these women,
you refuse to own him, and tell him you will never leave him one penny.

And for your third son James, you have done him the greatest wrong of all:
for, that he might as a property be isntrumental to your sin, you have
caused, or suffered your women to poison his principles with their corrupt
tenants; you have betrayed him yet a child, and most shamefully unfit for such
a relation, to marriage with the daughter of her, that has ruined your name
and estate.

Thus in particular have you wronged all your children, and in general by
making over all your estate, which by the Law of God and nature ought to have
descended after your decease to them, to Mr. Colborne.

Solomon says, that the good man is merciful to his beast: and Mr. Goodwin
(whom his women affirm is as wise as Solomon) is unmerciful to his own
children. The Apostle says, No man hates his own flesh are you (Mr. Goodwin)
no man? or will you make the holy Ghost a liar? And what has been the
incentive to all this unnatural dealing? your love, or your lust to Mrs. Jones;
you can name no other; that you might enjoy her, another man's wife, her husband
alive. You have stifled your conscience, scandalized the Gospel, reviled Gods
Ministers, suffered your self to be cut off from the Sacrament and Communion
with the Church of God, ruined all your children, and basely requited your
virtuous wife deceased: and all this to gratify two sinful women, that now
they have obtained their ends, begin to slight you, and no doubt when through
the infirmities of old age you shall be able to do them no more druggery, will
cast you off and expose you to want and misery. This all the world foresees;
for women of their profession do always so. Did not Mrs. Pigeon, when she had
stripped her husband of all he had, cast him off, though formerly her dear
husband? Be yet persuaded, your children would yet rejoice in you, and care for
you, though stripped of all your estate by these women. Do you not perceive how
they have ensnared you, and wound you about with their nets, as the spider does
the silly fly? first, they entangled you with music, and many years held you
under that pleasing note; then they cast over you the net of pretended piety,
and fained extraordinary holiness; and then they snare you in the net of love
to Mrs. Jones, which they work you to believe is lawful; and lastly, lest you
should break from all these, they throw over you the strong iron net of the
Law, and that doubtless will hold your estate fast, which is the thing they
seek for, whatever becomes of you.

I shall conclude all with a short paraphrase upon part of the seventh chapter
of the Proverbs, and let all men judge how it fits this occasion.

Verse 6. And I saw amongst the simple, and considered amongst the children, a
young man destitute of understanding, who passed by the street, by her corner,
and went toward her house.

Which how frequently you have visited, let all red Cross Street and Paul's
ally testify.

Verse 9. In the twilight, in the evening, when the night began to be black and
dark.

I and at noone day, in the light of the Sun.

Verse 10. And, behold there met him a woman with a harlots behavior, and
subtle of heart.

Verse 11. She is babbling and loud, whose feet cannot abide in her house.

12. Now she is without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner.

This is so perfectly Mrs. Jones her picture, that nothing can be more alike in
all the circumstances.

13. So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him.

For this I refer you to Mr. Pigeons attestation mentioned before in this
book.

14. I have peace offering this day; I have paid my vows.

15. Therefore came I forth to meet thee that I might seek thy face, and I have
found thee.

16. I have decked my bed with ornaments, carpets and laces of Egypt.

17. I have perfumed my bed with mirrhe, aloes and Cynamon.

I am in Gospel order, rebaptised, a member of Mr. Kiffins Church, and
profess according to the Antimonian light, that God sees no sin in his
children: and therefore,

Verse 18. Come let us take our fill of love, until the morning; let us take
our pleasure in dalliance.

19. For my husband is not at home; he is gone a journey far off.

I have sent him to Norwich, whither he is forced by my wicked usage.

20. He has taken with him a bag of Silver, and will return at the day
appointed.

I have stripped him of all, not leaving him one penny in his purse; and taken
order if ever he return, to have him clapped up in the jayle. Judge what a Saint
the harlot is in these four last verses, in comparison of Mrs. Jones: she owns
her husband, lets him carry away a bag of money, and expects his return.

21. Thus with her great craft she caused him to yield, and with her flattring
lips she entised him.

22. And he followed her straightway as an ox that goes to the slaughter, and
as a fool to the correction of the stocks.

23. Till a dart strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and
knows not that he is in danger.

27. Her house is the way to the grave, which goes down to the chambers of
death.

The Lord open your eyes
LEt the reader take notice, that at the time of young Mr. Goodwins arrest,
there was an account drawn up by one Mr. Lewis a Scrivener, by the appointment
of old Mr. Goodwin and his women, by which it appears, that there was then a
clear estate (all debts paid) of 1516l. Of which Mr. Cross recovered 0134l.
Rests 1382l.

To be divided (with the yearly benefit of the Trade) between Mr. Coleborne,
Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Pigeon.

Two words to Mrs. JONES, and Mrs. PIGEON.
NOT that I have any confidence to prevail with you by any thing I can say,
but that you may be warned and left without excuse: I am not ignorant of your
dispositions, scoffing at any thing that crosses your projects. Indeed you are
arrived at such a proficiency in sin, that because with painted words,
elevated, and then presently dejected Eyes, that send forth tears at command,
double sighs, and broken sobs; solemn Imprecations to what you would assert,
promptness to rebuke sinful expressions or behavior in others, when there
are such persons by as may witness your zeal; seemingly great tenderness and
scrupulosity in smaller matters, readiness to quote abused Scripture for all
you do; in all which you are incomparably practiced; because with these you
have not only charmed a weak old man; but even many seeming wise persons (not
acquainted with your subtilties) are deluded by you, so that some of them have
styled you most angelical Creatures. I say, having these abilities and
applauses, I much doubt you believe also that even God himself allows of all
you have done. But let me whisper a word to your consciences, if you have any.
I pass by here what you have done to your respective husbands, and diverse other
persons I could name. I will only put you in mind what you have to answer for
poor old Mr. Goodwin, and his children, all whom (for your covetous sinful
ends) you have ruined; some of them by your means brought already to a morsel
of bread. Was there ever such a desolation brought upon a family, to enrich
those that lately had not the least title, or interest in the family? That Mr.
Goodwin (father and son) that six years a gone lived in good credit, and with
a good stock, and a gaineful trade, through your injurious invasions and subtle
sleights, are neither of them at this day worth a groat: the whole Estate,
house, stock, and Trade under the covert of Mr. Colbornes name, being
translated to you. Nay, by the industry of Mr. Colborne the Scrivener, and Mr.
Hat the Attorney, you enjoy all this under a Legal title; so that thus
fortified, you triumph and laugh at all that dare oppose you, and you are now
fixed in your sinful purchase. But here Remember, though man cannot call you to
account, God will; and by how much the more religion has been a cloak to this
wickedness, by so much the more severe and dreadful is your punishment like to
be. And though Mrs. Pigeon says, I never took any design in hand but I
prospered in it; yet let her remember, that Gods word says, The prosperity of
the wicked shall slay them: let them both remember, that while the thief
steals, the Hemp grows; that while sin ripens, the reckoning day comes on
apace: that while they are revelling with their Sage-ale, and Marmalade, and
dividing the spoils of Mr. Goodwins estate, his children are spreading their
wrongs daily before God, to whom they appeal for Justice against you, and to
whose dreadful bar they summon you both, with your assistants, to answer this
horrible wickedness. God has given you both warnings of late; as you tender
your souls, be awakned by them to repentance. Remember, you must shortly dye,
and for all these things God will bring you to Judgment.

Ecclesiastes. 12 ult. For God will bring every work to Judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil.
FINIS.
READER,
I Am informed, That these women, taking the advantage of the Authors not
publishing his name, give out, that all is lies and slanders. In the first
place consider, if it be not reasonable in perilous times to beware of
perrillous persons. Again observe, that the substance of it is matter of Fact:
Of the truth whereof, if thou will be at the pains, thou shall be the Judge: For
example, Do thou doubt of the truth of old Mr. Goodwins behavior to his
former wife? ask Mr. Vernon in Bevis Marks: or of Mrs. Pigeons behavior
toward her two husbands? ask Mr. Pigeon, Mr. Wolf a Shopkeeper upon Exchange:
of Mrs. Jones her behavior to her husband? ask Mr. Hill a Lute-maker in the
Strand, Mr. Fletcher at the Earl of Warwicks, Mr. Horn in Little Saint
Bartholomewes: or of Mr. Goodwins scandalous converse for these many years with
Mrs. Jones? ask Mr. Vernon, Mr. Pigeon, and all the neighbors in Paul's Alley:
or of their obscene carriage in private? see Mr. Pigeons Attestation in the
hands of Mr. Cooper, Minister of Olaves Parish: or of the suspected death of
Roger Crey? ask Mrs. Brown in Pickle Herring, and all Mr. Goodwins servants: or
of Mrs. Pigeons invading Mr. Goodwins Estate, under pretense of freeing him
from his children? ask Mr. Henry Colburn Scrivenet: or of the ejecting young
Mr. Goodwin in that in humane manner? ask Mr. Goodwins servants, and all the
neighbors on the Green-bank. In fine, that there may not want Testimonies, even
these women have set to their Seal: For instance, take this short, but real
story. In page 28. of the Narrative, there is a short parallel made between
Mrs. Jones and the Harlot, in Prove. 7. 20. is this Note, I have stripped him of
all, not leaving him one penny in his purse, and taken order if ever he
return, to have him clapped up in the Gaol. This was printed above three Months
agone, and about a month agone comes Mr. Jones to London, his business, to see
his children, and to receive and settle the rents in St. John's street, which is
well known he intended to divide every penny amongst his children: at his
arrival being constrained in his affections, he went to his house to see them,
where he found one of Mr. Goodwins servants called Silvester Smith, a
Gentleman's Son of Estate in Nottinghamshire, courting his daughter Mary Jones,
a Girl about thirteen years of age, with whom the said Silvester is since
contracted in marriage. Where note how these wicked women do wind and screw
themselves into good families, as formerly they did by James Goodwin, and the
elder sister, though both were children, and shamefully unfit for such a
relation: and their design herein not so much to prefer these children, as to
become interested in the estates of other men. But to return, while Mr. Jones
in a civil loving way is discoursing with them, Mrs. Jones and Mrs. Pigeon both
in the house, sent and entered an Action for 400 l. against Mr. Jones in Wood.
street Counter, at the pretended Suit of one Mr. Mountague a Schoolmaster of
Ockingham in Barkshire, and brought away two Sergeants, who at his coming down
arrested him, and carried him away Prisoner to the Counter. The next morning
one of the Sergeants went to these women (as I conceive) to demand his Salary:
when Mrs. Jones asked of him, if Mr. Jones were in the prison; and being
informed he was, she then fell into a violent Crocodile passion, with tears
bewailing his condition: The Sergeant then told her, he was there by her order,
and that if she would withdraw the Action, he would presently release him: she
then cried out with vehemence, Oh no, by no means; he must lie in prison, and
we have more Actions to charge him with. Away in admiration of this divelish
dissimulation comes the Sergeant, and at his heels Mrs. Pigeon to the Counter,
and in the names of several persons entered four Actions more against him, to
the value in all of about 1000 l. of all which Mr. Jones protests he owes not
one penny. Since they have let fall the four last Actions, and did on
Wednesday, February the 2d come to a Trial upon the 400 l. Action. But first
Mrs. Jones is dispatched away to Ockingham to prevail with Mr. Mountague to own
it, who (as is verily believed) all this while knew nothing of it: which they
well hope she cannot fail to effect, his wife being also sister to these good
Ladies, a chicken of the same brood. Things thus disposed, to trial they come,
where when Mrs. Pigeons Counsel (Mr. Lane) told her it was not probable Mr.
Jones should owe Mr. Mountague, 400 l. and he have neither Bill nor Bond to
show for it; and though she offered to make Oath of it, he told her that would
not carry it; but wished her rather, if she could swear that Mr. Mountague had
disbursed any money for Mrs. Jones and her children since his absence: she
then, ad omnia quare, made Oath that Mr. Jones ran away from her sister five
years agone, leaving her neither bread, nor money to buy bread: though it can
be proved, they were two years at least soliciting him to be gone from his
wife, and at one time offered him 10 l. to be gone, and all that they might
carry on their intended project with old Mr. Goodwin. But to make short, by
this Oath she obtained a Verdict for 60 l. for Mr. Mountague, which Mr. Jones
not any ways able to pay, must remain prisoner in all probability during
life: which considering his melancholy temper, impatient of a Prison, I verily
believe will not be long. And now let the ingenuous Reader judge of the fidelity
of the Narrative, and the wickedness of these women.

FINIS.

