A Discourse touching the DRAYNING THE GREAT FENNES, LYING Within the several
COUNTIES of Lincoln, Northampton, Huntington, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge,
and the Jsle of Ely, as it was presented to his Majesty.

BY Sir CORNELIUS VERMVIDEN Knight.

Whereunto is annexed the Design or Map.

Published by Authority.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Fawcet, dwelling in Grubstreet near the lower
Pumpe. 1642.

A Discourse touching the Drayning of the great Fennes lying within the
several Counties of Lincoln, Northampton, Huntingdon, Norfolk, Suffolk,
Cambridge, and the Jsle of Ely, etc.
Diverse persons of Quality heretofore have been desirous to attempt the
Drayning of that great and vast Level called the Great Fennes, but they found
not only the Work but also the composing of an Agreement very difficult, for
they could not attain to so much as to make a Contract for the general
Drayning thereof, until of late years King JAMES of blessed memory, did
undertake (by a Law of Sewers) that great Work, who for the Honor of this
Kingdom (as his Majesty told me at that time) would not suffer any longer the
said Land to be abandoned to the will of the Waters, nor to let it lie wast
and unprofitable. But his Majesty's great occasions and the time would not
permit so great and good a resolution but it was deferred so long, that at last
the late Earl of Bedford (by the Law of Sewers made at Lynne) did undertake
the Drayning of the said great and vast Level so far as to make it Summer
ground.

Hereupon the said Earl made choice of diverse persons of quality who made a
purse and joined in the performance of this great Enterprise. And at the last
(after the Expense of above One hundred thousand pounds) the said Earl did
proceed so far in this Work, that it was adjugded to be made Summer ground,
and the recompense thereupon was set out.

But now notwithstanding all these great Expenses, they find by experience,
that the Lands can yield little or no profit being subject to Inundation still,
(though not so familiarly) whereby the Adventurers not only became frustrate
of their Expectation, but also all the Owners in general, who cannot make that
use of their Lands as they might do, if they made Winter grounds and reduced
to a certainty.

His now Majesty taking consideration thereof, and fore seeing that these Lands
being a continent of about 400000. Acres, which being made Winter ground would
be an unexpected benefit to the Commonwealth of Six hundred thousand pounds
per Annum and upwards, and a great and certain Revenue to all the parties
interessed. And likewise, because the Owners (who are very many) could not
agree to do so great a Work (the one being willing the other not, the one
able to contribute the other not) has therefore bin pleased to undertake the
making of those Lands Winter ground at his own charge, whereby the said Four
hundred thousand Acres will be made profitable, firm and good.

And for to execute this Enterprise the better, his Majesty did command diverse
Gentlemen expert in those Works to give their advice how these Lands might
recovered, in such manner as to make them winter grounds, to the end the Work
might be performed according to the contract. And amongst others, his Majesty
was pleased to make me one of that Commission, and after a View thereof taken,
every one of the said Commissioners have returned their report, and opinion (as
is usual in such case, and especially in a matter of such great weight) they
differ much in their way, and so no resolution could be determined at that
time, but did remain unresolved; yet all of them were of opinion that the
Work was very Feazable.

When King JAMES of blessed Memory, undertook the Drayning as aforesaid, at
that time I was come over into England, invited to this Work, I took several
Viewes thereof, went away, returned, and reviewed the same, took advice of the
Experienced men of the Low Countries, and from time to time did study how to
contrive that Work for the best advantage, being at that time in proposition
to have undertaken the doing of that said Work, together with my Friends at
our own charge for a proportion of Land. And my opinion therein I declared but
lately to his Majesty, and his Highness being well pleased with that way,
after debate had thereupon, was pleased to put the Direction of that Work upon
me, and to perform it at his own Charge, and for further Information therein,
has commanded to have it set down in Writing, which accordingly hereafter
follows.

The Situation of the Great Fennes, and the State thereof.
THe Level lies in six Counties, (viz.) Cambridge, and the Jsle of Ely,
Huntington, Northampton, Lilcolne, Norfolk, and Suffolk. It is of a great and
vast extent, that for its quantity at is of the Latitude of a whole Shire, and
bounds on the North-west on the River of Glean; on the West and South-east upon
the Upland-Countries aforesaid; and on the North, on Marsh-land and Holland,
being likewise in the said Level separated by Banks.

There do run through these Fennes eight Rivers which do come out of diverse
vast and great Countries which lie about it, the said Rivers are called Glean,
Welland, Neane, Ouse, Grant, Milden-hall, Brandon, and Stoke.

These Rivers lie common with the Land without separation by Banks, save only
Glean, and Welland, are something Imbanked, and some Banks there are in some
places on some of the other Rivers, but not to that purpose as to save any part
of the Lands, and for this reason, and for want of a sufficient passage for the
waters that come by the Rivers, all the Lands are over-flowen.

The said Rivers have three several Out-falls from the Fennes into the Sea,
and by these Out-falls the said Rivers and Lands unwater themselves in that
manner as now they do.

The Level is broad, and of great extent, and flat, with little or no descent
of its own, and grown full of Hassacks, Sedge, and Reed, and the Rivers full
of Weeds; and the Waters go slowly away from the Lands and out of the Rivers,
and they come swift into and upon it out of the upland Counties, where the
Rivers have a great fall. The aforesaid three outfalls are of great length
before they come to the Sea, the Lands of Holland, and Marsh-land, being great
Countries which lie between them, and do hinder the speedy Current of the
Waters toward the Sea.

There is much increase on the Sea side, and very large and vast Sands all dry
at low Water, and because of the Point of Norfolk, it makes it an Imbay,
whereby the Sands of the Sea are thrown there by the Floods, and these three
Out-falls come through these Sands, and the Tides every day bring into the
mouth of the Rivers a great quantity thereof, and there is but a few times
sufficient Land-water to set the Sands out again, to keep the Outfall open,
insomuch that Welland and Wisbitch Outfals are choked every Summer, But the
Outfall of Lynne has sufficient water to keep open his Channel, and although
in the Summer the Sands in Lynne Haven overcome the Ebbs, somewhat, yet they
do not lie long, but the first Land waters or next Spring Tides, carry them
away again.

But it is not only to be feared, but apparent that in process of time, the
outfalls of Wisbech and Welland, will utterly decay, by the said increase and
Sands the Sea, if they should remain as now they are, by reason of the daily
increase of the Marshes.

The Soil of this vast Country is Moorish, gathered and grown up higher by
the Weeds and Oaze of the waters, many of them are rich grounds, and all would
(if they were well Drayned) be very profitable and become good grounds,
especially after they be burned, manured, and husbanded as such grounds should
be.

There be many Isles, and rising grounds within this great Level. And the
Rivers pass by Towns low seated, lying here or next unto the Uplands,
wherein the Inhabitants of the Fennes do live in great abundance.

The said Countries of Marshland, Wisbich, and Holland, are fenced by Banks
from the waters of the Fennes, and sometimes they have been overflowen by the
said waters, and have often been in great danger, and they are at a continual
charge for the maintenance of the said Banks.

The Kings contract is to make these Lands Winter ground, that is to free them
from the overflowing of the Rivers aforesaid, so far as by Art can be devised.

Considerations to be taken in the Ordinary way of Drayning.
THere is in use a general Rule of Drayning and gaining of drowned Lands,
which is by imbanking all the Rivers on each side, and by leading away the
Downfall by Draynes and Sluices, and this is the Ordinary way of Drayning, as
is usual in all such cases.

But in this case of the Great Fennes, I cannot advise to go altogether in
such a way to avoid inconveniences of great and vast expense, many difficulties
of Inundation and uncertainties which otherwise would depend thereupon.

For then a multitude of Banks must be made about 70000 Rods in length on a
Level and Moorish ground, and far distant from the Falls. The yearly
reparation whereof would be (besides the charge of making them) very great.

The Head Draynes (which in this case are to be cut) for the leading away of
the Downfall, must be carried in all places through a higher ground then the
Lands Drayned, which will be the greater charge, and those grounds wherein they
are to be laid must be dear bought.

The Towns of Peterborough, Erith, and many others standing upon the Upper
ends of the Rivers, and but Low would be thereby sometimes drowned, unless
great Fore-lands and Receptacles be.

A great inconvenience would be on the South Side of Ouse, for by the imbanking
of the Rivers on that side, there would be Three or four Levels the one above
the other, and all of them would want fall all the Winter time. And to lead
away the downfall of them it must be carried by Tunnels underneath the three
several Rivers of Milden hall, Brandon, and Stoake, and that in sundry places,
and the water must go about 28. miles before it comes to the Fall, and so
the upper Level must of necessity commit the water thereof into the next, and
so into the lower again. And all this length of 28. miles go in a slow pace.
And how the downe-fall should be brought such a length without surcharging the
Draynes either in the one or other Level, J know not. And especially there
being several Brooks, the which in Winter time will overtake the Downfall,
and being liberal with their waters (being more then the Draynes and Tunnels
can swallow) the Level would become surrounded and so without perfection from
within.

And by the waters without the Banks, will lie in continual danger of
Inundation for want of a good Fall in the winter, and by a wind, catch, break
and undo all again.

And although each mouth of the several Rivers of Milden-hall, and Brandon, be
brought through new Channels lower to the Fall; yet will it not take away these
inconveniences in this way. And if by another way the several Rivers of
Milden-hall, and Brandon, should be brought to Stoake all in one along the
upper end of the Level, and so by Stoake mouth into Ouse; yet that way the
Downfall will have no issue neither for the water of the several Rivers being
all brought into Ouse, near together and kept within Channel, will so swell
in the Rivers, that the downfall thereof which is to be kept under Soil, will
have no issue, and so the Level be overflowne, and as it is now and no better.

And the Lands will be by this way much subjected to Inundation and Drowning,
both by the Rivers and downfall; and therefore not be worth so much in purchase
or to be letten as otherwise: and the charge of the works in this way (In
works not accounted) will be much greater then the whole Drayning will require
the other way which I direct hereafter following.

Therefore to avoid these and many more inconveniences, I find it best to lead
most of the Rivers about another way, whereby these four benefits will arise.

1 That the works may be made at a far less charge. 2 That they will stand
with more safety and no hazard of Inundation, and so may become habitable. 3
And not subject to half that Reparation. 4 And the Land of a far better
value then the other way.
Diverse things to be observed.
ANd to the end the Works may be made to Answer the difficulties the Lands
now lie in, in the contriving thereof, these following things are to be
observed:

1 That the Rivers come down swift out of the Vpland Countries, and when they
be in the Fennes (they being Level grounds) go but slowly away.

2 That the Level is of great extent, Twenty miles at least from the upper end
to the Fall; and therefore before the water can come thither, within a
convenient and answerable time and in that proportion as it is still sed by the
River water from above out of the Vplands, it must go swifter then Level
water.

3 That the Banks (so much as may be) be laid out from the Moorish grounds.

4 That the Rivers be carried on the highest grounds where possibly they may
be.

5 That the Draynes be laid in the lowest Grounds.

6 That there be receptacles for the waters to Bed on in all times of
extremity, otherwise the Work might be put to an impossibility and a
continual hazard of Inundation.

7 And that the Towns lying on the upper part of the Rivers may not be
damnified, by putting the waters too high between the Banks.

8 And although all this be provided for, yet the Banks to be made 10, 11, or
12. Foot high, on a Seat of 40, 45, 50, or 60. Foot broad in general,
according to the occasions more or less.

9 And that the River water and the Downfall be kept a sunder, and brought to
the Fall severally.

Now farther, observe how it stands with the River of Glean, (to give you an
Example) which River drownes Deeping Fenne, by the often breaking of the Banks
on that side, and by two Slakers (which are Inlets, whereby the Waters of Glean
when the Banks cannot contain them are let into Deeping Fenne by a certain
measure (that when the water is above the bottom of the Slakers, then it)
runs over into the Land. And this is because the Banks on either side of
Glean are laid too near together, therefore if the Waters should be kept
within the Banks as now they are, without Slakers they would run over and
break them, and Deeping Fenne would thereby be drowned on every occasion by
the breaches which the Water would make. Those Slakers then are made to keep
the said Bank from breaking, which is no otherwise then an issue in a corrupt
body, where there is a neglect to take away the occasion by a known Remedy, It
cannot be denied but that the Banks of Glean were laid too near, for had they
been laid four times so far a sunder, as now they are, the River would be
contained within Banks without Slakers, for if the Water be pent into a narrow
room, then the water in that narrow room must be higher, and so rise over the
Banks, but if it shall lie on a wide Bed, then it lies broader and the Cubes
of two several bodies will much differ, for you shall find a greater
proportion, and also gain a greater easement to the said Banks, then the
other way and room to lodge the Water between them without any Slakers or
Inlets, for they are Remedies worse then the disease, not to be suffered in any
work whatsoever if you desire perfection.


There should be great room left between Bank and Bank on each side of the
Rivers, Yet the one River according to the greatness thereof, will require
more then the other. For the greater the confluence of waters the more room is
required to receive it. And the more distance from the Fall the more room
likewise is to be left, because the waters being far distant from the fall,
go not so speedy nor have that current which they have at a short distance.

And in case that all the Rivers should be Inned and fenced by Banks to free
the Lands, and that great distances should be left between Bank and bank;
yet still it must be confessed, that a multitude of Banks in this Level must
be made through Moorish grounds in length about 70000 Rod, which would be
very chargeable and dangerous. And (if all be considered) impossible that way
to be made a sure work, and in such a case diverse Draynes for the downfall
must be made and all through high and valuable Lands, and more Sluices (which
are very chargeable, not only in their first making but also in their suture
maintenance) as may be seen by the draynes of Deeping Fenne and others which
are but newly made, and yet already almost grown up with all kind of Water
weeds. You may observe this in all kind of Draynes of this nature throughout
the whole Country. So that thereby the works become unfruitful after a little
while, and in this way many Thousands might be spent to small or no purpose.
But to avoid the multiplicity of Banks and the making of many Draynes, and to
reduce the Work to a possibility, it should be so contrived that there should
be but few of either of them made. Therefore it is best that diverse Rivers be
brought as into one, to avoid nere the moity of the Banks, which otherwise
must be made. And for the receptacles J resolve to imitate nature (as much as
can) be in the upland Countries, for between the Hills there are meadows, and
on each side pasture grounds or plough Land. I shall endeavor to contrive the
works that way, that there may be Meadows between the upland and the Winter
ground of the Fennes likewise.

Hereby first to avoid multiplicity of Banks, which are very chargeable both in
their making and maintaining.

Secondly, for that the Meadows will be receptacles for the water in time of
extremity to bed on upon all occasions of Floods, and so to keep the waters
at a lesser height by far, against the Banks and and no hurt, but a great
deal of good will be thereby; For those Meadows will lie very convenient for
the upland Country, and for the Winter grounds of the Fennes. And of these
Meadows there will be no greater quantity then the Imbanking of the Rivers by
the ordinary way of Drayning will take up, for there must be room left between
Bank and Bank.

And when all this is taken into consideration, with the Situation of the
whole, I find it the fittest way to divide the whole Level into Three parts.

1. The one from Glean to Mortons Leame.

2. From Mortons Leame to Bedford River.

3. From Bedford River Southwards, being the remainder of the Level.

To Drayne the Lands between Glean and Mortons Leame, all Stow-Brooke, and so
much of the River of Glean, as the Banks cannot contain, must be turned along
Deeping into Welland, and all Welland, into Mortons Leame, which lies
convenient to receive Stow-Brooke, part of Glean, VVeiland and Neane, to be
carried to Guyhurne, and from thence by Wisbich to the Sea, and so those Rivers
to make but one, whereby the Work will be made at lesser charges by far, and
also gain a more perfect Out fall, because the Rivers of Wisbich and Spalding
are not sufficient for want of water to keep open their Channels as they
should be kept, but are interrupted and subject to grow up by reason of the
Sand which the Sea brings in, whereas they ought to be kept open and have
their full depths and fall, for the ground to be drayned so far upwards as
into, or adjoining to the drowned grounds, for the issuing of their downfall.

To make a sure Work thereof, I advise to bring the aforesaid Rivers into one,
that they may (in time) gain themselves a natural Channel, which will be
far better then to leave them to sundry outfalls, which in future ages (as is
conceived) will reduce the Work into an uncertainty again, by reason of the
daily great increase of the Salt Marshes, and the Sands of the Sea.

And by this means the old Channel of Welland, will become very useful to
the Country, by the Sasse or Navigable sluice to be set at Waldron Hall for
Navigation to water the Country in Summer and to scowre the outfall, and in
Winter the Channel will serve to convay away the downfall of the adjacent
Lands, which otherwise must be done by draynes to be made at great charge, and
there is no convenience to have such Draynes, and beside the charge which is
intolerable, the service thereof will be incertaine, be cause there is no
place for them, but through high grounds in which Draynes can not be made so
useful as they should, especially for Deeping Fennes, which are very low
grounds, and hardly to be Drayned, except Welland be turned to Wisbich.

And hereby the said Deeping Fennes will be more certainly secured, and they
and Elow, as I verily believe will be more worth to be purchased, by Fifty or
Sixty Thousand Pounds, if Drayned this way, then if they should be Drayned the
other way.

But why should the two Rivers be brought to Wisbich and not through Welland,
Welland lying in the middle of this part of the Level?

Wisbech, and they are these:

1. The outfall of Wisbich lies convenient for the Drayning of South Holland
(alias) Ellow, and the North side of Wisbich, by the Sheire Drayne. And if
Welland be not put that way, the Out-fall of Wisbich cannot so well be kept
low enough to Drayne them as they should be, they being very Low grounds, and
the low water of the Sea lying now but little lower then they, and yet must be
sufficiently Drayned, and by the turning of Welland thither, the Out-fall of
Wisbich will grind deeper and gain a greater fall to lay them dry, and high
above water.

2. And consider that the Lands of South Holland, by descending from Spalding
to the Sheire Drayne above Four foot, and therefore of necessity they must
have their best issue into Wisbich Outfall, by the sheire Drayne, And that part
of Thorney Abbey grounds, Wisbich Common, and such lands as cannot run to
Welland with their down fall, must have a Drayne between Guyhurne and the
Shiere draine, at a place called Murra Plashe.

3. Wisbich Outfall and Mortons Leame, lie in the midst of the Level of
Fennes, and hereby w^ll become Navigable to the great benefit and convenience
of the Country, and the Outfall will be thereby made safe for ever, and the
Fennes be kept absolutely Drayned.

4. By the water of Glean and the Downfall which goes and is to go that way,
the Channel of Welland will be kept open and remain Navigable for small
Boats, and serve for the Downfall of the Country on that side.

5. Welland is a lesser River then Neane, and runs on a higher bottom, and
it is more convenient to bring the higher and lesser to the low and greater
then contrariwise.

6. It will be a less charge and more certainty. For the River of Welland is
more narrow, and Wisbich River is more wide and easy to be opened, because of
the works already made by the Earl of Bedford, and has already three foot
better fall then that of Spalding.

7. I find in the Report of Sir Clement Edmonds, 20. September. 16 18. by Order
of his late Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, upon occasion of the
differences which arose amongst the Commissioners of Sewers, for those
Countries. That upon examination it was found, that anciently the waters of
Welland and Neane went to the Sea by Wisbich Outfall. And by the said Report it
was likewise found good to draw the waters to their ancient Outfalls, which
confirms me in my resolution. And observe that Glean is higher then Welland,
and Welland then Neane; therefore of necessity Welland must be brought to Neane
as anciently nature brought it which is now hindered by a Bank and not Neane to
Welland. And it is very true, that the water of Welland, for the most part
runs now naturally by Crowland into Neane, which confirms the said Report,
and that Neane lies the lower, and that but little of Welland water goes by
Fosse-dike.

8. That part of the Level between Welland and Neane, lies descending from
Welland to Neane 4. or 5. foot, and if the River of Neane should be carried to
Welland, then the water of Neane must be raised higher then it runs
naturally, and be kept between two Banks, and one Bank will not serve as it
may be bringing Welland into Neane. And in such a case, the Town of
Peterborough, the Receptacles and all would be drowned upon every petty Flood,
especially all the Lands between Stanground and Peterborough.

There are some men which either out of Ignorance or for other ends to hinder
this good work object, that if Welland should be turned to Neane, it might in
the first place hinder the Level Drayned by the Earl of Lindsey, and
Secondly, Boston Deepes.

Lindsey's works which ran into the Fall a Mile and a half above
Fasse-dike. I answer, that put the case the Outfall should utterly decay, then
the Earl of Lindsey's Drayne may be brought below Fosse-dike, and so fall into
the deep Outfall there, where there is an open way to the Sea, but that
Outfall will not decay but remain always (as the work will be contrived) for
the River Glean shall always go that way for so much thereof as the Bank can
contain, which will be a greater quantity then now comes thereby, because the
Banks by the scowring of Glean will be made the more sufficient, and also part
of Welland, all the Summer if need shall be to water the Country, and keep
that Outfall open by the Lock at Waldron-hall, which will be so much as now
there goes by Welland old Channel, for the most part goes now by Crowland
and drowneth Thorney, Crowland, and Peterborough Fennes, and goes that way to
Wisbich as is aforesaid, and in the Winter drowneth them and all Deeping and
Ellow, and all the Country and nearer Towns to the Outfall.

And in the Winter there will be all the Downfall of Crowland Fennes, Deeping
Fennes, and the Earl of Lindsey's Level, On the North of Glean which will all
fall into that Outfall together with Glean, which will be able to keep it
sufficiently open for Glean and the Downfall, and if there shall want (as
there will not) more will be sent either by a Drayne through Deeping Fennes, or
by the Old Channel of VVelland, but it shall not need, one years experience
will take away all the fear, for there will be water enough.

And for instance, the Leame at long Sutton (which runs through the like
Soil) has been and is kept open through the Sands of the Sea by the four
Gotes near Cutton about 7. Miles from Spalding Outfall, and does run but 7. or
8. months in the year, those waters which do and always have kept open the
said Leame, are not so much as the 20th part of that water which shall go to
VVelland Outfall by these works, which makes it evident that VVelland Outfall
will be kept open, And further take Examples by all the Outfalls on the Coast
of Lincoln and Norfolk, where all the Outfals are kept open, and yet have no
River to help them, but nevertheless are kept open by the downfall only.

It is in use and practice every day where the Havens or outfals in the Low
Countries have no River, to make a Pan, and at every Tide to take water into
the said pan, and so they do keep open their out-fals of two or three Miles
long, but VVelland has a better remedy, that Outfall (as it will be there
contrived) will be the best outfall of all the Country.

If it were not to preserve Navigation for Spalding it were not amiss to bring
allthe downfall of Deeping and Thorney through Ellow, and so to Wisbech
outfall by a new Channel, and this is another remedy.

It is considerable to be spoken of thus far, because that the Works may be
very well contrived thus, or toward Wisbech, all parties provided for and
saved thereby, and so well for the Navigation of Spalding to VVishbich, in
stead of that of Fosse. Dike, as for the downfall.

As touching Boston Deepes. I answer that the Floods of the Sea come over all
the Sands which lie between them and the point of Norfolk, and do return
with the Ebbs toward the North thither again, and these Ebbs are that which
have always maintined Boston Deepes. It is not the River of Welland, and that
of Boston that can do it, they are but small waters, especially that of
VVelland, and the less powerful when it comes abroad into a vast place
where it is not to be discerned. For instance, Welland cannot make a deep in a
narrow Channel at Fesse dike, but at every low water travailers tide through,
the water being not above half Leg deep, which shows that it has neither
force nor great quantity of water.

And consider, that when VVeiland went by Wisbich, yet Boston Deepes were then,
I did not ground my reason upon Sir Clement Edmonds report, and that there is a
descent from Welland to Neane, but do likewise take it into consideration,
that the great stone Bridge at Spalding, through which some small part of
Welland water did come in the Winter time, which was of great antiquity, was
not Twelve Foot in the watercourse, and but Five Foot deep, and the stone
Pillar or Peer in the midst thereof, which supported both Arches, was but now
of late taken away by the Drayners of Deeping Fennes, when they did widen the
River, which makes it evident, that but little of VVelland water went that way
either of late or anciently; yea, less then now the Downfall will amount
unto, as I do contrive it.

Moreover consider, that when the River of Welland went to Wisbich, then the
Bridge at Boston stood firm, and in ancient time was made with doors to shut
out the Floods in manner of a Sluice, that it should not go higher then the
Town, which Bridge now has none, so that the Sea does now flow up with a
great quantity of water 20. miles by the water course above Boston, yet so long
ago when the said River had not the fourth part of the Ebb, which now it
has, and that Welland as aforesaid, did go to Wisbech fall, yet Boston
deep, was and the town had then a great commerce in Wool and other
Merchandise. And the reasons why it was so, is, that the Ebb which comes
over the Sands which lie between Norfolk, and it comes that way, and so
keeps a Deep there which could not otherwise be possibly maintained. For
the Rivers are not such as to keep open a Depth of such wideness as Boston
Deep is, especially among the Sands of the Sea. If it were not for the Ebbes
of the Sea it would soon decay. Moreover, the River of Wisbich Ebbes toward
the North by Boston Deep into the Sea, and if the river of VVelland be brought
to Witbich, it must go that way likewise to the Sea, as now it does, so in
this case it makes no alteration.

It is objected by some, that it were better to let the River of Welland go
between Banks to Spalding, and the River of Neane to Wisbich, and so leave
two Outfals.



2 That the 2. Outfals will burden the maintenance more then 1000. l, yearly
at least at all advantages.

3 That it will require 18. miles of Banks more and Draynes, and the charges
thereby increase at least 20000. l. and 1000. l. the year, for the maintenance
more, and make a worser work.

Now for the Particulars concerning the contriving of the Works between the
River Glean, and Mortons-Leame.
FOr the overplus of the River Glean which drownes Deeping-Fenne on that side
of the Country, is to be brought by a Drayne into Welland above Deeping, and
the Slakers to be removed and the Channel to be kept within the Banks
thereof. I do resolve only to take the overplus of the River of Glean, that
the remainder may be kept within the Banks, and the Slaker to be removed to
save Deeping Fen on that side. And that the Towns by which the said River
runs may not want water, and to keep Welland Outfall thereby, and if need
be, the sooner to gather head by means of the Sluice and Sasse which are to be
below it on Welland to scowre the Outfall, and by the said Sluice likewise the
downfall of this Level shall issue by VVelland: and the said drayne above
Deeping, is to take away also Stow brook and the downfall of all the Country
between VVelland and Glean, which now runs into Deeping Fens and drownes it.

The River of Welland is to be brought unto Mortons Leame; therefore a new
River is to be cut to begin near Waldron-hall, and so go on toward the Bridge
which leads from the Upland to Thorney Abbey somewhat below the Bridge, and from
thence below Willowhall, and so to Mortons Leame. And next unto Welland a Sasse
to be set to let water into old VVelland and to preserve Navigation.

Where by will be left on that side of the Country between the Upland ground
and the Banks, some quantity of Meadow ground and Pasture, to serve for
receptacles for water in the Winter, but these grounds will be by the white
waters and the making of the rest of the Lands winter grounds, become of a
greater value then they now are, and this number of Acres and the rest of the
receptacles which are to be left every where will not exceed the quantity which
would be left between Bank and Bank, if every Channel or River were
Imbanked, and thereby the waters of the Rivers and the waters which in time of
great raines comes from the Hills, will be kept between the Uplands and the
Banks, and from the drayned Land, and this will prevent the rising of the
waters to a great height, and the Banks will thereby in a measure be
disburthened, and so the Lands better freed from Inundation then by any other
way, and the Towns which lie without the Banks be kept safe from drowning.

The River of Wisbech from Guyhurne downward must be widened to make it
sufficient for both waters.

The Sluice at Clowes Cross, made to issue the waters of the Fennes must be
stopped, and the Fenne waters for that part of the Country must go part to
Crowland, and so by Spalding to the Sea and by Murra plash as need shall
require, and if the Fall can be gained at Guyhurne part may go by Wisbich,
otherwise VVelland and Murra plash must remain the only draynes for the
downfall which are not sufficient to receive it.

By these Works the Lands of Ellow will be freed from Inundation, and Deeping
be safe together with the rest of all the Lands in that Level from Gloan to
Mortons Leame, and thereby the Lands of Ellow, and on the North-side of Wisbech
will be discharged of the Fenne water which did run above the same all the
winter by the Sheire-drayne. And now to the contrary, VVelland and the
Sheire-drayne will be turned to be good servants in stead of ill Masters to
those Countries, to issue their down fall all Winter by them. And so they
will be made sure and certain Countries, and if the owners of the Lands of
Ellow and the North side of Wisbech cleanse their Ditches to lead away their
Downfall, they shall not want any further head Draynes other then that of
VVelland and the Sheiredrayne. The Sheire drayne must be for a certain length
amended something and altered, and a Sluice to be set next the outfall of
Wisbich river, to issue the waters of Ellow and the North side of Wisbich,
which Outfall will last always, the work being made as aforesaid.

The Work which lies in the middle of the Level between Mortons-Leame and
Bedford River, the River now running through it.
THis part is to be drayned by a Bank which is to go from Stanground to the
fields of Witlesey, and from Eldernell to Guyhurne on that side. On the other
side a Bank to be made from or near Ereth Causey along Bedford. River to
Poedike bank, or Salters Load, and by these Banks the waters of Neane on the
one side, and the Ouse on the other side will be fenced out of this part of the
Level, and Neane hereby will be turned to Wisbich.

But when Neane is turned to Wisbich and so to the Sea with Welland, though
there be provision made for all those waters in time of extremity to Bed on
between Bank and Bank, and between the Bank and the Vpland, yet the
Channel of Wisbich from Guyhurne to the Sea, will not be sufficient (may be
objected) to issue the said waters of the said Rivers, and so the Levels on
both sides may be endangered and the Banks be overflowne and broken down,
when great waters come down for want of sufficient issue made from Guyhurne to
the Sea.

Wisbech river in a larger manner then now it is, and as is heretofore spoken
of.


But yet is a question, when there is sufficient room left for the water to
Bed on, whether in such a case the opening in a great measure every where shall
be needful, and my reason is, that when all these Waters are put that way the
River lying in a Sandy ground, they will grind their own Outfall especially the
lower, ends thereof, and make it self Navigable and more deep by far then
now it is, and the Sluice at the Horseshoe will not be sufficient to carry away
the water, therefore the water is to be cut through near the Sluice. If the
River by the straight line through the North side of Wisbech be not made, and
by this work either way a fall will be gained.

That this part of the Fennes will issue its downfall that way so well as if it
were in the Ouse, because that anciently the waters of Neane and the most part
of that of Welland and Ouse by the West water went by Wisbich to the Sea, and
that the Channel at that time could not be broader, as may be guessed and seen
then now it is, It shall not need to be widened any more. The two Rivers
meeting will grind the Channel through the Marsh, and make Wisbich a Haven
Town like that of Lynne, though not in such measure of wideness.

And that Objection of the Sands which the Floods brings in, and so stop
the Channel again, is not to be considered here, for when there is a River
which has a back water as this will have, it will grind deep and open it
self by the water at every Ebb, and for instance the Ouse from Little-port to
Lynne keeps his depth by reason of the back Waters, so will Wisbech River
keep it self open, having the water of these two Rivers.

Because it may be objected, that the Inhabitants of Peterborough have
Navigation from their Town to Lynne by the River Neane as now it runs,
which will then be taken away.

Wisbich, and then it shall not be requisite to have a Navigable Sluice at
Stanground (unless they and the Towns thereabouts shall give sufficient
reason for it) which I shall endeavor to avoid with such like works as I can,
because they are both chargeable and dangerous in the making and maintaining,
and having their Navigation to Wisbich they shall need no other.

There is for the service of this work in the opinion of most men, a Drayne to
be made from Well to fall into Ouse about Germans- bridge, thereby to lead the
Downfall of this Level to the Sea, with a Sluice in the head thereof.

Wisbech River considered, shall not be needful, for if the Ouse at Salters
Load be disburthened of the confluence of waters now it has, then the Poedike
where it falls into Ouse will issue four times more water then now it does, for
the Ouse does now receive far more water then it shall after the third work
be made as hereafter is expressed, and thereby it must consequently follow,
that this Drayne from Well to Germans-Bridge shall not be needful.

Moreover the great receptacles which are in this Level by the great Meeres of
VVitlesey, Ramsey, etc. make it evident, that the downfall will never want a
Head Drayne on that side, for if there were one, yet the Waters would first go
to the receptacles, And there lie until the Draynes receive them; And in that
interim the Channel of Neane, will be sufficient to send it down in good time
to the fall, considering the Poedike to be as sufficient as Neane can be; And
the Waters of Peterborough being turned to Wisbich, it will disburthen the
Channel of Neane and the Level in general.

The third Work being a Level on the Southside of Bedford River, and so along
and between the Uplands of Suffolk, Norfolk, and Cambridge.
THe River of Ouse, is the principal River that Runs through this part of
the Country to the Sea, And comes from Huntingdon by Saint Ives to Erith,
where it begins to come into three Fennes, and so to Ely, then to Little
Port, and from thence to Salters Load, Dounham, and Lynne, and so to the Sea;
And with the other Rivers does familiarly over run all these Fenny Lands on
all occasions of Floods, which come down by the Rivers; And as this River of
Ouse goes down through the Fennes, the River of Grant, which comes from
Cambridge, falls thereinto, some distance above Ely,; The River of Brandon,
likewise falls into it at Priests-Houses, And the River of Stoke, falls into it
something above Salters Load, and all these loose their names by Ouse. A great
part of the River Neane, which comes from Peterborough, dothfall into the
Ouse, likewise all which meeting in one at or about Salters Load, do
surcharge the River in such manner as that this part of the Country is more
over flowne and dangerously drowned then any other partof the Fennes are; And
the said several Rivers which fall into Ouse, except Neane, do all fall into
the South side thereof, the one above the other, and all of them Gross wise
inclining to the North, and the Ouse running to the East in such a manner
indeed, as if the Lands were made purposely to be overflowen and so to remain;
The thwarting thereof divides it into several Levells the one above the other;
And if those Lands should be Drayned by several divisions then the one Level
must put his water on the other, and so Annoy the one by Discharging the other,
which would make an Imperfect work; And my reason thereof, I have given more
at large heretofore.

To have this part of the Country and those several Levells Drayned and made
Winter Ground, they must be made but one Level and many great alterations are
to be made therein, by bringing the very Rivers which run through it another
way; for as they Crosse-wayes fall into Ouse those Lands can not be made
Winter grounds by the ordinary way of drayning, as heretofore is made mention
of.

Therefore the principal River which is Ouse, may not go down through the
Fennes as now it does, but the best way is to turn that River at Erith into
and next unto Bedford river, and to shut the passage of Ouse as now it goes by
a Crosse-banke through the River to the firm Land, and so force it into that
course as now Bedford river goes, whereby all the Lands below Erith will be
freed from the overflowing of Ouse.

And to the end that the water of Ouse shall not annoy the Country any farther,
the said Beford River is to be Imbanked on each side thereof to keep Ouse
within certain bounds, the Banks thereof must be a great distance the one
from the other, so that the water in time of Extremity may go in a large room
to keep it from rising too high, and the more because there is a great
distance of about 25 miles from Erith before it comes to the perfect Fall.
And those Lands which are to be left for the water to Bed on, will be good
Meadow ground within some time Improved by the water of Ouse to a great value.

The three Rivers of Mildenhall, Brandon, and Stoke, must be made one River,
and to that end Mildenhall must be brought into Brandon, and both into Stoke,
and all into Ouse; and in that manner that the downfall of that Level may be
brought through a Drayne to be made to a better Fall then that of Stoke, for
the downfall of Grant to go in.

The Land between the new Cut and the Banks to the number of Four or five
Thousand Acres by guess, will be fit Receptacles for the waters at all times
of Extremity, and the old Rivers will thereby remain to be sufficient Draynes
to lead the downfall to Ouse within the Stop.

The Upland Country from Milden-hall to Stoke, is a Barren and sandy Country;
Therefore the Meadows which are to be left between the Banks and the Upland
as aforesaid, will be very useful for them, and receive by the white Waters
within some time as good an Improvement as any other Lands made Winter grounds.

The River of Neane being turned to Wisbich, as is aforesaid in the Second
work, none other River remains to be taken order with but Grant, and this
River must be led away by Ouse in such manner as the Alteration of the Works
shall appear to require, after all the other works be done.

And for the Brooks and Runlets which lie that way, they are likewise to be
guided, as upon the Alteration shall appear to the best service.

By this Alteration all the Rivers except Grant are turned out of their usual
course, so that the old Channel of Ouse which was the Channel, for Ouse,
Grant, Mildenhall, Brandon and Stoake, having now to receive but Grant alone
with the Downfall, will find room enough within the Channel without much
Imbanking.

To facilitate this Work for a perfection, there must be made a sufficient
Fall for that Level by a sufficient Drayne to begin at Ouse stop, and so to
go downward near the Fall underneath Stoke if need be, to bring Grant and
the Downfall by this Drayne below into Ouse at the Ouse stop through the
Sasse, and the Sluice to be made there a good quantity will issue, but all
cannot issue there, nor at all times, for the Rivers when they are up will take
away the Fall and the Drayne for Grant to go in, must have a good Fall
continually to speed the water of Grant away, because it is mixed with the
Downfall of that Level contrary to the Rule of Drayning, and therefore by Art
it must be observed how that must be according to the operation which shall
happen. And though it be against the Rule to mix the Downfall with the River,
yet in this case it cannot be avoided. And the Channel of Ouse being of a
great wideness and depth, whereby it receives not only Ouse, but also Grant,
Mildenhall, Brandon, Stoake, and part of Neane, and the tide of the Sea will be
sufficient when all the Rivers and confluence of waters are lead and turned out
of this Channel fave Grant only. And that there is made a new River or
passage to the Fall as is aforesaid, for Grant and the Downfall, which being
done, J conceive this Channel of Ouse being of such wideness and depth will
be able to receive with ease, the River of Grant, together with the Downfall
without prejudice of the Lands, the Works being contrived accordingly as they
should be.

Consider that if the three Rivers should fall into Ouse where Stoake River now
falls in, that then the Ouse will leave all the same waters which it had
before, except Neane, and then the Ouse will not be so far discharged. That
the Drayn may be spared, for the River of Grant and the Downfall of that
Level to go in, but must go underneath Stoake in a Pipe or Tunnell, and so
in the Drayne, go into Ouse where the Fall is sufficient, unless the turning
of Ouse a straighter way to the Sea do not hinder the Fall, but this must be
contrived according to the event thereof, and before, no certainty can be had
therein.

And if the three Rivers be brought to fall into Ouse where the Fall is good
and sufficient, then the Ouse at the outside of the Sasse, will be discharged
of that quantity of water, which together with Neane I esteem a Mosty of all
the water it had before, and no question but thereby a sufficient Fall, for the
Downfall may be gained and not be put to a Drayne for Grant and the Downfall
in that measure of charge which otherwise it would be.

And by this it may plainly appear to your Majesty, that near the Moity of
Banks, which in the other way of ordinary Drayning are to be made, are cut of,
and consequently the charge for the making and maintaining of them lesser this
way then by any the other Designs.

And hereby the Land will become more certain for habitation, and by reason
thereof of a sarre greater value then otherwise.

And this is as much as J can inform your Majesty by writing.

FINIS.
The 22. of February, 1641.

IT is Ordered by the Committee for the Great Level that the Design offered
by Sir Cornelius Vermuiden Knight, together with the Map be Printed.

The 25. of February, 1641.

ORdered by the Committee for the Great Level that it be Printed, together
with the Design, that all men whom it may concern to take notice of, may
thereby inform themselves, and may make their exceptions against it, and
likewise may offer any other design, and they shall have notice to be heard.

Hen. Pelham.


