Speculum Scripturale Schismaticorum: OR, A SCRIPTURE LOOKING -- GLASS, MOST
EXACTLY CHARACTERIZING ALL SORTS OF SCHISMATICS: Wherein, As, in a
Looking-Glass, Face answers Face;
So, Scriptures paint Seducers Root and Race:
And, that they are the Seedsmen of all Evil;
And, must be shunned, as Serpents, or the Devil.

Prove. 30. 11. There is a Generation that is pure in their own eyes ( such are
our Independents, and all sorts of Schismatics, who call themselves Saints,
and the Godly Party) but yet, is not washed from their Filthiness. Who say,
Stand by thy self, come not near me; for I am holier than Thou: But, These
(says the Lord) are a smoke in my nose, and a fire that burns all the day.
Isa. 65. 5. ROMANS 16. 17, 18. Now I beseech you, Brethren, Mark them which cause
Divisions and Offenses among you, ( And, do not Independents, and all Sectaries
this among us?) contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them:
For, they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own bellies; and
by good words and fair speeches ( just, as our Sectaries do) deceive the hearts
of the Simple.
The Scripture Looking-Glass. 1. KOrah, Dathan and Abiram rose up before Moses
and Aaron, with certain of the children of Israel, 250 Princes, men famous in
the Congregation, and gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, and
said unto them; Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation of the
Lord are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them. Wherefore (then)
lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Number. 16. 1, 2, 3.
But, for all their most wicked and proud pretense of Holiness, Moses pronounced
them all to be most wicked and rebellious men, and they were most fearfully
swallowed up alive into the earth, and so, perished most miserably, for their
Pride, Rebellion, and Hypocrisy. from ver. 26. to 33.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. I. Our Independents,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, and such like children of Error and Schism (some of
them, I confess, men famous in their Generation, for parts and gifts) have
also from time to time gathered themselves together (just like those proud,
rebellious and hypocritical men) against our Magistrates and Ministers (both
in Pulpits, Printers presses, and private Conventicles) and most factiously and
seditiously say of them, and unto them, To take too much upon you, in going
about to confine and conjure all Religion and Worship of God into the power of
the Parliament and Synodical Assembly of your Black-coats and Legal Preachers;
seeing that all our Congregations are made up only of Saints, and a godly
Party, even every one of them; and since that, only King Jesus ought to reign
and rule over us, both in conscience and practice; therefore, no earthly
coercive power is to be exercised over us, to compel us to worship and serve
God, or to hold any other opinions in matters of Religion, than our own
consciences do prescribe and dictate unto us. And are nor these words of
ambition, pride, jealousy and sedition (as learned and religious Mr. Deodate
well notes) against the order and Government established by God himself; as if
Gods ordinary gifts of grace did free them from all manner of subjection, and
did confound all manner of Order, by an equal popularity, or Agreement of the
People; thus he. But, the Lord our God himself has already begun most
remarkably to declare and manifest unto us all, very many of these men to be
most wicked, proud, rebellious, and most notorious self-seeking Hypocrites and
dissemblers, who [thus] craftily and deceitfully endeavor to overthrow and
destroy our rightful Magistracy, and truly religious Ministry, and all godly
Government, Order and Christian unity; and (however they craftily pretend King
Jesus, only, to be their Governor, as Judas Iscariot called Christ, Master,
yet they cannot endure his precise and strict Government, and therefore
struggle, though with all deceivablenesse that may be) to introduce an accursed
and intolerable Toleration of all sorts of Licentiousness (especially in
matters of Religion) profaneness, and atheistical Anarchie: And therefore, if
some of the Grandecs and Heads of this Schismatical Faction dye the common
death of all men, I shall [most justly] mightily admire it.

The Scripture Looking-Glass. II. Jeroboam, that notorious Idolater, who made
Israel to sin by his golden Calves, and deceitful trick of Ease to the people,
in their worshipping of God at Jerusalem; added this wickedness, also,
thereunto, That he made Priests of the lowest and basest of the People, which
were not of the Sons of Levi. 1 King. 12. 31.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. II. The Independents,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, and all other Sectaries and Schismatics, unto their
sins of Separation from us, their Will Worship, Rebellion against Magistracy
and Ministry, and that notorious deceitful trick of theirs, Liberty, or
Licentiousness, of conscience to do what they list in matters of Religion,
especially; Have added this wickedness also, That they make Mechanics,
Mercers, Linnen-Drapers, Taylers, Cobblers, Glovers, Porters and Chicken-men,
and such like base, bold, and illiterate fellows (yea, they have not been
ashamed to make brazen faced Huswifs, and impudent women) to be their
Preachers; and all under the cheating-colour of guifted persons, forsooth: And
with most foul and gross disgraces, do contemn and scorn the learned, godly,
grave, and Orthodox Ministers of the Lord, whom God himself has set apart for
the Ministry, both by an outward and inward mission and qualification of Parts
and Piety.

The Scripture Looking-Glass. III. Now, this I say, ( says the Apostle Paul)
that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo; I am of Cephas, and
I am of Christ: Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? Are ye not,
herein, carnal? in thus, dividing Christ into Sects and Schisms? And, are,
thus, become children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. and 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. and Ephesians. 4. 14.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. III. And do not every
one of our Independents, and Sectaries of all sorts, say thus also? I am of M.
T. Goodwins separate Church Way; I am of J. Goodwins Church; I of M. Lockiers
Church; I of M. S. Simsons; And I of learned K^ffin the Glovers Church. And, in
their thus irregularly, and unauthoritatively dividing Christ into unwarranted
Sects, Schisms, factions and fractions, are they not carnal and earthly-minded
men? yea, are they not (as the Apostle fitly terms them) vain and wanton
children, never settled, never contented, but tossed too and fro with every puff
and wind of false, dangerous and destructive Doctrines, Blasphemies, conceited
New-Lights, empty and ungrounded Revelations and Enthusiasms, and thus most
craftily cozening and deceiving, and being deceived, and under holy names
separating from the rest of their faithful Brethren; and not considering, that
though Christ has diverse Ministers and Instruments in his Church; yet that all
make up but one Church, one Body, one Kingdom.

The Scripture Looking-Glass. IIII. This, know also, my Brethren ( says the
Apostle Paul) That in the last days, perilous times shall come; for, men
shall be Lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, and without natural affection, unthankful, unholy,
truce breakers, false-accusers, incontinent, despisers of those that are good,
headie, and high-minded, traitors, having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof; from such ( my Brethren) turn away: for, these will not
endure sound Doctrine; but, after their own lusts, heap to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears, and turning away from the truth, being turned unto fables.
2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, etc. 13.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. IV. And are not we (my
deer Brethren) now in England and London, fallen into these perllious times,
and dangerous days? And are not our Independents, and all other Sectaries of
these our days (as here described by the Spirit of God) most notorious
self-lovers, and extreme covetous? Are they not (most of them) most proud
boasters of themselves to be Saints, and the only godly Party? Are they not
most fearful blasphemers? Witness Paul Best, John Goodwin, Price, and
Quarterman two of Goodwins disciples, with many others. Are they not
disobedient to Parents, and without all natural affection? yea, even downright
Paricides (and Regicides too) some of them, who upon conceits of pretended
Revelations, and most false and fallacious impulses of the Spirit, have slain
their nearest and dearest of blood unto them? as He in Ireland, who, thus,
sacrificed his own Son; And, a Soldier, very lately of S. Tho. Fairfax his
Army, who on the marriage day of his own Sister, having given his own natural
Father a great blow on the ear (upon occasion of a Revelation, as he told his
Father, that he must kill him) vehemently endeavored with his sword drawn, to
have murdered his Father, had he not been most violently restrained and
hindered by company that came into the room to rescue his Father, at an eminent
Gentleman's house in Bow near London? Are they not most unthankful wretches both
to God and men for that work of Reformation begun among us, and just liberty to
serve God from the Prelates Tyranny, which, ten years before that, they seemed
(with us) most greedily to desire; but now most extremely hate it, except only
in their own fantastical way? Are they not most abominable Covenant breakers
and abusers? witness, wicked Cham, alias, Cann, the Printer; and most
slanderous false-accusers of our most precious Parliament-members, and other
eminent Gentlemen in City and Country? Are they not (many of them) most
filthily incontinent, witness Mr. Gun of Southwark, even one of their precious
Preachers, and others also? Are they not most proud despisers of all our best,
gravest and godliest Ministers, whom they most contumeliously call Black-coats,
and Antichristian Legal Preachers? endeavoring to starve them up, and so to
deprive us of them, in denying them competent maintenance. Are they not most
insolent and high-minded Traitors and Rebels? witness the most wicked
endeavors of some of them to overthrow our fundamental Laws, and to introduce
a most accursed Toleration of all licentiousness, and a mere Chaos and
confusion in all things both sacred and civil? And are they not notorious
Hypocrites, having only an outside form of Godliness, but utterly denying the
power and practice of it in their private houses, by holy duties with their
families, professing themselves to be above Ordinances? And therefore is it not
high time to take heed of, and to turn away from such as they are?

The Scripture Looking-Glass. V. And (as the same holy Apostle says) of this
sort, also, are all those that creep into men's houses, and lead captive silly
women (even as, Satan, the Devil, also, at the beginning, assaulted and
surprised Eve, the woman, and, then, left her to entice and ensnare Adam, her
husband. Gen 3. 1, 2, 3. etc.) So do these men. And like James and Jambres
(those wicked Magicians of Egypt, who withstood Moses and Aaron) they reject
and resist the Truth; being men of corrupt minds concerning the faith. And
these evil men and Seducers, though they go on, grow worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived; yet (certainly) they shall not long proceed: for,
their folly and madness breaks forth, and is more and more most notoriously
made manifest to the world, even as the folly and madness of those wicked
Inchanters and Magicians was. 2 Timothy 3. 6, 8, 9, 13.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. V. And, do not our
Independents and all sorts of Sectaries just the very same thing, by their
Jesuitical Emissaries, T. G. P. N. W. G. S. S. J. G. etc.? Who (at first, about
four or five years ago, and so all along since) have most boldly and wickedly
poisoned the Kingdoms great Fountain, the Parliament Members: and after them,
huge Peter's, Oats, Kiffin the Glover, Patience the Botcher, Gorton the
cheater, and other such like engendered vermin of Religion; who also (like
Satan himself, and their elder Brethren, the Romish Jesuits) crept into men's
houses, and, first, set upon and assaulted silly women, apt to be seduced, and
aptest to seduce their Husbands, children and servants, as we see by daily
experience? And just as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses and Aaron, so do
these our Independents and Sectaries oppose and withstand our Magistracy and
Ministry, rejecting and resisting the Truths of Gods Word; being men of very
corrupt minds; yea, reprobate (or, abominable to God) in respect of their
perverse doctrines and unsoundnesse of faith in Christ: And like evil men and
crafty Seducers, they grow worse and worse [most of them] deceiving, and being
deceived. But certainly, they shall not [long] thus continue; for their folly
and madness breaks forth daily more and more (even to their own shame, in very
many of them) and is very manifest to all that are truly wise and religious,
and whose eyes of their understanding the Lord has graciously opened.

The Scripture Looking-Glass. VI. The Apostle Peter, also, tells us of his
discovery of false-Prophets, or false Apostles that shall come in future Gospel
times, and who began to appear among the people in his time; who did, and would
privily bring in damnable Heresies (and blasphemous Opinious) even denying the
Lord Christ: And, that many should and would follow their most pernicious
ways: by reason of whom the ways of Truth would be evil spoken of. 2 Pet. 2.
1, 2.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. VI. And, are not our
Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomiams and all other Sectaries of these our
times [most directly] those false Prophets and Pseud-apostles here spoken of?
who privily (that is, craftily and cunningly, under the painted and specious
pretenses, or embroidred cloaks of Toleration, liberty, and freedom to tender
Consciences, new-Lights, rare Revelations, a glorious Church way, Saints, the
godly Party, etc.) should and would bring in damnable Heresies, and most
accursed and blasphemous Opinions, even [many of them] denying the Lord Jesus
Christ (either, by a total apostacy, or through want of sincere obedience)
both in his Deity, and in his incarnation; yea, denying the three glorious
Persons in the Trinity, and the sacred Scriptures, or written Word to be the
foundation of our faith; to omit many other. And, do we not see how many are
drawn away by them to follow their pernicious ways, that is, their pestilent
doctrines? and by reason of whom, and their perverse paths, the ways of truth
are exceedingly evil spoken of; and the blessed work of Covenant-Reformation
is most slanderously termed by them Persecution and Tyranny; and Christ's
Government is by them called and counted a bloody, arbitrary and Antichristian
slavery: and how [thus] they most exactly cry out with wicked Athalia, Treason,
treason, Persecution, persecution; whereas they are the most cruel and crafty
traitors and persecutors themselves: witness, that true Saint, indeed, Mr.
Caughton, imprisoned by the Saints of these times; a strange paradox in piety.

The Scripture Looking-Glass. VII. And the same Apostle goes on, and tells us,
that through covetousness, they shall with fained words make merchandise of
their Disciples and Proselites, whose judgment lingereth not, and whose
damnation slumbreth not; but chiefly, those that walk after the flesh, in the
lusts of uncleanness, who despise Government, and presumptuously speak evil
of Dignities: and, like brute-beasts, speak evil of the things which they
understand not; and shall therefore perish utterly in their own corruption, and
shall receive the reward of unrighteousness. Spots they are and blemishes,
spotting themselves with their own deceivings, and seducing others, while they
feast with you; Having eyes full of adultery, and that cease not from sin:
Beguiling unstable souls, their hearts being exercised with covetous practices.
Cursed children, Wels without water, clouds carried with a tempest, to whom the
mist of darkness is reserved for ever. Speaking great swelling words of
vanity, and promising liberty to others, whenas themselves are the servants of
corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 3, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. VII. And does not the
Apostle Peter here also most lively delineate our Sectaries and Independents
practices, manners and conditions? Who, indeed, through covetousness (witness
their many Lectures, and fat collections at their itinerary [or, rather,
vagrant] preachings) by fained and painted words, framed to a show of piety,
mildness, and charity, craftily endeavor to lay hold on their disciples
goods, with the ruin of their souls. Hastening their own damnation by most
seditiously contemning Government, and most insolently and presumptuously
speaking evil of Dignities, Kings, Lords, and Rulers; and therefore are justly
left utterly to perish in the corruption of their own minds, as foul spots and
blemishes of Religion, seducing and deceiving those that feast and entertain
them. Being, herein, cursed children, in that they are, as it were, empty wels
without water, barren and fruitless in themselves of any true good, and
without sap or moisture of true soul-saving grace, to make others truly
gracious and growing Christians: yea, they are vapouring and vanishing clouds,
driven to and fro with the fleeting blasts and tempests of their most vain and
heretical minds; for whom the mists and foggs of infernal darkness is
reserved for ever. Who use to speak great swelling and swaggering words of
vanity and boasting hypocrisy of Saintship, and godly party, etc. using a
lofty and proud flashie style, both in their writing and preaching, especially
(as reverend Mr. Deodate notes most truly, in his exposition on this Scripture)
with high soaring and cloudy notions, and speculations to make their hearers
admire them, though they little or nothing at all understand them; and often
times their words being extremely void of truth, or of any virtue of Gods holy
Spirit to sound edification. And thus they also falsely and fallaciously promise
liberty to others (in suffering and inciting their novice-disciples to commit
gross sins, and lustful perpetrations under the vizard of Christian liberty)
whereas themseles [as here the Apostle sayes] are most servile slaves, and
servants of accursed Corruption.

The Scripture Looking-Glass. VIII. There are ( says the Apostle Jude also)
certain men crept in, unawares, who were of old ordained to condemnation,
ungodly men, who turn the grace of our God into lasciviousness. Filthy
Dreamers, who despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities: Who have gone in
the way of Kain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and
perished in the gainsaying of Corc. Spots they are in your Feasts of Love,
when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear. Clouds they are
without water, carried about with winds; Trees whose fruit withers; without
fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging waves of the sea, foaming
out their own shame; wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever. Murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
speaking great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration for advantage:
Mockers, who walk after their own ungodly Lusts. These are they who separate
themselves, sensual, and not having the Spirit, Jude, ver. 4, 8, 12, 13, 16,
18, 19.

The Schismatic Reflection, or, Face answering Face. VIII. See here again
(impartial and unprejudiced Reader) how most remarkably the Apostle Jude
describes the Independents, Anabaptists, and all other Schismatics and
Sectaries of our times, to be Corner-creepers, and sly stealers into men's
houses and hearts, branding them also with the black mark of ungodly men,
turning the grace of our God into wantonness and lasciviousness, as if Gods
word and free grace allowed them in any gross sin, under a false and wicked
pretense of being in Christ, as fals-hearted Feak maintains, and preachers; and
therefore the Apostle gives them their doom; assuring us, that such as these
were ordained by Gods eternal decree unto everlasting condemnation And so the
Apostle goes on, and calls them filthy dreamers, or brainsick men, by their
new Lights and enthusiastic Revelations; despising, and speaking evil of
Government, godly Order and obedience to any Authority, save only that which
is of their own setting up: And truly, this is very observable, that the Spirit
of God sets down this as a principal mark of Seducers and Hypocrites, in that,
these Apostles do, so often, mention their despising Dignities, or Dominions,
Kings, Lords, Magistrates and Ministers, whom they cannot abide, because they
would keep them within the bounds of godly order and obedience. And then the
Apostle proceeds to aggravate this sin in them, comparing it to the wages of
Cain, who was the first that wickedly departed from the true Church; and of
basely covetous Balaam, carried into errors by the bait of gain and worldly
pleasures; and imitating Core and his rebellious Companions, in rising up
against the true Pastors and Governors of the Church of Christ, and therefore
incurring the like unavoidable perdition that those men justly suffered. Yea,
the Apostle calls them spotted and crafty, seducing smel-feasts, who abused
that godly custom of the Saints society, unto gluttony and excess. Vaporous
clouds without rain; and such [indeed] are almost all Sectaries, fluttering and
flashing up and down, without any moisture or solidity. Fruitless trees, which
also have neither life nor sap, (like withered trees in Autumn) unfit to bring
forth any good fruit of holiness in themselves, or edification to others; yea,
trees twice dead, by apostatizing and falling off from the life of grace, to
sin and death; and, as it were, plucked up by the roots, even cut off from
spiritual union with Christ: Raging waves, and foaming seas, even unsettled and
proud spirits, belching out abominable Doctrines, and blasphemous Opinions.
Murmurers and complainers, men of contentious and impatient spirits; Admirers
also of men's persons and parts for advantage, and to gain by them for their
base and false flattering of them. Mockers and abusers of other men far better
than themselves, in all respects: and, O how daily and sadly do we see this
practiced, especially in printed Pamphlets, and that with authority, wherein
our most pious and painful, learned and religious Ministers are called no less
than Baals priests, Sons of Belial, Sir Jack Presbyters, and such like most
base and ignominious names, by the mercenary Sectarian Pamphleters of these
times; but to go on, and conclude; Separating themselves from their Brethren
(as sensual and carnal self-seeking men, who have not the Spirit) wilfully
cutting themselves off from the true spiritual Communion of Gods Church, and
are thereby deprived of the life, grace, and holy Spirit of the Prince of Peace
and Union, the Lord Jesus Christ, John 15. 6.

Woe unto the world because of offenses; it must needs be that Offenses come,
but woe to that man by whom the offense comes: For whosoever shall offend one
of those little ones which believe on me, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Scan Matthew. 18. 7. 8.
Such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of light: Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be
transformed, as the Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according
to their works. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they fall away,
to renew them again to repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. The just shall live by faith; but
if any man draw back ( or fall away) my soul shall have no pleasure in him.
Heb. 6. 4. and, 10. 38.
Consult, then (O all ye backsliding and apostatizing Independents, Sectaries
and Schismatics) this fair and faithful Scripture Looking-Glass; and see how
near ye come to the sin against the holy Ghost, and fear, and tremble.

Qui cum Jesu itis, non itis cum Jesuitis,
vel Romany, vel Schismaticis:
that is,

Who-ere, to walk with Jesus Christ, delights,
Shun Romish and Sectarian Jesuits. --
JOHN VICARS.

The Schismatical WOLF Sented.
MATTHEW. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing;
but, inwardly, they are ravening Wolves: ye shall know them by their Fruits.

The Heretical FOX Hunted.
CANT. 2 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines; for our
Vines have very tender Grapes.

FINIS.
London, Printed for T. M. 1649.


