Reverend Sir,
HAving lately received from you, by the hands of my loving Neighbor and
Friend Mris. Ducker, a book undeserved and unexpected favor, one of your last
books, entitled, Innocence and Truth triumphing together; I acknowledge it a
just engagement of obliged gratitude, and therefore, accordingly, I do here
return you deserved and most humble thanks for the same, by the same friendly
hand. And because (worthy Sir) I conceived and considered with my self, that
you sent it by way of love and desire to give me (who am, as I acknowledge, a
poor and unworthy Presbyterian) satisfaction, if it might be, touching your
Independent Church Way: I having now perused it all over, even a capite ad
calcem (and I hope with that piety and impartialitie, as my God has enabled
me, which becomes a Christian and fellow servants to the same Lord Jesus Christ
with you) I therefore hope you will, not so much pardon (which I pray not) as
accept (which I heartily desire) with Christian Candor, mine ingenuitie and
plain dealing with you, in now giving you an account, briefly, as I thought
it most fit, of what light or content and satisfaction I have received from it.
Truly Sir, I having read your Epistle to the Reader, found therein very full
and fair promise of your ingenuous aim and intention in the subsequent
discourse, viz. that you projected four things therein, Brevitie,
Perspicuitie, Moderation and Satisfaction. But having, I say, purused your
Book, truly Sir, (if I am not mistaken, as I believe I am not) you have come
extreme short of your promised project, in every of the four branches
thereof. For first, if I found you short, I am sure I found you sharp and
tart; For Perspicuitie, I assure you I found much cloudie obscurity; Very
similitudinem multam, non ipsam veritatem; satisfaction, therefore none at all.
But especially, in that of projected moderation, and promised temperature in
writing, (the great defect, and foul fault, so cried out upon by Independents
against all Presbyterian Writers or Speakers) in stead of moderation I found
abundance of bitterness and unsavory jerkes and jeers (the light issues, me
thought, rather of a youthful green-head, than the solid expressions of a
grave heart) sprinkled, almost, over all your whole discourse; which I must
confess, much troubled and affected me with wonder to meet with, after such a
seeming promise of moderation: Some few of very many whereof (because I knew,
Dolosus versatur in generalibus) I have here particularized with their pages
where they are evidently and easily to be seen. As first, (to omit your Via
Sanguinea, with all its most bitter and biting, yea sorely wounding expositions
of that term, in your Theomachia, etc.) Page 13. you compare Mr. Prynne in his
Reply, to the two false witnesses, who falsely accused our blessed Savior. And
in the same Page you tell the Reader, Here Mr. Prynne vapors in his Reply; and
immediately after, in the same page how notably do you jeere and scoff him
about three Tabernacles? And with what an elated spirit do you answer him,
page 16. line 4. together with a downright jeere about a National Church,
some 12. lines after? You also grossly tax him with errors, Page 17. Sect. 21.
And Page 18. and 19. you frequently jeere him, and among those jeeres you tell
him, that Acts 15. is only Mr. Prynnes Gospel; what a bitter and unchristian
censure lay you upon him, and all Presbyterians, Page 24. Sect. 26. toward the
end of it? And o how you jeere him with his quotations, Page 37. toward the
bottom; as also Page 49. and Page 51. you slander him with want of Reason and
Truth too; and Page 52. you tell him, his pen spits black reproaches in the
face of Independents. You also accuse him (Page 65.) of much untruth; and the
same also again most foully, Page 84. Together with a Notable jeere, exalting
your self, and vilifying Mr. Prynne, which I have noted at large in your
book, Page 85. Together with very many other such like expressions, too
tedious to be here recited; And yet (strange to consider) you conclude them
all (with the conclusion of your book) Page 99. in a hortatorie way to Mr.
Prynne in these words: That he would put less Vinegar and Gall into his Ink,
and more Wool and Cotton. And in the Apostles words, Ephesians. 4. 31. That all
bitterness and evil speaking be put away, as becomes Brethren. And now any
impartial person may judge whether you your self have followed this brotherly
exhortation; Nay, whether contrariwise, you have not with unbrotherly
aspersions, endeavored to besmeare the face of that precious Gentleman, most
worthy ever to be honored both by you all and us all? Truly Sir, you
Independent Gentlemen have dealt with this most worthy servant of the Lord,
just as the people of Lystra did with the Apostle Paul, whom at first they so
honored and admired, as that they were ready to deifie him and make him a God;
but shortly after they furiously indeavored to stone him to death: So ye, at
the first, in the time of Mr. Prynnes first most elaborate and learned divine
writings, yea and for his most glorious and Saint-like sufferings; O then, how
ye all (with us) most highly (and that most justly too) honored him, and
brought him home from banishment, as it were in the triumphing Chariot of your
love and praises! But now, since he has piously and faithfully written
against your Independent way, and only for this, O how have you and almost all
of your way, indeavored as much as in you is, to stone to death his illustrious
reputation, by most unworthy and unchristian reviling and vilipending of him,
both in words and writings! Even him I say, who for his piety, humility,
incomparable constancy, fortitude and magnanimity in suffering for Gospel
Truths, was not inferior to any of his most faithful fellow sufferers, yea,
whose soundness and sincerity, whose profound learning and indefatigable
labors in writing upon deepest points of Divinity and controverted Gospel
Truths (witness his Perpetuity of the estate of a regenerate man; his
Anti-Arminianisme, Unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, his Histrio-Mastix; and
many other his later, most learned, orthodox and precious pieces) have made his
never-dying name and fame most worthily renowned both in England and other
parts of the world, beyond the Seas. And yet this noble Gentleman to be thus,
I say, besmeared and bespattred with your unjust accusations, only I say
again, for writing the Truth against Independent novelties; O! it is most sad
and bad to consider. Truly Sir, you must here give me leave to be yet more
plain with you, I profess in the sincerity of my soul, that I do most
groundedly believe, that (had Mr. Prynne been such a Nonsense,
Consciencelesse, Irrational, false and frivolous writer, as you and others of
your way only have strugled (but all in vain) to make and demonstrate him by
your lavish tongues and pens) that yet, I say certainly, Mr. John Goodwin was
the most unfit man of all I know in London, to lay those undeserved
criminations to Mr. Prynnes charge. For, you know good Sir, that Qui in alterum
paratus est dicere, ipsum vitio carere oportet. For you therefore, Reverend
Sir, to take upon you to tax Mr. Prynne of errors, untruths, and such like, as
you have done, it was surely most absurd and unbeseeming you: for it is too
well known, how deeply you your self (before ever this most unhappy and
unholy difference of Independency with Presbytery was dreamed of) have been
censured both of Socinianisme; (and how justly too, others have most learnedly
in public declared) and more lately also how you have been discovered to hold
a most dangerous, yea a most damnable opinion (as a learned Independent brother
of yours termed it in my hearing, and who then said he would justify it
against you) touching justifying Faith by Christ. And now also, how fiercely
you are fallen on this unhappily disturbant new way of Independencie. I beseech
you therefore, Reverend Sir, seriously to consider these things, to muster up
your saddest thoughts, and to see into what a Labyrinth you are strangely and
strongly intricated. Sir, I do not, I cannot deny, but ingenuously confess
that God has given you much learning and eminent parts, but truly Sir, if I
be not mistaken, I greatly fear, your Independent Proselytes do too much
magnify, if not (almost) deifie you for them, and as it was with Pythagoras
his Scholars, an Ipse dixit is enough, I, fear for many, if not most of your
disciples, jurare in verba Magistri; Whereby I pray God, your great parts and
gifts be not (thus) a great Snare to your soul, which I much fear, if not
timely and truly seen into and prevented by Cordial selfe-denyall, and holy
humility in your self, being more kindly affectioned with brotherly love, and
in honor preferring others before your felfe, Romans 12. 10. And thus (Reverend
Sir) I have made humbly bold, by your own occasion, lovingly, and (I hope)
fairly and friendly as a poor true Christian brother ought ( Levit. 19. 17.)
Liberare animam meam, and thus to manifest my reciprocal love and gratitude
unto you, praying our good God it may be accepted with the like right handed
Christian Candor, and simplicity of heart with which it is sent and intended;
I humbly take my leave and rest, Sir,

Yours in our great Lord and Master. Christ Jesus, to be commanded. JOHN VICARS.
Ian. this 18. 1644.
Imprimatur

Ja. Cranford.
Jan. 24. 1644.
London Printed for Michael Spark Senior, at the Blew Bible in Green Arbor.
1645.

To his Reverend and much respected good Friend, Mr. John Goodwin, be these I
pray presented.


