A LOOKING-GLASS FOR MALIGNANTS: OR, Gods hand against God-haters. CONTAINING
A most terrible yet true relation of the many most fearful personal examples
(in these present times, since the year, 1640.) of Gods most evident and
immediate wrath against our malevolent Malignants. Together with a Caveat for
Cowards and unworthy (either timorous or treacherous) Newters. COLLECTED For
Gods honor, and the ungodlies horror, BY JOHN VICARS.

Psalm. 120. 3, 4. What shall be given, or done unto thee thou false tongue?
even sharp Arrows with hot coals of Juniper. Jerem. 18. 18. Then said they
(Isreal's malignants) come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; come and
let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.
Imprimatur hic Liber

John White.



LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the sign of the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN WOLLASTONE, Knight; Lord Major of the
renowned City of LONDON: AND To the Right Honorable and truly elect Lady, the
Lady WOLLASTONE, his most virtuous and truly pious Consort; J. V. most humbly
and heartily prays all increase of Honor here, and the blessed assurance of
Heaven hereafter.
Right Honorable,
YOur own singular, and even Connative Candor, piety, and courtesy to All;
and many and most immerited favors, deeply and duly engaging Me to both your
Honors, have induced, yea compelled me to be ever most studious of bounden
Gratitude. I therefore (with that honest poor Country man, of whom I have
read, who seeing many Princes and Nobles presenting to their Emperor very rich
and rare Presents; He also to show his love, brought only his own Picture
painted, and holding forth in his hand the figure of a fair and rich Jewel,
with this Motto over it, Et hoc vellem: That is, And I would give such a Jewel
as this is, were I able. So I (I say) having no better a present (as yet) to
present to your Honors, have most humbly made bold to dedicate to both your
Honors (together with my devoted self) this plain yet useful
Looking-glass. Which though it be but of a homely dress, yet will represent
to your Honors variety of remarkable objects, touching the miserable
Malignants and Anti-Parliamentarians of these our times; most worthy (I
believe) your Honors serious view and favorable acceptance. And to whom,
indeed, may I more fitly tender such a tender and fragil piece or utensill, as
a Looking-glass is, then to your good Honors, whom both I and this whole
City, yea I may say, the whole Kingdom do know by most happy experience
(witness your good Lordships most pious, prudent, and virtuous Government of
this famous City, and witness also your good Ladyships Masculine virtues, as
so many precious Pearls treasured up in a Feminine Cabinet, I mean a most
heroical holy Heart, together with the constancy and loyalty of both your
Honors to God and Goodness in the Parliaments Cause; and whom therefore (I
say) I know most willing to entertain and use this my Looking-glass, Candida
manu, with candid and courteous Acceptance, and also most able to patronage
and protect it, A rapacibus and furiosis malignantium unguibus, from the
uncivil and defiling fingers of any of all our unreasonable malevolent
Malignants. Go on therefore, my good Lord (as most honorably you do, guarded
and guided by the wisdom and power of Gods holy Spirit, and supported by the
daily prayers of Gods Saints and Servants) to countenance and encourage
Goodness, and to discountenance and keep under the enemies of Godliness,
Peace and Truth, even as your Honors late most worthy Predecessor did, to
Gods glory and his everlasting honor; ever setting before your Honors eyes,
and having in your blessed Breast that heart-fortifying-promise and admirable
encouragement given by God himself to his faithful servant Josuah, Josuah 1.
5, 6.
As I was with my servant Moses, so will I be with thee, Heb. 13 5.
I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Be strong therefore and of a good
courage. Which that your good Lordship most holily and happily may be, is and
ever shall be the daily prayer of

Your good Honors most humbly devoted, JOHN VICARS.

To the Reader.
AS it is too frequently and familiarly known ( benevolent or malevolent
Reader, whoever thou art) that to the hearing of Gods Word there come as well
ears of scorn as ears of corn: So, I make no doubt but this my
Looking-glass shall meet eyes of enmity and hearts of rancour, as it shall of
Amicability and Christian Candor. However, being careless of the malignity of
the one, and most studious of the benignity of the other, I here invite thee to
the view thereof; wherein thou shall see represented to thine eyes and
understanding, various, serious, and seasonable objects, fit for them both to
contemplate, ruminate, and feed upon. Variety, I say, of evidences and examples
of Gods most just and immediate indignation against and upon the unnatural,
malicious, and even bestiall Malignants of these times (for so says the
Prophet David, Psalm. 49. 12.
That even the most honorable of men wanting heavenly wisdom and
understanding, are compared to beasts that perish. And well were it with them
too, were they but as bad as beasts and had not immortal souls, as some
Mad-braines of late have most falsely, foolishly, and blasphemously gone about
to prove and prate of) who impiously fret and fight against God and his Cause.
Together with our silly and sottish Newters and uncomfortable Cowards, who
timerously or treacherously desert and forsake their God in the Parliaments
Cause, which unquestionably is Gods. By all which sad and serious Examples
(for, as our old Axiom is, Examples move more, and are more prevalent than
Precepts) my maine and only aim is to endeavor (by Gods assistance, for the
Christian love I bear to their souls especially) to show them the errors and
evils of their courses and carriages therein, and (if it be possible) to work
and win them to a true and timely retractation for the good of their souls and
bodies both here and hereafter.

But whereas, Object.
it may be, our Malignants will here object, either cut of incredulity, or
malignancy, or both, that all these fearful examples here alleged, are but
Chimaera's, and false or fictious Bug-bears to scare children or fools, and
therefore they the less regard them.

All that I will answer hereunto is this, Answ.
That I profess (as in the presence of God) I have used all care and diligence
to search and be assured of the truth of them all, and am able to produce very
able and honest testimonies of them, besides what I have expressed with the
Examples themselves. If therefore our unhappy and hood-winkt Malignants,
through their own flinty obstinacy, or benumbed ignorance and incredulity
(whereby etiamsi persuaseris, non persuadebis, Though you make things ever so
clear, yet they will not be convinced) will not suffer these things to work
so kindly on their Consciences as is herein desired and endeavored; yet then
I am confidently persuaded (by Gods gracious assistance) they may produce this
threefold issue and effect. 1.
First, they may be a means to confirm and strengthen the faithful and fast
friends of the Parliament in their godly and wellgrounded resolution and
Christian courage to persevere therein. 2.
Secondly, to reduce and reform some (at least) of the more moderate, tender,
and fearfull-spirited ones. 3.
And thirdly, they must needs serve for the greater condemnation of our
desperate Malignants, and to leave them (thereby) utterly inexcusable, if still
they persist in their perverse and froward obduracie. But what ever be the
issue, Liberari egomet animam meam. I have, so far, discharged my duty, and
will yet farther unfainedly pray, that the Lord may thereby get some glory,
though by so weak and unworthy an instrument, as is

Thine in the Lord, JOHN VICARS.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR MALIGNANTS.
THat there has been in all ages from the beginning of the World, A natural
Antipathy in the wicked against the godly.
even ever since that grand enmity which God put between the Woman's and the
Serpents seed, a natural Antipathie and inveterate malignity in the wicked of
the World against the godly, is undeniable and most clear both in sacred,
profane, and moral Histories. And that this connative malignity in them has
in all places and times broken out into most deadly feud and pernicious
Persecutions both by Hand and Tongue, especially, is as clear and
conspicuously apparent to all that have their eyes in their heads and will see,
or understanding in their hearts, and not be wilfully blind and obstinately
hard-hearted. Gods hand against Truth-Traducers.
And that God also, has evermore most evidently and eminently manifested his
high indignation, and even immediate wrath and displeasure, especially on
Tongue-persecuters of his precious people, and on blasphemous Traducers and
besmearers of his immaculate Truth, all times and places can produce most
copious presidents and most sad examples.

To pass by and pretermit all bypast presidents and former fearful examples
of Gods immediate and revengefull hand on such malignant Delinquents in former
ages, and extant (I say) in sacred Scriptures and other Histories, and not to
insist on that most remarkable one in Gods book, though most punctually
pertinent to our purpose, 2 Kings 2. 23, 24.
of above forty children slain by two wild Bears immediately upon their
mocking the godly Prophet of the Lord, and only calling him Bald pate in
scorn and derision; just as our malignants and their children jeeringly and
sc^ffingly call Gods people now adays by that foolish and nonsense name of
Roundheads. To pass by this, I say, and all other of ancient or more modern
times, and to come briefly and roundly (since they will have it so) to our own
times, even since the most unhappy breaking out of these most unnatural and
intestine bloody broils within our Kingdom of England; England not empty of
examples of Gods wrath against Tongue-persecuters of Truth.
wherein God has not left us empty (in Christian sorrow be it mentioned) of
many most evident demonstrations of his justly incensed indignation against the
malignant Heart and Tongue-persecuters of our times (against whom I mainely
intend this Treatise) but has given us as many and as memorable sad spectacles
of his apparent displeasure, in his scoffing enemies ruin, sorrow and shame,
as ever any former age or Nation saw and observed; which being so fresh and
fully known among us, even many of us yet surviving, they may most justly
serve (as I conceive) both as occasions of grief and godly sorrow in Gods
Saints to see these miserable malignants, who forsooth pretend and boast
themselves as brave Protestants as the best, yet to be so Godless and
graceless, so bitingly and bitterly to flout and affront the Lord Christ
himself in his holy members, and in his most glorious cause; and also of most
just shame and blushing at least (if not of heartbreaking and bleeding
conversion) in them all to see so dangerous and desperately dying conditions of
their malicious and malevolent brethren in iniquity; Optimum est aliena s^ui
iasania.
and thereby either to learn (and indeed it is a special piece of wisdom to
learn to be wise by other men's miseries) to fear God and do no more so
sinfully, or else most certainly and infallibly to fear and look for like
wrath and ruin, sooner or latter, in one kind or other, if not I say prevented
by true and timely repentance.

Now in the prosecution of this Treatise, A threefold model of the Mirror or
Looking-glass.
and in the framing and forming of this our intended terror striking Looking
glass, I shall by Gods assistance, with all convenient brevity and historical
fidelity, endeavor to show and set forth these three things.

First, I shall herein represent and set forth unto the fight of our mole-ey^d
Malignants, 1. Gods hand against malignants and their cause.
(if, at least, they will not too peevishly and perversely shut up their eyes
against most clear and radiantly Sunneshine Truths) Gods most evident and
eminent hand against our malevolent malignants, and their most accursed cause;
in diverse remarkable general pieces and passages of Gods admirable providence,
crossing and curbing their most wicked courses and contrivements against God,
in our Parliament and their just proceedings; and then also in some particular
nearer and closer personal and peculiar demonstrations of these clear Truths.

Secondly, I shall most conspicuously and apparently personate and show unto
them Gods most heavy hand upon malignants, 2. Gods most heavy hand upon
malignants persons.
in many most immediate and fearfully inflicted judgments and personal
punishments, suddenly and sorely laid upon them, even in the very acting of
their malignancy; whereby they must needs with Pharao's malignant Magicians cry
out and confess, Digitus Dei, certainly, this was no less then the very hand
of God upon them.

Thirdly and lastly, I shall herein exhibit to the eyes and understanding,
both of Malignants, 3. A Caveat to Cowardly and faint-hearted Neuters.
and also of all cold and cowardly Neutrals, and of either false or
faint-hearted deserters of the Parliament cause, and also of all unsettled and
unresolved weak Christians in four or five most memorable, and (as I may say)
Tragaecomicall examples of Gods justice mixed with mercy, in justly wounding,
yet graciously healing the consciences of some such as had either wilfully or
weakly deserted the Parliament, and therein Gods unquestionable cause, even
the work of a most glorious, pure, and pious Reformation of Church and State.
And so I shall shut up this our Looking-glass with a brief hortatory
conclusion to all sorts of men and women both malignant and benevolent or
welaffected.

And here now I might in the first place, rub up our malignants dull
memories, 1. Gods hand against malignants.
(and that not impertinently) and rouse up their drousie eyelids, and dead
hearts, with the review and remembrance of that most remarkable and memorable
passage of Gods providence, how in the beginning of these most uncivil
Civill-warres and commotions among us, 1. Gods hand against malignants in the
strange behavior of the soldiers in the first Army into the North against the
Scots.
when by the prevalent power of the malignant Parricides on the Kings part, an
Army was first raised to go into the North against our honest and harmless
brethren of Scotland, and that the Soldiers then pressed and provoked to go
forth to fight against them, in their march thither-ward (though they
themselves were but profane fellows, rude and irreligious young men, and
therefore one would have thought, most fit instruments to promote such an
irreligious work and war as that was,) how strangely the Lord over ruled
their hearts and ordered their spirits, making them to divert and turn all the
edge of their sury and disaffection against the Malignant cause and quarrel,
and upon the malignant and popish party themselves that had set them on work,
over-turning their Altars in all Churches and Chapels wheresoever they came
and found them breaking in pieces and burning the railes about them, plundering
and terretying the scandalous Baals-priests, and popish sons of Belial
wheresoever they found any of them; and not only refusing to be led and
commanded by popish Captains and Commanders, but flying in their faces, and
killing and wounding diverse of them, Which hand of God against them, in the
very same kind, has been also admirably seconded now again lately in those
800 or 1000 Soldiers brought out of Ireland, 2. Gods-hand against malignants,
in the Soldiers sent out of Ireland (since the Cessation of arms there) to
fight against the Parliament.
since that accursed cessation of Arms there, and landed at Bristol; intended
for that traitorous parricide Sir Ralph Hopton, to fight against our most pious
Parliament: But, I say, how admirably the Lord turned their hearts suddenly,
from that most accursed cause, and how that upon the tender of an oath unto
them to fight against the Parliament, they utterly refused it, flew in the
faces of their Commanders, and made them fly away, vowing and protesting with
apparent expressions of great indignation, that they would not fight for the
popish party in England, (as they had not in Ireland) and thereupon jointly
resolved to force their way (as they most faithfully did) from Bristol (where
they were first landed) to Bathe, and so to Gloucester, to fight on the
Parliaments side, under the command of that ever most highly to be honored
commander Colonel Massy, who gave them most free and friendly entertainment.
3. Also in the Western and Northern parts of the Kingdom, notwithstanding
their seeming success there.
To which I might here most pertinently and pregnantly add the yet more late
defection of very many of their intended party both in the West, to Lime,
Poole, and Plymouth, even then when they had been ready armed for Hoptons
service in the South. In the North also diverse both of the Gentry and Commons
who have deserted New castle; and in Wales and Cheshire also (now later, I say)
of the English-Irish Soldiers, who would by no means fight against the
Parliament. 4. In many memorable plots also admirably discovered, and crossed.
Together with the detection and discovery of many most mischievous plots and
base designs of treachery most admirably and strangely discovered, and so
happily and timely frustrated, even by the immediate mercy and good hand of
God; as that most bloody Plot against the Parliament, Jan. 4. 1641. The Plot of
the Scots Army at their former coming in among us, to have been sent against
the Parliament and City of London. The late Plot against Hull by Sir John
Hotham and his son. And the several most dangerous Plots (under pretense of
Treaties for peace, forsooth) against the most renowned and famous City of
London, as that dangerous Plot by Waller, Challenor, Tomkins, etc. And that
more lately now of Sir Bazil Bro^k, Violet (or rather Varlet) and hypocritical
Riley; with very many other of these kinds almost all over the whole Kingdom,
all too well known, and too tedious here to relate, and which I have most
fully and particularly related in my Parliamentary Chronicle, entitled, God in
the Mount.

Together also with the Lords most admirable discountenancing, yea cursing and
blasting all the wicked designs in the Kings party ever since that hideous and
hellish cessation of Arms in Ireland, with those most barbarous bloody and
damnable Irish Rogues, 5. In Gods most justly discountenancing and making
odious even to Malignants themselves that horrid cessation of Arms in Ireland.
which was most impiously plotted by the wicked malignant Counselors on the
Kings side, for their (falsely) hoped mighty advantage in the advancement of
their bloody cause; but which has (by Gods mavelous wisdom, mercy, and good
providence) proved one of the most ominous, and eminently odious means of the
ruinating and overthrowing of their most accursed cause and wicked courses,
even their malignants themselves being judges; and which our good God has
clearly ratified, I say again, by the extreme ill success they have had ever
since in all their wicked undertakings; and contrariwise, 6. And their extreme
ill success ever since.
in the great and good success our God has given to us ever since, especially
ever since our most holy and happy entering into a Covenant with our God, and
blessed League with our honest and religious Brethren of Scotland, 7. Our good
success ever since the Covenant with Scotland.
witness our happy victories in Lincolnshire, York^shire, Lime, Poole,
Plymouth, Newport-Pannell, Aulton, Grafton-House, Bewley-House, Holts-House,
and Arundell-Castle, with others; in which places, some reckon the Enemy has
lost (besides exceeding much Arms and Ammunition, and besides the brave and
rich ship taken at Arundell-Castle, a most admirable providence) between three
and four thousand, 8. The admirable breaking out of the Swedes against
Denmark.
but we may justly reckon a far greater number. Besides, the admirable
providence of God in stirring up (beside the whole Nation of our loyal
brethren of Scotland) the whole Kingdom of Swethland, to fall furiously and
fortunately on the Kingdom of Denmark, a most admirable providentiall piece,
mightily to cross and curb our English Malignants hopes and designs against
us. But to come more particularly and personally near to our intended purpose
in this first branch of our Looking-glass of Gods hand against our Malignants;
especially, I say, because personal particularities come nearer and closer
then generalities. I shall here therefore instance first in the strange hand of
God personally manifested against them, in that most admirable overture and
alteration of the course of things to the shame and sorrow of our unluckey
Lordly Prelates, to live to see their voluptuous princely Palaces (as
Winchester house and Ely house) turned into prisons, but especially the
spacious and specious palace of that Arch-adversary of Christ and his Cause
among us, that grand Ringleader and accursed contriver of all these our present
mischiefs and miseries (next to our sins) yea, the very head and heart of
Clergy and Laick-Malignants (according to their own Popish distinction) I
mean the Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, on whom it most nearly and closely fell
out by divine providence, so (strangely and even admirably) ordering it. 9.
Gods hand against Malignants in Doctor Laighton made master Lambeth house, now
converted from a Palace to a Prison.
Namely, that that honest and religious Gentleman, Doctor Laighton, that great
and grievous Sufferer for the cause of Christ, under the cruel tyranny of that
foresaid popish Persecuter, should not only live to see himself delivered out
of the snare, but his old grand Adversary himself to come into it in his
stead; and that the said Arch-Prelate should be fast locked up as a traitorous
prisoner in the Tower of London, whiles this good Doctor is made Lord and
Master of the Prelates Palace at Lambeth, and this said pompous or rather
popish palace, where so many precious Saints and servants of the Lord had been
most wickedly arraigned and condemned to prison, should now be turned into a
prison, to lock up most loose and profane Malignants; a most strange and
admirable hand of God certainly against them. Yea, and I might here again
remember them of that most remarkable overture of things among us in these
later times; namely, how it most admirably pleased the Lord to bring it so to
pass by his all overpowring hand of providence, that the Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury being imprisoned in the Tower of London, as an Arch-Traitor to our
Church and State; the Parliament should be pleased to cause the said
Arch-Prelates lodgings in the Tower to be searched for dangerous and
traiterterous Papers, Books, and VVritings, and who must be the man fixed on
for the performance of this service, but that most famous and faithful, 10.
Gods hand against Malignants in Master William Prynnes, (formerly a great
sufferer by the Arch Prelate of Canterbury) being sent to search the said
Arch-Prelates lodging in the Tower.
pious and patient Saint and Sufferer for Christ and his Cause, Master William
Prynne; who coming into the said Arch-Prelates bedchamber betimes in the
morning, with a guard of Soldiers to secure the business, and approaching the
Prelates bedside before he was u^, the Prelate asked him, who he was: This
precious and sweet Gentleman answered, my name is Prynne; What, says the
Prelate, are you he that suffered? Yea, says Master Prynne, I am he whom you
most unjustly and injuriously persecuted. Just as good Joseph said to his
brethren, at the time of his discovering and making himself known unto them,
I am Joseph whom ye sold into Egypt. O what a stab to the heart should this
have bin to this persecuting Prelate at that word ( I am that Prynne whom you
caused so grievo^sly and so unjustly to suffer) had not his heart bin more hard
and ad^mantine then a nether mil-stone, Genesis 45. 4.
and most extremly cauterized, yea, stigmatized with the hottest iron of most
desperate impenitency! and that then Master Prynne proceeding to the due
execution of the charge and trust reposed in him by the Parliament, should (
justissima illa coelesti Lege-Talionis) most justly, Justissima coelestis
Lex-Talionis.
I say, search the Pockets of the Prelates wearing clothes, before he would
suffer him to put them on and rise out of his bed, directly as he and some of
his popishly affected Confederates had formerly dealt with some most eminent
Members of a Parliam^nt formerly dissolved, and as he had caused Master Prynnes
own Chamber and Study, and many others also to be often most violently broken
into and searched, to the deeply indangering of their precious lives (which
undoubtedly he greedily hunted after) if it might have been, As was done to
reverend Master Henry Burtons house and study.
but therein (praised be the Lord) God gave this cursed Cow (according to the
Proverb) or rather raging fat Bull of Bashan, short horns; the Lords good
providence and their own innocence happily preventing this bloody design of
theirs. And might not here now this Arch-Prelate on the serious consideration
of these Premises, in just remorse of Conscience, have cried out against
himself (like that heathenish King Adonibezeck, Judges 17.
had he not had, as I touched before, a more then heathenish, obdurate, and
impenitent heart) Thus and thus have I done to others, and now am I thus justly
served by them; only with this difference, That I am used far more
mercifully then I used them.

I might here also add and copiously commemorate unto our mole-eyed Malignants
Gods admirable providence in so strangely ordering and disposing of things by
this present most memorable Parliament; 11. Gods hand against the Malignant
party in the Trienniall Parliament.
not only to contrive a most free and spontaneous or voluntary consent of all
the three Estates in Parliament to the settling of a Trienniall Parliament for
the future rectifying of things amiss in Church and State, and the more
prudent and provident moderation and government of all sorts of State Affairs;
but also, I say, that both King, Peers, and Commons, even both Houses of
Parliament, with his Majesty, should so admirably and unanimously make it
indissoluble, and (but by the sword, like Alexanders Gordian knot, which now
the Kings Popish and Atheistical Army is impiously, and (I trust) fruitlesly
laboring to do) irrevocable Act, That this present Parliament should not be
dissolved nor broken up, 12. And especially in a perpetuated Parliament.
but by the joint and unanimous consent of both Houses of Peers and Commons.
Which Act of theirs (as it were) perpetuating this Parliament, by (I say) a
most strange providence of God, what a most admirable Block it has laid in all
the wicked ways of that viperous generation of Atheists, Papists, and
Malignants, mightily thwarting, crossing, and crushing their most desperate and
deepest designs? I am not able (I acknowledge) to express it, and only Time
is able to make it manifest, to the glory of God, and wonder-striking
astonishment in the hearts of both Good and Bad.

And though in the last, yet not in least place, I might here put our
Malignants in remembrance (for they are, as we all see, too willing to forget
and slight both Gods hand against them, and his great mercies toward us) how
by means of this present most pious Parliament, 13. Gods hand against the
Malignants cause in Church Government and matters of Religion.
Gods hand has been most admirably bent against them and their most impious
Cause, both in the expulsion, and (I trust in the Lord) utter extirpation of
that most Antichristian and tyrannical Hierarchy of popish Prelates (and that
most especially by their own proud practices and desperate designs even
against the Parliament it self, witness their Petition to the King that
spoiled their sitting in Parliament) Arminian Doctors, and most scandalous
Priests, those sons of Belial, all over the Kingdom: And also in their
steads, the most holy and happy reduction and restoration of our banished and
abused, faithful, painful, and pious Pastors, even after Gods own heart;
together thereby with the blessed enjoyment of pure and powerful Ordinances,
and that in admirable plenty and freedom, as the like was never seen in this
Kingdom. Besides, the rare and long desired and now happily effected ruin and
razing down of popish high places among us, never (since the first
Reformation) till now taken away; in defacing and destroying popish Images,
Organs, Crosses, Crucifixes, and such like abominable and Idolatrous,
superstitious, Popish, apish Trinkets both in Churches and elsewhere;
especially the ruinating of that most infamous and most abominable Romish
Monument of idolatry Cheap Side Cross, in the very heart of London, and
burning abundance of those base and beggarly Romish Relics, even in the very
same place where that accursed Cross had with a Whores forehead bin so long
advanced among us; and (which is the sum of all our just admiration in all
forementioned) all these things done so soon, and in so speedy a space as
within the compass of two or three years at the most: Most admirable
demonstrations (I should think) of Gods hand unquestionably thus seen and set
against them.

And might not then All these; yea, any one of these premised presidents of
Gods most immediate hand against them, most justly serve to even wrest open the
wilfully shut up, and blinded eyes of our Malignants? Sure, me thinks, they
should, save that it is greatly to be feared they are given up to a reprobate
sense, if they still persist in such unheard of, and most strangely marbled
obstinacy. But yet since they may peradventure in their accustomed hardness of
heart be little or nothing moved or pricked in Conscience with these so pregnant
presidents and clear demonstrations of Gods vindicative hand against them.
Yet, I say, we will come yet more close upon them, and give them yet more home
and heavy personal strokes of Gods just wrath and revenging hand, not only
against them, 2. Gods hand upon Malignants persons.
but upon them, even, immediately on the very act of their most impious and
blasphemous words and wicked miscarriages to and against the saints and
servants of the Lord, making good his own everlasting and unperishing Word by
the Prophet (mark it, Esaias 26. 11.
I beseech you, O all ye most desperately minded and wilfully blinded
Malignants, as a word of rousing error unto you) Lord, when thy hand is lifted
up against them, they will not see; but they shall see and be ashamed for their
envy at thy people; A momento for Malignants
yea, the fire (of rage) of thine enemies shall divour themselves.

Examples.
The first fearful example (then) of Gods most just vindicative hand and
avenging indignation, even most evidently falling heavy by a sore and
heart-piercing personal blow upon the outrageous maligners, and graceless and
godless inveterate haters of the ways of Piety, and truly and thoroughly
intended Reformation of Religion shall be this:

One Charles Rose (a Rose of a very unsavory sent) an Apprentice to one Master
Charnell a Carver of VVood, Gods hand upon a most desperate malignant
Apprentice of London as a just caveat to all malignant London Apprentices.
at the upper end of Fanchurch-street near Algate in London, who put himself
into the Parliaments service a little after Bartholomew tide 1642. pretending
to be willing to side with the Parliament against the common enemy, but
secretly intended and resolved when he should find a fair opportunity (as he
told his fellow servants) to join with the King and his Army against the
Parliament: And when he was to go forth, declared further (in the hearing of
his Mistress) That he was now going to help to make halters to hang the
Roundheads. And it was observed by his Master, in his former carriage, That he
was of a refractory, yet dissembling spirit; and thus he marching forth with a
base treacherous heart to the cause of God and the Parliament, was suddenly
stricken by the just hand of God on the way, sometimes ill and sometimes well,
and being at last in his march as far as into Buckinghamshire in the way to
Alisbury, he was suddenly and fearfully stricken mad and utterly distracted and
bereft of his senses. Now three of my very loving and religious friends
traveling into those parts, found this wretched young man in the high way as
they rode, and saw him one of the saddest spectacles that ever they beheld, for
he was stark naked, only a course old sackcloth thrown over his shoulder,
neither Hat on his head, nor Shoes on his feet, his eyes very red with weeping,
and standing and staring as one affrighted; so these my friends came to him,
asked him whither he was going, and whence he came, but he would give them no
answer, nor take any relief in money (which they proffered him) but fell down
and cried out, Oh my Soul, my Soul; whereupon they all three stayed still,
alighted from their horses, and with much ado, at last got him to the next
Town, and by the way he was heard to say, Blood, Blood. It pleased God to
direct these my friends to an Inn in the Town, where the Hostess of the
house, on knowledge of his name, knew his father; where these my good friends
took some care to have him looked unto, and some of the Town took care after
their departure to have him conveyed to his Father, who lived some 16. or 18.
miles from that place about Oxford. When his Father saw him, he churlishly
refused to give him any entertainment (which, I confess, was inhumanely and
unnaturally done) yet herein observe the righteous hand of God too, who as he
has promised, that when a man's ways please him, Prove. 16. 7.
he will make even his enemies to be at peace with him; So likewise (by the
just law of contraries) when our ways, wits, and parts are against God and
goodness, he will make even our best friends to be at enmity with us. For, as
here, his father, I say, utterly rejected him, and suddenly dispatched him to
London to his Master, where he lived a while after pitifully distracted, and
never recovered his senses again; but about three hours before his death, he
seemed to have some reasonable apprehension of things, and to be somewhat
sensible, and just then was heard to cry out bitterly, He was a dog, he was a
damned wretch, and thus miserably died. And the truth of all these passages,
since my three honest and religious friends left him, they had from his Master
and Mistress, upon their farther enquiry after him. O that this sad and
fearful example of this so sure and severe hand of God upon this malignant
young man, might be as terrible to our London malignant Apprentices, yea, and
their malignant Masters too, as that affrighting handwriting on the wall was
to that wicked Belshazar, to make them tremble and quake, and to make them
hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly.

In the time of the siege of Hull in Yorkshire, in the year of the Lord 1641.
2. A Master Gunner, at the siege of Hull smitten dead upon his fearful cursing
and shooting off of a Piece of Ordnance.
among many other very memorable and remarkable passages in that famous siege
this was one, which I have by most credible and indubitable information from
thence, That the Kings Cormorants having straightly begirt that strong Town by
land and by water also, and they having planted three pieces of Ordnance at a
point of the river called Hassell, to hinder any passage of Barks and Vessels
from coming into Hull, and a Keele coming laden in the River toward the
Town, the Master Gunner shot at her, and mist her, whereupon being (it seems)
enraged, he swore, God damn him, if he did not sink her at the next shot: And
presently charging a Piece as he thought fit, and furiously discharging it, the
Piece brake in pieces, and instantly killed the Master Gunner himself, and
some two or three others that stood near unto him; but the Bark or Vessel
passed safely into Hull, without any prejudice or hurt. A most fearful
example to terrify (I should think, if it might be) such execrable cursing
and swearing Malignants. The truth whereof was (I say) confirmed by most
credible testimony from Hull, immediately after this accident (...) out.

In the year also 1642. some of Prince Ruperts Forces facing and assaulting
Windsor-Castle, 3. A Captain in Prince Ruperts Army at Eaton near Windsore
fearfully slain as he was furiously cursing
and making many shots at it, but still missing what they aimed at, it being a
little aim, and so not easily hit, a Captain amongst them (but his name my
honest Intelligencer knew not) from Eaton, where they had made their Station,
cried out to the Gunner, who was going to fire a Drake against the Castle, Give
me thy Gun-stocke, for, God damn me (says this wretch also) I will slay some
of those Roundhead Dogs; and while the Oath or causlesse Curse was yet warm
in his mouth, ere he could fire the Piece, a shot from the Castle dashed him in
the face, brake his teeth into his throat, of the pain and smart whereof he
lay lingering in much misery for two or three days, and then died in a
miserable and wretched condition. This relation I had from a very honest
Gentleman (then a Soldier and Officer in Windsore-Castle) and my very good
friend and acquaintance, whose testimony I know to be without exception.

About April 23. 1643. being the Lords Day, one Master Morton, Vicar of
Sheriff-Hales, 4. A malignant Minister in the midst of his Sermon inveighing
against Roundheads, suddenly and fearfully smitten dumb.
preaching upon a portion of Scripture out of the 120. Psalm, took occasion
thence in his Sermon to vent bitter imprecations against Roundheads (that is,
Gods faithful servants, and the Kings and Parliaments loyal and fastest
friends) charging them with Faction, Rebellion, and such like opprobrious
scandals, adding withal, in express terms, That the Powder Plot, and other
Treasons that have been practiced by Papists, were nothing to this late
Round-new-invention of the Roundheads. At which words (having stood hardly
half his time) he most strangely on a sudden gasped and gaped as he stood in
the Pulpit, and stared in the Auditors faces, but could not speak a word more
for a good space after, the people all that while, being amazed at this so
sudden and most strange a dumbe-shew in him. At length he stooping down, as it
were to take up some what at his feet, re-erected himself, and then said, Let
us give thanks for what we have heard, which he accordingly did, in a sumbling
and hardly intelligible manner* and soon made an end, and so went home; but
what became of him since I have not heard.

Also in the parish of Hollowell in Oxford, one of the inhabitants of the said
parish being a most licentious and profane fellow, set up a May Pole in the
Summertime, 1641. and that it might transcend the vanities and impieties of
other May-poles, 5. Gods judgment on a wicked fellow at Oxford in setting up a
Maypole with a Roundhead on it, and shooting at it.
set upon this the picture of a man in a Tub, thereby (as he said) to describe
a Roundhead; which picture, as it was credibly reported, he made in derision
of a godly Gentleman, a Munciple of one of the Colleges in Oxford; and the
reason why it must represent this Gentleman, was, because he was truly
religious and used repetition of Sermons, singing of Psalms, and other holy
duties in his house. This picture being thus set up on the May Pole, the said
profane fellow the author of it, with his loose and licentious companions,
making themselves mad-merry about it, at last must needs go shoot at the
Roundhead upon it, and having for this purpose brought Muskets with them and
other pieces, one of them, being the servant of the chief master of this
wicked May Game, shot and did hit the Picture; at which the said Master fell a
laughing extremely, and on a sudden sunk down, falling into a sharp and
terrible convulsion fit, and so continued a long time after very sick, and in
great pain and misery; but whether he be since alive or dead, I am uncertain.
This relation I had confirmed to me by an honest young Gentleman a Scholar of
Oxford, then resident in Oxford, and an eyewitness of most of it, besides
other credible information.

In the same City of Oxford also, a company of profane fellows and deep
drinkers met together in a Tavern, and being ((...) the custom is) mad-merry,
6. Gods hand upon one drinking healths to the confusion of the Roundheads in a
Tavern.
in the midst of their cups would needs go drink a health to the confession
of Round heads, which having accordingly gone round, one among the rest not
content therewith (being, it should seem, too soundly whitled with his caroused
cups) would needs for joy (forsooth) of this health thus drunk, rise up and
dance, and cut a caper, using these or such like words, Come (says he) I will
now cut a caper to the confusion of Roundheads; but he beginning to dance and
cut his caper, his head it seems, being too light to rule his heels, suddenly
fell down and broke his leg, whereof (being carried home) he lay in great
pain and misery, and not long after died thereof; this also confirmed by
credible testimony, In the time of the siege of Redding by the right honorable
the Earl of Essex the Parliaments most renowned Lord General, there happened
(as is well known) a most notable and remarkable skirmish between some of our
Parliaments forces, and the Kings Cormorants from Oxford, at a place called
Cansambridge, In which fight most valiantly and victoriously (by Gods admirable
assistance) performed by ours, there fell out a most memorable and strange
passage, most pertinent to this our present purpose and worthy our most sad and
serious commemoration, namely, that among the many slain and dead bodies on
the Kings side, 7. Gods most remarkable hand upon Serjeant-major general
Smith, slain in the fight at Causam bridge, at the siege of Redding.
(very many of them being prime Commanders and Officers in Arms, as was
clearly discerned by their brave clothes, pure fine Holland-shirts and fair
skins, being stripped naked at the end of the fight) there was found the body of
Serjeant-major Smith General of the Kings Army, a most wicked and desperate
Cormorant, who being a very fat and corpulent fellow, was found with his belly
ripped up, and his Grease taken away out of his body; which very thing (as I had
it by most credible and that not single information) this wicked Smith had
(about a twelve-moneth before, or not so much) threatened to act upon the
Roundheads at Okenham, where some of the Kings forces were then quartered, but
driven out by the Parliaments forces; where, and at which time of his enforced
departure thence he was heard in a furious threatening manner to say, Well,
farewell Roundheads for this time, but I will return again amongst you, and
then I will rip up your fat panches, and make medicines of your Grease, or
words to this effect. A most remarkable pattern of the Lords justice on him,
in so punctually repaying him ( Adonibezech-like) in his own coin. And in the
stripping of him (as was credibly reported) they found a Crucifix about him and
other marks of the Romish beast, a fit Champion (among the rest) to fight for
the maintenance of the Protestant Religion. 8. Gods wrathful hand on diverse
young Gentlemen in a Tavern, abusing the City Trainedbands, as they marched on
in the street.


In the year also, 1642. there happened another very fearful example of Gods
revengefull hand upon these most ungodly and graceless abusers and
tongue-persecutors of Gods people, which was thus; Diverse roystering and
swaggering young Gallants, being drinking in the Miter-Taverne in Fleet Street
London, it so fell out, that in the time of their swaggering, swearing, and
carowsing in the said Tavern, the Trained-bands of the City passing by, one of
these roaring gallants cast out something most unseemely out of the
Chamber-window among the said soldiers, using also some very abusive language
against them; whereupon, one of them having more Gentility and ingenuity of
spirit than the rest, reproved them that did it; whereupon they furiously asked
him if he were a Roundhead, and presently drew their Swords one upon an other,
and this Gentleman being suddenly made at by one of them, puts by his thrust,
got within him, and stabbed him with a Stilletto; the other two also coming on
him, he likewise wounded them both; of which three wounded, two of them
immediately died, and the recovery of the third was very questionable and
dangerous; Which done, this Gentleman made a way down the stairs with his
Sword in one hand, and the Stillet to in the other, and running down Ram-alley
got to the water and so escaped away. This I had from unquestionable
information, the very morning it was done, I my self going into Fleet Street
betimes that morning on some business of mine own, where and when I heard it
exactly and fully telated to me.

About the 20 of June also 1643, One Mrs* Haughton wife to Mr. Will. 9. A
monstrous and prodigious child borne in Lancashire of most malignant parents,
and the most fearful and remarkable circumstances in and about it, to the
terror of malignants.
Haughton of Prickmarsh within the parish of Kirkham in Leyfield in Lancashire,
was delivered of a child still-borne, which had no head, yet two ears, two
eyes, and a mouth in the breast of it, and the hands turning backwards to the
elbowes, with a cleft down the back; so as it was not discernable whether it
were male or female. After this child had been buried two or three days, the
Midwife teporting its monstrous and prodigious shape and not being credited, it
was thereupon taken out of the grave and reviewed, and was apparently found to
be as is already described, and as was reported to be; only a bundle of clouts
was taken up with it, which (it seems, and was known) the parents had (in
proportion of a head) caused to be fitted unto it. Now that which is very
remarkable herein is this* That the parents of this monster were (even as their
own parents also and predecessors were) notorious professed* Papists,
impudently abusive toward Protestants, cursing and calling them familiarly by
the name of Roundheads; (...) that which is yet more memorable herein, and
most remarkably worthy our serious consideration, and most clearly
demonstrates that foresaid prodigious birth to be a direct judgment of the
Lord for desperate malignancy against the Lords choice ones, is this, that the
Grandmother of that monster was she (whom pious Mr Prynne (to her indeleble and
perpetual infamy) has already set forth in print* in his famous History of
that pair-royall of heroicke sufferers, Dr. Bastwicke* Mr. Burton, and Mr.
Prynne,) who out of an inveterate malignity against, and in divellish derifion
of those three foresaid Worthies, called three Cats (which she had at that
time) by the names of those three precious Christians, and cut off the ears of
those her three Cats, both in desperate disdain (as it should seem) of their
glorious sufferings; and thereby also (in seeming jollity) to act again that
more than Turkish Tragedy. And was not here a most notable and clear evidence
of Gods undoubted indignation against such intolerably impious and impudent
malignants as these, the Lord thus manifesting that sooner or later he will
meet with their insolent and most audacious impieties?

In November also, 1643. a malignant Soldier (being intended for service of
the Parliament) was hanged at Cambridge for running from his Colors, which
came thus to pass: He with others also in the same condemnation being
apprehended for the cause aforesaid and by Martiall-law to cast Dice for their
lives; 10. A malignant Soldier hanged at Cambridge for running from his
Colors.
this fellow coming to the Dice, when he threw them out, cried at the cast,
Now, for God and the King, and God receive my soul. Whereupon it so fell out
that he casting the least chance of the Dice, must suffer death, and so was
accordingly executed at the same time* Now that which was very remarkable in
Gods hand thus on this fellow (besides the voluntary discovery of his
Cavalierian-heart^ in those words, Now for God and the King, which is the
Cavallers common signal word) was this, that when he was first pressed for a
Soldier he was heard often to say, He would be hanged before he would fight
for the Parliament. Even just like Sir Iervase ^ll^wales, once Lieutenant of
the Tower of London in King James his days, who was hanged on T^^er-hill, for
being accessory to the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, then his prisoner in
the ^ower, about the Earl of Somersets business. Which Sir Jervase himself,
being on the Ladder at the Gallows freely confessed; That in his life time he
had often (in his playing at Cards and Dice (...) that he might be hanged if it
were not so and so; and therefore ingenuously confes^'d Gods hand upon him for
that sin. And so say I now here, See O thou unflexible and flinty-hearted
malignant, how the Lord most justly met with this malignant spirited Soldier,
paying him most palpably in his own Coin; as this most notable and personal
example has most clearly declared. This I received out of a Letter sent by a
religious young Gentleman, a Scholar of Cambridge, to his father, a very
reverend Minister of the City of London, who gave me a transcript of it, and
whose testimony is, I know, without all exception.

In Cree-church parish also, by Algate in London, one James Atkinsons wife, who
with her said husband, were both of them commonly noted to be most malignant
enemies of the power and purity of the Gospel, 11. Gods hand most fearfully
upon one Mrs. Atkinson in Cree-church parish in London.
and mockers of goodness and good men; which her ungodly and ill disposition
she manifested in the Church of the said parish, at a Sermon preached there by
reverend and religions Mr. Wells of New England, who in his Sermon, desired his
auditors that they would not sleep; and she being asleep at that time, and
awakened by one Mrs. Clarke her neighbor, a godly Gentlewoman of the same
parish, and that in a very loving and neighbourly way, by jogging of her knee
as they sat together in the Pew; But she presently upon her awakening fell
into strange expressions of rage and fury, and instantly belched out these
wicked words, O you bold drunken flut, do you kick me? with diverse other such
uncivil speeches. All which the said Mrs. Clarke very piously and discreetly
(for the present) put up in modest and grave silence, and only acquainted her
husband, a very religious Gentleman, with Mrs. Atkinsons said usage of her in
the forenoone, and therewith expressed her unwillingnesse to fit again with
her in the Few. Whereupon Mr. Clarke unwilling there should be any further
difference between them, at least to continue with any private heart-burning
against each other, repaired to the Minister of the said Church, and desired
that he with the Church wardens and some of the ancientest of the Parish would
after the afternoones Sermon send for Mr. Atkinson to see whether he would abet
or countenance his wife in this her ill carriage. According to the said desire
he was sent for, and came; where, after he had asked the cause of his being
sent for; and Mr. Clarke beginning to relate it, Atkinson would not suffer him
to go on, but he also brake forth into foul words, and told him, He lied; for
Mrs. Clarke, he said, did kick his wife in the Church. Whereupon, the Lecturer
of the said Church Mr. Falkingham, desired in love to take him off, entreating
him that each of them might be heard, and so the business would be the better
and sooner reconciled. To whom Atkinson replied, Sir, I have nothing to do
with you; nor you with me. And to Captain Cower, who reproved him for such ill
behavior, he said, You are a Bl^ckhead and a Roundhead; and thereupon went
hastily and fretfully out of the Vestry, and fetched his wife, who also came
thither in a great heat, and (very probably) full of bitterness; and some
credibly reported, that she had boasted, being at home, how she had used Mrs.
Clarke. But most certain it is, that in the Vestry, (being questioned of these
things) she wished she might never go home alive, if Mrs. Clarke did not kick
her, and said, she would have the Law on her for it. And both she and her
husband did utter many other bitter words, at, and before this most evident
token of Gods displeasure: for (as I before touched) it was well known that
they both had been a long time much disaffected to pure religion and were very
ready oft-times, not only to speak evil of ordinary Christians, but even of
Gods own Messengers; and now, I say, at this time, she especially suffering
her tongue to wander beyond its bounds, it pleased the Lord that presently
after that fearful imprecation upon her self, aforementioned, she was
stricken so ill, that she began to falter in her speech; insomuch that those
present took notice of it, and thereupon she was led forth of the Vestry into
the Churchyard and set down upon a bench there, where she had means used for
her recovery; but she in a very short time there died, and was carried home
dead: And which is yet more remarkably fearful, it was credibly affirmed that
a little before her death (in her forementioned weakness, one of the women
about her had said unto her, that certainly Mrs. Clarke would not abuse her;
but she instantly cursed her, saying, A pox on you, you are one of the holy
sisters; and that it was observed by some at the time of her death, that her
tongue turned black in her head. A most terrible and dreadful example of Gods
wrath and indignation, both to her most malignant husband, and all such
irreligious spirits, as either in themselves, wives, or friends manage and
countenance such unchristianlike ways and wicked courses. All this I have by
most unquestionable information both from Mr. Clarke himself, and from others
who most exactly knew the truth of these things.

Upon Tuesday also November. 23. 1642. about 11 of the clock at night, the
monthly Fast Day being the very next day after it, one Captain Bard of Sir
Francis Wortleys Regiment, with about thirty Horse came from Ludlow in the
County of Salop, of purpose to plunder the house of one Mr. John Green a
reverend, godly, and learned Divine (and one of the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster) Pastor of Pencombe in the County of Hereford, 12. Gods hand most
remarkably upon a Cornet of a Troop of horse coming to plunder a very godly
Ministers house.
being eleven miles distant from the said Ludlow. Who being accordingly come to
the said Ministers house, whiles some of the Soldiers were breaking open the
door of his dwelling house, one Ogle a Northern man and a Cornet of the said
Troop of Horse was the first that brake open the stable door; and as soon as
ever the said Ogle was stepping over the threshold to go into the stable
first, as the Ministers servants who lay in a chamber adjoining to the stable
reported, and testified) he fell down as dead into the stable, and in the
morning his Hat and a small Piece were found in the stable behind a stone-horse
(which stood in a stall next the stable* door, which was made up so firm with
plankes and bars both behind and on each side of him, that he could not
possibly strike him) and so some of the other Soldiers brought him into the
said Ministers house as a dead man, the Captain saying, that he fainted for
want of meat, and so desired that some comfortable refreshing might be given
him. Then they placed him in a Chair, and so having plundered what they
thought fit from the godly Minister, they left the Cornet there and returned to
Ludlow. About some 2 hours after he began to revive, and a little to come to
his speech, and the first words he uttered (after an imperfect manner, were,
Holy mother of God help me; and by his often crossing of himself, and by the
testimony of others there that knew him, he was discovered to be a professed
Papist. Thus he continued a senseless man* his head, hands, and joints of his
body, seeming quite loose, he spoke very little and seldom and imperfectly,
did eat whatever was given him, and would pluck raw meat from the spit newly
laid to the fire and offer to eat it; and as he sat in his chair, if he
offered to lean forward, he would fall into the fire; if he leaned backward,
he would fall down backward; and one night he was found under his bed wrapped up
in one of the sheets only in his shirt. The women that attended and watched
with him, upon a diligent search of his body, could not discern or perceive
any bruise or so much as discoloring of his skin in any part of his body;
whereby they all could not but clearly conceive and believe it to be the
immediate hand of God upon him; and at that time some of his own Companions
were heard to say, (as was credibly informed) Let us be gone hence, for God
fights against us. This said Cornet being sent for to Ludlow upon the Saturday
following the Soldiers at his first coming seeing him in that senseless
condition, said, Sure he was drunk; but he still continued after the very same
manner as was forementioned, without sense or understanding, and a little time
after (as the Captain himself reported) died in that sencelesnesse. All this
being testified for most true, both by the said reverend Minister Mr. Green
himself, by his servants, and diverse others who were eyewitnesses of all
these premises.

About the midst of January also, 13. Gods immediate and remarkable hand upon
one Laurence Hyde, a desperate malignant against the Parliament
1643. there fell out a most memorable and fearful example of Gods immediate
punishing hand (near unto the City of Salisbury) upon a most pestilent and
desperate malignant and persecuter of Gods people in those parts; namely, one
Laurence Hyde a Commissioner of enquiry after all such as had either given or
lent any thing for the Parliaments service; who the very same day that Heath,
Banks, Foster, and Glanvill, those wicked Oxonian Earthwormes, Judges, and
Lawyers of illegalities, came into the City of Salisbury, to keep the Assizes
there) having threatened most vigorously to prosecute all the Roundheads in
those parts at the said Assizes; and thus riding with his Commission (as Saul
to Damascus, though not with such a blessed blow to beat him off from his horse
to holy repentance) as he was hastily riding on, within a mile of the said City
he suddenly fell from his Horse and so brake his neck or his shoulder bone in
the fall, that thereby he instantly died before he could be brought alive into
the Town. Being thus by Gods most evident and heavy hand upon him, cut short
and deprived of power to do that mischief to Gods honest and innocent
hidden-ones, which (as 'twas well known) he had frequently before menaced
against them. The truth of this I have confirmed unto me, not only by the
printed relation, (but as my custom is in all such like occasions) upon
diligent enquiry from such honest and credible testimony, 14. Gods hand upon 3
malignant Citizens, being all three neighbors together on Ludgate Hill in
London.
as I know to be without all exception.

There were also three neighbors dwelling on Ludgate Hill in London, two of
them Hosiers, dwelling directly one over against the other, the third a
Wollen-Draper, who lived next door to one of the Hosiers, all three of them of
one mind in malignancy, and inveterate enemies to the Parliaments proceedings.
One of these Hosiers in the month of January 1642. did intimate unto the other
Hosier his desire and purpose to go to Oxford, which the other understanding,
consented and promised to go along with him, and accordingly away they went,
and what their work and business was there, though not certainly known, yet
may be easily judged, no goodness, to be sure of it; but about a week after,
one of them having spent (as 'twas believed) all his spare prodigal money, or
done his wicked work, returned back again to his house in London; the other
stayed there longer behind, and came not back with him. Within a few days
after the return home of the said Hosier, he with his said neighbor the
malignant Woollen-Draper, went (as it was known to be their custom) to the
Tavern, called The Devil and Saint Dunstones near Temple-Barre, together
with some others, ejusdem farinae, of the same temper, or untempered moldy-
Malignancy, their business there being to be mad-merry, and to drink healths
to Prince Rupert that Prince of Plunderers, the Atheistical Marquess of
Newcastle, and such others of that rotten-rout: Now it so fell out that one of
their Companions proved more civil then the rest, and showed his dislike of
these their doings; whereupon the Hosier began to quarrel with that man, and
from their wrangling discourse they both fell to fighting, and as the Hosier
was struggling with the said party, there comes a third man and violently pulled
the Hosier off, who instantly fell backward, and with the fall brake his leg,
whereof he lay under cure a long time after. The Woollen-Draper, his foresaid
Associate, being a prodigal Spend-thrift, and run much in debt to his
Creditors, they (on the very same day of this their drinking in the said
Tavern, and at the very same instant time of his drinking healths there) came
with Sergeants and Officers, seized on all his clothes and goods, whereof he
hearing, and knowing himself thereby undone in his estate, instantly fled
away, and was no more seen. The third party of the foresaid ungodly society,
to wit, the other Hosier, (late servant to one Pate, a most desperate Malignant
also against God and the Parliament, and a notorious scoffer at godliness and
good men) who, I told you before, continued at Oxford, and came not home with
his fellow Hosier, abiding still, I say, behind at Oxford, kept continual
company with the Kings Cormorants there, drinking and swilling day and night in
their deboist company, and that in such excessive and immoderate measure, that
he was not only drunk, but fell mad among them; in so much that getting his
horse out of the Stable, he most desperately rode up and down the streets
there, till at last being espied by some Citizens of London that knew him, who
perceived quickly in what condition he was, and being for London themselves at
that time, they brought him home with them, with no little ado by the way; who
being thus brought home, continued so distracted and besotted in his senses,
that he neither regarded what any said or did to him, and wholly neglected his
calling, as being unfit to do ought therein, and shortly after he fell sick
for a season, and still continued so distracted, that at last it was held fit
to have him away to Bedlem; yet for some credit sake, his friends so prevailed,
that he was not put into the common condition of the Madmen there, but was kept
private in the house of one that endeavors the cure of such persons, and there
he was continued, but could not be cured of this his miserable and distracted
estate. And was not here a most evident and remarkable hand of God upon them
all three, to the terror (one would think) of all such desperate and
incorrigible Malignants. All which relation I have received from such honest
and credible testimony of the truth thereof, even of such as knew the three
parties very well, as is without all just exception therein.

And thus now, I have (as I suppose) sufficienly made good my word, and
performed my promise in the two former parts of this my Looking-glass, namely,
in most clearly representing and setting forth to the eyes and understanding of
every one, of any one that is compos mentis, and is not stark mad with malice
and mischief, both Gods hand most eminently against our Anti-Parliament arians
or Malignants, and also Gods evident heavy hand upon those our Malignants
persons, even immediately in the very acting of their malignancy. Enough, one
would think, to fright and terrify them from such impious and audacious
flouting, ^ff^onting, and maligning of Gods honest and harmless servants, were
not their Consciences cauterized with the hot iron of graceless impenetrable
obstinacy, and their hearts more hardened (against pure and innocent Truth and
Holiness) than the impenetrable Tortice shell, and they thereby even given
over by God to a reprobate sense, to their irrecoverable ruin and perdition.

But now, to go on to my Third promised part or representation in this our
Looking-glass, 3. A Caveat for Cowards and Neutrall-Deserters of the
Parliaments Cause.
namely, the Caveat for Cowards and fainthearted Neutrall-Deserters of the
Parliaments cause; and therein, I say most clearly, Gods cause. As also hereby
to speak to all unsettled and unresolved weak Christians (whom in this case we
must pity, pardon, and pray for, as being our selves subject to like failings
and errors, should not grace prevent and support us) to show them the great
danger and hard hazards they put themselves on, both in soul and body too, in
so unworthily fearing or refusing to own Gods Cause, A brief premised
Preamble to the subsequent examples of this Caveat.
though not out of treachery, yet if it be but of base timidity or fear; God
herein showing his wrath and indignation, and causing his jealousy to break
out against these also, letting them see how dangerous it is to jest or dally
with such sharp edged tools as these to the undoing of their souls and bodies
too, I say, if in his own free grace and mere mercy he did not in the midst
of justice remember to intermix mercy, and to look back, as it were, on their
sinking souls, as he did on Peter in such a case (if at least they belong to
Christ as Peter did) teaching them thereby to know the price of denying their
Master or his Cause before men, if not, I say, prevented by true and timely
repentance. All which I shall make most evident and clear by these four or
five Examples, all of them fallen out lately in these our probationall times,
which (by Gods providence) have come to my hands and knowledge, and which for
the glory of God and honor of our most precious Parliaments Cause, I could not
conceal, but set forth most faithfully, as I have received them from most
indubitable and unquestionable Testimonies of the truth of them all; even, I
say, by those who were both Eye and Ear-witnesses of the truth of them.

And here now in the first place, I might instance in a learned and reverend
Minister of Lincolnshire, 1. A Doctor in Divinity of Lincolnshire fell mad
upon* the taking of the Oxonian Protestation against the Parliament.
a Doctor in Divinity, who being taken by the Kings Cormorants, and carried
prisoner to Newarke, and there enforced to take the Oxonian Protestation or
Covenant against the Parliament, which (it seems) out of servile fear and
unworthy pusillanimity, he did, immediately after it, out or remorse of
Conscience, fell mad and fearfully distracted in his senses, and so continued
for almost the space of half a year, this being done by him about the midst
of the last Summer 1643. but being since at liberty among his Parliamentary
friends, is in good measure recovered, and a hearty Penitent for it. But it
being desired his name should be concealed, I cease to say any more therein
save only this, That I have this brief relation from such unquestionable and
credible testimony as most strongly confirms the truth thereof unto me. And
might we not, here now, think this one single example sufficient, to deter our
cowardly Newters from so vicious and pernicious prejudicating and deserting the
Parliaments pious proceedings? Yes certainly, had they but any small sparks of
ingenuity left alive in them: but since I know that they, yea, and Gods own
people too, must have line upon line (as the Prophet says) and example upon
example, and all too too little, till Gods Spirit of Grace awakens their dead
and drousie Consciences. I shall now give them another Example which comes more
close unto them, and most worthy their deep and serious observation and
consideration, which briefly is this:

Upon the second day of May 1643. one Thomas Bretton a young man, 2. One Thomas
Bretton, a most bitter and active Malignant against the Parliament, remarkably
converted on his deathbed.
and most bitter and active Malignant against the Parliament, late servant to
Alderman Cullum in Gracious street in London, falling very sick (which indeed
shortly after proved a sickness unto death) desired most earnestly to speak
with a reverend and religious Minister of the City, whom he had formerly heard
preach, and could not be quiet till he was sent for. The Minister being sent
unto, and entreated to come unto him accordingly, very willingly came; of whom
(so soon as the sick party saw him) he most heartily desired his pardon and
forgiveness. The Minister answered, That he knew not any thing wherein the
sick party had injured or offended him. But Bretton replied, That he had done
him wrong in jeering and scoffing at him, though he knew not of it, and told
him the particulars thereof. Whereupon this pious Minister told him, He freely
forgave him. Then he desired the Minister to pray with him, which he also did
for the space of about half an hour. Immediately after Prayer the sick party
said, He was now most happy, since God and Man had forgiven him; and told the
Minister, he was certain God pardoned him all his finnes. The Minister
answered, It was well, if his assurance were on good grounds. He replied, That
he was sure of it, for Christ had taken away all his sins, which God had in
his sickness set before his eyes; yea, and some such finnes as he did not know
or believe formerly to have been sins; but now Christ had borne them all on
his own shoulders, and eased him of all that heavy burden, with many other
most heavenly and divine expressions. And being near his death, even the night
before he died, he said, He assuredly saw Christ in a vision appearing unto
him, and telling him that his sins were pardoned, and that he had a Cause on
earth, and that the Parliament of England defended it, and that in the year of
our Lord Christ 1644. the Parliament should obtain a great victory over the
Kings Forces; and that then there should be none of those wicked Ministers
(that had misled Gods people) left among them, and that from that time the
Parliament should prosper; but in the mean season, that the rod of the wicked
should rest on the backs of his righteous ones. And after this he lay glorying
and rejoicing in the forgiveness of his sins, and even triumphing over death
till the time of his departure, which was the next day. This relation was
testified both by the said learned, reverend, and religious Divine, who was
often with him in his said sickness, and heard most of his expressions; and
also by another religious Gentleman who was also then present, and heard what
is here delivered, as aforesaid.

Also one Thomas Clarke, a rank malignant young man, and servant to one Master
Travill a merchant of London, 3. One Thomas Clarke also, a merchants man in
London, a notable malignant, his penitent confession on his deathbed in honor
of the Parliament.
being in the year 1643) stricken with sickness, of which he died; about
three days before his death, one William Coote (a neighbor of his) coming to
visit him in this his sickness, and having sat a while with him, as he was
going away the sick party desired him to stay a little, and told him, that he
would now say more to him then he had done to any, which was this, I am now
(says he) strongly persuaded in my heart, that the Parliament maintains a
right cause, and at last shall have victory over the Kings Forces, for they, he
said, fought for Antichrist; and he confessed withal, that he had lived a very
sinful life, and was most of all grieved that he had spoken so much against
the Parliament, for which he wished he could now weep tears of blood, together
with very many patheticall speeches to this purpose, and shortly after it
departed this life. This I have also from very honest and religious hands and
testimony, who have faithfully informed me of the truth thereof, as having been
both eye and ear-witnesses of the same.

In September also 1643. one Master Whitleigh in Golding, lane in London, with
his wife Mistress Whitleigh, both of them very religious Christians, 4. A
remarkable example of one Master Whitleigh and his wife, who deserted the Cause
of the Parliament.
and truly fearing the Lord, came with their four children (not long before)
to London from Tewksbury in Gloucestershire, principally desiring to remove
thence because of the wicked conversation of the Cavaliers, billeted where he
lived. And he having formerly served in the Parliaments Army against the Kings
Forces, but being now at London, and for about three months space void of
employment, resolved to give over service in the wars, as finding a timorous
fearfulness in himself to adventure any more into the Parliaments Army,
thereupon at last he had some thoughts to go into New England, and advising
with his wife, who also was most unw^l^ing he should any more put himself
into the Service of the Parliament, but by all means began to strengthen his
resolution to go away for New England. Whereupon he peremptorily now resolving
to depart thither with his wife and children, presently laid out thirty pounds
for their passage by Sea, and as much more for provision of necessaries to the
voyage. But being ready to depart, the Lord suddenly struck him very sick, and
in his sickness he was very much troubled in his mind, lamenting and crying
out very much against the sin of Cowardice and Fearfulness (which he
conceived to be the ground of his intended removal to New England) and
therefore much distrusting his souls estate, cried out often, That he had
sinned against God in cowardly deserting his holy Cause; yet earnestly praying
the Lord to forgive him this sin, promising and protesting that if the Lord
vouchsafed to restore him to health and strength again, he would resolutely
go on to spend every drop of the blood in his veins for the Parliaments
Cause; and afterward blaming his wife for giving her consent and encouraging
him therein, he shortly after died, yet before his departure he testified
abundance of comfort and assurance of Gods favor and the pardon of his sin.
Immediately also after his death, it so pleased the Lord that his wife fell so
distracted, that three or four women could scarcely hold her down in her bed,
and she taking no sustenance but what was forced into her mouth for many days,
she still in all this time of most sad perplexity crying out, That she had
sinned against God in counselling and encouraging her deceased husband to
forsake Gods Cause, and thereby (she feare^) she had been the cause of his
death. And thus she lay diverse days in much misery, crying out of this her
sin, and craving pardon of God for it. And about the end of September
aforesaid, my godly friend, from whom I had this relation, coming occasionally
to her house to see her, found that her raging fits had left her, but her
spirits much spent, and she lying speechless, so that he knew not how to
administer a word of comfort to her in that case; wherefore being about to
depart thence, she looked steadfastly on him, reached out her hand to him,
which he took in his, being as cold as clay, and therewith spoke many
comfortable words unto her, and ere he departed she manifested very much
consolation in her soul, both by words (though faintly) and gestures also, and
in a most happy and comfortable condition departed this life also, the very
next morning after his departure from her. This relation, I say, I had from a
very religious Citizen of London, and faithful servant of the Lord, who
himself was with Mistress Whitleigh thus departing, and whose own Sister
lived close by these parties, was well acquainted with them both in their lives
and death, and whose testimony I know to be without exception.

There was also about the time of the first victories of the famous and
renowned Town of Manchester in Lancashire, 5. One Master Standidge a
Lancashire Gentleman, deserting the Parliament, suddenly slain in the act of
his defection.
in the year 1642. one M. Standidge a Gentleman of Lancashire, who had
formerly been a man much engaged in his affections for the Parliaments Cause,
and had oftentimes expressed so much both by his stiff contendings with some
that were very near and dear unto him, as also by his practice and assistance
given to the said Cause. But afterward, by the slye insinuations and
persuasions of some seeming friends near about him; but especially being at
last overswaied and prevailed with (as was strongly supposed) by the Lord
Strange (then a great, but, blessed be God, a most unsuccessefull stickler for
the Kings party) he being very intimate with the said Lord Strange. This said
Gentleman did at last so much cross his own former practice and good esteem
he had and held of the Work and Cause of God in the Parliaments proceedings,
that he most unworthily quite deserted it, yea so far as to take up Arms
against it; and as he was in person, in command, and going against that honest,
famous, and victorious Town of Manchester in the Lord Stranges Army; the Lord
God of Heaven, in apparent displeasure met with him in this most disloyal
Apostacy, and going against God and his Cause: For as he was going to take
Horse upon some design, near to the said Town of Manchester, a bullet
suddenly hit him, and killed him presently, not directly from the Town, but the
bullet glancing upon a wall, reached him with a gliding blow, and so cut him
short of his purpose, and gave him the sad reward of his unhappy backsliding.
This I have from such unquestionable and religious testimony of a godly friend
and neighbor of mine, as I know to be without all just exception.

And is not here now (one would think) testimony enough for thee, O
incredulous Malignant, yea, even from the mouths of two Converts formerly of
thine own rank and rotten condition, but now, and that upon their deathbeds
( and the words of dying men we know, do, or ought to take deep impression)
making ingenious confession of their and your folly and madness in so
injuriously opposing the pious and just proceedings of the Parliament? But now
take one more to clear these truths yet more abundantly, 6. A most remarkable
relation of Master Joseph Latch a Merchant, his great misery for deserting the
Parliament, and his merciful recovery.
yea, one of no less moment and materiality then any of the former, and most
worthy serious notice and observation, namely, of one Master Joseph Latch, a
Merchant in Bashingshall-street in London, who having (by Gods blessing upon
his endeavors in his calling) gotten a good estate, and being a pious young
Gentleman, and well affected to the public good of the Kingdom in the
beginning of this Parliamentary war, and set forth two Horses for the said
service at his own proper charge; but having some considerable goods at
Bristoll, which he desired to convey to Manchester by land, in which
land-passage a protection from the King was necessary for their safe convoy
through Shrewsbury, where lay a Garrison of the Kings Cormorants: upon this
occasion he forced himself to go to Oxford to procure such a protection.
Thus then he took his journey thither, where he was no sooner arrived, but it
pleased the Lord it should so fall out, that he was presently espied by one
that had been a Malignant neighbor of his in London, a Lawyer, by whose
means he was presently apprehended as a Spy, on which suspicion he was
instantly clapped up prisoner in the Castle, and immediately after was fetched
before the Councell-Table, and in danger of his life. But having there very
good friends of the Kings party, namely, Sir George Binion, Sir Nicholas
Crispe, and Mr. Bradborne his kinsman, and others, he was by the Kings own
Warrant set at liberty and entertained at Sir George Binious lodgings; and yet
again for all this, Smith that hellish Cerberus, the Provost-marshall fetched
him out of Bynions lodgings at eleven of the clock at night, and carried him
to prison again. Whereupon Bynion went again to the King, together with Mr.
Bradborne, told His Majesty of it, who seemed much discontented thereat, and
presently sent a Squire of His body with a Commission to lay Smith by the
heels for his presumption, and to enlarge Mr. Latch; yea, and that without
taking the Oxford Protestation, lest thereby his estate in London should have
been seized on by the Parliament, as the estate of a Swornemalignant, yet with
a private serious promise and engagement to Bynion, that he would never
hereafter put forth himself in any public service for the Parliament. So he
at last returned safely home, and in order to his promse was now grown very
shy of serving with his Company according to the Ordinance of the Militia; and
shortly after, through the ill-advice of a very malignant companion of his,
made over his estate into Holland, put off his house in Bashing shall-street,
and then withdrew his person also into Holland, Thus our Engglish Jonas would
have fled from Nineve to Tarshish, but God raised a storm in his conscience,
which drove him back to our London Nineve there to cry repentance.
intending there to have lived till these times might change; and thus he quite
deserted the Parliament. But he had not been there above three weeks or a
month, but that it pleased God he fell sick there, and had a great and
restless desire to come back again into England; and accordingly, having a
fit opportunity, embarked himself, and was brought back sick to London, that
thus by the providence of God so ordering it, he might manifest his repentance
here where he had finned, and be an example to others both of the horror which
arises out of a guilty conscience sensible of apostasy from a good Cause, and
also from our Parliamentary Protestation and Covenant to maintain the same.
Thus then, I say, being come off the water, on Monday Sept. 25. 1643. he went
to a friends house of his, one Mr. Lacey in Canon-street, where he went sick
to bed, and in two days his sickness and corscience working together, he much
desired to speak with some godly Minister. Whereupon one was sent for, who
accordingly came to him on the Wednesday night; but knowing nothing of his
defection from the Parliament, and hearing a good report of his former honest
conversation, he only questioned him about his faith in Christ; whereunto
receiving an apposite answer, he held out unto him some promises of the
Gospel, wherein his soul might cleave unto the Lord, and having commended him
unto the grace of God, departed for that time; but Mr. Latch found such
sweetness in those promises, that he still would be asking when that Minister
would come again. That Thursday and Friday past, and the Minister not sent
for; but on the Saturday following he called very earnestly for the said
Minister, and would not be satisfied without him: so he being sent for, came to
him that Saturday at night, and found him very anxious about getting Christ, he
often saying, if I have not Christ, I must perish eternally. But immediately
after, as a man swallowed up of despair and drenched in the wrath of God, he
cried out, I am in Hell, I am in Hell. Then an honest young Gentleman his
loving friend, who had been his fellow-apprentise, and unto whom he had used to
unbosome himself, stepped to the Minister and told him what was the cause of all
this horror of conscience in him, and so related to him the substance of all
forementioned. Then the said Minister went again to M. Latch, and asked him
if he had taken the Kings Protestation at Oxford, who answered, no; yet still
rejected (in a desperate manner) all the comfortable words that were alleged
for his faith to rest upon; still crying out, I am in hell, I sink lower and
lower; O was there ever such an hypocrite as I am, and therefore I must be
damned, and I alone must have my portion with Judas, and be an example to all
the world and lie in hell to all eternity, in so denying the Parliament: and
go, says he, to his brother that stood by him, and tell such an one, and such
an one, two persons to whom he had near relation, that if they hold on their
way, they must burn in hell as I do; and neither his godly friend, nor the
Minister could persuade him that he was out of Hell; yet the Minister still
most piously wrestling against his despair, told him that Hell was not above
ground (in the Land of the living) and therefore he was not yet in Hell, but
that he should go to Hell shortly if he would not believe in Christ Jesus; and
then told him he would pray for him: But he replied, you shall save the Flock
of Christ, but you cannot save me, I am past prayer. And with the like
lamentable speeches, as of a man in the very torments of the damned; he did often
interrupt the Minister in his prayer, and so continued in this despairing fit
till after prayer. Then the Minister charged him to hearken to him, saying, You
never (you assure me) took the Protestation at Oxford against the Parliament,
but Peter denied Christ with an Oath, yea and with a Curse too; yet he went out
and wept bitterly, and was restored to grace and favor again. Christ says,
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest:
you are weary and heavy laden, come to Christ, believe in him, and he will ease
you, and will blot out your iniquities for his own names sake. At which words,
he suddenly raised up himself in his bed, and with exceeding earnestness of
spirit put forth strong cries unto God, saying, Lord help mine unbelief, Lord
help mine unbelief, Lord help mine unbelief, three times together; and
immediately thereupon burst forth into exceeding great comfort, saying, O
wonderful mercy, Christ is come to fetch me out of Hell, and I shall not
perish; my cries have entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, who has
now given sweet rest to my soul. And thus with many heavenly expressions of
Christ's wonderful mercy toward him, he continued at least two hours full of
sweet raptures and ravishments of soul; and besought the Minister and his
friends about him to make known these things, and how gracious and merciful
Christ had been unto him: and this also he desired them to take special notice
of; namely, that he protested that what he had said (as before) was not out of
any lightness or distemper of his brain, but in sensible apprehensions of his
soul, and what Christ had dictated to him, in whose arms he said he now was
most sweetly embraced, and that he had now found (as he had often heard) that
as the way to Heaven was by the gates of Hell; so he had found it true, and had
not only gone by the gates of Hell, but even through Hell it self, but now
Christ's glorious mercy had fetched him forth; and therefore he prayed them
again to tell and publish abroad what great things Christ had done for him,
and then all that were present went again to prayer, and he prayed with them;
and when his breath failed, he would lift up his hands; but before prayer was
quite ended he most sweetly expired, as he said, in the Arms of his sweet
Savior Christ Jesus, leaving the Minister and his Christian friends (who had
been sorrowful witnesses of the former dreadful peoplexities and horror of
his conscience) now most abundantly cheered and full of comfort and consolation
in the Lord, for this admirable, gracious change and conclusion.

And now, I hope, I have fully performed what I promised at the beginning, and
have copiously confirmed the truchs I intended to deliver and represent in this
my Looking-glass. And now I shall only desire to sum up all in a very
succinct hortatory observation of all hitherto delivered in this our Malignants
mirror or Looking-glass. And first I desire to speak a word or two to our
cowardly Neuters, and faint hearted deserters of Gods Cause in this our
Parliament; wherein I fear too many even of Gods children (and otherwise good
Christians, I hope) are too guilty. That since the Parliaments cause is
unquestionably Gods cause, and that our Malignants have clearly seen that God
is so jealous of this his honorable Cause, that he will not spare even his
own Servants, if they either reject or neglect his Cause before men, and that
he will certainly sooner or later wound their consciences with terror, if they
think to wound his cause, with either treachery or timidity and base
cowardice; let them not, I say, think to sleep in a whole skin, to shrink
their necks out of the collar and do well enough for all that: for certainly
God can and will find them out at last, as they also may have seen in these
former examples of two or three, even of Gods dear children, who like Jonas
would needs be flying from God and his cause, one into New England, and another
into Holland, but how the Lord found them out, caused them to see their
faithless folly, and ere he was reconciled to them smarted them both soundly
for it; and though he come slowly and (as the observation is) with
Leaden-heeles, yet will come sorely, and with Iron-hands, as has been here
before most evidently seen. And let them often ruminate and remember (and that
with trembling) what the Spirit of God says in the book of the Revelations,
Revel. 21. 7. 8.
He that overcommeth (that is, Heb. 3. 12.
which stands close to God and his cause, without fainting or giving over)
shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But,
the fearful and unbelievers (see here, O cowardly Newters, to thy shame and
terror, who are put in the very front or forlorn hope of the rabble of wicked
ones, that shall be shut out of the New-Jerusalem) shall have their part in the
like which burns with fire and brimstone. Take heed therefore my brethren (as
the Author to the Hebrews advises) lest there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief, Heb. 10. 38.
in departing from the living God. Luke 9. 62.
For certainly, says the spirit of truth (in the same Epistle) If any man
draw back (or has, as Christ himself testifies, put his hand to the Plough of
Gods work and cause, and looks back, is unfit for Heaven; nay more) Gods
soul will take no pleasure in such an one. Besides, remember this seriously, I
pray thee, that a Newter, or Key-cold fellow in Gods cause, is a most
despicable creature, despised both of God and the Devil, The miserable
condition of Cowards and Newters described.
being apt to be false and faithless to them both, and so good for the use of
neither of them, as not caring whether Gods or the Devils cause fail or
prevail, sink or swim; what cares he so he may sit still and enjoy his base
peace and pelf? only, it may be, he will give them some seeming good wishes,
at most and best. O let such as these, timely take heed by these examples, that
God meet them not sorely and surely too at last: and if thy Neutrality be from
wilful and wicked principles, then fear indeed and tremble at thy estate, by
those examples of Gods hand upon those mischievous and malevolent malignants by
death and destruction, even in the very acting of their evils. If out of mere
slavish fear and unworthy cowardice, yet fear also by those other examples,
considering what terrible straits and soule-pinching perplexities it may bring
thee unto, at the best; and presume not, though they happily repented and were
saved; for repentance is a Flower that grows not naturally in our Gardens, but
is the only gift of God, and he gives it graciously when and to whom he will.
Therefore, I say, presume not but fear; and whiles thou have yet space, labor
for grace, even immovable faithfulness, courage, and perseverance; remembering
ever, who it was that said, even truth it self, He that denies me, or is
ashamed of me before men, I will deny him and be ashamed of him before my
Father which is in Heaven. And thus I have done with these.

But now in the last place I desire also to speak a word or two unto our most
unhappy, miserable, and marble-hearted malignants (whom from my soul I pity
and pray for, as my brethren in the flesh) implacable and inveterate haters of
Holiness and of a pure Reformation, who would feign (under a beggarly pretext
of a lazy, licentious Peace, forsooth) still be more and more settled on the
Lees of their old, infant, half Reformation, (comfortable then I confess, in
blessed Queen Elizabeth's days, if we reflect on the woeful Marian days
before) even mere formal Protestantisme at large, which in effect is but
downright Atheism; or at best, a back door to Papistry, as we have used the
matter for so many years past; The upholding and maintaining whereof, I take
for granted; to be the ground of the great quarrel between them and Gods
people now adays. What will ye (then) or what can ye say for your selves poor
mole-ey'd and miserable men? (after the serious fight and rumination on all
these forelaid remarkable evidences and most luculent and conspicuous
demonstrations of Gods immediate hand both against and upon you; and after all
these notable Convictions and Confessions of the horrible and God-hated evil
of your cause and cases;) what, I say, will you now answer for your selves, why
you may not most properly and pertinently be called and counted wilful and
obstinate fighters against God and his just cause? See then, I beseech you (but
if you will not timely see, you shall (as I said before) see at last and be
ashamed and smart too) and be timely and wisely persuaded (as the truth is)
that though you will not acknowledge it, you your malignant works plainly
show it, and especially the Spirit of God (the only true searcher and
discoverer of the hearts and reins of all) has most clearly declared to us
in the second Psalm, both your work and your wages, your wicked cause; and
your wretched cases, viz. That all the banding and binding of the heads and
hearts together of Gebal, Ammon and Amaleck etc. of sottish formal
Protestants, What King our formal Protestants choose and refuse.
Prelates and Papists, with all that Jesuitical rabble, is mainely and only
this; We will not have this man, King Jesus; (but the tyrannical and
diabolical usurpers, base lusts, soul-slaying corruptions, sin and Satan) to
reign over us; and therefore let us (say they) break his bands in sunder;
that is, let us violate and vitiate his holy and wholesome Laws and
Commandments: let us east away his cords from us; that is, let us contemn and
despise his soul-saving counsels, free grace and love, and all his
heart-establishing precious promises: but all this while they blindly and
blockishly forget, or will not see and perceive (as the same Spirit and
fountain of Truth tells them) that the Lord now resolves to set his only
begotten Son Christ Jesus, as Lord and King to ^u^e and reign (over the tops
of all the Mountains of the earth) upon Sion his most holy Hill; and that he
therefore, even the Lord, the great Jehovah sits in Heaven sees, and smiles at,
and laughs to scorn all their combinations and accursed confederacies, all
their freting and fuming, beating and breaking of their brains and hearts too,
When Malignants cause shall overcome.
and telling them to their teeth, and showing them, maugre their brazen brows,
that all the while they do but imagine a vain thing, which they never can
they never shall bring to pass; For of this let them be most sure, that till
they can make it appear or probable that Satan is stronger and wiser than the
Almighty, that Antichrist is able to overcome the Lord Christ, to whom the
Father has committed all power in Heaven and Earth; I shall never believe,
that they or their cause shall prevail. For, I say, God has put into Christ's
hands an Iron Mace, not only to bruise, but to break in pieces (like so many
pot-sheards) their earthen and stony hearts though ever so seemingly stout and
stubborn, as partly and pretty-well (one would think) I have here, in these
forecited examples made most plain and conspicuous, but especially, as the
Lord God himself in all ages and times has made most manifest to the whole
World, even from the beginning of it to our present times; Psalm. 76. 10.
nay, not only so, but that the Lord has most admirably made (and that with a
witness too) the wrath of man to turn to his own high glory and praise, yea
and so restrained and constrained the remainder thereof to keep within limits
and bounds, as not to break out to do that mischief unto His which their
malignant adversaries most desperately and divellishly intended to have done
unto them. Malignants are but Gods drudges, and scull-boyes to his Church and
children.
Nay (wherein they are yet far more miserable, yea most miserable of all) God
most wisely and wonderfully makes them in this their intended malice and
mischief, to be but as it were, the very drudges and scull-boyes of his Church
and children* and to do them far more good than hurt, in scouring and
refining them from their dross and filth contracted from the rubbish of the
world in this life; yea and by their malignant plottings, fighting and
spighting, Reverend and religious Mr. Marshall.
cursing, swearing, jesting and jeering at truth and holiness) they shall (as
a most holy and reverend Minister of the Lord, said) exceedingly help forward,
promote and advance Gods cause, yea more (many times) than many of the choice
friends thereof; and yet (which, I say, is the height or rather the depth of
their misery) when they have thus done Gods work (though they little thought
it, and never intended it) they themselves (like the blind builders of Noah's
Arc, who were after it drowned in the Deluge) shall be so far from having
any part or portion in the comfortable issue and prosperity of his cause, that
they shall die in their sin, and be everlastlingly damned and perish for their
pains therein; if, I say, in the interim* God in his infinite and boundless
rich mercy, gives them not space and grace to repent.

What an unexpressible sad condition are ye (then) in, O most miserable
Malignants, if you could but see this your wicked work, and this your wretched
wages, as aforesaid, even with profane Esau, Hebr. 12. 16. 1 King. 21. 20.
thus to strive and struggle to sell away (as 'twas said of Ahab, that he sold
himself to work wickedness) your blessed Birthright of life and salvation.
(I speak here the pure language of Canaan, maugre the false and fl^shie
conceits and whimsies of our impious Antinomians, those slye and juggling
underminers of Christian humiliation for sin, A just objurgation to
Antinomians, by way of a brief digression.
and of all other holy duties, under a color of their either ignorant or
perverse wresting and misapplying of Gods eternal decree of salvation and free
grace to his children. Yea, I say of those unjust and injurious scandalizers of
our venerable, pious, and most painful Pastors, falsely terming them Legal
Preachers, and pressers of performance of holy duties in our own strength and
abilities; a most gross scandal and aspersion audaciously cast on them by
these Satan's Seedsmen of sedition and division in point of Religion. Pardon,
good Reader, this glancing digression of zeal in me, and now to go on) to
struggle, I say, with profane Esau, to sell your blessed Birthright of life
and salvation, for a poor, base, and beggarly morsel of meat, or mess of
pottage of worldly pel^e, carnal pleasure, and pretended peace forsooth, which
shall all perish in the use of them, and prove unto you nothing but mere
vani^y and vexation of spirit.

Cease then, I beseech you, O most unholy and unhappy Malignants, cease I say,
and that timely too, thus to fret and fume, to swear and swagger, and to show
your selves such palpable and apparent fighters against God, such banders and
combiners against Christ in his precious and peculiar members, whom though you
do in your life and healthy times scorn and contemn, The esteem that
Malignants have of Roundheads in the times of their sickness and distresses.
yet in times of sickness or extreme straits and heavy pressures, and
conscience-distresses, these are the only men you fare the better for; these
are the men, I say, that you are often enforced (even out of Conscience) to
send for in your sickness (especially when you think it is a sickness to
death) to pray for you, counsel and comfort you; yea, and ofttimes in health
too, are constrained to confess of them, 1 Samuel 24. 17.
and to say with wicked Saul to holy David, Thou art more righteous than I, for
thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil. And therefore
truly friends, in these like cases, I may greatly and most justly fear (and I
beseech you mark well what I now shall say unto you, and fear and tremble at
it too) that most of the Grandees and Cosmopolites of these our abominably back
sliding and apostatizing times, (most of them, I say, for I believe that they
do not all fight against God upon one and the same principle) especially our
learned and knowing Courtiers, Mark this, O our learned and knowing Malignants.
Prelates, scandalous Priests, and intelligent Protestants at large, I greatly
fear, I say, that they come as near to that sin, that terrible and
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, and are as deeply plunged into it as
ever any Apostate before them which sin, (if I mistake not) is wilfully, The
sin against the holy Ghost.
knowingly, maliciously, and perseveringly to persecute and prosecute with all
spite and bitterness of spirit the Truth and true Professors thereof, eo
nomine, because it is, and they know it is the Truth of God, and therefore they
cannot abide it, because their own works being darkness, they love darkness
more than light. 2 These 2. 10. 11, 12.
And that there are such to be found, the Apostle Paul testifies, and their
desperate condition too) and I make no doubt but some of them have or will be
enforced ere they dye to acknowledge and cry out, I have credibly heard that a
some of the Kings Cormorants or Cavaliers have in our late wars cried out, Let
us be gone, for God fights against us, as Serjeant-Major-Generall Basset a
Royalist, who at the dissolution of the siege at Plymouth, spoke the very words
to one of our Commanders in our works at his going away.
if not true penitence, yet in damnable despair, with that accursed Apostate
Julian the heathenish Emperor, Vicisti Galilae, vicisti; So these, You have
overcome us, O Puritans and Round heads, you have overcome us; for Gods
judgments have overtaken us in contending against you. And therefore I may and
must say unto you all, who ever you be in this case, and persist therein, as
Simon Peter said to Simon Magnus, You are certainly in the gall of bitterness,
in thus abusing the Spirit of grace and his peculiar and precious jewels; pray
therefore, O yet pray, if peradventure this sin may be forgiven you: which
indeed is the ultimum refugium, the last and best refuge and hope you have, yet
most unlikely to help you, if not serious and seasonable; For, he that turns
away his ear from hearing the Law (that is, from loving God and goodness, his
Cause, his Saints and Servants) even his very prayers are an abomination to the
Lord. And then you may with wicked Esau beg the blessing you so carelessly and
contemptuously sold away, even with frightfull cries and tears, and yet
everlastingly go without it. O consider this therefore, all ye that thus
forget God, lest he suddenly tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver
you. Acts 8. 23.
And since all these things are thus conspicuous and evident by all those
remarkable forementioned and recited examples, Mal. 3. 17.
let not any of the Malignant fellow-factors of so foul abuses to Gods Cause,
Prove. 28. 9.
his Church and Children, wilfully close up the eyes of their uunderstanding,
Psalm. 50. 22.
and still harden their hearts and spirits against such providentiall workings
and demonstrative convictions and confessions as those are, lest they also
become fellow-seelers of the like exemplary and most just corrections. But
pray, Revel. 3. 18.
O pray (as I will with you and for you) that God would anoint your eyes with
that Collyrium, his precious eye salve, that you may see; and that he would
speak to your Souls and Consciences with a powerful Ephphata, Mark 7. 34.
Be ye opened; that so you might see and repent. For I ingenuously confess,
that unless his Spirit speaks thus, all the means in the world else that may
be used come too short, and are but in vain: yet give me leave to speak unto
you as the Lord did to stubborn Israel by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3. 5.
You, whether you will hear or not hear (for you are a rebellious and
obstinate people) yet shall you know that there has been a word among you;
that the means have not been wanting to you, and if you (notwithstanding all
Threats and Treats, Mercies, or Judgments) will persist desperately in your
malignant folly and madness, I must and will farther say unto you all, as the
Spirit of God did of old Elies most wicked and malignant two sons, 1 Samuel 2.
25.
Notwithstanding all that their old godly father had said unto them, they
hearkened not to the voice of their father, and why? because (says the Spirit
of God) the Lord had a purpose, for their incorrigible wickedness, to stay and
destroy them. Wherefore to conclude all, my counsel (in brief) shall be unto
you all, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12.
poor miserable malignant men and women, only that of the holy Spirit of God
himself by the holy Prophet David, Be wise now therefore, O ye malignant
Princes and Peers of the earth: be instructed and timely advised, O ye Judges
and great Ones of the land. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling. Kiss the Son, even the Lord Jesus Christ, lest he be angry, and so
ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little: (O what
will it be then when ^is mightily inflamed?) O then most blessed are all they
only that put their trust in him, Mal. 4. 2.
and rest under the shadow of his wings, where only is true healing for body
and soul. The Lord give us all assisting and persevering grace so to do.
Amen, and Amen.

Omnis gloria solius est Domini.
An Epilogue TO MALIGNANTS, In the Language of Canaan.
IF now after the perusal (if at least thou had any piety or patience there
unto) of all formerly said and shown unto thee, 1. Malignants resolution to
God.
thou are yet refractorily resolved to say, as the Malignants did in Jeremiahs
time to him: Ier. 44. 16, 17.
As for the words which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will
not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever thing comes out of
our own mouth.

Then give me leave to tell thee the Lords resolution concerning thee. 2. Gods
resolution to Malignants.
Behold, I have sworn by my great Name (says the Lord) that my name shall be
no more named in the mouth of any malignant. Ier. 44. 26, 27.
Behold I will watch over them for evil and not for good. Isa. 33. 10, 11.
Yea, now will I arise (says the Lord) now will I be exalted; now will I lift
up my self; ye shall contrive Chafe* ye shall bring forth Stubble, your own
(cursing) breath, as fire, shall devour you.

But, as for you my people, (my cordial Covenanters, yet that have sinned
against me) for your sins, 3. Gods resolution to his cordial Covenanters.
I will cause you to pass under the rod; I will bring you into the bond of the
Covenant or Holy-league; Ezekiel. 20, 37, 38.
And then I will purge out from among you the Rebels or Malignants, and them
that transgress against me. I will bring them out of the Country where they
sojourne, and they shall not enter into the Land of Israel, or happiness of my
children.

FINIS.

