TWO SERMONS PREACHED: One before the Right Honorable House of LORDS, On their
Public Fast, May 26. 1647.

THE OTHER, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, On their Public Fast, in
Margarets Church in Westminster, September. 29. 1647.

By THOMAS VALENTINE one of the Assembly of Divines, and Minister in Chalfort
in the County of Bucks.

LONDON: Printed by M S. for John Rothwell at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

A SERMON Preached at Westminster before the Honorable House of Commons at
their Public Fast, September. 29. 1647.
REVEL. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou
may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the
shame of thy nakedness appear not, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that
thou may see.
THe Title of the Book tells you, It is the Revelation of John, and John tells
you chap. 1. verse. 1. It is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which he vouchsafed
to his Servant John, when he was banished into the I Will Patmos, by the cruelty
of Domitian the Emperor: Wherein all things necessary to be known from that
time, to the end of the world are revealed. In which Book (as in Paul's
Epistles) many things, nay almost all, are hard to be understood. Yet that part
which contains the Epistles to the seven Churches, having in it Reproves,
Admonitions, Exhortations, and Counsel, is more easy and plain.

This Text is part of that Epistle which was sent to the last of the seven
Churches viz. lukewarm Laodicea, the particulars charged upon this Church and
the rest, are more easy to understand. The difficulty is, in determining
whether these Asian Churches do typifie other Churches, and what they are, and
where they are planted. For the probability of the opinion, that some were
aimed at in them, diverse reasons might be alleged, as this, that this Book is
not a bare Narration of things heard and seen, but a Prophecy of things that
were afterward to come to pass. Others would have the state of the Church in
general deciphered out, but with Reference to particular times, as Ephesus
points out the purer primitive times, which did retain their integrity, but
yet the mystery of iniquity began to work, so that there was need of caution.

Pergamus and Smirna, point at those times when Arianisme and Popery got up,
and did domineere. Thiatira resembles the times, wherein the Church began to
rise, and get from under the power of Antichrist; and they being in their rise,
their works are commended to be more at last than first. Sardis and
Philadelphia, set out the Churches that did not rest in some beginnings of
Reformation, but made better progress. Laodicea is the last, and typifies a
Church, which having escaped Babell, did rest in their Gifts, Calling, and
Profession, and did judge themselves rich, whereas she was poor, blind, and
miserable, and this Church was in a middle way, partly Romish, and partly
Reformed, not very good, nor extremely bad, she did adhere and cleave too much
to Rome, and did please her self in her Pomp; therefore she is taxed, and
secretly threatened to be spued out.

The Epistle to this Church begins verse. 14. wherein is the preface or
inscription, containing the Person writing; Amen; the faithful Witness, the
beginning of the Creation of God, to the Angel of Laodicea: The matter of the
Epistle is,

First, A discovery of the Sin, verse. 15.17. Thou art neither cold nor hot, but
lukewarm; And thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing.

Secondly, The reproof and threatening, verse. 16. Because thou say so, and
art lukewarm, therefore I will spue thee out of my mouth.

Thirdly, The counsel given, and that is the Text which I have read.

Fourthly, There is a gracious promise made to this Church, verse. 20, 21. If
any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will
suppe with him, and he with me.

The form of my Text is a Counsel.

The Matter is a Duty which this Church is counseled unto.

First, The Duty is to buy.

Secondly, The object of it, or what we are to buy; And that is set out three
ways.

First, What it is; And it is a threefold Commodity.

1. Gold. 2. Raiment. 3. Eye Salve.

Secondly, What kind; And they are excellent, as appears by the qualities of
them. 1. Tried Gold. 2. White Raiment. 3. Good Eye Salve. This last is employed.

Thirdly, What use; And that likewise is threefold:

1. To enrich us. 2. To cloth us. 3. To make us see.

The Sense of the Text.
I counsel thee, etc. This manner of speech is not so frequent, for God does
ordinarily command, or reprove, or instruct, or threaten, or promise, and most
things in Scripture may be referred to those heads.

But this Text has another face, and comes in another form; It is a counsel
or wholesome advice to this Church, which in the precedent verses, is
instructed, reproved, and threatened; and here counsel is added to the former,
and in it you may discern much Love and Wisdom; Love desiring her good, and
advising her to a way that might prevent her Ruin; Wisdom likewise appears,
in that the Lord Jesus Christ, offering to sell these Commodities, does not
command us to buy them, nor force us to have them, but does, as men that bring
their Commodities to the Market, show them, and set them forth, commend them,
but leave it to their own choice to buy what they please; yet if a friend
come, they will advise him to buy, and give their word, and pawn their credit
for the goodness of the Commodity: So the Lord Christ would have you take his
word for these Wares, and to go through with the bargain, and not want them
any longer.

And that we may see reason to buy them, consider what they are, Gold, Raiment,
and Eye Salve. We are by nature poor, here is gold to enrich us; and we are
naked, here is raiment to clothe and cover us; we are born blind and here is
eye salve to cure us; gold for our estates, raiment for our bodies, eye salve
for the chief of our senses.

What pincheth more then Poverty? What shames us more then Nakedness? What
grieves us more then Blindness? Here is a remedy for every of these Maladies,
here is a plaster for every wound, and by the epithites given, you may
perceive that here are no drugs, no counterfeit wares, but all of the best, the
very best that Heaven can afford; tried gold, pure raiment, excellent
eye salve; What more precious then tried gold? What more glorious then white
raiment? What better for a blind man then good eye salve? But I need not set
forth the goodness of these Wares, they will commend themselves.

Yet a word to tell you what they are, (if I can) but there is some difficulty
in that.

Laodicea was a true Church, for it was planted in the Apostles times, and Paul
gave charge that his Epistle to the Colossians should be read in the Church of
the Laodiceans, and that they should read the Epistle from Laodicea, Col. 4.16.

Therefore they had ordinances, and we cannot conceive but that they were pure,
for those times did not admit of impuritie in the Ordinances of Christ: We
cannot think they wanted Officers, for the Apostles would look to that in all
the Churches; nor can we imagine they wanted Discipline and Government; a
Church Constituted so early in the first day of the Gospel could not but be
well erected. And in the reproof of this Church, they are not taxed for want
of these, or any of them; nay, they write to Paul (as Calvin thinks) and if
there had been such a defect in their Church, the Epistle to the Colossians
would not have supplied that want, for it speaks nothing of Government, and he
gives order it should be communicated to them.

Therefore according to the tenor and scope of the charge brought against this
Church, we may safely say, that their graces and gifts, were not so good, so
rich, so right, as should have been; for their works are challenged, verse. 15.
I know thy works, and their zeal was not good, it was not hot enough:
Therefore I think the constitution of the members of their Church was not
good, they were not zealous, not fervent in spirit; and if that be a heat
arising from many graces, or if but one, yet a defect therein proves a want and
decay in others, so that their graces were not golden but rather copper; and
Laodicea being a rich City, and dealing in Merchandise, they might rather
look after the material gold, and after pure raiment for the body, then these
golden and silver graces. The Chuch in the Constitution of it might be good,
yet the members resting in their Church Priviledges, and in the abundance of
outward things, might be wanting in their graces, the doctrine of faith might
be pure and sound, and yet the grace of faith might not be good and saving in
them; their worship might be pure, and yet they not zealous for that God they
worshipped. In this great house of the Church of Laodicea, the members, many of
them, were not vessels of gold and silver, but of wood and earth. 2 Timothy 2.20.
therefore they are justly reproved.

Other things might be faulty in this Church, but I name this, as being
clear, and it will make way for our better instruction.

Let us begin with some Observations; and first, you may see plainly in your
view, from the beginning of the Text this to be offered.

1. Observe. That the Lord Jesus Christ, does not always command like a King,
but sometimes counsels like a Friend.

We read in Ephesi. 3.10. of the manifold wisdom of God, (...) multiformis
sapientia, a wisdom that has many faces, and looks variously; sometimes God
speaks like a King, and sometimes like a Judge, and sometimes like a Friend;
In precepts Authority, in reproves Anger, in threatenings Severitie, in
counsels Love, and care of our good most appears.

To counsel one, it is to propound something to his consideration that is fit
for him to think of, and useful for him to do, and it supposes some
principles in a man whereby he is counselable; and there is nothing to which we
are counseled, but the same things are also commanded, only the manner is
more taking, and the matter must be of importance, else we take it not into
consideration, Prove. 22.20. Have I not written unto thee excellent things in
counsels and knowledge.

To counsel us.

First, It is a rational way, and fit to work upon a man, and God that tryes
always to do us good, takes this course to counsel us, Hos. 11.4. I have
drawn thee with cords of a man, and bands of love; I have dealt with thee more
human^, for man is counselable, but so is not a beast; coge pecus, you force a
beast, but man is to be persuaded; speak reason, and express love, and you
cannot be despised or slighted, reason cannot be gain-sayed; though the man
will not confess he is conquered by your argument, yet the understanding
secretly must assent, and love cannot be contemned; the party may, but love
cannot; but when the Wise God shall speak reason, and manifest his love, we
should not despise his counsel: Nay, many join together in this coonsell, so
the word imports, (...) to counsel with others, (...), consilium quod aliqui
simul ineunt, God counsels you, his Spirit counsels you, his Messengers
counsel you, and your own Consciences counsel you. For as (...) is a knowing
together, so (...) is conselling together; diverse sit in counsel together
about the good of man; and hereby it appears how we should esteem of the
kindness of God; the word is Mat. 12.14. (...), they held a counsel that was
against Christ, but the blessed Trinity hold a counsel for the good of man;
Let us make man, let us redeem man, and advise him for his good.

Secondly, It is very fit and proper for the action of buying, you shall not be
compelled to buy the Commodities here offered, but you shall use your reason,
whether a poor man should not do all he can to get good gold, and a naked man
clothing. But here I must needs explain this point, lest we should think that
a man were left to his own liberty in the point of his conversion, and this
simile of counselling to buy must not be extended beyond the scope; and we say,
That the will of man is overruled, and over-powred by the Spirit of Christ, so
as it cannot but come in upon the offer of grace, and the will is determined to
one thing, not left to it self, to take or refuse what is tendered to it; and
it is no absurdity (whatever Arminians think) to say, in the conversion of a
sinner there is a violence offered to the corruption of the will, and yet the
will not wronged, a suspending of the liberty of the will, and no destroying
of it.

If you consider a man affrighted out of his sins in a way of terror, as the
Jailer, Act. 16.29. who came trembling; you may say he could do no other.
Suppose a man pursued by a Bear or any ravenous Beast, if he have the use of
his legs, and of his reason, he cannot but run away from the danger; Hell
frights the sinner, Conscience flies in his face, and he cannot but come to
Christ.

The propensitie and act of the creature may be suspended, and not destroyed;
the Lions could not devour Daniel, the fire could not burn the three young
men; God did suspend the act of those creatures, but their natures were not
destroyed, for their enemies found the Lions to be fierce, and the fire to
burn; the will of man chooses to come, and cannot do otherwise, for it is
moved and guided by a supernatural power.

Thirdly, God does counsel us, for in all things of any importance we take
counsel, here is more need, and if we follow our own counsels we perish,
Prove. 11.14. Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of
counselors there is safety, Prove. 20.18. Every purpose is established by
counsel, and with good advice make war. If in other things we take advice
and not this, it shows we are more careless of Heaven then our affairs on
earth.

1. Use. Take counsel of him that is wise, and reject it not; lean not to
your own wisdom, for that will destroy you. A man that follows his own
thoughts in matters of Religion, is sure to miss his way, and lose his hope:
The counsel of God is good, we cannot say so of the wisest man, but his
counsel is good at all times, for he knows all things and all events, which
no man does, Prove. 19.20. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou
may be wise in thy latter end.

2. If we do not, we set up our own thoughts and wisdom above Gods, and we
oppose Christ's Prophetical and Kingly Offices.

3. Grace makes us teachable, and men should inquire what they ought to do,
Act. 2.37. Men and brethren, what shall we do? Act. 9.6. Lord, what will thou
have me to do? And they obeyed and followed the directions of the Apostles;
David did bless God for Abigails counsel, 1 Samuel 25.22, 32. And if we receive
not the counsel of God, we shall in the end bewail our folly, and read our
misery, arising from our own rebellious and desperate denyalls of grace; and as
the Pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves, so do many in
these days.

I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, and white raiment.

2. Observe. It is the wisdom of men to buy grace, and the means of grace,
whatever they cost them. Qualis emptio absque pretio? Quomodo hoc convenit
magnificentiae Dei si emenda est illius gratia? parum laudis habet ^^ns cujus
aquae venales habentur.


Obj. But how can we buy? What shall we give to God for these rich
Commodities? And how can it stand with the bounty of God to sell them to us?
And how does it under-value the grace of God when it is offered to sale?

Solut. For answer to this objection, and for opening of the point propounded,
we must know, That the grace or favor of God cannot be bought at all. And we
must distinguish between (...) and (...), the free grace of God, his good will
and pleasure, which is from all eternity, and the fruits thereof, the gifts of
the Spirit, together with all the means by which the Spirit works in the
hearts of Gods Elect: These latter are here offered to you to be sold, not the
former.

We cannot properly buy so as to give a valuable consideration for these
Heavenly Commodities; to buy, is to give a price to the seller, for which he
makes over his right to you, and puts you in possession of that which was his.

But properly we cannot buy so as to give a valuable consideration: And that
because,

First, All things are Gods already, unless it be your sins, the Cattle
upon a thousand Hills are mine, says God, Job 41.11. Whatsoever is under the
whole heavens is mine: So that you cannot pay God with his own, for if I buy
of a man I give him somewhat that is mine, and receive of him somewhat that is
his.

Secondly, All things that we have are inferior to grace, and the means of
grace, they are but transitory and fading, but Heavenly things are lasting and
durable, and there is no proportion between the largest offer of thousands of
Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, and the least dram of saving-grace, and
we must not think that money or mony-worth can purchase Heaven or grace; nay,
to take off our thoughts, the Lord tells us his mind, Isa. 55.1. Buy wine and
milk without money.

But what must be done?

First, Buy it with thy prayers and tears, and tell the Lord thou have need of
them, and cannot live without them; Rome teaches her children to buy grace
with the improvement of parts of nature, and to buy Heaven with their good
works, and tell us of such perfection in some works, that there is no sin
in them; but when they offer so largely, God must trust them, for they have no
ready money; but we teach our Chap-men to turn poor beggars, and you may get
more by begging at the hands of God, then by working, and yet we beg a stock of
grace that we may go to work.

Secondly, Buy it with thy labor and toil, travel for it if thou have it not
at home; the sons of Jacob go into Egypt if there be no Corn in their own
Country, and what pains men take to get the Commodities of the world, they
should do more for Heaven; in former times, before this Parliament sat, there
was a great scarcity, the markets did rise, there is now more plenty; but the
evil of the present times is, that there is a price in men's hands, and they
have not hearts.

Thirdly, It may be it will cost thy purse, if with the Merchant in the Gospel
thou have found the Pearl, buy it though thou sell all* Mat. 13.46. and it
would further your accounts, if your Bills of expense for Building, for
Purchases, for Portions, nay, for Sports and Recreations, (which rises to great
sums) you could bring in somewhat answerable for the Gospel and Religious
uses.

Whatsoever it will cost thee, break not for price, buy it at any Rate.

First, It will enrich thee, you may buy Land too dear, and Gold too dear,
but grace and the means of grace cannot be bought too dear, nay, the dearer
bought the better, you will keep it the better, and esteem it the more: The
more it costs a Christian to get Christ, and obtain assurance of Gods love, the
better it is, Prove. 3.14. The merchandise of wisdom is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold, more precious then
the rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her.

Secondly, It is of general use for all persons, and at all times, when you
shall throw away your gold and silver, a dram of grace shall be in great
esteem and will comfort your souls: Religion is not like a Soldier in time
of Peace, or a Chimney in Summer, but of good and necessary use at all times;
in prosperity to teach you moderation, in adversity to bear up your spirits,
in life, in death it is a Crown to you.

Thirdly, This Bargain proves better then was conceived; temporal things
seem better then they prove, and no man finds that in them which he imagined;
but spiritual riches afford more to the soul then at first was believed; here
that is true, It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer; but when he goes
apart he boasts, namely, of his great pennyworth, Prove. 20.14.

Therefore be as the buyer in these particulars:

First, find thy need of these Commodities, let thy soul say to God, give me
Christ and Faith, or else I dye; you must not so think or speak of any thing
else.

Secondly, See the goodness of them, you cannot know the excellency of them
till you be instructed and have experience, you cannot see till you have this
eye salve; and therefore no wonder if the Lord Christ offer his Commodities,
and put off but little, because men know not the worth of them.

Thirdly, No deceit in this bargain, you shall not be overreached, fair and
plain dealing to them that will buy the truth; Rome sells you sophisticated
and adulterated Wares, and her Tradesmen have dark Shops, and false Lights,
and will not have the people to know, or be able to judge of these Commodities;
they must not look into the Scriptures, nor understand the Doctrine of Faith,
but take all upon their word, and believe as the Church does; but the Text
offers tried gold; And we must try all things, and hold that which is good.

Mat. 6.^0. (...) Domi^us (...) quo s^^^ vel (...) ad (...) debeant pe^petuo
(...). Mus^ Quia minus ratione co^se^ta^^^ est quam (...) su^ locare ubi vel
sp^^te (...) ab ho^^^ibus?
Fourthly, Thieves cannot break through and steal these Commodities; As there
is a greater excellency, so more certainty in them. In all the troubles and
persecutions in the world, if you keep your courage and resolutions, and would
not part with your riches, neither Devils nor men can rob you of them; you may
have the gold and silver in your Chests taken from you by violence, and your
estates wrung out of your hands, but your graces cannot be lost unless you
consent to lose them; and they being of so high a nature, and so great worth,
get them whatever they cost you, and keep them carefully as you do your gold.

First, The more to persuade you to this, consider further of this twofold
Simile of tried gold and white raiment. He that has gold has all things
vendible, he may have House, Lands, an Office, Honor and Preferment, and
whatever (of this nature) he can desire: for gold will procure it, and gold
vertually includes all things that are to be sold.

1 Cor. 3 22.
So he that has Christ, and Faith, and other graces, has all things Heavenly;
all are yours, none can speak such Language as Believers; other men may have a
great deal, Esau may have enough, Ge^ ^3 9.
but Jacob has all. None so rich as the people of God, they have in their
possession all the fine gold and rich raiment, they are well clad, and richly
furnished, and they should live answerably; they have got such a bargain at
the hands of Jesus Christ as has made them for ever, and they should rejoice
in their condition; rich men please themselves in telling their gold, and
thinking of their wealth; let the Christian look upon his graces and
privileges with delight, and take great contentment in them.

Secondly, He that has tried gold needs not fear the touchstone, he that
has tried graces needs not fear further trials; It ought to be the care of
every one to see that his graces be of a right kind, that he have gold, not
brass: Many Protestants in the Church of England have too much pleased
themselves with Copper Faith, or they have taken a gilded glistering piece of
wood for gold; there is that which looks like faith, and zeal, and love, but
is not so indeed. We should try all things, we take not a piece of gold or
silver but weigh and ring it, because we would not be deceived; and it were a
shame for a man to put off his Commodities, and think he has made a good
bargain, when the money that he receives is false and counterfeit Coin. It is
an evil thing to rest in a show or form of godliness, all that comes of it
is to be thought by our selves and others that we are Religious: The Pharisees
had a name, they were esteemed by the ignorant people to be devoute; but what
will that avail in the day when our works must be tried by fire? It is only
gold a solid metal that will endure the fire, hay and stubble, and all light
stuff will burn and consume away.

Luther speaks of one Arsenius that had eminent gifts, and made a profession
of Religion, and was more forward then others; who being sick, his friends and
acquaintance visited him, and for his comfort told him that he could not but
have a great deal of joy and peace that was far before many others in
Religion; he answered them, That he had not so much comfort as they imagined,
and he now found it to be with his soul, not according to what they thought of
him, but according to the judgment that God passed upon him, and God judges
(said he) not after an outward appearance, but with a righteous judgment.

It were a vain thing in a man, that being Arrested and going to Prison, should
charge the Officers with doing him wrong, because he was esteemed by all his
neighbors a rich man, and worth many thousand pounds; in such a case the name
of a rich man will neither free from danger, nor pay debts. But he that has
this tried gold has enough to pay his debts, and a stock to live upon besides,
he fears no danger, no trouble, no persecution, not death, no not the fiery
trial, for his tried gold will hold out and pass for current, when all
gilding will wash off and waste away. Great then may be the comfort of such as
look after truth and the realitie of graces, they are happy both in life and
death, they are rich, and shall carry their wealth with them into Heaven: You
must part with your friends when you dye, and you must leave your riches behind
you, but your graces shall go with you. Vincent. in Specul. Mora.
To set out the dignity of them above your material gold, One tells you a
Story of a man that had a Suit, and when his Cause was to be heard, he applied
himself to three friends to see what they would do with him; one answered
him, he would bring him as far on his journey as he could; the second
promised him to go with him to his journeys end; the third engaged himself to
go with him before the Judge, and to speak for him, and not to leave him till
his Cause was heard and determined. These three are a man's Riches, his friends,
and his graces; his riches will help him to comfortable accommodations while
they stay with him, but they may take their wings and fly away from him before
he dye. His friends and kindred they will go with him to his journeys end,
bring him to the grave, and interre his body, and then they leave him to his
graces; Misericordia comes defunctorum. It is true of that and all other
graces. Rev. 14.13.
they go further, and accompany the soul when it goes before God, and speak
for him, and do more for him then the other can do: Blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their works follow them

But sad is the condition of evil men, for when they appear before God, there
will be no Intercessor for to speak for them, their sins will dog them even
unto the Tribunal Seat of God, and drag them down to Hell.

We have done with the tried gold, now a word or two of the white raiment; by
which is understood our Justification, and Sanctification, Ordinances and
Graces, and to show the glory and purity of them they are set out under white
raiment. White is a pure color, and betokens innocence; by nature we are
naked, but here is a glorious garment. White is more excellent then Scarlet,
for it is a natural color, and all natural beauty is above that which is
artificial; Mat. 6.29. Mat. 17.2.
Solomon in all his glory was not like the Lillies of the Field. When Christ
was transfigured on the Mount his raiment was white; and the glorious condition
of the Saints in Heaven is set out in this, Rev. 19.14.
that they shall be clothed with fine linen, white and clean.

No doubt this Church was exhorted to look after their Justification, to join
nothing with the righteousness of Jesus Christ who is set out to be white and
ruddy, Cant. 5.10.
and to preserve the doctrine of it pure and clean; and also Sanctification is
herein comprised, so that the former point is now propounded under another
comparison of white raiment, and we are to be persuaded to buy it: And
therefore con^ider,

First, It is of necessity to have raiment, we must not go naked; It is a
shameful imagination in such as in imitation of Adams perfection will pray,
and preach, and hear naked; they should be ashamed of it: August. 14. de
Civit. dei. c. 12.
And we see that nature teaches us to look for a covering for the body, and
the Text persuades us to get this white raiment for the soul; food and raiment
must be had, and men of quality will have garments answerable to their
condition; and whereas there is variety of clothing for the body, nothing will
serve the turn for the soul but this white raiment, Rev. 3.
we must have long white robes, the righteousness of Jesus Christ is long
enough to cover us all over, Rev. 7.
but every thing else is too short and narrow; he finds us naked, and gives us
his own robes, that our nakedness may not appear; and he makes a garment for
us; he causes inherent graces to grow and abound in us, but we must not
think that our graces help to cover us as a piece to be added, for nothing
can add to our Justification, or to our title, we may as soon guild gold
with clay, as by any graces or services of ours make our selves in a better
condition. We must put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Rev. 13.14.
and that is sufficient to present us faultlesse and blameless before God.

Secondly, It is for honor and ornament white clothing was used in Kings
Courts, and he that has this raiment shall be in the Court of Heaven; great
men are distinguished by their apparel, yet some are so proud that they care
not what they lay upon their backs, and you cannot know by their outside what
they are, but this white raiment is only for the Kings Children, and they are
glorious within. Dives base in heart, having nothing but rottenness within,
yet was clothed with Purple and fine linen; but the Saints are made glorious
and excellent when this raiment is upon them, and in Heaven when no apparel
shall be upon their bodies, yet that stola corporis shall be glorious, as that
the beams thereof shall be much better then any garment to cover them, and no
nakedness can appear to cause any shame.

1. Use. And hence you are to be exhorted to get this white raiment: None but
madmen go naked, none but beggars go in patched clothes; here is a garment,
and it is glorious; It is made ready for you, and there wants nothing but
putting it on. And what contempt will this be, that apparel be brought home to
you, laid on the Table by you, and you will not put it on, and wear it, but
gee in your own rags, and live and dye in your sins?

Secondly, This raiment will fit you, and well become you, and you will appear
glorious, and be so indeed: A Stage Player that personates a King has clothes
answerable, yet is a base fellow; and in the end of the Play, when he puts off
his clothes it appears so: but this will befall none that have true faith in
Christ. Hypocrites will be uncased, but all else shall wear their clothes unto
eternity, and never put them off. Nay, they cannot be without them; this white
raiment shall never decay, nor be worse for wearing, it will fit all persons,
and at all seasons; and therefore buy it at any rate.

Thirdly, And if you fear your money will not hold out to make such a great
purchase, then know, that your God will not stand with you for price; he says
not you must have so much Faith as Abraham had, so much Zeal as Phineas, so
much Courage as David, so much Wisdom as Solomon, or else you cannot be
saved: No such thing is said in Scripture; but if you see the usefulness of
these Commodities, and desire them, and will use all good means to obtain
them, you shall certainly have them; nay, you have them already. For this is
one difference between Temporal and Spiritual things, the evil of the one
sort cleaves to you before.

Fourthly, You have them, you are covetous before you be rich; but in those
Heavenly Blessings you look after, you have them, and the good of them, when
you first make after them. He that really and unfainedly desires Christ, and
Faith, and other graces, has them already in some degree, and shall have more,
for all supernatural desires come not from nature, but our Union with Christ.

Fifthly, And the last thing to be urged, is, That such as have this white
raiment should carefully keep it: A spot in a pure color is a great blemish,
and soon discerned. It is pity to see Christians walk loosly or
indiscreetly, but worse if scandalously; Rev. 16.15.
If they be blessed that watch and keep their garments, what will become of
them that defile them? It is a glorious thing to maintain an unspotted
profession to the end. And in case we have taken a fall, and fouled our
clothes, let us not lie still, and wallow in the mire, but rise, and wash our
garments till we make them white in the blood of the Lamb. Rev. 7.14.
Men must have clothes though they go upon trust, and run into debt; and
when they have them they should keep them carefully; For the Wise man bids you
to have your garments white at all times. Eccl. 9.8.
How will this condemn many that live in the visible Church, that have never a
ragge to cover their nakedness, and yet are contented with it? Others take up
a profession of Religion, and yet keep not their garments clean; they go
unhandsomely and slovenly. 1 John 3 9.
It is said, That he that is borne of God cannot sin, he has another nature
given him; and while he is himself, he cannot go against the principles of
grace, as a neat cleanly man would not do a slovenly act though no body should
see him; and a curious workman cannot bungle, so a godly man cannot sin and
tumble ^n the mire, for he is a Sheep, not a Swine. It is reported of the
Ermin, which is a neat creature, that if a puddle be on the one side, and Dogs
on the other, he will choose to dye rather then defile himself. I wish we
could see this cleanliness in Christians; It ought to be so, and Schoolmen
give a good reason for it, because grace works not by fear only, but by
hatred: A man fears a drawn Sword when the point is set against his breast,
and it is in the hand of an enemy; but if it lie on the Table, or be in the
hand of a friend, it is not feared. Men may fear sin when God does threaten
to run them through, but if he put up his Sword their fear is removed;
therefore the kindly work of grace is by way of hatred and loathing; a man
would not take a Toade in his hand though he knew the poison would not hurt
him; this hatred and loathing of all filthiness and pollution should be in
those that have this white raiment, and then they would keep their garments
clean.

Use. And now give me leave to make a further application to you that are the
Great Council of the Kingdom; and let me tell you, that the people of this
Land look for this pure gold and white raiment, and to purchase them they have
offered fair; Their Plate, their Money, their Horses, their Servants, and
their Sons; they begin to fear they shall not have these Commodities which
they have bidden well for, because in all this time they had little else then
ends of gold and silver; we will persuade them to wait longer, and to help
you by their prayers, that you may become the happy instruments of the
Kingdoms good, in making the gold and raiment in the Text, as plentiful as
the material gold was in Solomon's time. To effect this, you have need of
Solomon's wisdom; the present Divisions and Distractions of the time require
it; and unless God interpose his own power and wisdom, we conceive, we
shall be still under the troubles of War, such as were in David's time; And
though you do well to think of building the Temple, and ye contribute
somewhat toward it, yet we doubt whether we that are alive shall see it
done, and enjoy the peace and happiness of Solomon's time; Yet however, let me
represent unto you the state of the people in this Land, which is much like to
these Laodiceans, they are poor, and naked, they have thought themselves rich
in their Clergy, and honored above others in their outward pomp and glory;
and for their wealth and goods, they have abounded, and had need of nothing;
now they see themselves poor in every kind, and they lament their poverty,
they are naked also, both in regard of raiment and armor, and Aaron has made
them so, Exodus 32.25. They hope that you will take care to enrich them, and
provide such as will clothe them. You did purge the Sons of Levi, and took
away many that were no better then dross and Tin; you now give over. It is
much feared, least many Congregations shall still be poor and naked; the
people desire a golden ministry, such as have golden gifts and graces, and
then they hope there will be golden Christians; and the golden days will come,
in so much as in you lies, you should pity and relieve the Kingdom herein,
by setting up a godly ministry, and countenancing it against the reproach and
contempt of these present times, which is greater then heretofore has been
known. We thought the witnesses had been slain, because it is said, in Rev.
11.3, 7, 9. that after they had Prophesied in sackcloth a long time, then they
were killed, and then they were unburied three days and a half; There is no
doubt but godly Preachers (among others) were the witnesses that gave testimony
to the truth, and they have Prophesied mournfully, even in sackcloth a long
time together, and then they were slain, they were suspended, which was a
civil death; they were not killed as men, but as Prophets, and they were in
the streets as dead men, not suffered to execute their Ministerial Functions;
and this was for three days and a half, and the time of continuing the
suspension of many Ministers by the Bishops, which was three years and a
half, did fall out so pat and punctual, as it might well be thought to be the
slaying of the witnesses in England. It is not necessary to make this killing
of the witnesses, to be in all places at the same time, but that it fell out
among us at this time; the words following in the Text plainly show; for after
that time of three days and a half, the Spirit of Life entered into them, and
they lived again as Prophets, and were restored, and great fear fell upon
men. Those that were Actors in killing them, desired them to go and desire
their freedom, which was quickly and easily granted, they were glad to be rid
of them: Ornati ^;u^mo honor and gloria ad exemplu^ Ch^isti qui post mortem
debellatam sublatus est in caelum quod autem vox auditur jubens ascendere eo
significatur non aspiraturas prophetas ad hoc honoris suo in art sed aliorum
authoritate collo candas esse in isto fa^^igio pu^a Sol^^ni aliqua principum
sanctiore. Brightman in Locum.
And further, to confirm this, It follows in the Text, that there was a great
voice from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither. Heaven is the highest part
of the visible World, and it resembles men in highest place and power, King,
and Parliament; And this great voice from Heaven was from the State; and you
said to poor despised Preachers, Come up hither; You gave them countenance and
encouragement, even before their Adversaries; You said to the proud prelaticall
idle Clergy, Come down hither; and I think you said well; But to the godly
despised Ministers of the Gospel, you said, Come up, ascend higher; and you
gave them respect; But now there is a voice from the Earth, which says, Come
down hither. The people that Petitioned you against the maintenance of the
Ministry, they say, Come down to us, you are too high, do as we do, work
for your living as we do. Whether this voice from Heaven or Earth shall
prevail? We leave it with you and the God of Heaven to determine: Only let
me give you an Item, to take heed in this case of doing, as David did between
Mephibosheth and Ziba 2 Samuel 16.3, 4. He accused Mephibosheth that he aspired
after the Kingdom, and looked after great matters; and when the Innocent lame
man had opportunity to make his own defense, yet David unjustly gave away
half his Land to his Accuser, 2 Samuel 19.29. They are like enough to say of us,
W^e would get higher, and we look after great matters; but take heed of
dividing upon such a false surmise; and give one half away to satisfy their
desires, and leave the other half for us to live upon in a poor manner. But I
forbear the further pressing of these things, and in a word return to the
first Branch of my Exhortation: I beseech you give us nothing but gold; let not
your Authority countenance any thing but what is good and precious; You are
Gods Merchants, and you should have put off more then you have done: Many
things come before you, little is settled. It were an evil thing, for many
Causes to come before a Judge and nothing to be determined; The Lord quicken
your spirits, and guide you in your way. And for you the people of this Land,
be wise to judge of things as they are indeed; There is gold to be had, and
white raiment, the Lord Jesus Christ would sell you these; You sometimes
cheapen them, and inquire after them, but you go not through with the
bargain. Who would want gold in his purse, and good raiment upon his back, if
he could have them? You may have these if you will, and it will be a horrid
thing in the day of your account, to render and return poor naked souls
before Go, that might have been enriched and clothed.

FINIS.

