To the Right Honorable, Alderman ADAMS, Lord Mayor of the most famous and
Renowned City of London; The Right Worshipful Sir John Wollaston and Sir
Richard Sprignall; Together with the Right Worshipful the Lady Rebecca
Wollaston, and the Lady Anne Sprignall, their most virtuous and truly pious
Consorts, All, my ever most highly honored good Friends: J. V. most Cordially
prays the Fullness of the Kingdom of Grace, here, and of the Kingdom of
Glory here^fter.
Right Hono^rable and Right Worshipful,
THe much Christian Courtesy and very many and most constant immerited
favors, whereof from time to time, I and mine have most sweetly tasted from
your Honor and Worships: But especially, the serious observation of the pious
and painful, yea, even indefatigable Labors of Love, for God and his great
Cause, which not only I, but even the whole Kingdom in general, and this
renowned City in special, have clearly taken notice of, and been most happily
sensible of, to proceed from your Honor and Worships, (Et, O terque quaterque
felicia saecula, quae Vos tales Patriae genuere Parents) This double and
indissoluble Ligament (I say) of ever bounden Gratitude, has most deeply
engaged me to dedicate and consecrate, This third Part of my
Parliamentary-Chronicle to your good Honor and Worships, as a most true
Tessera and Sincere Symbol of that ever obliged observance, which (together
with my poor All) I most justly and ingenuously acknowledge to be most due unto
you All, my ever most highly honored good Friends in general; and hereby also
in a more special and peculiar manner to take oportune occasion to give-in my
most cordial congratulation and just and joyful Acclamation for your good
Honors happy inauguration unto the most honorable Majorallity of this
celebrious and most Renouned City of London; which, though it may seem to come
somewhat too tardily, yet I assure your Honor it comes now most cordially; and
though it cannot speak so loudly as others, yet I assure you (my good Lord) it
speaks as lovingly as the best of your good Lordships most devoted Votaries.
Which, therefore, together with my best Services hoping your good Honor and
Worships will in your accustomed Candor and even connative ingenuity, receive
with the Heart and Hand of courteous and candid Acceptance; I shall hereby be
still more and more deeply endeered, in all my best endeavors, especially, in
my poor Prayers to press the Thron of Grace, that your good Honor and
Worships may long flourish, as most famous tall-grown Cedars on the tops of the
Mountains of this our English-Lebanon, inferior to None of your former famous
Predecessors; and shall hereby also most obligedly rest,

Your good Honors and Worships, in what he is, to be ever Commanded; JOHN
VICARS.

To the Courteous and Christian Reader.
THe continued Encouragements and most aimable approbation (Christian and
candid Readers) which you All (especially the truly religious and reverend
Divines both of City and Country) have given unto me, in the former two Parts
of this our Parliamentary-Chronicle, have set a sharp edge upon my serious
Affections, and been as a Spirit-quickening Spur to stimulate and stir forward
my most zealous Resolutions and Endeavors to the Continuation of this our
Parliamentary-Chronicle, and most famous and renowned History, to a third Part
thereof. Wherein, as formerly, so now, I have labored with all the Discretion,
care, and conscientious Sedulity, wherewith I was possibly able to communicate
nothing therein but true and innocent Intelligence of all our most famous and
important Parliamentary Proceedings (in way of rare and real mercies to this
Kingdom in special) for the space of one entyre 12 Month past. Yet herein I
must ingenuously confess I may possibly have missed in some particular
circumstantialls, either of Manner, Time, Persons, or Numbers, considering that
they are all, for the most part, received from several remote Hands, and
remote Habitations; yet for thy better assurance herein I have (according to
the wise counsel of a most learned and religious Divine, my much honored good
Friend, Reverend Master Arrowsmith) still taken mine Intelligence as near as I
could from the Lame-post. Wherefore I heartily desire thee; good Reader, with
christian candor and ingenuity, to connive at and pardon what ever small slips
or failings, thou may peradventure meet with, from me, herein, who
faithfully assure thee, that I have with my best ability, striven in all
equitable Sincerity to wrong None, but to right All, as near as I could.
Whereunto if thou vouchsafest courteously to condescend, together with the
grant of a portion in thy holy prayers for the poor and unworthy Author, I
shall justly account all my great pains, herein, plentifully repayed, and for
the same most gratefully rest,

Thine in the Lord John Vicars.

GODS ARK OVER-TOPPING THE WORLDS WAVES.
MOst truly says the princely Prophet David; Psalm. 107. 23, 24.
They that go down into the Sea in Ships, and that are busied in great Waters:
These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the Deep. And as truly may
I say; They that go forth, and lanch into our English-Ocean (to use the said
holy Prophets Metaphor, and keep a little to his Sea-Allegories) in the Ship of
serious Contemplation and pious Exploration, England fitly likned to the Sea.
may as easily and admirably see and discover the strange workings of the Lord,
and the rare wonders which he does in the deep deportments and various
vicissitudes of State-affaires in this (I say) our English-Ocean. Upon one
side, they may see the huge swelling waves, the mighty and big billows of
furious floods and raging and roaring waters, I mean wicked and ungodly men,
Atheists, The wicked and ungodly rabble to the raging waves of the Sea.
Papists, Prelates, and rotten-hearted Malignants, in City, and Country,
puffing, snuffing, blowing, and beating their brains, and vexing their hearts
to overtop and overturn, to swoop away and swallow-up in the deeply
ingurgitating whirpool of their irreconciliable rage and malice, the Ark of the
Lord, his Church and Children, principally personated and represented in Both
Houses of Parliament, The Parliament and Assembly of Divines compared to the
Ark of God.
and in the happy Assembly of Divines, sweetly subservient unto them, in the
long longed for pure and thorough Reformation of all things amiss in Church and
State. On the other side they may see the most admirable and indeed
unexpressible power and providence, the most infinite wisdom and unfathomable
mercy of our good God, the as prudent as potent Pilot and Moderator of all
that his English-Ark, God the Pilot.
bearing it up most safely and securely, sustaining and maintaining it (maugre
all the beatings and billowings, the sitly surges and swellings of all those
raging and roaring waves and waters) and making it still fairly to float, The
Ark overtopping the waves.
and overtop their highest rising and most furious flashing and desperatest
dashing waves, craggiest penetrating rocks, swallowing sands and shelves, and
mightiest and most malicious puffes and blasts of malignity and mischief, all
of them conspiring and aspiring with malice, pride and impious ambition, either
to swallow-up or ( per fas aut nefas) to tear in pieces, this most honest, holy
and harmless Ark of God; The wicked are Satan's Gally-slaves.
but all of them, laboring and tugging (like so many Galley-slaves of Satan)
in vain (which is their greatest misery) ever glorified and praised be the
free grace of God therein, as now we shall most lively delineat and set forth,
by Gods gracious assistance, in this our third Voyage through this vaste and
various Ocean. And having now, I say, by the good hand of Gods gracious
providence, made two former voyages through this our English-Ocean, The Authors
two former Voyages in this English-Ocean.
and twice safely, and (I hope) successfully arrived at the desired Haven, and
brought my vessel thither fully and fairly fraught with such merciful
Merchandises, as I hope may help my Christian brethren to trade withal, for
the enriching of their hearts and souls with copious expressions of bounden
gratitude and infinitely obliged thankfulness to our almighty Jehovah-jireh,
Gods glory is and ought to be the Alpha and Omega of all mercies.
our most glorious and gracious Elohim, God- All-sufficient, for the highest
improvement of his all-deserving praise and glory, which, indeed, is and ought
to be the pious Alpha and Omega, the original and ultimate aim and end of his
free and gracious Giving, and of our so undeserved receiving of such, and so
rich, rare, and manifold mercies and deliverances from the hands and hatred of
our so raging and roaring enemies.

Now I ^ay I am resolved, by Gods guide and my Readers accustomed candor and
experienced patience, to set sail again into this our English Main-Ocean, The
Authors third Voyage.
and to enter upon a third voyage therein: Only beseeching thee, good Reader,
to assist me with thy holy prayers, that our good God will graciously breath
upon our sails, and give us a prosperous gale which may carry us on
comfortably to the end of this Voyage, and reduce us safely to our desired
Haven; And now therefore plainly and pertinently to begin and go on in this
our intended Parliamentarie-History.

But, here, before I proceed to the narration of the ensuing
Parliamentarie-mercies, which immediately succeeded the most happy and holy
entering into the League or Covenant with God and our Brethren of Scotland and
Ireland for the prosecution of a pure and perfect Reformation, in all the three
Kingdoms, An Apology for the pretermissio^ of some preceding
Parliamentarie-Mercies in the third Part of the Parliamentary-Chronicle, and
which come now to be here related.
with which Covenant we closed and shut up our former Continuation or Second
Part of this our Parliamentarie-Chronicle: Give me leave now (good Reader) in
the first place to premise and set down a few very memorable mercies,
pretermitted (by too much haste to finish the former Part, at the importunity
of the Stationer) in our said Second Continuation, wherein, I was, I say by the
Stationers overmuch haste to publish that second part) enforced to omit many
memorable passages, or if not to omit, yet to misplace many, between the
Months of June, July, August, and September then next following, my orderly
Conclusion of that second part being about the midst of June, renowned Sir
William Waller being then victorious in the Western parts of the kingdom, with
his faithful and courageous Achates, Sir Arthur Haslerig; as you may see
clearly about page 380, 381, 82, etc. Give me leave now I say in the first
place to make a fuller supply of the deficiencies of those foresaid Months
with diverse memorable passages there omitted, but yet, which fell out in order
and came to my knowledge before some of those last mentioned Parliamentarie
Mercies, wherewith (I say) I concluded that Second Part; and which now I
thought fit here to make mention of rather than to suffer them to be raked up
in the ashes of oblivion, which, briefly, are these that follow.

The happy and blessed Assembly of Divines being Convened at Westminster for
the rectifying and settling of things amiss in the Church, July, 1643. A
recital of some former Parliamentarie-Mercies, omitted in their proper place,
in the former Narration.
both touching Doctrine and Discipline (as has been mentioned in the former
Narrations of this our Parliamentarie Chronicle, page 352.) It pleased the
Lord, immediately after the settling of their said Convocation or Assembly,
namely, July the 19th, 1643, to put into the hearts of our said venerable
Assembly (among many other sacred and serious matters) to exhibit a Petition
to both Houses of Parliament, The Assembly of Divines petition the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, for speedy reformation of some special evils among us.
which Petition, coming to my hands, I thought fit to give the godly Reader a
sight and sense of the sweet and fragrant sent thereof, together with both the
Houses comfortable answer thereunto, the happy and wholesome effects whereof
have since that time dropped and distilled like so many honey-dewes upon our
Church, already, and is like to be more and more (by Gods gracious assistance
and blessing on their pious endeavors) manifested among us, in Gods due time,
as in their proper places we shall have occasion to make mention of, and as in
good measure, we have had former opportunities hereunto. Which Petition, I say,
for the excellency and singular sweetness thereof, and for the high honor of
God, and the heart-reviving comfort of his children; yea and for the just and
eternal credit of the pious Petitioners themselves, I have here, I say,
thought fit to insert, which was as follows.

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in PAR^IAMENT.
The humble Petition of diverse Ministers of Christ, in the Name of themselves,
and of diverse others.
Humbly shows;
THat your Petitioners upon serious consideration and deep sense of Gods heavy
wrath lying on us and hanging over our heads and the whole Nation, A copy of
the Petition of the Assembly of Divines delivered to both houses of Parliament,
July 19, 1643.
and manifested particularly, by the two la^e sad and unexpected defeates of
our forces in the North, and in the West, do apprehend it to be our duty, as
Watchmen for the good of the Church and Kingdom, to present to your religious
and prudent Consideration, these ensuing requests, in the name of Jesus Christ,
your Lord and ours.

First, That you would be pleased to command a public and extraordinary day of
humiliation, this week, throughout the Cities of London, Westminster, the
Suburbs of both, and places adjacent, within the weekly bills of mortality,
that every one may bitterly bewail his own sins, and any mightily to God,
for Christ's sake to remove his wrath, and to heal the Land, with professed and
renewed resolutions of more full performance of the late Covenant for the
amendment of our ways.

Secondly, That you would vouchsafe, instantly to tale into your more than
ordinary serious Consideration, how you may most speedily set up Christ more
gloriously in all his Ordinances, within this Kingdom, and reform all things
amiss throughout the Land, wherein God is more immediately dishonored. Among
which, we humbly lay before you these particulars.

First, 1.
That the brutish ignorance and palpable darkness possessing the greatest part
of the people, in all places of the Kingdom, whereby they are utterly unfit to
wait upon God in any holy datie (to the great disgrace of the Gospel, and the
everlasting endangering of their poor souls) may be remedied, by a speedy and
strict charge to all Ministers constantly to Catechize all the youth, and
ignorant people (they being cammanded to be subject to it) and all sorts to be
present at it, and information to be given of all persons who shall withstand
or neglect it.

That the grievous and heinous pollution of the Lords Supper, 2.
by those that are grossly ignorant and notoriously profane, may be henceforth
with all Christian care and due circumspection prevented.

That the bold venting of corrupt Doctrines, 3.
directly contrary to the sacred Law of God and religious humiliation for sin,
which open a wide door to all Libertinisme and disobedience to God and man, may
be speedily suppressed every where, and that in such manner as may give hope
that the Church may be no more infected with them.

That the proph^^ation of any part of the Lords day, 4.
and the days of solemn fasting, by buying and selling, working, sporting,
traveling or neglecting of Gods Ordinances, may be remedied, by appointing
Officers in every place, for the due execution of all good Laws and Ordinances
against the same.

That there may be a through and speedy proceeding against blind guides and
scandalous Ministers, 5.
by whose wickedness, people either lack or loath the Ordinances of the Lord,
and thousands of souls perish, and whereby the removal of the Ark from among us
is (to the trembling of our hearts) evidently threatened. And that your Wisdoms
would finde-out some way to admit into the Ministry such godly and hopeful
men, as have prepared themselves and are willing thereunto, without which there
will suddenly be such a scarcity of able and faithful Ministers, that it will
be to little purpose to cast out such as are unable, idle, or scandalous.

That the Laws may be quickened against swearing and drunkenness, 6.
with which the Land is filled and defiled, and under which it mourns.

That some severe cou^s^ be taken against fornication, 7.
adultery, and incest, which do greatly abound, especially of late, by reason
of impunitie.

That all Monuments of Idolatry and Supers^ition, 8.
but more especially, the whole body and practice of Popery be totally
abolished.

That justice may be executed on all Delinquents, 9.
according to your solemn Vow and Protestation to that purpose.

That all possible means may be used for the speedy relief and release of our
miserable and extremely distressed Brethren, 10.
who are prisoners in Oxford, York, and elsewhere, whose heavy sufferings cry
aloud in the ears of our God, and it would lie very heavy upon the Kingdom,
should they miscarry, suffering, as they do; for the cause of God.

That so, God, who is now, by the sword, avenging the quarrel of his Covenant,
beholding your integrity and zeal, may turn from the fierceness of his wrath,
hear our prayers, go forth with our Armies, perfect the work of reformation,
forgive our sins, and settle Truth and Peace throughout the Kingdom.

And the Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

This Petition being read in Both Houses, an answer was returned to the Divines
that presented it, to this effect: That the Petition was very well approved of;
The Parliaments Answer to the Divines Petition.
That both the Houses had agreed to have a public fast in all those places
mentioned in the Petition, on the Friday, then, next following, being July the
21 (which accordingly was solemnly performed by both Houses of Parliament, and
the Assembly, altogether as well as by the Cities, in their several
Parish-Churches) And that they would take the other particulars into speedy
Consideration.

Say now then (good Reader) was not here a very fair and prosperous blast
breathing-forth by Gods providence, A fan gale to carry on the Ark of God.
to carry on his Ark the more safely and securely through the swelling waves of
malignant oppositions? but to go on.

About the midst of July, 1643. came certain information by letters out of
Lincolnshire, that it had pleased God to give extraordinary good success to our
forces in that County, Gainesborough in Lincolnshire won by the noble Lord
Willoughby of Parrham.
in the taking of that strong Town of Gainesborough by the noble Lord
Willoughbie of Parrham, which Town he entered by a desperate assault in the
night time, forceing upon their Courts of guard, which they found but
negligently manned, and so possessed the Town without any bloodshed, wherein he
took prisoner the Earl of Kingstone, and also 30 Knights and at least 20 other
Gentlemen of quality of that County, The p^izes taken.
besides 250 common Soldiers, and released about 200 of the Parliaments
prisoners, who had been taken at sundry times, in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire;
and they took also in the Town great store of arms and ammunition. And the
same intelligence assured us, that within few days after (to complete our
cause of just thankfulness to God) the Siege which was suddenly made against
the said Town (immediately after this taking of it) by the Earl of Newcastles
Popish forces (who thus hoped suddenly to have surprised it) was by the
vigilance and magnanimity of renowned Colonel Cromwell most courageously
raised, Colo. Cromwell raises the Newcastelian forces from besieging
Gainesborough.
he having most undauntedly fallen upon the Newcastelians, and taken 300 of them
prisoners, slain 50 of them on the ground, and routed and dispersed the great
concourse of their forces which came from Newark, Bradford, Leeds, and other
parts of Yorkshire, then, lately before overrun by Newcastle, on the former
unhappie Defeat given to the most noble Lord Fairfax. Yea, the same certain
intelligence informed us also, that the foresaid Earl of Kingstone, who as you
heard was taken prisoner at Gainesborough, being by the Lord Willoughbies
command conducted by some of his forces, in a pinnace, and so intended to be
carried prisoner by water to Hull; but the Earl of Newcastles forces thinking
to have rescued him from them, summoned the said pinnace (in which the Earl
was) to bow sail and to come ashore, The Earl of Kingstone slain in a pinnace
by Newcastles Cavaliers.
but the Lord Willoughbies forces refusing so to do, they shot fiercely at the
ship; in so much that they shot the Earl to death in the pinnace, and so made
him a prisoner to death, not hurting any one of the Parliaments forces, but him
only. Yea, and to make those Northern victories yet more glorious and
illustrious, there came credible information by letters from Lincolnshire to
London, upon Thursday July 27th, The Town of Stamford taken by Colonel
Cromwell.
that victorious and courageous Colonel Cromwell had then taken in the Town of
Stamford in that County, had there slain about 200 and taken 300 Cavaliers
prisoners, among whom were many Commanders and Gentlemen of quality of that
County: And that which made these brave victories the more rare and remarkable
was that the knowledge and information of them came to us on the foresaid
Thursday, Return of our Monthly fast days prayers.
July the 27th, which was the very next day after our public Monethly-fast, as
a most blessed and gracious return of our prayers into our bosoms, to make us
the more thankful and faithful for the time to come.

Much also about the same time came certain intelligence to London by letters
out of Lincolnshire, that about a 1000 of the Cavaliers from Newark and
Bever-Castle hovered and roved about Stamford and Wothrop-house, a great and
strong seat in those parts, but were bravely molested and chased thence by that
brave and most worthily renowned Commander, Colonel Cromwell, and at last
forced to take Sanctuary in a very strong and stately Stone-built house, not
far from Stamford also, Burleigh-house in Lincolnshire taken by Colonel
Cromwell.
called Burleigh-House, situated in a large Park, and surrounded with a strong
Stone-wall, but God seasonably sending Colonel Hubbard and Colonel Palsgrave
to his assistance, both with men and Ordnance, the brave Colonel with this
auxiliarie strength, immediately advanced to the said Burleigh-House, sat down
before it, and having commodiously planted his Ordnance, shot at it two or
three hours (beginning about three of the clock that morning) but could do no
good that way, the house being so strongly built. Then the noble Colonel
sounded a parley to the enemy, A parley sounded by Colonel Cromwell.
and offered them quarter, to have their lives and liberty to depart without
their weapons; But the enemy utterly refused the motion, resolutely answering
that they would neither take nor give quarter. Burleigh house stormed.
Heerupon the valiant Colonel gave present order to storm and assault it with
his Musketteers, whereupon the fight grew very hot and was bravely performed on
both sides for a while, and with much difficulty and danger on ours, the enemy
being very active and confident; and thus the assault continued diverse hours,
till at last the Cavaliers courage began to fall, ours pressing on them very
fiercely and furiously, so that they sounded a parley from within the House; A
parley sounded from within the House.
whereupon the as virtuous as valourous Colonel, commanding presently that not
one of his Soldiers should dare to shoot or kill any man during the parley on
pain of death, notwithstanding their former cruel and bloody answer to his
foresaid proffer of quarter to them. In brief they soon concluded upon quarter
for their lives, The House taken, and the priz.
and so they took them all, being 2 Colonells, 6 or 7 Captains, 3 or 400 foot,
about an 150 or 200 horse, with all their arms and ammunition, together with
the pillage of the whole house. Admirable was the providence of God in this
victory, The great providence of God in the preservation of our Soldiers in
this victory. 400 Clubmen come to aid the Cavaliers discomfited, and fifty of
them slain by ours.
in that, in all this fight which continued about nine or ten hours, not above
six or seven of our men were slain (though many were hurt) in that so hot and
fierce an encounter or assault: only about two miles beyond Stamford toward
Grantham, some 400 Clubmen coming to the aid of the Cavaliers, and having
killed some of our Colonells Scouts, he sent three or four troops of horse to
meet and encounter them, who at the first onset had almost slain one of the
Captains of one of our said troops, so furiously they fell upon ours at the
first; whereupon ours being instantly much enraged, fell very fiercely upon
them, and had quickly slain about fifty of them, and forced the rest to fly
into a great Wood, hard by them, for their lives.

Immediately after this brave victory thus most successfully achieved, namely,
about July the 31, 1643. this noble and renowned Colonel sent a Letter to
Cambridge to the Parliaments Committee there, informing them of his brave
proceedings also with the Earl of Newcastles Popish forces; who had then lately
again besieged Gainesborough, which for the Readers better content therein, and
clearer satisfaction, I have thought fit here to insert, verbatim, as it came
to my hands.

The Copy of a Letter written by Colonel Cromwell, to the Committee at
Cambridge, July the 31, 1643.
Gentlemen;
IT has pleased the Lord to give your Servant and Soldiers a notable victory,
Col. Cromwels own relation of his brave victory over the enemy at
Gainesborough Siege.
now, at Gainesborough. I marched, after the taking of Burleigh-House, upon the
Wednesday, to Grantham, where I met about 300 horse and Dragooneers of
Nottingham; with these by agreement with the Lincolners, we met at
North-Scarl, which is about ten miles from Gainesborough, upon the Thursday in
the evening, where we ^arried until two of the clock in the morning, and then
with our whole body advanced toward Gainesborough. About a mile and half from
the Town, we met a forlorn hope of the Enemy, of near an 100 horse, our
Dragoneers labored to beat them back, but not aliting from their horses, the
Enemy charged them, and beat some four or five of them off their horse; then
our horse came up and charged them, and made them retire into their main body.
We advanced and came to the bottom of a steep hill, A hot skirmis^ at a hill.
upon which the enemy stood; we could not well get up, but by some tracts,
which our men assaying to do, the body of the enemy endeavored to hinder,
but wherein we prevailed, and got the top of the hill; The hill gained by the
Lincolners.
This was done by the Lincolners, who had the Vanguard. When we all had
recovered the top of the hill, we saw a great body of the enemies horse,
facing us at about a Muskets shot or less distance, and a good reserve of a
full regiment of horse behind it; we endeavored to put our men into as good
order as we could, they enemy in the mean time advanced toward us, to take us
at a disadvantage; but in such order as we were, we charged their great
body. The fight most fiercely begun.
I having the right wing, we came up horse to horse, where we disputed it with
our swords and pistolls a pretty time, all keeping close order, so that one
could not break the other; at last, they a little shrinking, and our men
perceiving it, and pressing in upon them, Ours rout the enemies horse.
immediately we routed this whole body, some flying on one side, others on the
other side of the enemies reserve, and our men pursuing them, had chase and
execution about 5 or 6 miles. Ours have them in chase five or six miles.
I perceiving this body which was the reserve, standing still unbroken, kept
back my Major Whaley from the chase, and with mine own troop, and the other of
my regiment, in all three troops, we got into a body. In this reserve,
General Cavendi^sh charges the Lincolneers most fiercely.
stood General Cavendish, who one while faced me, another while faced four
of the Lincoln-Troopes, which was all of ours that (then) stood upon the place,
the rest being engaged in the chase; at last, the General charged the
Lincolners, and routed them; I immediately fell on his rear with my three
Troops, which did so astonish him, Colo. Cromwell charges him as bravely.
that he gave over the charge, and would fain have delivered himself from me,
but I pressing on, forced them down a hill, having good execution of them, and
below the hill drove the General with some of his Soldiers into a Quagmire,
General Cavendsh slain.
where my Captain Lieutenant slew him with a thrust under his short ribs, the
rest of the body being also wholly routed, and not one man staying upon the
place.

We, Gainesborough relieved.
after this defeat which was so total, relieved the Town with such powder and
provision as we brought; which done, we had notice that there were 6 troops
of horse and 300 foot, on the other side of the Town about a mile off us;
whereupon we desired some foot of my Lord Willoughbies, about 400, and with
our horse and their foot marched toward them; Another skirmish with the
Newcastelians on the other ^ide of Gainesborough.
when we came toward the place where their horse stood, we beat back, with my
troops, about two or three troops of the enemies, who retired into a small
village, at the bottom of the hill. When we had recovered the hill, we saw in
the bottom, about a quarter of a mile from us, a regiment of foot, and after
that another, and then also Newcastles own regiment, consisting in all of about
fifty foot colors, and a great body of horse, which indeed was Newcastles
whole army, Newcastles whole Army appears.
which coming so unexpectedly, put us to new consultations. My Lord Willoughbie
and I being in the Town agreed to call off our foot, and so I went to bring
them off; but before I returned to them, diverse of our foot were engaged, the
enemy advancing with his whole body, our foot retreating in some disorder, and
with some loss, Ours retreat and safely recover the Town.
yet got the Town, where now they are, our horse also came off with some
trouble, being wearied with their former long fight, and their horses tired,
yet bravely faced the enemies fresh horse, and by several removes got off
without the loss of one man, the enemy following the rear with a great body.
The honor of this retreat, as also of all the rest, is due to God alone. My
Major Whaley did in this business carry himself with singular courage and
gallantrie, becoming a Gentleman and a Christian. Thus have you this true
relation, as short as I could contract it; what you are to do upon it, is next
to be considered. The Lord direct you therein.

Gentlemen I am, Your faithful Servant, O. C.
Huntington, July 31. 1643. A list of the slain and prisoners taken at the
raising of the Siege of Gainesborough.
General Cavendish slain; Colonel Beton slain; a Lieutenant Colonel slain; a
Sergeant Major slain; Captain Husses slain; a 100 dead in the place; an 150
prisoners taken; and 200 slain in the pursuit of them; a total defeat, not
ten men in a body.




Much about the aforesaid time also, The rising of the Kentish Malignants.
namely, in the said July, 1643. came certain information to London, that the
Kentish Malignants perceiving the firm resolution of the Parliament and City
of London, not to desert but closely to adhere to the cause of Religion and
liberties of the Kingdom, and being extremely vexed with a spirit of malignity
and rage to hear of the constant preparations of the pious and well-affected
Parliamentarians (especially I say, in the City of London) to raise a
considerable strength of horse to make a flying Army (a design, at that time,
very hotly on foot) to pursue the Kings Cormorants or devouring Cavaliers, and
thus to force them from their wicked trade of plundering and pillaging the
Country. The new oath or Covenant is pretended to be the cause of this
insurrection.
They therefore, in Kent, upon a pretense of rising against a new Oath or
Covenant, begun at this time to be taken by the Parliament, and Cities of
London and Westminster, and intended to be ordered to be taken over the whole
Kingdom, which they declared they had no mind to take; and yet this Oath or
Covenant was not as yet imposed upon them, The main end of imposing this Oath.
nor any penalty on the refusers thereof, only the names of such as refused
it were to be taken and returned, thus, to distinguish the well-affected from
the ill-affected, and to disarm them, and to keep a more vigilant eye over
their persons, The main plot of the Ke^tish Malignants.
as just causes were administered. Whereas their main plot was to make a
general insurrection and seditious disturbance of the whole County, and thus
to make way for Sir John Culpepper, Sir Edward Deering, and a strong party of
the Kings Oxonian Cormorants to join with them, and thereby to disturb the
Parliaments and Cities foresaid preparations, and for the farther endangering
of this royal Metropolis or chief City of the whole Kingdom, and therein to
work the ruthful ruin of Church and State. Therefore, I say, these Kentish
Jack-Cades, under color (forsooth) of resisting and rejecting of that Oath and
Covenant, seditiously assembled themselves first at Seven-Oakes in Kent,
Seven-Oakes is their Rendevouz.
which they intended to be their chief Rendevouz, and where they quickly
increased (for as our Proverb is, Ill weeds grow apace) into a body of about 2
or 3000 desperately minded Malignants, or Atheists, which you please; their
chief Ringleaders being Sir Edward Bathurst, Their chief Ringleaders.
Captain Stanley, and one Mr. Leigh, with some others of those parts. They
being thus audaciously assembled together, about 200 of them attempted to have
seized on the Magazine at Dartford, but a troop of horse appearing there
prevented them therein; yet some of them meeting with Sir Thomas Walsingham, a
most worthy patriot of his Country and member of the Parliament, as he was
riding with two servants only to Dartford, boldly laid hands on him and
carried him prisoner to their Rende^ouz; Sir The. ^^lsingham, and Captain Rolf
taken prisoners by these Rebels. And in great danger of their lives.
and about the same time also, they forced Captain Rolf (a very worthy and
religious young Gentleman of Arpington in Kent) out of his bed about 100* 11 of
the clock at night, who never suspected any such rising, or sudden surprisall,
and with no little danger of his life carried him also prisoner with them to
Sir Thomas W^^singham, and there kept them together in prison, and a little
before these Rebels were subdued, they were both in great danger to have been
slain or put to death in prison, had not God graciously prevented it.

Now the Parliament understanding of this sudden mutiny, presently sent a
Declaration among these mutiners by Sir Henry Vane the younger, Sir Hen. V^^e
sent into Kent by the Parliament with a Declaration of pardon to appeal them.
who took great pains by all fair means to pacify them, proffering them
pardon if they would instantly lay down their arms and peaceably submit to the
Parliament; if not, the blood that must be spilt would lie on their own heads.
And withal to reduce them by force in case of disobedience, Colonel Brown was
presently dispatched into Kent, Col. Brown sent also into Kent with forces both
horse and foot from London.
with a 1000 London-Red^oates, and about 800 more after them, together with two
troops of horse from London; diverse Voluntieres also of the well-affected of
Kent, rose against those seditious and joined with Colonel Brownes forces. And
that no opportunity might be omitted for the taming of these insolences, the
Parliament gave power to the Committee for the Militia in London to raise
Dragooneers and to use what other means they thought fit to suppress them.
This Kentish insurrection was a part of Tompkins and Challenors conspiracy.
The Cities great care and providence.
And in regard the Parliament had had former information that this rising was a
part or branch of treacherous Tompkins and Challenors design (who had
appointed Blackheath to be the place of Rendevouz, if that plot against the
City had then taken effect) they appointed strict watches and guards to be
kept in the City and Outworkes thereof, and that a strength of horse should be
sent into Surrey toward Rigate and other parts thereabout, to suppress
insurrections, if any should happen to be there also. Now these Kentish Rebels
being thus assembled at Senock, as aforesaid, and hearing of the approach of
Colonel Brownes forces toward them, The Rebels fly from Senock to Tunbridge.
they deserted this Town and fled thence to Tunbridge, and from thence sent a
Messenger with a submissive Petition to the Commanders of the Parliaments
forces to be presented to the Parliament, that they were willing to lay down
arms, The Rebels Petition the Parliament.
if the Parliament would forgive their offenses; but the Parliament most
prudently, and like themselves indeed, utterly rejected any Petition from them,
Their Petition rejected, whiles they were armed.
whiles arms were in their hands, but, if they would lay them down, first, and
then Petition, they might find grace and favor from them. Now Colonel Brown
having thus pursued them to Tunb^idge, and summoned the Town, upon the summons
they desired a parley, which was presently granted; but it produced nothing in
effect but mere delays, they still refusing to lay down their arms, Colo.
Brown charges the rebels.
and submit themselves to the Parliament. Whereupon the brave Colonel gave
order to charge them, which was done presently by our active London-Red^oates,
and the Rebels in a confused manner, answered their charge, A hot skirmish for
at least three hours space. Col. Browns most valiant and resolute courage.
and so continued skirmishing with our men, for at least three hours together,
they having closely and sorely lined their hedges and sculking behind the
trees in the lane by which our men were to enter the Town. At length Colonel
Brown, like a brave Commander indeed, most resolutely was one of the first men
that adventured through the thickest of danger to enter the Town, his brave
London Ped^oates following close and paying them home with their Musket Shot,
which these Mutineers perceiving and feeling, they presently betook themselves
to flight, The Rebels are put to f^^ght. Prisoners taken.
and strugled every man to shift for himself; but our forces pursuing them,
took about 200 prisoners of them, amongst whom were Captain Ligh and Captain
Stanley, and two malignant hedge-Priests, desperate and atheistical fomenters
and encouragers of this seditious insurrection, and some others of no^e. The
slain on both sides.
About twelve of their men were found dead in the place, besides what they had
secretly ^^nveyed away, and many of them sorely hurt, and not above 6 or 8 of
our men slain in this whole Service, though the advantage they had against us
in our assaulting the Town was very great. They complained (being now put to
it) pitifully, Their Priests were the principali fomenters to this rebellion.
that they had been (...) and drawn into this insurrection, principally by
their wicked Clergymen, as they called them, who assured them they should
have had a 1000 horse from Oxford to join with them ^t their first rising, and
that the Parliaments forces were so far engaged els-where in other services,
that they were not able to send any considerable party against them. Upon the
Saturday before there were (as was credibly informed) about 5000 that had
joined together in this Sedition; About 5000 of them were assembled at
Tunbridge.
but being come to Tunbridge (and perceiving how things went from the City of
London, clean contrary to their hopes and expectation) they sl^ly and secretly
slipped away, except about 5 or 600, and these also had laid down their arms,
when they came into Tunbridge, had they not been animated to the contrary by
the inhabitants thereof, The Inhabitants of Tunbridge desperate Malignants.
who were most of them most desperate Malignants against the Parliament; but
they were now soundly paid their just demerits by our Soldiers; who after the
victory pillaged and spoiled them to purpose ere they left the Town. Sir
Michael Levesey also a most worthy patriot and discreet Knight of this County,
Sir Michael Levesey, also at Yawlding, his good service against those rebels.
who had the care and oversight of the Wild of Kent committed most worthily
unto him, understanding that a great body of Kentish rebels was gathered
together at a Town called Yawlding in those parts, presently drew forth such
forces of horse and foot as he had thereabout in readiness, and marched
thither; whither being come, he planted his Ordnance for battery against the
Town, Sir Michael plants his Ordnance against the Town, yet endeavors by
treaty to appease them.
which were indeed so planted as that he might have beaten it down upon the
enemies heads if he would; but he being very tender of the effusion of blood,
resolved rather, if it might be, by treaty to overcome them, and to win them
to obedience, and therefore summoned the Town peaceably to yield, promising
them that they should enjoy the benefit of the Parliaments Declaration, if they
would submit and lay down arms. The Town very much sleights Sir Michael.
But they were at the first very avers, slighting the Parliaments Declaration
exceedingly: So that then Sir Michael began to play upon the Town with his
Ordnance, which so affrighted them that some of them would have fled out of the
Town, but it had pleased God so to order it, A remarkable passage of Gods
providence against the rebels in Yawlding.
that by reason of a great flood of water upon one side of them (occasioned by
much rain fallen at that time) and Sir Michaels Soldiers on the other side,
there was no passage out of the Town but by swimming, drowning, and dying; And
Sir Michael giving them such fierce and restless alarms, so distracted them,
that Sir Michael most discreetly observing their frighted condition, sent to
two of the heads of their rout very fair conditions by one Mr Godfrey, Master
Godfrey in Sir Michael his name fairly appeaseth the rebels.
who read the Parliaments Declaration to them again, and used therein such
patheticall and compassionate expressions to them in Sir Michaels name, that
they being on a sudden much affected therewith, presently laid down their
arms, dismounted one piece of their Ordnance in his presence; and Sir Michael
on this their real submission, The prize found in the Town.
entered the Town with all his forces of horse and foot, where he found a great
quantity of Muskets, guilt swords, pistolls, pikes and Calivers, enough to arm
5 or 600 men, besides about 30 pieces of Ordnance, some of them mounted, the
rest dismounted, many barrells of gunpowder and foot Colors; he took there
also an 150 good horse, the prisoners, both Gentlemen, Commanders, and others,
were for the present sent to the Church, Yawlding set in good order and quiet.
and in the interim the Town was set in good order, which was so suddenly and
thoroughly done, as was admired and much wondered at. The prisoners also all
crying for mercy, had it presently granted to them, but on condition never
more to attempt the like disturbance and insurrection. Colonel Springests
Regiment and Captain Westrow did very good service in this business: and thus
was this mutiny most happily appeased in those parts.

At which time also, namely about Friday the 28th of July, 1643, the Malignants
about Canterbury and Feversham having notice of the foresaid rising at Senock
and Tunbridge, Canterbury and Feversh^m malignants began then to rise also.
were growing and increasing to a great head, and began also to lay about them,
and were gathered into a body at Feversham and Sittingborn, and began to
fortify themselves with four pieces of Ordnance, but by Gods mercy the honest
party of Canterbury foreseeing this danger which the whole County was thus
likely to fall into, The well-affected party of Canterbury appease this
insurrection.
with the assistance of their Major and Aldermen, presently raised 3 or 400 of
Dragooneers, and instantly marched to Feversham with two Drakes, and by Gods
providence without striking of one blow, they appeased that tumult, and caused
them all to lay down their arms, and yield themselves prisoners, secured the
chief actours, The Major of Fevershams carriage in the business. Sir Geo. Sands
taken prisoner.
among whom was the Major of Feversham, who at his first apprehension (as was
credibly reported) cried out in a pitiful manner, that he was abused and
deluded by Sir George Sands to rise thus in rebellion against the Parliament,
whom also they happily then also laid hold on at Feversham, and secured in safe
custody. Having thus appeased and stilled all at Feversham, the said worthy
Major of Canterbury and his valiant associates, hasted forthwith away to
Sittingborn, The Major of Canterbury marches on to Sittingborn.
but before they could reach thither, the mutineers there were all run away and
dissolved into nothing, like smoke in the air, having left also four pieces
of Ordnance behind them, which Canterbury men seized on, and went to Sir
Edward Hales house, within half a mile of Sittingborn, who notwithstanding that
he was a Parliament Man, and one of the Deputy Lievtenants of this County,
and so near them, yet used no means to appease any of these tumults, but
rather administered secret helps and encouragements to them, and his
Grandchild and heir being chosen Captain of these rebels, Sir Ed. Hales and
his Grandson a Captain of these rebels taken prisoner.
whom therefore with his Grandfather Sir Edward Hales, they took into their
custody, together with Mr Farnabie, a Schoolmaster, a great stickler also in
this insurrection, and a man of a very insolent and malignant spirit; and
shortly after, they were all, namely, Sir Edward Hales, The heads of the
Rebels brought to London and imprisoned.
Sir George Sands, the Major of Feversham, Mr Farnabie, and the rest of note
were brought to London to the Parliament, and after examination there were all
committed to prison, Sir Edward and Sir George, to the Tower of London, Mr
Farnabie to Newgate, and the rest to the Fleet. And thus by Gods great mercy
and good providence, this so dangerous an insurrection was most happily and
timely appeased, and this County afterward reduced into a most quiet and
peaceable condition; As by an Ordinance of Parliament, which not long after
came forth, whereby authority was given to the Deputy Lievtenants and
well-affected prime patriots of that County, for the better securing of the
peace thereof, may more fully appear, and which said Declaration, for the
Readers fuller satisfaction I have thought fit here to insert and set down
verbatim, as it was published by authority of Parliament.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, touching the
Rebellion in Kent. Die Mercurii, August, 16. 1643.
WHereas diverse ill-affected persons of the County of Kent have unlawfully and
traitorously assembled themselves together, and in a warlike and hostile manner
possessed themselves of diverse Towns and places in that County, and have
traitorously and rebelliously levied war against the King and Parliament, and
robbed, killed, and spoiled diverse of his Majesty's Subjects: And
notwithstanding they were invited by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament,
to lay down their arms and every man to depart in peace to their several
places of habitation, with an offer not only to pass by their offenses then
already committed by them, but to give redress to any just grievances they
should in a peaceable and Parliamentarie way present to the Parliament; yet
they wilfully and contemptuously refused that favor offered unto them, and
gave battle to those forces sent by authority of both Houses to suppress
that insurrection, where by Gods great goodness they were wholly routed, and a
very great number taken prisoners. Now to the end the like inconveniences may
be prevented hereafter, and that the peace of the County may be better settled;
It is ordained by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
that Sir Henry Vane. senior, Sir John Sidley, Sir* Authony Welden, Sir Michael
Leveley, Sir Henry Heyman, Mr Nut, Mr Augustine Skinner, Mr Thomas Blunt, Mr
Thomas Franklin, Sir Edward Boyse, Mr Brown, Sir William Springate, Sir Edward
Master, Mr John Boil, Mr John Boyse, Sir Peter Wroth, Mr Richard Lee, Sir
Thomas Walsingham, Mr Thomas Selyard, and Sir John Robarts, or any three of
them shall forthwith seiz upon all the arms and horses of all those that have
in person appeared in that insurrection and rebellion, and of all such as have
willingly assisted or countenanced the same, or that have willingly relieved
any of the said rebels with arms, ammunition, money, or otherwise, or that
have refused to give their assistance (being thereunto required) to suppress
the said insurrection or rebellion; and that the horses that shall be so seized
on, shall be sent to the City of London to the Commissary for horses there to
be entered and listed for the service of the State; and that the arms so to be
seized shall be laid up in some place of safety in that County, to the end
the same may be distributed to the well-affected party of that County, when
occasion requires. And it is further ordained, by the authority aforesaid,
That the said Sir Henry Vane, senior, Sir John Sidley, Sir Anthony Welden, Sir
Michael Levesey, Sir Henry Heyman, Mr Nut, Mr Augustine Skinner, Mr Thomas
Blunt, Mr Thomas Franklin, Sir Edward Boyse, Mr Brown, Sir William Springate,
Sir Edward Master, Mr John Boyse, Mr John Boil, Sir Peter Wroth, Mr Richard
Lee, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Mr Thomas Selyard, and Sir John Robarts, or any
three of them, shall have power, and are heerby authorized to enter upon and
seiz all and singular the lands, tenements, and hereditaments; and the goods,
chattells, and cattle of all and singular the persons that were actors,
countenancers, or abettors in the said rebellion, who did not submit to the
said Ordinance, and immediately come in, lay down their arms and repair to
their places of habitation; and to seiz and imprison their persons, to the end
they be proceeded against according to the Law, and the merit of their offense.
Provided always, and it is further ordered, by the authority aforesaid, That
the said Sir Henry Vane, senior, Sir John Sidley, Sir Anthony Welden, Sir
Michael Levesey, Sir Henry Heyman, Mr Nut, Mr Aug. Skinner, Mr Thomas Blunt, Mr
Thomas Franklin, Sir Edw. Boyse, Mr Brown, Sir William Springate, Sir Edward
Master, Mr John Boil, Mr John Boyse, Sir Peter Wroth, Mr Richard Lee, Sir
Thomas Walsingham, Mr Thomas Selyard, and Sir John Robarts, or any three of
them, shall have power and are heerby authorized to compound with such of the
persons aforesaid, as they shall think fit objects of such merciful
proceedings, and to receive of them such sums of money by way of fine and
ransom, as they or any three of them shall think fit, having respect to the
offense, and the estate of the person offending, and to certify the names and
sums received of every person, and return the same to the Guildhall in London,
to the treasurers appointed to receive money and plate upon the Propositions;
and every person that shall compound and pay the money according to this
Ordinance, shall be freed in their persons and estates and discharged from any
farther prosecution for the crimes and offenses committed by them in that
rebellion or insurrection; and it is further ordained, that the said Sir Henry
Vane, senior, Sir John Sidley, Sir Anthony Welden, Sir Michael Levesey, Sir
Henry Heyman, Mr Nut, Mr Augustine Skinner, Mr Tho. Blunt, Mr Thomas Franklin,
Sir Edward Boyse, Mr Brown, Sir William Springate, Sir Edward Master, Mr John
Boyse, Mr John Boil, Sir Peter Wroth, Mr Richard Lee, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Mr
Thomas Selyard, and Sir John Robarts, and every of them shall be protected and
saved harmless by the authority of both Houses of Parliament, for what they
shall do in pursuance of this Ordinance.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.
About the 22 of July, 1643, came certain intelligence by Letters to London out
of Cheshire, that the most successful forces of that renowned and pious
patriot Sir William Brereton had happily taken from the Kings accursed
Cormorants, a very strong hold in those parts called Houghton-Castle, Houghton
Castle in Cheshire taken by Sir Will* Breretons forces.
which had long time been a sore goad in the sides of Sir Williams great
affairs in that County, but now was by Gods mercy and his vigilancie
delivered up unto him and in his full possession and safe custody.

Much also about this time, the King having by the wicked Counsel of his most
impious Achitophels at Oxford, sent out a Proclamation in his own name to
command all his loving Subjects to forbear all commerce and trading with the
City of London, A* Proclamation from Oxford to starve the City of London.
and to withhold all provision of victuals from them, and all this under a
great penalty, hoping by this means to starve the City, and so in time to
enforce it to their wicked intended tyrannical subjection to Popery and
slavery* but (blessed be the Lord) this base plot had like issue with the rest;
The Cities care and providence to prevent this plot of the impious Oxonians.
for the City of London was not so easily to be begirt and starved by a
Proclamation from Oxford, though the Broad-Seal countenanced and commanded it:
for the Lords and Commons in Parliament (presently upon this unpatternd
Proclamation to starve a City for its honesty and fidelity, and thereby to
destroy the whole Kingdom) passed an Ordinance to give the most renowned Lord
Major of London, and the Militia thereof power over all persons within the line
of Communication, suddenly to discover and disarm all malignants, and to purge
it of all such dangerous persons, and about 5000 more Citie-Souldiers to be
charged to do duty at all the Out-workes of the City. Nay, and our most
renowned Parliamentarie-Statists rested not here (so tender were they of the
welfare and preservation of the City, in reference to that pernicious
Proclamation) but past an Ordinance in both Houses for the appointment of the
then most pious and prudent Lord Major and two Sheriffs of London, The L. Major
and two Sheriffs of London take the Lievtenantship of the Tower by authority
of Parliament. A just and brief touch of the due praise of Ald. Penningtons
happy Majoraltie. Alderm. Pennington, only, made Lieutenant of the Tower of
London.
to take the charge of the Lievtenantship of the Tower of London (Sir John
Conyers having at his own voluntary desire obtained the consent of the
Parliament to go beyond Sea into Holland) and after the expiration of the said
ever to be honored, heroic and most active-spirited Alderman Penningtons most
happy Majoraltie (which by Gods gracious guide and special assistance, he
finished with more honor and renown, the times thereof seriously considered,
than any of his predecessors in that place of honor and trust had done before
him) it pleased the Lord to put into the hearts of our most noble
Parliamentarie Worthies, to confer the said Lievtenantship of the Tower of
London, solely and wholly upon him, as one in whom they had so good experience,
they might most indubitably confide, in the faithful managing of a place of so
much trust and concernment, for the welfare, safety, and security of the City
and Kingdom, and partly also, as an honorable guerdon and repay of his former
wise and loyal discharge of that his foresaid troublesome and chargeable
Majoraltie.

And here now good Reader, I shall desire to cast anchor and make a little
stay, A succinct and most grateful review of all the Parliamentarie-Mercies of
this month.
to pause and ponder on the most sweet Parliamentarie-Mercies of this first
Month of our voyage and adventure into and through thus much of this
boisterous and billowing Ocean of the Kingdoms distractions and disturbances,
and with a grateful heart, succinctly to see what God has done for us, as in
a short Map and ocular prospect of them.

As first, 1.
in that excellent Petition of the Assembly of Divines to both the Houses of
Parliament for the good of Church and State in a pious reformation of things
amiss in both.

Secondly, 2.
in the Parliaments prosperous success at Gainesborough by the Lord Willoughby
against the Earl of Newcastles forces there; And the taking of the Town of
Stamford by brave Colonel Cromwell; Together also with the taking of
Burleigh-House by the said brave Colonel.

Thirdly, 3.
in another brave victory obtained by the Parliaments forces, at a second
Siege of Gainesborough.

Fourthly, 4.
in Gods admirable and timely appeasing of that desperate and dangerous
Rebellion of the Kentish Malignants.

Fifthly, 5.
in the taking of Houghton-Castle in Cheshire, and that provident prevention of
a^wicked plot to starve the City of London in keeping provision of victual
from it.

Sixthly and lastly, 6.
in the most happy and prudent putting of the Tower of London into the safe
custody and government of the most worthy Lord Major and Sheriffs of London,
for the better safety and security of the said City and whole Kingdom.

Upon the which said serious review of all these rich and rare
Parliamentarie-Mercies, tell me, good Reader, have thou not already seen Gods
Ark most bravely born up above all the swelling and blustering waves of the
worlds mischievous malignancy against it; Gods Ark above the worlds waves.
and It carried on with most pleasant and prosperous gales of Gods guard and
guide and gracious protection of it? Yes certainly, witness this six-fold coard
of clearly convincing testimony. Great cause have we therefore, to check those
proud waves of the world, for their insolency against our God and his most
righteous cause, even in the Lords own words, by his holy Prophet; Fear ye
not me, Je^. 5. 22.
( says the Lord) will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the
sand for a bound to the Sea, by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass it? And
though the waves thereof rise and toss themselves, yet can they not prevail,
though they roar, yet can they not pass over it. Cease then and abate your
pride, O ye proud and pernicious Royalists, since our God does so curb and
keep you in. As for us, we shall therefore, Psalm. 46. 1, 2.
as we have just cause, triumph and sing; God is our refuge and strength, and
a very present help in time of trouble: Therefore will we not fear though the
earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried and hurried into the
midst of the Sea. But, to go on, and to launch forth again in the deep, for
the further prosecuting of our next Months voyage.

About the beginning of August, August, 1643. A ship of about 300 tun bound
from Denmark to Newcastle laden with arms and ammunition, taken at Sea.
1643, a brave Ship of about 300 tun, bound from Denmark for Newcastle, having
been lately before taken at Sea, by the most noble renowned and loyal Earl of
Warwicks Ships, within a league of Tinmouth, laden with arms and ammunition,
to furnish and arm our Kings forces against the Parliament. The Commander of
which Ship was a Papist, or Romish-Catholike, and that which he pretended to be
a countenancing and supersedeas against all assaults of his Ship by any advers
party, was a Letter from the King of Denmark, which imported, that the goods
wherewith this Ship was fraught were his, and therefore not to be touched or
meddled with: But the Ship (notwithstanding all their pretexts) being seized on,
and notice thereof immediately dispatched away to the Parliament, an Order was
instantly returned to keep the Ship, and to inventorie the goods thereof, and
to let the Danish Commander know that the Parliament would be answerable
touching the disposal of them according to their discretion and direction. And
thereupon the Ship was brought safely to London, and there unladen; A Copy of
the true Inventorie of the freight and goods wherein I have here thought fit to
insert, for the Readers better satisfaction and content, as I my self received
it from the hands of one of the most eminent and most worthy Members of the
Militia in the City of London, which was as follows.

Barrells of Gunpowder -- 476 Bundles of Match -- 890 Drums -- 050 Belly-pieces
of armor -- 150 Swords -- 3040 Muskets -- 2977 Pistolls -- 493 Head-pieces --
3000 A true Copy of the Inventorie and particular prize and goods taken out of
the Danish-Ship, Aug. 4. 1643.
Roundheads or Clubs -- 1000 Pikes, very good ones -- 1500 Musket-rests --
3000 Forks to fight against horses -- 0500 Collers of Bandiliers -- 3000 Belts,
1 Hogshead. Hangers, 1 Hogshead. Girdles, 2 Hogsheads. Hangers, 4 Barrells.
Pistoll-keyes, 1 Firkin. Flasks, 3 Barrells. Hangers, 1 Barrel. Moulds for
Muskets, 2 Kilderkins. Stones for Pistolls, 1 Firkin. Souch-powder, 1 Firkin.
Cannon-Bullets -- 197 And pigs of Lead -- 14.
And near upon the same time, a Ship laden with Sea-coales (whereof I had
unquestionable information) from Newcastle, Another brave prize taken at the
same time.
and bound for Holland, was then also apprehended, by the vigilance of the most
noble Earl of Warwicks Ships, wherein they found about 3 or 4000li. in money
(hid deep in the coals) which was to have bought arms, etc. in Holland, for
the Kings use; but thus happily diverted another and a better way.

And truly (Reader) there must needs be seen a special hand of Gods providence
toward us, in this Danish prize formentioned; for this Ship could not have been
seized on in a more seasonable time, The seasonableness of that Danish prize,
wherein Gods providence is the more to be observed.
than as thus it pleased the Lord to dispose it, considering the great use the
Parliament had at that time of the said arms and ammunition, to help to set
forth a new army then making ready to march forth again under the command of
that noble and renowned General Sir William Waller; and especially also the
circumstances of that time considered, The low ebb of our armies briefly
touched.
namely, the then ill success of our armies in the North under the command of
the noble Lord Fairfax; and the most unhappie surrender of Bristoll and Exeter
also shortly after it to the Kings forces; Sir William Wallers unhappie defeat
in the West Country, and the Lord Generals army being mouldred and crumbled
away, and almost quite torn in pieces by sickness and such like casualties, as
that he was not able to advance and take the field to affront the Kings and
Kingdoms enemies, until they could be conveniently recruited and filled up
and furnished with men and arms. Of all which, having most fully made mention
in the Conclusion of the Second part of our Parliamentarie Chronicle, I shall
cease to speak any more thereof.

And now about this time, namely, the 6th of August, 1643. the Parliament being
credibly and comfortably informed out of Yorkshire, that the most noble and
renowned Lord Fairfax had in much competent measure recruited his Army at
Hull, Diverse of the Danish arms sent to Hull, to the noble Lord Fairfax.
Clubs, called Roundheads, sent to Hull.
and got together some troops, of horse and companies of foot, that so he might
the better both increase and strengthen his forces, the Parliament sent him
many Muskets, Carbines, Pistolls, hooks and piked Clubs, viz. Roundheads, (as
they were termed, that so his honest Roundheads might, with them, soundly beat
and bang Newcastles Rattle-heads, or rather, Rotten-headed and hearted Papists
and Atheists, as not long after, by Gods mercy, they did, by the brave conduct
of renowned Sir John Meldrum) together with 200 barrells of gunpowder, part I
say of this Danish prize so happily seized on, as aforesaid.

Much also about the foresaid time, there was a general report (and that upon
good grounds and reasons) all about the City of London, A plot for a pretended
Peace in the house of Peers in Parliament.
that there was a purpose (if not a plain, though private, plot) at Oxford, to
work some of the Peers in Parliament to treat again upon some articles or
propositions for a pretended peace, and indeed a motion was made (as was
credibly reported) in the House of Lords, to set it on foot, which was
generally much disrelisht and disliked in the City of London, and began to
cause great jealousies and fears among the wisest and best-affected Citizens,
as they and the whole Kingdom had just cause, we having ever received
greatest damage and detriment by such fained and treacherous treaties: The
Citizens of London Petition the Parliament against the pretended Peace.
Whereupon the most renowned, famous and faithful Citizens of London, with an
unanimous consent resolved to join together as one man, in a Petition to the
Parliament, in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of London,
which Petition coming to my hands, I have here thought fit to insert, for the
Readers better content and satisfaction therein.

To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens; and Burgesses of the Commons
House in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of
London, in Common Council* Assembled.
Shows;
THat your Petitioners having heard that such propositions and offers have been
lately sent from the House of Peers to this honorable House, which (as we
greatly fear) if yielded unto, may be destructive to our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; And finding already by experience, that the spirits of all the
well-affected party in the City and Counties adjacent, that are willing to
assist the Parliament both in person and purse, are much dejected thereat, and
the brotherly assistance from Scotland as well as the raising and maintaining
of forces our selves, thereby likely to be retarded (all which the Petitioners
refer to your serious consideration) and considering our present sad condition
lies upon us in a special manner, through the incensed patience of the
Almighty, by delay and want of execution of justice upon traitors and
Delinquents, and having an opportunity yet afforded us to speak, our humble
desires are:

That you would be pleased so to persist in your former resolutions, whereupon
the people have so depended, and wherein ye have so deeply engaged your selves
(though you should perish in the work) that justice may be done upon offenders
and delinquents; And (since we are as willing as ever, to expose what we are
and have, for the crowning of so good a cause) you would be pleased, by passing
the Ordinance hereunto annexed, or one to this effect, to put us into a probable
way for ours and your defense; wherein your Petitioners will by the blessing of
God be never wanting;

But will ever pray, etc.

This Petition being presented, Aug. 7. 1643. by the Petitioners aforesaid, to
the House of Commons, was well accepted and thanks returned by Mr Speaker for
their care of the Kingdoms welfare, The Parliaments present answer to the
Petition.
with promise that the particulars desired should speedily be taken into
consideration; and to consider of an Ordinance to the purpose in the Petition
mentioned, which was referred to a Committee.

Now this Petition thus exhibited to the Parliament by Alderman Atkins, The
effects of the said Petition.
in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons, as aforesaid, shortly
after produced this real effect for the present in answer to their foresaid
Petition, namely, that about the 16th or 17th of August then next ensuing, the
Lords and Commons in Parliament having had serious consultation about the said
Petition, published an Ordinance of Parliament, wherein was an Oath or Covenant
framed by them to be taken by all of any condition or rank whatsoever,
throughout the City of London, An Oath or Covenant to be taken by all Citizens
of London.
together with diverse prudent and provident Decrees for the better settling and
securing of the welfare of the said City, which for the excellency thereof,
and for the Readers more full content and satisfaction therein, I have here
also thought fit to insert.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
With an Oath or Covenant, to be taken by all Persons within the Cities of
London and Westminster, or line of Communication, for the better securing of
the Parliament, the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs thereof
and parts adjacent.
FOr the better securing of the Parliament, the Cities of London and
Westminster and the Suburbs thereof and parts adjacent, in these times of
eminent danger; The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled do ordain; That
the Committee of the Milit a for the City of London, or any person or persons
authorized by them, shall have power, and are heerby authorized and required to
tender and administer unto all and every such person or persons within the said
Cities, or within the Line of Communication, or any of the Parishes mentioned
in the weekly bill of mortality, which are appointed or hereafter shall be
appointed to bear arms under the command of the Committee for the Militia of
the City of London, the Oath or Vow hereafter mentioned: That is to say;

I, A, B. in the presence of almighty God, do vow and protest that I will
according to my power and vocation, maintain the Cities of London and
Westminster, with the Borough of Southwark, and Suburbs of the said Cities,
and the Forts, Outworks, and lines of Communication, lately made about the said
Cities and Borough, against all forces raised or to be raised by the King or
any other without the consent of both Houses of Parliament, or authority
derived from them. And that I will not directly nor indirectly endeavor the
giving up, seizing, or taking of any the Forts, Outworks, Magazines or places
of strength within the precincts aforesaid, without the consent of both Houses
of Parliament, or of such as shall have authority derived from them, and of
the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the said City of London: And
that I will not prejudice the said Cities, Suburbs or places, raise or assist
any forces, tumults, or unlawful assemblies of people; nor will directly or
indirectly give any intelligence or willingly suffer any intelligence to be
given to the forces raised without the consent of both Houses of Parliament, or
otherwise, to the prejudice of the said Cities, Suburbs or places; And that I
will with all convenient speed discover to the Lord Major and Governors of the
Forts within the City of London, or to some of them, all such plots and
designs, as I shall know or be credibly informed of, to be against the said
Cities, Suburbs or places, or any of them. And this Vow and Protestation I make
without any equivocation or mental reservation, believing that I cannot be
absolved from this my Vow and Protestation, and wishing no blessing from God,
if I do not perform the same. So help me God.

And it is further ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that if any such
person or persons aforesaid, shall refuse to take this Oath or Vow so tendered,
the Committee of the Militia for the City of London, or any two or more of
them shall have power and are heerby authorized and required by themselves,
their agents and ministers, forthwith to disarm every such person so refusing,
and to seize their horses; and in case any such person after such disarming
shall have any arms found with him or with any other to his use, which he
shall not immediately reveal to the said Committee of the Militia, or some of
them, that then his goods and estate shall be seized on to the use of the
Commonwealth, and for the defense of the said Cities; as likewise the goods
and estate of every such person as aforesaid, as shall willingly harbor or
conceal the arms of any such person so refusing. And shall also have power and
are heerby authorized and required to seiz the person or persons of all such
persons as aforesaid, as shall refuse the said Oath, or any other person or
persons which are or shall be known to appear to be malignant or ill-affected
to the Parliament, and to put them into safe custody, or to remove and expel
them from or out of the said Cities and lines of Communication, or otherwise to
dispose of them as they shall think to be most conducing to the safety of the
said Cities and places. And it is further ordained by the Lords and Commons,
that the said Committee of the Militia, or any nine of them, or the Commander
in chief of the forces raised within the said Cities and lines of
Communication, or any the foresaid Parishes mentioned in the weekly bill of
mortality, shall have power and are heerby required to suppress all
insurrections, tumults and unlawful assemblies within the said Cities and
precincts aforesaid, and to apprehend all offenders therein, their ayders and
abettors; And also all such as shall wear any marks, signs, or colo^^s, to
distinguish themselves as a party joining against the authority of
Parliament, and to punish or execute them, or so many of them as they shall
think fit, according to the rule of Martiall-Law. And it is further ordained by
the Lords and Commons, that the Committee of the Militia of London, or any nine
of them, and the Commander in chief, and the respective Officers in their
several places, shall govern and punish their inferior Officers and Soldiers
under the command of the said Committee of the Militia, according to the
Articles and Laws of war, set forth by his Excellency the E^^l of Essex,
and authorized by both Houses of Parliament. And the said Committee of the
Militia are heerby further authorized to take order (as occasion shall require)
for the shutting up of all shops within the said Cities and lines of
Communication, until farther order shall be taken by both Houses of
Parliament, or by the said Committee; to the end that all persons may according
to their power and vocation be and continue in a readiness and fitting posture
for the defense of the said Cities and parts adjacent. Provided, that no power
heerin granted, shall extend to any Peer or Member of either of the Houses of
Parliament, or any of the assistants or attendants upon the House of Peers or
House of Commons.

Die Jovis, August 17th, 1643. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that this
Ordinance for the safety of the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
Liberties thereof, be forthwith printed and published. John Brown, Cler. Parl.

About which said time, and upon this well-grounded encouragement by the
aforesaid Ordinance of Parliament, the most renowned Citizens of London began
to take a more strict and exact care* of the welfare of their City,
Citie-Malignants imprisoned in Saint Faiths Church under Paul's, and in Ships on
the Thames.
and by an Order from the Citie-Militia, very many persons of disaffected
malignant Citizens were seized on, and for want of safe prisons to retain them
in custody, they were committed into the enclosures of the walls of St Faiths
Church under the superstitious and superfluous fabric of Paul's great and
mountainous Cathedral, and very many others also for want of strong prisons
were imprisoned in Ships upon the river Thames, and kept safe under hatches
with sufficient and constant guards, to keep them safe from plotting and
practicing mischief at home. Much also about the same time, The Earl of
Hollands T^unks seized on by water.
the Earl of Holland having most^ignobly and disloyally by stealth left the
Parliament and fled to Oxford; about 14 or 16 of his Trunks, which had also
been surreptitiously conveyed by water up the river Thames in a Barge and bound
for Oxford, and all of them full fraught and stuffed up both with money and other
most rich and costly robes and commodities, were stayed and seized on and
carried back to Windsor-Castle, and from thence were conveyed speedily after to
London. About the 20th of August also, 1643. came credible information by
Letters from the coasts of Wales, The Fellowship, a brave Ship of Bristoll,
taken by Capt. Smith in the Swallow, a Parliament-Ship.
that the Fellowship of Bristoll, a ship of about 400 tun, carrying 24 pieces
of Ordnance, and the Hart-frigot, in company with it, set sail from Bristoll,
for Mi^ford-Haven, whither being come, they summoned the County of Pembrook,
and informed them (for, now, Bristoll Cavaliers had already learnt from Oxford
the exact art of lying, as well by Sea, as by Land) that all the Parliaments
forces were quite overthrown and discomf^^ed, and that now all the Kingdom
repaired apace to his Majesty, and that Cha^tam, Rochester, and all Kent were
revolted from the Parliament, with a great many more of such like false and
fictitious inventions, which the flashie and ill-affected Gentry of that
County seemed too easily to give ear unto, yet somewhat disliked these
Maritime Cavaliers or Cormorants, that they should thus suddenly come on shore
among them and cast up works to secure the landing of the Irish Soldiers and
rebels (as their purpose was) among them. But whiles this was in doing, and
the Inhabitants seeing the drift and intention heerin, as aforesaid, and
somewhat unwilling to have it so, yet could hardly tell how to help themselves
and hinder it: The Swallow, a brave Ship in the Parliaments service, under the
command of the right noble and ever to be honored Earl of Warwick, came
suddenly into the said harbor, and came to anchor near unto the Fellowship of
Bristoll, and presently summons the Captain to come on board his Ship, who a
while insisted on quarter, and would capitulate to be set on shore, but Captain
Smith (for so was his name that was Captain of the Swallow) utterly refused any
terms of quarter, and without delay gave him a broad side, wherewith he killed
3 or 4 of the Fellowships men, whereupon they presently yielded their Ship and
themselves prisoners; among whom (as was credibly informed) were four
Sea-Captains, viz. Captain William Hale, Captain Brooks, Captain Burley, and
Captain Barnaby. This excellent piece of service was performed by Captain
Smith, aforesaid, a very gallant and religious Gentleman, who too well knows
the King is unhappie in nothing more than in being too indulgent to the Popish
party about him, who seek his ruin under a false and perfidious pretense of
his happiness.

And about the latter end of August, aforesaid, that right noble and renowned
Commander, Sir William Waller (notwithstanding the malicicus hearts, foul
mouths, and false tongues of inveterate malignants, belching and bruiting
abroad many disgraceful reports to the contrary, thereby to increase and
encourage, as much as in them was, discontent and distractions among the
people) obtained from his Excellency, Sir Wi^^allers Commission to advance with
his intended designs, is granted by his Excellency.
the Lord General, his long desired and much expected Commission, for his
advance of the important affairs of the Kingdom, which was delivered unto him
on Saturday, August 26th, in the honorable House of Commons, by Mr Speaker,
and that with much and universal joy and content, and with the general
prayers of the whole House for his prosperous and happy success; the fruits
and effects whereof, we shall by Gods mercy taste of and declare in Gods due
time. And whereas also many persons had either ignorantly or maliciously, or
both, given out (to disparage this design) that the power of his Commission
extended only to about six or ten miles distance from London; the said
Commission is, for certain, of so ample and so large extent, that he may
conduct his forces into any County of the Kingdom, as the exigencie of
affairs shall necessitate and require.

And now good Reader, let me desire thee here again to recollect thy thoughts
a little by a grateful revise and contemplation on all those last past
memorable passages and Parliame^tarie-Mercies and Merchandises of this months
voyage also, as

First, the most happy taking of that rich prize, the Danish Ship, so fraught
with arms and ammunition. A brief recapitulation of all these last recited
Parliamentarie-Mercies, by way of obliged thankfulness.


Secondly, the dangerous plot for a pretended Peace, discovered and prevented,
and the most happy and contrary issue it produced in occasioning an Oath and
Covenant in the City of London, to unite and knit them the more firmly and
faster together, and thereby securing the most dangerous Citie-Malignants in
safer custody.

Thirdly, 1.
the apprehending of the Earl of Hollands rich Trunks.

Fourthly, 2.
the taking of the Fellowship, a brave Bristoll-Ship; and the confirming of Sir
William Wallers Commission by his Excellency the 3.
Lord General, for the advancement of that brave Commanders intended great
designs. 4.


And now then tell me, GODS Ark fairly carried on with fair blasts of good
success against its boisterous billows and swelling waves.
good Reader, on the brief review of all these memorable mercies, were not here
many most fair and prosperous blasts of good success to help to carry on
Gods-Ark, his holy-cause, through the midst of the troublesome and tumultuous
Ocean of these the Kingdoms intestine and destructive swelling waves and
waters of unnaturally homebred and inbred broils and bloody d^ssentions, like
so many devouring whirpools, gaping to ingurgitate all into their insatiate
ma^^es of all-devouring mischief and destruction? And on this so sweet and
comfortable consideration, still to return (with enlarged alacrity of spirit)
all the honor and praise of all these sweet and singular mercies and free
favors to God alone, Psalm. 136. 4.
who only does wondrous things, for his mercy endures for ever. But to go
on, in happy progress of the next months voyage and adventures.

About the beginning of September, September. 1643.
1643. came certain information by letters from Plymouth to London, that one of
the members of the House of Commons in Parliament, namely, Sir Alexander Carew,
governor of a considerable Island near Plymouth, which commands the Sound
there, Sir Alexander Carews plot against Plymouth timely discovered, and the
danger prevented.
had proved an apostate and endeavored secre^ly to betray that Island, and
thereby, the brave Town of Plymouth, into the hands of the Cornish Corm^rants:
But, by Gods great mercy and good providence, was timely prevented therein, by
the fidelity of the Officers in arms and honest Soldiers, who upon the first
discovery of his perfidious purpose, suddenly seized on his person and kept him
in safe custody, till he might be sent away to the Parliament, to receive just
punishment for such a base and perfidious demerit.

Also about the beginning of September, aforesaid, came certain intelligence to
London by letters from Hull, that the said brave and strong Maritime Town
having been besieged by the Earl of Newcastles Popish and atheistical army,
consisting of about 15000 horse and foot, who lying about Cottingham and
Newland, and those other near adjacent parts, Hull besieged by the Earl of
Newcastle.
about a mile or two distant from Hull, had cast up several works against it,
and planted diverse pieces of Ordnance and batteries on them; And though they
frequently shot against the Town very many 36 pound bullets and other
Canon-shot, yet by Gods great mercy and good providence, did very little or no
hurt at all by them; yea that on the Lords-dayes when the Inhabitants were at
Church serving the Lord their God, Gods mighty preservation of the Town.
the bullets came whisling over the Church and flew into their marketplace,
but did no harm, save only to a Malignants-house and chimney in the Town; and
(ever praised be our good God) by the most noble and renowned Lord Fairfax his
wisdom and valor and martial circumspection, they were still kept at such a
distance from the Town that the enemy could not shoot their grenades into the
Town as they desired and vehemently endeavored, Beverly pitifully plundered by
the enemies.
but they pitifully spoiled the Country about Hull, and especially the Town of
Beverly, which as soon as they came into, they miserably plundered; yea and they
thought to have done the Town of Hull a terrible mischief by cutting them short
of fresh water, but (blessed be the Lord) the Town felt no great want thereby,
being very competently furnished with all sorts of provision and sustenance for
men.

Now, Newcastle grew exceeding mad, and was extremely vexed that he was so
hopeless of getting the Town, The Earl of Newcastle despairs of getting Hull.
having been formerly so hopeful (at least in his high and proud conceits) to
get it for his Winter Quarters, and to be a Sanctuary for him from the Scots;
and it was generally reported (and that probably enough) that he cared not for
the loss of 10000 of his men, so he might bu^ get possession of it: But by Gods
blessing on the most noble Lord Fairfax his valor and vigilancie, there is no
fear of that strong Town in all probability. Yet see how it pleased the Lord
it should fall out within the said Town, in the time of this Siege, (which is
the thing I mainly intended to mention at this time and in this place) namely,
That about September. the 16th, 1643, being Saturday, an accident happened at the
North-Block-house of the Town, A sudden and most remarkable preservation of
Hull.
the danger whereof (had not the Lord marvellously prevented, and had it fallen
out on the side of the Town where the enemies lay, as it did on the most remote
^ide from them) had undoubtedly ruined the whole Town. For, there were at least
^ortie Carthages of Gunpowder suddenly blown up and some grenades which lay
there in the same place, Hulls very great danger, at this time, by Powder,
suddenly blown up.
and all fired, which quickly brake down a great part of that strong
Block-house, both within and without, which breach and loss ('it was verily
believed) could not be repaired with, at least, 2000li. charge; but I say, the
especial providence of God, heerin, appeared, in that it was blown up on that
side of the Town which lay next to the Seaside, otherwise it would have been a
very advantageous opportunity to the enemies for their more secure assaulting
and storming of the Town. The admirable hand of God in Hulls mighty danger.
Besides, this was also very remarkable above the rest, and in it, the hand of
God most eminently was seen, that it blew open a door, in which very room there
were fourteen barrells of Gunpowder, some with the heads open, yet took not
fire, which had it done, it would most certainly have blown up, at least, the
whole house, and have spoiled some considerable part of the Town: But, I say,
by Gods great mercy and admirable providence, they were all untoucht, and it
did no other harm, than as aforesaid. It was conceived and feared, at first,
that it came by some treachery, The occasion of Hu^ls so great danger.
but upon diligent search and inquisition 'twas clearly found to be done by the
carelessness of a Gunner; There were four men killed by it, and as many hurt,
and with this loss the danger ended, blessed and praised be the Lord our God
for it. And now we shall for a while leave Hull in this besieged posture and
condition, and speak of some other Parliamentarie-passages, worthy our notice
and observation.

About the midst of September, 1643, our most prudent and provident
Parliamentarie-Senators, The Parliaments care for the encouragement of London
Apprentices in their Service of the Kingdom.
in their pious and prudent care for the encouragement of Apprentices and young
men to be cheerful and forward to assist the Kingdoms great affairs against
the common-Adversaries thereof, set out an Ordinance of Parliament for the
securing of their indempnitie in going forth in service, and listing themselves
under the command of Sir William Waller in his Expedition. As also another
Ordinance came forth at the same time, for the searching of Trunkes and any
other carriages that past out of London. And a third also for a Collection to
be made for sick and maimed Soldiers. All which three said Ordinances of
Parliament, for the Readers better satisfaction, content, and delight, I have
thought fit here to insert.

The Copy of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
for the securing those Apprentices from indempnitie that list themselves under
the Command of Sir William Waller.
Die Veneris, September. 15. 1643.
WHereas in times of common danger and necessity, the interest of private
persons ought to give way to the public; It is ordained and declared by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, That such Apprentices unto Watermen, plying
and rowing upon the river of Thames, as have been or shall be listed to serve
as Soldiers for the defense of the Protestant Religion, and liberty of the
Kingdom, his Majesty's royal person, the Parliament, and the City of London,
under the Command of Sir William Waller: Their sureties and such as stand
engaged for them, shall be secured against their Masters, their Executors and
Administrators, from all loss and inconveniences, by forfeiture of bonds,
Covenants, infranchisements, or otherwise. And that after this public service
ended, the Masters of such Apprentices shall be commanded and required to
receive them again into their service, without imposing upon them any
punishment, loss, or prejudice, for their absence, in the defense of the
Commonwealth. And the Lords and Commons do further declare, That if it shall
appear that the Masters of such Apprentices have received any considerable loss
by the absence of their Apprentices, they will take care that reasonable
satisfaction shall be made unto them out of the public stock of the Kingdom,
according to justice and indifferency.

H. Elsynge, Cler. P. D. Com.

An Order of Parliament, That all Trunks and Carriages that come out of the
City, be searched at the Courts of Guards, etc.
Die Sabbathi, September. 23. 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That all Trunks
and other Carriages that come out of the City to pass the Courts of Guards,
shall not pass till they be searched by such men as the Committee for the
Militia shall depute, or by the Courts of Guards. And that my Lord Major be
desired to give order, that no Fl^x, Brimstone, or Saltpeter, or other things
that tend to the making of provisions for war, be permitted to pass these ten
days, either by water or by land, unless it be by warrant under the hand of Mr
Speaker, and that such goods shall be good prizes, as shall be so seized. And
it is left to the Committee for the Militia, to reward those that shall so seiz
the same out of the said goods, and the persons that shall so send any of the
said goods, as aforesaid, shall be secured and tried by a Council of war.
And this Order is to be printed and published, and to be sent to the several
Courts of Guards by the Committee for the Militia.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. P. D. Com.

An Order of Parliament, That a Collection be made in all Parish-Churches and
Chapels throughout London and Westminster, for sick and maimed Soldiers, etc.
Die Sabbathi, September. 23. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That on
Wednesday next (being the day appointed for public humiliation) there shall be
a Collection made in all the Parish-Churches in and about the City of London
and Westminster, that are mentioned in the bill of Mortality; as also in the
several Chapels within the said limits, by the Churchwardens and other
Officers of the said Parishes and Chapels, for and toward the relief of sick
and maimed Soldiers. And the moneys by them so collected they are not to
detain upon any pretense whatsoever, but to make payment thereof at
Tallow-Chandlers-Hall, near Dowgate, on Friday next, being the 29th of this
instant September. 1643. unto Mr William Greenhill, Mr John Pocock, Mr John
Randall, and Mr Richard Hutchinson, (or any two of them) Citizens of London
appointed to be Treasurers for the receiving and paying of moneys to sick and
maimed Soldiers. And it is heerby likewise ordered, That the Ministers of the
said several Parishes and Chapels shall earnestly persuade the people freely
to give and contribute to this so pious, charitable, and honorable a work, in
this time of great extremity, there being many maimed men here already, and
more expected from the Army, for the recovery and cure of whom there is great
reason to provide, they having so freely and cheerfully hazzarded their lives
for the preservation of all our lives and liberties, and the true Protestant
Religion.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. P. D. Com.
Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance and Order be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. P. D. Com.



And here also I may not omit justly to enumerate and commemorate the great
blessing of the 29th day of this September, 1643. as a singular
Parliamentarie-mercie, and special blessing of the Lord our good God, both to
the most famous and renowned City of London in special, and, indeed, to the
whole Kingdom of England in general, namely, the happy continuance of the
successful godly and gracious government of the said most famous City, Sir
Jo. Wollaston most happily chosen Lord Major of the City of London.
by the comfortable and desired choice of that most worthy virtuous, and pious
patriot and Senator of the said City, Sir John Wollaston, to succeed for the
ensuing year in the honorable Majoraltie thereof, who was chosen thereunto;
with a most full, fair and unanimous consent and suffrage of the hearty votes
and voices of all the numerous company of grave and well-affected Citizens then
assembled (thereunto) in the Guild Hall of London. A rare mercy indeed,
considering the times, for I make no question, The Authors just and
experimental attestation and commendation of Sir John Wollaston Lord Major of
London.
nay I am most confidently assured (out of that intimate and ancient experience
which I my-self have most happily had of his singular piety and ingenuity of
spirit, and sweetness of natural endowments, and approved cordial affection
and constant adherence to the cause of God in the Parliaments proceedings) that
he will with no less deserved honor and reputation (by Gods gracious
assistance) manage the ^elme of government, and steer the Stern of the Ship of
the Cities great Ocean and motion of serious and important affairs, than his
former famous Predecessor did. And that also which sweetens this mercy, The
mercies of this Lord Majors choice also was a sweet return of prayer.
and makes it so much the more remarkably eminent is, that his honorable
choice also, as his pious Predecessors, was a happy and holy fruit and return
of prayer, it being on the very next day after our monthly day of public
humilitation, when the Lord had been in particular sought unto for this
blessing. And for the confirmation, in part, of what I have thus fairly and
faithfully attested of him; It pleased the Lord, very shortly after his
inauguration into his honorable Majoraltie, and ere he was (as the Proverb is)
hardly warm in the seat of authority, as aforesaid, now to put him even
already upon an honorable trial of his love and loyalty to the great cause in
present question and agitation; A notable trial by Gods most wise disposal,
put upon the Lord Major of London, and most loyally managed by him.
and as he was now an eminent Cedar of our Lebanon, and but new-now planted on
the top of the Cities mountain, and, so, obnoxious to many and mighty
blustering blasts of trial and probation: So, I say, it pleased the Lord to
administer an occasion to show and set forth his loyalty and fidelity, and
that God had enabled him (and would so still) like a strong well-grown and
well-grounded Oak, to stand fast and most immovable, to oppose, withstand, and
break the force of the either violent blasts of malignitie, or sly and
insinuating breathings of treachery, wherewith he now I say, was already
assaulted from Oxford, thus:

About the first of November then succeeding, Four Proclamations sent at one
time to the Lo Major of London, to be published, in the Kings name, in the
City.
a Messenger was sent from Oxford, with no less than four Proclamations to be
delivered to the Lord Major of London, (all of most pernicious and dangerous
consequence) and by him and his authority to be published and proclaimed in the
Kings name throughout the City of London.

The first, to alter the general Monthly Wednesday-fast, contrary to an act
established by King and Parliament, and strange and uncouth reasons given for
the cause of the alteration thereof, one reason being, in regard of the horrid
and damnable Cessation of arms in Ireland; O monsirum infandum, inform,
ingens, etc. The second Proclamation was to make all money coined in Ireland,
current in England. The third, to command all Counties in the Kingdom to
accept such new high Sheriffs as were pricked at Oxford, and to remove the
office of Green wax from London to Oxford. The fourth, to inhibite the
administering and taking of the National League and Covenant between England
and Scotland, (of which Proclamation more hereafter in its more proper place.)
But, I say, this our most worthy, wise, pious, and loyal Lord Major (to the
glory of God, his own just honor, the joy of all Gods people, and the vexation
of all the base malignant spirits in London, whose false, faithless and
graceless hopes in him, were now at the first, I say, most worthily frustrated
and blasted by him, even in the very bud) who no sooner received the said four
Proclamations, but the presently sent the Messenger and them, with a strong
guard, to the Parliament, who took it as a singular and acceptable service from
the Lord Major, kept the Proclamations, and committed the Messenger to
Newgate-prison, as a Spy, for coming from Oxford to London, without either
their warrant, or his Excellencies the Lord Generals, contrary to their late
Ordinance of Parliament.

About the latter end also of the said September, Provision of firing ordered
by the Parliament for preventio^ of dangerous mu^^n^es by the poorer sort.
1643. the Parliament taking into serious consideration, the great
inconveniences which the Kingdom in general and the City of London in
special were like to feel and find in the ensuing Winter-season, by reason of
the want of Sea-coal, fuel, and firing, which would fall most heavily upon the
poorer sort of people, and might cause a mutiny and molestation of the peace
of the City, if not timely prevented, and they not (therein) competently
provided for, according to that old adagie, That hunger and cold will break
through stone-walls. Therefore, upon a Message from the House of Lords in
Parliament, a Committee also of the House of Commons was appointed to join with
a Committee of Lords to consult about the prevention of this (otherwise)
inevitable danger, and to take order for the felling and cutting of wood for
the better supply of the City and parts adjacent with firing for the winter
season (according to an Ordinance of Parliament which both Houses Woods to be
cut down to furnish the City and parts adjacent with fuel.
had passed immediately after, viz October 2d, 1643.) and by virtue whereof the
said Committee had power to appoint the felling and cutting of such quantity
of wood as they should think fit within sixty miles of London, in all Forests,
Chases, and Parkes, belonging to the Kings or Queens Majesty's, What woods
were to be cut down.
or out of any other woods, groves, springs, or other land where fellable wood
was, belonging to any Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Chapters, etc. Papists,
Delinquents, or other Malignants against the Parliament, and the same to be
disposed of for the better supply of the City, as aforesaid, and to be sold at
such rates as the said Committee should think fit.

And now again, good Reader, be pleased a little here to re-peruse and review
the sweet Parliamentarie-Mercies of this Month also.

First, A summary grateful review of this Months Parliamentarie-Mercies.
In the timely preservation of Plymouth from a treacherous plot.

Secondly, In the Siege and preservation of Hull from that dangerous casualtie
by Gunpowder.

Thirdly, In the threefold Declaration of the Parliaments piety

John Wollaston to be Lord of the City of London, in such a time of so great
need of godly

four pernicious Proclamations sent to the said most worthily honored Lord
Major; and in the Parliaments so prudent and provident provision of fuel in
this Winter-season.

And then tell me (good Reader) whether God did not heerin also most smoothly
carry-on his Ark with prosperous gales, GODS Ark carried on with fair and
prosperous gales.
maugre all the swelling surges of the wicked intentions of its envious
adversaries; and on the sweet sight and serious consideration thereof, to give
the Lord only all the praise and glory, and with holy David to break forth
into a holy ecstasy of rejoicing gratitude and say, Psalm. 68. 19.
Blessed be the Lord our God, who, thus, daily loads us with benefits and
blessings, even the Lord, the God of our salvation. And now to go on.

And here now I shall begin this month of Octobers successful voyage,
October. 1643.
with a singular act and evidence of our most renowned Parliaments piety and
charity to that most famous Nursery of many succeeding thousands of poor
helpless Orphans, The Parliaments charitable act and order for the good of the
poor children of Christ's Hospital in London.
I mean Christ's Hospital in London; The best and most beautiful Flower of my
Garden. Where (and I most heartily bless my good God that I have this happy
and fit and fair opportunity, to acknowledge, and to let the whole Kingdom
know, as I am infinitely bound, to Gods due glory and mine own comfort) I the
unworthy Author of this Parliamentarie-Chronicle, have from my tender infancy,
had my best being, breeding and education: The Authors own grateful
acknowledgement of Gods goodness to him in the said Hospital.
And, to which House of Charity, (and so consequently to the renowned Citizens
of London, the pious and provident Patrons thereof, next under God) I owe my
self, and my poor All, what ever it be, both for all my former happy
education, and present sustentation, there, in my place and Calling. But to
leave this brief and grateful digression, (which, I hope was not altogether
impertinent to this place; I am sure, not to my person and condition) and to
come to the present business: It pleased God, I say, to put into the hearts of
our plous Parliamentarie-Statists, to set forth a singular act and order of
Parliament for the good of the poor Children of Christ's Hospital, in these
hard and pinching times, that they might have comfortable sustenance and
maintenance, notwithstanding the great straits and necessities of the Kingdom.
Which order of Parliament happily coming to my hands, I have thought good here
to insert, for the Readers better content and satisfaction, which was as
follows,

Die Lunae, Octobris, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That all the
Rents and Revenues, belonging to Christ's Hospital, which are to be paid for
the immediate use and advantage of the Children of the said Hospital, shall be
free from the Ordinance of the Twentieth and Fifth part, and from all other
Taxes or Charges whatsoever; And they do require all Assessors, heerby to take
notice heerof; Provided, that the Tenants who enjoy good and considerable
bargains, in their Leases from the said Hospital, do claim, and enjoy no
freedom, exemption, or adva^tage by this* Order.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliament.

October the 6th, 1643. The House of Commons in Parliament adjourned themselves
into several Committees, and one choice Committee of them assembled the same
day at a Common Hall in London, which was called on purpose to consult with the
Citizens for the speedy raising of an 100000li. An 100000li to be raised in
the City of London, for the advance of an army of 21000 Scots to come into
England.
for the advance of the Scottish Army unto us, for repayment of which sum,
our Brethren of Scotland undertook (as has been formerly mentioned) to bring
21000 men into this Kingdom; which said 100000li. was also desired to be
borrowed of the City upon loan, and to be certainly repaid out of moneys
procured from foreign parts, upon the public Faith of both Kingdoms of*
England and Scotland, and there were sundry excellent speeches made there and
then to the Citizens, to set forth the great importance of their speedy
assistance in this particular, and how acceptable a work it would be to the
Lord, not only to enter into a holy League or Covenant, for reformation of the
evils in Church and State, but also to seal it with some benevolent and
cheerful act of Contribution, (though but by way of loan) to set forward the
work; that thus both hand and heart might go together in the work, and we,
with holy David, 2 Samuel 24.
might manifest that we would not offer a sacrifice to our God of that which
cost us naught. To which motion, then, most efficaciously made, there, All then
present, with very much cheerfulness and alacrity, declared their forwardness
and willing assent to the utmost of their ability, as was desired; and at the
same time, and afterward, also, at the taking of the said Covenant in all the
ParishChurches in and about London, great numbers subscribed for very
considerable sums to be raised, accordingly, with all convenient and possible
expedition.

And now, good Reader, thou may be pleased to remember, that we lately left
the atheistical Earl of Newcastle and his Popish Army, besieging the strong
and important Town of Hull, most bravely defended (as I mentioned before) by
the most renowned and victorious Lord Fairfax, A famous victory obtained by
the Lord Fairfax against Newcastles Popish forces, whereby the Siege of Hull
was raised.
the most noble and faithful Governor thereof: Now therefore to return to it
again, I shall here acquaint thee, that about the 14th of this instant October,
1643. came certain intelligence to London* from thence, both by several
relations, and also by Letters of a most memorable and brave bickering between
the besiegers and the besieged, wherein the Lord was pleased to crown the most
noble Lord Fairfax with a very glorious and famous victory over those his
Popish adversaries, and thereby to raise that insolent Siege of this proud
Atheist against Hull, put the said new Marquess (forsooth, for, honors at
Oxford are, it is too well known, so cheap, that they are most easily bought and
sold for any base and treacherous* design against the Parliament and Kingdom)
of Newcastle to new troubles, and driving him quite out of his little patience
and probitie, and making thereby his wit as well as his honesty run a
wool-gathering, The Marquess of Newcastle put to great straits by this Defeat.
and, indeed, plunging him into inextricable perplexities, as was most
remarkably evident in this most memorable and brave Defeat given to him and his
Popish forces before Hull, where he lay in Siege, as you have already heard.
For now Winter being come on, and he desirous to make Hull his most strong and
advantageous Winter-quarter, and safe retyring and retreating place on all
disasterous occasions, he now resolved to set stif^y and stoutly upon the work,
and with his utmost powers to endeavor to procure it, but was now forced to
make a new reckoning, for thus reckoning without his host; The description of
which noble and renowned skirmish and brave bickering, for the more full and
clearer setting forth of the truth thereof, I have here thought fit to give the
Reader a sight of the Copy of that renowned Commander Sir John* Meldrums own
letter, even verbatim, as he himself (being a principal actor in the whole
business) writ and sent it to the Speaker of the* Parliament, only I shall
here or there interlace some few material circumstances, extracted out of the
most noble Lord Fairfaxes Letter, sent also about the same time to the said Mr.
Speaker of the Parliament; which was as follows.

For my honorable Friend, William Lentall, Esquire, Speaker of the Commons
House of Parliament.
SIR;
I Shall not weary you much with the relation of some happy successes, God
has blessed us withal, since my arrival at Hull, knowing that many pens will
be set awork* A Copy of Sir John Meldrums Letter to the Speaker of the
Parliament touching the brave victory he obtained at Hull.
whereby neither the truth in the narration, nor the favor and mercy of God,
can be fairly and fully revealed. There having been a supply sent into Hull,
October. 5th, 1643. of about 400 Soldiers, from the Earl of Manchester, and
about 250, from Sir William Constable Upon monday the 9th of the said October,
the Reginalists or Popish forces under the Earl of Newcastles command, about
break of day, did with a great deal of courage, being commanded by Denton
Stricland, and one Little, a Countryman of mine, who commanded in chief, fell
upon one of our Outworkes, called the Ragged-jetty, a place of great importance
for the safe riding of our Shipping, before the Town; but by the resolution of
two English Commanders, and a Countryman of mine, cousen-germane to Sir William
Cunningham, and the courage of the Gunners and Soldiers, they were (upon view
of an hundred Musketeers which followed me from the Mount) beaten out of the
work, and driven to a most shameful retreat, leaving the bodies of their
Commanders dead upon the place; many of their Soldiers killed and wounded.
Whereupon, on the said 9th of October, my Lord General called a Council of
war, where it was resolved for us to issue forth, and to beat them out of
their next works approaching to ours. The order was, to fall out in two
distinct bodies of five hundred Musketeers apiece, commanded (under my charge)
by two Colonells, Lambert and Rainsborow, who with Major Forbess and Major
Wren, carried themselves very bravely in the business; and thus (the Lord
General having placed three troops of horse, to keep off the enemies horse
(which were quickly drawn into a body) from annoying our foot) marching along,
about nine of the clock that morning, toward the enemies line of approach, on
every side, the enemy abandoning one work after another, until we had made
our selves masters of their Ordnance. But, as the Sun (in its greatest
brightness) is subject to Eclipses: so it fell out with us at this time; for,
the forwardness and violence of our soldiers was abated by about an hundred
pikes of the enemy, who charging the Van of our foot, scattered and drove us
back again, even so, as that they regained their Ordnance, and enforced us all
to a shamef^ll retreat; neither my self, nor the other Commanders being able to
stop any one man, (no, if the Kingdom it self had been at the stake.) In this
retreat Colonel Rainsborow, was (as I conceive) either taken prisoner, or
killed dead, and so fallen into some ditch, for he could not be found, but his
man's dead body was found. Upon my Lord Generals order to shut the gates, and
upon the sense of their own miscarriage, a body of our foot was drawn up again,
which falling again, with as much animositie and heat of courage, as formerly
they had retreated, did drive them again out of their works, recovered again
all the Ordnance lost, and gained beside, a half-Cannon and a Demiculverin of
brass, which we had not possessed in the first charge, even one of their
^orreigne great brazen-staves, which now through Gods mercy has proved a Staff
of Reed unto them. Upon this change of the Scene of affairs, the Marquess of
Newcastle and General King brought down their whole Army upon us from their
head quarter: Whereupon we turned the two last pieces, now taken by us, upon
this body of their army, and thereupon they were all instantly forced to a
most wretched retreat, and to stand at a distance until we had slighted
their whole line of approach, and then we brought off nine pieces of Ordnance,
the Demy-Cannon, aforementioned, called (by some) one of the Queens gods, and,
by others, the Queens Pocket-pistoll, which at first we made shift to draw out
of danger of the enemies recovery, till we had more leisure toward night, to
fetch within the walls, as afterward we did, and brought them safely within
our quarters. Now after the enemy perceived they had lost the two brass-pieces
(which they did imagine we were not able to draw off) their whole body of
foot with forty Colors drew themselves (as a fresh reserve, both horse and
foot) within Pistollshot to our Ragged-Jettie, resolving (it seemed) to fall
upon it that night, which they did with great fury and violence. But it pleased
the Lord, infinitely to manifest great strength in the weakness of our weary
men, and as it were to put new spirits into their tired bodies; and after a hot
ski^mish of about two hours at least, we also having ordered (as they
perceived) two hundred* Musketeers to keep without the Jetty, which could not
possibly have been done, if the enemy had had Ordnance, and having put so many
resolved men within the said Jetty; thus, I say, at length it pleased the Lord
so to order and dispose of things, that they all betook themselves to their
heels about midnight, and we^e driven quite out of the field, and forced to
retire quite away to their head-quarter. The Marquess of Newcastle himself and
Lieutenant King, were beholders of the second part of this act, and (as it was
reported) King himself was wounded in two several places. Our Ordnance did
them a great deal of mischief, and if we had had but a fresh body of foot,
they had been put to a great strait indeed. In their retyring, their other
great-god (helpless gods) stuck fast in the mire, until all the Country People
were called together to draw her off. Among the Captains that deserved well in
this service, Captain Micklethwait, Parsons, Bethel and Hardstaff; for the
horse, Captain Clayton (the bearer heerof, who has a general love of all the
Soldiers) did us singular good service. Captain ^almond, Captain Sibbalds, and
Captain Crooker, did all of them carry themselves very valiantly. I my self had
a blow on my side by a slug of cutted-iron shot from the great piece, but
thanks be to the Lord, was not the worse for it; but, I believe, had her
Majesty known where the shot should have lighted, she would have checked the
Gunner, for not charging full home. Whilst we were in this service (to
increase our comfort) we heard the noise of the great encounter in
Lincolnshire, whereunto also God has pleased to give a happy issue, whereby
we may perceive, that God is certainly upon the stage, and that Dagon must
down. Since the beginning of this my Letter, we understand that Colonel
Rainesborow is safe. Sir, I desire that you will continue your accustomed
favor toward

Your affectionate friend and servant, JOHN ME^DRUM.
From Hull, October. 14. 1643.

And although, this virtuous and valourous Commander Sir John Meldrum, in his
wisdom and humility forbeares to write ought of his own best deservings in
that foresaid Service; A brief touch of Sir Jo. M^^drums worth and valor,
attested by the renowned Lord Fairfax himself.
yet I cannot forbear to give the Reader, at least one touch thereof, attested
by the most noble and renowned Lord General himself, the Lord Fairfax, in his
Letter to the Speaker of the Parliament, which, in brief, was this, That
itpleased God (to give you my Lords own words) by the gallant courage and
activitie of Sir John Meldrum, and the spirit and valor of the other
Commanders and Officers, that all which the Soldiers had got and lost at the
first assault (forementioned) by their sudden fear and retreat, was totally
recovered again, and that with advantage too, and the whole victory in the
Conclusion.

And now, having formerly touched upon the mention of that famous fight and most
glorious victory which our good God graciously conferred upon that as virtuous
as valiant* General the noble Earl of Manchester, against the Popish and
atheistical forces of Newcastle in Lincolnshire, under their Papisticall
Commander the Lord Widrington and* General Henderson, The most famous and
renowned victory obtained by the right honorable Earl of Manchester, at
Horncastle in Lincolnshire.
at Horn-Castle;. I shall now in the next place give the. Reader a most exact
and full and fair account thereof also, in all the material and substantial
passages of it, especially for the just advancement of the honor of the Lord
our God, and the great comfort of all that wish the welfare and prosperity of
our Jerusalem. About the 10th of October, 1643. my Lord of Manchester having
had notice when he was at* Linne of a great force of horse and Dragooneers come
into Lincolnshire, under the command of General Henderson, and that upon the
retreat of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Colonel Cromwell from about Lowth, they
were much heightened with confidence of success, when ever they could draw-out
forces to an eng^gement. The want of foot and Dragooneers made Sir Thomas
Fairfax and Colonel Cromwell very unwilling to fight with them; till they had
acquainted my Lord, and tried what supplies he could afford them; and withal
his Lordship was assured (if he could draw any forces toward Balenbrook-Castle,
the enemy was so confident of his own strength) that he would bring down all
his force to fight with him. Upon these grounds my Lord drew all his forces
both horse and foot from Linne, save only one troop of horse and six companies
of foot, which he left for the guard of that Town with Colonel Walton, whom he
made Lievtenant-Governour.

Thus, upon the Monday, my Lord drew out all his foot out of Boston, ten
Companies he laid in Bolenbrook-Town, under the command of Major Knight,
Sergeant Major to Sir Miles Hobart; Colonel Russells Regiment was quartered at
Strickford within a mile of them; and my Lords own (being but three Companies,
the rest being sent to Hull, and left at Linne) at Stickney, and the horse were
all quartered in the Towns round about, at eight and ten miles distance.

Upon this Monday at night, Major Knight summoned the Castle of Bolenbrook in
my Lord of M^nchesters name, Bolenbrook-Castle summoned.
but was answered, That his bugbear words must not win Castles, nor should
make them quit the place; that night, our men took in a little house on the
right hand between the Castle and the Church, and resolved the next night to
endeavor to break-open the Church-doores, and there to mount a Morter-piece,
and thence fire the Castle. The enemy had notice on the friday following, The
enemy prepares to meet and fight with the Earl of Manchester.
that my Lord was coming, or come into those parts, and thereupon drew out all
their horse and Dragooners from their several Garrisons, at Lincoln, Newark
and Gainsborow, with a bold resolution to find him out and fight with him.
Upon Tuesday those of the Castle killed one or two of our men; and as Major
Knight and Quartermaster General Vermeyden were viewing of it, made some shot
at them, and one of them hit the said Quartermaster General a little below
the ancle, but pierced not the skin, only bruised his leg.

That afternoon, my Lord of Manchester came himself to Kirkby, which is within
a mile of Bolenbrook, with Colonel Cromwell, where also my Lord Willoughby met
him, Our forces are drawn all near each other about Bolenbrook.
and Sir Thomas Fairfax was then at Horn-Castle, about five miles off, one of
his Regiments having the watch at Edlingston, about three miles farther, but
nearer to the enemy. My Lord had not been long there before he received a
Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfax, that an allarm was given to some of our
Quarters, and that himself had sent out some horse to discover what it might
be, and would immediately give him a farther account, which he did by another
Letter, about an hour after, the party being returned and could get no
information of any enemy near, but conceived it to be a mistake. However, Sir
Thomas resolved to stay there until the evening, and then to come to Kirkby to
my Lord. My Lord conceived it fit, and so did all those that were with him, to
give the allarm to all his quarters, and to appoint Horn-Castle to be the
Allarm-place, and then to go himself, immediately, thither to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and when all their men were thus drawn together to take farther
resolutions; and so, immediately, with my Lo. Willoughby, and some Officers
with him, he took horse for Horn-Castle, Sir Thomas Fairfax, in the mean time,
getting no intelligence of the enemies approach, came away toward Kirkby to my
Lord.

Before my Lord had reached Horn-Castle, The enemy gives ours the allarm,
about Horncastle.
the allarm came to him in good earnest, that the enemy was fallen into our
quarters, and was marching toward Horn-Castle. Coming nearer the Town he could
hear great shouting and noise, which he conceived to be the enemies triumph,
having beaten our men out of the Town; but it proved otherwise; for, Ours
bravely bicker with the enemies forlornhopes.
some of our men falling upon the enemies forlornhopes, though (but part of two
troops) seeing themselves desperately engaged, resolved to put the best face
on it, and fell upon them with crying and shouting, which did exceedingly amaze
the enemy, and gave our men the easier passage through the midst of them. Now,
my Lord finding the enemy come into his quarters before he could have any
certain information where he was, and the allarm-place possessed by the enemy,
he appointed Kirkby and Bolenbrook-hill, for all his men to repair unto; and
accordingly sent word to all the quarters whither all our men came but that
night, except three troops that were directed to Stickney, and three or four
troops that went by the way of Tottershall, and came not in till next morning.
Many of our troops came to Horn-Castle, according to the first orders, but
finding the enemy there, came away without any loss at all or very little. The
enemy had fallen into our quarters at Thimbleby and some Towns thereabout,
Three or four of our troops in great dang^r, but came off most bravely.
where three or four of our troops were in a manner surprised, but, finding
themselves engaged, gave so good testimony and proof of their courage and
resolution, that the enemy had little or no cause to brag of that nights work,
which being of so memorable consequence, I have thought fit briefly here to
relate, which was thus: Captain Johnson, Captain Samuel Moody, and Captain
Player, were three of the commanders of these troops which the enemy had thus
almost surprised in their quarters, and were afterward also environed about by
the enemy, Cap. Iohnsons, Cap. Moodies, and Captain Players brave courage and
resolution.
who had gotten between them and the body of their horse: so that they were
forced to break through two bodies of the enemies horse, of at least a thousand
horse in each body; but with admirable courage and resolution, they with their
troops charged the enemy, crying all of them (as before they had agreed among
themselves) with a shout and loud voice; Come on, come on, all is our own, all
is our own; which so amazed the enemy, expecting some ambuscado, that these
three troops brake through the first body, and so through the second, doing
great execution, yet lost but three men. After that, they hasting toward the
Town of Horncastle (where they thought the Earl of M^nchester was) about a mile
before they came at the Town, they discovered another party of the enemies
horse. The commanders notable discretion and courage.
Here, they discreetly agreed to go soberly toward them, every man making
answer to him that asked any question, nothing but Friends, friends, all
friends, as if they had been of the enemies troops, and were going upon some
design, it being, yet, dark; therefore when the enemies called to them, Who is
there, the other all answered, Friends, friends, and so they passed, but as
soon as they were past, and thought themselves secure, they turned faces about,
and asked the enemy, Who are you for? They answered, for the King. Then, said
they, We are for the King and Parliament, and charging the enemy, fled toward
Horncastle, and the enemy pursuing, followed them to the Town-side, there being
no forces in the Town on either side; The great strait they were still put unto.
but they in the Town, had with carts and timber, barracadoed the passages into
the Town, so that by this means there was some loss in the troops, being thus
unexpectedly put to their shifts; but the loss was but little, a Cornet and
some few others, and they brought half a douzen of prisoners with them. Which
could not but manifest a most evident hand of God in so great a preservation.
But to proceed.

All that night we were drawing our horse to the appointed rendevouz; And the
next morning being* Wednesday, my Lord gave order that the whole force both
horse and foot, should be drawn up to Bolenbrook-hill, where he would expect
the enemy, Bolenbrockhill designed to be the place to fight.
being the only convenient ground to fight with him; But Colonel Cromwell was
no way satisfied that we should fight, our horse being extremely wearied with
hard duty two or three days together.

The enemy also drew (that morning) their whole body of horse and Dragooneers
into the field, The enemies strength and ours.
being 74 Colors of horse, and 21 Colors of Dragooneers, in all 95 Colors.
We had not many more than half so many Colors of horse and Dragooneers, but I
believe we had as many men, besides our foot, which indeed could not be drawn
up until it was very late; The word on both sides.
The enemies word was Cavendish, and ours was, Religion. I believe that as we
had no notice of the enemies coming toward us; so they had as little of our
preparation to fight with them. It was about twelve of the clock ere our horse
and Dragooneers were drawn up; after that we marched about a mile nearer the
enemy, Both armies in sight of each other.
and then we began to descry him by little and little, coming toward us. But
until this time we did not know we should fight, but so soon as our men had
knowledge of the enemies coming, they were very full of joy and resolution,
thinking it a great mercy that they should now fight with him. The piety of
our army*
Our men went on in several bodies, singing Psalms. Quartermaster General
Vermeyden with five troops had the forlorn-hope, and Colonel Cromwell the
Van, assisted with other of my Lords troops, and seconded by Sir Thomas
Fairfax; Both armies met at a Town called Ixbie.
Both armies met about Ixbie (if I mistake not the Towns name) both they and
we had drawn up our Dragooneers, and gave the first charge, and then the horse
fell in. Colonel Cromwell fell with brave resolution upon the enemy,
immediately after their Dragooneers had given him the first volley, yet they
were so nimble, as that within half pistoll-shot, they gave him another, his
horse was killed under him at the first charge, Genesis Cromwells great danger.
and fell down upon him, and as he rose up he was knocked down again, by the
Gentleman that charged him, who, 'twas conceived, was Sir Ingram Hopton, but
afterward he recovered a poor horse in a Soldiers hand, and bravely mounted
himself again. The sight in the very heat of it.
Truly this first charge was so home-given and performed with so much admirable
courage and resolution by our troops, that the enemy stood not another, but
were driven back upon their own body, The enemy ^^ins to (...).
which was to have seconded them, and at last put them into a plain disorder;
and thus in less than half an hours fight they were all quite routed and
forced to run for their lives, The enemies fly.
though they were two for one, and as soon as our men perceived them to
shrink, they fiercely charged within them all, and then, I say, they ran for
it, leaving all their Dragooneers, which were now on foot behind them. Thus our
men pursued them, and did execution upon them about five or six miles, all the
way being strewed with broken arms, dead men and horses.

And here I may not omit to make mention of the rare courage and valor of that
most noble Commander Sir Thomas Fairfax, who when they first viewed the enemy
and saw great odds in their number, was so much the more inflamed with godly
courage and resolution, Sir Tho. Fairfax, his undaunted courage
saying, Come, let us fall on, I never prospered better than when I fought
against the enemy three or four to one. One hundred of their men to avoid the
fury of our men were drowned, The issue of the fight.
many were wounded, and in one gravel pit above an 100 were hid, some there
breathing their last breath, others less wounded; my Lord of Manchester most
mercifully gave order that care should be taken of them all. And here it must
not be forgotten, that some with mortal wounds upon them cried out, The
Commission of Array, The Commission of Array cried out on by the dying Soldiers.
the Commission of Array brought us hither full sore against our wills; we were
as true servants to the Parliament, and our Religion and liberties, as any in
England, and woe to those that were the cause that Lincoln and Yorkshire became
a prey to the enemy, we die as true friends to the Parliament as any. Two
hundred horse were found left in the Castle, their riders being all fled; many
hundreds fled into the waters up to the arme-holes; they that lay slain in the
high ways were very many, and diverse of quality, for there were brave bodies
stripped naked; The spoil and prizes taken.
Sir George Bowls was slain, and Sir Ingram Hopton, Colonel Shelley was taken
prisoner among those taken out of the water, and Colonel Airs; the number of
horse taken in all were about 2000, of prisoners about 1000, and as many slain,
of arms 1500, and not 100 of the enemies ('it was verily believed) to be found
in a body; of 94 Standards, 35 were taken: We lost very few of our men, none
of note; we hardly found above one officer hurt, and that was Colonel
Cromwells Captain-Lievtenant. The army, with the most noble Lord of
Manchester, possess themselves of Horncastle.
Our foot were not drawn up to the place where the fight was, until after the
fight and chase was over. Horse and foot though very weary marched on toward
Horncastle, where my Lord lay that night, with all the foot, his horse being
sent to their old quarters in the Towns adjoining. And truly, both Officers
and Soldiers did their duty that day singularly well and bravely, my Lord
himself also took wonderful pains in bringing the business to this foresaid
pass, in drawing up all the foot to have relieved the horse, in case they had
been put to straits, and had needed it. But God himself did all, taking away
the enemies hearts, and giving resolution and courage to our men, to him
therefore be all the honor and glory of this famous victory.

Now whiles these things were thus in agitation, Letters of the enemies
intercepted, confirming the truth of this great victory.
the noble Lord Fairfax had a Letter brought unto him, which was intercepted,
written by that ignoble Popish Lord Widrington, the then present Governor of
Lincoln, in which Letter, (writing to his great Lord the Marquess of Newcastle)
he confirms by his own confession the truth of this great victory. Another
Letter was also intercepted written by General Hinderson also to the Governor
of Newark. The former Letter enforming Newcastle, that the loss of all
Lincolnshire and Yorkshire too was in a great hazard, especially if he were
forced to quit Hulls siege too; and in his said Letter also certifying the loss
of diverse of their prime Commanders for certain slain in the foresaid battle.
Hindersons Letter, also, importing a pitiful complaint of his loss in the said
fight, and assuring the Governor of Newark that since the fight he was not
able to rally or get together, hardly 400 men of all his former great and
numerous forces.

And that which adds extraordinary luster to the honor of our wonder-working
God, and which I may not here by any means omit; It pleased the Lord by his
admirable providence so to order it, This famous victory, and that also at
Hull, were obtained both in one and the same day.
that both this great victory at Horncastle and that brave victory also
obtained by the most renowned Lord Fairfax at Hull, under the command of that
most worthy and expert Commander Sir John Meldrum, were bestowed by the Lord
our God upon his people and Parliament, upon one and the same day, namely,
Wednesday, October 11, 1643. And now to go on.

About the 16th of October, 1643. came Letters from Gloucester to London, with
most credible intelligence, that the truly valiant and magnanimous Commander
Colonel Massy, that ever to be honored and renowned Governor, Col. Massies
good service at Tewksbery.
and (by Gods wonderful assistance) maintainer of Gloucester, having true
intelligence that about a regiment of the Kings Welsh forces were come to
Tewksbery, intending to fortify and quarter themselves there, and to make that
Town winter-Garrison; This noble and most vigilant Colonel being very desirous
to be rid of such unfriendly and unruly neighbors, speedily and privately drew
forth a considerable party of horse and foot from Gloucester, and marched with
them to Tewksbery, where he suddenly and resolutely fell upon the enemy, slew
above 30 of them, took many prisoners, and forced the rest to fly for their
lives, some of whom, were in that their hasty flight, drowned in the river
Severn. He also took many of their horses and arms, most of their pickaxes,
spades, and other instruments, wherewith they were raising trenches and
strengthening their kennells, to have lain lurking the more securely, like so
many prey-devouring Wolves, or Sheep-biting mischievous Mastives; and having,
thus, most successfully demolished their works, he returned again victoriously
to Gloucester.

Much also about the same time came certain intelligence by Letters out of
Warwickshire to London, Another brave defeat given to the Kings forces by the
Parliaments forces in Warwick-Castle.
of another brave defeat given to the Kings Cormorants at Cambden, in another
part of the said County of Gloucester, which was informed to be thus; About
300 of the Kings horse came from Oxford into that Town of Cambden; whereof the
Parliaments forces in Warwick-Castle having speedy intelligence, there came a
considerable party of them in the midst of the night into the said Town,
surprised most of them in their beds, and carried them away prisoners with them
to Warwick-Castle, together with all their horses. There were between thirty
and forty of thtm that for some space stood stoutly to oppose our forces, but
they were all soon quelled, and some of them slain in fight, but the rest were
all taken prisoners, and carried to Warwick-Castle, as aforesaid.

About the 20th of October also, 1643. Our most prudent and provident
Parliamentarie-Statists, for the better securing of the great affairs and
weighty negotiations of both the Houses of Parliament, and their just
proceedings therein for the welfare of Church and State, An Ordinance of
Parliament against Spies and intelligencers.
they set forth an Ordinance or Declaration for the prevention and surprisall
of all spies and intelligencers from Oxford to London, and from London to
Oxford, for the sequestring of their estates, and allowance of a fair reward to
all such persons as should be assistant in giving notice of and apprehending
any such, according to the tenor of the said Ordinance, which for the Readers
better satisfaction therein, I have thought fit to insert, as it was printed
and published by authority of Parliament.

A Declaration and Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
for the Sequestring of, etc.
Die Martis, October. 31. 1643.
WHereas by the frequent intercourse of persons and intelligence (contrary to
the use and custom of War) between the Cities of London and Westminster, and
other parts of the Kingdom, and the persons of the King and Queen, and forces
raised by the King against the Parliament and Kingdom; opportunity has been
given for the plotting and contriving a late treacherous and horrid design, and
in case the said intercourse and intelligence should continue, the same way
will still be open for any other of the like nature in time to come; As also
for the frequent conveying of moneys and other provisions for the supporting of
this unnatural War. For the preventing whereof, be it declared and ordained by
the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, that no person or persons
whatsoever shall from henceforth repair or go from the said Cities of London
and Westminster, or from any other parts of the Kingdom, unto the person of
the King or Queen, or Lords of Council abiding with him or her, or to any
person or persons within any of the Kings Quarters, Leaguers, or Garrisons, or
that are within any of the armies raised by the King, nor shall give or hold
any intelligence by Letters, Messages, or otherwise, with the persons of the
King and Queen, or other persons aforesaid, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament, or warrant from the Lord General of the forces raised by the two
Houses, or from the respective Officers that shall command in chief any of the
forces. And the said Lords and Commons do further declare, That the person or
persons who shall do to the contrary heerof, shall be proceeded against, as
those within the Ordinance for sequestrations. And shall be farther accounted
as persons that do adhere unto those that have levied war against the
Parliament and Kingdom, and be liable to the same punishment. And be it
further declared and ordained, for the better and more effectual execution of
the premises, That the person or persons that shall discover any of the persons
offending, as aforesaid, shall have one fifth part of all such benefits and
profits that shall ac^rue or grow, by reason of the seizing and sequestring of
their estates, according to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, and
of the said Ordinance of Sequestration. And in case any person or persons after
the last of June, having knowledge of the said offenders and offenses, shall
not within convenient time reveal the same unto the Speakers of both Houses of
Parliament, or to the Lord Gene^all, or other Officers commanding in chief, the
said person or persons shall incur the like penalties and forfeitures as are
heerin provided against the said principal offenders.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration and Ordinance be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge,
Cler. P. D. Com.

About the 24th also of October aforesaid, the most noble and victorious Earl
of Manchester (whom the Lord most graciously raised up to show himself most
valiantly for the cause of God and his Country, and whom the good hand of Gods
almighty power and providence has made victorious over those abominable
Antichristian and atheistical forces in the North) in pursuance now of his
late so prosperous and successful atchievments in those parts, The City of
Lincoln taken by the noble Earl of Manchester.
and of that brave and memorable victory he obtained at Horn-Castle, as
aforesaid, went on also most courageously to the City of Lincoln, whither
being come with his forces, and upon the summoning thereof it was soon
surrendered to him. Wherein he found and forced to be left, in the City, The
prize taken in the City of Lincoln.
Close, and Minster of Lincoln, arms for at least 2500 men, 28 or 30 Colors,
three pieces of Ordnance, and great store of other ammunition, the Cormorants
or Cavalerian Officers having liberty granted to depart on horseback with
their swords, but the common Soldiers only with sticks in their hands; and
thus became Master of this City, Gainesborough also taken, by the said noble
Earl of Manchester.
without bloodshed or much molestation. After which he most victoriously
marched also to Gainesborough, another of the enemies Garrison Towns in the
said County; But the Garrison therein hearing of the surrender of Lincoln, and
that the noble Earl of Manchester was making hasty preparation unto them, they
more hastily slighted their works, (as by credible information was related)
and speedily quitted the place, and fled away thence to Newark. And very
shortly after this most noble and renowned Lord having received farther
assistance and supply by the coming over of such horse as the most heroic Lord
Fairfax could spare him from Hull, he now resolved to prosecute his design to
the full of quite clearing Lincolnshire (maugre all the opposition of
Newcastles viperous papisticall forces) from those devouring Cormorants, and
hideous Harpyes, which had so infected and infested that whole County, where
now for a while we will leave him full of cause of praise and thanksgiving to
his God, who made him so victorious, and pray for the perfecting of this his so
pious and honorable resolution.

And here now good Reader, give me leave to tell thee, or rather to remember
thee of what thou knewst too well before, The great design against the City of
London.
viz. That the most famous and ever to be honored City of London, being the
main, if not the only white and mark of the inveterate malice and envy of the
Oxonian Court-Achitophels and atheistical and Popish Cormorants and
Malignants; this place mightily and mainly being the great Remora and mighty
Stone in the way of their mischievously intended tyrannical Monarchy and
Popish Hierarchy, which must be removed, or else all their whole work must
needs be fruitless and frivolous. Now therefore having grasped such a handful
of the Kingdom in the Western parts thereof, and having, as they hoped (but
falsely, praised be God) gotten good hold on the Northern parts of the Kingdom
too; Now, I say, they began to knock all their heads and hearts together on the
anvill of their utmost Jesuiticall Counsels, seeing London to be so great a
goad in their sides, and such a strong bolt and obstacle in the way of their
high designs, and that it was impossible to be mastred by any of their present
might or immediate assaults. This therefore was the main and great design, The
great plot and design was how to contrive to starve up the City of London.
how to starve up the City this Winter; which must be first by breaking in
with their armies into the associated Counties, fortifying some considerable
Towns therein, and thereby awing the rest with restless alarmes and excursions,
disabling them in money and arms, hindering, thus, all commerce to and from the
City, and thus also stopping all kind of provision to be brought to it; and
then the Irish Rebels (or deluded Irish Protestants, yea both) to be brought
on by multitudes to assist and help forward this great and main design, and
then to share and divide the plunder, the honors and lands both of London,
England, and Ireland among them; only Scotland must have the unhappie
happiness, to stay to be devoured at leisure, and in the last place of the
three Kingdoms.

Now the manner of the beginning and setting this design on foot, was, The
manner and ways of the enemies contriving their plot against London.
to take and fortify Redding again, Bedford, Newport-Pannell, etc. and so to
get forward to Cambridge and Huntington-shire, that way toward the
North-Easterly parts of the Kingdom, and thus to increase and strengthen
advantages already gotten, (at least, I say, as they falsely conceited) and then
consequently to be for the South-Eastern and Southern parts thereof. And thus
had they in their hopes and touring (or devouring) proud and pernicious
opinions already swallowed us up in the mawes of these their mischievous and
most mal^cious designs: Thus Man (as our Proverb is) does deeply purpose, but
our God only does over-poweringly dispose of all things; but to go on. For
the full and effectual prosecution heerof, The manner of the enemies acting
their co^trivements.
that most vile and ^^perous active Agent of theirs Sir Ralph Hopton is
designed (with all the preparations they could make for him) to advance to
Winchester, Chichester, and so forward to Kent; this was the substance of this
great plot and high design on the City of London, and consequently on the
whole Kingdom, which being thus laid before the eyes and understanding of the
judicious Reader, and wise observer of the passages of this kind, he may most
clearly and with admirable delight, comfort, and content, behold and see how
our good God in his infinite mercy, 2 Chro. 16. 9.
wisdom, and all-disposing providence, ( whose eyes run through the whole
world, to show himself strong for those that are of an upright heart) still
most graciously crossed their wicked counsels, and turned them into folly and
madness; as, in all the subsequent passages shall be fully related and set
forth, How God all along crossed and disappointed all the enemies deep designs.
and all which, I shall desire the Reader (with me) to take most grateful
notice of, as they fall out, both in Sir William Wallers vigilant and valiant
attending and waiting on Hoptons ways and deportments in the South and
South-Western parts; and in his Excellencies the Parliaments Lord Generals,
and Major General Skippons most wise and warle observation and attendance on
the ways and courses of that most pernicious Prince of Plunderers, Rupert,
about Bedfordshire, Newport-Pannell, and St Albanes; together with the rest of
our faithful and famous Commanders more Easterly and Northward; all which I
shall represent to the Readers view in fit and following places.

But, before I yet come to those particulars, give me leave, good Reader, with
thy accustomed candor and patience, to acquaint thee here also with another
great design they had upon us, and our precious Parliament, to cross and curb
the provident proceedings in our most just defense, Another great plo^ of the
enemies to hinder our Brethren of Scotlands coming in to our aid and assistance.
against their accursed and bloody breaking in upon us, our lives, liberties,
and Religion, namely, their deep endeavors to hinder our honest Brethren of
Scotland from coming forth to help us; Wherein also the hand of God will be
wonderfully seen for good, and the passages whereof most worthy to be recorded
and enrolled in the number of these our precious Parliamentarie-mercies, as
most highly conducing and contributing to the honor of our most wise and
wonder-working God, and the great comfort of all his Saints and servants; which
(to omit diverse other former plots and contrivements to this foresaid end) was
briefly thus:

About the midst of October, 1643. An Ambassador sent from the Queen-Regent of
France into Scotland, to divert those our brethren from coming to aid us.
means having been used by private Messengers into France by the pestilent
Council and contrivers at Oxford, The Queen-Regent of France sent an
Ambassador into Scotland, of purpose to divert the Scots resolution from
coming into England to assist the Parliament: The substance of whose Message
being, That as they tendered the continuation and preservation of that ancient
league and amity which had been between the Crowns of France and Scotland for
so many hundred years, they would be now advised to stay at home in peace, and
not to show themselves in any hostile or armed manner against their King etc.
But, to be brief, for most certain, the said Ambassador was soon and soundly
answered, and so departed thence into France again, without that expected and
intended issue he came for, and those our Brethren most piously and constantly
persisted in their obliged and engaged resolution to join in our aid and
assistance.

Again, much about the same time, the King sent two Letters into Scotland, Two
Letters sent by our King into Scotland to cross the Scots resolution to aid
England.
commanding that they should both be publicly read in all the Cities and
Market-Townes of that Kingdom, and that then they should both be entered upon
Record, the Copies whereof were by those our honest brethren of Scotland, sent
to our Parliament. The one of them was against a Proclamation which the States
of Scotland set forth in the Kings name, to command the Subjects, there, to be
ready with their a^mes, whenever they were summoned, on severe penalties;
which the King said he much marveiled they would do without his consent, The
substance of both the said Letters.
etc. The other Letter was against their godly and most gracious Covenant,
requiring them not to prosecute it any farther, and enjoining them not to aid
his two Houses of Parliament, which, he said, were in actual rebellion against
him, etc. But, praised, for ever, The Royallists hopes, heerin also, frustrated.
be our good God, by whose gracious providence, their hearts were most wisely
and resolutely established not to be dashed and daunted therein, but they
utterly refused to yield to either of his demands and commands in both the
Letters, and sent his Majesty an answer suitable to their Christian duty, and
the nature also of such a Message and command, and so went on most religiously
and resolvedly in the just and warrantable work they had so advisedly
undertaken.

But now to go on, in the manifesting (as I promised) and setting forth, The
grand plot of starving up the City of London, now prosecuted by the
Royallists, but blessedly frustrated.
in order, the progress of the great work at home, by our adversaries designs
against the City of London, and therein the whole Kingdom, in that their
forementioned grand plot to starve up the City by taking from them all the
neighbor Countries succors and supplements of all kinds; and thus at last,
hoping to bring it low, and (according to that old Proverb, If you will tame a
wanton Colt, take away his provender) and tame it, and make it stoop to their
most untaimed wild and wicked tyranny: but yet, how our most wise and
righteous God crossed and confounded this their wicked work and devilish design.

And now in the first place I must tell you, how the most noble and victorious
Earl of Manchester, being in Lincolnshire prosecuting his successful and
victorious enterprises in those parts, as has been formerly and fully related,
having intelligence that the Oxonian-Cormorants were entered into Bedfordshire,
with purpose to make an inroad into the rest of the associated
Eastern-Counties, whereof he was made Commander in chief, under his Excellency
the Lord General: His Lordship, The Earl of Manchester resolves to aid his
associated Counties out of Lincolnshire by Colonel Cromwell.
therefore, held it not fit to leave them without relief against such
plundering and all-devouring Cormorants, and greedy unwelcome guests, and was
therefore necessitated to grant such a composition to the Lord Widrington,
Colonel Henderson, etc. (then in the City of Lincoln) as otherwise he would
not, that thus he might hasten to the preservation of those his foresaid
Counties; and so having gotten this City (as has been forementioned) he
presently sent away renowned and victorious Colonel Cromwell, Col: Cromwell
sent out of Lincolnshire into Huntingto^shire with considerable forces.
with a considerable part of his forces toward Huntington, to interrupt the
Cormorants pernicious intentions in those parts and about Cambridge; but his
Excellency, the Parliaments renowned Lord General* being then at St Albanes
with his army, presently sent Messengers to countermaund the brave Colonells
resolutions, and required him to return again to my Lord of Manchester, Col.
Cromwell ordered by the Lo. General to return again into Lincolnshire.
and to prosecute those intended Services in the North, assuring him that by
Gods assistance, he would take special care that the associated Counties
should receive no prejudice by the Kings Cormorants, which he most nobly made
good and accordingly performed. The Kings Cormorants fly out of
Newport-Pannell.
For presently after it, his Lordship sent a considerable strong party of
horse and foot toward Newport-Pannell, against those greedy Cormorants, who
hearing of their certain and speedy approach, made all the haste they were
able to fly away from thence, for fear of being intrapped in a nooz, whereby
on a sudden those parts were already fairly and fully cleared from fear of them
both at Newport and Bedford too. And heerby also Colonel Cromwell being
returned to the noble Earl of Manchester, his great and noble designs in those
parts went on again most successfully; The great plot mightily dashed and damped
already.
and thus by Gods special providence and great mercy, the Kings Cormorants
were doubly disappointed of their late high-built hopes and pernicious
purposes. For, by their intended fortifying of Newport, they hoped to have
established one main branch of the foresaid swelling design to have starved up
the City, by thus encroaching by degrees into the Eastern-associated Counties,
and also by their thus coming and nestling (by little and little) in them, they
strongly hoped to have drawn and diverted the Earl of Manchester quite out of
Lincolnshire, and so to have taken him off from the pursuit of his victories
in those parts: But his Excellency, as I said before, most nobly clipped the
wing of that highsoaring hope of theirs, by marching into those parts to expel
the enemy out of them, and so the safelier to secure them. Thus, I say, the
Lord our good God doubly blessed us against this devilish design of theirs,
blasting it in the bud, stifling it in the birth, and very beginning of it, and
making it abortive to them, and giving us great assurance thereby of yet more
hopeful advantages, as by Gods blessing we shall have fit and fair
opportunities to mention them in their several succeeding and proper places.

And now, A summarie recapitulation of all this Months Parliamentarie-mercies,
and therein the sweet preservation of his Ark, his great Cause.
good Reader, let me desire thee here to make a little stay, to strike sail
and cast thine anchor of serious recogitation and summarie contemplation, into
the deep Ocean of all this Months many and most rich mercies and
Parliamentarie preservations of this Ark of Gods Cause.

First, In the Lords stirring up of the hearts of our Parliamentarie-Worthies,
to remember the welfare of the poor children of Christ's Hospital; and also
raising up the affections of the Citizens of London to seal their holy League
and Covenant, with a large and liberal contributed Scotlands advance unto our
help.

Fairfaxes brave victory against the Earl of Newcastle at Hull, and thereby
raising the siege thereof.

Manchesters renowned victories over the Popish and atheistical forces in
Lincolnshire at Bolenbrook and Horncastle.

Famous Colonel Massies good service at Tewksbery; and that also Parliaments
Garrison at Warwick-Castle against the Kings forces at Cambden.

In the Ordinance of Parliament against Spies and intelligencers; Manchesters
victories in the gaining of the City of Lincoln, and strong Town of
Gainesborough.

And lastly, In the most happy frustrating and defeating of the starve the
City of London, and so to enforce the conquest of it; and in Gods crossing
that other great design of our Oxonian Achitophells to have hindered our honest
Brethren of Scotlands resolution to advance forward to our assistance.

All these rare mercies, I say, laid together and seriously considered, O how
can we choose, but be extraordinarily elevated to a high pitch and peg of
obliged gratitude, to our great and glorious God, GODS Ark still born-up above
the tops of all its advers swelling waves of opposition.
who has so powerfully and prudently propped up and protected his thus poor
menaced and assaulted Ark, securely bearing it up above all the raging and
swelling waves and boisterous billows of fierce and furious adversaries,
beating and brushing against it, with their utmost envy and most malevolent
oppositions; And therefore, I say, with holy David, to break forth into
insulting and triumphant joy in the Lord, and say; Our hearts are fixed, Psalm.
57. 7.
O God, our hearts are fixed, we will sing and give praise. Awake up our
glory, awake Psalterie and Harp; and let us all awake right early thus to
bless and magnify the Lord. Psalm. 60. 12.
For through our God we shall do valiantly; and it is he that shall tread
down our enemies under our feet. But now to go on.

About the beginning of this November, November. 1643.
our most prudent Parliamentarie Statists wisely considering and most
circumspectly advising on the inveterate malice and mischievous designs of the
Oxonian Atheists against the Parliament and Cities of London and Westminster,
as has been foreshewn; they therefore past an Ordinance of Parliament, wherein
they declared, An association of Hampshire, Surrey, Sussex, and Kent.
that they held it most fit and necessary for the better settling and securing
of the state of this distracted and much dilacerated Kingdom, that all such
Committees as were then nominated in the said Ordinance, all Colonells,
Captains, and other Officers, and well-affected persons, inhabitants of the
Counties of Hampshire, the Town and County of Southampton, Surrey, Sussex, and
Kent, shall and may associate themselves, and mutually aid, succor, support,
and assist one another in the mutual defense and preservation of themselves
from the inroades and outrages of the Kings Corm^rants, and have power thereby
given them to raise forces of horse and foot, to suppress and expel all such
forces, as are or shall be raised in the said several Counties, to levy war
against the Parliament, or that shall make any insurrections, or shall plunder,
or destroy any of his Majesty's good subjects in those Counties. And the Lord
General the Earl of E^^ex was thereby desired to grant a Commission to that
most valiant and renowned Commander Sir William Waller, Sir (...). Waller,
Commander in chief, of this association.
to command in chief, as Sergeant Major General of all such forces raised in
the said Counties; the happy and successful issues of which said association,
you shall now shortly have in their succeeding proper places.

And that the world might see (and all Malignants mouths be stopped, if it were
possible to do it) the godly and Christian care of this most renowned and
pious Parliament, The Parli^ments providence for the welfare of foreign English
Plantations.
not only at home, but abroad also providing for the welfare of foreign English
Plantations, our most prudent and provident Parliamentarie Senators set forth
an Ordinance of Parliament, whereby that most noble, renowned, loyal, and
pious patriot, Robert, Earl of Warwick, was made Governor in chief, and Lord
high Admiral of all those Islands and Plantations, inhabited, planted, or
belonging to any of his Majesty's the King of Englands Subjects, within the
bounds and upon the coasts of America; which said Ordinance for the Readers
better satisfaction and full content therein, I have thought fit here to insert
and interlace.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons* assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Die Jovis, November. 2. 1643.
Whereas many thousands of the natives and good Subjects of this Kingdom of
England, through the oppression of the Prelates, and other ill affected
Ministers and Officers of State, have of late years to their great grief and
miserable hardship been enforced to transplant themselves and their families
into several Islands, and other remote and desolate parts of the West Indies:
and having there through exceeding great labor and industry (with the blessing
of God) obtained for themselves and their families some competent and
convenient means of maintenance and subsistence, so that they are now in a
reasonable well settled and peaceable condition. But fearing lest the outrageous
malice of Papists and other ill-affected persons should reach unto them in
their poor and low, (but as yet peaceable condition) and having been informed,
that there has been lately procured from His Majesty several grants under the
great Seal for erecting some new Governors and Commanders amongst the said
Planters in their aforementioned Plantations; Whereupon the said Planters,
Adventurers, and Owners of Land in the said foreign Plantations, have preferred
their Petition unto this present Parliament, that for the better securing of
them and their present Estates, there obtained through so much extreme labor
and difficulty, they might have some such Governors and government as should
be approved of and confirmed by the authority of both Houses of Parliament.
Which Petition of theirs the Lords and Commons having taken into consideration,
and finding it of great importance both to the safety and preservation of the
aforesaid Natives and Subjects of this Kingdom, as well from all forain
invasions and oppressions* as from their own intestine distractions and
disturbances, as also much tending to the honor and advantage of His Majesty's
Dominions, have though fit, and do heerby constitute and ordain Robert Earl
of Warwick Governor in chief, and Lord high Admiral of all those Islands,
and other Plantations, inhabited, planted, or belonging to any His Majesty's
the King of Englands Subjects, or which hereafter may be inhabited, planted, or
belonging to them, within the bounds, and upon the coasts of America. And for
the more effectual, speedier, and easier transaction of this so weighty and
important a business, which concerns the well-being and preservation of so
many of the distressed Natives of this and other His Majesty's Dominions, The
Lords and Commons have thought fit that Philip Earl of Pembrook, Edward Earl
of Manchester, William Viscount Say and Seal, Philip Lord Wharton, John Lord
Roberts, Members of the House of Peers, Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight and Baronet,
Sir Arthur Haselrigg Baronet, Sir Henry Vane, junior, Knight, Sir Benjamin
Rudyer Knight, John Pym, Oliver Cromwell, Dennis Bond, Miles Corbet, Cornelius
Holland, Samuel Vassal, John Rolls, and William Spurstow, Esquires, Members of
the House of Commons, shall be Commissioners to join in aid and assistance with
the said Earl of Warwick, chief Governor and Admiral of the said Plantations,
which chief Governor, together with the said Commissioners, or any four of
them, shall heerby ^av^ power and authority to provide for, order, and dispose
all things which they shall from time to time find most fit and advantageous
to the well-governing, securing, strengthening and preserving of the said
Plantations, and chiefly to the preservation and advancement of the true
Protestant Religion amongst the said planters, inhabitants, and the further
enlargement and spreading of the Gospel of Christ amongst those that yet remain
there in great and miserable blindness and ignorance. And for the better
advancement of this so great a work, It is heerby further ordained by the said
Lords and Commons, That the aforesaid Governor and Commissioners shall heerby
have power and authority upon all weighty and important occasions which may
concern the good and safety of the aforesaid Planters, to call unto their
advice and assistance therein any other of the aforesaid Planters, Owners of
Land, or Inhabitants of the said Islands and Plantations, which shall then be
within twenty miles of the place where the said Commissioners shall then be;
and shall have power and authority to send for, view, and make use of all such
Records, Books, and Papers, which do or may concern any of the said
Plantations: And because the well-setling and establishing of such Officers and
Governors as shall be laborious and faithful in the right governing of all
such persons as be resident in or upon the said Plantations, and due ordering
and disposing all such Affairs as concern the safety and welfare of the same,
is of very great advantage to the public good of all such remote and new
Plantations;

It is hereby further ordained and decreed, That the said Robert Earl of
Warwick, Governor in chief, and Admiral of the said Plantations, together
with the aforesaid Commissioners, Philip Earl of Pembrook, Edward Earl of
Manchester, William Viscount Say and Seal, Philip Lord Wharton, John Lord
Roberts, Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight and Baronet, Sir Arthur Haselrig Baronet,
Sir Henry Vane, junior, Knight, Sir Benjamin Rudyer Knight, John Pym, Oliver
Cromwell, Dennis Bond, Miles Corbet, Cornelius Holland, Samuel Vassal, John
Rolls, and William Spurstowe, Esquires, or the greater number of them shall
have power and authority from time to time, to nominate, appoint, and
constitute all such subordinate Governors, Counselors, Commanders, Officers
and Agents as they shall judge to be best affected, and most fit and
serviceable for the said Islands and Plantations; And shall heerby have power
and authority upon the death or other avoydance of the aforesaid chief
Governor and Admiral, or any the other Commissioners before named, from time
to time to nominate and appoint such other chief Governor and Admiral, or
Commissioners, in the place and room of such as shall so become void. And
shall also heerby have power and authority to remove any of the said
subordinate Governors, Counselors, Commanders, Officers, or Agents, which
are, or shall be appointed to Govern, Counsel, or Negotiate the public
Affairs of the said Plantation, and in their place and room to appoint such
other Officers as they shall judge fit. And it is heerby ordained, That no
subordinate Governors, Counselors, Commanders, Officers, Agents, Planters, or
Inhabitants whatsoever, that are now resident in or upon the said Islands or
Plantations, shall admit or receive any other new Governors, Counselors,
Commanders, Officers, or Agents whatsoever, but such as shall be allowed and
approved of under the hands and Seals of the aforesaid chief Governor and
high Admiral of the said Plantation, together with the hands and Seals of the
aforementioned Commissioners, or any six of them, or under the hands and Seals
of such as they shall authorize thereunto.

And whereas for the better government and security of the said Plantations and
Islands, and the Owners and Inhabitants thereof, there may be just and fit
occasion to assign over some part of the power and authority (granted in this
Ordination to the chief Governor and Commissioners aforementioned) unto the said
Owners, Inhabitants, or others; It is heerby ordained, That the said chief
Governor and Commissioners beforementioned, or the greater number of them,
shall heerby be authorized to assign, ratify, and confirm so much of their
aforementioned authority and power, and in such manner, and to such persons
as they shall judge to be fit for the better governing and preserving of the
said Plantations and Islands from open violence and private disturbance and
distractions.

And lastly, That whosoever shall do, execute, or yield obedience to any thing
contained in this Ordinance, shall by virtue heerof be saved harmless and
indempnified.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
shall be forthwith printed and published. John Brown, Cler. Par.

About the 8th of November, 1643. came certain intelligence to London, by
Letters out of the Western parts of the Kingdom, and also by the testimony of
diverse credible persons, that a certain considerable number of English-Irish
Protestant Soldiers being transported out of Ireland to Bristoll, under the
command of Sir Charles Vavasor, on pretense to fight in England for the King
and Parliament, A considerable number of English-Irish Protestant Soldiers
landed at Bristoll out of Ireland, revolted from the King to the Parliament.
where being arrived, and thinking that Bristoll had been still in the
Parliaments possession, but finding it otherwise on their arrival, and that
their commanders would have enforced them to have taken an oath or Covenant to
fight against the Parliament, they utterly refused it, declaring that they did
not come from fighting against the bloody Papists in Ireland, with an intent to
take part with the same and the other Papists in England; and thereupon, there
being a great mutiny between the Soldiers and their Commanders, the Soldiers
slew some of their Commanders in the place, enforced the rest of their
Commanders to fly to Oxford for shelter: The English-Irish Soldiers fall foul
on their Commanders and Officers.
After which they unanimously departed out of Bristoll toward Bathe, and from
thence also putting themselves under the Command of one Apleton, a brave
spirited man and valiant Soldier, they marched to Gloucester to the most
renowned Colonel Massey to be disposed of by him in the Parliaments service;
and before their departure from Bathe, They march away to Gloucester, to serve
under Colonel Massi^.
diverse of the gen^rie and well-affected inhabitants of that County (as was
also credibly informed) being weary of the Kings Cormorants tyranny, laid hold
on the opportunity and joined themselves with those Soldiers, and put
themselves into the same service with them.

And was not here a most remarkable hand of Gods providence, A remarkable hand
of Gods providence in this business.
thus at the very first of these the enemies bloody and base attempts in that
most atrocious and scelerous Cessation of arms in Ireland, manifesting thus, I
say, in the very front of their devilish design, the Lords high indignation
against them, and undoubted purpose to blast and bring to naught the rest of
this their most nefarious villainy, in his own due time, to their greater
shame, sorrow, smart, and infamy? But to proceed.

About the 10th of the foresaid November, came certain information by Letters
and other very credible testimonies out of Shropshire, of a very notable and
brave Defeat given to that irreligious (if not atheistical) and pragmaticall,
but yet (blessed be the Lord) that unfortunate and unsuccessfull upstart Lord
Capell, A most brave defeat given to the Lord Capell, by Cheshire and
Shropshire forces.
and his vulturous and ravenous Harpies, by the most valiant forces of Cheshire
and Shropshire, under the happy conduct of that most virtuous and victorious
Commander Sir William Brereton, and his unanimous and magnanimous associates,
therein, Sir Thomas Midleton, and most courageous Colonel Mitton, which was as
follows.

Sir Thomas Midleton having authority to raise forces for the defense of the
King, Parliament, and Kingdom in N^rth Wales, as Colonel Mitton had in
Shropshire, desired and deserved indeed (by the good service they had done in
Staffordshire, The manner of the performance of the defeat.
as they went) the assistance of Sir William Brereton, who commanded in chief
in Cheshire, and is a Colonel in, and has a tender care of, and interest in
the affections of Staffordshire Soldiers. This noble Colonel willing to
accommodate those Worthies, drew part of his forces from Namptwich to safeguard
them into, and make provision for their safety in Shropshire; and thus marching
together to Wem, a little Town, about six miles from Shrewsbery, the place of
their torment, as Capell had made it, unto honest men.

At Wem, I say, they began to fortify, and this lusty Lord Capell perceiving
by the help of his Council of War, The Lord Capell marches toward Namptwich.
how prejudicial this was like to prove to his designs; he heerupon led on
his misled animals to Namptwich, hoping to get, abroad, what he prudently
foresaw, he was like to loose near home; but being come to Namptwich, he found
that that Garrison gave him his hands and his belly full, ere Sir William
Brereton, Sir Will. Brereton follows Capell and makes him retreat to Wem.
who (most providently watching his motions) was on his march toward them,
could come to their relief. Which also this nimble gallant perceiving, he
quickly retreats toward Wem, and with his whole army (consisting of about 4000
horse and foot) fell desperately upon that small strength which Colonel
Midleton and Colonel Mitton had there; who contrary to his good Lordships
expectation did most bravely maintain the fight, until renowned, active and
indefatigable Sir William Brereton, The Lord Capell soundly beaten at Wem.
was come again from Namptwich, to their rescue and assistance, who being now
all together, did such execution upon the enemy, that it, with the particular
circumstances of Gods admirable providence therein, All this Relation was
written and attested by a very pious Soldier of this action.
deserve to be perpetuated to all posterity in those parts: The particulars
whereof being so memorable, I have here thought fit for the Readers better
satisfaction and more full content, to set down as they came from singular good
hands, which were as follow.

1. That whiles we quartered at Drayton, as we were on our March to assist
Sir Thomas Midleton, Diverse rare passages of Gods providence and preservation
of our forces in this defeat.
and the rest; when there came with all possible speed upon us, no less (as was
credibly reported) than a 1000 horse from Shrewshery, to have surprised us in
our quarte^s; they were all repelled and beaten back again, by only a party
of thirty or forty horse and Dragooneers, commanded by Captain Munck, there
being diverse of them slain, and the rest pursued by our horse many miles toward
Shrewsbery; Thirty or forty of our horse and Dragoons chase and beat a thousand
of their horse.
at which time some of Major Bromhalls men were taken prisone^s, some slain and
some wounded; and one Ge^rge Cook a very valiant man of Sir William Breretons
own troop was slain, and one Peter Anlet, another of them taken prisoner, but
afterward redeemed.

2. That we were not interrupted in our march to Wem all the next day, nor
disquieted or disturbed there during six or seven days, until we had made
some works of defense, which though they were then but slight and weak, yet
were of some encouragement and advantage to our men.

3. That when they had made mighty preparation to hinder us in our
fortification at Wem, and that notwithstanding all the forces they could make,
united into a body (which were said to consist of three or four thousand,
which quartered within three or four miles of Wem) yet that they should and
did receive interruption by two or three Companies of our Dragooneers, who were
quartered at Lappington, a little village about two miles from Wem, who hearing
of the enemies approach, betook themselves to the protection of the Church and
Churchyard, which they did most valiantly maintain a long time, until by the
multitudes of the enemies encompassing them, they were enforced to betake
themselves only to the Church, where they behaved themselves so valiantly, as
that their enemies could not take the Church, until they fired the porch and
roof of the Church, which were covered with shingles, by which means some of
our men were almost suffocated and stifled, so as they were constrained to
deliver up themselves prisoners, though we speedily rescued many of them. Our
Soldiers, then, wounded, were, Major Spotswood, and Captain Daughtie (since
reported to be dead) and one other Captain wounded; and their Cannonier wounded
or slain, and their whole army was repulsed by less than 200 foot and 300
horse of ours, who hasted from Wem to the relief of our men in the Church, so
soon as they heard the enemies Cannon play, and our horse pursued and routed
them, so as they left one of their Cannons within our power, but by reason of
the darkness of the night we knew not thereof, nor could we see to pursue
them, the lanes being narrow and hedges thick. They took Major Bromhall
prisoner, and we took Master Needham the Lord Vicount Kilmurreys son
prisoner. If they had then come on to Wem they had found the Town very weak and
naked, and much less able (in respect of the works) to make resistance and
defense, than when they did make their violent assault upon tuesday and
wednesday 17. and 18. October.

4. That betwixt the first and second assault, (at which time, they were much
more encouraged by the increase of their strength from Litchfield, Dudley,
Worcester, and some from the Kings army) and when their forces were all
united, and in readiness: The Lord in his wisdom and goodness was pleased so
to order as that there were many interruptions, and diversions, which
occasioned their delay, as want of cariages, and steering their course toward
us and assaulting Namptwich on purpose to withdraw the Cheshire forces out of
Wem, during which intermission we made good use of our time in Wem to perfect
the works.

5. That when they all came against Namptwich upon Monday October 16. they were
so confident of surprising the same (as that the Lord Capell) (as it is
reported) returned back all the Chester horse which were tendered unto him and
coming to his assistance, returning this answer, That he had strength
sufficient to take Namptwich, to which end he did speedily (and that before
notice was given of his approach) seize upon and possess himself of Acton
Church, and Dartford house, and attempted to force their passage by the way of
Beame-bridge, but by the valor of those few men who were left in the Town they
were repulsed from passing the water, not without the loss of diverse of their
men: Four whereof were found dead in the ditch, those that attempted to
undermine the walls in the darkness of the night were taken prisoners, and
this night, and the next morning there were near forty prisoners taken, besides
many horses and arms, and many of their men run away: And upon the news of
our approach to their relief, they sent away their carriages, and marched
after them with speed toward Wem. This was the fifth time they did come before
and attempt this poor Town of Namptwich, which the Lord has miraculously
preserved and defended, and returned them always back with shame and
dishonor.

6. That whilst the Cheshire Soldiers continued in Wem, (which were about 500
Musketteers, besides horse) the enemy did forbear to make any attempt against
the Town, but were repulsed and beaten off with great loss, by a far less
number than the third part of those who were commanded out of the Town, and
gone to relieve Namptwich, as though the Lord judged all too many, and
preferred rather to deliver them by Gideons three hundred, to whom the whole
glory of this deliverance, is to be attributed and ascribed.

7. The unparalleld magnanimity, resolution, and dexterity of those young
Soldiers, who were not in any service (except some of them in that skirmish at
Lappington) before they were engaged in this siege at Wem, whose courageous
spirits were so supported, and transported beyond themselves, as did much
admire and daunt the enemy, there being no such thing expressed as any desire
or willingness to entertain or embrace the motion of a parley or treaty with
the enemy, seeming all to be as of one mind, resolved to fight and stand it out
to the last man.

8. The great slaughter and execution which was performed upon the enemy when
they set upon Wem, there being six cart loads of dead men carried away at one
time, (besides the wounded) and, as it is said, there were fifteen found buried
in one grave, near the Town-workes, and diverse were seen dead, and stripped,
lying upon the ground the next day. And that little execution which was done
upon our men, whereof we lost not above three in the Town, Major Marrow, and
one Soldier, and one boy, and we had very few others hurt.

9. The quality of the persons slain or wounded, even such as were most
eminent or considerable. Col. Win certainly slain, his Major Vaughan wounded in
the ribs; one of Winters Captain^ shot in the back; Captain Davison taken
prisoner, since dead; Captain Francis Manley shot in the leg; Captain Ellis of
Oswestray wounded, some say slain. Captain Jones slain, as some say; Colonel
Scriven slightly wounded; Sir Richard Willis, Major Trercon, and Major
Braughton wounded, as some report, the certainty I cannot affirm; their
Cannoneer shot in the leg; Captain Chapman taken prisoner, who was Captain
Lieutenant to Colonel Woodhouse, exchanged for Captain Zanchie; Captain
Lieutenant Smith, a Papist, who was Captain Lieutenant to Sir Rich: Willis;
Colonel Scrivens Captain Lieutenant taken prisoner; a Gentleman of good
quality shot in the back at Leighi-bridge.

10. The various circumstances of admiration which happened during the fight,
wherein the Lords hand is much to be acknowledged.

First, One of their great Cannons or Morter-pieces (or both as it is reported)
brake with the first shot, sure I am that part of the carriages of one or both
of them was broken and left in the lane.

Secondly, The mighty execution which our Cannon did upon the enemies, whereas
their Cannon and Morterpiece, though discharged, did no execution at all,
having (as it should seem) no commission from heaven, to touch any of those
that fought the Lords battle.

Thirdly, A Cannon discharged in the night by Col. Mittons order, intended to
give Sir William Brereton and his Soldiers, who were marching, warning, that
the Town was not taken, and only levelled at one of the enemies fires, (as
some report) dismounted one of the enemies Cannons, wounded their Cannoneer in
the knee or leg.

Fourthly, A barrel of powder was blown up, which burned or wounded 15 of
their men, whereof 12 dyed.

Fifthly, The confessions and acknowledgements which the Lord extorted out of
the mouths of some dying men, as it is reported of Colonel Winter, that he
should reply to some (who were lamenting their misfortune to be repulsed by a
few) that there were more with them in the Town than against them, for God was
with them, and diverse other expressions to the like purpose.

Sixthly, Others confidently report, that one of their Cannons taking fire
twice or thrice, yet could they not procure the same to be discharged,
wherewith they were much amazed, and did draw off their pieces and retreated.

All this, I thought fit, here, thus particularly to relate, as a just and rare
monument of Gods power and providence in thus taking the proud and
self-conceited wickedly wise ones of this world, in their own accursed
craftiness, and still (as has been clearly seen and shown all along in this
narration) making good and ratifying to the full, Psalm. 62. 9, 10.
that of the holy Prophet David, an excellent place, appliable most fitly to
the vain and profane enemies of Gods truth in these our days; Surely, men of
low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the
balance they are altogether lighter than vanity. Trust not therefore in
oppression, and become not vain in robbery. But to go on.

About the 14th of this instant November, The renowned Earl of Manchester
spoils Newark of provision.
came credible information by letters to London, from the most noble Earl of
Manchesters forces in and about Linc^lnshire, that about 4000 of the said
renowned Earls horse being then quartered about Newark, had d^iven away most
of the cattle, b^asts, sheep and horses, from about all those parts unto Bost^n
and Lincoln; thus to shorten and necessitate the garrison in Newark of
provision. Bullingbrook-Castle taken by the Lord Willoughbie of Parrha^
And that the Lord Willoughbie of Parrha^ had taken Bullingbrook-castle from
the Newcastellian Cormorants. As also that brave and most valiant Commander Sir
Thomas Fairfax with about 12 troops of horse, was now gone into the
West Riding of Yorkshire, where a party of the never-sufficiently praised
Manchesterians and other loyal Lanca-shire forces appointed to meet him, for
the farther advancement of some great design in those parts, and for the
further terror of the Popish and atheistical Newcastellian forces, whose
formerly reputed formidable and flourishing army, was at that time (as was
most credibly and frequently informed) in a very tottering, torn, and declining
condition; The declining condition of the Earl of Newcastles army.
for that upon the mustering thereof he could hardly bring together 7 or 8000
horse and foot into a complete body: And therefore no wonder that he had sent
so many Letters to Oxford (one whereof was for certain intercepted by the
Parliaments forces) whereby he signified that unless his Majesty did move with
his Army very speedily that way, to his assistance, all the Northern parts
would be totally lost, especially also because he found the gentry of
Yorkshire much discontented and most unwilling to march out of their own
County; The defection also of the Gentry of Yorkshire from him.
which indeed was a rare mercy also and a great overture of things there, by
the good providence of our God thus ordering it. And for the farther
confirmation heerof, about the 16th of November, 1643. came certain
intelligence to London by Letters out of the remoter Northern parts, that above
an hundred Gentlemen and substantial Freeholders, well mounted, were gone out
of Northumberland into Scotland, and had listed themselves under one Colonel
Welden, a Northumberland Gentleman, to come in with the Scots, and that the
generality of the people of those parts were even impatient till our brethren
of Scotland were come in among them, their burdens having been so intolerable
by reason of the Popish army, and their so insolent carriages over them, that
they now longed exceedingly to be eased thereof. A yet farther defection of
other Northern Counties from the Kings party.
Yea and that diverse other Gentlemen in other Northern Counties, had declared
themselves (some privately and some publicly) that they would now no longer
assist the King, especially in regard of that horrible and accursed Cessation
which he had made with the most abomin^bly bloody rogues and rebels of
Ireland. The Gentlemen that then did lay down their arms in a public manner,
were (as was credibly informed) Sir Edward Hussy, Mr Sutton, Sir Philip
Therold, with diverse others of like quality, as then (in discretion) forborne to
be particularly named. And certainly that most intolerable and most wicked
Cessation of arms in Ireland has and will lose the King more, The Cessation
of arms in Ireland a main cause of this foresaid defection.
every way, than any other of his many most improvident and unadvised rash and
even irrational actions (to say no more of them) that ever he did, not only
the moderate and mere Neutrality affected, but even some of the obstinate
malignant party, being now silenced, when the objection of this most scelerous
Cessation is urged unto them. And indeed how can it otherwise be, especially
considering, that his Majesty himself, (who is in all their reputes and esteem
called and accounted a Protestant Prince) should by a late Declaration printed
by his authority at Oxford; The Kings Declaration from Oxford, justifying that
abominable Irish Cessation.
so palpably and plainly (under poor and ignoble Fig-leaf pretenses and
colorable causes, though mainly intended (as we all too well see and know) to
transport rebels of Ireland to fight against his most honorable and innocent
Parliament and people) should, I say, maintain and justify such a most grossly
impious Cessation with such unparalleld Popish brutish rogues and rebels, as
no English-hearted Protestant could have been induced to believe, had it not
been so openly declared, printed and published abroad; a Cessation, I say, for
a whole year (that is, for ever) and that, without first, requiring them (at
least) to declare in writing under hands and seals, that they had extremely
scandalized his Majesty (if, at least, he were clear and free from the fact)
by their proclaming (as they did) in the Marketplaces in several parts of
Ireland, Mark this well o English-Maligna^ts, touching this Irish Cessation.
that they had his Majesty's Commission, under the great Seal of England, yea
and produced the said Commission, for the justification of that Epidemicall
murder, and Diabolical Massacre, to be done by the Kings authority, as
diverse upon Oath have testified, as is expressed at large in the
Irish-Remonstrance, and Dr Jones his book, both published by authority of
Parliament; or without requiring them to deliver up, so much only, as two or
three of their prime (nay not of any one inferior) bloody Rebels to suffer
most deserved death, Mark this also, and admire it.
in a way of justice; but, oh, horresco referens, to be satisfied with a most
beggarly sum of about 30000li in money (and this sum also, to be a
fomenting help to farther the most accursed design of cutting more English
throats also) as a sufficient expiation and satisfaction, for the most horrid
slaughter and butchering of, Almost tw^ hundred thousand English Protestants
butchered in that most barbarous Irish-Massacre.
at least, one hundred thousand (nay it is credibly assured, near upon 200000)
English Protestants in crimson-gorie Ireland, and all this in deliberate
cold-bloud too; Nay more, not doing the poor surviving miserable English
Protestants so much, or rather, so little pettie-justice, as to demand of those
roguish-Rebells, the only bare restitution of one acre of ground or a house or
hovell to hide the head of any one so distressed and utterly spoiled surviving
Protestant. Mark this also.
Yea, and to strike and stab English Protestants, both in England and Ireland,
yet more deeply to the heart, styling and calling those unparalleld bloody
rogues and most accursed Caniballs (pardon my zeal, good Reader, for I have
with tears of hearty grief, And this too, and tremble at it.
read over Irelands tears of blood) calling them, I say, in the foresaid
Declaration, His Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects; and contrariwise, Us of
England, most frequently and familiarly, nothing but, Traitors and Rebels.
Read and consider this, all Christian hearts, and then tell me, whether that
of the Prophet be not most properly appliable to the authors of all this,
Isaiah 5. 20*
whoever they be. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. But to go on.

And, here, for the Readers better satisfaction (and, in aeternam rei ipsius
infamiam) I have thought fit to give thee a full sight of the said odious
Declaration, verbatim, as it was printed and published, with some clear
demonstrative circumstances after it, to manifest the undeniable truth of the
thing. Which Commission follows in these words.

CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc. To all Cath^lique Subjects within our Kingdom of
Ireland, Greeting; Know ye that We for the safeguard and preservation of our
person, have been enforced to make our abode and residence in our Kingdom of
Scotland for a long season, occasioned by reason of the obstinate and
disobedient carriage of Our Parliament of England against Us; who have not
only presumed to take upon them the government and disposing of those*
Princely Rights and Prerogatives that have justly descended unto Us, from our
Predecessors both Kings and Queens of the said Kingdom, for many hundreds of
years past, but also have possessed themselves of the whole strength of the
said Kingdom, in appointing Governors, Commanders and Officers in all parts
and places therein, at their own wills and pleasures without Our consent,
whereby we are deprived of Our Sovereignty, and left naked without defense:
And for as much as we are (in our selves) very sensible, that these storms
blow aloft, and are very likely to be carried by the vehemency of the
Protestant Party, into Our Kingdom of Ireland, and endanger Our Regal power
and authority there also: Know ye therefore that We reposing much care and
trust in your duties and obedience, which we have for many years past found:
Do heerby give unto you full power and authority to assemble and meet
together with all speed and diligence, that a business of so great a
consequence does require, and to advise and consult together by sufficient and
discreet numbers at all times, days and places which you shall in your
judgment hold most convenient and material, for the ordering, settling and
effecting of this great work (mentioned and directed unto you in Our Letters.)
And to use all politic ways and means possible to possess your selves (for
Our use and safety) of all the Forts, Castles, and places of strength and
defense within the said Kingdom (except the places, persons, and Estates of
Our loyal and loving Subjects the Scots.) And also to arrest, and seize the
goods, estates, and persons of the English Protestants within the said Kingdom
to Our use; and in your care and speedy performance of this Our will and
pleasure, We shall perceive your wonted duty and Allegiance, which We shall
acknowledge and reward in due time.

Witness Our self at Edenbrough the first day of October in the seventeenth
year of our Reign.
There is one thing which may stick as a doubt with some that read this
Commission, which is not cleared by that Gentleman, that has observed well
upon The Mysierie of Iniquity: viz. That the Parliament have possessed
themselves of the whole strength of the said Kingdom in appointing Governors,
Commanders and Officers in all parts and places therein: It may be objected,
There was no such thing done when the Commission bore date. It is answered: The
Parliament even at that time, and two months before, were a nominating fit
persons to be presented to his Majesty, to be entrusted with the places of
strength within the Kingdom.

But for further observations upon this Commission, and the probability of the
truth thereof (for works in tenebris must come to light by circumstances) be
pleased to read the Book, entitled, The Mystery of Iniquity, where this
Commission is at large set down, and you will find Endymion Porter had the
great Seal of Scotland in his custody when the Commission to begin the
Rebellion in Ireland was sealed, as he had the great Seal of England in
custody, when the Commission to make a Cessation with those bloody Rebels
(called by his Majesty Subjects) was sealed.

But see now (as was touched before) how the most wise God graciously ordered
the effects of all these most wicked plots to fall out exceeding contrary to
the wicked hopes and aims of the Jesuiticall incendiaries and Atheistical
projectors of them, The contrary effects of the Irish Cessation.
turning their counsel into folly and blasting, these their high or rather
hellish hopes, even at the first springing and sprouting of them into
execution, witness, I say, that forementioned example thereof in the Irish
Soldiers transported out of Ireland to Bristoll; yea and that of one Arundell
Master of Pendennis-Castle in the West, who (as it was credibly informed by
Letters to London) discharged two pieces of Ordnance against two ships
fraughted with Irish-Rebells, notwithstanding that they produced the Kings
Warrant for their landing there, and that he also sent a Post to Oxford to
know his Majesty's pleasure, signifying, withal, that if they landed, the
Gentry of all those parts would forsake the King: Witness also that remarkable
piece of State-policie and providence, whereunto our most prudent Parliamentary
Worthies were now at last inevitably necessitated to have recourse by this most
odious Cessation, and diverse other such like destructive designs of the
Oxonian adversaries of the Kingdom, A New-Broad S^^l of England.
I mean the establishment and setting on foot a New-broad Seal of England to be
resident in the Parliament; a piece of great and high concernment for the
better advancing and forwarding of the future great and weighty affairs of
the Kingdom. A Copy of which Declaration and Ordinance of Parliament, I have
here thought fit, for the Readers better content and satisfaction, to insert,
verbatim, as it was printed and published by order of Parliament, November. 11.
1643.

A Declaration and Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT,
Touching the Great Seal of England.
WHereas the Great Seal of England, which by the Laws of this Realm ought to
attend the Parliament, being the Supreme Court of Justice and Judicature within
this Realm, for the dispatch of the great and weighty affairs of the
Commonwealth, which is especially interessed and concerned therein, was above
a year last past, that is to say, the two and twentieth day of May, An. 1642.
by the then Lord Keeper thereof, Edward Lord Littleton, then a Member and
Speaker of the House of Peers in Parliament, contrary to the great trust in him
reposed, and duty of his place, secretly and perfidiously conveyed away from
the Parliament into the Kings Army, raised against the Parliament; the said
Lord Keeper departing therewith into the said Army, without the leave or
privity of the said House; By means whereof, great mischiefs and inconveniences
have ensued to this Kingdom, and the Kingdom of Ireland.

And whereas the said Great Seal ought constantly to remain in the hands and
custody of one or more Officer or Officers (sworn for that service) and to be
used and employed for the weal and safety of His Majesty's People; which
notwithstanding has been diverse times sithence the conveying away thereof, as
aforesaid, put into the hands of other persons not sworn, and Popishly and
dangerously affected, who have had the disposing and managing thereof at their
own wills and pleasures, and has been traitorously and perniciously abused, to
the ruin and destruction of the Parliament and Kingdom, by granting and
issuing out diverse illegal Commissions of Array, and ^other unlawful
Commissions for raising of Forces against the Parliament, by issuing out of
most foul and scandalous Papers, under the Name and Title of Proclamations,
against both Houses of Parliament, and diverse Members thereof, and others
adhering to them, and proclaming them Traitors and Rebels; Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer, to proceed against diverse of them, as Traitors, and other
Commissions to seize and confiscate their Estates, for no other cause, but for
doing their duties and services to the Commonwealth; as likewise by granting
that horrid Commission, for executing of that most bloody and detestable
design of Waller, Tomkins, and others, for the destruction of the Parliament,
and City of London, and of the Army raised for their just defense; and (as if
Massacres and Assasinations, had been but light and venial crimes) another
Commission has been granted under the same Seal for a Cessation of Arms with
the barbarous and bloody Rebels in Ireland, after the effusion of so much
innocent blood, and slaughter of above one hundred thousand Protestants, Men,
Women, and Children, by their merciless, and bloody hands: whereupon a
Cessation of Arms is accordingly concluded; and those brutish Rebels thereby
imboldned to prepare themselves, not only for a total Extirpation of the
Protestants remaining there, but for a Conquest also of this Kingdom: And
further by granting of several Commissions, and Offices of Trust and Command,
to notorious Papists, who by the Laws and Statutes of this R^alm, are made
incapable thereof; and by conferring of Honors, and Dignities, and granting of
Lands and Estates to diverse exorbitant Delinquents, who stand legally impeached
of high Treason, and other high Crimes and misdemeanors in Parliament.

All which, and many other unlawful and enormous Acts have passed under the
said Great Seal, since the removal thereof from the Parliament, as aforesaid:
Which the Lords and Commons taking into their consideration, and finding all
ways, and means obstructed for the procuring of any redress from his
Majesty, in the Premises, notwithstanding their long hopes, and uncessant
Labors, for the obtaining thereof, are bound in duty, and of necessity to
provide some speedy Remedy for these insupportable mischiefs.

BE it therefore Declared and Ordained, by the said Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, that as well all and every the said acts formerly mentioned,
which have passed under the said Great Seal, as also all Letters Patents and
Grants of any Lands, Goods or Estates, of any person, or persons whatsoever,
for adhering to the Parliament, all Compositions or Grants, of any Wardships,
or Leases of any Wards, Lands, Liveries, Primer seizins and Ouster le maines*
since the said 22. of May 1642. which have not according to the due course of
Law, passed through the Court of Wards and Liveries, established by Law: All
grants since the said 22. of May 1642. of any Honors, Dignities, Manors,
Lands, Hereditaments, or other thing whatsoever, to any person or persons,
which have voluntarily contributed, or shall voluntarily contribute any Aid or
Assistance to the maintenance of that unnatural War, raised against the
Parliament; And all pardons granted to any such person or persons; And all
other Acts or things whatsoever, contrary to, or in derogation of the
Proceedings of both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, which have passed
under the said Great Seal, since the removal thereof from the Parliament,
shall be, and are heerby declared to be utterly Invalid, void, and of none
effect, to all intents and purposes.

And that all and every act or thing, which after the publication of this
Ordinance, shall pass by, or under the said Great Seal, or under any Great
Seal of England (other than what is heerby appointed and established) shall be
utterly void, frustrate, and of no effect; and every person, or persons, which
shall put the same in use, or shall claim any thing thereby, shall be held and
adjudged a public Enemy of this State.

And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that a great Seal of
England already by them made and provided, shall be forthwith put in use; and
shall be, and is hereby authorized and established to be of like force, power,
and validity, to all intents and purposes, as any Great Seal of England has
been, or ought to be.

And that it shall be put into the hands and custody of the persons hereafter
named, who are heerby Ordained Commissioners for that purpose; that is to say,
John Earl of Rutland, and Oliver Earl of Bullingbrooke, Members of the House of
Peers, and Oliver St John's Esquire, His Majesty's Solicitor General, John
Wild Sergeant at Law, Samuel Brown, and Edmund Prideaux Esquires, Members of
the House of Commons; which said persons, or any three or more of them, whereof
one Member or more of the Lords House, also one Member or more of the House of
Commons, shall be present, shall have, and are heerby Authorized to have the
Keeping, Ordering and disposing thereof, as also all such and the like Power
and Authority, as any Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, or Commissioner of the
Great Seal, for the time being has had, used, or ought to have.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration, Touching the
Great Seal, be forthwith printed and published. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

And for the more legal and authentic proceeding heerin; the Parliament swore
a new Clerk of the Crown (Mr Willis the late Clerk of the Crown, and Mr Augar
his deputy having absented themselves) who, as soon as he was sworn, (according
to the Act for a trienniall Parliament) did swear those Commissioners of the
Great Seal; as that act does direct every Lord Keeper or Commissioners of the
Great Seal, to swear, when they enter upon the custody of the Seal. Thus
prudently and providently was this business of so great weight and consequence
carried. And now to proceed.

Although it pleased the Lord that that most noble and renowned Commander Sir
William Waller, had not that success at Basing-House in Hampshire (by reason of
the most impregnable strength of the baracadoes and fortifications in and about
it) which was expected and bravely endeavored; Yet about the middle of this
November, we had credible information by Letters from thence, that before Sir
William had drawn his foot forces from before the said Basing-House, and
voluntarily raised that Siege; Sir Will. Waller apprehends the Lord Saulton, a
Popish Scottish Lord, at Newbery, and 4000li in money with him.
Sir William having certain intelligence of the arrival of the Lord Saulton, a
Scottish Popish Lord, on Sussex coasts, who had been in France to promove the
Popish designs in England, and was now landed, and making for Oxford, but was
happily met with about Newbery by the troops of horse sent out by Sir William,
to way-lay him; where they apprehended him, and about ten or twelve horse with
him, together with a sum of about 4000li in money (as was most credibly
informed) with whom also were found Letters of great importance and
concernment: who with his Letters was forthwith safely sent up to London to the
Parliament, to be secured in safe custody by them.

About the 20th of November, 1643. a Letter was sent to the honorable House of
Commons in Parliament, and directed to the honorable William Lenthall Esquire,
Speaker of the said House, concerning a great fight at Mount Stamford near
Plymouth, at which fight though the said Fort was lost to the enemy; The brave
fight at Stamford Mount near Plymouth, and the excellent effect it produced.
yet in regard of the brave defense of it, and the singular good event which
(notwithstanding the loss thereof) it produced, I have here most justly thought
fit to insert the relation of it (as a rare Parliamentarie-Mercie) as it was
sent in a Letter, I say, to the Speaker of the House of Commons in Parliament;
together with the Copy of a Vow and Covenant, which the Deputy- Lievtenants,
Commanders, Townsmen, and Soldiers took, to live and die in the defense of the
Town of Plymouth, which were as follows.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Commander in chief of the Town and Port of
Plymouth, to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of
Commons, concerning the great fight at Mount Stamford.
SIR;
SInce my last unto you of the 28th of October, 1643. the enemy has pressed
hard upon us against Mount Stamford works, with their great Ordnance, A proper
note, and fitly applied.
and began to play against the same on the Sabbath day last, being the 5th of
November, hoping by that means to perform what the hellish plot of the
Popish-Gunpowder-Treason should have done: They played so hard against it all
that day with batteries (and it being not any way made to endure the same) that
some of our Guns they dismounted, and some clogged with earth which fell upon
them, so as we could not make use of any of them; in so much that on the
morrow they surrounded the Work, fell on with all their strength of Horse and
Foot upon all quarters: yet the chief Commander of the Fort behaved himself
so bravely, that three times he forced them to retreat; and could we have got
any indifferent relief over the Water in any reasonable time, we had kept the
Fort. Yet nevertheless the Enemy sent a Parley three times before the Captain
would accept of it. Then conditions were made, That all Soldiers should march
away with their Arms, flying Colors, and Bullet in their mouths; and that the
Captain should have any one piece of Ordnance away, that he would make choice
of. The Enemy lost four or five Captains before the Fort, besides diverse
other Officers, and many Soldiers. We lost at that time no Officer of note,
only one Lieutenant killed with a great shot, and diverse Soldiers taken
prisoners, which were all exchanged the next day, for some of their own men
that we had formerly taken. I believe they will not brag much of their victory
by getting that Work, for we are now better and in more safety in the Town
than before. For we were forced to keep a Leager there, and continually to
relieve them; so that our men were forced to very hard duty, to keep all the
other Works and Fortifications belonging to the Town. The Enemy having the
Work yielded to them, those of the Enemies party in the Town (as it must be
expected in all places are some) began to get courage, our own friends
doubtful; and I believe* the Ne^tralists do desire that the Town might be
delivered up: Whereupon, for fear either of the treachery of the Townsmen, or
for want of experienced men, I seized the Fort and Island, the Castle and
Magazine, that in case the Town should be forced and overpowered with
strength by the Enemy, and knowing this place of such great concernment, that
through Gods assistance I would keep them till supplies and relief come.
Whereupon I have put them into the hands of such as will keep them for the
King and Parliament, with the last drop of blood in their bodies. Our friends
began then to be encouraged, our enemies both within and without us to be
dismayed, thinking that there was no hope of surrendering the Town: so ever
since, the Townsmen and all Inhabitants have been more forward to contribute
their best assistance than formerly many have done. And upon Thursday last
after Prayer and our mornings best preparation for the same, my self and Mr.
Major, took a Vow and Protestation, which I have here sent enclosed, and caused
it to be presented to all Gentlemen, the Committee of Parliament, the Deputy
Lievtenants, all Townsmen, all Officers and Soldiers, and all Inhabitants
whatsoever; which I find was generally taken with great joy and
cheerfulness. I hope the honorable Houses of Parliament are not unmindfull
of us; yet I never received any instructions from them since the fifth of
September, being the time that I departed from London, although I have sent
four several Packets concerning diverse and special affairs. I humbly crave
that with all speed I may have Powder, Lead, and Match sent, that I may with
honor perform the trust imposed upon me. Thus humbly kissing your hand, I
take leave and rest,

Plymouth 11 November. 1643. Your most humble Servant to be commanded, James
Wardlace.


The Vow and Protestation.
I A. B. In the presence of Almighty God, do vow and protest, that I will to
the utmost of my power, by Gods assistance, faithfully maintain and defend the
Towns of Plymouth and Stonehouse, the Fort and Island, with all the Outworks
and Fortifications to the same belonging, against all Forces now raised against
the said Towns of Plymouth and Stone-house, the Fort and Island, or any part
thereof, or that shall be raised by any Power or Authority whatsoever, without
the consent and authority of both Houses of Parliament. Neither will I by any
way or means whatsoever, contrive or consent to the giving up of the Towns
and Fortifications aforesaid, or any parcel of them, into the hands of any
person, or persons whatsoever, without the consent of both Houses of
Parliament, or of such as are Authorized thereunto by them. Neither will I by
Gods grace raise nor consent to the raising of any Force or Tumult, nor will I
by any way or means give or yield to the giving of any advice, counsel, or
intelligence, to the prejudice of the said Towns and Fortifications, either in
whole or in part: But will with all possible speed faithfully discover to the
Major of Plymouth, and to the Commander in chief there, whatsoever design I
shall know or hear of hurtful thereunto. Neither have I accepted any pardon
or protection, nor will I accept any protection from the Enemy. And this Vow
and Protestation I make, without any Equivocation and Mental reservation
whatsoever: Believing that I cannot be absolved from this my Vow and
Protestation; and wishing no blessing from God on my self or my posterity, if
I do not truly and sincerely perform the same. So help me GOD.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, that this Letter and
Protestation be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Par. D.
Com.

Much also about the foresaid time, viz. the 20th of November. 1643. came certain
intelligence from Lancashire to London, by a Letter to the House of Commons,
from Colonel Rigby, a most worthy Member of the same House; of a most rare and
admirable, yea even miraculous Defeat, given by him the said brave Colonel to
the Earl of Newcastles forces, near Thurland-Castle, upon the edge of
Lancashire. The exact Narration whereof being fully set forth by himself in his
said Letter, I have here thought good for the Readers better content and
clearer satisfaction therein, to give thee it verbatim, as it was printed and
published by authority of Parliament, which was as follows.

A true Relation of the great Victory obtained by Gods mercy and providence by
the Parliaments forces in Lancashire, under the Command of Colonel Rigby, sent
in his own Letter to the honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the
House of Commons in Parliament.
Honored Sir,
THat I may give you an account of our proceedings at Thurland, you may
understand that Sir John Girlington having drawn Forces into his Castle of
Thurland, he began to plunder the Country, and to commit robberies and
murders, and thereupon for the suppression of him and his adherents, I
repaired thither, and after seven weeks strait siege of the Castle, it was
delivered unto me, to be demolished upon agreement, to suffer him and all his
in the Castle, to pass away with their lives, and goods: During most part of
the siege, the greatest part of the Forces of Westmerland lay within our view,
and daily threatened us; but God confined them to their own County, and every
day more and more inclined the hearts of the Commons of Westmerland to decline
any attempt upon us, though we then lay in an Out-Angle of our County, far
from supplies, and whilst these things were in suspense, a design was set on
foot by all the malignant Gentry of Westmerland and Cumberland, and by Roger
Kirby, and Alexander Rigby of the Burghe, two Lancashire men, to raise all the
Forces of Cartmell and Fournes, part of Lancashire, to join with Cumberland and
Westmerland, to surprise Lancaster and Hornby Castles, and to assault us on all
sides, and to raise our Siege, and then to proceed further into Lancashire, and
(as upon credible information I believe) to join with Latham-house, and all the
ill-affected in our County, to our general devastation. And for this end,
they drew together part of Cumberland forces into Fournes, and with them the
strength of that place, to about the number of sixteen hundred, intending the
next day to March into Cartmell toward us, and there to add to their forces,
and in their way, they took and imprisoned diverse of the best affected, and
caused the rest of them to fly out of the Country, who posting to us, I
forthwith took five hundred foot, two Drakes, and three small Troops of horse,
parcel of my Forces at Thurland, and with them in one day, I marched almost
thirty miles, over mountains, and through Sea-sands, and waters, within two
miles of the Enemy, and the next morning being the Lords day, we found the
Enemy in the field, standing with a body of horse, and another of foot, in a
posture to receive us, upon a ground chosen for their own advantage: and when
we were within half a mile of them, we committed our selves to Gods
protection, and began our work with public prayers for his blessing upon us:
And those done, we speeded unto the Enemy, with such resolution and courage in
all the Captains, and common Soldiers, as by their deportment, I might have
rather deemed, that they had made have to have saluted their friends, than to
have encountered their enemies: the enemies word was ( In with Queen Mary) ours
was ( God with us) and at our first appearance, God so struck the hearts of
these our enemies with terror, that before a blow given, their Horse began to
retreat, our foot gave a great shout, our Horse pursued, theirs fled; their
foot dispersed, and fled; they all trusted more to their feet, than their
hands; they threw away their Arms and Colors, deserted their magazine drawn
with eight Oxen, and were totally routed in one quarter of an hours time; our
horse slew some few of them in the pursuit, and drove many of them into the
Sea; we took their Colonel Hudleston of Millam, two Captains, and an Ensign,
and about four hundred Prisoners, six foot Colors, and one horse Color; and
their Magazin, and some horses, and more arms than men: and all this without
the loss of any one man of ours; we had only one man hurt by the Enemy, and
only another hurt by himself with his own Pistol, but neither mortally; upon
the close of the business, all our men with a great shout cried out, Glory be
to God; and we all, except one Troop of horse, and one foot Company, which I
left to quiet the Country, returned forthwith toward our siege at Thurland;
most of our horsemen without alighting from our horses, and most of us all,
without eating or drinking; so that early the next day we came again to
Thurland, where we found our siege continued, within view of more than treble
forces from Westmerland; this work in Fournes had that influence upon all the
Castles, and all the Gentry of Westmerland, and Cumberland, who then lay within
our sight at Kirby-Loynsdale, that within two days after, the Castle was by
the Negotiation of Sir Philip Musgrave, then commanding in chief in Westmerland
and Cumberland, agreed to be rendered unto me, to be demolished, which is
accordingly done: And though I endeavored to have preserved all the
combustible materials therein from fire, yet I could not therein prevail with
the common Soldiers without great displeasure.

My humble* suit now is, to have the order of the House of Commons for my
indemnity, for demolishing of the Castle: And because Colonel Hudleston (who
yet has a Regiment in Yorkshire, in or near Hallifax) is as I hear Sergeant
Major General of Cumberland; and the most considerable man in Cumberland, and
our next neighbor to Lancashire, and one whom without further danger to the
peace of our County, I cannot conceive can be kept prisoner here, I have
therefore presumed to send him unto you, under the care and custody of Mr.
Robert Fog, of whose industry and fidelity, both you and we here have had much
experience: Sir, that God may bless, and prosper all your designs, and
proceedings for his glory, and the peace of this Kingdom, is the daily prayer
of

Your most humble Servant, Alex* Rigby.
Preston in Lancashire, this 17. of Octo: 1643. Ordered by the Commons in
Parliament, that this Relation be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D: Com.




About the 25th also of this instant November, came certain information from
famous Pool in Dorsetshire, of the brave achievements and famous performances
of those renowned active spirits in their most valourous taking of the Town of
Warham in that County, which was also ratified by a letter to a worthy Member
of the House of Commons in Parliament to this effect. The most loyal and
resolute Commanders and Officers in this garrison of Pool, in prosecution of
some former fortunate adventures and most valourous resolutions, wherein God
had extraordinarily prospered and preserved them, sent out a party of about
200 Musketteers, Pools brave performances.
under the Command of Captain Lay* a man of whose fidelity and valor the
Parliament had had much experience, who disposing his men into such boats and
lighters as belonged to the Town, went by water to W^rham* a Town about seven
miles distant from Pool, westward, drawing near the Main-land, but navigable
home to the very Town in such vessels as they made use of. The first
opposition they met with was by certain Musketteers of the enemies, Captain
Lays undaunted resolution at the Town of Warham.
who played on them from a breast work, made on the passage, a mile before they
came to the Town; where the said valiant Captain immediately commanded a party
ashore, which being perceived by the enemy, they instantly threw down their
arms, ran away crying our, heels, heels for the Town* So that the Town
having by this means an alarm, Warham prepares to encounter the Poolians.
were all in a readiness to receive the Poolian^, before they could possibly
approach them, and had drawn several ambuscadoes into the hedges to annoy
them, which way soever they came, and withal making good the bridge-foot (as
they conceived) which was the main hiding place to come into the body of the
Town. But this courageous and resolute Captain being too wise for such
untuter'd fresh water Soldiers, before he came near the Town, had landed an
indifferent strong party, which being divided into two parts were at one and
the same time to enter the Town in two places at once, and the residue were to
follow presently at the main landing place, all which was exactly observed
according to command and direction; but by the way, the enemies ambuscadoes,
still, at adventures played upon our men, retreating amain into the Town, but
did little hurt, for the night not being very light, and our men having command
to keep their matches closs, The Poolians politic carriage in approaching the
Town.
and not to discharge till they came to the Towns end, where they might have
some inducement to bestow a volley of shot to purpose; this was a notable
means that the enemy knew not well how to shoot to annoy them. Our men, thus,
courageously coming on, the enemy left all their defensive brest-works, and
rallyed themselves into a body in the midst of the Town, and all with one voice
crying out, Pool-men enter the Town of Warham.
Now come on ye Roundheads, if ye dare; and our men came timely up together
into the several quarters of the Town; the enemy having no way to escape but
by a gate behind them, which could not possibly be blockt up by our men; but
ours being come up most bravely together, gave them a handsome volley of shot,
at which the enemy unanimously without farther dispute betook them to their
heels, The enemies fly. Prisoners taken.
and throwing down their arms, fled away, and it being in the night season,
many escaped out of that Postern-gate; but about 200 of them were taken
prisoners, and much ammunition and arms, besides many fat beeves, sheep, and
other provision, which was then provided for the next days Market, Prizes
taken.
with good store of other pillage, and the Soldiers, who before had resolved
to be in no Drapers debt for new-cloathes, borrowed as much cloth as would
serve their turn of other kind neighbor- Cormorants, who at the first word
gave them no denial therein, and thus by the time that they had made a
diligent search through the whole Town for their enemies which were left
behind, The Poolians victorious and safe return.
they got much other freight for their vessels, and sent home also a good
quantity of hay and provender, with their other prizes, to welcome home brave
Captain Sydenham with his horse, who was then likewise gone Eastward from Pool
to Winborn to demand that Town also; but his main purpose was to keep the
Warham alarm from them, at Winborn, and so to farther Captain Lays design,
which as aforesaid he bravely effected and returned safely to Pool.

About the 28th of this November also it pleased our good God so to order and
dispose of things by the wisdom and providence of our ever to be honored
Worthies in Parliament, that the most noble and renowned pious and valiant Earl
of Warwick was by an unanimous consent of both Houses voted to be Lord high
Admiral of England, The Earl of Warwick made Lord high Admiral of England.
an honorable title fit to be invested on so honorable, trusty and noble a
personage; and indeed I cannot exactly say, whether the title more honors him,
or he the title; but, this I am sure of, the title is most like to be more
honored, and the Kingdom the better secured by him, whose actions are and
ever have been most like himself, honorable, pious, and faithful.

Much also about the aforesaid time came credible information by several
Letters to London out of Warwickshire, The brave exloits of the most valiant
and faithful Governor and garrison of Warwick Castle.
that Sergeant Major Bridges, Governor of Warwick Castle, had sent our
several parties of horse from the Castle at several times, which brought in
from within two miles of Banburie out of the Lord Says grounds at lest a 1000
sheep, which the Banbury garrison had stolen from the poor inhabitants of the
Countries and places adjacent; And also that they had surprised an hundred
horse of the enemies, taken a Sergeant Major, and some other Officers, and to
the great comfort and content of the Inhabitants of Gloucestershire, had
lighted upon an high Sheriff, commonly called the Task-Master General; who had
laid many heavy impositions and taxes upon the Country People of those parts,
making their lives grievous unto them. Also, that understanding that a company
of ragged Welch-vermine were come into Worcestershire, and intended to nestle
and fortify themselves in Caughton-House, belonging to Sir Robert Throgmorton,
a great Papist, the said brave Governor sent thither about 80 Musketteers, who
speedily possessed themselves of the House, fortified it very strongly; and,
since that, sent fifty horse thither, beside, to make the said House a more
strong and complete garrison for part of his Soldiers, the better to free and
secure those parts from the plunderings and rapines of the enemies forces. And,
certainly, had all the Parliament Commanders been as faithful, courageous, and
active, as this most valiant Commander was, and as the ever to be renowned
Colonel Massy, governor of Gloucester, Colonel Wardlow, governor of
Plymouth, and the governor of Pool, valiantly to watch and lay hold on
advantages, as these have done from time to time, the enemy had been in a
lower estate and condition than now they are, and we might have put a more
speedy period to this war: But we must most wisely ascribe the event of all
things to the all-disposing hand of our most wise God, who thus orders it,
giving over some to cowardice, and others to treachery, that so he may the more
wea^ us from relying too much on the arm of flesh, and cause us to trust more
unto, and to see far more in the Creator, than in any creature-props and (...).

About the 30th also of this foresaid November, The valiant and brave
performances of Sir Will. Brereton and Sir Thomas Midleton.
came certain information to London by Letters out of Cheshire, that Sir
William Brereton, that most famous and successful pious Patriot, and Sir
Thomas Midleton, that most loyal and valiant Commander went on very
successfully in those parts, and that after they had taken Hol^-Castle, the
drawbridge over the river Dee, Harden-Castle, and the Town of Rexham, by which
means they made stop of all provisions out of Wales going to the relief of
Chester, Sir Thomas Midleton went out with a party into Flintshire, and that
the Town and Castle of Flint presently were surrendered unto him; and after
that, that the Town and Fort of Mostin and four pieces of Ordnance in it were
also surrendered to him; whereby they garrisoned their men in all the Towns
about Chester, the Country coming in unto them, as also many Gentlemen of note
and quality, and that with very much freeness.

About the foresaid time also our most renowned Parliamentary Statists passed
an Ordinance of Parliament for the better encouraging of all Merchants, An
Ordinance of Parliament granting Letters of Mart, to Merchants and Seamen,
against the enemies of the Parliament.
Masters of Ships, Mariners and others, (to be approved of and appointed
thereunto, by the most noble Earl of Warwick, Lord high Admiral of England)
that should set forth any ships or pinnaces to Sea, wa^likely appointed,
equipped and manned, at their own proper cost and charges, that in recompense
of the same and their adventures therein, they should have and enjoy to their
own proper uses, all such ships, ammunition, goods, moneys, and Merchandiazes
which they took or surprised by sea or by land; intended or designed against
the Parliament and their adherents in this Kingdom, or for the relief of the
rebels in the Kingdom of Ireland, or that had carried, or whom they should
take carrying any supplies to the intents aforesaid: And also that so much
money should be paid to them or their assigns, by the Treasurer of the Navy,
for the time being, as should enable them respectively to victual their ships
and pinnaces for so many months as they shall employ them at Sea in this
service, accounting twenty ^^lings to each man for months victuals, and not
exceeding forty (...) to every hundred tu^^s burden of their respective (...)
every voyage. Thus we (...) and mercy of our good God to counsel (...) our
most honored Worthies to (...) fare of the Kingdom both by sea and by land,
ever magnified and praised be his holy and great Name for it.

And thus having, The Arks safe arrival at the end of this Monthly voyage.
by Gods providence and gracious assistance, carried on the historical
Narration of Gods Ark, even the holy Cause of our pious Parliament, in all this
Months victorious Voyage, and having now thus happily arrived to the end
thereof: I shall here now desire the godly Reader to give me leave, a little
while to cast anchor and to make a short stay of recapitulation of, and
profitable rumination on, The holy-Merchant-like improvement of this Months
voyage to Gods glory.
the rare and rich mercies of this Months voyage, thereby to see what holy
merchantlike improvement we can make of this our voyage for the honor of our
good God, in briefly observing and admiring the menacing molestations and
shrewd brushes and disturbances which the advers waves and boisterous billows,
rocks and sands of most wicked and ungodly proud and presumptuous enemies of
this Ark, laboring to overtop or overturn it: yet now, by the Lords almighty
and irresistible power and sweet protection, A Summarie recital of all the
rare and rich mercies of this Months voyage.
all those proud waves were broken, the rocks removed and the devouring sands
securely evaded.

Both in the good hand of God, first, Uniting and associating the Counties of
Hampshire, Sussex, Surrey and Kent, and ordaining renowned Sir William Waller,
1.
Commander in chief over them.

Secondly, 2.
In the Parliaments pious care and providence for the welfare of foreign-
English Plantations.

Thirdly, 3.
In causing a considerable number of English-Irish-Protestant Soldiers
(transported out of Ireland, and landed at Bristoll, to fight against the
Parliament) to revolt from the Kings designs by them, and really and readily
to turn to the Parliaments-side against the Parliaments enemies.

Fourthly, 4.
In that brave defeat given by the Parliaments forces in Shropshire and
Cheshire, to that proud and unsuccessfull upstart Lord Capell.

Fifthly, 5.
In the most successful, pious and renowned Earl of Manchesters spoiling and
bereaving of that pernicious Town of Newark, of their provision; the taking of
Bullingbrook-Castle; the declining and perishing condition of proud and Popish
Newcastles army; and the notable defection of the Gentry of ^orkshire, and
other Northern-Counties from the Kings party.

Sixthly, 6.
In the admirable contrary effects which the wisdom of the Lord our God caused
the accursed Cessation of arms in Ireland to bring forth, which mainly
appeared in the Parliaments perfecting and producing their former long intended
new Broad-Seal of England, and the hopefully happy effects thereof.

Seventhly, 7.
In renowned Sir William Wallers brave prize taken about Newbery; The most
excellent effects, which the loss of Stamford-Mount at Plymouth produced; And
renowned Colonel Rigbies famous victory at Thurland.

Eighthly, 8.
The brave achievements and victorious performances of the little Town, yet
greatly renowned Garrison at Pool in Dorsetshire.

Ninthly, 9.
The happy re-establishment of the renowned Earl of Warwick in the place of
Lord high Admiral of England, for the singular security and safety of the
Kingdom, as well by sea as by land.

Tenthly, 10.
The brave exploits of the valiant Governor and Garrison of Warwick Castle.

Eleventhly, 11.
The most successful proceedings and brave achievements of those two renowned
Colonells and Commanders Sir William Brereton and Sir Thomas Midleton.

Twelfthly, 12.
and lastly, the most prudent and provident Ordinance of Parliament, granting
out Letters of Mart by Sea, for the better hindrance of the accursed designs
of our Oxonian adversaries in the rebellious and most bloody Kingdom of
Ireland.

And now tell me, good Reader, do thou not see plainly, by all these
premised passages, and apparent prints of Gods providence, The Lord sitting as
a most prudent and propitious Pilot at the Stern of his Ark, Gods little flock
preserved thus in his Ark, gives all the honor to God alone.
and graciously and gloriously carrying it on safely and securely through the
midst of all these molesting and raging waves of wicked men, and all their most
desperate and devilish designs against it; whereby we may and must, most
justly, and ingenuously acknowledge with the sweet Psalmograph, the holy
Prophet David; Thou, O Lord, art our safe and secure hiding place; Thou alone
do preserve us from troubles; Thou do encompasse us with songs of
deliverance. But to proceed.

The first thing wherewith I shall begin this Month of December, December.
1643.
shall be that happy and blessed business to this Kingdom, of fully
confirming and setting on foot the new Great Seal of England. But before I come
to the present relation of what was more fully settled and confirmed therein;
Give me leave, good Reader, to acquaint thee with what formerly past about it
in Parliament, A New Great Seal of England.
namely, That about the midst of October last, when as the Commons debating on
the speedy putting it in execution, they considered a collection of certain
Acts, then read, setting forth the power and use of the great Seal of England,
and reviewed their former votes touching the absence of the other great Seal at
Oxford; the substance of which former votes having relation to what was then
farther agreed upon, I have thought fit here to insert.

Resolved on the Question.
1. That the great Seal of England ought to attend the Parliament.

2. That the absence of it has been a cause of great mischiefs to the
Commonwealth.

3. That a remedy ought to be provided for those mischiefs.

4. That the proper way is by making a New great Seal.

And they then proceeded to some farther votes touching the same, which were to
this effect.

Resolved on the Question.
That the great Seal at Oxford be disanull'd, and what ever act or thing has
passed under it since it was carried away from the Parliament, to be void and
of none effect; and that an Ordinance of Parliament be forthwith drawn up to
that purpose.

By which Vote those late thundering Proclamations against the Parliament and
well-affected Subjects of the Kingdom, and the many new honors conferred on,
etc. and many others at Oxford for their good service in withholding his
Majesty from his Parliament, and fostering this unnatural rebellion against
the Parliament and Kingdom, thereby occasioning the death of many thousands of
his Majesty's, good and loyal subjects; will fall flat to the ground.

Also resolved on the Question.
That Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament be forthwith appointed, viz.
Three of the House of Peers, and six of the House of Commons (if the Lords so
think fit) to have the trust of the new great Seal, which is to reside with the
Parliament for the use of the Parliament and Kingdom.

And, lastly, resolved on the Question.
That the House of Peers be forthwith desired to nominate such members of
their House to join with a proportionable number of the Commons House, as
Commissioners for the said New great Seal, and that all businesses proper to
the Seal be dispatched by them, or by order of both Houses.

All which was accordingly ratified not long after, as was manifested in the
Ordinance of Parliament for the great Seal forementioned. After which long and
serious agitation, consultation, and debates in both Houses of Parliament, The
New Great Seal of England confirmed.
and a Declaration from both Houses now fully resolved on, and the Lord Ruthen,
Earl of Kent, being with full approbation of both Houses chosen and made a
Commissioner thereof, in stead of the Earl of Rutland (first chosen) who upon
some scruples of conscience objected by him, was acquitted of that service, and
the Ordinance of Parliament accordingly altered: The new great Seal was now, I
say, delivered to the Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament for the
putting thereof into due execution, viz. To the Earl of Kent, and the Earl of
Bullingbrook, The names of the Commissioners.
for the House of Peers; Mr Saint John, Solicitor General, Mr Sergeant Wild,
Mr Prideaux, and Mr Brown, for the House of Commons. The solemn and exact
manner of delivering whereof to the honorable personages aforesaid, I have
also thought fit here to insert, for the Readers better conte^^ and delight
heerin, as I have received it from good hands, which was thus.

The great Seal was carried up by the Speaker of the House of Commons, The
manner of the Solemnity of the delivery of the New great Seal of E^gland to the
Commissioners.
accompanied with that whole House to the House of Peers, who delivered it to
the Speaker of that House, and made a short speech at the delivery of it,
desiring the said Seal might be delivered to the Commissioners, and the Oath
for the due execution of their places thereabout be tendered to them in a full
Parliament, before both Houses, which was done accordingly; The Speaker of the
House of Peers, viz. The Lord Gray of Wark, swearing the two Lords, and the
Clerk of that House, John Brown, Esquire, swearing the other four
Commissioners; which done, the Seal was delivered to them, and they presently
carried it to Master Brownes office, and put it into an iron-chest, with three
different locks, as was formerly appointed, and the said Commissioners shortly
after appointed a Sealing-day to put the said Seal in execution, according to
the Ordinance of Parliament, without any farther let or obstacle; the happy
and blessed effects whereof, we shall in their due time, by Gods good
providence and gracious assistance, see and give the Reader occasion to
understand of in their convenient and proper places.

Upon the 30th of November last, our most honorable Commons in Parliament
passed an Order which was printed and published the second of this instant
December, The Solemn-League or Covenant to be farther pressed where not yet
taken.
That the Ministers of the several parishes within the bills of Mortality,
should on that next ensuing Lord's Day, in the afternoon, tender the
Solemn-League and Covenant in the several Churches and Chappells within the
bills of Mortality to such as had not then taken it, with other very material
Clauses therein contained, which for the Readers better satisfaction and
content therein, I have thought fit here to insert, as it was printed and
published, which was as follows.

Die Iovis, Novem. 30th, 1643.
An Order of the Commons assembled in Parliament, concerning the returning in
writing to the House of Commons, the names of such Ministers and other persons,
within the bills of Mortality, as shall not take the Solemn-League and
Covenant before Wednesday next.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, that the
Ministers within the several parishes within the bills of Mortality, do on
the next Lords day, in the afternoon, tender the Solemn League and Covenant in
the several Churches and Chappells within the bills of Mortality, to such as
have not yet taken it. And that the Minister and Churchwardens of every parish
be required, on wednesday next to return to the House of Commons, the names of
all such, in their several parishes, as have not taken, or shall then refuse
to take the Covenant. And the Ministers, Lecturers, Curates in the said
several parishes that have not yet taken the Covenant, are required then to
take it; And if any of them refuse or further delay the taking of the same,
then the Churchwardens of those parishes are required to return to this House,
in writing, the names of such Ministers, Lecturers and Curates that so refuse.
And the several Ministers in the said several parishes, are to give notice of
this Order publicly on the next Lord's Day in the afternoon. And this Order is
to be printed and published and sent to the Ministers of the several parishes
aforesaid.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

And now that we are again fallen most fitly on this sacred subject of the
holy-League and Covenant, although I have spoken somewhat of it in the close of
my Second Part of our Parliamentarie Chronicle, touching the taking thereof,
first by the Commons in Parliament, and are now in order of the progress
thereof fallen again (I say) upon it, as it was enjoined to all sorts in the
City of London: yet, give me leave now, good Reader, here also, to acquaint
thee, briefly, how it past and was taken in the House of Peers in Parliament,
which comes now to be handled in the next place, for the present.

On October, The House of Peers take the solemn League and Covenant.
the 15th, being the Lords day, the House of Peers, according to a former
appointment, in a very full appearance (contrary to the calumnious and
slanderous report of that Oxonian-Minter of untruths, Aulicus, the Kings liar
in chief, as acute Britanicus ^^tly styles him) took the Solemn-League and
Covenant, in Westminster-Abbey, after the morning Sermon, which was preached by
Dr Temple, a reverend and able Divine, and a member of the Assembly, his text
being out of Nehemiah, 10. 29. The Sermon being ended, the Lords assembled
themselves together, and each of them, with much alacrity and cheerfulness
subscribed unto the said Covenant, in order as they are here mentioned, viz.
The Earls and Lords that took the Covenant at westminster.
The Earls; 1. Pembrook; 2. Essex; 3. Warwick; 4. Suffolk; 5. Salisbury; 6.
Denbigh; 7. Bullingbrook; 8. Stamford. The Lords; 9. Say and Seal; 10. Howard;
11. Gray of Wark; 12. Wharton; 13. Rochford. Besides, several other Lords who
were not then present, but had formerly declared themselves for the Covenant,
viz. The Earls of Northumberland, Lincoln, Nottingham, Rutland, Mulgrave, and
the Lord Dacres; Also, the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Fairfax, Lord
Willoughby of Parrham, Lord Roberts, and Lord Gray of Groobey, who were forth
in the Parliaments service. Certainly, the entering of so many honorable Peers
of this Realm into so solemn a League and Covenant, for reformation and
extirpation of Popery and her sister Prelacie out of this Kingdom, must needs
much amaze and amuse not only our London Malignants, but also all the Court
Parasites and Papisticall and Prelaticall Machivilians at Oxford, who, no
question, gnasht their teeth, and did even gnaw their tongues with malice and
envy, when they heard of such a general and unanimous taking of this
Covenant, both by the Nobility, and by the Communaltie of the Kingdom.

In the same Month also of October, 1643. on several days appointed
thereunto, Commanders in Arms, Knights and Gentlemen also take this Covenant.
there were great confi^ences of Martial Commanders, Knights and Gentlemen of
quality, who most cheerfully and freely took this Covenant, as others had
done, reverend and learned Mr Caryll of Lincolnes-Inne preaching one day at St
Marga^ets-Church in Westminster unto them; and likewise other grave and godly
Divines to others of them, on other days appointed thereunto. And when the
whole City of London, The Covenant sealed in the City of London, with the Loan
of an 100000^^
and all within the bills of Mortality took this holy Covenant, according to
the Ordinance of Parliament, in October last (as has been forementioned in
that month) they were so forward and cheerful therein, that upon a motion
thereunto made, they sealed the Covenant with the loan of an 100000^^ to the
Parliament for the helping forward of our faithful, loyal and loving brethren
of Scotlands advance to help the Lord and us against the mighty and
mischievous enemies of this Kingdom, and our most precious Religion, Laws and
Liberties. The main end of this holy League and Covenant.
Their main, if not only aim therein being the honor of God, and settlement
of Religion, sound doctrine and discipline in the Church of God, the redemption
of our King from Cavalerian and Popish thraldom, and therein his best good and
investure into all his most just rights and Prerogatives, and the vindication
of our Laws and Privileges, our just inheritance, which with honest Naboth,
we would not, we might not sell away, especially for Popish and tyrannical
slavery, on any conditions: yet see (notwithstanding the pious Parliaments,
Peers and Peoples honest aims, loyalty and integrity heerin, as aforesaid)
how those venomous Spiders of Oxford sucked poison out of those fragrant flowers
and Herb of grace, Oxford Spiders suck poison out of the herb Grace.
most Satanically slandring and abusing this holy Covenant, and the honest
Covenanters; Which was most evidently seen in a most impious and audacious
paper, under the title of a Proclamation against the Covenant, which those
vipers at Oxford most villanously and traitorously using and abusing the Kings
name therein, set forth and published to open view; which said Proclamation
coming to my hands, I have thought fit here to insert, that the world may see
how atheistically bold they are to abuse all sacred and most holy things at
their own impious and Plutonicall pleasure, which was as follows.

By the King.
His Majesty's Proclamation, forbidding the tendering or taking of a late
Covenant, called a Solemn-League and Covenant for Reformation, etc.
WHereas there is a printed paper, entitled, A Solemn-League and Covenant for
Reformation and defense of Religion, and happiness of the King, and the peace
and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, pretended
to be ordered by the Commons in Parliament on the 21. day of Sept. last, to be
printed and published. Which Covenant, though it seems to make specious
expressions of piety and religion, is, in truth, nothing ^lse but a traitorous
and seditious combination against us, and against the established Religion and
Lawe^ of this Kingdom, in pursuance of a tra^^erous design and endeavor to
being in foreign force to invade this Kingdom. We do therefore straightly
charge and command all our ^^ing Subjects of what degree or quality soever
upon their allegiance, that they presume not to take the said seditious and
traitorous Covenant. And we do likewise heerby forbid and inhibite all our
Subjects, to impose, administer or tender the said Covenant, as they and every
of them will answer the contrary at their utmost* and extremest perils.

Given at our Court, at Oxford, this ninth day of October, in the 19th year of
our Reign. God save the King. Oxford, printed by Leonard Litchfield, Printer to
the University of Oxford, 1643.



Thus you see how these accursed and most corrupt Counselors at Oxford do most
basely abuse the Kings name to countenance their wicked ways, and most
destructive designs against God and goodness; most blasphemously calling and
counting that most holy and religious Covenant and League of loyalty to God
and the King, a Combination of treachery and perfidious rebellion. But, yet,
notwithstanding this and all the rest of their Muehivillian plots and
practices, GODS Ark carried on prosperously notwithstanding all advers
blustering blasts against it.
thus, to sink, overtop and over-turn Gods sacred Ark, his glorious Cause, and
work of Reformation; Our most wise and good God most powerfully and prudently
breathed on this his holy Ark, most blessed and prosperous gales, carried on
the work most successfully, and notwithstanding, I say, all the adverse brushes
and blustrings against it, this blessed Covenant was, since that, freely and
cheerfully taken, both by the rest of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, who
had not formerly been present at the first taking of it; and by the Judges,
Lawyers, Clerks, and Gentlemen of all sorts and ranks whatsoever, Ministers
and people, in City and Country; yea and diverse both Earls, Many deserted
Oxford and took the Covenant.
Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Officers in arms, Soldiers and others, who
have, since, deserted the Kings party and left Oxford, that sink of muddie
slime, and cage of unclean birds, have heartily (as we hope) and freely taken
this Covenant, and entered with the rest of Gods people into this holy League,
to live and die in this our most blessed and glorious Cause. But now to proceed:

About the 6th of this instant December, came credible intelligence by Letters
to London, from out of Gloucestershire, that whereas the enemies resolutions
were grown very high and lofty to garrison and entrench themselves round about
the City of Gloucester; yet, that they have been bravely lopt and cut down,
The brave exploits of renowned Colonel Massy at Gloucester.
by the vigilancie, valor and prudent circumspection of that most famous and
ever to be renowned Commander Colonel Massey. As first, Colonel Vavasor being
appointed Governor of Tewksbery, issued out his Warrants in that name, to the
adjacent parts, commanding in provisions and pioners for the strengthening of
his garrison and establishment of his government there: But by two troops of
horse sent out of Gloucester, he was so disanimated and frighted that his
government soon dissolved, Colonel Vavasor beaten from Tewksbery.
and Tewksbery was quite quitted by them, and he thus freed of so troublesome a
neighbor as he intended to have been.

After this, Colonel Sir John Winter, the Court- Papist, and one of the Queens
white-boyes, entered upon the government of Newnham with such forces as the Lord
Herbert could afford him, horse and foot; but by a party sent out by this
active and resolute Colonel Massy, after some of Winters forces had got a
good purchase of stolen Cattle into their filching fingers, and were entered
their garrison at Newnham ere Colonel Masseys troops could reach them, after a
complement of thanks given to one Major Adams, a grand sheep-stealer in those
parts for his extraordinary care in that piece of the every which he had new
brought in unto them; Sir John Winter frighted from Newnham.
but, I say, ere the said complement was fully ended, the Gloucester troops
most resolutely arrived at this Towns end, which being so sudden, changed the
close of the foresaid complement into a fearful alarm and cry, We are all
lost, we are all lost. So that with the loss of two of their colors, and 7 or
8 men slain, they quitted that government, also. Besides, after this, the
enemy took courage on the other side of Gloucester, to erect new governments
at Tedbury and Wotton; which caused that valiant and vigilant Governor
Colonel Massey to march that way also, with what forces he could possibly make
against them; but two troops of his horse which were seen before, by the
enemy, were so formidable and terrible to them at Tedbury, that with the loss
of some 14. or 15. of their Soldiers slain and taken prisoners, the whole
regiment, government and governors, with Horatio Carey, fled thence and were
dissipated, scard and scattered, with such a panick fear and trembling, as
hardly to return again in haste to that government. Upon this good success,
this most worthy and unwearied Col. Massey took the opportunity to march to
another Garrison at Wotton, Wotton garrison also dissolved and discomfited by
Col. Massey.
where the enemy (being, and that with good reason, jealous of him) expected
his coming upon them also, who accordingly hearing of his coming upon them
indeed, drew themselves into a body upon a hill to face our brave Colonel, but
on his nearer approach they retreated hastily to their Garrison, at night,
where, somewhat late, Col. Massey valiantly coming on and setting on them,
found the enemy all mounted, yet gave the word and so fell on them, and put
them all to flight toward Bristoll, with great terror, of whom he took only
11 or 12 prisoners, ^lew some 5 or 6, but all the Officers, being well mounted,
and by reason of the extraordinary darkness, it being also a very rainy night,
made their escape, and left that government also for Col. Massey to quarter in,
that night. After all this the gallant Colonel marched back to Gloucester,
contrary to the hopes of Sir John Winter, aforesaid, and the rest of that
^action in the City of Gloucester, A plot against the City of Gloucester,
prevented.
who had secretly and treacherously sent to all quarters of the Forest,
Monmouth and Herefordshire to march presently to Gloucester, on hope, by the
assistance of a fly party (aforesaid) in the Town, now in the Governors
absence, to have surprised the City, as by the sequel may easily appear. For,
that very night, the Governor had intelligence that the enemy in the Forest
was advanced three miles toward Gloucester, and upon their march thither, (he
then not thinking on or hearing of any such purposed plot by the enemy) who
thereupon, The manner of discovering the plot.
who thereupon, commanded a Captain at one of the clock at night to draw 50 or
60 Musketteers from off the guards, and to advance that way, some three miles
off to make good a House upon the passage to the City; but ere the said
Captain came to Mr Cooks House at Heighham, he encountered the enemy both foot
and horse drawn up in a broad lane, upon whom he commanded fire to be given,
and suddenly slew one of the enemies Captains, and 3 or 4 Soldiers more, Sir
John Winters plot defeated.
at the very first charge: But the enemy so suddenly and unexpectedly meeting
with this party, sent out, as aforesaid, by this prudent and provident
Governor, suddenly retreated to Huntley, where Sir John Winter, in person,
much amazed at that change, with all speed also marched away, in such a
confused manner, at the approach of about 14 or 15 of the Governors horse,
that they fell in among them also, slew 7 or 8 of them, and carried 9 or 10 of
them prisoners to Gloucester, and so that plot, was by Gods mercy, thus,
happily prevented, and the enemy discomfited.

About the 10th of this instant December, came credible information by Letters
and other intelligence from Plymouth to London, A brave defeat given to the
Lord Digbie at Ply^^uth.
that upon that Lord's Day was a seven-night before, about 2 or 3 of the clock
in the morning, the enemy (under the command of the Devil and Lord Digbie,
then chief Commander there) gave an assault on the Town, and set upon the
weakest Forts thereof, and at last took, by force, the Fort called the
Lorde-fort, The Town forced to a retreat.
and forced the Town and Soldiers to a retreat. But upon this alarm, the whole
Town was ready standing on their guard, and by break of day made a ^ally out
with very great courage against the enemy, being 2000 foot and 800 horse, with
undaunted spirits and resolution, either to recover their ^o^s or lose their
lives; and so fell most furiously upon them, The enemy put to a retreat.
but the enemy unwilling to endure such a fierce and sudden shock, quickly
retreated, and our men soon regained their work and Ordnance, and upon the
enemies disorderly retreat, our horse came on very valiantly, seconded and
maintained by the Musketteers, and so most bravely routed the enemy; so that
some fled into the water, The enmie soundly beaten.
and mud, and mire, and whatsoever way seemed best to make an escape and save
their lives; of whom 25 were found dead on the place, The slain and prisoners
taken.
40 prisoners taken and 80 horse, besides many arms and several barrells of
powder and other prizes. God, undoubtedly fought for them, for the enemy was,
at least, six for one of ours, the most brave and valiant Governors horse was
twice shot under him, yet he most undauntedly came safely off by Gods good
providence, and returned home most victoriously, for this time, secure from the
danger of the enemy, praised be the Lord for it.

Much also about the same time came certain intelligence by Letters from
Northampton, A brave defeat given to the enemy at Dunscot near Tociter, by the
Northampton forces.
that a party of horse issued out of the garrison at Northampton, in the night
time, to fall upon the enemies quarters, at a place called Dunscot, a mile and
half from Tociter, whither being come, they valiantly fell upon their
grand-quarter, killed 15 or 16 on the place, took 17 prisoners, and wounded
diverse, took 35 horse, and gave them alarms in most of their quarters round
about, and so retreated without the ^o^s of one man. And this defeat so
aff^ighted the enemy, that when ours ^ent out a party of but 10 or 12 horse,
they would make them all quit a Town where they quartered, yea though fire were
but given on the Sentimells, in so much that they were constrained to remove
their quarters more toward Banburie; Such a spirit of fear and terror possessed
them upon this only defeat.

About the 14th of this instant came also most certain information to London,
The most famous defeat given to the L. Craford at Alton is Surrey.
by Letters and other infallible testimony, of the great and famous victory
(through Gods good providence) obtained by the Parliaments forces under the
command of renowned Sir Will Waller against the Kings (...) under the command of
the Lord Graford at Alton in Surrey, which being in special, related by a
Messenger; sent by Sir Will. Wa^^er himself to the Parliaments Committee for
the safety of both Kingdoms, and to diverse of the House of Commons, and by
them ordered to be printed and published, I have been thought fit to give the
Reader the relation thereof, from the said Copy, together with some small
additions of another authentic relation thereof, which came to my hands, which
was as follows.

An exact Narration of the great victory (through Gods providence) and famous
Defeat, obtained by the Parliaments forces, under the command of Sir William
Waller, at Alton, in Surrey, December. 13. 1643. against the Royalists.
ON Tewsday the 12th of this instant December. Sir Will. Waller, in the afternoon
drew forth his forces into a battalia in Fernham-Park, being about the number
of 5000 horse and foot, among which were the regiment of Westminster, whose
behavior and valor in this service is never to be forgotten. The manner of
their ordering the business.
The manner of the business was exceeding well carried, both by Sir William and
all the rest, for strictness of appearance, and likewise for secrecy, in so
much that neither the enemy, nor any malignant party could have the
opportunity to understand the least part of their intentions heerin. They were
upon their march by seven of the clock in the night, They marched at night.
and in an hours march obtained a heath between Brundon and Fernham, and
there, after an hours stay, for the foot, whose march could not be so quick,
as the horse, they all marched willingly and cheerfully together, till near one
of the clock that night, in the way toward Basing; but on a sudden were
appointed to face toward the South, and so toward Alton, passing exactly
between the hills, till they obtained within half a mile of the said Town, The
secret carriage of their march.
most privately and undiscovered at all by the enemy; our Scouts being so
diligent that not a person stirring in all those passages was left at liberty
to have any opportunity to inform the enemy of our proceedings; and being now
in sight of the Town, about nine of the clock in the morning, we understood by
the Scouts we took, that the Lord Craford was in the Town, who had there about
500 horse; the taking of which Scouts, The Lord Craford and 300 horse got out
of the Town.
and some of them escaping, gave opportunity for the said Lord to shift for
himself, who conceived himself and all the rest of his forces lost, yet
unhappily found a private hole, by which he made an escape with a party of his
horse, about 300 and rode Eastward toward Winchester road, where,
unexpectedly, he met with some of our horse, and so was enforced for fear to
retreat back again into the Town, and fled Southward, which our horse
perceiving, pursued them hard, whiles our valiant foot made the woods ring
again with the echo of their loud shoutings for joy. There were three or four
of them slain in their flight, The slain and prisoners taken in the pursuit.
but being in narrow lanes, after half a miles pursuit, our men retreated to
us, having taken about 30 horse and some prisoners. In which interim, out foot
were not idle, nor Sir William himself, whose rare and politic exploits in
this service deserve to be registered with the rest and best of his former brave
achievements and honorable actions. The Town begirton all sides with our
horse and foot.
The horse were immediately appointed to make good all passages, so that the
enemy could have no benefit of their accustomed trick of running away, but
were still taken by our horse when they attempted it; Our foot also in the mean
time, behaving themselves bravely like men, with great expedition and
resolution, beat the enemy out of their works on the North-west and East
parts of the Town, The enemy is beaten out of their trenches.
and possessed themselves thereof, where they cheerfully displayed their Colors
in the face of their enemies, and then our men advanced valiantly into the
Marketplace; Our men enter the Town.
and the enemy being all Musketteers, drew themselves into the works, near the
Church, where they had double trenches and a half Moon, and made the Church and
a Barn, A very fierce fight for the space of near two hours.
thereby, their chiefest refuge; and here grew a very hot fight, which was
continued near two hours together, by reason of a malignant in the Town who
wilfully fired his own barn and other houses, thereby to offend our men with
the smoke, by reason of which smoke, indeed, we lost about three men; but at
last the said fire and smoke abating, our men fell closs to their work again,
and enforced the enemy to retreat into the foresaid Church and barn, where
they were all taken prisoners. The enemy fought valiantly.
The enemies, to give them their due, made good the Town with much courage and
resolution, and would not yield, when they had lost many men, and so long as
their Lieutenant Colonel Boles lived, Lievt. Colonel Boles slain in the fight.
stood to it very stoutly, but he being slain in the fight aforesaid, and a
chief commander besides of theirs, much wounded, they then began to shrink, and
then ours came in upon them, and became Masters of the Town on all sides; The
Town is totally taken.
and the Town being now thus taken, the enemy desired and obtained quarter;
yet being infected with Irish-rebells, and their wonted treachery, one of them
after quarter given, fired off a pistol in the said Church, Major Shambrock
shoe with a pistol in the church after quarter given.
against Major Shambrook; but by Gods providence, he was not killed therewith,
but hurt in the thigh, and hopeful to recover; upon which act, there was much
ado to keep our men from cutting them in pieces, which it was believed they
would have done, could they have known the Irish from the other.

In this fight were taken prisoners, The prisoners and prizes taken.
700 in the Church, near an 100 in the Barn, above an 100 in the field, with
diverse Irish men and (...) men; also near 200 horse, a 1000 arms, one
Colonel, one Major, one Lieutenant Colonel, 13 Captains; 3 Coronets, one of
which with the Princes arms; another, the Earl of Straffords, with diverse
other Colors hid in the Church. The slain on the enemies side.
There were slain of the enemies, near forty, among whom was Colonel Richard
Bolles, as aforesaid. The enemies word was ( Charles) ours was ( Truth and
Peace:) The mighty providence of God was marveilously seen in this, as in many
other mercies toward us; The slain on our side.
for in this fight, for a certain truth, there were not above five of our men
slain, and about six wounded, and about six scorched with gunpowder, by their
own negligence. And now all this being done, as aforesaid, our most worthy and
renowned Major General caused the people of the Town to slight all the works,
took the prisoners and tied them two by two, with match, and sent most of them
to Farnham Castle, where they were kept in safe custody, till they were
otherwise disposed of.

After this, Above 500 of the prisoners take the Covenant, and served under Sir
William Waller.
we were credibly informed that above 500 of these prisoners which Sir William
took at Alton, took the Covenant, and served under Sir William Waller, and
about 500 more refused it, and those prisoners (being most of them Irish) were
afterward sent up to London, with the City forces, who safely and triumphantly
conducted them thither. One passage, heerin, I may not omit, viz. That a little
before this design and fight, the Lord Craford had begged the favor of our
most worthy Major General, Sir Will. Waller sends the Lord Craford a hogs. head
of Sac^.
to let him have a Hogshead of Sack, which noble Sir William with a loving
complement sent accordingly unto him, which the Lord Craford caused to be
carefully kept for his own drinking; but by reason of this sudden and
unexpected company coming thus to visit him, he was struck with such a panick
fear that he left the wine behind him without any complement, to be again at
Sir Williams disposal; but after the fight and his flight to Winchester, their
head quarter, he sent a Letter to Sir William Waller, to this effect.

SIR;
I Hope your gaining of Alton cost you dear. The Lo: Crafords Letter to Sir
(...).
It was your lot to drink off your own Sach, which I never intended to have
left for you. I pray you favor me so much as send me mine own Chiru^geon, and
upon my honor I will send you a person suitable to his exchange.

Sir, your servant, Craford.
Winton, December. 16. 1643.

And soon after the said fight, Sir Ralph Hopton also writ a Letter to Sir
William Waller from his Quarters at Winchester, which was to this purpose.

SIR;
THis is the first evident ill success I have had; Sir Ral: Hoptons Letter to
Sir Will* Waller.
I must acknowledge that I have lost many brave and gallant men. I desire you,
if Colonel Boles be living to propound a fit exchange; if dead, that you will
send me his corpse. I pray you, send me a list of such prisoners as you have,
that such choice men as they are, may not continue long unredeemed. God give a
sudden stop to this issue of English blood, which is the desire of your
faithful friend to serve you.

Winton, 16 December. 1643. Ralph Hopton.


And one thing more (as a very observable passage of Gods providence heerin) I
cannot omit, namely, That the knowledge of this victory (as we were credibly
informed) came to Oxford, A remarkable passage of Gods providence.
just upon the very same day on which they were making Bonfires at Oxford for
joy of the death of that ever most worthily honored and most pious and prudent
Patriot, one of the most famous and never to be forgotten Atlasses of this
Church and State, Mr John Pi^s departure out of this life.
I mean, learned and religious Mr John Pim; which relation of their loss at
Alton could not but be as it were a strong shower of rain to quench the
profane flames of their wicked fiery jollity at our loss of so precious and
choice an instrument of so much good as God had made him to the Cause and
Kingdom. But now to proceed.

About the middle of this instant December, A plot to convey away the young
Duke of Gloucester and the Lady Princess Elizabeth to Oxford, discovered and
prevented.
the Duke of Gloucester and the Lady Princess Elizabeth, the two pledges of
the Crown of England Scotland and Ireland, royally kept and maintained by the
Parliament at St Jameses, were by a private Oxonian plot designed, with the
close help of some malignant and disaffected persons about them, to be
conveyed away to Oxford, but Letters being intercepted, they were presently the
better secured, and all ill-disposed servants about them ordered to be removed,
and good Ministers placed in the rooms of bad ones, and to preach monthly by
turns at St Jameses, reverend and godly Mr Stephen Marshall and Mr Obadiah
Sedgewick being appointed two of them for this service.

And about December. 20th, 1643. the trained bands which had been sent out of
London and Westminster to Sir William Wallers army, The triumphant return of
the trained Bands of London and Westminster, with their prisoners.
viz. the Red-Regiment, under the command of Colonel Sir James Harrington of
Westminster; The Green Regiment of Auxiliaries, under the command of Colonel
Whitchcot; and the Yellow Regiment of Auxiliaries; all which had been upon
diverse hazardous and desperate services and adventures since their going forth,
and especially at the siege of Basing-House, and this last brave defeat at
Alton, now returned home (by the good hand of God, to whom be all the honor
and praise thereof) victoriously to London with about 400 prisoners, which they
and others of Sir William Wallers forces had taken at Alton, the Wednesday
before, as has been already declared; The prisoners they brought.
namely, 37 Commanders and Officers, and 330 common Soldiers, together with
diverse servants and attendants belonging to some of the chief Commanders. And
as thus they came triumphantly home, The brave company that went out of the
City to meet them.
they were met by the most worthy Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Alderman
Pennington, by Colonel Manwaring, and Colonel Zachary, together with a brave
company of the Hamletts belonging to the Tower, and the City Marshalls, and
diverse other most gallant Citizens who accompanied them into the City, that
afternoon; As for their prisoners they were safely guarded through London to
the Royall-Exchange, and from thence conveyed and dispersed by direction of the
Committee of the City for the Militia into several places of Strength in and
about London, viz. Leaden Hall, Bridewell, Newgate, Eli-house, London-house,
and diverse other prisons, where they were safely kept in durance, till they
could be disposed of by way of Exchange or otherwise.

Much also about this time, An excellent Ordinance of Parliament for the
conservation of the good government of the City of London.
both Houses of Parliament taking into consideration, that the well-government
of the City of London did chiefly depend on the faithfulness and integrity of
their Common-Councell-men, and such like Officers of the City, they passed an
Ordinance for the disabling of all those to be Common-Councell-men, or to bear
any other office of Churchwarden, Constable, etc. who shall or do refuse to
take the solemn-League or Covenant, appointed to be taken throughout all the
three Kingdoms; and the like course to be observed concerning those whose
estates are sequestered for their delinquencie and malignancie against the
Parliament, who were also to be debarred from bearing any Office, or having any
vote in any such offices or places, as aforesaid. A singular good course indeed
for the happy conservation of the peace and welfare of the well-affected
party in the City, and the better putting in due execution of the Orders and
Constitutions of the Parliament and City, as occasions are offered.

About the 20th of this instant came certain news by Letters to London, that
valiant Colonel Sydenham, The brave exploits of valiant Colonel Sydenham, of
Pool.
having taken Warham in Dorsetshire, as has been forementioned, and fortified
it; He went with about an hundredth men to Dorchester, where he apprehended
Capt. William Churchhill, Deputie-Governour of that Town, and his Lieutenant
Paty, both which had been very active against the Parliament, and had compelled
that Town and County to yield obedience to the Kings Cormorants. And there this
brave Commander Col. Sydenham brake open the prison and freed such honest men
out of it as had been committed by those cruel Cormorants, for refusing their
illegal commands, and took them with him for their further safety. There also
he met with a Cart laden with Muskets and gunpowder, which came from Weymouth
and was bound for Bristoll, the gunpowder he threw into the river, brake 200
Muskets, and carried away 80 of them, his men not being able to carry any more.
He also borrowed there of one Mr Cokar, a malignant Goldsmith, such plate as he
had; and all this he did in an hour and half, and returned safe to his
garrison at Warham. And a little before this action, he went into the Isle of
Purbeck, and carried away from thence 323 cattle of all sorts. This is that
valiant and faithful Gentleman, that saved the Town of Pool from the Earl of
Crafords intended treachery against it.

Much also about the foresaid time came credible intelligence by letters to
London from Canterbury in Kent, that about the 13th or 14th of December. the
Ordinance of Parliament for demolishing idolatrous and superstitious images,
pictures and monuments, was there put in execution: And the first place which
was set upon in Canterbury-Minster was the famous window in that Cathedral,
The notable reformation at Canterbury in the Cathedral, in Kent. Austine first
Bishop of Canterbury.
wherein (among many other Popish pictures) was Austine the Monks picture, who
first brought Poporie (not true Christianity, as they vapor and brag) from
Rome into England; and this Austine, forsooth, was the first Bishop of
Canterbury, and therefore was very fitly first pulled down: Next, they went to
the Quiredoor, over which were placed 13 images or statues of stone, 12 of them
personating the 12 Apostles, Christ and the 12 Apostles. Twelve more Popish
Saints.
and the 13th, in the middle of them, our Savior Christ, these were all
hewn-down, and 12 more images of Popish Saints over them, which were also
headlong thrown down, and like so many Dagons had their necks broke in the
fall, yea and hands and bodies too. Many other they also brake down in this
Cathedral, and many Crucifixes, Picture of God the Father and the Holy Ghost.
Pretty sport with a Prebendaries wife of Canterbury.
yea and blasphemous pictures of God the Father, and the holy Ghost, being
there found were zealously confounded and turned (as they deserved) into base
rubbish. And as the work went on, the wife of one Dr Blessenden, a Prebend of
that Church, came in very devoutly, and cried out, Oh hold your hands, I pray,
what hurt do these images? spoil not such a fair and beautiful Church; and
when she saw a man strike at the image of Christ lying in a manger, she
screekt out (as was credibly informed) to her Popish husband, who thereupon
came into the Cathedral, As good sport also with her husband the Prebendary
himself.
and (according to accursed custom, no doubt) began to plead for Baal, those
Popish images, telling them that were there of the lawfulness of them from the
Cherubims in the Temple: But whiles he was must seriously and sottishly
disputing thus with some godly Ministers then present to assist the
Commissioners, he grew very sick of this dispute, and was fain to give way to
the work which went on most fervently. After his departure they fell upon 7
large images of the Virgin Mary, Seven figures of the Virgin Mary.
pictured in the window over the steps going into the Quire, all which were in
several as glorious shapes as paint and Art could make them, with Angels
lifting her up to heaven, with these inscriptions, Gaude Maria, Sponsa Dei,
etc. And under her feet were placed the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and in the
bottom of that window, this inscription; In laudem and honorem beatissimae
Virginis, A Cathedral Petty-Canon shoots his fools bolt at this work.
etc. And here now there came in a Petty-Canon, and shot off his pety-canon, or
his fools bolt, and told them they exceeded their Commission, but they soon
sent him away with a flea in his ear, and a mote in his eye, much vexed and
perplexed to see his Demigods and Semi-Saints so coursly handled. After this
they came to a most gorgeous and idolatrous image of Thomas Becket, Thomas
Becket a Romish Saint an English traitor.
forsooth, that arch-traytor to the King, which they also instantly defaced and
demolisht, and so went on most zealously and religiously in ruinating and
turning into rubbish all those monuments of idolatry in that Cathedral,
blessed be the Lord for it.

December also the 20th, Gainesborough stormed by Sir Tho. Fairfax, and Sir
John Meldrum, and a brave prize taken.
1643. came certain intelligence by letters from Hull to London, that those two
right valiant and magnanimous Commanders, Sir Thomas Fairfax and Sir John
Meldrum, about noone time of the day, assisted by some men by water, sent unto
them by the most noble Lord Fairfax from Hull, suddenly and successfully
stormed the Town of Gainesborough in Lincolnshire, took therein 500 arms and
store of other ammunition, together with 260 prisoners, common-Souldiers,
besides the Lord Caworth, Col. Saint-George, the then Governor of the said
Town; also Lieutenant Colonel Royalston, Major Hern, and Major Chapel, 16
Captains, 2 Lievtenants, 2 Ensigns, and other inferior Officers. Another
brave gale of wind indeed, besides that of Alton lately mentioned, to fill the
sails of our floating-Ark, and make it sail on the more cheerfully through the
boisterous billows of the Kingdoms intestine broils, The Kings party most
unsuccessfull ever since the Irish Cessation.
praised for ever be the Lord of hosts for it.

And here good Reader, give me leave to tell thee, and to desire thee to take
serious note and observation of it; That ever since that accursed Cessation in
Ireland, with those most barbarous and inhumanely bloody Rogues and Rebels,
and the Kings so tender respect unto them, as to term them his Catholic
Subjects; and contrariwise the Parliament, but a pretended Parliament, and them
and all their loyal adherents, traitors and rebels, the righteous God of
Heaven has never prospered any design of moment which his Majesty or his
accursed Cormorants have taken in hand, but still they have been most
unsuccessful, and put to the worst every way and every where. For, besides the
many and marveilous forementioned victories, which God has most graciously
given to the Parliaments party (ever since that so odious and unreasonable
cessation) which have been in their proper places before related. Now also about
the 20th or 22th, of this instant came certain information by Letters and other
indubitable intelligence from Northampton to London, Pious Sergeant Major (...)
Skippon and his brave Londoners, at Grafton-House.
that pious and valiant Sergeant Major Skippon, with a party of the most
renowned Citizens of London, (who for their admirable valor, fidelity, and
constancy to the Commonwealth, and for the maintenance of the true Religion,
and preservation of the known Laws, indeed, and liberties of this Kingdom,
especially now in these modern times, when the Kingdom has most need of them,
are no whit inferior to the most famous ancient conquering Roman^s, being and
returning successful and victorious where soever they be) together with a
party of the valiant and victorious Northampton forces also, Grafton-house
stormed by the Londoners and brave Northampton forces.
had most courageously stormed Grafton-House, (a place of great strength and
consequence, being also the Queens own j^yuter) and after much hard service,
and many most furious assaults made upon it (they having also sent a party, at
the same time to face Tociter, that so they might prevent all relief from
coming to Grafton) at last, most victoriously obtained the same, and took
prisoners therein, Col. Sir John Digbie (a rank noted and most active Papist,
Grafton-house taken, and the rich prizes and spoils therein.
and brother to that arch-traytor and incendiarie, George Lord Digbie) Col. Sir
Edward Longervile, and 5 Colonells more, above 300 common-souldiers, 600 arms,
6 piece of Ordnance, 80 brave horse, besides many brave sadle-horse, together
with many other rich things of great worth and estimation, which were all left
for plunder to the valiant Soldiers, and which they had and divided among
themselves most merrily. An Ordinance of Parliament enabling the Militia for
the City of London, to send forth two regiments unto Sir Will. Waller.


This brave victory, together with that at Alton, could not choose but be a
singular encouragement to our other London trained-bands and auxiliaries, who
now about the 23th of this instant December, were designed (by an Ordinance of
Parliament, enabling the Militia of London thereunto) to send forth such
regiments of horse and foot as they should think fit, for the farther relief
and supply of Sir William Waller; and about this time, they did accordingly
send forth, the White and Yellow Regiments of the ^ained hands and auxiliaries,
in the room of those who had lately returned home, as you heard before. By
which Ordinance of Parliament the City Militia had also power given them, to
recall the same forces, at their pleasure, and to proceed against such as
refused to go out, according to their votes, and the Ordinance of the Militia,
either by fine or imprisonment, as seemed fit to them: And that the brave and
undaunted spirited Citizen and successful Commander, Colonel Richard Brown,
was by the said Ordinance appointed to be Sergeant Major General of the said
Citie-forces.

And much about this time there fell out another remarkable passage, much to
his Majesty's dishonor, (since his still persisting in his unnatural
disaffection to his loyal Subjects, A notable plot against Nortingham Castle.
and i^religious affection to the Irish-Rogues and Rebels) viz. That the
Marquess of Newcastle plotted and contrived, by one, Colonel Dacre, to have
corrupted and undermined the valiant and most loyal governor of
Nottingham-Castle Colonel Hutchinson, Colonel Hutchinso, Governor of
Nottingham Castle, his constancy and fidelity to God and his Cause.
to betray the said Castle and Town into the said perfidious and ignoble
Marquess of Newcastles hands for the Kings use; but that the Reader may see the
Christian courage, constancy and fidelity of this most worthily to be honored
Governor, and the most base and unworthy ^ampering and enticing insinuations
of Newcastle and his, Agent thereunto, I have here thought fit to give the
Reader the exact Narration thereof, by the interchangeable letters which passed
to and fro between either party, under their own hands, which will fully and
clearly demonstrate the thing, and give the Reader much satisfaction and
content in the perusal thereof, which was as follows.

A discovery of the treacherous attempts of the Kings Cormorants or Cavaliers,
to have procured the betraying of Nottingham-Castle into their hands; expressed
in a Letter sent to one Mr Millington a worthy Member of the House of Commons,
and 4 more at the same time.
SIR;
I Have thrice been tempted upon the offers of great rewards and honors, to
betray this Castle. The first was by Sir Rich: Byron, another by Mr Sutton,
both which I (...) the Committee with all, (...) scornful refused (...) being
this third time (...) I thought it my duty to acquaint those (...) ^eer
entrusted me, both for their satisfaction and my own discharge, if any thing
should happen to my prejudice heer-after; for I expect that now they see their
attempts in this kind fruitless, they will as basely endeavor to blemish with
false aspersions that honesty which with bribes they cannot corrupt; be pleased
therefore to understand the whole proceeding of this last offer, and the
occasion, which was this.

Colonel Dacre, one that was formerly in the North, a familiar friend and
acquaintance of my brothers, sent to me to desire that he might have the
liberty to see him, to which, with the knowledge of the Committee, I gave
consent; and then being in his company, he desired some words in private with
my brother, pretending a desire to be satisfied in some doubts of his
concerning this war; but some accidents then falling out, he was prevented of
that private conference, and therefore desired that my brother some two days
after would come to his quarters; but he, to prevent all suspicions, would not
go but writ him a denial: after which Colonel Dacre writ very earnestly to
him to come again, and invited Captain Poulton to come with him; but my
brother would not, only with the leave of the Committee he sent Cap. Poulton to
excuse it, of whose going we intended to make such use, as if we could, to
discover how the enemy lay, and what their intentions were: so soon as he came
thither, he was most kindly entertained, and Colonel Dacre taking him aside,
told him, that now the Governor of Nottingham and his brother had an occasion
offered to gain themselves great honor, to do the King very good service, and
to receive a great recompense for so doing; which he demanding how that was,
the Colonel told him, that if I would deliver up the Castle, the command of it
should be confirmed to me and my he^^, I should receive ten thousand pound, and
be well assured of it before ever I delivered the Castle, and that I should be
made the best Lord in Nottinghamshire, that my brother should have three
thousand pound to deliver the Bridges, and that Cap. Poulton should have two
thousand pound to get this effected; to which Cap. Poulton answered, that he
thought it was an impossible thing, for the Governor had formerly been tempted
with such like offers, and had refused them, that we all scorned so base an
act, and for his own part, he would starve and rot before he would betray his
trust: the Colonel was further importunate with him, to move it to me, and
that you may, says he, be better assured I do not this without Commission, he
then pulled out of his pocket a paper written with these words, or to this
effect; These are to authorize Col. Dacre to treat with Col. Hutchinson and
Lieutenant Colonel Hutchinson, for the surrendering up of the Castle and
Bridges of Nottingham for the service of his Majesty, and to make them large
promises which shall be performed: and this paper signed with W. Newcastle at
the bottom: and he further desired, that he might but come to the Castle to
speak with me; when Captain Poulton told him, there was no hope of obtaining
that, he entreated him that he would but deliver the message to me, which he
told him he would do; and the Colonel told him, that if I would not deliver
the Castle, yet if he himself would but leave us, and come away, he should
immediately have a Regiment of horse delivered into his command; and earnestly
pressed that I would send him an answer: which presently after both my brother
and I did, the Copies whereof I have here sent you. There were also two
Officers of Cap. Whites Troop, whom we sent along with Captain Poulton, whom
Colonel Dacre also took aside, and made large The offers to Captain White was
10000li. and 100 to his Officers to procure it.
offers, both to Capt. White, and them, if they would procure him to turn to
their side; But Capt. White has so often scorned and refused such unworthy
offers, that this did but increase his contempt of them, whose faith and
honestly has been apparently great in this cause. I confess, had it not been
for drawing a scandal or jealousy on my self, I would have gone so far as to
have gotten the Propositions under Col. Dacre his hand, if not under the
Marquess his hand; but this I durst not do, lest my own honest intentions
should in the mean time have bin mistaken: I therefore thought it sufficient to
make it presently known to the Committee, and so to acquaint you with it, and
withal to assure you, that were I certain we should utterly bedeserted and
left (as, for any relief I yet hear of, we are like to be, our Soldiers
being 30 weeks behind with pay, and the whole Country now possessed by the
enemy) yet I would maintain my faithfulness to the Parliament, so long as I
have one drop of blood left in me; and when I am forced to the last extremity
^^am confident God will give me strength to maintain this Christian resolution,
that I have by Covenant both with God and man bound my self unto; which is,
that I will rather choose to die ten thousand deaths with a clear conscience to
God, and an honest heart to my Country, than to sell my soul for the purchase
of my life, and all the wealth and honors this world can bestow upon me. Your
sons are both well here in the Castle, and I hear your wife is so in the
Country; only I hear your goods and corn are wholly plundered. What service I
am able to do for you here, if you please, you may command,

Your friend and servant, John Hutchinson.
Nottingham Castle, December. 18. 1643. Postscript
Sir, just as my Letters were going to Colonel Dacre, there came one from him
to Captain Poulton; the copy of which, with Captain Poultons answer, I have
here also sent you, the original I preserve by me, as a testimony of their
unworthy proffers.




To Colonel Dacre.
SIR, Your propositions sent to me on Wednesday last by Captain Poulton (for
which you showed him my Lord Newcastles Commission) were so unworthy of a
Gentleman, so wicked, and base, that once I thought in contempt and scorn to
have forgotten them; yet lest my silence may receive too favorable an
interpretation from you, know and tell your General, that set you on this
brave employment, that I abhor the thought of treason to my Country, though I
might thereby grow as great for wickedness as he; tell him I Will wear no title
but what my faith and virtue purchases, and I Will leave my children an honest,
though a small inheritance, to whom my spotless name, not tainted with the
foul blot of treason, shall be an ornament, when the remembrance of all
treacherous Apostates shall rot with infamy; and I doubt not but my gracious
Prince, once cured of his mistake, will reward my loyal constant faithfulness
to his Regal Power, and Parliament, with a larger recompense than he propounds
for my corruption: if he do not, virtue is its own reward. Tell your most
Excellent General, his threats and promises are both alike contemptible to me;
I fear not those, and I hate these. I fight not to repair a broken fortune,
but to maintain a just quarrel; in which may that man perish, and fall low as
the depth of hell, that can be hired to prove unfaithful; tell him, if you
dare, that it had been an employment more beseeming you, or any Gentleman, had
he sent you with ten thousand armed men, to assault our well defended walls;
than with so many pieces of contemned gold, to lay your siege against an honest
hear. I could honor an enemy for performing brave and gallant things; but
such attempts as these will render your persons as odious to all honest men, as
your rebellion: and I am sorry you should undertake so base a service, as to
deserve the just neglect and scorn of

John Hutchinson
Nottingham Castle December. 16. 1643. Postscript.
Pray Sir, send me word what you should have had for the procuring this* that I
may know at what rate the enemy valueth this Castle.




To Colonel Dacre.
SIR, You have now convinced me of an error, I once thought it possible that
some rash mis^led young men might still among the Cavaliers have retained a
sense of Gallantry and Honor, though no Religion; and have been enriched with
those moral virtue which made the Heathen famous; such a one I believed you to
be; but since you can attempt to buy me to so great a villainy, as you did in
your late propositions by Captain Poulton, I must needs be persuaded, you would
never offer me what you your self would not have done: It Is I confess strange
to me you could imagine, that a Christian, a Gentleman, or a Commonwealths-man
would ever prove such a villain, as for a little gaudie dirt to sell his soul,
his honor, and his Country; perish that most contemned gain, with all that
can accept or offer it: Dacre, 'twas base in you to think so of me, I am sure
you cannot so mis-interpret any act of mine, as to receive from it the least
ground of encouragement to such an opinion; and had you known my Brother, you
would have thought it easier for you your self alone to have conquered all the
men now fighting in the Kingdom, than to corrupt that guard of virtues which
protect his constant soul from treacherous thoughts. Did you think men of
sense will part with real honor for a Title? you are not capable of a
religious consideration; or I could tell you, that our ^ouls (redeemed with an
unvaluable price) are by you most unequally valued at a poor inconsiderable
sum of money; but your thought cannot reach heaven: look upon earth, and give
me an example where ever any Traitor preserved his foul name from an horrid
blot of infamy on him and on his house for ever? How can you think, He that by
you will be corrupted to betray another trust, will not by another be again
corrupted to betray yours? Keep your despised coin to tempt some frail
waiting woman, it may work with her to procure such honest things as you
affect; but desist these base attempts on men of noble spirits, with whom they
will but render you as contemptible as your offers. Consider the unworthy
message you sent, and blush at the remembrance of your guilt in it, and if yet
you have so much worth left in you, repent the injury you did to him that was
your Friend. Farewell that name for evermore between us.

George Hutchinson.
Trent Bridges, December. 16. 1643.

To his truly noble friend Captain Poulton.
Noble Sir,
I Was in hopes to have waited on you this day, but indeed I received an
Express last night from my Lord General, wherein I am commanded to wait on
his Excellency near Chesterfield this day. Sir, I hope you remember the
business I sole to you of when you were at my quarter; I will engage my self
upon my life, that what I promised shall be really performed; if you please but
to consider and truly value the business, I make no question but I may obtain
my desires: which I will assure you is not for any particular ends, but in the
first place to serve my gracious King, and then my friends, which I will assure
you, I shall ever esteem your Lieutenant Colonel and your self to be;
desiring very much to hear from you by this bearer; wishing us all to agree,
for upon my word it troubles me to think, that all honest men should not be of
one side. Which the Lord grant that we may all be, I remaining always, Sir,

Your most humble servant, Richard Dacre.
Watnell, Friday morning the 15. of December. My humble service to my truly
noble friend your Lieutenant Colonel, and tell him I wish him as my own soul.




To Colonel Dacre.
SIR, Had the Cavaliers since found out away to perform their promises better
than they did at Bristoll, Gainsborough, etc. you might have had some hopes of
a young man whose best fortune is his sword: but so unworthy have their
dealings ever been, so little faith and honor do you give testimony of, in
tempting me to act such things as gallant men would not accept, if offered;
that I must tell you these unworthy ways you take to advance your cause, are
but so many confirmations to me in this I do maintain against you. He that
fights for honor, not for plunder, to which the Dutch Prince has well trained
all your armies, would scorn to receive his enemies Fort on any conditions,
but such as were purchased by his prevailing valor, not undermining treachery:
to which, Sir, I am as unflexible, as you to worth and goodness. The Governor
I believe and his brother have returned you their answers; and you may in this
receive the negative resolution of

Thomas Poulton.
Nottingham Castle, December the 16. 1643.

Thus we see what ways these irreligious and perfidious Court-Cormorants take
to devour and destroy all in their Harpeian-reach, and to compass this wicked
design by such base and dishonorable aims and means; A Pack of Cavalerian
plots.
just as that ravenous Prince Ruperts, or rather Prince Robbers underhand
dealings to betray Bristoll: The Earl of Crafords base agreement with loyal
Capt. Sydenham to betray Pool: C. R. to a writing to betray Aylesbery; George
Lord Digbie, subscribed in a Letter to Sir John Hotham to betray Hull, and this
most unworthy endeavor to have basely obtained this Town and Castle of
Nottingham. In all which we may most apparently perceive and see, our good and
gracious, great and glorious wonder-working God, our most merciful Shepherd of
his Israel, who never slumbers nor sleeps, but is most wise and watchful over
us for good, even then when we least deserve or desire the same; but now to
go on.

About the 24th of this instant came certain intelligence by Letters from
Leicester to London, A brave defeat given to the Belvoir Cormorants by Colo.
Weight, Governor of Burleigh-house.
that about an 140 of the Newark and Belvoir Cormorants went into Rutlandshire
to plunder and pillage the Country, where they took many kine, sheep and
horses, from the Country people, which being timely made known to Colonel
Weight, who most valiantly kept and commanded Burleigh-house, upon the edge of
that County, with a competent garrison, for the Parliament, he issued out of
the said House with but about 60 valiant choice men, and marched toward them to
Strozby-Heath, Colo. Weight sends the enemy a challenge.
where about he overtook them, and sent a trumpet to sound them a challenge,
but they having more mind to be gone with their prey than to stay and fight,
went on the^^with. Whereupon this valiant Colonel, with his resolute Comrades
fell courageously on them, and so necessitated them either to fight or die, and
at the very first encounter (which was very hot for the time) Allen his Capt.
Lieutenant so bravely charged them, that he mortally wounded Capt. Capt.
Plunket a most wicked and bloody Irish-Rebell, slain.
Plunket (the vilest villain among all the Cormorants of Bever, or
Belvoir-Castle, or Newark either (and one mentioned in the Kings Proclamation
in the beginning of this Parliament for a notorious Irish Rebel, but now, it
seemed, come over to fight for the Protestant religion) and who was here made
their chief Commander in this robbing design) who immediately dyed of the said
wound; Colonel Lucas also was sorely cut over the face with a sword, and had
not his horse been better than himself, he had been, at that time, taken
prisoner. And upon a second charge Colonel Weight so bravely bestirred himself
with his valiant associates, Colo. Waights brave resolution at a second charge.
The enemy is put to flight. The prisoners and prizes taken.
that though he had his horse shot under him, and his Lieutenant shot in the
thigh; yet they carried it on so resolutely, that his enemies betook themselves
to their heels and ran away, in the pursuit of whom, even to Belvoir or
Bever-Castle, they slew diverse of them, took about 60 of their horse; 46
prisoners, many arms, recovered the greatest part of the prey from them,
wounded many of those that fled, and all this without the loss of any one man
of theirs, and but three wounded. About the 26th day following, 36 of those
prisoners were brought into the Town of Leicester, that they might be safelier
there kept than at Burleigh-House. A most worthy act in Colonel Weight after
the fight.
After this victory thus by Gods mercy obtained, the noble Colonel, so
ordered the business with his Soldiers, that all the stolen cattle recovered
from the robbing enemies, were restored to their proper owners again. A most
just and laudable act in him, and most worthy to be imitated by all the
Commanders that fight on the Parliaments side, in defense of our Religion,
property and liberties.

About the 28th of this instant December. The siege of Plymouth deserted.
came also certain news from Plymouth, that the Kings Cormorants who had long
besieged that Town (but by Gods admirable providence and protection, had been
prevented of their pernicious purposes against it) had now at last, a special
design upon it, namely, to storm it, about the 23th of this instant, at night,
The enemy resolves to storm Plymouth.
whereof their prudent and valiant Governor Colonel Wardlaw, having timely
intelligence, he caused all such persons as were able to bear arms in the Town
to stand upon their guard, and also drew forth the greatest part of his forces
that night, who most industriously and undauntedly cast up a sconce against the
enemies trenches, and in the morning sent out a party upon the forlorn hope,
who skirmishing a while with the enemies began to retreat, whereupon the enemy
supposing they had none to second them, followed them close, till, at last, the
rest of the Governors forces appeared for their relief, and after a very
fierce encounter between both parties, A very fierce encounter on both sides.
Plymouth-men being then off from their works, and with remarkable courage
enforced their enemies to a very hasty retreat from the Town, slew at least an
100 of them in this assault, At least one hundred of the enemies slain, and not
above 16 of ours.
with the loss of not above 16 of their own men, and made them, heerby, quite
relinquish the Siege, leaving behind them about 660 of their sick and maimed
Soldiers to our mercy (which was far greater than their malice and mischief
deserved of us) who were not able to be conveyed away, The Siege quite deserted
and 660 of the sick enemies left behind. Major General Basset his ingenuous
confession touching this siege.
nor so much as to crawle out of their trenches. And upon the day of their
deserting this siege, and departure out of their trenches, one Thomas Basset,
the enemies Major General, called to one of Plymouth Officers in their works,
and bidding them farewell, told them, that he verily thought God fought against
them; and said, moreover, That if he could be convinced that he was not in the
right, he would hang himself at his door ere he would take up arms in this
quarrel on the Kings part. Here, yet, ye may see was some ingenuity in a
seduced Malignant. And this was avouched, for most true, in the Narration of
Plymouths siege, published by authority of Parliament, page 13. Thus, I say,
they left the siege and departed, some to Plympton, others to Modbery, and the
rest to Tavestock. But in their retreat, they most wickedly and maliciously
swept that part of the Country about the Town of all sorts of provisions that
possibly they could get within their reach and knowledge, The horrible malice
and mischief of the Kings Cormorants at their departure.
not leaving a sheep, swine, or cow behind them; and to express the depth of
this their diabolical rage and malice, they burnt all the hay and corn
thereabout; thus utterly undoing many poor people who had nothing else to live
upon. And here, I may not omit one most memorable print of Gods admirable
providence to Plymouth in the time of this their long and strait siege, but
must with all bounden praises to the Lord gladly make mention of it, to stir
up others also to help to magnify and admire the name of our good and gracious
Lord God therein, which was this; That after the Town had been a long time
strictly besieged, A most admirable passage of Gods providence to Plymouth by a
great shole of Pilchards coming into their harbor in the time of this Siege.
and no fresh victual, either flesh or fish could be had (it having pleased
God also that the Ships which had long time been sent from London for their
relief, had been beaten back, with contrary winds) whereby the poor people were
grievously pinched and put to it. But, behold, on a sudden, there cam^ in an
infinite multitude of Pilchards into the harbor, within the Barbicon, which
the people took up, with as great ease as cheerfulness in baskets and tubs, and
that in such a plentiful measure, as did not only refresh them for the
present, but a great deal more were taken, preserved and salted, whereby the
poor got much money in selling them. Such a passage not heard of, I believe, in
our kingdom, since the siege of Rochel in France, by that innumerous shole of
Cods, which then preserved that Protestant Town, then besieged by the French
King with an 100000 Popish enemies; as the French History records. The truth
heerof, I have also attested out of the foresaid Narration of this Plymouth
Siege, page 14. And now to go on.

Much about the foresaid time also came credible intelligence from Northampton
to London, Captain Clark of Northampton apprehended diverse Commanders playing
at Cards.
that that most valiant, vigilant, and well experienced Soldier, Capt. Clarke,
one of the prime Commanders in the garrison at Northampton, advancing from
thence with a party of horse, and coming to a place called Brandon, within 2
or 3 miles of Taciter, in that County (according to the intelligence given
him) sprung up a covie of Prince-Robbers, Commanders and Officers, (being
indeed the greatest part, if not all the Commanders the enemy had in their
garrison at Tociter) one whereof was a Lieutenant Colonel, and another a
Sergeant Major, with their horses, and a malignant Parson of that County, in
their company, they surprised them all, as they were playing at cards (for, you
must know, that it is the greatest devotion that these profane time-servers
use, at the good time, forsooth of their merry Christmas, which they account
the most solemn time in the year for beastly Bacchanalian and atheistical
playing, drinking and revelling) and thus spoiling their sport, they were all
carried prisoners to Northampton. And at the same time also, such another pretty
prank or Christmas-gamball was played them by a party of Dragoones sent out
from Windsor-Castle, Windsor-Castles Dragoons brave exploits about Redding.
who advancing as far as Redding, and having come within little less than half
a mile of the Town, and faced the enemy there, they entered the Towns of
Twyford, Hurst, and Okingham, and took there diverse of the enemies horse, and
four high Constables, who were gathering Contribution-money for
Redding-Cormorants (they having then collected the sum of 80li.) Four high
Constables and 80li. taken and carried to Windsor.
which the said Dragoons took from them, and brought it (together with their
prisoners and horses) into Windsor-Castle. And very shortly after, another
party was sent out from thence, who coming into Stoke, about 4 miles from
Windsor, they had intelligence of a great feast which was that day to be kept
at the house of a notorious malignant in that Town, Good cheer provided for a
party sent out of Windsor, at a great. Malignants house at Stoke.
who had accordingly invited all his malignant neighbors unto it, who being
all assembled, and preparing to sit down, our said forces came suddenly in upon
them, and having laden a Cart full of their provision, which they had made
ready for dinner; with great store of sack and claret, and other sorts of wine,
they speedily dispatched it to Windsor; and brought away with them 3 prime men
of about twenty then present, namely, the Master of the house, the Parson of
the Town, and another active malignant, who were all committed prisoners in the
Castle, there to feed on prison-short Commons, whiles the garrison-Souldiers
merrily feasted themselves with their good cheer, and drank off their wine
heartily, it being all disposed of among the said garrison-Souldiers.

December the 30th, The high-altar and Popish pictures in King Henry the
sevenths Chapel taken away and demolished.
1643. The high altar and other superstitious pictures and Crucifixes in King
Henry the sevenths Chapel in Westminster Abbey, were by order of Parliament,
and in the presence of the Committee for innovations, taken away and
demolished, even the very next day after the monthly fast Sermon, preached
that day before the House of Commons in Parliament, by Mr Hinderson, that
reverend and renowned Scottish Minister, at Westminster. This pious act being
performed at the request of the said venerable Mr Hinderson, as I was by
credible testimony informed.

And now, good Reader, having by Gods gracious assistance, thus finished this
Months voyage, and brought our Ark safely into the harbor of this Months
conclusion, A brief recapitulation and grateful rumination on all this last
Months remarkable mercies.
I shall here desire, we may a little repose our senses, and reflect our
serious thoughts, upon a most brief and grateful recapitulation of all the
precious traffic, and rich merchandise of mercies, brought in for the better
improvement of Gods honor and precious praises therein; and to see and survey
with thankful hearts, as in a short Map, what God has (this month) done for
us, and how he has graciously and gloriously carried on this blessed Ark, the
Parliaments most upright and innocent cause, through all the boisterous
billows and swelling surges of all its inveterate and malignant enemies rage,
and most malicious, sly and subtle machinations, not only to overtop, but
overturn it too with utter ruin and destruction, if it had been possible for
them; as namely,

First, In settling the New great Seal of England.

Solemn-League or Covenant, in places and by persons, where it had not formerly
been taken; and, this, notwithstanding that shrewd crosse-winde it met with by
the way, in the Oxonian accursed Proclamation, published against it.

Massy at Gloucester, against his many and malicious garrison-neighbours.

Digbie before Plymouth; and that other defeat at Dunscot near Tociter, by
Northampton forces.

William Waller, at Alton, in Surrey; the discovery and prevention of the plot
of conveying away the Duke of Gloucester and the Princess Elizabeth from St
Jameses to Oxford: And the most triumphant return of the Train'd-Bands of
London and Westminster, with their prisoners taken at Alton.

Ordinance of Parliament for the preservation of the City of Londons good
Government; The brave exploits of Cap. Sydenham at Pool; And the notable
reformation of the Cathedral Church at Canterbury.

Gainesborough, and the brave prize taken therein; The Kings unsuccessfulness
in all his most weighty enterprises, since that most odious and scelerous
Cessation of arms in Ireland; Together with the Storming of Grafton-House, and
the rich spoils taken therein; And the great encouragement of the other London
trained Bands thereby, to go forth in the public service; and the excellent
Ordinance of Parliament, enabling the Militia of London, the sooner and better
to send them forth to noble Sir William Waller.

The notorious plot against Nottingham Town and Castle discovered Belvoir
Cormorants, by renowned Colonel Weight.

The most happy and admirable freeing the brave Town of Plymouth,

And lastly, The pretty prankes and successful surprisall of those Cavalerian
Commanders and royall-Cormorants, in the midst of supine and secure carding and
dicing, by valiant and vigilant Cap. Clark, and his Northampton forces.
Together with the WindsorGarrisons, apprehending of the 4 high-Constables and
80^^ in money, and diverse Malignants also, at their Christmas Bacchanalian
feastings; As also that religious reformation of King Henry the sevenths
Chapel at Westminster. All which so rich and rare mercies, powered upon us
with so open and bountiful a hand, out of the Lords rich and unexhaustible
treasury of free grace and mere mercy, so many defeats and victories against
our adversaries, their great loss, and our great gain; such plots discovered;
such Ordinances for the States and Church and Cities good confirmed, and that
not only this month, but one month successively after another; O who can
choose but say, and apparently see Gods Ark still triumphantly over-tapping the
worlds waves thus incessantly raging and swelling against it! GODS Ark
over-topping the worlds waves swelling.
And who seeing and seriously considering and cordially tasting with the palate
of true christian godly gratitude, the sovereign sweetness of all these
exuberant blessings, can choose but stand and admire and adore, our great and
good and wonder-working God, and with that sweet Psalmograph of Israel, holy
King David, can forbear to break forth into amazing exultation, Psalm. 31. 19.
and sing and say; O how great is thy goodness (O God) which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee! which thou have wrought for those that trust in thee,
before the sons of men! But now to proceed.

And here now again to launch out into the deep, Januarie 1643.
and begin this next ensuing Months voyage for new discoveries and
descriptions of Gods admirable dealings, in most undeserved mercy, with this
our sinful Nation and Kingdom, in the remarkable preservation of his so
menaced and molested Ark, tossed up and down on the wretched waves of these our
most unnatural intestine bloody broils; I shall in the first place desire to
take liberty, a little, to touch upon one foreign passage of Gods most wise and
wonderful disposing of things, as well abroad as at home for our welfare
(verifying that notable Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.
The eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show
himself strong in behalf of them, whose heart is upright and perfect toward
him.) So far forth, only, as it has notable influence and resultance on our
Kingdoms present affairs, A most notable and deep design and pernicious plot
against the Protestant Religion, in all Christendom.
which is this; That about this time it pleased the Lord to give us
intelligence from Denmark, that whereas the Jesuiticall plot, now in sad and
sanguine agitation, is, to destroy the Protestant Religion throughout all
Christendom; And because Great Britain and Ireland are the main fat morsells
their treacherous teeth so water for, as their principal impediment in the way
of their wicked work, for an epidemicall and universal tyranny over men's
bodies and souls, two of these, at least, being the special upholders of the
true Christian Religion indeed; I mean, the refined and refining pure
Protestant Religion, which is the goad in their sides, and the offensive pearl
in their eye: To destroy which, they have, now, I say, engaged (or at least
endeavored to engage) all these three Kingdoms, in the first and prime place,
in a most degenerous and unnatural war, one against another, and each of the
Kingdoms against it self, as in part they have most devillishly done, the most
miserable effects whereof, we all to our present sorrow see and feel. And for
the better corroborating and strengthening of this their great and Catholicall
design, they have in a deluding way procured the neutrality of Denmark and
Holland, The Danes and Hollanders co^tribute to the King against us.
who have, more than underhand, contributed much against us therein, and much
more was shortly expected from Denmark, had it not pleased the Lord in his
admirable wisdom and mercy toward us to stir up the heart of the resolved
Queen of Sweden (in revenge of the blood of that late precious and never enough
honored King of Sweden, An admirable and sudden breaking-out of a combustion
twixt Denmark and Sweden.
her dear deceased husband, slain in the Germane wars, in defense of the
Protestant Religion) to be a great block in their way, and a mighty obstacle
to this their deep design, and strangely to cut short that army which the
King of Denmark had plotted with the Emperor (as it was cunningly contrived by
the Romish Jesuiticall Counsel) to raise up, first, for the destruction of the
Swedes his nearest neighbors, The King of Denmarkes plot against the Swedes,
discovered by Letters intercepted.
and so to sweep them out of Germany, and afterward for farther designs
against England. And to this end, the King of Denmark had secretly desired
assistance from his neighbor the King of Poland, next neighbor, on the other
side, to the Swedes: but divine providence most blessedly discovered the plot,
and by Letters from Denmark (which the Swedes happily intercepted) the whole
plot was made known. The Swedes also (by the same good hand of providence)
wisely concealed it; yet diligently prepared to prevent the danger, and by
speedy adding some strength to that they had made ready for another design,
els-where; they fell suddenly upon part of the King of Denmarks Country, before
they thought of any surprisall, and therefore were unready to make any
considerable resistance, and the Swedes heerby (O the admirable and unfathomed
depth and profundity of the wisdom and justice of our God!) have most
valiantly and resolutely run through (or overrun) the whole Country of
Holstein, The Swedes enter into Denmark.
a brave and rich Province, being most Southward of all Denmark to Germany,
which is the Duke of Holts Country, second Son to the King of Denmark; And they
most victoriously have proceeded farther into the other parts of Denmark, by
G^stavus Horn, a brave Swedish Commander, and have taken some of their chief
Magazines, and many thousands of arms, some of which, The falling out of the
Danes with the Swedes, much for our good.
no doubt, intended to be sent against us; for heerby the King of Denmark was
constrained to make stay of 2 ships laden with arms to have been sent to
England, and must then be employed (and all little enough) in his own defense.
Thus we see, Man purposes, but God disposes; Our God can take the wicked in
his own craftines every way, and every where, and bring to naught the Counsels
of Princes: But his own work shall stand and prosper in the thing for which he
sends it. This I thought good here to premise, as a certain and seasonable
addition to the honor of our great and glorious wonder-working God, and the
just ground of raising up our hearts and spirits to a yet higher pitch of
praising his name for our wonderful preservation, both at home and abroad.

And about the beginning of this instant January, Sir Tho. Holts House
surprised by Coventrie forces.
came credible intelligence from Warwickshire to London; that Coventry forces
marched out to Sir Thomas Holts-House, about 14 miles from Coventry, and a
little mile from Brumingham, and summoned them within the House, but they
refused to yield; A treacherous parley desired from the house. The house
batterd and taken.
whereupon Coventry forces made some great shot against the House, which caused
a parley, and while the parley was, some shot was made from the House, which
hurt or killed two of Coventrymen: Whereupon they left parling, and instantly
fell to battering the House, whereby they killed diverse of them within, and
forcibly made their way into the House, took about 80 prisoners, some horse,
and all the plunder of the House, Bewly-House also taken by the foresaid
Coventry forces.
and so returned safely to Coventry. Shortly after they issued out again, under
the command of Colonel Boswell, and marched to Bewley-House, which was one Mr
Sheldens, being a very strong hold on the edge of Warwickshire, but in the
County of Worcester, which the enemy had strongly fortified. But, in brief,
Coventry forces, forced their passage and surprised it, and the whole garrison,
and much wealth and rich pillage therein, and all the Irish-Rogues whom they
found there, they put to the sword, and victoriously returned safely home again.

Much also about the same time, namely, the beginning of this instant January,
A most dangerous and pernicious plot against the Parliament discovered.
1643. it pleased the Lord, the great and glorious searcher of hearts, and
discoverer of the most secret and deepest designs of the most politic and
pernicious enemies of his Church and children, to bless our Kingdom and
Parliament, in the timely revelation of a very dangerous plot and conspiracy,
under a pretense of Propositions for peace, for^ooth; to which end, there was a
new Cross-Petition contrived, under a color of accommodating the differences
between the King and the Parliament; The aim in this plot to divide the City
and Parliament.
but thereby, in very deed, to destroy the Parliament, by dividing the City of
London from it, and by such a combustion to prevent the coming in of the Scots
to the aid and assistance of the Kingdom and Parliament. Now the parties who
were prime promoters and machinators of this plot, The co^trivers of this plot.
were, Colonel Read, a Jesuiticall Papist, and a great Commander in the
Rebellion in Ireland, and a prisoner to the Parliament, but released and then
residing at Oxford, Sir Basil Brook, a notorious Papist also, and personally
acting also in that Irish-rebellion, and a prisoner to the Parliament, and who
to make his abode at London the firmer, and more immovable, contrived (as I
was credibly informed) to have an Execution for debt, laid upon him; that thus
without suspect or molestation, he might actuate at London in the plot; One Mr
Violet (or rather, stinking Varlet) a most malignant Goldsmith, or rather, a
Projector in that trade; And one Mr Riley, a Citizen of London, and
Scout-Master General for the City of London, who had the name and reputation
of an honest and religious man, but in the issue of this discourse will be
found to appear, either a very simple fool, or a notorious hypocrite, and
downright deep dissembler. The place of meeting was at the three-Cranes in the
Vintrie, The place of meeting and consulting.
and at The Man in the Moon. The way and manner of contrivance thereof, was,
first that Mr Riley (being in much credit in the City) must be a means to get
this Irish-Rebell Read out of prison, by whose means (for the better effecting
of their plot, The contrivance of the plot.
he being at liberty) an address was easily made to my Lord General, that one
Captain Read, a poor old man taken by the Earl of Manchesters forces, tonight
be exchanged for one that was a Quartermaster for the Parliaments army, and
then in prison at Oxford, and was a Scout of Mr Rileys. Now, my Lord General
relied so much on the supposed integrity of Mr Riley, that he forthwith granted
his Exchange, and the Rebell-Read was thereby presently released. But before
this Read departed out of the City; He, Mr Riley, and Sir Basil Brook, had
conference together about this design, and it was agreed that Colonel Read
should direct his letters to Mr Riley, by the name of, The Man in the Moon; and
that one Mr Wood should be the Messenger between London and Oxford; This Wood
being an apprentice of London, and living then in the Stocks. The plot
discussed on at Oxford.
Read being come to Oxford, propounds the design to his Majesty, who
instantly called to advise with him, the Queen, the Lord Digbie, a proclaimed
traitor, and the Duchess of Buckingham, the Arch-Prelate of Canterburies
convert, forsooth, wife to the great Irish-Rebell, the Earl of Antrim, then at
Oxford. His Majesty with these rebels and traitors, contrived what they
should propound to the City to beget Propositions for Peace (just such an
intended peace as Bynions should have been) and thereupon, they concluded to
write to the City, that his Majesty was resolved to maintain the Protestant
Religion, The settleme^t of the Protestant Religion, by Papists, traitors, and
atheists still pretended.
and that, in as ample manner, as the Irish-rebells and atheistical traitors
(thus admitted to be of his Majesty's Cabinet Council) would or could require
his Majesty to settle it, for the good and content of the whole Kingdom, the
clean contrary-way. Now at the first time of their general meeting they
concluded of the draught of a Letter, to the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen,
The result of their first meeting, was to send a Letter to London.
from his Majesty, full of expressions of love* (to encompasse the design) to
his loyal Subjects the Citizens of London (though traitors and rebels a
little before) and this was dispatched by Wood, with a Letter from Colonel
Read to Mr Riley (by the name of the man in the Moon) to pass over his
Majesty's Letter with Sir Basil Brook, and to put it into such words, as they
should think fit; but Read writ in his Letter to Riley, that what he did he
should do it quickly, for it must be done and concluded before the Scots come
in, or not at all; and withal writ to have Violet set at liberty, to come to
Oxford to seek an exchange, that he might pass to and fro, on this occasion.

They met accordingly, and concluded of the Letter for his Majesty to sign,
and of some Propositions; Violet was the Clerk that writ them, Sir Basil
Brook, and Mr Riley (as was informed) contrived them.

Mr Riley loses no time, Ril^ys honesty acts a peace for this peaceful work.
but applies himself to Sir Arthur Has^erig, and propounds Mr Violet in
exchange for a brother of his, Mr Hasterig, prisoner to the pretended Lord
Loughborough, commonly called Master Hastings, and to have leave to go to
Oxford: Sir Arthur thinking Mr Riley to be the man he was reputed to be, gave
way, and his liberty was obtained to go to Oxford to solicit this exchange.

Violet goes accordingly, carries with him the Letter for the King to
subscribe, and other Instructions, and (as by his Examination he confesses) he
imparted the same only to the King, Queen, Duchess of Buckingham, Colonel
Read, and the Lord Digby, who all met together, and that he stayed not seven
hours in Oxford; but returned with the Letter directed to the Lord Major and
Aldermen, signed by his Majesty, under his signet.

Violet returned, The plot advanced.
and the Letters being imparted to Mr Riley, and Sir Basil Brook, means was
used how to engage others in the plot; whereupon, Violet attempted to sound Sir
David Watkins, and soon came to the bottom of honest Sir David's judgment, who
told him he did like well of Propositions of Peace: Provided, the Parliament
was first made acquainted with it.

Some occasions interposed, that deferred the delivery of this Letter,
whereupon his Majesty was sent unto to sign another Letter of the same, which
accordingly he did on New-yeares-day; and on wednesday after, Violet, with the advice of Sir Basil Brook, was to deliver it to the Lord Major.

But private Intelligence being given of the design, And by Gods providence so
dainly discovered.
Mr Riley was apprehended, and examined before the Committee at Goldsmiths
Hall, who denied that he knew of any such Letters or Propositions, or that he
held any Correspondence with Colonel Read, and could contribute nothing to the
discovery of the matter: At last a Paper dropped out of his pocket, with this
Direction upon it; To the Man in the Moon; which Master Solicitor after some
time of respite, took up, and retired, and read to himself, which Letter
discovered the whole business: Master Riley being examined the second time,
confessed the Letter, and that by himself was meant, The Man in the Moon, and
that the Letter was of Colonel Reads own hand writing.

Sir Basil Brook was sent for, Sir Basil Brook examined.
and examined, and confessed the whole business: Violet was not to be found
that night, but next day he was apprehended, and the Kings Letter found about
him: and upon his examination confessed the whole business, and what private
discourse he had with his Majesty, and what private Message was sent from the
King by him to Alderman Gibs to promote this business.

His Majesty in his Letter to the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen, The Letter
to the Lord Major.
Courts them by the name of Subjects, and takes his rise upon an assurance he
had of the inclination of the Committee of the Militia to Peace; which he was
induced to believe, by a speech that was made from them; and professes the
maintaining the Protestant Religion, and the confirming the Rights and
Privileges of the City; (though by a Proclamation of the same date, his
Majesty calls them his rebellious City of London: and as a token of his
favor to them, adjourns the next Hillary Term to Oxford.)

Sir Basil Brook, The conspirators imprisoned.
Mr Riley, and Mr Violet, are committed close prisoners to the Tower, and
Violet is voted by the Parliament to be first tried by a Council of War, for
coming and going as a Spy between Oxford and London.

The Parliament have voted this to be a Jesuiticall and seditious design, to
divide the Parliament and City, etc.

And on Monday Jan. The whole business communicated to the City of London.
8. the whole state of the business, and the Letters and Proclamations, and
Examinations, and the Lord Digbies Letter to Sir Basil Brook concerning this
design, were all communicated to the City at a Common Hall, there being eight
Lords, and sixteen Commons sent as a Committee to make known the whole
proceedings, that all the world may see, that the Irish Rebels and Papists are
the only Counselors his Majesty hearkens unto, to drive on, and uphold the
design to destroy the Parliament, and by consequence the Protestants Religion.

And that all the world may know it is the Root and Branch of the Protestant
Religion they strike at, one of Sir John Gells Commanders fell upon two Troops
of the Cavaliers in Darbishire, commanded by two Papists, took them, their men
and horses, and two Colors: In the one of them, was an Effigies of a Tree,
signifying the Protestant Religion, and a Cavalier standing at the Root,
cutting it down with an Axe, with this Motto, Root and Branch: This was shown
and held in the hands of several of the Members of Parliament, in the House of
Commons, and may therefore be assured for an indubitable truth. Thus God our
mighty preserver, makes good unto us still his most precious and unperishing
word of Truth, (to be with his Church to the end of the world) and wherein he
will never fail us nor forsake us, if we by faith and obedience can wait upon
him and walk with him. But now to proceed.

About the 4th of this instant, came credible information, by Letters from
Garns^y to London: That whereas formerly it had been certified from thence,
that Mounsieur l^ Grange, Mounsieur Carey, and Mounsieur Haverly, three
faithful and fast friends to the Parliament, in that Island, had been
treacherously betrayed aboard a ship which came into that harbor, by pretense
of great friendship to them and the rest of the Islanders, Gods providence in
delivering three worthy Gentlemen of Garnsey, faithful friends to the
Parliament from prison in Castle-Cornet in Garnsey.
but they having gotten these three worthy Gentlemen into the Ship, they
carried them prisoners into Castle-Cornet, there, in the custody and command
of that perfidious viper of his Native-Country, Sir Peter Osborn; Since which
time, they having been kept prisoners there about a month space (with a
purpose, as it was credibly reported, to have conveyed them shortly after to
Oxford) they had, at last, a fair opportunity offered them for an escape, which
they accordingly took advantage of, in this manner. The tide being low about
the Castle, they made them cords of Match, whereof they found great store, in a
room, whither providence (unwittingly to themselves) brought them; and then
co^ing to the battlements of the Castle-wall, where stood great pieces of
Ordnance, they fastened one end of their Match to a piece of Ordnance, and so
ventured down into the river; But before they could wade quite-over, they were
missed and discovered afar off in the river, by one Medcalf the Porter of the
Castle gate, who at the fight of them instantly acquainting Sir Peter Osborn
(that atheistical Royalist) therewith, he presently commanded 3 or 4 pieces of
Ordnance to be discharged and shot off at them, but neither of them touched
either of the Gentlemen; but they all three came, thus, most safely into the
Town to their friends, on a Lord's Day, when the people were all at Church, Acts
12. 11.
and (like Peter released admirably out of prison, by the Angel, and let in to
the other Disciples when they were at prayers together for him) were most
joyfully received, and entertained by them; They being three of the most
prudent and pious protectors of the welfare of that Island; which merciful
providence and preservation of almighty God in this their deliverance, both
from imprisonment, and such farther intended imminent danger, I conceived most
worthy a most thankful commemoration, in this our Parliamentarie-Chronicle.

And much about the same time came certain intelligence out of Sussex from
Arundell to London, that the most valiant and renowned Commander Sir William
Waller, Arundell-Castle besieged and taken by Sir Will. Waller.
since his fiege of that Castle having received six great pieces of battery
from Portsmouth, began to play against the said Castle, being resolved to make
a short work of it, and that they within the Castle perceiving he intended to
make a battery, consulted with their Lord Bishop, and Dr Chillingworth, that
most egregious Popish and Socinian apostate; and after the said consultation,
they desired a parley, and that after some disputes between them touching the
articles, and they now seeing most plainly there was no possible expectation to
be relieved by Sir Ralph Hopton; The Castle delivered up to Sir William Waller.
The prisoners taken.
the Castle was at last delivered up to Sir William Waller, and all within the
Castle left to his m^rcie, wherein he took prisoners, Sir William Ford, high
Sheriff of Sussex, who formerly brake out of Windsor-Castle, and had sent a
Letter to his Majesty, offering to bring him a thousand men, and to undertake
the conquest of the whole County of Sussex, although it be sixty miles in
length, but before he had gone twelve miles thereof, he was caught again for
want of a running horse; There was also then taken Sir Edward Bishop, Colo.
Bamfield, Lievtenrnt Colonel Roles* Major Massey, Major Moulines, and diverse
other Gentlemen of quality of Sussex; Fifty Reformadoes taken, and 1200 Common
Soldiers, 4000li in money taken and other rich pillage.
There were also taken above fifty Reformadoes, that had all Commissions to
raise Companies; 1200 prisoners, and their arms, diverse Engineers, about
4000li. in money, and great store of other rich prize and pillage. And here,
now, if we reckon up these our late victories together, and the number of
prisoners taken, we shall easily see they will amount to at lest a little
army; As namely, first at Alton, 900; at Gainesborough, 700; at Grafton, 300;
at Sir Tho. Holts-House, near an 100; A little army taken prisoners in a
little time about the taking Arundell-Castle.
almost as many at Bewly-House; by Sir William Constable and Sir John Meldrum,
in a House in Yorkshire, from which Sir Hugh Cholmley ran away, at least an
100; and here, now, at Arundell-Castle above a 1000; besides what had then
lately been taken by Pool and Southamptons garrisons, At least 3300 enemies
taken prisoners.
which in all may arise to at least 3300, horse and foot, besides all the
ammunition, and arms; In most just and serious consideration whereof, have we
not great cause to magnify the mercies of our good God unto us, in thus still
weakening the armies of our adversaries, and strengthening our hands against
them? And yet again to add to the luster of this foresaid famous victory, very
shortly after the taking of the foresaid Castle, it pleased the Lord so to
order and dispose of things, that Sir Will. Waller seized on a very rich prize
by Sea, namely, A brave Ship also richly laden, taken at Arundell-Castle.
a Dunkirk-Ship of a great burden, which had been chased by the Hollanders (as
was then credibly informed) and was forced into the harbor at Arundell, and
that, not till we had taken the Castle; which Sir William himself went aboard
of, and found in her about 20 excellent brass pieces of Ordnance, an 100
barrells of powder, 2000 arms, great store of other ammunition, diverse
Commanders, and other persons of quality, together with a great quantity of
linen cloth, as considerable, in value, as the other prizes, which could not
but be a singular advantage to Sir William for the present better securing and
defense of Arundell-Castle.

And about the 8th or 10th of this instant came certain information from
Leverpool, A Bristoll ship also taken at Leverpool, in Lancashire.
in Lancashire, to London, that a Ship of the Kings, which he had sent from
Bristoll to Chester, with good store of arms and ammunition, most
unexpectedly, but very happily and opportunely, came into Leverpool, to serve
the Parliament, the Sailers therein, having compelled their Master to put in
there, which arms and ammunition came very seasonably to help to arm and
recrute Colonel Ashtons regiment, which a little before had received some
loss, in their valiant performances against the enemies of their Country.

And about the 12th of this instant month of January, 1643. the famous and
ever to be renowned City of London, The City of London takes into serious
consideration the great care, love and pains of the Parliament for the welfare
of the Kingdom.
being very sensible of the great care and indefatigable pains of the
Parliament, in and for the defense and preservation, of Religion, the whole
Kingdom, and liberties thereof, from that slavery and misery which the
Prelaticall and Popish faction would bring upon them, and also of their
singular vigilance and great providence and circumspection to discover all
plots and secret designs against the City and Parliament, to divide the one
from the other, and so to destroy both together; and to show that they are the
more inseparably conjoined and firmly united the one to the other,
notwithstanding all the joint endeavors, and sly insinuations of the
adversaries, and in special of that late mischievous Machination by Colonel
Read, that base Irish-Rebell, Sir Basil Brook, and the rest of that accursed
rabble, The Citizens of London invite the Parliament, etc. to a dinner in the
City.
as was forementioned. The City, I say, was therefore pleased, in the name of
the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, their representative-Body, by
both the Sheriffs and some selected Common-Councell-men, to make an humble
request to the Parliament, by way of testimony of their gratitude, for the
great endeavors (as aforesaid) of the Parliament, for the good of the whole
Kingdom; to invite them all therefore, even of both the Houses to a dinner at
Merchant-Taylors-Hall in London, A most excellent Message and Motion of the
City to the Parliament, at the invitation.
on Tuesday or Thursday, then next ensuing, whether day might best stand most
convenient with the great affairs of the Kingdom; Expressing farther to both
Houses, that they desired that that late design to have divided the Parliament
and City, might appear by this loving action of theirs more firmly to have
united them to one another. Which motion of theirs was most acceptable to the
Parliament, as appeared by the answer given them by the Speaker in the name of
the House of Commons, which in substance was this;

That the House of Commons had considered the loving expressions delivered by
them at the bar in the name of the whole City of London, The Parliaments
answer to the Cities invitation.
manifesting their great esteem of the endeavors of the Parliament, and their
sense of the late design of the enemy against both the Parliament and the
City, by such a division to involve both of them into one universal calamity,
declaring their resolution to continue in a faithful compliance with the
Parliaments good endeavors, and to live and die with them in the maintenance
of the public Cause; having now also desired them (as a testimony of this, and
to deceive the expectation of their enemies) that they would honor them with
their presence at a dinner in the City: The Speaker, therefore, told them, he
was commanded by the House to take notice of the good affection of this great
City therein, and that the House looked on the invitation, as a seasonable
demonstration of their love to them, and their resolved loyalty to the Cause,
and that therefore they were resolved on Thursday then next ensuing to give
them a meeting according to the Cities desire: And (said he) that both they and
you may lay hold on this opportunity jointly to acknowledge the continued
blessing of God in prospering this Parliament and the City from the secret
practices and malicious open designs of their enemies, The Parliaments most
pious desire to have a Sermon to be preached at this meeting.
and particularly in this lewd and last discovery; they desired that on the
foresaid Thursday morning at their intended meeting about eight of the clock,
there might be (in such a place as the City should think fit to make choice of)
an able godly Minister entreated to preach a Sermon for the commemoration
(among the rest of Gods manifold mercies) of this late, and not the least,
deliverance both of the Parliament and City, and indeed, therein, of the whole
Kingdom. And Master Speaker told them farther, The admirable expressions of
loving acceptance of the Parliament of the Cities love to them.
that he was commanded in the name of the House to assure them, that, as the
Cities resolution was to live and die with them: So they resolved (by the grace
of God) never to desert the City; but to make it one of their greatest cares to
watch all opportunities to advance the honor and happiness of this City,
which, under God, has been the principal means of the preservation of this
Parliament.

Now on Thursday, January the 18th, 1643. according to this foresaid
invitation, The guests invited meet at Christ-Church in London.
the whole Parliament of Lords and Commons, with the Assembly of reverend and
learned Divines, and the Scottish Commissioners, met at Christ-Church in
London, between 9 and 10 of the clock in the morning; in the first place to
testify and acknowledge their bounden gratitude unto almighty God for the
gracious preservation both of the Parliament and City from the late desperate
design of those pernicious Conspirators aforesaid, who had complotted with
Oxford agents to have made a dissension and discord between them. There
preached before them, that day, that venerable, pious, and learned Divine
Master Stephen Marshall, Venerable M^ Marshall preached before them.
who before the Sermon, made an elegant and patheticall Preface, wherein he did
excellently set forth, both the true occasion of their meeting, and the
admirable luster and glory of that most honorable Assembly, the like never
seen, since England was a Kingdom; Which being singularly observable, I have
here for the Readers better delight and most full satisfaction therein, exactly
set down and inserted, which was to this effect.

Right Honorable, and well beloved in our Lord:
THis day is a day purposely set apart for feasting, and it is like one of the
Lords Feasts, where you have a Feast and an holy Convocation; and you are first
met here to feast your souls with the fat things of Gods House, with a Feast
of fat things, full of marrow, and wine on the lees well refined: and
afterward to feast your bodies with the fat things of the Land and Sea, both
plenty and dainty. But if you please you may first feast your eyes. Do but
behold the face of the Assembly, I dare say it is one of the excellentest Feast
that ever your eyes were feasted with. Here in this Assembly you may first see
the two Houses of Parliament, the Honorable Lords and Commons, who after thus
in my years wrestling with extreme difficulties, in their endeavoring to
preserve an undone Kingdom, and to purge and reform a backsliding and a
polluted Church, you may behold them still not only preserved from so many
treacherous designs, and open violences, but as resolved as ever to go on
with this great work which God has put into their hands. Here you may also see
his Excellency my most honored Lord, and near him that other Noble Lord the
Commander of our Forces by Sea, as the other is by Land, and with them
abundance of Lords and resolute Commanders, all of them with their faces like
Lions, who after so many terrible Battles, and abundance of difficulties, and
charging in the faces of so many Deaths, are yet all of them preserved, and not
a hair of their head fallen to the ground. Whose excellency and unparalleld
same and fidelity I must confess I want words to set forth as it deserves.
Here also you may behold the representative Body of the City of London, the
Lord Major, the Court of Aldermen, the Common Council, the Militia, and in
them the face and affection of this glorious Cities this City which under God
has had the honor of being the greatest means of the salvation of the whole
Kingdom, and after the expense of Millions of Treasure, and thousands of their
lives, still as courageous and resolute to live and die in the Cause of God as
ever heertofore. Here you may likewise see a reverend Assembly of grave and
learned Divines, who daily wait upon the Angel in the Mount, to receive from
him the lively Oracles and the pattern of Gods House, to present unto you. All
these of our own Nation, and with them you may see the Honorable, Reverend,
and Learned Commissioners of the Church of Scotland, and in them behold the
wisdom and the affection of their whole Nation, willing to live and die with
us: all these may you behold in one view. And not only so, but you may behold
them all of one mind, after so many plots and conspiracies to divide them one
from another. And which is yet more, you may see them all met together this
day, on purpose both to praise God for this union, and to hold it out to the
whole world, and thereby to testify, that as one man they will live and die
together in this Cause of God. Oh Beloved, how beautiful is the Face of this
Assembly! verily, I may say of it as it was said of Salomons Throne, that the
like was never to be seen in any other Nation. I question whether the like
Assembly was ever to be seen this thousand years upon the face of the earth.
Me thinks I may call this Assembly The Host of God, I may call this place
Mahanaim, and I believe there are many in this Assembly that would say as old
Jacob did, when he had seen his son Joseph's face, Let me now die, seeing my son
Joseph is yet alive. And for mine own part, I am almost like the Queen of
Sheba, when she had seen the Court of Solomon, it is said, that she had no
spirit in her; and I could send you away, and say, that you had no cause to
weep to day, or to morrow, but to eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send
portions one unto another: and I should send you away presently, but that I
have first some banquetting-stuffe for your souls, such as the hand of God
has set before you for your inward refreshing: the ground whereof you shall
find in the 12 Chapter of the 1 Book of Chronicles, and three last Verses.

Upon which Text the said Mr Marshall made an excellent Sermon, sitting his
discourse, suitable to the persons and occasion. After the conclusion of the
Sermon, the said Honorable Assembly went to Merchant-Taylors-Hall to dinner,
all the Regiments of the London Trained Bands standing in a complete posture
from Christ-Church to Merchant-Taylors-Hall, as two walls, between which they
passed without press or disturbance. The first that went forth were the
Common Council men and Militia of London in their gowns; after them the Lord
Major and Court of Aldermen in their scarlet gowns on horseback, with their
Officers and Attendants; next came the Lord General and the Lord Admiral and
the Earl of Manchester together, with about 16 Earls and Lords of the Peers
House of Parliament, and diverse Colonels and Military Commanders all on foot;
and immediately after them came near two hundred of the worthy Members of the
House of Commons; and the Speaker of that House, with the Mace born before him;
and then the Commissioners of Scotland; and after all these about 80 Divines of
the Reverend Assembly: All which did much content and delight the spectators to
see these so noble, faithful, religious and honorable Pillars of the Truth,
and maintainers of their rights and privileges, and Patrons of the true
Religion, appear with so united a concurrence of hearts and spirits.

The same morning there was set up in Cheapside in the place where the Cross
formerly stood, a standing frame of slight Firre-poles, on which were hung up
diverse Pictures and Trinkets, as Crosses, Crucifixes, Images and Saints, Agnus
Dei's, Beads, Whippes, and other superstitious Relics, and frivolous
inventions of Papists: all which, with a chest of Popish Books, were set on
fire at the coming by of the said honorable Persons, as a testification of
their detestation and hatred of all such Romish and Babylonish superstitions:
and to declare their intentions to reform and take away those things which may
justly incense the wrath of God against us; one thing is also very remarkable,
that after they had been honorably entertained at Merchant-Taylors-Hall, and
dinner ended, in stead of idle Maskings, and other such uncomely actions,
heertofore used at such public meetings, to declare their union of spirit, as
in the presence of God, all, both Lords and Commons, at the godly motion of the
reverend Assembly of Divines, publicly and unanimously (heavenly harmony
indeed) sung together the 67 Psalm, to testify their thankfulness to God. A
religious president, worthy to be imitated by all godly Christians in their
both public and private feastings and meetings.

And which adds much to the admirable radiant luster of this so precious a day
of rejoicing in the Lord, The same day of this glorious Assembly our Brethren
of Scotland came into England with their army. All these, causes of vexation
in the wicked, causes of rejoicing in the godly.
and to make this our joy yet more complete, on this very same day of this so
rare and fair an Assembly, namely, the 18th of this instant January, our loyal
and loving Brethren of Scotland came with their whole army into England, to
help the Lord and us his greatly abused servants, against our mighty and most
malicious enemies: All which, I mean, both this most memorable and unparalleld
Love-feast, and the seasonable entrance of our brethrens brave army, and all
in one day; how much they must needs vex the impious Oxonians, and all the rest
of our motley-Malignants; and how great and unexpressible cause they gave of
cordial comfort and enlarged thanks to the Lord to all his Saints and
servants, I leave to every rational and honest Reader, religiously to judge
and consider. And for the yet greater and most just glory of God, within a day
or two after, A public and more general day of thanksgiving appointed by
order of Parliament.
namely about the 20th of this instant, both Houses of Parliament (to show
their deeply obliged thankfulness to the Lord for that late foresaid great
deliverance) agreed most piously upon an Order for a public day of
thankesgiving in all Churches in and about London, for Gods great mercy in
preserving the Parliament and City of London from the secret practices and
most malicious designs of their foresaid enemies, Sir Basil Brook, Read,
Violet, and Riley, which was immediately printed and published, and accordingly
performed on the appointed day.

Much about this foresaid time also came certain intelligence by letters from
about the parts of Staffordshire and Namptwich, A bloody defeat given to the
Parliament forces, by Sir John Byron, but an introduction to a great and most
admirable victory obtained by ours.
to London; of an unhappie defeat given to the Parliaments forces of
Lancashire, part whereof were enforced to fly to a Church for their farther
hoped safety, but were there also environed, and at last broken in upon, and by
that base and bloody (pretended Lord) Sir John Byron, most barbarously put all
to the sword, at his accursed Turkish command; and which was worse, to triumph
in this his inhumane barbarity, he immediately upon this villainous victory of
his, wrote a Letter to his as base and treacherous brother the mischievous
Marquess of Newcastle, which was by Gods providence intercepted by noble Sir
William Brereton, and by him sent to the Honorable House of Commons in
Parliament; a true Copy whereof ( in aeternam rei infamiam) being afterward
printed and published, I have thought fit here to insert, for the Readers
fuller content and satisfaction.

A Copy of Sir John Byrons (I had almost said Sir John Butchers) Letter to the
Marquess of Newcastle, dated, December 26. 1643.
My Lord;
I Have already dispatched two Messengers to your Excellency, to give you an
account of my proceedings in these parts: I am now at Sambich, and have thought
fit to acquaint your Excellency, that Brereton for the relief of Namptwich, had
so prevailed with the Lancashire-men, as to draw thence 1500 foot, which I
having notice of, immediately marched toward him, but as soon as I came within
sight of him, he instantly (according to his custom) ran away ( a most
intolerable and egregious Popish liar, as all men know, that know that noble
and renowned Commander) in great confusion, so that, now, those (...) are so
dispersed, that they are not like to meet together again: And I doubt not, but
by Gods assistance, in a short time, to clear this Country (if your
Excellencies forces advance toward Stopford) to be able to set footing in
Lancashire. The rebels had possessed themselves of a Church, at Bartumley, but
we presently beat them forth of it, and I put them all to the Sword: Which I
find to be the best way to proceed with these kind of people, Pro. 12. 10.
for, mercy to them is cruelty ( so, indeed, says Solomon of such wicked ones
as Byron)

I am, my Lord your Excellencies most humble servant, J. B.


But, now to come to my intended purpose, (this forementioned relation being
only an introduction to what follows) that this inhumane monster, bloody
Byron, and all his accursed malicious adherents might clearly see and take
notice of a divine providence (notwithstanding this his insulting and
blasphemous Letter) which over-powers the greatest potency of the proudest
Bragadochi^es, yea mightiest Monarchs in the world, which oppose his
all-sacred and sovereign power and authority: There came, therefore, most
certain intelligence by Letters out of Cheshire to London, of diverse brave
repulses given to buteherly Byrons forces at the siege of Namptwich, A most
brave defeat given to Sir Nicholas Byron, Governor of Chester, by Colonel
Mitton.
by the most valiant besieged Soldiers and Inhabitants of the said Town. And
shortly after, by a Letter under Col. Mittons own hand, which was brought to
London about Jan. 20th, 1643. By which it was for certain advertised; That Sir
Nic. Byron, Governor of Westchester (uncle to this foresaid bloody Byron)
having heard of the sore repulses and defeats given to their forces at
Namptwich (which redounded to the great loss of his proud insulting kinsman,
bloody Byron, as aforesaid, at his said kinsmans entreaty) Sir Nicholas
advanced with a party of horse and foot from Westchester) to fetch in arms
and ammunition, both to supply his kinsmans wants therein, and his own too
(their Ship being carried to Lerpool, as was forementioned, which should have
supplied those their wants) and coming unto a Town called Elsmere, near
Colonel Mittons quarters, this most valiant and loyal Commander Colonel
Mittan drew forth his regiment and fell upon the enemies forces aforesaid, who
were then in the Town, The slain, prisoners and prizes taken.
he killed above 60 of them in the place, took the said Sir Nicholas Byron,
Commander in chief, Sergeant Major General Willis, a very considerable
Commander (even that perfidious runaway Willis, taken prisoner, formerly, at
Winchester) belonging to the Cavalerian garrison at Shrewsbery; and his
brother, Major Willis; Capt. Offley, Capt. Hatton, Capt. Rixam, and another
Capt. with an 100 inferior Officers; 250 horse and arms, 30 of them being the
prime horse of all those parts; eight double barrells of powder; 700 weight of
Match; 3 pieces of Ordnance; all which he brought safe to Stafford; together
with all the provision, that Sir Nicholas had brought at this time from
Shrewsbery, for supply of his own and his Cousens wants; which indeed renders
this exploit more famous, and of the greater consequence, the enemy in those
parts being then in such want of warlike provision, as they were.

About the 23th also of this instant came certain intelligence out of
Darbishire, Sir John Gell^s brave surprisall of Burton upon Trent.
by Letters, to London, that that valiant and most loyal and active Knight and
brave Commander Sir John Gell took Burton upon Trent, and therein diverse
Commissioners of the Array, being Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of great
quality in that County, with about nine-score common-Souldiers, their guard,
much arms, ammunition, and treasure; Colonel Hastings himself hardly escaping
by flight. This defeat was also, so much the more advantageous, in that it was
very probable to be a means to recover three troops of horse of ours, then
lately surprised at Melton in Leicestershire, by exchange, and some prisoners
to boot.

Much about the same time came true information to London, Hilsden-House taken
by the Parliaments forces.
that Sir Alexander Deyntont house, in Oxfordshire, called by the name of
Hilsden-House, was taken by some of the Parliaments forces, it being about 14
or 15 miles from Oxford, and some 7 or 8 miles from Aylesbury. It was taken by
a party that went from Newport-Pannell, and some from about Banbury, they
being in all not above an 100, yet there were in the House an 140, many whereof
were then taken prisoners, and about an 100 arms, but Sir Alexander himself
escaped. And here also (having happily had the opportunity of a pretty piece,
printed and published by Order from this noble and renowned Earl of Manchester)
I have thought fit to add and insert some very memorable notes and
observations (collected and divulged by the said noble and pious Patriot) upon
the many remarkable mercies of the Lord, conferred upon the seven associated
Counties, Cambridge, Essex, Hartford, Huntingdon, Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Lincoln, since their first association, most worthy our most serious sight and
consideration, both for the just honor and glory of God, and the singular,
encouragement of those and all other the Counties of this whole distressed and
distracted Kingdom.

First then I shall desire the Reader to remember the great mercy and good
providence of God in quenching that fire which began to be kindled at Laystolk,
1. Laystolk quieted.
by some eminent malignants there, which would undoubtedly have hazarded all
the Eastern parts of this Kingdom, if God had not, I say, by a seasonable
providence, timely prevented the same, by some of the noble Earl of Manchesters
vigilant Commanders of the association, this disturbance beginning to break
out, in that very conjuncture of time, in which there had been a confederacy
of the disaffected of those parts togather to a head.

Secondly, 2. Croyland subdued.
the reducing of Croyland, which is a place strong by situation, and which had
a professed Papist for its Governor; which how dangerous it was to some parts
of this association, and to the neighboring parts of Lincolnshire,
Northamptonshire, and Hantingdonshire, is well known to those that were subject
to their daily plunderings and pillagings.

Thirdly, 3. Granthams victory.
The defeat given to the enemies at Grantham, where 11 of the Parliaments
troops facing 21 or 22 troops of the enemies; five of the associated troops
charging the right wing of the enemies body, utterly routed them, and had the
execution and chase of them almost two miles, and got five or six of their
Colors.

Fourthly, 4. Burleigh-house taken.
The taking of Burleigh-House, where was also taken the Lord Cambdens regiment
of horse with their Colors, three or four Companies of foot and Dragooneers,
with all their ammunition, and with about four hundred prisoners.

Fifthly, 5. Gainesborough relieved.
The defeat given to the enemies horse at Gainesborough, to the breaking of
near 30 troops of the enemies horse, where was slain, the Lieutenant General
Charles Cavendish, Colonel Heron, the high Sheriff of Lincolnshire forced into
Trent, with many other Officers and Soldiers, who were there drowned, and
whereby Gainesborough was, at that time, relieved with ammunition, which then
it exceedingly wanted; and this battle fought and victory gotten, as without
any considerable loss to us; so within a mile of the Marquess of Newcastles
army.

Sixthly, 6. Twentytroops of horse of Hull preserved.
The saving near 20 troops of horse belonging to the Lord Fairfax, and under
that renowned Gentleman Sir Thomas Fairfax, his Son: with which horse, he has,
since, performed such notable good service in Cheshire, and other parts, which
said horse were almost starved by the strait siege of Hull, and could not in
probability have been thence delivered, but by the horse of this association;
which was done by 14 troops of horse and 3 of Dragooneers, belonging to this
association, there being nothing in assistance of them, but six troops
belonging to the Lord Willoughby, and near 40 troops of the enemies, under the
Command of Sir John Hinderson, who had opportunity to have fought with our
horse before we could come to join with Sir Thomas Fairfax his troops, if he
had pleased, but did not take it.

Seventhly, 7. The winning of Lyn-Regis.
The taking of Lyn-Regis, a strong Town, and of great importance, by raw and
undisciplined new raised Soldiers; which was a place as likely to have undone
this whole association, as any, which rebelled at such a time, as the Marquess
of Newcastle was at the strongest, and so absolute in Lincolnshire, that if he
would have engaged his army to have come to the rescue thereof, the forces of
this association, then raised, had not been considerable to have made
resistance.

Eighthly, 8. Winsby fight.
The fight at Winsby, where, ours being about 60 colors of horse and Dragoons,
did encounter near 90 colors of the enemy; both parties being by estimate
between 8 or 9000 horse and Dragoons; the enemy being, in all probability,
about 5000 of that number, where ours gave them such a defeat, that they took
and killed about 1100 of them, and took near thirty of their Colors.

Ninthly, 9. Lincoln taken.
The taking of Lincoln, where the force of the defendants were in computation
many more than of the assailants, which the enemy surrendered to us on hard
terms to themselves; where we got about 3000 arms, the enemies colors, with
good proportion of ammunition, and five or six pieces of Ordnance.

Tenthly, 10. Gainesborough taken by storm.
The taking of Gainesborough by storm, the greatest part of the foot being our
association-men, who repulsed the enemy, got over their works, without any
loss, and possessed the Town, whereby Lincolnshire (formerly, almost totally
under the command of the enemies) became wholly cleared of them.

Lastly, 11. Hilsden-House taken.
The taking of Hilsden-House, which a week before, the garrison of Ailesbury
attempted, but could not take, after which time, and before we endeavored it,
the enemy had sent in two or three loads of ammunition: Where were taken above
200 prisoners, about 12 barrels of powder, and proportionable Match, all their
arms, and about 50 horse. Which service was much to the ease and comfort of
the poor Inhabitants of the almost wasted County of Buckingham, which was
oppressed by them, and by the countenance of which House, great sums of money
and contributions, were raised both for themselves and Oxford, and a regiment
of foot, and the completing Colo. Smiths regiment of horse was speedily
intended. Where also were taken men of quality, Sir Alexander Deinton, and the
said Colonel Smith, besides two field Officers and diverse Captains.

Now, these things have been thus particularly here recited (not for vain
ostentation, nor that any honor should be given to any person, or to our
forces, but) that by thus commemorating particulars, the hearts of Gods people
might be enlarged and quickened, in sincerity, to give God only the glory due
to him alone; and to encourage other Counties also to the like activitie and
performances.

Januarie the 26th, 1643. there was a conference of both Houses, where several
Letters and Warrants were read by the Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Wharton,
Another most devilish plot between the Earl of Bristol and Sergeant Major
Ogle, to make a division between the Parliament and City of London.
discovering a desperate design, agitated between the Earl of Bristoll and
Sergeant Major Ogle, sometime a prisoner in Winchester-House, during which time
he sent Letters and held correspondence with the Earl of Bristoll at Oxford,
who proposed unto him, that the only way to disturb the Parliament and City,
would be to make a division, between the Presbyterians and the Independents,
(this latter indeed proving an unhappie Remera, in the otherwise most hopeful
progress of the business of settling a holy and Apostolical Discipline and
Church Government) Anabaptists, Brownists and Separatists; for which purpose,
he advised him to deal with some Divines, to declare unto them, that they
should persuade the people that the Presbyterian Government would be worse than
the English high Commission, or Spanish Inquisition. Mr Nigh and Mr Jo. Goodwin
wrought with to help on with the plot.
Upon which Sergeant Major Ogle sent for Mr Nigh and Mr John Goodwin, to whom he
discovered all the matter, and withal showed how they might prevent the coming
in of the Scots, by infusing into the peoples heads and hearts, if possible,
(especially the trained Bands of the City, whom they desired most of all to
divide) such instigations as these; That they came to alter our Religion, to
possess themselves of our estates, and tie the weak consciences of their
Presbytery, which would be worse than Episcopacy. But Mr Nigh and Mr Goodwin
declared the design to some Members of the Parliament, who advised them to
hold correspondency with them, and to sift out the intentions of the Courtat
Oxford, how far forth the King would condescend to liberty of Conscience,
Propositions for encouragement to the Independent-men to help on the design.
if they would side and comply with him.

Whereupon they proceeded so far, that several Propositions were drawn up, and
it was agreed the King should grant a toleration of their Independencie, or any
thing they would desire in that way, upon condition they would adhere to him,
and resist the Presbyteriall and Scotch government, Ogle (during the agitation
of these things) was much encouraged by the Earl of Bristoll; and order was
taken by his advice with one Mr Crispe, a Citizen of London, to pay unto Ogle
an 100 li, for his good service. At last, a Letter was procured, under his
Majesty's hand, to Mr Devonish, Keeper of Winchester-House, to release the said
Ogle out of prison; Which he (first informing the Parliament) and being advised
that to do, Sergeant Major Ogle being released out of prison, gets to Oxford.
accordingly performed it. Whereupon Ogle being released, got to Oxford;
Whence, he and the Earl of Bristoll sent diverse Letters to the said Ministers,
and others, to encourage them to the work, promising that Mr Nigh should be his
Majesty's Chaplain, and several other Independents should be highly preferred
and rewarded. In fine, This plotcame to naught in the end.
Letters were procured under the Kings hand for a safe conduct to four men to
treat of these affairs; but by Gods good providence this plot perished and
came to naught, even in the very Embryo of it.

About a short time after, there was another design agitated between Bristoll
and Ogle, Another plot to betray Windsor-Castle into the Kings hands.
to betray Windsor-Castle into the Kings hands; which, in brief, was thus; They
had dealt with Mr Devonish again, the Keeper of Winchester-House, as aforesaid
(conceiving, at the enlargement of Ogle, that he was at their disposal) that
he should labor to prevail with the Parliament, that a party of horse should
be raised, which should be entertained in Windsor-Castle for the safeguard of
it, and so making a party in it, should surrender it to the enemy, The manner
of contriving it.
who should be ready on notice given to second it, and take strong possession
of it. And for the better effecting of this, there were Letters read signed
with the Kings own hand on the top, and subscribed at the bottom Ogle, as if
he had been his Majesty's Secretary, thus to encourage Devonish to that
attempt. This plot also perished almost in the birth.
But he honestly and faithfully revealing all this intercourse also, to the
Parliament, their design proved frustrate, and perished, God be praised, ere
it came to its wickedly intended maturitie.

About the foresaid 26th also of Jan. 1643. came certain intelligence from
Aylesbury by a Post, to our most noble and renowned Lord General, signifying
by letters then sent, that an army from Oxford of about four or five thousand
horse and foot were within seven miles of Aylesbury, Another plot to betray
Aylesbury most neatly disappointed.
marching toward the Town; but the next day came other Letters, certifying the
certainty and substance of the business, which was this; There having lately
been some difference and flight discontent between Lieutenant Colonel Mosley,
and some other Commanders of Aylesbury, and the Lieutenant coming to London
upon some occasions of his own, was closed withal by some of Oxford factors
for treachery, then resident in secret at London, and in particular, the
foresaid Sergeant Major Ogle (who was now, Sergeant Major Ogle a plotter again
in this treachery also.
it seems, grown an apt Scholar and deep proficient in the School of
treachery) who having intelligence of Colonel Moselyes foresaid discontent,
took the boldness to deal with this honest and wise Lieutenant Colonel, about
the delivery up of Aylesbury to the Kings forces; the discreet and loyal
Lieutenant Colonel, at the very first carrying the business very smoothly and
cunningly, Ogle and his accomplices, (at last, finding him, as they hoped, pliant
and coming on) struck in with him to purpose, and after diverse meetings, A
1000li promised as a reward for the betraying of Aylesbury, and great
preferment; and an 100 pound thereof paid in hand, a good horse, and a sword.
the bargain came to be confirmed, and a 1000 li. must be the reward to deliver
up Aylesbury, whereof he had an 100 li. in hand paid unto him, and a brave
horse and sword, together with safe conduct under the Kings own hand, for
himself and all that he should bring with him, who should all be preferred to
places of command in the Kings service. The business was to be put in
execution, on the 21th of January about 12 of the clock at night. The word was
Charles; and the enemy was to be let in at the North-gate; but if they could
not accomplish it that night, it was to be deferred till the 24th day
following, for it was Lieutenant Colonel Moselyes turn to watch every fourth
night. Ogles mighty motives to encourage Lieutenant Colonel Mosely in the
plot. Three hoped strings to their Bow, yet all brake and faild them.
At their foresaid meetings Major Ogle used many arguments to persuade him to
it, alleging how much it would advantage his Majesty's service, in regard the
Parliament was to sit at Oxford the Monday following, which might much animate
the Kings party, and exceedingly encourage that Parliament to proceed. And in
case this design should not take effect, the King sent him an engine (which
was shown at a Conference in Parliament, touching this discovery) whereby he
should have fired the Magazine of the Town; but, if none of these succeeded;
then upon their Storming of the Town, he was to set fire on the Town. The Kings
forces being confident of their project, at least to succeed one way or other
of the three, drew forth all their garrison from Taciter, The great preparation
of forces to go to take possession of Aylesbury.
and the greatest part of their forces from Banbury, Abington, Oxford, and
Wallingford, most of the forces the King could make in all those parts, to the
number of at least 5000 horse and foot. All these marched two days and three
nights in the extremity of very bitter cold weather, which was at that time, in
so much that at last they were not able to march or set one foot before
another, the ways were so deep with snow, and the snow beating in their faces,
and so many hard passages they met by the way, that their foot were enforced to
make way for the horse, Their extreme misery in a most bitter March.
which did so weary the poor foot forces, that they fell down fourscore in a
heap, as it were together, not being able to stir, whereupon the Officers
came with Canes and beat them like dogs to force them forward, and so at last
with much ado compelled them to get within two miles of Aylesbury, and were
quartered at and about Ethrop-House, At Ethrop-house 2 miles from Aylesbury,
the enemies heard the design was discovered.
in expectation of the promised prize; but being now, with all that foresaid
toil and miserable hardship gotten hither, betimes in the morning about five
of the clock, they there heard for certain, that their design was discovered,
so that they were enforced to return back again to Oxford; the walk and fresh
air being all they had for their 100 li. the good horse and sword, which
Lieutenant Colonel Mosley got by the bargain; which their prize of mouths
full of fresh air, must needs be worth their money, considering how ill they
were accommodated for fresh air at Oxford; Their good reward which they got
for all their cost and coil.
and so, I say, they returned homeward with as much comfort and content, as a
dog newly whipped, with his tail between his legs, biting, tearing, and plundring
(those that were able) all that was in their way before them; but it was verily
believed (yea and apparent too) that the King lost, The King lost, at least 500
of his men at this Service.
at least 500 of his men in this sore and fruitless service; for, many of them
ran away, many dyed, and many others fell sick and diseased. And were not here
so many sore brushes against the Ark of God, and as it were so many rough and
rigid Remora's, to stop, at least, if not over-turn, Sore brushes against Gods
Ark.
the Ark of God, his precious Cause, and thus to have, at least, impeded and
hindered its prosperous progress? Yet see how our good God, the most gracious
protector and Pilot thereof, freed it from the deep and desperate danger of
them all. But yet here is not all, for the enemies inveterate malice was working
still; for much about the same time of the other foresaid plots, there was a
devilish design against the Town and Castle of Nottingham also, A desperate
design against Nottingham-Town and Castle. A true Copy of Colo. Hutchinsons
letter, sent to a worthy Gentleman of Nottingha^shire, resident then in London.
to have suddenly surprised it, either by force or fraud, for which purpose
they had provided 1500 horse and foot, out of the garrison of Newark, and their
other Cavalerian quarters thereabout, and prepared a Letter to be sent and
delivered beforehand to the most valiant and faithful Governor of the Castle,
Colonel Hutchinson; for a full and clear relation whereof, I shall refer the
Reader to the Governors own Letter; a true Copy whereof, written by noble
Colonel Hutchinson himself, to a worthy Patriot of his Country, then residing
in London, coming to my hands, I have here thought fit to insert, verbatim, as
it was printed and published by authority, which was as follows.

SIR; About 6 of the clock in the morning, Jan. 16th, 1643. the enemy faced us
on both sides of the Town; and our house with 2 foot Companies went to the
works, but they being a very great body, and the works not yet defensible in
many places (they to give them their due) very bravely came on, and forced
their entry into the Town, and our horse and foot were both forced to retreat
to the Castle, but we had not one man slain or wounded in the retreat: Our
Ordnance from the Castle made a lane among them at their entry, and our
Musketteers killed many of them as they retreated into the Castles The enemy
possessed themselves of St. Peter's Church, and those houses and street ends,
which hindered our sallying out, but when our horse saw they were able to do no
service (their body of horse being far greater) Colonel Thornhagh and all the
other horse Commanders, encouraged their Troopers to take Muskets in their
hands, and serve as foot (which to their great glory they very cheerfully and
courageously did) and with a foot company joined to part of them, sallied out
and beat the Cavaliers out of the nearest houses to the Castle, and possessed
them: When we saw our sally and retreat, both made indifferent safe, we drew
out 2 other foot Companies, and all the rest of the Troopers with Muskets, who
went on with so great courage and valor, that they drove the enemy before them
out of the Town, with a great deal of dishonor and confusion: we have now 80
prisoners, and all their arms, and a great many killed, the certain number
whereof I cannot relate, diverse of them were wounded and carried dead off from
the field, some they had buried in the field before they had entered the Town,
we traced them 2 miles in the snow by much blood which we found spilt; and we
hear that they left dead and wounded men in the Towns as they passed. I do not
perceive we have any prisoners above the quality of a Captain, Lieutenant, but
the reason is, because the Commanders ran away in such have, that they left
their own and got Troopers horses, and took no care of their men, but left them
without command, being happy who could first escape away: We lost not all this
day but one man slain, and 2 or 3 wounded: At last the enemy rallied in a
valley about a mile from the Town (where they had a body of horse which never
came into the Town) we faced one another, but we finding their body so much
exceeding all our force, would not hazard the whole garrison upon such unequal
terms, toward night the enemy marched away to their several Garrisons. Col.
Cartwright had his horse killed under him with a Cannon bullet they say (but I am
not certain) that he himself is shot. That you may know their devillishnes,
give me leave to acquaint you with their design as it was related to us: They
were resolved to have surprised us this morning by two of the clock, but the
bitterness of the snowie weather which fell, hindered so speedy a march of their
foot as they expected; therefore failing of that, their farther design was, to
try if they could get the Town, which if they could, they then resolved to
summon the Castle, and if they could neither win nor have it delivered up,
they resolved to plunder, and then fire the Town; to this purpose and with
these threats they had prepared a Letter to send me, and when they could find
none that would venture to carry it, they seized on Mr Majores, and would with
many threats have compelled him to carry it to me; one clause of it was, that
if I would not send them the Major and Aldermen, nor deliver the Castle, they
would proceed to plunder and fire: Before Mr Majores was well out of doors
with his Letter, there was so quick and unexpected an answer sent them by 400
Musketeers, which sallied out upon them, that they were in too great have to
take with them the plunder of the Town, so that in that respect the Town
escaped well and lost nothing of value; we must acknowledge it was a wonderful
mercy of God that it escaped firing, for they cast a many coals of fire amongst
a great deal of hay, in Capt. Whites Quarters, and laid fire to diverse houses,
and had prepared diverse Gorse Bushes to fire, and shot muskets and pistols into
the thatch of houses as they passed by, and into barnes, but God preserved us
from all these dangers, so that though the fire was found half an hour after
they were gone quick in the hay, yet there was not so much as a smoke in the
Town: The number of these forces were (as near as we could guess) or find out
by the prisoners) 1500 horse and foot, being all the force that could be
gathered together from Newark, Si^ Charles Lucas, Col. Fretwell, with other
forces drawn from Bolsover, and Welbeck, and Shelford: They faced the Bridge on
the other side of the Trent with between 2 and 300 horse and Dragoons which
came from Hastings, Belvoir, and Wiverton. By this you may see how we are
straightened and how over potent our enemies are, and you may imagine how
impossible it is for this poor Garrison to subsist without some relief of
money to encourage our Soldiers, and the truth is to make them able to live to
do the public service: Therefore Sir, I beseech you, prosecute my desires in
my last Letter to you as the greatest service you can do your Country and
Obligation you can lay on

Your loving friend and servant, J. H.
Nottingham Castle, Jan. 16. 1643. In all this days service we had not any
assistance from the Townsmen, besides those which have all this year been in
the Castle with me, though I had twice summoned them to receive arms for the
defense of the Town, but could not persuade them to do it, but now I am in some
hopes that they will by this be brought to concur more cheerfully with me, for
their own defense, and that the Cavaliers (though they have no cause to brag of
this) will more deerly buy their next entrance, I hear since that most of the
enemies foot are run away, which were about five or six hundred; all their foot
flung their Arms away, that they might run the lighter.

Sir, Since I writ this Letter I am certainly informed, that there are above a
100 Cavaliers lying dead in Thor^high and Sausom woods, and Nottingham Coppice,
the weather being so sharp that their wounds bled to death, and some of them
starved with cold, and we have since found many of them dead in the Town that
were wounded, and hid themselves in houses, and there bled to death; they have
left many wounded all along the Towns as they dispersed themselves to their
several Garrisons from whence they came. The greatness of their loss is more
than yet we can discover, and what I have related to you is less than what we
know to be true: we have some prisoners that were in the Parliaments service in
Ireland, and are now taken with the enemy; I desire to know the pleasure of the
House concerning them; whether they shall be tried by a Council of war, as
runawayes, or excha^^ed, because it may be our fortune to meet with more
considerable men of the same kind.

Your servant, J. H.
Nottingham-Castle, Jan. 17. 1643.



From all these plots, then, and most desperate and devilish designs of our
restless rancourous adversaries, we may clearly see that of the Prophet Esaias
most eminently verified. Esa. 57. 19, 20.
That it is the Lord alone, who is able to create peace and salvation to his
people that are a far off, and to those that are near, evermore to heal and to
help them. But, the wicked (as here we have seen in all these plots and
desperate designs) are still like the troubled Sea, which cannot rest, but is
evermore casting up mire and dirt. And therefore there is no peace (says my
God) to the wicked. But now to proceed.

And here now I have thought fit to acquaint the Reader (though a little out of
order, in respect of the day of the Month only) with the most admirable and
blessed providence of the Lord, in stirring up the hearts of our loving and
loyal Brethren of Scotland, Our Brethren of Scotlands first advance and coming
into England for our assistance.
to such a pitch and highth of Christian sympathizing with us in our present
pressing troubles and deep distractions, as to leave their own native Country,
wives, children, kindred and estates, yea, their all, and to bring their lives
in their hands, and to adventure their most precious heart-bloud for us and
with us, in the godly vindication of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and to
help forward the happy reestablishment of Peace and Truth among us, which if
rightly and seriously considered, is and ought to be most justly esteemed and
accounted one of the richest and rarest temporal mercies that have from the
first, What a rich and rare mercy this of our Brethren of Scotla^ds coming into
England, is unto us.
or can to the last befall us; even a whole Kingdom or Nation, unanimously to
combine and conjoyne with us in this necessitated holy-war. O what sufficient
thanks and praises is England ever able to retribute and repay to Englands good
God for it? O England, England, let this so rich, so rare a mercy, be never
forgotten of thee; let those our loyal, our loving Scottish-Brethren, be ever
most intimately and entirely beloved of thee. And now to the matter, which I
shall succinctly deliver to the Reader in a full relation of our said loving
Scottish-Brethrens march from Barwick to Newcastle, as it was printed and
published by authority, which was as follows.

A full Relation of the SCOTS March from BARVVICK to NEWCASTLE.
THere is no cause why we should conceive that our Brethren of Scotland have
delayed in any wise their coming, though they have not been here so soon as
some expected, but rather that we should give God praise for their so soon and
speedy march.

First, Considering the great Army which they have raised, and provision for
them, which to be done orderly, and by the brotherly assistance of that whole
Kingdom, is a great work, and asks long time.

Secondly, Because they are not only ayding and assisting unto us, but also to
our brethren of Ireland, who are brought to a very low, and most miserable
condition, insomuch that informations from thence have certified the Kirk of
Scotland, that 200. at the least of the Scots are starved to death in Ireland
for want.

Thirdly, Their chief Engineer has formed a new kind of great gunns, never
before discovered, which were made purposely for this design, above three
quarters of a yard long, or some a yard, that will carry a twelve pound bullet,
to do good execution at a good distance, and yet so framed, that a Horse may
carry one of them, all which took up a great deal of time.

Yet nevertheless, blessed be God, they are now come into England, their
number being 18000 Foot, 3000 Horse, and between 4 and 500 Dragoneers, and they
bring along with them 120 great Gunns, and other train of Ammunition, very
full and large, which came to Barwick by Sea, and there met the Army in a
convenient time, and was prepared ready for them in their march.

On Tuesday the 18 of January last, they marched to Barwick and that day was a
sore day to them, by reason of great storms and Snow that fell all the day
long, and yet such was their valiant resolution, and desire of expedition, that
they came 18 Scotch miles that day to reach Barwick which is at the least, as
much as three and twenty or four and twenty of our miles here.

They billited about Barwick that night and there received their train of
Artillery, which they neglected not, though after so long and wearisome a days
journey, and the next day, being January the 19. they marched out of Barwick,
one Regiment after another, as conveniently as they could obtain fit quarter
in those parts.

Our Brethren of Scotland brought along with them Printed Declarations of the
Kingdom of Scotland, for information and satisfaction to their brethren of
England, concerning their present expedition, viz.

Whereas the greatest Questions that are like to arise in this business, may
be deduced to these three particulars, viz. The justness of ourcause: The
lawfulness of our calling thereto: And the faithfulness of carriages therein:
our brethren of Scotland will hereby endeavor to give satisfaction in them
all, and doubt not to do it, unless there remain some, whose inveterare
malice has produced in them a resolution to be unsatisfied.

This their Declaration gave the Country so good satisfaction, that they found
no opposition, and they do carry themselves so civil and well and without
offering the least wrong to any, where they come, that the Count ey are
exceeding glad of their being come.

When the Messenger that brought the message to the Parliament yesterday, left
the Scotch Army, which was on Wednesday last, then they were at Adestone,
within some six miles from An wick in their march toward Newcastle, which is
about some 28 English miles, and then a Letter was prepared to be sent to
Colonel Glemham, the Governor of Newcastle, to require the delivery of the
same up to the use of the Parliament, in England, and he does verily believe
that by this time they can give account of the same: for on Saturday last they
intended to be before Newcastle.

Colonel Glemham, it seems had marched out of Newcastle with a Partee, such
strength as he could make; and the the Letters were delived to him, which came
from our brethren of Scotland, sent from both the Chaire-men of the Committies
of England and Scotland, which was very fair; and declared, that they did not
desire blood, but to bring in those Delinquents to justice, who seek to divert
his Majesty from the Parliament. The Letter was delivered to Colonel Glemham,
and by him read to the Army then with him, which himself would not deny, but
that it was very fair; and so made unto them three Propositions, at the
reading of the said Letter.

1. Whether the Country should be burnt up before them, and all destroyed and
laid wast. To this it was answered, No, which they had reason so to do,
because there were then present many of the Gentry of those parts, who had
interest in the Land there.

2. Whether they should oppose the Scots, and send them a denial. To which it
was answered, that they were altogether unable to oppose them, because they
being but two thousand Foot, and some few Horse, it would be in vain to stand
against them.

3. Whether an Answer should be retuned to the said Letters, To which some
said, that it were best, First to send to the Earl of Newcastle, to know his
mind: Others, that it was convenient, first to send to Oxford, before an answer
be returned.

The Messenger further reports, that as he sailed by the mouth of the
Channel which leads to Newcastle, he saw some seven Ships or more, which
seemed to be fraught, and upon inquiry, it was certified that they were laden
with Malignants goods, supposed for Holland, whereof he gave notice to some
Commanders under the Lord Admiral, who appointed eleven Ships to wait their
coming out, and if they came not forth before Saturday, the day
appoinappointed by our brethren of Scotland to be at Newcastle, then to fall in
and steal upon them.

Now that our brethren of Scotland may not be looked upon with the prejudice of
strangers, we hope this firm Union of this mutual Covenant will bear it out:
There is a Committee of our own Nation, the most of which are Parliament men,
such to whom they have committed the trust and care of their Religion, Laws,
and Liberties, joined with them, without whose concurrence, nothing that
concerns us is to be transacted. And to free us of all unjust suspicion, which
if our minds are not ready to conceive, yet the malicious mouths of our
Adversaries, and theirs, are ready to suggest, that notwithstanding their
Declaration they have some finister and secret ends, which may prove
prejudicial to our Rights and Happiness: It is hereby made known to us, that
they have freely engaged themselves, by an Article of the late Treaty betwixt
the Nations, to give the public Faith of the Kingdom of Scotland, unto the
Kingdom of England, that neither their entrance into, nor continuance in this
Kingdom, shall be made use of to any other ends than expressed in the Covenant,
and that Treaty subscribed to by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms, which
they are resolved, to the honor of God, and of this Nation, to keep inviolate.

And they declare, that they are so far from desiring harm or loss to any of
their Brethren of England, that their sincere and real intentions are not to
add fuel, nor bring oil, but water to extinguish these lamentable
combustions and fires, which they have with so much duty and love labored to
quench: That their taking of Arms is not to make Wars (if they be not
necessitated) but to obtain a better grounded and more durable Peace, for
enjoying our Religion and Liberties in all the three Kingdoms: and that the
wicked (who are the unworthy authors of all our troubles) being removed from
our King, a right understanding may be' established betwixt his Majesty and
his people. And as they have solemnly sworn to protect all who shall adhere to
this Covenant: So do they certainly expect, that all their Brethren in
England, who are zealous for the true Protestant Religion, loyal to the King,
and faithful for their Country, will join with them in procuring these just
desires: which being obtained, they shall be most willing and ready to return
to their Native Country, esteeming it their greatest happiness, that truth
with Peace may be established in all his Majesty's Dominions.

ANd here give me leave, good Reader, to add 2 or 3 things omitted in that
former Relation, but very observable in their said March, Three or 4. memorable
Contingents in the Scots March.
which were these.

First, that on Thursday January the twenty fifth, their Army had a hard and
difficult March, in respect of a very great thaw, 1. A great thaw, much
hindering the Scots march.
after much frost and snow upon the ground at that time, which so swelled the
waters (whereof there were not a few in their way, that oftentimes it came up
to the middle, and sometime to the arme-pits of their Foot, insomuch that the
horse passed with little less difficulty; which though it was not without much
hazard and danger, yet (blessed be God) without the least harm or damage to
the meanest Soldier.

Sir Thomas Glemham also did intend (to hinder the Scots March and advance
forward) to cut Feltam-Bridge; 2. A Bridge which would much have retarded the
Scots March, not suffered to be cut down as intended.
but the Masons and workmen which he brought thither for that purpose, were so
affrighted and amazed, by reason of the exclamation and execrations of the
Country, women upon their knees, that while Sir Thomas went into a House to
refresh himself, they all stole away, and before he could get them to return
again, he received an alarm from the Scottish Horse, which made himself also
to fly away with speed to Morpeth, but there also he stayed not long, but
Marched to Newcastle.

Also the great storm of Snow, which in, reason, the Scots could not but expect
would encounter them in the way (especially at that time of the year) and
might have killed many of their Foot, 3. The contrary effects of the great Snow
in the Scots march.
did not (by Gods providence) hurt any of them: but contrariwise did greatly
hinder the enemy, from putting in execution their wicked resolutions, to
plunder and drive away all the Cattle and goods, and burning up of all the
Corn of the whole Country, where the Scots should pass, that so they might
starve their Army.

Lastly, that there was so great a Frost (the like whereof had not been seen in
any man's memory in those parts) that in two nights, 4. A remarkable hard Frost
which helped all the Army over the river Tweed.
the River of Tweed freezed so strong and thick, as that the whole Army of our
brethren the Scots and all their Ammunition which was at a place called Kelso,
marched most safely, upon the ice, which otherwise could not possibly have come
over the River in a long time after, and that with difficulty and danger too.
But their forces have thus happily passed on to Alnwick, the Lord Marquess of
Argyle marched to Cocquet-Island, which was yielded to him at the first shot
which they discharged against the Town, Gods evident hand of good Providence
going along with the Scots Army.
though they had 70 Soldiers within it, 7 pieces of brass Ordnance, and
victuals almost for a year. And were not here remarkable testimonies and
clear demonstrations of Gods special good hand of Providence, guiding and
guarding this blessed Army so safely and securely, in so imminent and eminent
dangers, and difficulties, as these were? Yes, most assuredly, and none,
questionless, but a mere Mole-ey'd Malignant, or open Atheist, can deny it.
But to go^ on.

Shortly after our said Brethren of Scotlands arrival thus into the Kingdom,
besides a most excellent satisfactory Declaration set forth and sent abroad in
print by our said brethren, as was touched in the former relation of their
march; A Declaration consented to, and confirmed by the Estates of England and
Scotland.
There was also another Declaration, which had past the Convention of Estates
in Scotland, (about the 28. or 29. of Jan. 1643) that was unanimously confirmed
by our pious and prudent House of Commons in Parliament, and transmitted to the
House of Lords, and by them also assented to: which in effect declared, who in
both the Kingdoms should be received into mercy, and who not. viz.

First, 1.
all Papists in arms to be proceeded against for their lives, as Traitors, and
their estates confiscate. The like for all Irish Rebels whom His Majesty does
entertain in these wars.

Secondly, 2.
None of the grand Incendiaries and fomenters of this war to have any mercy
showed them, either for life or estate.

Thirdly, 3
That all such as have or shall refuse the Covenant, to have all their estates
forthwith sequestered.

Fourthly, 4.
That such Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen and others, that have been misled to
take up arms against the Parliament, and shall return to the Parliament by the
first of March, or to any part of their Armies, shall be protected as to his
life and liberty; but as to his estate, a competencie shall be allowed to him
and his family, but a proportion must go out of it to help to satisfy the
losses of others that have suffered, and to defray the charges of the Kingdom.

And for the yet more happy completing of the Parliamentary mercies of this
Month, Namptwhich most bravely relieved, and a most glorious victory obtained
by Sir Tho. Fairfax and Sir Will^ Brereton.
both privative and positive both by freedom from secret mischievous and
treacherous plots and conspiracies, and thereby great dangers threatened; as
also by many admirable and comfortable Victories and thereby sweet and
sovereign blessings obtained: See here how in the very close and shutting up
of this Month it pleased the Lord on the very night of this Months Fast Day,
or Monthly Humiliation and seeking the Lord in the face of Christ, as a most
immediate and gracious return of our prayers (a thing which I have all along
observed in most of the Months of these our Parliamentary passages, in both
the former parts of this our Parliamentary Chronicle) how it pleased the Lord,
I say, as a blessed return of prayer, A retunr of Prayer.
to crown us in the conclusion of this month with a most memorable and almost
incredible famous Victory (by Gods almighty power and mercy) obtained by his
ever to be honored Instruments therein, those two renowned, valiant and
victorious Commanders, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir William Brereton, near
Namptwich, against the Forces which came out of Ireland into those parts, and
were then under the Command of bloody Bragadochio Sir John Byron, of whom we
made mention before. The general report and relation whereof came unto us to
London on the 3. The first relation of this famous victory came to London on
the conclusion of this monthly fasts, ho^y duties.
of this instant January, 643 being the Monthly Fast Day, at night, just about
the time of the conclusion of the holy exercises of that day and which was by
Letters confirmed more certainly and particularly the next day being Thursday,
and Friday following: The substance and manner whereof was this. The English
and Irish Forces which but a little before came out of Ireland, under the
command of sir Michael Earnly, and several other Commanders, having laid siege
to that brave and faithful Town of Namptwich, Namptwich 3. times ass^ulted,
and the enemy most bravely repulsed.
(resolving it is probable to do some brave piece of service, at their first
arrival into England,) had, therefore made three several onsets and assaults
upon it, and were most bravely repulsed every time by Captain Booth, Governor
of the Town, with great loss to the Enemy; Lieutenant Colonel Boughton, and
four Captains more, besides many common Soldiers being there slain before
the town. At last they hearing the advance of Sir Tho: and Sir William toward
them to relieve the besieged, The siege raised.
they raised their siege from thence, and drew out their Forces upon a plain,
near the Town, to give them b^ttell. The 2. Armies met and encountered each
other.
Both Armies b^ing met, there continued a fierce encounter between them, which
was very bravely performed on both sides for the space of two hours at least.
At last, the enemy (Gods providence so ordering it) began to give ground, which
our as vigilant as valiant Commanders soon perceiving, were greatly encouraged
thereat to animate and draw on their soldiers with the braver resolution.
Bloody Byron, commander of the Horse first began to fly.
Sir Thomas Fairfax most magnanimiously charged their Horse, whereof bloody
Byron was Commander, who not daring to stand to so fierce a shock, began first
to fly, (mangre all his former lying vaunts over brave Sir William Brereton)
our Horse valiantly pursuing the opportunity thereof, gave not over, till they
had ^^terly routed their enemies, and dispersed and scattered all their Forces.
The names of the Prisoners of eminency taken (all of them, Prisoners and prizes
taken.
either Commanders of the English Forces in Ireland or native Irish-rebells)
were Major General Gibson; Sir Richard Fleetwood, Major; Sir Michael Earnley;
Sir Francis Butler, an Irish Rebel, Colonel Monck, Colonel Warren;
Lieutenant Colonel Gibs, Sir Ralph Dames, Major Hamon; 14. Captains, 20.
Lieutenants, 27. Ensigns, 3. Cornets, 4. Quarter Masters, 40. Drums, 4.
Sergeants, 63. Corporals, 1700. Common-Souldiers, and above an 100. Above an
100 Irish-Queanes with sharp and long Skeanes to cut throats.
wicked Women and Irish Queanes, with long and sharp Skeanes, or Knives, to
play the barbarous Cutthroats of such as they should have taken Prisoners, or
were wounded, had they got the Victory; 6. Pieces of Ordnance, 4. Canoneers,
27. Wagons, laden with very rich spoils, taken by the Irish-Forces, from the
Inhabitants of those parts. Very many of them were slain on the Ground, and in
the pursuit of them, among which, were, The slain on the Enemies part.
Colonel Wane, a Lieutenant Colonel, 4. Captains; yea, and Sir Will: Brereton
in his own Letter to the Parliament, testifies, that there were about 2400. of
the Enemies slain and taken Prisoners, in this Battle; and at the siege of
Namptwich there were above 500. slain before the Town; and yet, that in all
that siege the Town lost but 2. men in all.

Boasting bloody Byron himself fled (like a cowardly beaten and bitten Dog,
Bloody Byron fled to Oxford.
with his tail between his legs) to Oxford, there to bragg how he had made
noble Sir William Brereton fly, as his custom was; and to vapor of his happy
victory, and good success he has had since his former late inhumane butcherie
of Lancashire Forces: His lying brag retorted on him.
Herein still, the Lord most wisely and justly suiting his Divine dispensations
to men's actions, and worthyly repaying to the wicked a suitable and
proportionable measure of Justice and revenge.

Of this, and all the rest of his rich and rare mercies, and wonderful
Victories, and Deliverances, let our Wonder-working God alone, have all the
most meritorious praise and glory. And accordingly, on the Friday following,
which was the 2. of February, the pious and prudent House of Commons in
Parliament, An Order of Parliament for solemn Thanksgiving to God, for this
great vi^tory.
passed an Order to this effect, That on the next Lords day, public thanks
should be rendered unto Almighty God, both for the seasonable coming in of our
faithful and loving brethren of Scotland to our assistance against the mighty
Enemies of the Lord; for the good success of the Garrison of Nottingham,
against Newcastles treacherous fraud and forces, together with the happy
discovery and defeat of the several late plotts of the Enemy against us, as
was forementioned; and especially, for this last foresaid famous Victory of Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and Sir William Brereton, against the English-Irish Forces in
Cheshire; and it was Ordered therein also, that the said Order should be read
by the Ministers of the several Congregations, in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, and that the names of all such Ministers as should
refuse to publish the said Order should be returned to the Parliament.

And here now I shall desire to cast Anchor again, A most grateful revise and
review of all the most memorable Parliamentary mercies of this Months Voyage.
and make a little stay of Contemplation, and grateful rumination, on the
precious Traffic and rich Commodities of this Months Voyage, wherein the
godly Reader may see at a sight, and seeing, admire the great mercies of our
good God, thus still carrying on his Arc, and causing it to overtop all the
troublesome waves and winds of Malignity that have thus still bruisht and
rusht against it, and bringing it home in safety to the Haven of this Months
end, fairly fraught with all these mercies.

As first, 1.
in raising up the spirits of the Swedes to interrupt the Auxiliary design of
Denmark against England.

In the taking of those two Houses, 2.
Holts-House, and Bewley-House, two pernicious Kennels or Cages, for the Kings
Cormorants, those birds of Prey, to roust and nestle in, for the fitter falling
upon the spoil and plunder of the people, and places near about them.

In the happy and timely discovery of that pernicious plot of dividing the
Parliament and City, 3.
under the modest mask, forsooth, of pretended Peace, by Sir Basil Brook,
Riley, and the rest; and the happy deliverance of those three honest and loyal
Patriots of their Country in Gernsey, from the present Imprisonment, and
intended future danger which they were in.

In the happy taking into the Parliaments possession of Arundel-Castle, 4.
by Sir William Waller, and his valiant Forces; besides a brave Ship full
fraught with Arms, Ammunition, and other good Merchandises.

The most happy Harmony and union of Spirits, Love and Loyalty, 5.
between the Parliament and City of London, most sweetly manifested in that
famous invitation at Marchant-Taylors-Hall.

In that most noble Defeat given to Sir Nicholas Byron, 6.
by valiant Colonel Mitton; Sir John Gells valiant surprisall of Burton on
Trent; and the taking of Hilsden-House, by the Parliaments Forces.

In the happy discovery and disappointment of the base Plots, and treacherous
designs of mischievous Major Ogle, both in endeavoring to sow the seeds of
sedition in the City of London, by Master Nigh, Master Goodwin, and other
Independents; in the Plot against Windsor, and that also at Aylesbury; and the
most happy preservation of Nottingham Town, and Castle, by loyal and valiant
Colonel Hutchinson.

The long desired and seasonable coming into this Kingdom, 8.
of our loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland to our assistance, with a potent
Army, to help to re-establish Peace and Truth among us.

In the harmonious, 9.
pious, and prudent consent of the Commissioners and Estates of both Kingdoms,
in a most excellent Declaration, for the just terror and trouble of our Popish
and Atheistical Adversaries, as a condign punishment of their viperous
insolences.

And lastly, 10.
in that most memorable and famous Victory which the Lord graciously vouchsafed
to give unto his two faithful and magnanimous Joshuahs, Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and Sir William Brereton, at Namptwich. All which admirable Parliamentary
mercies being rightly reflected on, God's Ark over-topping the Worlds waves
swelling.
and seriously considered of, with a truly pious, and grateful heart; who can
choose but s^e, and say, Gods Ark was here also triumphantly over-topping the
Worlds waves and winds, fiercely raging and swelling. And upon the right and
religious review thereof, who can, but in all bounden gratitude, with holy
David break out into most thankful expressions of soul, and say, Ascribe unto
the Lord (O happy England) ascribe unto the Lord glory and strength; Psalm. 29.
1, 2, 3, 10.
ascribe unto the Lord the glory due unto his great name: worship the Lord in
the beauty of holiness. For the voice of the Lord is upon the great waters,
yea the Lord rides upon many and mighty waters, as King for ever. And now to
proceed.

About the beginning of this month of February, February, 1643.
came certain advertisement by Letters out of Gloucestershire to London, that
the ever to be renowned Commander Col. Massey, had lately before issued forth
with a party of his Soldiers, Col. Massey surpriseth Sir Henry Talbot in his
quarters
and had fallen upon Sir Henry Talbots quarters at Shepstow, where he surprised
the said Colonel, 3 Captains, 3 Lieutenants, 3 Irish Reformadoes, Sergeant.
Major Moore, besides 60 Common Soldiers, with much arms and ammunition, And
that he had also the week before this sent out a Frigot manned with his
Garrison-souldiers, which took a Vessel going with supplies to the Enemies
forces at Worcester; And performs other brave exploits.
the Bark was laden with Tobacco, and some ammunition, which was all brought
into Gloucester for his own Soldiers. And it was likewise then confirmed, that
diverse parties of his Horse had taken diverse Carriers going with several
parcels of Gunpowder, and other Military necessaries to the Enemy; which he
also disposed of to his own better uses.

Also about the beginning of this instant Febr. Sir John Meldrum takes the Isle
of Axholm
came certain intelligence from Sir John Meldrum, that brave, pious, and
prudent Commander: that whereas a little before, some Frenchmen had
treacherously betrayed about 20 of Sir John's Soldiers, and a Captain of his,
together with diverse well-affected Inhabitants of the Isle of Axholme, into the
hands of Newcastles Cavaliers: Sir John, hereupon, resolved to go into that
Island with a convenient party to repay that affront, and to give them their
due desert for their said treachery: and about the 4. of February, Sir John
approaching the Isle, The Island, prisoners and prizes taken.
most valiantly assaulted, and took the Royal Fort, or chief Defense of the
said Island, which commands all the passages from Newark upon Trent; and that
he purged the Island of all the Malignants therein, and took there about an
hundred prisoners, most of them men of quality; 8 pieces of Ordnance, 300 Arms,
and a Troop of Horse of Newcastles Cormorants; together with 5 Hoyes upon the
River, which were going forth with provision to Newcastles Army.

Much also about the same time, A Council of State for all the 3 Kingdoms
established.
our most pious and prudent Parliamentary Worthies, having long and diverse
times had much debate in both Houses, about a resolved Council of State, for
the more sure and secret transacting and managing of the principal and most
weighty affairs in and about all the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland; and having deliberated most seriously both of the persons, and power
of those that were to be chosen thereunto; and after a most wise and discreet
regulating thereof, so as that they may never commence nor determine a Peace
without the House of Commons consent and good liking: They at last agreed, that
all those personages which were nominated by the Lords, should be returned
without any alteration, and so resolved to transmit the business to the Lords.
The names of those that were to be of this Council, are these following: The
names of the Council of State.
The Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Warwick, the
Earl of Manchester, the Lord Vicount Say and Seal, the Lord Wharton, and the
Lord Roberts. Of the house of Commons, Sir Gilbert Gerard, Sir William Waller,
Sir Arthur Haslerigge, Sir William Armyne, Sir Henry Vane senior, Sir Henry
Vane junior, Sir Philip Stapleton, Mr. Crew, Mr. St. John Solicitor, Mr.
Brown, Mr. Glyn Recorder of London, Mr. Perpoint, and Mr. Wallop. And for the
State and Kingdom of Scotland; the Lord Lowden, the Lord Maitland, Sir
Archibold Johnstone, and Mr. Berkley. But shortly after, An ordinance of
Parliament for the settling of the Council of State.
namely about the midst of this instant February, the Ordinance for the
absolute settling of this great Council of State, passed both Houses with a
joint concurrence in all particulars; both the time of their sitting, for three
months, to advise, consult, order and direct concerning the Recruits, The
maine matter of this Council of State, and their place of meeting.
regulating, and government of the Armies, and concerning Treaties and Answers,
and other the great affairs of the three Kingdoms. The names of the persons ye
have had; their place of meeting was Derby-house in Chanel-row in Westminster.
This piece of State-policie may, by Gods mercy, (and has already, as we have
found by happy experience it has and does) produce much good to the whole
three Kingdoms, and is, no doubt, a mighty terror and startling to the
Enemies. God in his mercy go on still to direct them for the best advancement
of his glory, and the blessed peace and welfare of the three Kingdoms.

About the5. A p^ot against Southampton discovered and prevented
of this instant, came certain intelligence by Letters to London, of another
mischievous design plotted against the Town of Southampton, most happily
discovered and prevented by the wisdom and loyalty (next under God) of Mr.
Peter Murford Sergeant Major to Colonel Norton, the most noble and active
Governor of the said Town. Which Letter containing the exact relation thereof,
and having in it diverse very observable passages, I have therefore thought fit,
for the Readers better and more full content and satisfaction therein, here to
insert verbatim, as it was printed and published by Order and Authority.

A true Copy of Mr. Murfords Letter, touching the discovery of a new Plot
against the Town of Southampton, by the Kings Cormorants or Cavaliers.
SIR,
YOur Letter is come to my hands, which I take kindly from you: I should desire
to exchange lines oftener with you; I thank you for your news. I had Letters
this day from my Lord Admiral, for the Maria-Pinace to ride before this Town.
We are yet in safety (blessed be God) but daily braved by the Enemy, yet
hitherto they have not dared to fasten upon this Town: And I have observed,
that they have never come before this place, or near it, but we have still
worsted them; we have always taken prisoners, horses, arms, wounded or slain
some of them. On Thursday last we took six men and Horse, whereof one was a
Cornet. On Saturday we took two men, Horses and Arms, shot a Captain, who
lies languishing at Rumsey, and wounded three men more. The Lord be still our
defense and refuge, and give us thankful hearts for his preservation over us.
This poor County of Hampshire having had its share of blood and misery, in this
sad Tragedy of our Nation, that there is hardly left any thing for man or
beast therein.

I perceive you have received knowledge of a treacherous practice for the
delivery of this Town, but lest you should be misinformed therein, I will give
you a brief account thereof. Some few days before Christ-tide last, the Lord
Hopton marched with his Army from Winchester, toward Southampton, with a
purpose to face it, (as we were informed) but he came not within two Miles
thereof, to outface it, but marched to Redbridge, (the way into the New
Forest) brake it down to hinder us of Provision from thence; after so
horrible an Act, he faced about, and marched to his old quarters again, without
attempting any further achievement.

The next day here arrived a Letter from one Mr. Jasper Cornelius (sometimes an
Attorney of this Town, but run away before my coming hither, for Malignancy)
directed to Mr. R. Mason, a Merchant of this Town, intimating that this
Cornelius was the day before with the Lord Hopton before this Town, and was
the means of diverting the Lord Hoptons intent of attempting this place, and
tells Mr. Mason he had made choice of him to deliver an enclosed Letter to me,
with all secrecy, which I received, (yet the said Cornelius was an unknown
man to me) by his Letter he insinuates, that then was a fit time for me to do
his Majesty good service, and that I was not the man I was formerly; meaning
(as I conceived) that the government of this Town was imposed upon my honored
friend, Colonel Norton (which I long sued to be eased thereof) and by it he
thought I was a disconted person, and so fit to be wrought upon; but he was
deceived, I being never better pleased then to be eased of so great a burden,
which I had borne long enough, (though it pleased his Excellency to require my
service with a more suitable command to my disposition, made me Sergeant Major
to Colonel Norton, which pleased me far better) after the receipt of this
Letter, I instantly acquainted my Colonel and Master Mayor therewith, we all
agreed I should show a seeming complying, the better to bottom their design,
and to find out what malignant party they had made in this Town. I forthwith
gave him a copy of a Character to explain his mind more fully. To which he
replied, That by the command of his Superiors, he did in the name of His
Majesty, and his Country, and two Lords (which he named) offer me a thousand
pounds in money, a present employment of more value and honor, than at present
I had, His Majesty's pardon under the great Seal, and his favor, if I would
be a means to reduce the Town of Hampton to His Majesty; I returned a
seeming complying Answer, and demanded the one thousand pounds in hand, or the
moity thereof, and assurance given me for the residue, the employment named,
and the Pardon sent me; this performed, he should soon see what I would say to
it. In the interim my Colonel acquainted my Lord General, and Sir William
Waller, with the offer made by Cornelius; wherein I continued the Treaty to
regaine time, until Sir William Waller had finished his business at Arundel,
and drawn his Army this way, and then to have drawn the Enemy hither, in hope
of gaining this place, whilst Sir William might have fallen behind them in
this place of advantage, and so to have deceivd such treacherous corrupters. I
continued the Treaty, until I had his Majesty's Sign Manual for a Pardon
sent me, and afterward the Pardon it self; but I could get no money, but
strong engagements of honor to perform with me, when the work desired was
effected. I whiled out a months time with them, to the exchange of eight
Letters, Master Robert Mason being still the man they employed to bring theirs,
and receive my Letters, whom they had bound to secrecy by an Oath, before I
knew thereof, who brought me the copy thereof, hoping to have gained me to the
like, saying he had no engagement all this time on me, neither by protestation
nor promise, to perform with them; and which I still delayed (which put the
Projectors to a jealousy that I was not real all to them) yet to draw them
still on, I framed some offers, in the nature of Articles, for my self and
this Town (to which the Lord Hopton subscribed that upon his honor he would
perform them:) but I still pressed for the money, but could not obtain it;
they fearing I would Craford them as Poole did; yet Master Mason offered me to
become bound for it, which I accepted of: but before he could perform, on
Friday last was sevennight, he earnestly pressed me to declare my reality in
the design. I saw the man in a distracted ecstasy, by his over-zealousnesse
and rashness for them, having no assurance of me, my bowels pitied him, his
wife, and many children, told him plainly, I never intended to be a villain
and traitor, to betray a trust committed to me, and the lives and goods of so
many innocent people to be made a prey to cruelty, and told him I have revealed
it from the beginning to my Colonel.

Then he begged I would conceal his name; I told him, I could not, but in
compassion of his condition, gave him leave to go to his house (being but
three Houses from mine,) in which time I went forthwith to acquaint my
Colonel, with what had happened between Master Mason and my self; we
concluded instantly to seize his person, and caused all the gates to be
secured: but yet he escaped from us, and could not be found, although we
searched carefully for him; since we hear he is at Winchester, and shall be
preferred, and employed in matter of trust. In all the time of our Treaty, I
could not discover that he had any confederates of any Townsmen with him, but
had undertaken it, to carry it alone. But I was grieved, that I was conceived
by the adverse part, to be a fit Instrument for them. But now they have tried
me, I am confident, they will never do the like, but to revenge themselves on
me: But I will to all the world declare, and maintain my faithfulness to my
Country, and Cause I have undertaken, and clear my unfeigned reputation.

Thus much I thought good to say unto you, that you may give a satisfactory
testimony of that design in my behalf, if you hear it falsely reported. And
I shall be ready to requite you, in vindicating of truth, and acknowledge my
self,

Southampton, Feb. 5. 1643. Your real friend, PET. MURFORD.


About the 6. The impious- Oxonians being brought to a desperate condition,
pretend propositions for Peace.
of this instant, came to the public knowledge of the City of London, and so
to others in the Kingdom, a notable design from Oxford, namely, That in the
latter end of January last, the pretended Parliament, or rather mischievous
meeting of Popish, Atheistical, and Malignant fugitive Lords, and rotten
Members of the most blessed Parliament at Westminster, (being brought into a
desperate condition, by the happy and good success of our said Parliament^
Forces against them) assembled themselves into a most illegal juggling Iunto,
or accursed Conventicle at Oxford, and would needs there, A Letter sent to our
Parliament, or rather to his Excelcelency the L. General, from Oxford.
forsooth, make a poor show of Propositions for Peace; And by their Lord
General Ruthen, the Popish Earl of Forth, they contrived a Letter, which was
signed by the Prince, the Duke of York, 44 of the foresaid conditioned Lords,
and about an 100 rotten Commons; and was sent, as from Ruthen, to his
Excellency, the Parliaments most noble and renowned Lord General, the
magnanimous and heroic Eul of Essex; and in that Letter manifested their
scornful esteem of our most renowned Parliament at Westminster, not allowing
it so much as the name of a Parliament, which must needs argue a proper piece
of intention really to advance a true Peace betwixt the King and his
Parliament. Now hereupon the said Letter being by his Excellency communicated
with the Parliament, they thought it not fit to take notice of the said
Message; A Complemental Letter returned from his Excellency the L. Genesis with a
Declaration, and the Covenant enclosed in it.
only it was consulted and resolved on by both Houses that my Lord General
should be entreated to send a Complement to the Earl of Forth, and to enclose
the Covenant and Declaration agreed upon by both Kingdoms, in this Letter,
which accordingly his Excellency performed, as follows.

His Excellencies Letter to the Earl of Forth, in answer to a Letter from
Oxford, subscribed by the Prince, Duke of York, and diverse Lords and Gentlemen
at Oxford.
My Lord:
I Received this day a Letter of the 29. of this instant, from your Lordship,
and therein a Parchment subscribed by the Prince, Duke of York, and diverse
Lords and Gentlemen: but it neither having address to the two houses of
Parliament, nor therein there being any acknowledgment of them, I could not
communicate it unto them. My Lord, the maintenance of the Parliament of
England, and of the privileges thereof, is that for which we are all resolved
to spend our blood, as being the foundation whereon all our Laws and Liberties
are built. I send your Lordship herewith a National Covenant solemnly entered
into by both Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and a Declaration passed by
them both together, with another Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland.

I rest, Your Lordships humble Servant, ESSEX.
Essex-house, Ian. 30. 1643.

About the 9. Malignants estates and goods sequestered and sold away for the
public use.
of this instant February, our most noble and renowned Patriots in Parliament
resolved on the sequestring of the Estates of many grand Malignants and
Incendiaries, and to order and dispose of their Estates for the public use.
And they appointed a Committee accordingly to take order for the sequestrating
of the Lands and Estates of the Earl of Berk-shire, (prisoner in the Tower)
and that the same should be disposed of for the use of the public good. The
Earl of Berks, The Earl of Carbery. Lord Aborthorum. Wa. Mountague Lo.
Cottington.
And the like for the estate of the Earl of Carbery, a great stickler for the
adverse party in Wales; The Lord Aborthorum; Mr. Walter Mountague, prisoner in
the Tower; The Lord Cottington, that Spanish Don, and grand Incendiary of the
Kingdom. And that all the goods and Chattels already sequestered, and to be
sequestered, belonging to the aforesaid Lords and Gentlemen, should be forthwith
sold, and the moneys made use of for the public service, and more especially
for supplies for the Noble Lord Fairfax in Yorkshire. The like also for all the
goods and chattels belonging to Sir John Banks Lord Chief Justice, Sir Io
Banks. B. of Winchester B. of Armagh.
at Oxford. The like for the Bishop of Winchester; and the like for all the
goods of all other Malignants, sequestered and being in Cambden-house in London,
or elsewhere. As also the goods and whole estate in and about London, belonging
to that unhappy and unholy Neuter or Ambo-dexter, Dr. Usher, Arch-Prelate of
Armagh, resident at Oxford, A brief and bad memorial of the Archbish. of
Armagh, D. Usher.
a man once, I confess, of good, yea of great esteem (like his apostate
brother Dr. White, Bishop of Ely) in City and Country, both in England and
Ireland; but at length, whose last days (hitherto) have proved his worst
days; Of whom, one thing I may not here omit, to his eternal shame and
ignominy; That upon debating of the business in Parliament concerning him,
there was evidence given in to the Parliament against him, That upon the first
framing of that pernicious Oath at Oxford, to enjoin all men to take up Arms
against the Parliament; this slye Archbishop was a chief Agent, by his
Episcopal rhetoric to persuade all men to take the said Oath; A most wicked
imprecation of this Arch-Prelate of Armagh.
yea, and that he wished, they might all dye in prison that refused to take it:
and that diverse who by his persuasions had taken it, were afterward much
troubled in conscience, and some of them dyed in that condition, much perplexed
and unsatisfied. A most sad and bad burden to lie on the Conscience of such an
unholy and unhappy Instigator thereunto, whose perishing blood will (I fear)
be one day severely required at his hands, without repentance.

Also about the 10. of this instant, certain intelligence came out of
Yorkshire, by Letters to London from the most Noble Lord Fairfax, of the
taking of Burlington in the said County (the place where the Queen formerly
landed, Burlington in Yorkshire taken by sir Will. constable.
when she unhappily returned out of Holland) by a party of Horse and Foot
commanded by that valiant and virtuous Colonel Sir William Constable, who
entered the Town in a full Carriere, took 250 Common-souldiers, besides Major
New nam the Governor of the Town, and diverse other Officers, with 2 Drakes,
and 500 Arms, besides other Ammunition. In this exploit, Major Briery, and
Captain Bethel, the one in the Van, the other in the Rear, did singular good
service, and put the Enemy into a great disorder. This place being within 6
miles of Scarborough, will make Sir Hugh Cholmley, that perfidious Apostate, to
look about him. And very shortly after came farther intelligence of another
notable Exploit performed by the said brave and valiant Commander Sir William
Constable, Another brave exploit performed by sir Will. Constable at Driffle in
Yorkshire.
who surprised a party of the Enemy at a place called Driffle, between Malton
and Scarborough, where he took 300 of Newcastles Horse, Colonel Washington, one
Serjeant-Major, three Captains, diverse Officers, and about an hundred and
sixty common Foot-souldiers, and routed another Regiment besides.

Much about the same time came certain information by Letters from the Scotch
Commissioners out of the North, That since our loyal and loving Brethren of
Scotland's advance into this Kingdom, from Barwick toward Newcastle, The
progress and success of our Brethren of Scotland in the North.
and their taking of Alnwick and Morpeth, the two only Towns of defense and
strength twixt Barwick and Newcastle. That they also took the strong Island of
Cocquet with about 200 men, and their Arms, 7 pieces of Ordnance, and other
necessary martial provisions. Also that Colonel Gray (brother to the Lord Gray
of Wark) with a Regiment of Horse came in unto the Army of our said brethren of
Scotland, and most cheerfully took the Covenant; That they had rescued a head
of cattle, which were driven away by the enemy toward Newcastle and that they
most honestly restored them to the persons from whom they were taken; A notable
act of justice; and that the Counties of Northumberland and Westmerland most
cordially came in and adhered to them. About the tenth of this instant,
certain letters being intercepted were read in Parliament which came from the
Lord Goring to the Lord Digby dated at Paris Feb. 7. 1643. The sum whereof in
brief was this. That he hoped this Letter would have better success to come
to the hands of his most blessed sacred Mistress, than his former Letters had;
The Lord Gorings* Letter intercepted and read in Parliament.
That he was in nothing more happy than to be accounted a Trator at London,
considering his sacred Mistress had the same badge of honor stamped upon her
before him; in whose service he professed he would be ever faithful to the
quick; (and was not here think thou good Reader a pure and sure slave to
Satan?) That the same morning he wrote this Letter, he was called to swear to
be true to the two Crowns of England and France, and afterward was to dine
with the King. And further specifying what foreign forces, arms and
ammunition were in preparation to be sent into this Kingdom. And, said he (in
this very expression) let my Mr. hang me, if I do not furnish him with arms,
ammunition, etc. And concludes thus, that what he writes, they may believe to
be as true as Gospel. This flashey letter of this old doting shameless
Traitor, full (as ye see) of blasphemy and Treason, and so adjudged by the
Parliament, they have ordered to be recorded, with an other former intercepted
Letter of his, which will be sufficient evidences to make good their
impeachment of high Treason against him. See here, then, good Reader, the good
hand of Gods wise and just providence, thus to discover the secret and slavish
enemies of his Church and people. But to go on.

Besides those former brave exploits of that pious, Diverse noteble exploits of
the Parliaments Forces, briefly remembered.
and prudent Commander, Colonel Sir William Constable aforesaid. There came
certain intelligence to London much about the middst of this instant February,
of diverse other most valiant performances, and victorious atchivements of the
Parliaments Forces in several other places, worthy our most thankful
remembrance, both to Gods glory, and the Instruments deserved praise.

The first was performed by the brave and active well-deserving Garrison of
Pool in Dorsetshire; Pools exploits.
who sallied out, and by an Ambuscado (their enemies own late Stratagem
against Pool, with some little loss, not long before) they entrapped Colonel
Windham, and about 7. or 8. score of his Horse, and slew his Lieutenant Colonel
Barker, but the Colonel himself, with the rest of his men taken, as
aforesaid, they carried Prisoners into Pool.

A Party also of Warwick Garrison issuing out toward Stow on the Would,
Warwick-Castle.
in Gloucestershire, took a Cavalier Colonel, Prisoner, and about 30 good
Horse with him.

And here also I may most justly commemorate diverse brave achievements of
Sir Thomas Fairfax, Sir Tho. Fairfax his brave exploits.
that as famous as pious Commander in Cheshire, since his last great Victory at
Namptwich, who most prosperously pursued his late Victory in those parts, took
a strong hold called Keel-House; Another called Adlinton-House. Duddington
also, belonging to sir Thomas Delves; And Crew-House, where he took an 150.
Royalists Prisoners, and great store of Arms and Ammunition, together with
Dorison-House, another strong Garrison of the Enemies, where he took 200.
Prisoners, with good store of arms and ammunition.

Darby Forces also having been two days before Kings-Mylus, Derby-Forces take
Kings-Milus.
a very strong House of the Earl of Huntingtons, near Wildon-Ferrey, upon the
River of Trent, whereinto Colonel Hastings, alias Rob-Carryer, had put a
Garrison of Soldiers, who much annoyed that part of the Country, but the
House being very strong, their Ordnance did no great execution upon it.
Whereupon that brave and most courageous and faithful Patriott, Sir John Gell,
chose 5. men out of each of his Troops to storm it; who made such a desperate
assault upon it, that they took this House with the loss only of three of
his men, whence they brought 46. Prisoners, with their arms to Darbey; but
Captain Daniel and his Lieutenant, they sent Prisoners to Nottingham-Castle.

Lastly, The Lo: Fairfax and Sir William Constable take VVhitby, a Haven-Town
in Yorkshire.
that most noble and renouned successful Patriott of the Northern parts, the
good Lord Fairfax, with his valiant Commander, sir William Constable, marched
toward Whitby, a Haven-Town, in the farthest part of Yorkshire, with a very
considerable Army; intending, if the Enemy would not deliver up the Town, to
Storm it: For this Whitby was a very strong Garrison of the Earl of
New-Castles: But the Enemy considering in what a condition they were,
surrendered up the Town to the Lord Fairfax, wherein were above 500. Captains,
Lieutenants, Commanders, Officers, and Common-souldiers; besides, at least 20.
of the Commission of Array, The prizes taken.
and almost a 1000 Sailors, and Inhabitants of the Town; all which delivered up
the Town, and with it themselves, to the said most noble Lords Service,
together with 40. Vessels, greater and lesser, in the Haven. So this most
Honorable Lord, with valiant sir William Constable, seized on all their
Works, Ships, Ammunition, 500. Arms, many Barrels of Powder, Match, and other
train of Artillery, and it was verily believed, about an hundred pieces of
Ordnance in the ships, and on the Works, for the use of the Parliament.

About the 16th. An Ordinance of Parliament for taking the Solemn Covenant over
the whole Kingdom and Dominion of Wales.
of this instant February, 1643. an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, and instructions agreed upon by them, for the taking of the Solemn
League and Covenant, throughout the whole Kingdom, (which we have formerly
mentioned to have been solemnly taken by both Houses of Parliament, and in and
about the whole Cities of London and Westminster) and the Dominion of Wales,
was new Printed and published, together with a most emphaticall and patheticall
^xhortation, An Emphaticall Exhortation Printed therewith.
made by the Assembly of Divines (at the motion and desire of our most pious
and prudent Parliamentary Worthies) for the more willing and cheerful taking
thereof, and for the better and more full satisfaction of all such scruples as
might arise thereupon; which was ordered to be taken after this manner. The
order or manner of taking the solemn League or Covenant, as was prescribed by
the Parliament.
The minister was first to read the whole Covenant distinctly and audibly in
the Pulpit, and during the reading thereof the whole congregation to be
uncovered, and at the end of his reading thereof, all to take it standing,
lifting up their right hands bare, and then afterward to subscribe it
severally by writing their names (or their marks, to which their names were to
be added) in a book or parchment-role, where-into the Covenant was to be
inserted, purposely provided for that end, and to be kept as a record in the
parish. After all which, there was also printed a Catalogue of the names of all
such members of the House of Commons in Parliament, as had subscribed to, A
Catalogue of the names of the Members of the House of Commons that took the
Covenant at least, 228. at one time.
and taken the said Covenant, being then, 228. besides the Lords in the House
of Peers and diverse others of the Lord and Commons, who being employed about
the weighty affairs of the Commonwealth in remote parts of the Kingdom and so
could not subscribe with the rest. A most fair and sweet encouragement for all
other persons in the Kingdom, not only to subscribe, but to keep their
Covenant, having the Pattern and President of so many worthy, and pious
Patriotts, set before them in so glorious and religious an Action, which is not
only lawful, but (all things considered) exceeding expedient, and necessary
for all that wish well to true Religion, the King and Kingdom to join in, and
to be as a singular pledge of Gods mercy and goodness to all the three
Kingdoms.

About the aforesaid time also came certain Intelligence by Letters to the
Parliament, The proceedings of our brethren of Scotland about Newcastle.
of the proccedings of our loyal and loving brethren of Scotland, about
Newcastle, who (as it was credibly and constantly informed) had then gained a
Scence, and the maine Out-workes, with the loss of about 14. of their men;
whereof a Captain, a Lieutenant, and a Sergeant of Colonel Linseyes Regiment,
were slain. That General Lesleys Son, a brave and valiant young Gentleman,
had beaten 14. Troops of the Popish Army into the Town again, A Summons sent
to Newcastle, and the answer thereunto.
without the loss of a man, and took two of their men Prisoners; who
protested that the Marquess himself was (then) in the Town, and that the Lord
Widdrington, General King, and Sir Tho. Glemham, were there also: The
probability whereof will appear by an Answer returned from the Town to a
Summons which the Committee of both Kingdoms sent to the Town of Newcastle,
which was as follows.

The copy of the Summons sent by the Committee of both Kingdoms, to the Town
of Newcastle.
Right Worcester: and loving friends:
Our appearance here in this posture, through mis-informations and
misunderstandings, may occasion strange thoughts in you. If we had opportunity
of speech with you, (which we hereby desire, and offer to you) it is not
impossible, that as we hold out the same ends, viz. the preservation of
Religion, the Kings true honor and happiness, the public peace and liberty
of his dominions: so we might agree on the same way to promote them. If you
yield to this motion, you shall find us ready to do our parts therein: but if
worse counsel take place with you, and parley be rejected, although you will
be unjust (thereby) to your selves, yet we have reason to expect you should be
so just to us, as to acquit us of the guilt of those manifold inconveniences
and calamities which may be the fruits of those forcible ways, you will
thereby constrain is to. We desire your present Answer.

Subscribed the 3d. of Febr. 1643. By the Warrant and in the name of the
Committees, and Commissioners of both Kingdoms, By us,

Your friends, ARGILE, WILLIAM ARMINE.



The Answer of the Town of Newcastle to the Summons of the Committee of both
Kingdoms.
My Lord,
WE have received a Letter of such a nature from you, that we cannot give you
any answer to it more than this; That his Majesty's General being at this
instant in the Town, We conceive all the power of Government to be in him: But
were he not, you cannot sure, conceive us so ill read in these proceedings of
yours, as to Treat with you, for your satisfaction in these particulars you
write of; nor by any Treaty to betray the Trust reposed in us; or forfeit our
Allegiance to His Majesty: For whose Honor and preservation, together with
the Religion and Laws of this Kingdom, we intend to hazard our lives and
fortunes, and so we rest,

Your Servants, John Morley, Mayor. Nic. Cole, Tho. Liddle, Lionell Madison,
Alexander Davison, etc.

Subscribed by us, Febr. the 3d. 1643. in the names of the Common Council, and
the rest of the Inhabitants of the Town of Newcastle.

Shortly after these things the valiant Scots having gained (as was
forementioned) the Sc^nce and out works of the Town, The Scots proceedings
after the foresaid answer.
they rested not satisfied thus, but sent out a strong party and gained also
the keeles or Lighters and small boats between Stella and Newcastle and so
made a bridge three miles above Newcastle toward Newboln over Tyne, and shortly
after, their grand Brigade of the Scots army marched over to besiege Newcastle
on the South Side and also to cut off all supplies from his Majesty and the
Irish-rebells and rogues, his best beloved subjects. And thus was the
invincible Popish army of the North of England, beleagur'd in a small compass
and cut off from all manner of relief, where for a season, we will leave them,
till a farther and fitter occasion to make farther mention of their
proceedings, for this our Parliamentary Chronicles intentions and purposes.

And thus we see, by Gods good providence that the North was in a very fair
way of being totally regained to a right understanding of the state of things;
which will yet further appear more probable if we here also consider the
wonderful good success of the most noble and ever to be honored and renouned
Lord Fairfax, Sir William Constables most successful proceedings in the
North.
who had about this time enlarged his quarters from Hull 20. miles toward
Durham, and by a party of horse commanded by that valiant victorious and
religious Commander Sir William Constable, drove that rotten apostate Sir Hugh
Cholmley out of Scarbrough Town into the Castle, which caused such an
operation in the hearts of the inhabitants of Whitby, as that they were soon
and surely reduced and settled (as you already heard in part they were) to the
Parliaments side, and presently after seized on Sir Hughs great House and Fort
on the High-Clift, disarmed his garrison, and so kept it for the Lord Fairfax
who afterward sent 200. horse, the better to secure it. This most valourous
and virtuous Gentleman Sr. William Constable stayed not here but advanced
toward York and beat up one of the enemies quarters, near Malton within
twelve miles of York, who gave an alarm to their head quarters, where there
were 400. foot and 16. troops of horse all put into order to charge; but Sr.
William with twelve troops of horse most courageously charged them, A brave
victory obtained by Sir William Constable at York.
routed them, and took these prisoners following, viz. Lieut. Colonel
Washington, Major Gray, Capt. John Vavazer, Capt. Newsteed, Capt. Witnell,
Capt. Corsfield, Lieutenant Tuffni, three Lieutenants of horse, 5. Cornets, 3.
quarter masters, 3. Corporalls, 2. Trumpets, one minister (or hedge-priest)
175. foot, and 300 horse: and thus this noble Lord Fairfax, shortly after
became Master of the whole East Riding of Yorkshire.

The Kings Oxonian Counselors or rather ( Conventiclers and devouring
Cormorants, having had a deep design by that late conquered and quelled
bloody Byron, forementioned; namely, with his so great a strength, which was
also to be augmented in Cheshire by very many Irish-rebells, to be then shortly
landed at Milford Haven, and thus I say, with a very strong army of those
Irish-Rebells, Welsh Papists, and viperons Malignants, to have put a stop to
the Scots army in the North (but I say, A plot or design against our brethren
of Scotland most happily frustrated.
Byron was conquered by that most brave defeat, as you have already heard,
given him at the raising of the siege at Namptwich by those two famous
Commanders, Sir Thomas Fairfax and Sir William Brereton) Prince Robber also
with all the forces he could collect and make up, was to meet them at their
randevouz in the said County-Palatine of Chester. About twelve ships fraught
with Irish Rebels were to have been landed at Milford Haven, but most valiant
and courageous Capt. Swanley, having by Gods good providence put into the said
haven, Milford-haven won by brave Capt. Swanley.
was first possessed thereof before they came thither, and when they came, most
bravely beat them all off again from landing there, only a part of 2.
regiments landed afterward at Bewmorice, for whose safe conduct a regiment of
horse was sent from Prince Plunderer (who went in person toward Chester with
what forces could be spared to help to maintain the foresaid design, Prince
Robber helps on the design.
and there he sent out a most base and bloody warrant up and down that County,
to summon all that were able to come in unto them, to join with him in that
wicked design, and for those that refused, this was to be their punishment,
viz. To look for no mercy, but speedily to expect fire and sword. Whereby he
compelled many for fear to march with him into Shropshire) but that brave,
magnanimous, and active Commander Colonel Mitton, timely understanding thereof,
fell upon some of their quarters, and after a short skrimish without any
considerable loss to himself, Col. Mitton most bravely beats him
routed a whole regiment of them, took about 60. horse, two of Sr. Rich.
Fleetwoods sons, Commanders in that regiment, and other officers, 50.
foot-souldiers prisoners, an 100. arms: And thus partly, and especially, by
those two noble Commanders Sir Tho. Fairfax and Sir William Brereton; Prisoners
taken.
partly by Capt. Swanley and partly also by this defeat of brave Colonel
Mitton, this their great and wicked design was (by Gods great mercy) quite
broken in pieces, and came to naught. The County Palatine of Chester much aimed
at by the King.
And thus also was this poor County-Palatine of Chester (upon which the kings
eye was more fastened, to fix and augment strong forces there, for the greater
advancement of this and his other great designs, than on any one County in the
kingdom: Witness his first sending thither that Cow-stealer, the
unsuccessefull atheistical Lord Capell, who was soon beaten thence; Then
Sergeant Major Willis, surprised by Colonel Mitton; Then the bloody Lord
Byron, beaten as aforesaid; And after all these pilfering* Prince Robber
himself, (...), as you have heard by the said most valiant Colonel Mitton.
Thus was this County, at last, brought into a more quiet and stable condition,
ever praised and blessed be the Lord our good God for it.

About the 16. of this instant Feb. 1643. there was a conference between both
the Houses of Parliament, which was managed by the noble and truly pious Earl
of Manchester; the effect whereof was this. Care taken in Parliament for
settling of Church government.
That whereas there were diverse inconveniences and great disturbances, begun to
be brewing and already raised, and likely to grow much greater (if not timely
prevented) in the City of London by reason of many unhappy differences of
opinions in matters of Religion, by Anabaptists, Antinomians, and such like;
the honorable Peers did therefore desire that both Houses would join together
in sending to the Assembly of Divines, to expedite their care in settling of
Church Government, with as much speed as conveniently might be* and in the mean
time an Order was drawn up to be sent to the Lord Major of London, Care taken
about Preachers in London.
which was also read in the Churches; Wherein, it was desired that special
care might be taken that none did Preach in any Church, but such as the
Minister or the Pastor thereof, shall answer for their Doctrines delivered, if
justly questioned; of which therefore all Ministers especially were to be very
careful. A course marvelous fit to be put in execution, least if such Tares
take root it might cost more care and toil to pluck them up and root them out
(and thereby also endanger the pulling up of the good corn) which by a timely
prevention might be easily remedied and better Ordered.

About the 18. of this instant came certain Intelligence by Letters from
Northampton to London, that a partee of Horse was lately before sent out from
thence upon a design within three miles of Banbury, Northampton garrisons good
success.
where they had Intelligence that Captain Farmer (son to Sir Hutton Farmer, a
great Royalist) was quartered with his Troops; who coming suddenly into the
same Town, they took the said Captain and above 40. Captain Farmer taken
prisoner.
horse, diverse Commanders, Officers and common soldiers, with some Arms, and
brought them all safely into Northampton. Thus our hopes of prosperous success
(through Gods assistance) do still increase, there having scarcely one day
past (about this time of the year) for above a month together, wherein we
have not had comfortable tidings and certain relation of good service done by
the Parliaments forces at Northampton, A brief, but good and grateful note.
Warwicke-Castle, and other parts: Let God have all the glory even the Lord of
hosts, who only is the giver of all victories.

About the 20th of this instant came certain intelligence by letters from
Hull, The noble Lord Fairfax his brave victory about Hull.
That the noble and ever to be honored and loved Lord Fairfax, with a
sufficient party, issued out of Hull upon the enemies quarters routed 3.
Regiments of their horse, took 300. of them in the fight, above an 170
prisoners, slew 50 on the ground, and took diverse Captains and Commanders.

And that the most notorious Prince of Robbers (or as now the King has made
him, Pool Garrison took 3000. l. of Prince Robbers going to Waymouth.
the Duke of Cumberland or Plunderland, call him what you please) having got
together (among all his great and rich pillage and plunder) and sent about
3000. l. in gold and silver toward Waymouth, intending (as was conceived) to
pass it away by Sea, into his own Country; but the brave Garrison of Poole (I
call it a Garrison, but may indeed call and count it an Army, for its Valor
and Vigilance, it having equalled if not transcended some of our great bodies,
this last winter, in Martial exploits; having had private Intelligence
thereof, watched them narrowly, and at a fit opportunity fell upon the convoy
thereof near unto Dorchester, surprised them and all their Horse, Arms, and
Ammunition, and bravely took from them the said 3000. l. in gold and silver,
and carried all away with them to Pool: a brave and sudden unexpected
accommodation to Valiant Captain Bingham, to be employed for the use of his
Forces in the said Town.

About the 24. A most dangerous plot against Nottingham Town and Castle
discovered.
of this instant also came most certain information by Letters from Notingham
to London, of a most admirable and mavelous deliverance of the said Town and
Castle, from a most bloody plot, intended against it, by the Kings base and
bloody Cormorants; and also a very great Victory obtained by the Town and
Castle upon the said Enemies on the happy discovery thereof, which was thus
related.

Some Horses laden with sacks went from Newcastle toward Notingham, Cavaliers
in Women's apparel.
and about 30. Cavaliers or treache^ous Cormorants with them, some of them in
the habits of plain Country men, others of them like unto homely country-women,
in women's apparel, (see here the devilish audacity and craft of the sons of
darkness) who all with great confidence and undaunted audaciousnesse, passed
thus along as if they had been going to Nottingham Market; but coming to the
Court of Guard, they were examined, and made answer, That they had brought corn
to sell in the Market: But it pleased God that some of the Soldiers perceived
something to stick out in the supposed women's bosoms, which bred an occasion
of some mistrust; and the Captain of the Guard being there, and taking it into
consideration, Sacks of Corn turned into powder, pistols and match.
he caused the women to be laid hold on, and to be searched, and withal bad
the seeming Countrymen to shut out the corn, in a place which he had appointed
them, and promised to pay for it, which they could no ways avoid, but go they
must, though but with heavy hearts; in which mean time the women were
searched, who, in the search proved men, and every one of them provided of his
weapon, The cavalerian treacherous Metamorphosis discovered.
under their coats (which, it seems, was that which stuck out so) and the
pretended sacks of corn being emptied, were found to be powder, Pistols, and
Match. Hereupon these couzening Cormorants were further examined, but were very
unwilling to confess the Plot for all this, only they said they were sent as
Spies from Newark, but the prudent Governor (before whom they were now
brought) seriously examining the business, and being too old a bird to be
caught or couzend with such chafe, The Governor of Nottingham threats the
cavalerian cormorants the rack, to confess the plot.
took match and caused their fingers to be tied therewith, and told them what
they must trust to, except they would speedily discover the Plot. Hereupon they
fearing presently to be trust up, protested, they would make the Plot fully,
and faithfully, known unto them, that they were sorry they were so unfortunate
to go about so wicked a design, and confessed as follows. That in the night these
Cormorants, and ten more, The confession and discovery of the plot by the
enemies themselves.
being in all about 40. in number, should with their pistols and other weapons
have fallen upon the Court of guard on a sudden, and so put them all to the
sword, at which time a party of horse and foot should be ready to march into
the Town, and put all to the sword that stirred to make any the least
resistance, and thus to take all into their own hands, and they assured them
that the said strength of horse and foot would certainly be there that night.
Whereupon the most valiant and vigilant Governor being not a little joyful,
Preparation to encounter the enemy by night.
that it had thus graciously pleased the Lord to discover this plot, prepared
that night for the enemies coming, and had provided a strength to be ready at
the time appointed, who (just accordingly as 't was made known) came that
night, and being discovered by Nottingham forces, our men courageously issued
out and set upon them, speedily put them to the rout and retreat, took
prisoners between 2 and 300 of them, A brave victory obtained against the
enemy, beside the discovery and defeat of their plot.
and had they not wheeled about so soon; there could scarce have a man of them
escaped them; the rest fled away in great disorder, some swam over the river,
to save their lives for haste, others betook them to horse back, some to
hedges, to hide themselves for the time, and there were afterward about an 100.
found dead in the river, who it seems were in their hasty flight drowned; and
our men took above 300 Arms, and many Horse; besides the admirable and blessed
deliverance from this base Plot, and their barbarous intended cruelty therein.

And here, good Reader, I may very fitly (there not having fallen out any other
matter of great concernment, this month) cast Anchor, and give our Arc a
little rest in the harbor of this Mount-Ararat, A summary recital and
grateful review of all this Months Parliamentary mercies.
a little while to re-collect our serious thoughts and most grateful
recogitations and summary reperusalls of all the most excellent and eminent
mercies and rich Parliamentary-merchandizes of this months prosperous Voyage
through the boisterous and billowing Ocean of our Kingdoms sad intestine
bloody distractions and disturbances. As namely,

First, in reciting renowned Col. Massyes brave surprisall of Henry Talbot in
his Quarters, with the brave prizes and purchase obtained thereby.

In valiant and virtuous Sir John Meldrums, taking of the Isle of in Yorkshire.

The happy, prudent, and politic establishment of a Council of for the more
suit and secret managing of the most important affairs of all the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

The happy and timely discovery of the dangerous plot against Southampton.

The nullifying, and foolifying of the Oxonian Propositions for a Peace,
thereby to have retarded, and prejudiced the Parliaments proceedings; together
with the sequestring and selling away of Malignants goods, for the public use,
immediately thereupon settled and resolved on.

The many various and victorious defeates and performances of Fairfaix, Sir
William Constable in the North; and the rest of the Parliaments Forces in the
Western parts of the Kingdom; interception of dangerous Letters to the State,
and other successful enterprises.

The happy and holy resolution of our most famous Parliamentary Statists, in
confirming and expatiating the progress of the Solemn-League, Covenant,
throughout the whole Kingdom of England, and Dominions of Wales, to be taken
by all, of all sorts of people, in Cities, or Countries within their power and
jurisdiction.

In the singular good success yet further enlarged by the good North, by Sir
William Constable, at Sea, by Captain Swanley at Milford-Haven; by Colonel
Mitton, and the mighty preservation of Cheshire.

The pious and prudent care taken by our Religious Parliamentary Senators for
the regulating of the Government of the Church, and about Preachers in London.

And lastly, in the good success of our Parliamentary Forces in Northampton,
York, Pool, and the marveilous deliverance of Nottingham Town and Castle, from
that most desperate and deep design by the Royal Cormorants; together with
the brave Victory which God gave unto ours there, immediately upon the discovery
of that pestilent Plot.

All which religiously recollected, and wisely reviewed, will amount to thus
much, even a copious Cornucopia, of rare and fair Mercies of the Lord, still
continued, and enlarged to worthless, and wretched England, a scelerous and
very sinful Nation; yet, I say, all these precious particulars abundantly
declaring and clearing the truth of all herein intended; God's Ark over-topping
the worlds waves swelling.
namely, How our God has most graciously and gloriously caused this his dear
Darling, his holy Arc, his precious Cause (thus maintained by our ever blessed
Parliamentarie Worthies) to overtop, and safely rise, and ride above all the
worlds boisterous and swelling Waves, still struggling and striving to
overturne it. And therefore plentiful enough to cause us all to confess, with
holy Moses, Exodus 19. 4.
That we have all seen what the Lord has done to our Egyptian Malignants; and
how he has born us up with Eagles wings, and brought us so near unto
himself. And therefore, with the pious Prophet, most gratefully and graciously
to acknowledge; That all these Mercies come forth from the Lord of Host, Esaias
28. 29.
who is wonderful in Counsel, and most excellent in working wonders. And now
to proceed.

Thus having a little here made a stay, March. 1643.
and refreshed our Weather beaten Bark, and in some measure fitted it for this
next succeeding Months Voyage; I shall now cheerfully put forth again, and
lanch into the Maine. And first of all acquaint the Reader, that about the
beginning of this instant March, A return of Prayer.
(as a happy return of Prayer, on the last Month day of Humiliation) came
certain intelligence, Biddle-house taken by Sir Tho. Fairfax and valiant Col.
Ridgley.
that Bidle-house upon the edge of Staffordshire, and near Cheshire, was
taken, or rather, with discretion surrendered, to that most famous and faithful
Commander, Sir Thomas Fairefax, and that most valiant and loyal Patriot, Col.
Ridgeley; which house was of so great consequence, that by this means, all the
Moore-Landers are freed from the great annoyance of a vexatious Enemy, The
Prisoners and prizes taken
and in a condition to assist their neighbor Cheshire. In which foresaid
House, were also taken the Lord Brereton, (who was supposed to be taken before,
but it was a mere mistake) and with him 4 Colonels, 200 Common-Souldiers, 500
Arms, and great store of riches, Plate, Gold, and Silver.

Also that the Forces of our most renowned Lord General (whom His Excellency
the Lord Generals just praises.
we may very fitly Parallel with that famous old Roman Commander, Fabius,
Hanibals sore Antagonist; Of whom for his prudence, and providence, it was said
by Cicero, that famous Roman Orator, Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit ^om.
Grave Maurice Prince of Orange this wise Martial Maxim.
Or to that most renowned old Prince of Orange, Grave Maurice, who was never
rash in any attempt, or weighty enterprise he undertook; yet ever for the
greatest part most victorious) but like a grave and discreet General, still
pondered how he might win, and not lose, I mean, any of his Soldiers: For, he
never accounted that Commander valourous, who had not more care of his
Soldiers, than of his Towns, Forts, or Castles, which either he took, or
kept; but would, as near as might be, make both sure: So, I say, this our most
noble Lord General has all along, most prudently carried on all his great
designs with like wisdom and Martial moderation and discretion; and about
this time, his Forces about Alesbury and Newport-pannell performed a most
excellent piece of Service, under the command of renowned and active Colonel
Cromwell, and Colonel Craford, without the loss of any one man slain on ou^
side, Hilsey-house in Buckingham shire, taken.
at Hilsey-house, when they took Sir Arthur Denton, Colonel Smith, and diverse
other Gentlemen of quallity, together with an 100 Horse, and about 300
Soldiers, whereof there were about 150 Walloones and Frenchmen, such a pack of
bloody Villains, that the world hardly had the like, they having committed
many great Robberies in those parts; all which Walloones therefore and
Frenchmen had no quarter given them, but were put to the Sword, as they most
worthyly deserved.

And since the taking of this Hilsey-house, The Princes Troop surprised about
Banbury by Northampton Forces. Another return of Prayer
we were credibly informed, that the brave Garrison of Northampton went out
with a Party, and faced Banbury, and thereabout surprised all, or the greatest
part of the Princes Troop, and brought them safe to Northampton.

About the second also of this instant (as another rich return of Prayer, even
within two days after the last Monthly Fast Day) came certain Intelligence
by Letters out of Yorkshire to London, of a brave Victory obtained (through
the mercy of our good God) by that valiant Commander, Colonel Lambert, under
the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, Colonel Lamberts brave victory obtained at
Bradford.
in the West Riding of Yorkshire, not far from Bradford; where the Bradford
Garrison understanding, that Colonel Lambert advanced that way, to reduce that
Town to the Service of the Parliament, they presently sent intelligence of
this his resolution to York, as also of the weakness of this Colonels
condition: whereupon a commanded power of Horse and Foot (led by Colonel John
Bellasis, Governor of York) far exceeding Colonel Lamberts Forces (at least
three to one) in number, The unequality of their Forces.
was forthwith dispatched to releeve them. In brief, both parties faced each
other, not far from Bradford, and Colonel Lamberts Forces though less in
number, did exceed in valor (for, indeed, as reverend Master Ienkins, Pastor
of Christ-Church in London, sweetly said, Mr. Ienkins, Pastor of Christ-Church
in London, his excellent saying.
We have oftentimes known that God has had too many to fight his battles,
but never too few) and the encounter grew exceeding hot; and for 7 hours
space, the thundering disputation was fiercely continued; at length (by Gods
great mercy) Colonel Lambert perceived he had the better of his enemies; but
yet, his necessity was such, that for want of Powder, he knew not what to do;
for, none of his Soldiers had, at the most, above two charges left. Hereupon,
The great straights Colonel Lamberts Forces were put unto
a Council of War was suddenly called, and as suddenly it was agreed, that
before they would offer any pa^ley to the enemy, the Horse should charge once
more; which, in that desperate exigence, was performed with such undaunted
courage, and resolution of spirit that the Enemies Horse not able to withstand
the shock, A very furious fight.
began a little to give ground, which our Cavalry soon observing, they
followed the advantage, with so much impregnable courage, that they forced them
to a very disorderly retreat, and our Foot taking notice of the brave action
and advantage their Horse had gotten, The admirable courage of our horse and
foot
as valiantly charged the body of the enemies Infantry, who perceiving their
own Horse to abandon them, began to leave the Field, and swiftly to retire
toward York, even with what confused speed they possibly could. The enemies
fly.
The brave successful Colonel Lambert could not follow them in pursu^, by
reason of the great want of Powder, in which at that present he was. The
prisoners taken and the slain.


But he took Prisoners in the fight, Colonel Sir John Girlington, and diverse
other Officers in Arms, and persons of quality, and about an 100 common
Soldiers; Colonel Bellasies himself being shrewdly put to the switch and
Spur to escape; there were above an hundred slain in the place. And thus
this valiant Colonel Lambert after this defeat, and brave Victory so
fortunately achieved, presently entered into Bradford, and re-garrison'd it for
the use of the Parliament.

About the 5 or 6 of this instant March, 1643. came certain Intelligence, by
Letters out of Leicestshire, to London, that Colonel Hastings (that noble, or
rather, notable Thief) having intelligence, that according to the direction of
the Parliament, The Covenant taken in Leicester.
the National Covenant was taking throughout that County, and to that purpose,
that there were Summons of all the Clergymen, Churchwardens, and other
Officers, to come in to Leicester, to take the Covenant, whither accordingly
they came, for two or three days together, with much freeness and
cheerfulness; Col. Hastings molests their proceedings therein.
whereof, I say, Hastings having notice, he with 4 Troops, from
Bever-Worton-house, coursed about the Country, as far as Dunton, and
Litherworth, and took near upon an 100 of the Clerg^emen, and others, and
carried them Prisoners to a Town called Hinckley, intending to have carried
them to Ashby-de-la-Zouch, etc. using them very coursely, and threatening to
hang all them that should take the Parliaments Covenant; His outrages in the
Country.
nor were they content with this, but roaving up and down the Country, they
took away about 80, Kine, Oxen, and Horse from the poor Country people, and
one Master Warner, a godly Minister whom they much abused, threatening to hang
him. But the intelligence of these things coming to Leicestor, and they (most
justly) very ill resenting these outrages, Leicester Town hears thereof and
sets out against Hastings.
and cruelties, lost no time, but though all their horse were gone to Newark,
yet they resolved, every private man, to spare his own horse, and so sent away
presently, an 120 of the Foot Soldiers, and some 30 Troopers that lay at
Bagworth-house, to keep it from the enemy, under the command of Colonel Gray,
whom the Lord Gray had made Governor of Leicester.

These their Forces being upon their March toward Hinkley, They marched that
night suddenly to Hinkley against the enemy.
so well ordered the matter, that about eight of the clock that night, they
fell most valiantly on them in their quarters, undiscovered, took the Enemies
Scouts, and without much resistance took the outworks, and a piece of
Ordnance, and there performed their work also with so good success, that they
presently; entered the Town, God gives ours a brave victory and booty at the
Town of Hinkley.
killed one of the Enemies Captains, named Man-waring, and four or five more
of their Soldiers, wounded 9 or 10 of them very sorely, presently routed them
all, took two of their Lieutenants, one Quartermaster, one Ensign, 45
Prisoners, and 140 Horse, with their Arms, released all the Country men,
rescued all the Cattle, and restored them to the right owners, and so returned
home safe with this victory and booty, the next day being Shro^e-Teusday (as
then they called it.) None of Leicester men were slain in this defeat, only 4
wounded, whereof one was casually hurt by Colonel Gray, because he forgot
their Word in the fight, Our word and the Enemies word.
which was, God prosper us; the Enemies Word being, For the King. But that
which makes this exploit^the more remarkable was, that the Enemy was between 4
and 500 strong, as was credibly informed) and ours not above 200 at the most.
Our men went on most courageously in all the Service, and had they not been too
greedy of the prey, we had mere taken them all. And therefore desire to
ascribe all the honor to God alone.

And about the same time also came certain intelligence to London, Sir John
Stowell slain near Southampton.
that valiant and vigilant Colonel Norton had takes several prisoners in his
parts about Southampton, and slain diverse of the seulking enemies, among whom
Sir John Stowell was slain in the place.

About the 18th of this instant came yet farther intelligence by letters out of
Yorkshire to London, Another brave prize taken by Col. Lambert.
that, that brave and valiant commander Col: Lambert (since his late famous
victory at Bradford) hearing that a party were gathering against him to oppose
him, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, be drew out his forces to meet them, and
discovering the enemy near Kirkelesse consisting of about 11. troops of horse
of the Earl of Newcastles, as good as they could make up for the design: Col.
Lambert presently drew out a small party, which he sent upon the forlorn hope
to draw the enemy into a noose, Colonel Lambert his politic stratagem to
ensnare the Enemy.
who discovering only a small party of our men, they marched toward them.
Hereupon our men began to retreat, the enemy followed; In which interim, brave
Colonel Lambert having wisely carried the business, had plac^d a party on
each side of the enemy, so as they were surrounded ere they were aware.
Whereupon, with very little harm the valiant Colonel surprised and cooped them
up on three sides, and there being a river on the fourth side, they all became
his prisoners irresistibly, save only two or three who adventured to swim over
the river, who whether they were drowned or not was uncertain, for the river
was deep and dangerous; The noble Colonel took prisoners at this time, 4.
Lieut. Colonels and Sergeant Majors, 7. Captains, 11. Cornets, 300. soldiers
and other officers, with other purchase and prizes which the enemy had pillaged
in the Country; a sore pull from them, and a fair strengthening of us, blessed
be the Lord for it. And about the very same time we had certain knowledge that
Sir William Constable Sir Will. Constable takes Chester bridge and Stamford
bridge.
that most pious and prudent commander, and one Captain Carter had with a very
small and unconsiderable loss taken two bridges, in the East Riding of
Yorkshire, both of them very considerable places for their designs, the one
called Chester-bridge and the other was Stamford-bridge; with them they took
also diverse prisoners and three pieces of ordnance there.

Much also about the same time came credible information to London, that a
party of Colonel Waights horse from Burley-House in Col. Weight at Burley
House.
Rutlandshire, went out suddenly toward Beaver-castle, intelligence having
been given them of a troop of horse quartered a mile off from the castle.
Whereupon they with the best preparation they could make of sadle-horses and
others for dragoones (the most part of their garrison troupers, being then out
in the service at Newarke siege, with Sir John Meldrum) they fell on them in
their quarters, The prize taken.
took diverse of them prisoners, and then went nearer the castle took thence
20. fatt oxen and at least 200. fat sheep and brought them all away safely with
them to Burley-House.

And much about the foresaid time, we were for certain informed, at London,
that diverse ships at sea, full fraught with Irish-bloody-rebells bound for
Westchester, About a 1500. Irish rogues cast away in a storm at sea.
met with a great storm (by Gods justice and good providence) which so
violently tossed and shattered them, that at least a full regiment consisting of
1500. were cast away and drencht and drowned in the salt streams of the sea,
as they had destroyed others in the gory streams of their blood at land. And
about the same time it was informed most infallibly, that the noble garrisons
of Pool and Warham beat upon the then ignoble Weathercocke, A land storm also
destroyed them from Pool and Wareham garrisons.
the Lord Inchiquins regiment of Irish bloody Rascals in Dorsetshire with a
fierce land-storme, where they took diverse prisoners 2. pieces of ordnance,
killed very many of them, fired their magazine, and returned victoriously and
safely home again.

About the 10th of this Instant March, came information from Southampton, that
a party of Sir Ralph Hoptons horse came and faced that Town; Whereupon the
brave and valiant Governor thereof, Colonel Norton sent out some forces
against them, Col. Norton at Southampton.
who came forth and faced them also, whiles other some of his forces had placed
themselves in some advantageous ambuscadoes, and upon the engagement of the
rest in fight, came upon the reere of Hoptons forces, beat them soundly, took
about at least 80. of them prisoners, among whom were 2. Cornets and other
officers, whom they safely carried into Southampton.

And that most loyal and magnanimous commander, Sir Will. Belfore in Hampshire.
Sir William Belfore had performed much good service against the enemy, near
Basing-house in Hampshire, where he defeated a party of Basing forces which
sallyed out of the said House and fell upon his infantrie in their marching
that way; But Sir Williams horse wheeling about and coming in the rear of
them, killed 20. on the place, routed 200. horse and took many prisoners,
whereof some were men of quality. After which he advanced to Newbery and took
possession of the Town, which the enemies garrison (understanding of his
coming toward them) had quite quitted upon his approach thither; at which time
he was about 5000. strong in horse and foot.

And about the same time came certain intelligence from foreign parts (which
I here mention, as having reference to our present affairs in England) that on
the last Monthly fast day of Febr. CHARLES Prince Elector Palatine took the
Covenant in Holland.
last, 1643. which was also kept at Delph in Holland (the same day that ours
was in England) by the English Inhabitants and Merchants there residing; and
that the Prince Elector Palatine, CHARLES, subscribed the Solemine-League or
Covenant, entered into by the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and which had
been sent over and ordered by the Parliament to be taken by all the English in
all those Provinces; and that many also of the Court in Holland have done the
like; Also that the Swedes had about that time taken the King of Denmarkes
castle of Elsenburge, which guards the Sound on Norway side; and that they had
then also taken two Danish ships with 1200. of the king of Denmarkes soldiers.
And (which is of greatest concernment and most remarkable) that the Swedes were
then expediting an Embassy to the Parliament of England, The Swedes also
desire to associate with England against Rome.
wherein they desired (the first motion whereof we touched before) that they
might associate themselves with the kingdoms of England and Scotland for the
mutual defense of one another in point of the Protestant religion against the
Popish party, in any part of the world. Thus good Reader, we see still daily,
how the kingdom of Antichrist, like Saul's house, decays and decreases more
and more; and therefore how justly and joyfully we may and must expect the
House of David to increase, The House of Saul decreases and the House of David
increases.
flourish and prevail in all parts of the earth, and thereby our glorious
hopes more sweetly and firmly to be lifted up in expectation of the most
happy, holy Halcyon days of the Church of Christ in this last age of the
world: Amen, and Amen.

About the 12. of this instant came farther intelligence also out of
Yorkshire, That the most noble Lord Fairfax did still enlarge his quarters in
those parts; Sir William Constable still victorious.
and that his two most valiant Champions, Colonel Sir William Constable and
Colonel Lambert grew more and more prosperous and victorious: And in
particular, that Colonel Constable marching to York, quartered at a place
called Pocklington, and from thence to the enemies quarters, and faced their
Garrison at Tadcaster-Bridge, within ten miles of York, on the East side,
Tadcaster taken.
fell valiantly on the Enemies, and in short time took it; In which Ga^rison he
took 10 Captains, Lieutenants, and Commissioners of Array, besides other
Officers about 200 Soldiers, 300 Arms, 3 pieces of Ordnance, 14 Barrells of
powder, besides match and other good prizes.

Much about this time, The good effects of the Parliaments Declaration to
summon in delinquents from Oxford.
the Declaration of both Kingdoms, for the coming in of the Oxford partee by
the first of March, 1643. had a great influence upon many of the more
ingenuous, moderate, and discreet delinquents among them, so as diverse of note
and quality came in before, and some ^ince the time assigned, and very
willingly took the Solemn League and Covenant: Some of the most considerable of
whom, I have here thought fit to express by name, viz. The Earl of
Westmerland, the Earl of Monmouth, the Earl of Thanet, The names of reclaimed
Delinquents.
Sir Francis L^e, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Bedchamber, the Lord Paget,
who went to Warwick-Castle, the Earl of Carlisle, Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper,
Baronet, high Sheriff of Dorsetshire and Governor of Weymouth, Sir Edward
Deering, Sir John Evelin of Hampshire, Sir John Evelin of Surrey, Sir William
Acton, an Alderman of London, Mr. Roger Pits, Mr. Mason, Mr. Carpenter and many
other, most of them men of eminency and great Estates, who came to London and
took the Covenant; besides many who had submitted themselves to the Parliaments
Garrisons, at Northampton, Warwick and other places, too numerous to be here
particularized; and many more would fain have come away thence, had they not
taken such a strict course in all the Kings Quarters to retain and restrain
them, by setting up Gibbets at Oxford and threatening them most terribly with no
less than hanging if they Gallow^ set up at Oxford to deter men from falling
off from the Kings partee.
were taken in any such defection. Here also I conceive it not unfit (but in
much pertinent measure consonant to these our Parliamentary mercies) to make
mention of that most vile and base Athesticall defection of that most ignoble
and perjured Knight, Sir Richard Geenvile, which, I say, may justly come in as
no small mercy to us, in regard of the great design of the Parliament, Sir
Rich. Greenvile his base defection from us, a great mercy to us.
(about that time) against the enemies thereof, a mercy, I say, that he went
then away (since he was so rotten at the core, and had so false a heart to the
State and Parliament) so soon, when as he did us so little hurt, where as had
he stayed till our Forces had gone into the Field, and had been to join in
Battle with the Enemy, (as not long after they did) he might (especially being
then also in such an eminent place of power and trust in the Army) Sir
Faithless Fortescue fitly remembered here.
like his brother in iniquity, Sir Faithless Fortescue at Edgehill Battle, he
might, I say, have done us a far greater mischief in the fight, than he did by
this his base flight. But for this his so wicked and unworthy tergiversation,
he was followed with a most just reward; for upon the 15. of this instant
March, being Friday, according to an Order of the Council of War, 2 Gibbets
erected to Sir R. Greenviles eternal infamy.
there were two Gibbets erected, the one over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill in London, and the other in the Palace yard at Westminster, whereat
Proclamation was made by the Provost Marshall, and trumpeters of his
Excellencies Army, declaring Sir Richard Grinvile (that grand Apostate and
Ren^gado of England) a Traiter unto the Kingdom; which Proclamation was fixed
upon both the foresaid Gibbets, in writing, in the words following.

Whereas Richard Greenvile, A Copy of the Proclamation fixed on the gibbets
aforesaid.
has of late presented his Service unto the Parliament, and has been
entertained by the Parliament as a Colonel of a Regiment of Horse. And whereas
the said Greenvile contrary to his promise, engagement, and honor of a
Soldier, has basely, unworthily, and faithlesly deserted the said service,
and felloniously carried away the money, paid unto him in regard of the said
Service. These are to proclaim the said Richard Greenvile, Traitor, Rogue,
Villain and Schellum, not only incapable of military employment, but of all
acquaintance and conversation with men of honesty and honor: And this
Proclamation in the mean time to be nailed on the gallows, whilst it shall
please God to deliver the said Greenvile into the hands of justice, that he
himself may supply the room of this Proclamation.

Done this 15. of March 1643.
Much also about the same time, The Parliaments most godly care taken for the
pious institution of the Kings children at Saint Iameses.
by an Ordinance of Parliament there was again, farther Order taken (besides
what I have already mentioned, herein, before) for the more holy and happy
institution and education of his Majesty's two children at St. Jameses, where
several new Officers and Attendants were appointed to wait on the Duke of
Gloucester and the Princess Elizabeth, as namely, reverend, religious, and
learned Mr. Torshell to be Household Chaplain; and that truly pious and
gracious Gentleman Mr Humphries to be Mr. Comptroler, etc. and that those which
were Malignant, corrupt and Popishly affected, should be quite displaced and
removed thence, and the former Prelaticall Priests to be also utterly
casheired, and in their stead, reverend and truly pious and Orthodoxly learned
Mr. Stephen Marshall, Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, Mr. Caryll, Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick,
and Mr. William Spurstow were assigned to preach constantly by turns before
them, thus by Gods gracious assistance and special blessing to instill holy
and wholesome principles into their Princely hearts.

About the 16. of this instant came certain Intelligence by Letters Bredport
and much good prize taken by brave Capt. Thomas Pyne.
from Lime to London, that besides that former gallant exploit of the Garrison
of Lime in Dorsetshire, in taking of the Town of Bredport, and between an 120
and 140 horse, and good store of Arms, Ammunition, pillage, and many
prisoners; which exploit was performed by that much to be renowned and most
valiant and wise Commander Captain Thomas Pyne, Pynes of Lime in Dorsetshire,
Captain Tho. Pyne of Lime in Dorsetshire his most worthy praise.
whom fame has not in any thing so much injured, as that his name and honor
has been till now, retarded and kept under a cloud of silence; both in his
accompanying the several precedent atchieuments, of that brave and famous
Garrison, wherein he, under God, has had a special interest. This most Loyal
and active Commander, I say since the taking of Bredport issued out of Lyme
with a party of horse and dragoones, against the enemy in their garrison at
Burley-House, within seven miles of Lyme, Burleigh-house near Lime in
Dorsetshire, taken.
belonging to Count Arundell, a rand Papist, which House is very strongly
situated, with a fair moat about it, and 2. pieces of ordnance in it. Yet
notwithstanding, by assault, these valiant assailants entered the same, took
above 50 ^risoners (whom they carried to Lyme the rest escaped) the said two
pieces of ordnance also, and presently put a garrison of their own men into
it, of about 200 men to defend and maintane the same by means whereof they
compelled contribution from at least 11 adjacent parishes which before paid the
Kings Army, besides Bredport within a mile thereof.

Much also about the same time, namely, the midst of this instant March, An
extract out of the relation of the brave reducing and securing Pembrookeshire
to the Parliament, by that renowned Sea Commander, Cap. Swanley, written more
at large elsewhere by Cap. Will: Smith, Vice Admiral in the same Voyage.
1643. came certain information, by Letters out of Wales, and especially,
about the County of Pembroke, that, that most loyal, courageous, and
successful Captain, and Commander by Sea, pious Captain Swanley, with
certain good Ships arrived, by Gods good providence, in Milford-haven, on the
coasts of Wales, where at their arrival, they found at Anchor, in the Haven,
the Globe of Bristol, and a small Ship, which arrived there in Milford about 8
days before they came in, and had brought from Bristoll; Ammunition to
fortify the Harbor, both great Gunnes, Powder, Bullet, and other provisions,
and had landed them, where after some opposition by the Enemy against them, and
many shot exchanged on both sides, the Admiral with the joint consent of the
rest of the Commanders, built a Fort on the Southside of the said Harbor over
against the Pyll (where the Enemy was fortified on the North side of the
Harbor) and placed therein a Demy-Cannon, wherewith they played into the
Enemies Works, which proved a great encouragement un to many in the County
(when they heard of it) to adhere unto the well-affected party, who at that
time were very weak and inconsiderable.

This Fleet being thus safely settled in the Harbor, Colonel Laughorne, a
pious and singularly well-affected Gentleman of that County, together with the
Mayor of Pembrooke, Colonel Laughorne and the Mayor of Pembrook come aboard the
Leopard.
a very religious Gentleman also, came aboard the Leopard, and informed the
Admiral with the feeble condition, the well-affected party was in, in those
parts; as also of the strength, power, and insolency of the adverse party.
For, after the enemy had Fortified the Northside of the Harbor, they intended
also to have fortified the Southside within a day or two after, had not this
their arrival thus happily frustrated that design of the Enemies; and then
how difficult (if not impossible) the entrance into that Haven had been, any
one may judge.

The Earl of Carbery had voted (they mightily presuming on their strength, The
Earl of Carberies pride and menacing insolences.
and fearelesse of all opposition, the Haven being once so fortified) he would
plunder the Town of Pembrooke, and the houses of the Gentlemen, who had in any
measure adhered to the Parliaments Party, and that their persons should be put
to death by cruel tortures; and the Mayor of Pembrooke (they gave out) should
be put into a barrel of nails, and brought to Prikspill, and from the top of
a hill should be rolled down into the Sea. Which report so terrified the
Gentlemen of the County, that they fled from their houses, and hid themselves
in obscure places in disguises, and sent their wives and children to Tynby,
where this Atheistical Lord lay, humbly to supplicate his Mercy and
protection; Among whom there was a reverend aged Gentlewoman, the wife of one
Master Griffith White, A remarkable passage full of serious note and compassion.
who had in her house 8 Sons, and 8 Daughters, who were Virgins, and four
small Grandchildren, in all twenty in number, with diverse Servants both Male
and Female. This Gentlewoman pressing his Lordship to commiserate her sad
estate, in case her house should be plundered, desiring his protection; His
Lordship replied, he would grant her none; The Gentlewoman with tears in her
eyes desired his Lordship to look on her Children, who, in point of honor, he
stood engaged to protect, as also the Chastity of Matrons, and Virgins; the
which without his Lordships protection, she said, would undoubtedly be
violated, and her Family perish. To which his Atheistical Lordship replied,
with diverse reproaches, and some jests among, That it were better her Children
and Family should perish, than that the the King should want means to perfect
his designs; To which she said, his Majesty could not want, if he would be
graciously pleased to be content with what God, The inhumane carriage of the
Earl of Carbery toward a grave Gentlewoman.
and the Laws have provided: At which his Lordship flung out of the room,
leaving the Gentlewoman with tears in her eyes, and so she was feign to
depart to her house, full of grief and pensive thoughts. A passage of so
barbarous a deportment of a Lord to a grave Gentlewoman, that I believe,
History can scarce Parallel to have proceeded from any Heathen.

The lamentable condition of the well-affected, What strength the well-affected
Party in Pem: were able to raise to defend themselves.
being by the Admiral and Commanders discussed and disputed; It was demanded
of Colonel Laughorne, and the Mayor of Pembrooke, what Force the well-affected
party was able to raise to oppose his Lordship; It was by them replied, that
they could not raise above 40 Horse, and about 60 Foot: Then it was demanded,
in case there should be 200. Seamen landed, well armed, whether they would
join with them, and be active and resolute in their own defense against this
insolent Lord, otherwise, they must prepare to go away with the Fleet.

The Colonel and Mayor with the well-affected Gentry, The brave resolution of
the well-affected in Pembrookeshire.
like gallant men, who had rather dye, than outlive the honor and happiness
of their Country, resolved cheerfully and faithfully to put themselves under
the providence of the Almighty, and with the help of the Seamen, to affront the
Enemy, which was without delay put in execution, and speedily and undauntedly
fell upon the Garrison of the Enemies, in a strong hold called Stockpoole, the
Mannor-house of one Master Roger Lort, on which our great Guns having made a
breach, after 8 hours assault they took, with the loss of two of their men,
and many wounded on both sides. Then they fell on another Garrison of the
Enemies, called Treffloyne, within a mile of Tynby, The victorious beginnings
and progress of the noble Captain Swanley and his Company.
out of which Town the Earl of Carbery issued with about 200 Horse and Foot,
intending to have relieved the said Garrison, with whom he faced our Forces,
but at whom they let fly a Piece of Ordnance, whereat his Lordship wheeled
about with all his Forces, and swiftly ran into the Town. Our Forces
prosecuting their former assault upon the Garrison, took it, and therein 45
Horse, and 150 Arms, with the loss of two men more on our side, and six on
the Enemies. God having given them this good success, they retired to
Pembrooke, to refresh their men, and enable themselves for a more potent
design on the Enemy, intending to oppose the whole body of them, which
consisted of about at least 1200. horse and foot; but the Earl hearing of this
design, and though he had fortified Haverford-West which was their rendevouz,
and where most of his strength was placed, his Lordship like a valiant
Commander with 20 horse, A brave trick of a Welsh commander in chief.
some foot and 4 field pieces, ran away, telling the rest of the commanders
that he rode unto the adjacent Counties to raise more forces, and that he would
suddenly return.

Now when our men had refreshed themselves, they marched forth with six field
pieces mounted on their carriages, with wagons to convey their ammunition and
victuals, A strong Fort at the Pyll taken.
and now resolved first to fall on the Fort at the Pyll, which they bravely
assaulting both by land and by water, with their ordnance, they at last entered
the Fort by force, which the enemy perceiving cried quarter, which was granted
though they little deserved it, as who had formerly vowed that if they proved
conquerours, they would kill the dogs, and ravish the bitches, and drown the
whelps, (meaning us, and the inhabitants their adversaries,) most inhumane
language, only fit for the barbarous and blasphemous Imps of the Beast of
Rome. In this Fort we took 200. The prize taken in the fort
arms, 18. pieces of ordnance; 240. soldiers, 26. commanders, and two good
ships, the Globe of Bristol forementioned, wherein were twelve pieces of
ordnance and another ship called the Providence. This brave victory was only
the gift of God unto us, and the purchase of his own strong arm, to him alone
therefore be all the praise and glory; for in this fight and victory we lost
not a man of our side, either by sword or shot. When the enemy was routed some
of their soldiers fled to Haverford-West, and informed the commanders there of
the loss of the Fort, and that al their commanders and soldiers therein were
taken prisoners. Sir Henry Vaughan and the rest of his r^ut, their brave
deportment on the knowledge of our victory.
At which news (it was credibly reported) Sir Henry Vaughan with the rest of
the commanders began to rage, rav^, and swear like mad men; and as bears
robbed of their whelps, ran up and down the streets, crying out, beat up the
drums, gather our horse and foot together, for we will out this night and be
revenged on these Round headed Parliament dogs; and having with this bravado
drawn their forces into a body, being about 450.; Sir John Stepney, Sir John
Stepney an exquisit welsh-Survey: our.
the governor of the Town, like a prudent Surveyer, and provident over-seer,
went into the Churchyard, to see if he could discern our forces to approach
toward Haverford-West, and instantly about half a mile from the Town, he
discovered a heerd of black bullockes coming toward him in the field: Those
horned beasts all in a cluster, so amazed this wise knight and brave soldier,
A herd of black Bullocks, mistaken for an army of men.
that being afraid of his own shadow, his worship in his valor ran to the
head of their forces, and swore by Gods-wounds, the Round-headed dogs were
coming; at which report, they all marched out of the Town, and calling to
mind the late valiant example of their brave L. General Carberry, they wheeled
about and ran away. The mavelous pretty effects of the Welsh-mens fears.
The boys of the Town perceiving them to run, fell on the rear and took from
them 60, muskets; this disorder in the rear made those in the front believe
that the Roundheads indeed, were close at their heels, and the pitiful and
pannick fear thereof metamorphosed all our Cozen-Taffees into nimble
Mercuries, with winged speed enforcing every man to fly for his life: some
threw away their arms for h^st, and those that had the charge of the powder
flung it into the river, that so the Roundheads might make no use of it
against them; and in this manner and by this means was the Town of
Haverford-West surrendered unto us. That saying of wise King Solomon, Levit. 26.
17.
or rather of God himself, Solomon's teacher, Prove. 28. 1.
being here most truly verified. The wicked flies when no man pursues him;
whereas the righteous is as bold as a Lion. When the enemy fled out of this
Town they left behind them at least an 100. Haverford-west strangly taken
without looking for (as yet) or fighting for.
red coats which had never been worn: a good quantity of victuals and ten
pieces of ordnance all which argued they wanted nothing but a good conscience,
and a good cause to maintain.

Thence our forces marched (being plentifully replenished and furnished with
all necessaries) toward Tynby, whither they being come they presently summoned
the Town to be surrendered to them, Our forces marched toward Tynby and summon
it.
but the governor returned a negative answer; hereupon we advised and required
them to send out of the Town all the women and children, assuring them that
unless they did comply and that speedily, they would in discharge of their
duty, use their utmost endeavor to force them thereunto; In all which we
receiving no satisfaction from the Governor or Mayor of the Town, our men
fell to playing on the Town with their ordnance, both by sea, and by land,
both our seamen and landmen performing admirable good service, and the Town
also maintaining the assaults with brave resolution, Admirable resolution in
the assaulting of Tynby on both sides.
as ours more bravely assaulted them even to the face of death and danger.
Commissary Guine the Governor of the Town, showed himself indeed to be a man
of an undanted spirit, issuing out of the Town, and bringing up his small shot,
and making good their own ambuscadoes; Commissary Guyne, a stout soldier, but
a desperate enemy to Gods Cause.
but his hot valor exposed the Town to unavoydable misery, by his furious
vowing he would neither give nor take quarter; whereby he forced himself into
much danger, for leading on his men to face our small shot, who plied their
muskets so thick and nimbly, that his men forsook him, and himself received a
shot under his right pap, which enforced him to retreat, who was no sooner
entered the Town, The enemies Mr Gunner slain.
but the master Gunner thereof was also slain. In all which brave and resolute
fight, we must not omit to manifest the high praise of Gods providence toward
us; for our small shot having forced the enemy out of their ambuscadoes, The
rare providence of God over ou^ men.
pursued them close to the Town-gate, their gunner having laden a piece of
ordnance with case-shot, and watching for such an opportunity, having also
travised the gun said to those that stood by, Now you shall see me make a
slaughter of these Roundheads, Harm watch, harm catch.
at which word a small shot from our forces hit him on the head, after which he
never spoke word more, but dyed instantly; which fall of his so daunted the
enemy, both commanders and soldiers, that forthwith they cried out for
quarter, and so we by Gods mighty mercy and goodness obtained the Town of
Tynby, Tynby taken though of almost impregnable strengh. The prize taken.
which was held by the judgment of the most judicious, almost impregnable, it
being not to be entered but by single file. In this Town we took 3 or 400
prisoners, as many arms, 7 pieces of ordnance, all which were taken on
Saturday March the 9. 1643 and on the Lords day, March the 10. Carewcastle was
also surrendered unto ours; Carew Castle taken.
and therein also was happily consummated the total subduing of all the
malignant and insulting party in the whole County of Pembrooke. We took from
the Earl of Carbery and his accomplices in this action, A sum of the total
Victory over the Earl of Carbury.
4 castles, 53 pieces of ordnance, about 6 or 700 soldiers, as many arms, and
the whole County, I say, of Pembrooke subdued, who thereupon most unanimously
took the Covenant to stand to Gods cause for the King and Parliament. In all
which the Lord of hosts gave his servants the victory over his and their
enemies, and gives us all therein, just cause to put our confidence in him, and
in that comfortable ejaculation of holy David to exult and say. By this we know
that thou, Lord favourest us, in that thou have not suffered our enemies to
triumph over us. And now to proceed.

About the foresaid 16 or 17 of March also, came true information of more very
good success with our ships at Sea, about the Isle of Garnsey, performed and
obtained by Captain Jordan, who went out with a squadron of ships well manned (a
part of brave Capt. Jordanes good success at sea, chasing the Earl of
Marlbrough the kings admiral.
Captain Swanlyes fleet, before famously mentioned) to beat the Earl of
Malborough, the Admiral of the Kings fleet at Sea, who was gone to those parts
of Garnsey and Iersie, to get soldiers for the Kings Service, which yet he
could not effect, as he hoped; and at last, Captain Jordan understood that the
Earl was got to St. Mallows, whither he thereupon set sail, and came to Cape
Tryhull, whence he chased two Vessels, the bigger of them fleeting toward
Saint Mallows, Two ships taken at sea, with their prizes.
he took by the way, which had been a ship belonging to Lyme, and was bound for
Topsham, laden with Canvase cloth, wine, etc. of burden an 110 tuns, and
bearing 13 pieces of Ordnance: The other ship was chased by Captain Thomas, who
forced her on shore, and the next day got her off, being also laden with
Canvas, and belonging unto and bound for Topsham, of 36 tuns, and she being
shot between wind and water, they unladed her goods into their own Ships. Two
ships more and their prizes taken.
The next day plying the Cape aforesaid, they took two Barks more of Topsham,
laden with Woollen cloth, Iron, Train Oil, etc. bound for Saint Mallows, of 30
tun a piece, and of value able to defray the whole charg of the ships then in
company. But the Earl having got into Saint Mallows they could not reach him,
nor durst he stir forth all the time of their waiting for him there, and so
they missed of that hoped opportunity to have bickered with him.

About the 18th. of this instant came certain information by Letters from
Gloucester, that although the ammunition, intended for Gloucester could not
wholely be conveyed thither with safty, by reason of the great partee of the
Enemies thereabout, yet that Colonel Massey, Glocesters good condition.
that most famous Commander, having sent an express to the Earl of Denby, Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and Colonel Bear, That he was able by Gods assistance, to keep
the Town 6. months longer; yea, though he were closely besieged, and that
therefore, if any design or opportunity were offered them, he prayed they
would pursue it. Since which time neither of those brave Commanders had been
without action, and for confirmation thereof, besides their former services,
Col. Bears brave defeat given to the Earl of Northampton at Cambden.
it was particularly advertised by several Letters, That the valiant
Commander, Colonel Bear having intelligence of a Regiment of the Earl of
Northamptons, quartered at Cambden, in Gloucestershire, he drew forth a Party
of his Horse, who fell upon the Enemy there, routed the whole Regiment, took
80 Horse, about 10 Officers, whereof one was a Major, and 2 Captains, 2 Horse
Colors, and 5 Foot Ensigns, an 100 Prisoners, much Arms and Ammunition, and
pursued them as far as Burford in Oxfordshire, and afterward brought the
Prisoners, and Prize to Warwick-castle.

About the 20 th. Col. Massey still victorious.
of this instant, also we had certain intelligence by more Letters from
Gloucester, that, that valiant, faithful and renowned Gentlemen Colonel
Massey, whose actions render him truly Honorable (for Virtue is the badge of
Honor, as Vice is of Shame) had taken from the Enemy, about 8 Miles from
Gloucester, 35 Horse, and some prisoners, and returned back safely and
seasonably to Gloucester, having intelligence, that sir John Winter his Popish
neighbor, was at some places in the Forest of Deane, to raise, men by virtue
of the Commission of Array; whereupon he forthwith marched toward him, and most
bravely defeated his design, took about 60 Horse of his prisoners, and
victoriously returned home again. Thus most gallantly and vigilantly awing his
Enemies on every side.

And about the 22d. Our Brethren of Scotland pass over the River Tyne without
resistance.
of this instant March came Letters from the Army of our loyal Brethren of
Scotland, which were read in the Parliament, certifying, that they had then
passed over the River Tyne, at three several places without any opposition,
and shortly after, were possessed of Sunderland, about which time the Enemies
showed themselves upon a hill, within two miles of the Town, but soon
retreated without giving one stroke; and then the Enemies Forces of Durham and
Newcastle joining, and by the accession of new forces from Yorkshire, supposed
to be about 14000 Horse and Foot, they showed themselves again, in a body
within 3 miles of Sunderland, whereupon the Scots drew out, put themselves in
Battalia, both Armies standing so all day long, and lay in the field all night,
within half a mile, at most, of each other; the like they did, the next day,
and the next night after, but the Enemy having the advantage of ground,
Newcastles great loss of Soldiers lying in the field.
the Scots could not engage their Army without great disadvantage, and through
the unpassablenes of the hedges and ditches betwixt them. Within 3 or 4 days
after, in the morning, the Enemy retreated apace toward Durham, and the Scots
sent out a Party after them, who skirmished upon their Rear, and took some
of them Prisoners; by whom they received information, that Newcastles Forces
lying in the Field, in the clod Snowey weather, and in the skirmish had lost at
least, 800. Horse and men, killed, and run away. And within 3 or 4 days
after, the whole body of the Scots Army advanced against the Enemy toward
Durham, leaving about two Regiments at Sunderland, for the security of that
place.

About the 24th. of this instant, came certain information by Letters from
Lyme to London, Captain Tho. Pynes most brave defeat given to the Cormorants at
Colliton, near unto Lyme.
that Colonel Wear going from Lyme with a party of near upon 7 or 8 score
foot and Dragoons into Devon, at least, 14 miles from his Garrison, to join
with some well-affected persons that had invited him to come thither, and were
then in Arms, but unhappily set upon by the Enemy, who killed and surpised
most of them before the Colonel could get to them. Whereupon the Colonel
retreated to Lyme, and the Prisoners which the Enemy took, they carried to
Colliton, a Town within 4 miles of Lyme; and to express their joy for this
Victory, they presently fell a drinking and carousing in exessive manner.

But the vigilant and valiant Captain Pyne, Security is the bane of safety.
of whom we have made mention before, having got good intelligence thereof,
lost no time, but that very night went out of Lyme, with a party of Horse to
Colliton, being come thither, they first killd the Sentinels, then entered the
Town, and suddenly fell upon them in the night, and height of their secure
jollitie; The prisoners and prize taken.
where he took a Collonell, 2 or 3 Captains, and other Officers, released all
their own Prisoners, took above 60 common Soldiers, with diverse Horse and
Arms, and brought them all safe into Lyme. By which excellent exploit (all
things rightly reckoned and accounted) one would think they had little cause
to boast of that days good success, much less of a Victory.

And about the 26 of this instant March, my intelligence put me in mind here
to make mention of Gods admirable and most wise ordering and disposing of
things to the glory of his Name, joy of his children, and vexation of the base
Brats of Rome, and malignant Enemies of Reformation; Excellent Reformation of
the Cathedral at Westminster.
in the most rare and strange alteration of the face of things in the
Cathedral Church at Westminster. Namely, that whereas there was wont to be
heard, nothing almost but Roaring-Boyes, tooting and squeaking Organ-Pipes, and
the Cathedral Catches of Morley, and I know not what trash; now the
Popish-Altar is quite taken away, the bellowing Organs are demolisht, and
pulled down, the treble, or rather, trouble and base Singers, Chanters, or
inchanters, driven out; and instead thereof, there is now set up a most blessed
Oxthodox Preaching Ministry, Quantum mutatur ab illo.
even every morning throughout the Week, and every week through the whole
year a Sermon Preached, by most learned, grave, and godly Ministers, of
purpose appointed thereunto, and for the gaudy gilded Crucifixes, and rotten
table of dumb Idols, Popish Saints, Popish trumpery expelld; pious preaching
established.
and Pictures, set up, and placed, and painted thereabout, where that sinful
Singing was used; now a most sweet assembly, and thick throng of Gods pious
people, and well-affected, living teachable Saints is there constantly, and
most comfortably, every morning to be seen at the Sermons. O our God! what a
rich and rare alteration? what a strange change is this indeed?

And about the end of this instant March, we were credibly informed, that
Hopton, and his Mercenary, and compulsatory Confederates had swept the Western
parts pretty clean, to make up a mighty (supposed formidable) Army, as if
therewith he intended to pursue Gods people, like furious Pharaoh himself, to
the red Sea of ruin and destruction; or rather to make the Seas and Rivers red
with the blood of Gods Saints, and servants, which the land was loath to drink
in; An introduction to the subsequent famous victory at Alsford.
Inchiquine with his Hell-bred Irish, General Forth, foaming and fuming with
his witless Welsh, and the rest of the rabble of Outlandish, godless,
graceless, French, Walioones, etc. Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck, with the
Philistims, were all gathered together, that they might all perish together at
once, like Sisera and Iabin, Asshur is but Gods Rod to scourge his sinning
children.
at the brook of Kison; The Cause is one, and the effect shall be the same;
for the same God lives now, and for ever, and has only appointed them a time,
wherein to whip his Children for a while, for a day, to be scourged and
disturbed (but not destroyed) by them: For, says the Lord, Asshur is my Rod.
Psalm. 125. 3.
But this being once done, this rod shall be cast into the fire, and then,
neither their Idols, Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, Ave-Maries, Pater-nosters, or
any, or all their Masse-Sacrifices, shall be able to save them, but they shall
perish, and be packing to Rome, whence they most unhappily came among us.
Hoptons preparation. Sir William Wallers preparation.
For, as I say, Hopton was thus preparing his powers against God: So on the
other side, Sir William Waller, Sir William Belfore, and renowned Major Genesis
Brown, a rare Pair-royall of most famous, faithful, and magnanimous
Commanders, were also with a very considerable Army, within a little distance
of the multitude of their impious Adversaries, and as ready to receive them, as
they to give the Charge.

The head Quarter of the Enemy was at Winchester, Hoptons head-quarter was at
Winchester.
and upon the Downs, four miles from Winchester, where Hopton had raised some
Works, and a great part of his Army lay about in the Field. Sir William Waller
also, Sir William Wallers head-quarter.
Sir William Belfore, and Sergeant Major Brown, lay about Petersfield and
Trafford; and some parts of the Armies on both sides, faced each other, as they
lay at distance, and some slight Skimishes had first been with some of Hoptons
Horse, who were beaten by brave sir William Belfores horse, but Hoptons were
experienced hoppers, and runners too, and so saved themselves the better.

But now to come to the maine matter intended; A necessary preamble before the
Fight.
And yet before we come to speak exactly of the fight it self, I shall desire
the Reader to give me leave, with his patience, to premise these pertinent
antecedents thereof, very worthy pre-observation; namely, That about this time,
it was that, that sad accident fell out (by Gods most wise ordering and
disposing of things) of the raising of the Siege at Newarke, a business of
mighty importance, and great expectation on both sides, Oxfords blustering
Bravadoes about the raising of the Siege at Newarke.
especially on ours, in great hope; and as great fear on theirs: But, I say, it
pleasing the Lord thus to cross our hope of comforts, and to free them of
their fears, for the present, and therein to give them a seeming Victory
therein, and thereby to raise up their instant and insolent swelling thoughts
to an extreme pitch of Pride and Arrogance, insomuch, that their Mercurius
Aulicus, the Kings Liar in Chief, Mercurius Aulicus, the Kings Liar in chief.
at Oxford-Mint, must publish abroad to the World, a huge blustering
Declaration, of the great and glorious Victory obtained by Prince Robber, at
Newarke; not only in raising the Siege, but in an utter dissipation and
discomfiture of our whole Army, with many other Chymerian-additions.

The like credit also must be given to a farther fiction; namely, That the
Scots were also totally defeated by the Earl of Newcastle; whereas, in very
truth, the Lord had at that very time, given our loving Brethren of Scotland a
brave Victory against Newcastle, whereof more, (...)
in its due time; And a Letter, or Declaration was accordingly poasted from
Oxford, in all have, to Sir Ralph Hopton, which was, according to command,
openly read in the head of his Army; and for their better encouragement, it was
seriously affirmed, that now they had no considerable Enemy to encounter, but
only a small despicable handful of Roundheads, under the Command of Sir
William Waller, Notorious boasts and lies to cosen the poor seduced Soldiers.
which they said, were so inconsiderable, that half Sir Ralph Hoptons Army
would be easily able to give them an utter defeat; which being done, there
would remain nothing of difficulty, for the making up of a complete Conquest
of the whole Kingdom, save only to march victoriously to London, obtain
their Forts, level their works, and take the whole Plunder of that rich and
rebellious City, as a reward of their service.

Thus, A message sent to Sir Will. Waller not to engage himself in fight.
by this means, they having deluded the Common Soldiers throughout their
Army, and animated them to fight, (it being also at that time, when Sir William
Waller had received a message; which, no doubt, was as soon made known to his
Adversaries, not to engage his Forces in a fight for the present, except he
were assaulted by the Enemy, or found an apparent advantage;) and accordingly,
Hopton speedily prepared himself to the onset, with extraordinary celerity, A
true and exact relation of the famous fight, and most memorable victory,
obtained at Alsford, by renouned sir VV. Waller against sir R. Hopton.
and resolved violence, and vehemence.

Which Fight coming now to be handled, and mentioned in the next place, I
shall herein give the best and fullest relation thereof, that I could possibly
fix upon, which was penned by an actor, and eyewitness thereof, as it was
presented to the most worthy, and right Honorable Lord Mayor of London, and
the rest of the right Worshipful Comittee for the City Militia; which was as
follows.

May it please your Honor.
Upon Thursday, the 21 th. of this instant March, 1643. (our Brigade being
quartered at Midhurst) our Major General Brown, received Orders from Sir
William Waller, to advance toward Winchester, to a Town called Trafford, which
accordingly he did, with incredible speed, almost at an hours warning, and
that night arrived there, which we found to be a small Village, not above seven
or eight houses to quarter all our men, there we met with much hardship,
staying for Orders till the Lords day following; Upon Monday the 25. we marched
forwards to join with Sir William Wallers maine Body, which accordingly we
did, and that night were appointed to Quarter at Westmean, three miles distant
from the maine Body, where we found a Partee of the Enemies Horse, when our
Quarter Masters entered the Town, which occasioned some action, though not much
considerable, we only took a Quartermaster prisoner; The next day, which was
Tuesday, we lay still, only our Scouts brought in some Prisoners, 6 Troops
incountring with 16 of the Enemies, put them to flight, and brought away 3 of
them prisoners; The day following we discovered the Enemy, who took some few
of our men that were straggling from their Colors, and soon after appeared in
a great Body upon the hill, on the left hand of the Town, The Enemies plot to
surprise us at Church prevented.
intending (as some Prisoners confessed) to take us at Church, it being the
Fast day, but it pleased God, who foresaw the Plot, to prevent the danger,
directing us to keep the Fast, the Wednesday before, when we lay still at
Midhurst, so that we were provided to entertain them, and drew our men into a
Body near the Town; which done, Orders came to march away, which accordingly
we did, in the Forlorne-Hope, expecting the enemy every hour to fall upon us,
so that we were forced to make a stand, a mile or more from the Town in
extreme danger, till Sir William Wallers Forces came up from Eastmean to join
with us, then we marched along till we came near to Cheeriton, to a place,
called by some, Lamborough-field, where we quartered all night, the Enemy lying
upon Sutton-Common, and some part of them nearer to us, so near, that the
Sentinels could hear one another talk.

Upon Thursday morning, a commanded Partee was sent to view the Enemy, which
they did, and encountered with a Forlorne-hope of the Enemies, and behaved
themselves very bravely, so that day was spent in skirmishes, where much
gallantry, and true valor was showed by our Horse, especially two men, whose
names I do not well remember, A brave skirmish between us and the Enemy.
to the perpetual honor of the Actors, and great admiration of the
Spectators; by whose means a considerable Partee was once engaged, and the
Enemy came on with a great Body, which appearing, we discharged one Gun, which
did such execution in our sight, that they all fled.

This day a Council of War was called by both parties, both by us and the
Enemy, as since we are informed, and the engagement was such, A Council of War
called on both sides.
that of necessity they must give battle, or retreat with much dishonor, the
next morning we prepared for the Work, and having sought to God for
assistance, we did address our selves to the Service; in the first place, a
Forlorne-hope was drawn out of our Brigade, four Files out of a Company, led
on by Captain Tomson, a stout man, who were sent to take possession of a wood,
which lay on the right hand between us and the enemy, which they obtained with
ease in the Enemies sight; but such was their policy, that they foreseeing the
necessity of our gaining the wood, if ever we gave battle to them in that
place, planted their Drakes on the farther side of the Wood, which they
discharged upon our men so thick, that the place was not tenible, though the
greatest part of Musketeers, and some others, were drawn up to them, so that
they were forced to retreat in one hours space, The fight fiercely begun.
which gave great encouragement to the Enemy, who presently came on with their
maine body of horse, very powerfully, and were met as courageously, yet being
of the greater number (for our whole body was not then together) forced ours to
a disorderly retreat, at which time the day was doubtful, if not desperate,
The day at this time very doubtful.
our Foot all the while was engaged on the left wing, to drive the Enemy from
the hedges, where our men played their parts gallantly, and drove them from
hedge to hedge by degrees, till they had forced them to the top of the hill;
our Horse doing little for the space of an hour after their retreat, only
some Parties incountring with each other; at which time our Noble Major
General Brown, (who was ever known to be a valiant man, and must be looked
upon as a special instrument in the work,) Major Genesis Brown bravely charges
the Enemies horse.
drew off 100 men from the hedges, and in his own persons led them on to charge
the Horse, which they did most gladly, and courageously, and forced the enemies
horse to wheel about, whereupon our body of horse came on again, and that
very manfully, at which time they charged quite through the enemies body, and
put them to a rout, so that they were forced to retreat to the top of the hill,
where they first appeared, this was about two of the clock in the afternoon, at
which time they began to retreat, The Enemies put to the rout retreat.
and sent their carriages away, their body of foot followed after, the horse
and some few foot only, being left to face and to fight with us; at the last
it pleased God to raise up the spirits of some few, not above 300 and to put
such courage into them as to adventure out of the closings, to charge the maine
body upon the plain, which they did so resolutely, that they put them al to
flight, our horse pursued them 2 miles at the least, The Enemy put totally to
flight.
til the enemies horse overtook their own foot, who cried out (as the country
people said) Face them, face the^, once more face them; which they did, but to
small purpose; for our horse came up, and at the first charge they were all
routed again and fled, our horse pursuing them til they overtook the foot,
routed them likewise, and dispersed them several ways, some fled to Basing
some to Alton, and some to Winchester, and by the way they cried out the
Kingdoms lost, the Kingdoms lost, etc. and when they left Alsford where they
had long quartered, they set the town on fire at both ends, which doubtless
had burt to the ground, but that our men came in and put it out, there was only
fou^eor five houses burnt.

Thus it pleased God (who alone is the giver of all Victory) to vouchsafe us
not only a deliverance (which we should have owned as a mercy) but a glorious
conquest. As for the instruments, I dare not challenge any of neglect in this
days service, to speak the truth, both Horse and foot quit themselves bravely.

We took prisoners in the fight Sir Edward or Sir John Stowell, Prisoners
taken.
Major Gener: of a Brigade, a man of great estate: Col. Beard Colonel of a
Regiment of Horse, and of a Regiment of Foot, who was employed in Ireland:
Lieut. Col. Kingston, Captain Price, Capt. Chidleigh, Captain Iackeson; Cap.
Seamer, Ensign Cowper, Lieut. Kite, Ensign Mellis, Ensign Marsh, Ensign
Midley Cornet Constable, Cornet Ducket, John Morsey Physician; Together with
many other Captains and Commanders, besides common soldiers, the certain
number I know not; whereas we have not lost 40 men that we know of; one of our
men that was taken prisoner (but left behind by reason of his wounds) told me
himself, they had not taken 20 prisoners in all; and, I know not of 20 slain;
the most considerable loss on our part, is the Col. Tompson (a brave man) is
shot with a Drake, and his Leg is cut off, we are in great hopes of his
recovery; Major Boswell is desperately wounded, Cap. Melton is taken prisoner,
some few are wounded, but I hope not mortally, the certain number of the
slain I cannot report; those that speak most sparing say 500. they told us in
Alsford, that they fetched off cart-loads of dead men, and some they buried,
and some they carried with them, The Lo. John brother to the Duke of Lenox,
slain in this ^ight.
the Lord John the Duke of Richmonds brother is slain, and General Ruthen as
some informed (though the Malignants are loath to part with such a soldier, or
to hear of his death) but it is certain he escaped safe to Reading.

On Saturday morning I spoke with the Messenger, who came from Sir Will, Waller
to our Major General with Orders, for we stayed at Alsford, 14 miles behind
Sir William Waller, who affirmed that the Horse and Foot were totally routed,
not a body of 200 Foot to be found, of the great army, consisting in all of
12000. that we had taken seven pieces of Ordnance, many carriages, and that Sir
William would set upon Winchester immediately, being within a mile and a half
of it then, I trust in God he is by this time possessed of it. Many passages I am
forced to omit for brevities sake, both in and after the fight: we had both
the same word, God with us: but see what it is to dissemble with a God of
truth. Our next word was, Jesus help us; so he did: and then the last word
was, Glory be to God. Give me leave to end here, and let this day be ever in
our thoughts, and the word be ever in our mouths, a day wherein God was seen
in the high places of the field, a wise, mighty wonder-working God, there is
not an Atheist that can own thee, and not acknowledge it to be digitus Dei;
It Is God alone that has done the work, to him alone be all the praise; The
rest is this,

March 30. 1644. Gentlemen, I am your humble servant, E. A.
The Queens Regiment being there, and Prince Maurices forces; most of the Irish
neither giving nor taking quarter.



And thus have thou seen (good Reader) to Gods eternal glory, and thine and
all Englands unexpressible joy and comfort how the Lord has by his almighty
power and unsearchable rich grace and wisdom, done that for us which he
promised by the Prophet (take notice of this Scripture, Zach. 8, 19.
and the conclusion of that verse) Thus says the Lord of hosts: The fast of
the fourth Month, and the fast of the fifth Month etc. shall be to the house of
Judah, joy and gladness and cheerful feasts; Therefore (mark this) love the
Truth and Peace. Even so truly the Lord has most directly dealt with us; This
months Fast day repayed, within 2 or 3 days after, with a blessed Feast day.
For this very Months Fast Day being a day of most just and great sorrow and
humiliation for our sad loss at Newarke Siege, it pleased the Lord our good
God, that the very next and immediately ensuing Lord's Day proved a jubilee and
joyfull-day; that our then last Wednesdayes fast and Prayers were turned into a
feast of most joyful and gladsome praises of the Lord, in our so admirable and
so immediate repairation of that former loss, A return of Prayers.
by this so great and glorious a victory, which was on the Friday immediately
following Wednesday before. As if the Lord had seemed (be it spoken with holy
reverence) to be sorry for our sorrow, and to sympathize with our sadness, and
loath (as it were) to let us lie under the burden of our heaviness 2. or three
days together, lest our spirits might have been too much depressed with
grief and sorrow. O who can then forbear, but hereat break forth into Moses
his blessed ecstasy and rapture of joy, exultation, and admiration, of this our
Gods so free, so forward, and so inessable goodness, Exodus 15. 11.
and with him say and sing. O who is like unto thee, O Lord, our God, among all
gods, O who is like unto thee! Glorious in holiness, fearful in Praises,
doing Wonders. The enemy being thus put to flight, and enforced to leave the
field (as aforesaid) some part of their infantry with the carriages began to
march away a pace, their horse and the rest of their foot standing for some
small time, only facing of us, being left to shift for themselves as well as
they could* but whiles they stood thus facing of us, ours fell on again upon
them and routed both their horse and foot; The pursuit of the Victory.
and no sooner was the field cleared, but ours having intelligence that most of
the carryages were gone to Winchester, and that the Commanders that escaped
were fled to Basing-house, The Enemies fly to Winchester, Basting-house and
Andover, etc.
and likewise some horse and most of the infantry toward Andover, Sir William
Waller with a part of his Army marched in pursuit of the carriages toward
Winchester, Sir William Belfore pursued the infantry, and valiant Sir Arthur
Haslerigge the commanders. Who being thus closely pursued (before they came to
Winchester) the ordnance with little or no guard, How the Enemies Ordnance
escaped from being all taken.
struck through a by-lane and leaving Winchester, got to Basing and so to
Redding, it being in the night, and so the easier for them to escape, and the
harder for our forces to discover the way they went; yet we took some of their
carriages which were going to Andover; and pursuing the flying enemy to
Alsford, about 200. of the Irish received the terrestrial reward of their
bloody merits.

Now when Sir William Waller came to Winchester the Mayor Sir William Waller is
come to Winchester.
and Aldermen submitted (dissemblingly) to him, declaring themselves for the
King and Parliament, desiring to be preserved from violence and plunder which
was accordingly granted them, and notwithstanding a small and inconsiderable
number of the Kings forces, then in the Castle, our men having refreshed
themselves, it was not thought fit that so brave an army should spend, no, not
an hours time, about so poor and petulant a design as the reducing of that
castle only, but rather with all vigilance and valiancy to pursue the victory,
and fall on some other service of far greater importance; Gloucester fully
relieved with necessaries.
and though they were certain that Gloucester was in part relieved, yet they
deemed it would be a good piece of service to scour those coasts thereabout,
which Sir William Waller performed accordingly, and that most noble and loyal
hearted gentleman Sir Will. Belfore with a party of horse marched up as far as
Salisbury without any resistance.

In this fight the Kentish-men behaved themselves most bravely like their
ancient famous and unvanquisht predecessors, The Kentish men's brave behavior
in this fight.
even as if they had been again to struggle with the Norman Conqueror, for a
whole Kingdom, or their ancient Liberties, Laws and Privileges; and to their
lasting fame (during the whole fight) gave not a foot of ground to the proudest
enemy. The admirable valor also of the City Regiment.
And so also did the City Regiment, to their eternal renown and indelible
honor, like so many ancient Roman Conquerours; who of their voluntary accord
went upon the forlorne-hope, beat the enemy with impregnable courage, from the
hedges, which they had lined with store of musketeers, and gained the passage
to a wood which stood our forces in great stead (as was forementioned in the
description of the fight) and soon after by Gods providence turned the scale of
the days honor (which before hung on equally indifferent terms) and put the
enemy to the rout. And here before I conclude the relation of this famous
victory, Observations upon the Victory.
give me leave, good Reader, for thy fuller content and delight herein, to give
thee these few material observations thereon.

First, that the enemy made himself so sure of routing Sir Will. Waller, as
that their commanders had Commissions, ready signed, in their pockets, to raise
forces in Kent, a County which is (as I touched before) resolved to sacrifice it
self, to destroy those accursed Cormorants, and defend their ancient rights,
which William the Conqueror could not gain from them; and are therefore
resolved that Popish Queen Mary shall purchase them at a dear rate, if she
overcome them.

Secondly, that the word which the enemy had, and which the Parliament forces
had, was one and the very same; GOD WITH US. And God indeed the most righteous
Judge, showed who took his sacred name in vain, they or we; and for whom, he
graciously stood, by the success of the battle.

Thirdly, how mischievous and wicked the enemy is in his courses Alsford, but
that their Irish were put to the sword, they set the Town on fire in two or
three several places; but it was happily and seasonably quenched by the care
and industry of the Parliaments forces.

Fourthly, that they were so inhumane and cruel, that the poor

And lest our malignants might report (as indeed they did at London and else
where) Malignants lying mouths stopped, with the undeniable truths concerning
this Victory.
that Sir R. Hopton had soon so rallyed his forces the next day, both horse
and foot, that Sir William Waller and Sir William Belfore du^st not pursue him,
let the wise and impartial Reader judge the truth thereof by these subsequent
material occurrences, which, de facto, were thus.

Winchester the Mayor of the Town, the very next morning sent word to Sir
William Waller, that the gates of the City were open for him, and his coming
expected, there being only 100 in the castle whom an hundred of ours might
easily keep in.

Winchester was so possessed with fear of Sir Williams coming, that he
presently set open the prison doors, and set 80 prisoners at liberty (taken as
'twas supposed, at Rumsey) who came all to Sir William Waller.

Parliament side (whom they had taken in the fight) were by the enemies
suffered to escape and return to their colors.

Andover, they fled and left the Town to the Parliaments forces whither Sir
Will. Belfore coming, The Lady Hopton and a train of 200. taken by Sir Will.
Belfore together with money and plate.
he heard that the Lady Hopton (wife to Sir R. Hopton) was at or near Newbery,
he thereupon sent out a party and surprised her, and with her took 200
prisoners whereof 80 were horse and great quantities of Plate and money: yet
what plate, goods or Jewels did properly belong to her and her attendants was
permitted the next day, to be friendly conveyed to Oxford with her, she being
used with all respect and civility by Sir William Waller and Sir William
Belfore; so was not the Honorable Lady Fairfax used at Bradford in Yorkshire,
though afterward she was only and barely sent home.

Lady Hopton, so near Redding, put the garrison at Redding into such an
affright and terror that on the 3. of March the said enemy quitted that great
garrison Town, and the like in other garrisons also about Oxford and those
parts.

William Waller pursued the enemy to Salisbury, entered that Town, and took
there near upon 500 Arms, and made all the Cathedral men run for fear of
after-claps.

Seventhly, Whitchurch in D^rsetshire taken with Sir John Mills and a 100
Gentlemen more.
and lastly, that Sir William Waller rested not there Dorsetshire, and at a
Town called White-Church, took sir John Mills, and 100. Gentlemen more, who
were met there together to raise men for Hopton; Which party went presently
after to Waymouth for farther designs. And now false and foul mouthed
malignants judge, even ye your selves whether Hopton was not soundly beaten, to
suffer all this without least resistance, all this while and so long away?

One thing more of moment, The Isle of Wights memorable and commendable Act of
love to sir William Wallers army.
I may not here pretermit for the honor of the inhabitants of the Isle of
Wight, near Portsmouth, viz. That since this routing of Hoptons forces, as
aforesaid, they not only supplied Sir William Wallers army in a very large
manner with victuals (which was then very welcome) refusing to take one penny
of pay for the same; but farther of their own voluntary accord (as has been
since, credibly informed) raised 300 stout able men and sent them to Sir
William together with large expressions of their cheerfulness and
forwardness, farther to assist him, with their lives and fortunes, as their
should be an occasion offered.

Now the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration, this so happy success of their Forces under the Command of Sir
Will. Waller, and Sir William Belfore, as aforesaid, A day of public
thankesgiving ordered to be kept in all Churches for Gods great mercy in this
so famous victory.
against the Forces of the King, under the Command of Sir Ralph Hopton; In
acknowledgement of Gods singular great mercy herein; Ordered, that on April
the 14th, being the Lords day, Public Thanksgiving should be in all Churches
and Chapels on the Southside of Trent, within the power of the Parliament; and
that the like thanksgiving should be on the Northside of Trent, 14 days after,
which was to be the 28th of April, then next ensuing, which Order of
Parliament, for the Readers better content, and satisfaction, I have thought
fit, here to insert, as it was Printed and published by their Authority.

Die Lunae, 1 April, 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled; appointing a
Solemn day of Thanksgiving, etc.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, having certain information, of
the great mercy of our good God, in the happy success of the Forces of the
Parlioment, under the Command of Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belfore,
on Friday, March 29. 1644. Do in their acknowledgement of Gods mercy herein,
Order, That upon the Lords Day, which will be on the 14 of this instan- April,
Public Thanksgiving be given in all Churches and Chapels, on the Southside of
Trent, within the power of the Parliament, unto the Lord of Hosts, that gives
all Victory, for the seasonable, and extraordinary blessing, whereby the Army
under the Command of Sir Ralph Hopton was totally routed, with the loss of
very few of the Parliaments Forces: And all Ministers, in their respective
Churches and Chapels, are hereby directed and Commanded to give notice
thereof, and to Exhort and excite their people to acknowledge and improve this
great blessing in a Spiritual way, that as this mercy was bestowed in return
of our Prayers and Humiliation, upon the late and solemn Fast, the Wednesday
before this Victory: So, God may have the sole honor and glory of it, in our
praises and thanksgivings: and that the like thanksgiving shall be made on the
Northside of Trent, 14 days after, which will be on the 28 of this instant
April.

Ordered, that this Ordinance of public Thankesgiving be forthwith Printed,
and Published. And that the Printer of the House do bring in a convenient
number to the Members of the House, to be sent into the several Counties. Hen.
Elsynge. Cl. Parl. D. Com.

And here, A most grateful Summary recapitulation of all the Parliamentary
Mercies of this Month.
now, good Reader, let me desire thy godly and Christian patience and
permission, a little to make a pause, and cast Anchour again, at the end of
this Months happy voyage; briefly to revise and survey the precious
Merchandises, and happy Incoms of Gods goodness to our English Nation, in
protection of his Holy-Arke, the Parliaments Cause, So constantly and cruelly
molested, tossed and turmoyled by the swelling waves, and insolent surges of
wicked and ungodly Adversaries, which will be most conspicuously evident to all.

In the taking of Biddle-House in Staffordshire, by Sir Thomas Fairfax,
Ridgeley; Hilsey-house in Buckinghamshire, and the surprising of the Princes
Troop by Northampton Forces.

In Colonel Lamberts brave victory at Bradford, in Yorkshire; Hastings at
Hinchley, in Leicestershire, where, and when the Solemn Covenant was settling,
and taking in those parts; together with another most brave defeat, given by
the foresaid valiant Colonel Lambert, to Newcastles Forces; as also Sir
William Constables good success; and Colonel Waights also at Burleigh-house.

In the notable Sea-storme, wherein about 1500 Irish Rebels were Irish-Rascals
at Pool, and VVareham in Dorsetshire; together with the singular good success
of Colonel Norton against the enemies at Southampton.

Sir William Belfores good success against the enemy near Basing-house
Hampshire, The Prince Palatines taking of our Covenant in Holland; and the
whole Kingdom of Sweathlands voluntary Message, and desire to enter into Amity
and Confederacy with our Parliament against the Adversaries of the true
Protestant Religion.

Sir William Constables victorious taking of Tadcaster in Yorkshire;
Parliaments Declaration for calling in Delinquents from Oxford; and how God
turned that wicked Apostasy of Greenvile into a mercy unto us; Together with
the pious care of the Parliament, for the godly institution of the Kings
Children at S. Iameses; and the singular good success of the Parliaments
Forces, at Bredport, and Burley-house near Lyme.

The most victorious proceedings, and magnanimous atchivements Parliaments
Forces in South Wales, by renowned Captain Swanley, who most happily
prevented much-intended evil there, and reduted the whole County of Pembrooke
to the obedience of the Parliament.

The yet farther good success of the Parliaments side by Sea, in Jordanes
chasing the Earl of Marlebrough, the Kings Admiral, from his intended
Designs, and winning diverse Ships, and valuable Prizes from them; Together
with Gloucesters good posture, and condition; And Colonel Bears and Colonel
Masseyes victorious achivements over the Enemies.

Brethren of Scotlands safe passage over the River Tyne, without resistance,
and the fear and terror of the Lord put into the Enemies hearts, that they
durst not set upon our brethren, but being enforced to wait on the Scottish
Forces day and night in the Fields, lost many hundreds of their Army, to the
great weakening thereof, and enforcing of them to a hasty retreat to Durham.

Collyton, near Lyme, by valiant Captain Pyne; and the excellent reformation
of the Cathedral at Westminster.

Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belfore, at Alsford in Hampshire,
against Hopton, and his formidable Forces, who had even already swallowed us up
in their deep hopes and greedy expectations; but, wherein, God admirably
frustrated their high-built-hopes, and dashed in pieces their deepest designs.

In just and serious Contemplation, and Consideration, then of all those
precious premises, who can deny, but that he has most evidently and undenyably
seen, God's Ark over-topping the Worlds Waves swelling.
in this Months most prosperous and successful Voyage, God's Ark
Over-topping the worlds waves swelling, and although the outrageous waves of
wicked men, Atheists, Papists, and perverse Malignants, gave the Arc
(especially in this Alsfords bickering) many sore brushes against its sacred
sides to overturne it; Psalm. 93. 3, 4.
So that we might say, with holy David. The floods were lifted up, O Lord, the
floods did lift up their voice, (as in those Oxoniensia Sesquipedalia verba)
the floods did lift up there waves: But the Lord was mightier than the noise of
their many waters; yea, than all the mighty waves of the Sea. And therefore let
us all with most cheerful hearts and voices, with that sacred, sugered Singer
of Israel, aforesaid, in holy exultation, and gracious gratification, Say, and
Sing. Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, and let all those that
hate him, Psalm. 68. 1, 2, 3
flee before him. As smoke is driven away, so drive thou them away, O God: as
wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of the
Lord. But let thy righteous ones still be glad and rejoice; yea let them
exceedingly r^j^yce in thy Salvation. And now to proceed.

ANd here now to hoyse up our sails again, April. 1644.
and begin the next Months Voyage; see what singular and sovereign good fruit
we are all ready fraught with (in the very first setting forth) to the farther
praise and glory of God (a work most pleasing to heaven, and all true holv and
heavenly minded Saints) namely, how it pleased the Lord to put into the hearts
of our most pious Patriots and precious Parliamentary Worthies, A most
excellent Ordinance of Parliament for the better sanctifying of the Lords day.
the care of the more holy and strict sanctification of the Lords Day, about
the beginning of this month of April to pass and publish a most excellent
Ordinance of Parliament, wherein were many sweet, holy, and wholesome Orders and
Penalties agreed on, and confirmed, to be put in exact excution, and inflicted
upon all manner of Offenders against the same: And among them this one clause
was also added. That the Ordinance formerly made, for the burning of all books
of giving Liberty for profane pastimes and Lawful recreations, forsooth, (as
our impious Pontificians wickedly termed their wickedly termed their
Bacchanalian sports) set out by the Arch-Prelate of Canterburies license and
allowance, A fair gale of wind to carry on our floating Arc in the voyage.
should all be put in execution throughout the whole Kingdom, under the
Parliaments power and Authority. And was not here a blessed blast and fair
gaile of wind, breathed out from heaven it self, upon this Ark of God, to
carry it on successefully in this Months troublesome Voyage, through the
swelling Seas of this so sorely distracted and distressed Kingdom?

And about the 2 of this instant April, came certain Intelligence by Letters
out of Sir John Gell that famous and commander gives the enemy a brave defeat
at Munkbridg.
Derbyshire to London; That, that brave, active and faithful Commander in
Arms, Sir John Gell, after the raising of the Siege at Newarke, had such a
Vigilant eye upon the Enemy, that he sent forth a partee which fell upon one
of their quarters, at a place called Munk-bridge upon Dove-river, not many
miles from Derby, where they killed 22 on the place, routed the rest and drove
diverse men and horse, into the said River, where they were drowned; took an 140
horse, and 80 prisoners.

Much also about the same time, came credible information by Letters out of
Yorkshire to London, that Colonel Bellasis, Governor of York, marched out
thence, toward Bradford, where his Victorious Antagonist, brave Colonel
Lambert, lay with his Regiment, which, Bellasis intended and hoped to have an
opportunity to set upon and surprise. Abrave defeat given again to Colonel
Bellas^s by Victorious Colonel Lambert.
But the Vigilant Colonel having timely intelligence of his coming, sallyed
out of the Town to meet the Enemy; after a little facing one another, Colonel
Lambert warily perceiving that the Enemy were too numerous a partee for him to
encounter with, thought it not safe to advance beyond his Works, whereunto he
discreetly retreated, and there maintained the fight very valiantly, and beat
off the assailants with their loss, having killed and wounded so many that the
Enemy was forced to a hasty retreat, which the Valiant Colonel soon perceiving,
pursued them therein, at least 6 miles, in which Action Colonel Lambert took
200 horse and furniture, and a 100 Foot, and took Colonel Bagshaw, a notorious
Lancashire Papist, 8 Captains and other Officers and Commanders.

About the 8th. of this instant, we had certain Information by Letters from
Gloucester to London, that the supply of powder and other Military Ammunition
and Provision, How the Ammunition for Gloucester was conveyed thither from
Warwick.
which had long lain about Warwick, expecting an opportunity to be conveyed to
Gloucester to Colonel Massey, was now at last come safely thither, and it is
worthy the observation, in what manner it was effected, which in brief was
thus. It was sent by parcells at 3 several times; the first time, several
barrels of Powder, Match, Flax, Brimstone, and some quantity of Money, were
sent by honest Carriers, with their pack-horses, about 14 in number; which were
conveyed with a guard of 60 Horse: A strange mistake by night both by the Enemy
and our Forces, yet the Ammunition got safe to Gloucester.
In the night time the Forlorn Hope (as they past along) espied a fire in
several places in a small compass, as they conceited, which (out of sudden
fear) they took to be the Enemy; The Enemy also espied the same fire, and
conceived that the Parliaments Forces were there. The Parliaments Forces upon
their fear, wheeled about quite out of the way: the Enemy by reason of their
fear, hastily retreated from them; but the honest Carriers (not knowing, or
once dreaming, but that the convoy of the Parliaments Forces was before them)
drove on their Horses till they came to one of Colonel Masseys outmost
Garrisons, where the Ammnition was joyfully received, and presently convoyed
into Gloucester; but the convoy turned to Warwick with (only) hopes (which
blessed be God afterward proved true) that the Ammunition came safely to
Gloucester. The second time also all that was sent came safely to them, without
danger or disturbance. The third time, when all that was appointed for
Gloucester was sent away, was also most safely conveyed by Colonel Bear, who
went with his Valiant Troops without fear of the fiercest Enemy; who now had
need look about them that they be not frighted with a worse fear than an
Ignis fatuus, Gloucester greatly enabled to oppose the adversaries by the safe
coveyance of the Ammunition to it.
for now Gloucester was hereby enabled not onley to be most secure within it
self, but also to offend, and greatly to disturb their pernicious neighbors:
For since this, the Country (as 'twas credibly reported) came in unto Colonel
Massey very much, and deserted Mr Dutton and the rest of the Commissioners of
Array, in those parts, and took the Covenant to serve the King and Parliament.

About the 10. also, of this instant April, came certain intelligence by
letters from several persons of quality and note in the London brigade dated
from a Town called Wickham within a mile of Waltham in Hampshire, that on the
6. of April 1644. Major Genesis Brown that brave, famous and victorious London
Commander, in his march from Southampton toward Waram, had intelligence that
Colonel Whitehead being set down before Waltham house aforesaid with about an
100 men, Waltham house taken by Col. Whitehead with the assistance of the
London Brigade.
there being also the like number within the said House to keep and maintain
it; who hearing that the London Brigade passed by that way, he sent unto Major
General Brown to desire his aid in taking thereof with the quicker dispatch:
Whereupon the London Brigade marched toward the said House and planted their
Ordnance against it; but upon the valiant Majors drawing up his men to make an
assault, Propositions were sent forth from those in the House to the Major
General, which at last were assented unto, Propositions to surrender the House
yielded unto.
being to this effect. That the commanders and officers then in the House,
might pass away with their horses and their swords by their sides, and the
common-souldiers only with a rod or staff in their hands. Which articles were
accordingly performed on both sides, the enemies leaving behind them all their
arms and ammunition and good store of provision and rich plunder, all which
was divided among the soldiers to their great refreshment and encouragement.
After which the brave London Brigade marched away, God honored the London
Brigade with Victory, both going forth and coming home.
leaving the House to Colonel Whitehead to demolish and pull it down, if he
conceived it requisite or convenient. And thus it pleased God to honor this
London Brigade with this other victory, making them successful and victorious
both in their going forth, and in their coming home. To God alone be all the
praise and glory thereof.

And about the foresaid time also, we had credible information by letters out
of Yorkshire to London, that that noble Son, Sir Thomas Fairfax was joined
with his most renowned Father, the ever to be honored Lord Fairfax, The Forces
of Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the Lord Fairfax his Father, conjoined together.
and that they jointly were full 2500. foot and 4000. horse, a most gallant
power, and like to make a most notable diversion of Newcastles army. And that
about the same time great store of Corn and other provisions of all sorts were
sent from Hull and other places to our brethren the Scots army; The effects of
which happy and honorable Union of this famous fathers and sons forces, we
shall have occasion to make mention of in its proper ensuing place. In which
interim we were credibly informed that the most noble Lord Fairfaxes forces had
taken Cawood-castle, Cawood Castle and Axholm Island taken.
near York, belonging to the Archbishop of that Sea, with diverse of the
Marquess of Newcastles forces, and much arms and ammunition therein; and they
had again possessed themselves of the Isle of Axholme, with an 160 horse and 80
foot therein, besides much arms and ammunition.

About the 12. also, of this instant April, came certain intelligence out of
Wales of the happily continued and brave exploits and singular good service of
that most worthy and valiant Patriot and Sea-commander, More of Captain
Swanleys good Service in South Wales.
Captain Swanley which was confirmed by letters, sent to noble Sir William
Brereton, which letters made mention of all Pembrookeshire, Carnarvanshire and
Mountgomery, all these 3. Counties to be (by Gods special blessing on his
brave endeavors there) joined in an association for the King and Parliament,
and that they had taken all the chief Towns and castles of those Counties, and
in them the number of 49 pieces of ordnance; And that if the Lord vouchsafe
them a good preaching ministry, Want of pious preachers in Wales a great
hindrance of their reducing to the Parliament.
of Pastors after his own heart, it is very probable, that those old (now
brutish) Britains, may become pious Protestants; for they begin now, to be
very much discontented at the coming over of so many of the blood-thirsty
Irish rebels.

Much also about this foresaid time, came certain information out of the
Eastern-parts of the Kingdom, that the affairs of those parts, and especially
about Lincolnshire, went on very prosperously, by Gods blessing on the forces
of that most noble and pious Patriot and successful Commander in chief, the
right honorable Earl of Manchester who had (under the command of valiant
Colonel King regained and repossessed themselves of those Towns which the
enemy had lately before taken, Crowland regained by the Earl of Manchesters
Forces under the command of Valiant Col. King.
and particularly, Crowland alias Croyland, a most Malignant Town, but a place
of very great consequence, which was surrendered to the said valiant Colonel
King. The articles agreed on, between the said Colonel and Captain Styles (a
pestilent Malignant, and of the right Canterbury-cut, Commander of the forces
in the Town) were; That the soldiers in the Town should have quarter for
their lives; should march out with their swords, Articles of agreement for
delivering up the Town.
but leave all the arms and horses in the Town unto the Colonel, which were
accordingly performed, and no violence offered them by any of our forces;
notwithstanding their most perfidious dealing with ours, so lately at Newark.
There were taken in the Town, 80 horse and 300 arms.

About the 16. of this instant April, 1644. The learned, grave, and pious
Gilbertus Voetius, Hollands honorable attestation of famous Mr. William Prynne
his learned Labors in the Parliaments Vindication.
professor of Vtrick, one of the united Netherland Provinces, declared his
judicious and learned testimony of that most famous, and ever to be most justly
honored Philopatriae, Mr William Prynnes most elaborate Book entitled, The
Sovereign Power of Parliaments, in four Parts etc. Which testimony he sent in
his Letter to Mr Walter Strickland ( the Parliaments Agent in the Netherlands)
dated Vltrajecti, Non. Feb. 1644. In these words. Accepi nuperrime commodato
librum Gulielmi Prinne tam din mihi desideratum; et Rations omnes cum
responsionibus, tam solid et erudite pro Parliamentis, contra adversarios
instruct as atque explicatas deprebendi, vt non videam quid ultra desiderari
potest. Debebat tractatus ille latin and Gallice exstare, vt Reformatis
Theologis ac Politicis in Europa legi potest. The sense and substance of which
honorable Attestation is this in English. That he did highly esteem of the
long desired labors of Mr. William Prynne, with his solid and learned
arguments in defense of the Parliament against the common adversaries thereof,
and held it very fit, that the said Books, containing four parts, should be
translated into the Latin and French tongues, that so they might be read of all
the reformed Divines and Statesmen in Europe. This passage of Hollands
honorable Attestation of Mr. Prynnes Book, a Parliamentary mercy.
This passage I have here most deservedly added, as a Parliamentary-Mercy of
the Lord, in thus raising this faithful and heroick-hearted Patriot from his
(once) being, as it were buried alive in the grave of a most unjust and
barbarous foreign Perpetual Banishment, thus to vindicate the most
honorable reputation of our most renowned English Parliaments.

About the 18. of this instant, out most pious, prudent, and provident
Parliamentary Statists, taking into serious and deliberate consideration, the
good affection which the Swedes bear to this Kingdom, which they have
several ways expressed to this our present Parliament; they therefore held it
very fit, that fair correspondencie should be continued betwixt them and us;
Fair correspondency between the Swedes and our Kingdom and Parliament.
and thereupon agreed on an Ordinance, with the consent of the Committees of
both Kingdoms, to send, with their Agents, to the Sweeds, to declare their
reciprocal amity, and mutual affection to them: As likewise into Zeland, and
other the united Provinces, who had likewise declared their good affection to
the proceedings of the Parliament, and have endeavored to prevent the bringing
over of Arms and Ammunition into this Kingdom to be employed against them.
The like also with the united Provinces.


And about the 19 of this instant, came certain intelligence to the
Parliament, by Letters from the most noble and renowned L. Fairfax, that most
famous, The most famous and admirable victory obtained by the Right Honorable
Lord Fairfax, at Selby, in Yorkshire.
faithful, and never sufficiently honored, pious Patriot of his Country;
intimating the admirable good success, wherewith it pleased the Lord God of
Hosts to Crown him, since he, and his most magnanimious and virtuous Son,
Sir Thomas Fairfax, joined their Forces together; and especially touching that
famous and admirable Victory which they obtained at Selby, in Yorkshire; For
the Readers better satisfaction wherein, and the fairer and cleerer
Demonstration of the very truth whereof, I have here thought fit to give thee
the Copy of the said Letter, verbatim, as it was by Order and Authority of
Parliament, Printed and published. Which was as follows.

A Letter sent from the Right Honorable, the Lord Fairfax, to the Committee of
both Kingdoms: concerning the great Victory, lately obtained (by Gods
blessing) at Selby in Yorkshire.
My Lords,
ACcording to the Orders sent to me and my Son from your Lordships, we have
now joined our Forces together; and though the Enemy held all the passages from
the East Riding to the West, and by that means intercepted diverse of our
Letters, and thereby became acquainted with our appointments, and so
endeavored to prevent them which forced me to decline Selby, and make a
passage over the River, ten miles below it, in Marshland, where my Men and
Carriages being passed with some difficulty, on Sunday and Monday last, I
instantly marched with the whole Army, consisting of two thousand Horse and
Dragoones, and two thousand Foot, or thereabouts, to Ferry-Bridge, and so to
Selby, where Colonel John Bellasyss (commanding in chief in Yorkshire) then
lay, with an Army of fifteen hundred Horse, and 1800 Foot, as themselves
confessed, though reports made it much more numerous.

Upon Wednesday, our Forlorn-hope of Horse beat in a partee of the Enemies
Horse, and followed them into the Town, taking diverse of them prisoners, and
the day being far spent, I quartered the Army within a mile of Selby that
night, and drew them out again early the next morning, and then with the Foot
in three Divisions, one led up by my self, a second by Sir John Meldrum, and a
third by Lieutenant Colonel Needham, fell upon the Town, to storm it in three
places altogether, where the Enemy received us with much courage, and made
strong resistance for two hours, or thereabouts; but in conclusion, my own
Foot Regiment forced a passage by the River side, and my Son with his
Regiment of Horse rushed into the Town, where he was encountered by Colonel
Bellasyss, and the Enemies Horse; but they being beaten back, and M. Bellasyss
himself wounded, and taken prisoner, and our Foot entered on al sides the Town,
the Enemy was wholly routed; and as many as could, saved themselves by flight,
some toward Cawood, some toward Pontefract, and the rest toward York, over
the River by a bridge of Boats laid by themselves; We pursued them every way,
and took in the Town and chase, the prisoners, Ordnance, Arms, Ammunitions,
and Colors mentioned in the List enclosed.

Of my own men, I lost in the fight diverse gallant Commanders and Soldiers,
and very many sore wounded; And indeed, all my Army, both Commanders, and
Common soldiers, behaved themselves with as much courage as ever I observed in
men.

All which we must acknowledge to God alone, who both infuseth courage, and
gives Victory where he pleases: I shall now, I hope, be able to raise more
Forces in the Country, and improve this Victory that God has bestowed on us,
to the best advantage. This being all for the present, until further occasion,
I rest

Your Lordships most affectionate and humble Servant, Fer. Fairfax.
Selby, 12 April, 1644.

A List of the Officers taken Prisoners, the 11. of April. 1644
Colonel John Bellasyse. Colonel Sir John Ramsden. Colonel Sir Thomas
Strickland. Lieutenant Colonel Tyndall. Lieutenant Colonel Forbes. Major
Heskit. 8 Commanders of Horse. 14 Captains of Foot. 4 Lieutenants of Horse. 20
Lieutenants of Foot. 6 Cornets. 11 Ensigns. 9 Quartermasters. Elias Walker,
Master of the Magazine. Richard Ludlow Provost Marshall; And diverse Sergeants,
Trumpets, Corporals, Drums, and others Officers. Diverse slain, and lay strewed
in the way to York for four miles together; others that fled to Pomfract, were
pursued as far as Ferry-Bridg. Four Brass Pieces of Ordnance. Seven Barrels
of Powder. Sixteen Bundles of Match. Two thousand Arms or above.
Many Horse and Foot Colors taken, but as yet sixteen or seventeen come in.
And sixteen hundred common Soldiers. Above five hundred Horse. The Pinnance
taken at Gainsbrough; All their Bag and Baggage, and many Ships and Boats upon
the River. And four hundred more prisoners were taken at Homcough near Selby
and some commanders among them. And was not here, good Reader, the Ark of God
mightily elevated and borne up (maugre all the malignity of this terrible
Storm of wrath and rage in the enemy) above all the swelling waves and
boyste^ovs billows of the enemies fiercest fury? God's Ark, here, mightily
carried up, above all these swelling and blustering billows.
Did not the Lord ride gloriously in triumph on the Chariot of his innocent and
upright Ark, and curb the pride of these proud swelling surges, and cause his
blessed Arc, I say, safely to float above them all? Yes certainly, it must
needs be confessed, even by our adversaries themselves, who (to their shame and
sorrow) felt and found it so. Now then, the L. Fairfax, presently after the
fight and victory obtained as aforesaid, This brave victory thus obtaned, the
Lord Fairfax was now master of the Field.
sent a letter to the Parliament and therein desired to be directed by them how
to dispose of the prisoners he had taken, 400 of them being by him sent to
Hull, and the rest sent after. He also declared to the Parliament, that by Gods
great mercy in this brave Victory he was now become master of the Field in all
Yorkshire. And upon the receipt of this letter and the happy intelligence of
this so renowned victory, it was presently Ordered by the Parliament, A Day of
Solemn Thanksgiving appointed.
that the next ensuing Tuesday (which was in Easter-Weeke) should be a solemn
day of thankesgiving throughout London and Westminster unto almighty God for
this great victory. The Copy of which order coming to my hands, I have here
also inserted, which was as follows.

Die Mercuri, 17. April, 1644.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament. That the
Ministers in the several Churches and Chapels within the Line of
Communication, and Parishes within the Bills of Mortality, do give notice to
their Parishoners, of the great Success it has pleased God to give the
Parliaments Forces in Yorkshire, and Pembrookeshire; And to acquaint them that
the Houses have appointed, and set apart Tuesday next, for a public
Thankesgiving, to be given to Amighty GOD for his great Blessings and Successes.

H* Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Very shortly after all this the Parliament 8000. pound ordered, presently sent
to the most Noble Lord Fairfax.
Ordered that 8000 l. should be immediately sent away to the said most noble
and renowned Lord Fairfax, as an encouragement to the Soldiers, to go on the
more cheerfully in their present designs. Now the hopeful consequence of this
great blow, was (by Gods good providence and assistance) more undoubtedly, than
the victory it self: For, now this noble and renowned Lord Fairfax, was not
only (as himself worte) Master of the Field in all Yorkshire; The most
hopeful consequent advantages of this great Victory.
but he was thereby also enabled to advance even to the Teez-side without
interruption, to assist our loving brethren of Scotland, and now also Newcastle
must either fight with the Scots before the Lord Fairfax come to them, or else
retreat (as afterward ye shall hear he did) and what a disadvantage to the
Enemy this must needs be, any may West Riding and Hull, so as the trade of
cloth might now again be continued to the great comfort

And here let me give the Reader this one more note and observation, worthy our
most serious thoughts and commemoration; Two days of Solemn Thanksgiving in
one and the ^ame Month.
that by this so renowned and famous a victory, it pleased the Lord to give us
two most special and choice occasions, of two most solemn and set days of
Thankesgiving to the Lord in one and the same Month, over the whole Kingdom;
for two such famous and memorable victories over our fierce and furious
enemies, as that of Alsford and this at Selby: such a rare and sweet mercy as
we have not (till now) enjoyed since these unhappy and unnatural wars began
among us; our ever most gracious and glorious wonder-working God, be ever
praised and magnified for the same. But now to go on.

About the 20. of this instant April, came certain intelligence by letters to
the Parliament and Scotch-Commissioners, from our loyal and loving brethren of
Scotlands army in Yorkshire; Newcastles Army sorely put to it. Our brethren of
Scotland draw up close to Durham.
That Newcastles army having been forced to retreat from Hilton toward Durham,
our brethrens army drew to Easington, being the midway betwixt Hartlepoole and
Durham, where they found reasonable good quarter for their horse, resolving to
abide thereabout till they made the enemy either fight or fly. Those quarters
they kept till about the 10. or 12. of April, when as (after a fast kept the
day before) they marched to a place called Quarrendon-Hill, The Marquess of
Newcastle deserts and flies from Durham.
but two miles from Durham. The enemy seeing them draw so near, and observing
also his soldiers to decrease upon the approach of danger, he drew as many
forces as could be spared out of Newcastle and Lumley-castle to uphold his
strength of foot; but finding all would not do, and not a little plunged and
perplexed at the news from Selby, and that the noble Lord Fairfax had obtained
such a full, considerable, and complete victory, which was on the 11. of April;
He upon the 13. of the same was now enforced to remove his whole force and
strength, and that in great have too, and left Durham to our Brethren of
Scotland; and leaving behind him his troublesome luggage and provision and
great quantity of victuals, and directed his march Westward. The noble and
vigilant General Lesley omitted no time in pursuit of him, but upon the first
notice (without any respect to the ransacking their for saken quarters) raised
his Leaguer from Quarrendon-Hill and marched after him to Ferry-Hill and so to
Darnton, General Lesly pursues him.
which is as far South as the enemy could reach by that time, only a little
Eastward of, him and 14 miles on this side Durham; and thus followed on their
resolution, being merely guided by the enemies march, following them which way
soever they went, whom they now intended to follow close, or rather march along
with, either till they had advantage to fight with them or should meet the
noble Lord Fairfax to enclose him. Newcastles great loss without any fighting.
And if there be any truth in reports; Newcastle lost at this time, and upon
the last straits and distresses which he was put unto, one half of his army
without fighting; and shortly after all this, the fugitive Marquess quitted
also Lumley-castle, and so betook himself to the City of York, intending to
make that his City of refuge, Newcastle is got into the City of York.
or rather skulking den, as long as he could. Whither at last (as intelligence
came to London about the latter end of April 1644) he was most securely arived
with the remainder of his forces, both horse and foot; and whither our valiant
and vigilant brethren of Scotland followed him, being about the same time, at a
place called Burrough-bridge some twelve miles from York, Northerly; being now
by this time ready to join with the ever honored and right noble Lord Fairfax.

And it was informed to the Parliament about the 22 of this instant that Rupert
that Prince of Plunderland was got to Beavercastle, Prince Plunderer at
Bevercastle.
and advanced toward the North to join (as 't was strongly conjectured) with
Newcastle, if not prevented: Whereupon the most noble Earl of Manchester, The
noble Earl of Manchester follows him close.
went presently to Stanford with about 4000 gallant horse and 5000 foot,
intending to follow him close, and to sit upon his skirts as soon as any
advantageous opportunity was offered. And upon this information an express was
forthwith sent from the Parliament and the Committee of both Kingdoms with an
order unto him, to advance with all his forces and to attend this Prince
Robbers removes, and by waiting for all advantages, if it were possible, to
force him to fight (which 't was conceived, was not so easy a matter to do, as
to hasten him to filtch) and therewith an order was made immediately for a
speedy supplying of the said noble Earl with Carriages and all other military
necessaries.

About the 25. of this instant, came letters to the Parliament from Sir Will.
Sir Will. Waller gives the enemy a brave defeat about Basing house.
Wallers army, intimating that this ever to be renowned generous General
having intelligence that a considerable convoy of the enemies, was going with
much Cattle and other necessary provisions, for the further supply of their
garrison at Basing-house; he sent out a convenient party of his horse, who
suddenly encountered them, seized on their cattle and carriage, took of the
enemy, near the said garrison, one master Gunner, 3 Sergeants, 3 Corporalls,
40 common soldiers, a 1000 sheep, and other fat cattle, together with a
considerable sum of money which they had gathered in the adjacent Counties to
have helped to pay their garrison.

And about the 26. of this instant, came letters out of the North assuring the
Parliament that the most noble Lord Fairfax and his famous, The most noble Lord
Fairfax and our brethren of Scotland conjoined into a body.
faithful and thrice noble son Sir Thomas Fairfax were conjoined with our
loyal brethren of Scotland, and that having a very brave army they had drawn
their forces on each side the river of Ouze, near unto York, and had closely
begirt the said City, whereby they not only stopped the passage of any persons
from coming to the Earl of Newcastle by water, but by land also, having made
good all the bridges, and were in great hope, in Gods good time, and by the
Lords gracious assistance, to be victorious masters of the said City.

About the 28. also of this instant, came letters from Northamptonshire
informing us that a party of some 30 foot men, with firelocks were sent out
from Sergeant Major Whetham Governor of Northampton, to collect money in that
County, near Banbury; they had only a Clerk of a company with them, who
commanded that party, 30. Northampton soldiers surprised and taken prisoners
by Banbury garrison.
which about Easter Day 1644. lay at Sir John Draytons house, at Cannons-Ashby,
6 miles from Banbury: But a party of the enemies about 200, and 20 horse with
them, from Banbury-castle having intelligence of their being abroad there,
marched into the Town; which our Forces having notice of, got quickly into the
Church, for their better-safety and defense, whether the enemy pursued them,
and soon got in by fastening a pettard to the Church door, which instantly
forced it open; whereupon our men got into the Steeple, which they bravely
maintained 2 hours together, but at last the Enemy beginning to fire it, they
yielded themselves upon composition, and were all carried prisoners to Banbury
save only one, whom being sorely wounded, they left behind; who, since got
back again to Northampton, and there declared these things as aforesaid. All
our Northampton soldiers imprisoned in a barn at Banbury.
Our men in this action, killed one of theirs with a stone from the Steeple,
and wounded 2 or 3 others, but the Enemy got all their Muskets, and about 7
pounds in money, and imprisoned all the Soldiers in a Barn in Banbury. The
next day the Committee and Governor of Northampton, hearing hereof sent for an
exchange of these prisoners, which being refused; Major Lidcot who commanded
the horse in Northampton (it was that same Lidcot that gave the Earl of
Northampton a touch on the forehead, that knocked him off from his horse, at the
fight near Stafford, where and when the said Earl was slain) This brave Major,
I say, being much displeased at their refusal of the said exchange, presently
after led forth about 5 or 6 Troops of Horse, with 50 firelocks, to Banbury
who being undauntedly led into the Town on foot, most fiercely entered the same,
Northampton forces are most bravely revenged on Banbury garrison.
bravely set al our foresaid prisoners at Liberty out of the Barn, and then
most furiously marched into the very body of the Town, where a partee of the
Enemy opposed them, but ours most bravely beat them into the Castle, took 33 of
them prisoners, whereof 2 were Ensigns and 2 Corporalls, released 10 men more
whom the Enemy had pressed and intended to send to Oxford for his Majesty's
service, slew 5 or 6 of the Enemies in the fight, and took besides 40 horse,
and as many Muskets, and so returned back unto Northampton, with the loss
only of one man, who adventured too far and was taken prisoner. Thus were they
well revenged on their Enemies for their former loss, having suddenly and
souldier-like put themselves thus upon such a desperate and most dangerous
adventure.

And much about the conclusion of this Month of April 1644. we were certified
by Letters out of Scotland, that our faithful and loving brethren of that
Nation, were not a little encouraged at the prudent and pious progress of our
Assembly of Divines in England at Westminster, The christian amity and fidelity
of our brethren of Scotland toward us of England.
they having sent Letters to some Members of the said Assembly, and to their
own Divines, to the same effect; intimating therein, That England could give
them no greater content and encouragement to gain their best assistance and
love, than this their willingness in joining themselves with them in the
Solemn Covenant, thereby to set up a thorough Reformation in all their Churches
according to the Word of God. And together with those Letters, they sent
likewise a letter, sent by the Juncto at Oxford to the Noble Earl of Argyle and
other Lords of the Council of Scotland, The substance of a letter sent by the
Iuncto at Oxford to the Lords of the Council of Scotland.
which were much to this effect, in brief.

First, therein manifesting their impious explanation of the Act of Association
of both kingdoms, which (as they said, with Jesuitical Spirits) was consented
to by the Lords Subscribers thereunto, and others that were prisoners with them
at Oxford (as though the Act of Association had not been made with the joint
consent of his Majesty, and the Parliament of both Kingdoms, but between a
private Juncto and some aspiring Papists, stupid Atheists, Parasiticall Jesuit
Priests, and damnable Irish Rebels, then at Oxford:) Foul and false imputations
laid on the Parliament at Westminster, by the Oxford juncto.
Withal, they further averred, That the Lords in Parliament at Westminster,
were not then above 25, and that the major part of the Commons were then, with
them, at Oxford, that there were nothing but tumults in London, and unruly
Voting, which was the cause that they themselves had deserted that pretended
Parliament, (as then, they audaciously and maliciously called and counted it)
and what, said they, in this Letter, Will ye, my Lords, get but a knock with a
pollax, or a Sequestration-lash? But all this was but the Preface to this their
learned Epistle. Their subject matter follows, in such modest strains as
these. We do conjure you, O the wretched Rhetoric of the Oxfordians to argue
themselves and their posterity into perpetual slavery.
my Lords, by your common allegiance and subjection to the King, by the amity
and affection betwixt the two Nations, by the Treaty of Pacification, and by
all Obligations both Divine and Humane, to use your utmost endeavors to
prevent the effusion of so much blood as must needs follow the invasion of this
Kingdom (this you must consider was before our Scottish brethrens coming in
unto us) by your intended Armies, preparing for the pretended Parliament at
Westminster. Thus you see, good Readers, that our impious Oxonians seem to be
very sensible and tender, of the effusion of blood, which, they say, the
coming in of the Scottish Nation will occasion, Notorious and Devilish
hypocrisy in this Oxford Juncto's juggling.
though they know very well, that their former coming in, was, by Gods mercy a
great means to prevent it, and so also may this; but they are too willing to
forget, or at least to silence, what horrid cruelties are daily committed by
their bringing over of such multitudes of Irish Rebels, or that this damdable
Plot of theirs, can be any Invasion of our Kingdom, since these are, forsooth,
the Kings honest Catholic Subjects. O gross and egregious daubing and
dissimulation!

Now, Our brethren of Scotlands wise and provident answer to the Oxonian Letter.
the Lords of the Council of Scotland, having received this Letter, spent no
long time about it, but the very next day (O the mercy of our God, thus to
clear up their pious and prudent judgment herein) dispatched an answer to
that Letter, much to this effect. That they conceived their Lordships at Oxford
were not so great strangers to their proceedings, as not to know that their
expedition into England was not intended, till all other means were first
assayed and disappointed. That they will not deny the invitation of the
Parliament to aid them; and that not only out of pity to see England bleed,
but out of sense of the danger of their own Religion and Laws, they had thus,
as a maine cause, taken up Arms at this present; that they hold not the
invitation of the Parliament any ways invalid, or nulled, because they at
Oxford are wanting thence, or others are gone beyond the Seas, (having either
wilfully deserted the Parliament, or been expelled thence for their
Delinquency;) but, how this Parliament has sought earnestly for Reformation of
Religion, for redress of grievances, and the happy settlement of the great
affairs of that Kingdom, and which was indicted by his Majesty for these
ends, and is ratified by a special Act of Parliament, not to be raised without
advise and consent of both Houses, as null and void; and that those who stay in
Parliament are not a sufficient number without them at Oxford, is more than
they can apprehend. And as they are more deeply affected with unfeined grief,
for these unhappy differences between his Majesty and his Subjects, and more
sensibly touched with the sufferings of their Brethren, than desirous to judge
of the Laws and practices of another Kingdom: So they do hold themselves in
duty obliged to their Country, to clear that Kingdom of that unjust aspersion
of invasion; These things, with sundry other excellent expressions were
contained in this Letter, or answer to the former, as by the Letters
themselves, Printed and published, at large appeared.

And here, now, good Reader, I shall again desire to cast Anchor, to put in, A
Summary most grateful recital of all the excellent Parliamentary Mercies of
this Month.
and make a short stay in the happy Harbor of this Months Voyages conclusion
also, a little to refresh and recollect thine and mine own serious thoughts in
the most grateful Contemplation and Recapitulation of all the eminent and
excellent Parliamentary Mercies, as so many specious and precious Merchandises,
safely brought home in the Successful adventure of the Ark of God, in this
Months Voyage, which may conspicuously appear to the eyes and understanding
of any, of all intelligent and impartial Readers.

First, In that most fragrant April Primrose, or odoriferous virtuous Violet,
I mean, that most excellent Ordinance of Parliament for the better sanctifying
of the Lords day.

In those brave Defeates given to our Adversaries; The one at Munck-bridge, by
Sir John Gell; the other given to Colonel Bellusyes, by victorious Colonel
Lambere in Yorkshire.

Conveyance of the Ammunition from Warwick to Gloucester; And how thereby they
were enabled to fright and secret their neighboring Enemies; Together with the
taking in of Waltham-house by Colonel Whitehead, with the good assistance of
the London Brigade, which God made victorious both going and coming.

Conjunction of the Lord Fairfaxes Forces, with his most valiant and virtuous
Son, Sir Thomas Fairfax, whereby their eminent designs, were (by Gods mercy)
greatly advanced, which was immediately begun in the taking of Cawood Castle,
and the Isle of Axholme.

Swanley in South-Walles; And the regaining of Crowland a place of great
concernment, by the noble Earl of Manchesters Forces.

Hollanders Honorable attestation of precious Master Prynnes learned Labors,
in his Invincible Vindication of the Parliaments Power and Privileges;
Together with the most comfortable correspondency between our Kingdom and
Parliament, and the Kingdom of Swethland; and also States of the United
Provinces.

Fairfax, at Selby in Yorkshire,

Newcastles Atheistiall Army, from Durham to York, by our valiant and vigilant
brethren of Scotland, the most noble Earl of Manchester, and most worthily
thrice Honorable Lord Fairfax: who all uniting and joining themselves together
into a body about York, necessitated Newcastle to be enclosed and cooped up
within the walls of the said City.

William Waller to the Kings Cormorants at Basing-house; Together with that
other, given by Northampton Forces to their Adversaries at Banbury.

Oxonian Plot, to have diverted, or rather, perverted the Christian Amity and
Fidelity of our loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland, in their pious
purposes, and resolutions to come into our Kingdom, for our timely and
needful assistance.

All which precious premises rightly regarded, and most seriously considered,
especially, that most remarkable Conquest at Selby; and this the Lords most
gracious turning of Oxonian Achitophels crafty and cruel Counsel into folly;
O who can but most justly and ingenuously acknowledge, that in all, in any of
these rare and rich Parliamentary-mercies, the Lord has most comfortably
caused his blessed Arc triumphantly still to over-toppe the high swelling
waves and rough rising billows of Papists* God Arc, over-topping the worlds
Waves swelling.
Atheists and mischievous malignants. So that we may in strong and long
experienced confidence in God conclude, with holy David: Yet (truly) the Lord
is good to his Israel, and to all such as are of an upright heart. Psalm. 73. 1.
Great c^use have we therefore with magnanimous Martyn Luther, in our greatest
straits and seeming distresses, to say and sing; God is our refuge and strength
a very present help in time of trouble. Psalm. 46. 1, ^, 3.
Therefore we will not fear* though the earth be removed, and though the
mountains be hurryed or carried into the midst of the sea, and though the
waters thereof roar and be troubled.

But now to go on, May. 1644.
and to lanch forth again into the next Mouths adventure. And first to begin
with the certain intelligence, which about the beginning of this Month of May,
came to London by Letters from Plymouth, that that traitorous Skellum, and base
Apostate, Sir Richard Greenvile came within two miles of Plymouth to a place
called S. Butolphs, with some Forces of Horse and Foot, whereof Plymouths
Commander in Chief, A brave defeat and repulse given to the Enemies at
Plymouth.
Lieutenant Colonel Martine, having timely intelligence, upon the 18th. of
April last past, between 4 and 5 of the Clock in the morning, issued out with
17 Colors of Foot, and 3 Troops of Horse, the Forlorn Hope being Commanded by
Captain Owen, who not knowing the way, came upon the Enemies Scouts unawares,
who would have fired upon them, A great providence at our Soldiers first
adventure.
but (by a special providence of God) their Carbines would not off; whereupon
Captain Owen safely advanced with his Soldiers to the Quarters of his
Enemies-Foot-Souldiers; fell upon them all pell-mell, and at last forced them
to retreat, and to make what haste they could to sanctuary in the Church, in
the said Town, The Enemies beaten into the Church.
from the Steeple whereof the Enemy fired very violently upon our men, and many
of them shot from diverse places round about the Church, and others from the
Houses; but their surie was soon abated, for our men fell in upon them most
courageously and took two whole companyes of them complete, Ours obtain a
brave victory.
with their colors and drums, 2 barrels of powder, besides store of match,
with 40 horse; there were also about 20 of the enemies soldiers drowned in
their flight endeavoring to swim over Salt-Ash in Cornwall. Our men heard
(since this defeat) that Greenvile himself was in the Town; whereof had they
had true and timely notice, in all probabillity, they had then surprised him.

On the Friday following, which was about April the 20. or 21. in the morning,
The enemies horse face Plymouth again.
the enemies horse again faced our works; upon which ^odain attempt, our men
could not be kept in, but out they would upon them; at which time about 60 of
ours sallying forth, pursued them as far as Plympton-bridge near which place
their maine strength lay, but ours were so provident and circumspect as not to
adventure too fare, but had given them such a brave alarm, as put them to a
nonplus, what to do; But ours, I say, not intending to hazard themselves so
unequally, unless a very fair advantage had been offered, Ours make a very
fair and safe retreat.
made a very fair and safe retreat; our forlorn hope, in this sally being led
by valiant Captain Holme, who fell upon one of their works, killed two in it,
and one brave Cavalier of quallity besides, who with his horse was slain by a
shot from a piece of ordnance, and many other also were slain about that time
by several shots from Mount-Go^ld. And thus was Plymouth bravely cleared, for
the most part, some three miles about, whereby they had a fit opportunity to
cut down two woods near the Town, and supplied themselves well with fuel,
which had been one of their former greatest wants.

Much also about the same time, we were credibly advertised by an express from
Gloucester that, that ever most renowned Governor Colonel Massey sent forth a
party thence, A brave defeat given to the enemy by valiant and active Colonel
Fox.
which joined with the forces under the command of Colonel Fox, and some other
small parties from the garrisons of Warwick and Coventry, and entered Eusum,
where they took 80 of the kings Cormorants prisoners, with much provision and
many arms; and at the same time they obtained a very good booty at Wych and
other garrisons of the enemy in Worcestershire from whence they brought away
diverse prisoners and performed all this with the loss only of 4 men of theirs
who were taken straying from their companies and carried prisoners into
Worcester.

And about the third of this instant May, 1644. this active and resolute
Commander Colonel Fox went forth from Tamworth, accompanied with not above 64
men; and that night came to Budeley a very considerable garrison Town of the
enemies. Budely in Worcestershire surprised by valiant Col. Fox.
At his coming to the first Court of guard in the Town, he boldly commanded
them (it being in the night) to make way for some of the Princes Regiment who
desired to quarter in the Town, that night; which was immediately granted unto
him, both by that and the second guard at the chains; and so being thus come
to the entrance into the Town, his men slew 5 or 6 of the Sentinells and
thereby possessed themselves of the Town, and set a guard at diverse of the
doors, where the commanders, officers, and men of quallity lay, all which he
took with most of their common-souldiers, there being about an 120 in all.

From thence he went to a great Mannour-house, Sir Tho. Littleton surprised by
Col. Fox.
not far from the Town, where he surprised Sir Thomas Litleton a
Parliamentman and some other gentlemen, took thence 4 brave Flaundersmares,
and great store of provision, all which with 40 most gallant horse of the Kings
Cormorants, and as many prisoners together with Sir Thomas, he brought into
Coventry the very next morning; about which time all the neighboring
Cormorants and garrisonsouldiers thereabout were raised up in arms with an
intent to have rescued their friends, thus taken captives and carried away from
them; but blessed be God they came a day after the fair, and according to that
old proverb; When the steed was stolen then they would have shut the stable
door; for all the prisoners and prizes were safely housed in Coventry.

About the 6. of this instant May, Mr. Goads relation of the most happy and
prosperous progress of the thrice noble and renowned Earl of Manchest^r in
Lincolnshire.
came a most full and exact relation, testified under the hand of that learned
and truly religious minister of God, Mr Goad Chaplain to the right honorable
and most renowned Earl of Manchester concerning, the prosperous proceedings and
victorious atchievments of this most vi^tuous and valiant General especially
of the famous winning of Lincoln, and so consequently the regaining of all
that whole County; and of the frighting and forcing of those most odious and
enormous devouring Cormorants from all their Augean-stalls and holds therein,
which relation for the Readers better content and fuller* satisfaction therein,
I have thought fit here to insert, together with some small addition out of
another very authenticke and unquestionable author, which came to my hands
which were as follows: After the most renowned and successful Earl of
Mancesters army had marched toward Huntington, and from thence to Oundell and
the Towns adjacent, the Lord General himself met it at a place called
WaterinHeath where the Rendevouz was appointed to be, from whence we marched to
Stamford, and quartered there till we were in some measure furnished with
ammunition fit for a nearer advance toward the enemy. The manner of the Earl
of Manchesters march.
During our abode at Stamford intelligence was carried to the enemies, being
then at Grimsthorp and Sleeford with a purpose to fortify those two places,
being chief inlets into Holland and those parts; but my Lord speedily sending
out a party though but small, whereof the enemy hearing before ours did
approach them, they quitted Grimsthorpe, not having made any works at all
about it: My Lord being farther advertised that the enemy lay almost all over
the County of Lincoln raising money and levying men by the Commission of
Array, and miserably plundring the Country, his Lordship forthwith sent out
another party under the command of the Lieutenant General Cromwell consisting
of about 2000 horse and dragoones, upon whose advance they quitted Sleeford
(where they had begun a regular fortification, and might have proved great
offense to us) whereupon they contracted themselves retreating in great fear
and confusion toward Newark and the other side of Trent, where at a general
Rendevouz, at, or about Mansfield, they met with all Newcastles horse, An 100
troops of Newcastles horse plunder the Country on the other side of Trent.
who together with them made up about an 100 troops, who quartered on that
side Trent, to the almost undoing of that part of the Country. Now his Lordship
being much affected with the distress of the Country, and perceiving that the
vagabond-like Enemy declined to fight with him, and were only inclined to
plunder, The Earl of Manchester advan^^^ to Lincoln.
he advanced to Grantham and* from thence to Lincoln, resolving by the
Almighties assistance to attempt and take that place whereby he might either
really weaken those Enemies of God and this Kingdom, or else necessitate them
to fight with us. We came to Lincoln on Friday the third of this Month, i^ the
afternoon, Sir P^reg^in Barty taken prisoner and brought to my Lord of
Manchester.
on which day in the morning Colonel Sir Peregrin Bartie (high sheriff of
this County, the Earl of Lindseyes brother, and sometime Governor of this
City) was brought prisoner unto us by a party of ours. We drew up our whole
army in the face of the City on the brow of the hill near Lanwicke, and
perceiving the enemy had made the entrance into that part which is called the
old Town very strong, Lincoln summoned by my Lord of Manchester.
my Lord sent a trumpet to them, with a fair demand of the place for the King
and Parliament, whereunto a very uncivil answer was returned, reproaching us
with the defeat at Newarke, hoping we should be served here, as there.

The next day we sent out a party of our Horse toward Gainsbrough, and took
some Prisoners, who told us of a great body of Horse, Resolution to storm the
Town.
to the number of 5 or 6000. that were coming against us, under Colonel
Gorings Command, which made my Lord resolve to storm them that afternoon, and
to that intent, the scaling Ladders were brought forth, and the Foot made ready
to set on; but second and better thoughts stayed us till next morning, we
having intelligence, that they were far enough off from coming to their
relief for that night.

My Lord, Colonel Cromwell sent out with 2000. horse to oppose Col. Goring from
relieving Lincoln.
in the mean time, sent 2000 Horse, under the Command of Lieutenant general
Cromwell, to meet the Enemy, and to stop them from coming to relieve the City;
and thereupon the Foot were by Order drawn off from about the Hill, which the
Enemy perceiving, it caused them to insult, hooping and hollowing against us,
thinking we were afraid to set upon them; but the next morning they were
forced to sing another note in another tune. For, that night Order was given
for the Foot to lie on the several quarters of the Hill, Preparation to storm
the City of Lincons.
round about their Works, and to be all in a readiness, to fall on from
every quarter when they heard the great Ordnance go off, which was between 2
and 3 in the morning, there being accordingly, 6 Pieces together let fly. And
my Lord had a little before commanded 2 Regiments of Foot, viz. Colonel
Russells, Colonel Russels and Col. Mo^ntague lead on most bravely to the
onset.
and Colonel Montagues to draw down toward the Gate and Drawbridge, which
they accordingly did, with admirable alacrity and resolution, being led on by
those two most valiant and religious Colonels, who through the might of God, so
undauntedly approached the Enemy, that after a very short dispute, even within
less than a quarter of an hour, terror seized on the enemies spirits, and
our men seized on their works, The lower town taken.
and so with incred^ble courage possessed themselves of the low Town, the enemy
flying to the upper Town and castle. The Enemy in their retreat endeavored
to fire the Lower Town.
Ours took diverse of the enemy, in this brave bickering, without the loss of
any on our side, which we humbly acknowledge to Gods glory, to be a great
mercy. Upon the enemies retreat, they endeavored to have fired the low Town,
but ours pursuing closely prevented their mischievous intention in a great part
and helped most industriously to quench those houses which they had fired. We
pursued no farther at this present, resolving by Gods help to have sto^med the
other part of the Town and castle the next morning by break of day (though
the common soldiers seemed to be impatient, even of that short and needful
delay) but by reason of much rain, which fell that night and all the next day
and night, we were necessitated to defer this work till Monday following; in
which interim the Lord gave us the Sabbath day wherein we might seek him for
his blessing in so great a business.

Now the Enemy having by their Horse (whom Colonel Cromwell strongly waited on
with our whole Body of Horse) enforced us thereunto it was consulted on, A
second full resolution to storm the Town and Castle as was formerly intended.
whether the former resolution of Storming the next morning should hold or not,
it was presently agreed again, that by the help of our God, the Lieutenant
Gener^l should with our Horse, attend the Enemies Horse, as aforesaid, and our
Foot storm the Town, which was done accordingly; wherein we received
merveilous mercy from God, who gave much wisdom and valor to our men, as was
then manifested, for that (at most) in one quarter of an hour (as was
fore-showne) we gained their Works, every Division beating back the Enemy,
and entering the places allotted to them, to the admiration of the wisest and
ablest of our enemies, who did confess, that though they knew our intentions
to storm them that night, and therefore had drawn out all their Forces, being
21 Foot Companies, and 2 Troops of Horse, besides the help of many of the
City, The furious assaults on the Enemy in the upper town and Castle.
to make good their Works against our assault; yet they were not able to stand
out against the fierceness of our men, whom (as they said) they thought to be
stark mad to come on in so desperate a manner; at which (as then) so now on
this second onset they were so amazed, and terrified, that they fled to hide
themselves; but their pursuers found them out, though they were crept into
their Cathedral, many of them; For our men never left running and pursuing of
them, until they came to the top of the hill, The indefatigable pains and,
courage of our men about the Castle.
which would have been enough to have tired a very Horse, where being under the
Castle-workes, ours set up the Scaling-ladders, which they in the Castle
seeing, left their Firing, and fell busily to throwing down of great stones
upon us, from over their Works and Walls, by which we received more hurt than
by all their former shot, yet all would not daunt our men, but up to the top of
the Ladders they got, which proved 100 short (many of them) to reach to the top
of their Wall^s and their Works, The scaling Ladders set up against the Castle
walls.
they being, most of them, as high as London walls, but yet they made shift to
get up; which the Enemy perceiving, they had no spirit now left in them* but
betook themselves to their heels from the walls, The Town and Castle obtained.
and our men close following them, having all got over the walls and works;
shouting, and hollowing, and following them as fast as they fled, but they not
knowing whither to run, cried out for Quarter, saying, they were poor
Array-men, and forced thither to fight.

We slew above 50 of them at this onset, The slain and the prisoners taken.
about 20 of whom were slain in the Castle-yard, where they made the most
resistance. In all, we killed and took Prisoners of the Common Soldiers,
about 800; Officers, and Gentlemen of quallity and worth, about 200; in all,
near about a 1000 men. We took all their Horse and Arms, 8 Pieces of
Ordnance; good stores of all sorts of provisions in the Magazine; sufficient
for a long siege.

Considering the greatness of this success, The loss on our side, very
inconsiderable.
our loss was not considerable; for, albeit the Colonels, and other superior
Officers were in the face of all the dangers, performing equal service with
the meanest Soldier (who undoubtedly, received much life and courage from the
undaunted resolution, and fearlesse forwardness or their Commanders) yet, I
say, we lost not any Field Officer; only two Majors wounded, Two Officers
slain, and but 10 Common Soldiers.
one Captain, viz. Captain Oglesby, and Lieutenant Saunders slain; and about
10 Common Soldiers at the most, slain; most of which were slain with stones
thrown down upon them from the Castle-walles.

For this great victory, and mighty preservation, though we would not rob men
of their due praise; Yet, we desire (as most fit) to make our boast of God, all
the day long, who has been our help, The singular piety of the most noble
and renouned General.
and our strong God, and has greatly appeared herein.

And blessed be the Lord, that put into the heart of our most noble General,
as to seek God earnestly for his help, before we undertook the Work, so
far denying himself, as to give himself no rest or refreshing, till (calling
together most of the chief Commanders) he had returned solemn praise and
glory unto God, A brief List of the Commanders and Officers in Arms taken
prisoners.
for the great help which he vouchsafed us.

Now for the greater declaration, and manifestation of the praise and glory of
our Wonder-working God, I have thought fit to give the Reader a Summary List of
the Commanders and Officers taken Prisoners in this famous Victory. Viz. Sir
Francis Fan^, Governor of Linc^lne. Colonel Sir Charles Dalison, Colonel
Midlemore, Colonel Bandis, 2 Lieutenant Colonels; 2 Sergeant Majors; 21
Captains; 18 Lieutenants; 14 Ensigns; 18 Sergeants; 6 Gentlemen, 4 Drums, one
Trumpet, one Over-seer of the Works, one Master Gunner, two Gunners Mates. All
these we saw taken at the present, and are with the least, there being more
found afterward in corners, whose names and number were not inserted into this
List of Prisoners. All the Common soldiers taken were willing to fight for the
Parliament.
And take this note also by the way, for a Conclusion; that all the Common
Soldiers, after they were taken, did cheerfully desire to serve the
Parliament, making many Protestations, and serious Vows, of their readiness
and fidelity to venture their lives for our Cause. And now to proceed.

About the 9th, of this instant May, it pleased the Lord to put into the hearts
of our ever to be most highly honored, praised, and prised Parliamentary
Worthies, (for the honor of God, and better advancing of the work of
Reformation, An Ordinance of Parliament for the demolishing of all Organs and
superstitious monuments, etc.
in the Lords most pure and unblended Worship of God) to cause an Ordinance of
Parliament to be Printed, and published, for the speedy demolishing, and taking
down of all Organs, Images, and all manner of Superstitious Monuments in all
Cathedral and Parish Churches, and Chapels, throughout the Kingdom, and
Dominion of Wales; which for the excellency thereof, I have thought fit here to
insert, verbatim, as it was published for the godly Readers better content, and
pious delight, which was as follows.

Die Iovis, 9 Maij. 1644. An Ordinance for the further demolishing of Monuments
of Idolatry, and Superstition.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, the better to accomplish the
blessed Reformation, so happily begun, and to remove all offenses, and things
illegal in the Worship of God; do Ordain, That all representations of any of
the persons of the Trinity, or of any Angel, or Saint, in or about any
Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parish Church, or Chapel, or in any open place
within this Kingdom, shall be taken away, defaced, and utterly demolished; And
that no such shall hereafter be set up, And that the Chancell ground of every
such Church or Chapel, raised for any Altar or Communion Table to stand upon,
shall be laid down, and levelled: And that no Copes, Surplisses superstitious
Vestments, Hoods, Roodlofts, or Holy Water Fonts, shall be, or be any more used
in any Church or Chapel within this Realm; And that no Cross, Crucifixe,
Picture, or Representation of any of the persons of the Trinity, or of any
Angel or Saint shall be, or continue upon any place, or other thing used, or to
be used, in, or about the worship of God; And that all Organs, and the frames,
or cases wherein they stand in all Churches and Chapels aforesaid shall be
taken away, and utterly defaced, and none other hereafter set up in their
places; And that all Copes, Surplisses, Superstious Vestments, Roods, and Fonts
aforesaid, be likewise utterly defaced, whereunto all persons within this
Kingdom, whom it may concern, are hereby required at their peril, to yield
due obedience.

Provided that this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to any Image, Picture, or Coat of Arms, in Glass, Stone, or otherwise, in any
Church, Chapel, Churchyard, or place of public Prayer, as aforesaid, set up
or graven only for a Monument of any King, Prince, or Nobleman, or other dead
person which has not been commonly reputed or taken for a Saint: but that all
such Images, Pictures, and Coats of Arms, may stand and continue in like
manner and form, as if this Ordinance had never been made. And the several
Church Wardens, or Overseers of the Poor of the said several Churches and
Chapels respectively, and the next adjoining Justice of the Peace, or deputy
Lieutenant, are hereby required to see the due performance hereof. And that the
repayring of the Walls, Windows, Grounds, and other places which shall be
broken, or impaired by any the means aforesaid, shall be done and performed by
such person and persons, as are for the same end and purpose nominated and
appointed by a former Ordinance of Parliament, of the eight and twentieth of
August, 1643. For the utter demolishing of Monuments of Superstition or
Idolatry.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, that this Ordinance shall be
forthwith Printed and Published. John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Much about which foresaid time, came certain intelligence out of Wales to
London, Capt. Swanley takes Carnarvan Town and Castle, and other good prize.
that God had still exceedingly blessed and prospe^ed that most industrious and
valiant Gentleman, Captain Swanley, in all the parts of South Wales* and that
he had lately taken the Town and Castle of Carnarvan, together with great
store of Prisoners, many Arms and Ammunition; as also that he had taken diverse
more Irish, which were landed in those parts, whom because they were good
Swimmers, he caused to use their natural Art, and try whether they could tread
the Seas as lightly as their Irish-boggs and quagmires, and binding them back
to back, cast them overboard to swim or drown, and to wash them to death,
from the blood of the Protestants that was upon them.

And about the same time we were certainly informed, that the most gallant and
active Governor of Gloucester, Col. Massyes constant activity.
Colonel Massey, loosing no time to annoy the Enemy, nor omitting any
opportunity to advance and advantage the Kingdoms Cause, intercepted a Letter
going from Wales to Oxford, the contents whereof, signifying, that if
assistance came not, all Wales would be utterly lost. And he also having
intelligence of some preparations for that design on the Enemies side to be
put in action by Colonel Mynne, Col. Mynne beaten in his Quarters.
he instantly and resolutely fell upon Mynnes quarters, took diverse Prisoners
and Horse, and brake the neck of that design.

And about the same time, it pleased the Lord, very graciously to defeat our
Adversaries devilish designs, in the discovering of a most treacherous plot
for the betraying of Gloucester into the enemies hands, A Plot to betray
Gloucester discovered.
which was acted and agitated by one Edward Stanford Esquire, a known Papist,
who plotted with an honest and loyall-hearted Gentleman, Captain Backhouse, a
Captain of Horse under Colonel Massey: In whom this Papist conceived he had a
deep interest, by reason of former ancient, and intimate acquaintance. To whom
this Stanford assured a reward of 5000 l. for effecting the Treason; 5000. l.
proffered for a reward to betray Gloucester.
But Captain Backhouse most loyally and politickly deceived the said Popish
Traitor, and by special assent, and good liking of Colonel Massey, exchanged
diverse Letters, about the firm contriving and carrying on of the business,
and so brought the Popish Agent into such a Fools, or Knaves Paradise, as that
he received 200 l. 200. l. paid in hand of the 5000. to Capt. Backhouse.
in hand of the said moneys from Stanford, and held out the acting of the
business at least 3 months in treaties about it; and things so fell out in
that interim, that partly Captain Backehouse seemed to be necessitated to put
it off, but principally themselves were not fitted for action therein: So that
in the upshot they found themselves wound into a dangerous noose, had it gone
on, The ^^^successe of their plot from themselves.
and so voluntarily themselves left it off. All this being at large related in
print by Captain Backhouse himself, with the interchangeable letters that past
between them; wherein was a clear and full discovery of the whole plot to the
just shame of those bloodthirsty traitors, and the most deserved honor of that
most loyal and faithful commander Captain Backhouse.

May the 10. the most renowned and ever to be highly honored Citizens of
London observing a long and tedious obstruction in the Parliament about the
re-establishing of the State-Committee of both Kingdoms, The Citizens of
London petition the House of Peers for the re-establishment of the
State-Committee.
which in its former setlement had produced much good to the affairs of the
Kingdom; and finding that the City Malignants began in their common discourse,
to seem to have great hopes of an utter dissolution thereof; and most justly,
much fearing the ill consequences that were likely to follow thereon, and
considering that the main rub and remora thereof was in the House of Peers;
The religious, resolute, prudent and provident Citizens therefore petitioned:
First, their own City Common Council, and the Common-Councill in the name of
the whole City (lamenting the not farther continuing of this Committee for both
Kingdoms) petitioned the whole House of Peers for a most happy and speedy
concurrence with the House of Commons (especially now when an unanimous
correspondency between them) even in this conjuncture of time, might redound
much to their honors, and the singular good of the Kingdom, it having in 3
months time, almost ruined our adversaries, The result and issue of the Cities
petitioning the House of Peers.
in their deepest designs against us, as affairs then stood: To which
petition the Lords returned a very respective answer, with great thanks for
their love and care for the public good.

And upon the 15. of May following, the two Sheriffs of London with several of
the Aldermen and Common-Councill, being the representative body of the City of
London, The Citizens of London also petition the House of Commons.
presented to the House of Commons in Parliament an humble petition expressing
to that honorable House their thankefullnesse for the great and undefatigable
pains which the House had now for some years past, taken in the service of
the public: Telling them withal, that they were very sensible of the great
discouragements they had received by some late obstructions; yet did humbly
desire them to loose no time in settling the Committee of both kingdoms;
assuring them that the City was resolved to obey the orders and directions of
the House of Commons; The result and issue of the Cities ^^^tion to the House
of Commons.
and that with the House of Commons they would live and dye; as by the petition
it self it was more at large expressed. The House of Commons hereupon by their
Speaker, instantly returned many thanks to the City for their continued
affection to the public, and to that House in particular, and because a
Petition so full of affection and resolution for the good of the public,
might appear to posterity; They ordered it to be entered in the Journall-Book
of the Parliament; and the answer thereunto, Singular sympathy 'twixt the House
of Commons and the City of London.
which was framed in expressions so suitable to the Petition, as that it was
exceedingly for the honor of the City; and for the terror of the enemies of
this great Cause, who eagerly sought and were in great hope at this time to
have divided the one from the other. The substance of this answer was delivered
by Master Speaker, as aforesaid, on the very day of the delivery of the said
City Petition; and upon the Saturday following (their Petition having been
delivered but the Thursday before) being May the 18th, it was by express Order
of the House delivered in writing by diverse members of the House, at a Common
Council in Guild Hall, sitting there of purpose to recieve the same: The happy
event of the City Petition in the principal expectation from both Houses of
Parliament.
Yea, and upon the 20th or 21 of May, next ensuing, the Lords sent to the House
of Commons this so long desired Ordinance for settling the Committee of both
kingdoms, with the alteration only of one word in it, and the addition of two
words more than were in it before; and thus this weighty matter (so long in
disputation and expectation) was now comfortably composed and yielded unto, to
the great content of the well-affected, and to the adversaries of the Causes
great vexation and discouragement. But yet within a day or two after, the House
of Commons moved the House of Lords again (by way of a reply to former
Propositions therein) with solid reasons why they could not concur with the
Lords to have an additionall number of 15. Secrecy is the Key of certainty.
to manage the State-affaires with secrecy which is the key of certainty,
(this having been the great block and obstruction in this weighty business)
and matters of high concernment being best carried on when the number is the
least: The State-Committee for both Kingdoms established.
So that at last, the Lord was pleased to direct the heart of the Peers to a
full and clear setlement of this great business according to the desire of the
House of Commons, and long longed expectation of all the Well-affected Party,
and to the heart vexation of Malignants, who hoped for an unhappy intestine
division, hereby, among our selves.

Much also about the same time came certain intelligence by letters from
Colonel Massey of more singular good success which God had then given unto
him against his neighbor enemies, especially against that great Papist, Col.
Masseyes brave defeats given to the Enemies at Newnam, Westbury, and Little
Dean.
Sir John Winter the Queens Secretary whom (together with the most barbarous
and bloody Irish-Rebells) his so pious Mistress employed to settle the
Protestant Religion: I shall forbear (for brevities-sake) to give an exact and
particular relation, how this most renowned Colonel, by a brave martial
stratagem, laid a train of powder and a granado at the end of it, which did
good execution to the purpose on the enemies; the succinct number of the
prisoners and the place where they were taken, were as follows: Newnam defeat.
Prisoners taken at Newnam (which was Sir John Winters head-quarter) 3
Captains; 3 Lieutenants; 4 Ensigns; 12 Sergeants; The prisoners and prizes
taken.
4 Corporalls; 4 Drums; one Cannoneer; one Engineer; one provost Marshall; 1
Chaplain of the army; 4 double barrells of powder; 60 skaines of Match; one
Fawknet; 3 Hambrough guns; 4 Pieces of Ordnance; 130 Common-souldiers, besides
good store of Arms. Wesbury defeat.
Taken also at Westbury, the same day (which in the relation was about May the
7.) the whole garrison with officers and soldiers, The prisoners and prizes
taken.
one Capt. one Lieut. one Ensign; besides other officers; 60 soldiers;
besides 9 slain; 2 barrells of powder, and 12 skaines of match. At Litle-Deane
also the day before; slain, The defeat at Little Dean, and the prisoners and
prizes taken.
Lieut. Colonel Congrave the Governor thereof; Captain Wigmoore, 70 others
also slain there and at that time; and 15 prisoners taken. And thus have you
briefly seen, how that ever most worthily to be ever honored and valiant
Commander Col. Massey made notable advantages of that provision which was so
lately before sent unto him: And how to give this brave Commander his due
praise or how to crown his brows with sufficiently flourishing green Laurells,
I confess, I am not able, my expressions being indeed too low to set forth so
high deserts, and the present generation is so envious, that if I could and
should give him but so much right as I conceive him most worthy of, and should
not say as much of the rest, Col. Massyes just Encomium.
they would, I fear, storm against me, though I desire to exclude or extenuate
no man's worth, nor would disparage any in commending active Massey; I will
only therefore say thus much, in brief, and that most truly; Many garrisons
have done bravely but Massey at Gloucester has exceeded them all. And truly
that brave Commander Colon: Mitton of Wem garrison, may challenge a second
place, in our highest and lowdest praises and expressions; and why not renowned
Lime garrison the third place which has also done bravely to deep admiration,
as has been already and shall be yet more fully set forth in it is proper
place; The just commendation of diverse other garrisons.
All all the rest, I say have done singularly well, to Gods glory and their
honor be it spoken: As Captain Ludlow at Warder-castle; Col. Norton, Colon.
Sydenham and the rest at Pool, who have done as much as no man could expect
more; yea Warwick garrison, Alesbury and Northampton, and the rest who have
all done most heroickly and honorably; and if they have come short of any
others, I hope they have meant as well as the best, but peradventure had not
the like opportunities thereto; But to proceed.

About the 12. of this instant came credible information out of the Western
parts from the garrison of Lyme, Lyme stormed and the enemy bravely repulsed.
that revived Prince Maurice (not this ghost, though he be ghost-like, in
reguard of his infirmity) stormed the Town of Lyme a third time, and was now
also beaten off with great loss, above 80 of his men being slain in one ditch
and 60 in another, and the rest of his army pursued even to their own works;
and that Lyme garrison brought off 2 Pieces of the enemies ordnance, within the
command of their works, though the enemy slew many of the poor Countrymen to
compel them to fight to have saved the 2 pieces of ordnance, but all in vain.

And now upon Monday the 13. of this instant his Excellency the Parliaments
Lord General of all their Forces, advanced toward Oxford, his Carriages went
the day before, and he in person followed the next day early in the morning,
which was Tuesday the 14th, upon which day at Blackfriars in London, was a day
of humiliation kept in the behalf of the Western affairs; A day of
Humiliation set a part to seek the Lord upon the advance of the L. Genesis Army.
at Saint Brides a Day of Thankesgiving for the Victory at Lincoln, together
with prayers and Solemn Supplications for the good success of the Noble Earl
of Manchesters Army; and ere his Excellency left London he earnestly desired
that a day might be set a part to seek the Lord for him and his brave Army;
which was accordingly performed in a most high and solemn manner, by the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, Shriffes, and Common-Councill of the City of London at Christ's
Church, on Friday the 17th of May: A thing which had not been done before in
all the time of these unhappy wars, since they first began, and therefore we
have the greater ground of hope of a happy issue and good success, and that
God will in mercy be found of those that seek him first, and which desire to
go forth in his name and in his strength alone.

And about the 16th. of this instant May, Devonshire and Cornwall disaffected
to the Irish.
we were certainly informed at London that the Counties of Devon and Cornwall
began to be sensible of and displeased at the concourse of the Irish coming
into those parts, declaring that rather than they would bear with it any
longer, they would with an unanimous consent, as one man, rise against them and
expel them out of their Countries; and thus we may hope that the kingdom will
at length be beaten into a condition of having their eyes of understanding
opened to see and believe those truths of their hastening danger which they
before so long withstood, to their late and long just misery, and that now at
length they will come back, although it be by weeping-crosse, which they might
have avoided, had they not either through envy or ignorance fought against
those who with the hazard of their lives have thus long preserved the Kingdom;
and until this unhappy difference and inhumane discord and bloody war was
plotted and managed by Romish-Iesuits and most ambitious and proud-Prelates;
Amost just objurgation of England from Devon and Cornwalls great folly in
deserting the Parliament.
no story can make report of so much baseness of the English Nation
(especially after so much illumination) as to take up arms against their own
Parliament, chosen by themselves, and which has been in all ages the
preservation of the subject: But to proceed.

Whereas the Malignant-Spirits and most malicious adversaries of our Kingdom
are continually working and contriving how to ruin themselves and the whole
Church and State, and had for this end (by their active agents in Scotland, A
most wicked and devilish plot to undo Scotland also with England by the
Popish Royallists there, by way of diversion to recall our brethren of Scotand
from assisting us.
the Marquess Huntley, the Lord Montrosse, Craford, Musgrave and others)
attempted an intestine insurrection in the Kingdom of Scotland, about Aberdene
the most malignant Town in all that Kingdom; hoping thereby by way of a
divertive war, to bring off our brethren of Scotland from Newcastles and
Yorkes siege, to look to their own Kingdom of Scotland, which they intended
thus to distress and disturb with civil broils and certain ruin, if
possibly they could, like most desperate and villainous vipers: But, our wise
and most worthy Brethren of the nation had most prudently foreseen (by heaven
inspired wisdom and providence) this machinated malice and probably ensuing
mischief of these their suspected enemies; and did therefore with all
convenient circumspection endeavor to shut fast their own doors, before they
adventured to look abroad: The Noble Earl of Argyle stirs against the Popish
insurrection begun in Scotland.
And therefore the most Noble, prudent, and potent Earl of Argyle who had
engaged himself for Marquess Huntleys fair and peaceable demeanor in their
absence, though Huntly was a known Papist, and who being a Papist held fast,
still, that old Popish principle; That no faith is to be kept with Heretics.
And therefore in this time of the Scots absence in England, he having first
begun this seditious insurrection, with but an inconsiderable stength; The said
Noble Earl of Argyle (by Gods assistance) having suddenly raised a fair Army,
The Earl of Argyle breaks the neck of this Plot, and puts the Marquess Huntly
to flight.
soon stifled that abortive birth, and wicked design; the whole Country, as one
man, rising with the foresaid Noble Earl, and courageously setting upon them,
put them all to flight, and brake the neck of this their hellish hope and
expectation, ere they could grow to any great Maturity.

And since that the foresaid Montrosse and his Popish and Atheistical mates,
making head again in Scotland, and intending to get Dumfreiz into their
possession again: It pleased the Lord to raise up the Spirits, not only of
that most Noble Scottish Peer aforesaid, the Earl of Argyle, The Earl of
Calender also rises with about 8000. horse and foot to suppress this
intestine insurrection.
but also of the Valiant Earl of Calender, and others well-affected to this
cause of God, who soon raised a power of about 8000 horse and foot, and quickly
repelled the pride and expelled the persons of Montrosse and his mischievous
confederates out of Scotland, took from them all their Ordnance and many Arms
and much Ammunition, and forced them to fly into Cumberland, and those parts
and so to Carlisle; whether they were also pursued by the said noble Earl of
Callender, and (as about this 16 or 18 of May we had credible information) he
beat them out of that Town of Carlisle and forced them to fly into the Castle,
where they were all then straightly besieged, Montrosse forced to fly into the
Castle of Carlisle.
and in a fair way to be all surprised and taken therein. Thus we see how our
great and glorious God carries on the work, lifts up his Arc still above all
the swelling Surges and billowing waves of Malignity, to him be all the honor
and glory thereof: And this also I thus thought fit here to make mention of, as
having such clear and near reference to the present weighty affairs of our own
Nation and Kingdom.

About the 20th of this instant May a true and perfect Relation was made to the
Parliament (by Captain Jones and Captain Player, who came out of Lime, the
Saturday before) of the most valiant and resolute carriage of the Governor,
Captain Seeley (a second Massey) and his brave Soldiers, in defending that
Town against Prince Maurice who by storming of the Town, The present state of
Lyme related to the Parliament by Cap. Jones and Cap. Player.
by loss, by sallies out of the Town, and by running away, from first to last
has lost 2000. of his men, Col. Bluet, Col. Strangewayes and diverse persons of
great note, were slain; the ditches and trenches were several times filled
with the dead bodies of the enemy, and Prince Maurice lost his own colors and
two battering pieces; he sent a trumpet to fetch off the body of Colonel
Strangewayes, and took one away whom they said was the man: These two
Captains likewise informed that the enemy had made above a 1000 great shot
against the Town, and yet had slain with them but one old man, that was making
his will, just as the bullet hit him (the like at Gloucester where but one old
woman and a pig was killed with a Cannon) and that they had consumed at least
200 barrels of powder in shooting in the great and lesser guns: That when the
ditches were filled with dead bodies of the enemy, Prince Maurice sent for a
parley, the Governor refused it, The brave and most resolute carriage of the
Governor of Lyme to Pr. Maurice.
and sent him word he would make a breach 20 yards where he would desire it,
and give him leave to come and take the Town if he could, but the Prince
refused his offer and sent him word that he would make a breach himself and
hang the Governor over the wall, the Governor sent him a prisoner home and
bad him tell Maurice; England that had fed him and his brother with bread, they
in requital came to consume with fire and sword; but he hoped to see them both
rewarded with a Halter, or made shorter by the head. One of Maurices Capt. whom
the Town took being mortally wounded desired to receive the Sacrament (a rare
devotion in a cavaliere) and being upon receiving of the Sacrament, was
demanded whether P. Maurice was alive, he positively assured he was; though he
had been long and then continued very ill of an infirmity, and presently after
the Cavalier dyed. There were 400 foot of Sir Arthur Hasteriggs then come into
the Town of Lyme, and a 100 more under the command of Captain Chase of
Chichester, a valiant and faithful commander: If Maurice pleased to abide any
longer against Lyme (as he did) he was like to find (as he did) as harsh
entertainment as ever he did formerly.

Much about the same time letters came to the Parliament from the Earl of
Warwick informing them of the taking of a good prize by sea going to the Queen
at Exeter intended to have put in at Dartmouth, which had a convoy of four
Statesmen of war, under the command of Van Trumps Rear Admiral, not far
from Callis; Captain Owen being Rear-Admirall to the Earl of Warwick, A
brave prize taken at Sea by the noble Earl of Warwicks Ships.
and having three more brave Ships, met with the said Ship, and Holland Men of
War, and demanded the prize, which, not being condescended unto, he gave them
a broad side or two; whereupon the States Men of War (it was conjectured
according to their instructions from the States, though not from Orange)
presently left the prize to the Parliament Ships, who brought her into the
Downs, and the prize and Ship was estimated at 8000 l. at least, (And surely
it might appear that the prize was the greater, by reason of so great a
Convoy) in provisions of War, and other things which her Majesty sent for
over.

About the foresaid time also, came certain intelligence to London, that the
Committee for the County of Kent, lighted upon an excellent example of honor
to God, for the mercies they received in that County, and so consequently to
the whole Kingdom; in that they had designed the 21th day of this instant May,
An excellent pattern of gratitude in the County of Kent
for a general Day of Thankesgiving, over all Kent, for their deliverance from
the late Rebellion, raised through their whole County. I shall here give the
Reader a true Copy of their Warrant thereunto, that it may remain on record,
as a Monument of their Gratitude to the God of heaven, to all Posterity.

A true Copy of a Warrant sent from the Committee of Kent, to all the Ministers
in that County, for the Celebration of the 21th. day of May, a day of
Thankesgiving, for their deliverance from the late Rebellion, and for other
mercies to that County.
WHereas the goodness of God has been wonderfully manifested toward this
County, in the speedy suppression of the late rebellion, and the several
defeats and disappointments of the Enemy approaching this County with great
Armies, all threatening the ruin and destruction of the whole County. The
Committee therefore hold themselves obliged to invite the County (while there
is opportunity) to a general acknowledgement of these unexpected, and
undeserved mercies; and have therefore Ordered and appointed Tuesday the 21th.
of May, 1644, to be observed by all the Inhabitants of this County, as a day of
thankesgiving to Almighty God, for so great deliverance, and lengthning our
tranquillity in the midst of a deluge of war: And all the Ministers in this
County are hereby required, in their respective Churches, to observe the said
day of thankesgiving, and to exhort and excite the people, to acknowledge and
improove the said multiplied deliverances in a spiritual way, that God may
have the sole honor, and glory of them all, in all our praises.

To the Minister of, etc. You are to publish this Order, in the Church, on the
next Lords day.
And here I cannot omit one thing, but must crave leave of the Reader to
mention it; namely, the renowned worth, and high valuation we all ought to
have, of that ever to be honored, and most honest hearted Patriot of his
Country, the Earl of Pembrooke, who not long since most nobly and heroically
engaged his person, A just and most deserved testimony of the right noble Earl
of Pembrookes love and loyalty to the Parliament.
purse, and credit, in the raising of moneys, for the service of that famous
Garrison Town of Lyme, and other parts in the West; and how he offered most
freely to morgage his whole Estate, to raise moneys for the preservation of
those Towns in the West, that stand so firm and faithful to the Parliament.
And that on the 17. of this instant, he did publicly declare himself to be so
far, and so fully satisfied in the most courageous and wise proceedings of
the House of Commons, that he for his particular, was faithfully resolved to
live and dye with them; and has all along most clearly evidenced his constant
loyalty to the Parliament, and cause of God, without the least ignoble thought
of base desertion, or tergiversation from it, from the first to this very
present. A rare example and true trophie of Nobility in him.

About the 22th, of this instant May, we had certain intelligence, Cawood
Castle and all in it surrendered to the Parliam.
by Letters out of Yorkshire, that Cawood Castle in that County was surrendered
up to that most valiant and virtuous Commander Sir John Meldrum, for the use of
the King and Parliament, about 4 of the clock in the afternoon; wherein were
25 Arms, 4 Pieces of Ordnance, 4 barrels of Powder, all the bag and baggage;
therein also was delivered up, Lunsdale the Governor thereof, and all the
Commanders surrendered themselves into our hands, upon only Quarter for their
lives; The Common Soldiers to go home, taking the Covenant; which was
performed accordingly, Sir George Duncombe, who contributed much to the
surrender of this place, took the Covenant, and came in to the most noble Lord
Fairfax. This was the same Duncombe that was the most active man in raising the
King Forces in Yorkshire, to set on foot this, not British, but brutish
war, for which good act, his Majesty knighted him; and the reason why he now
became out of love with the Kings service (as himself said) was, because his
Majesty, contrary to his promise and faith, employed Papists in Command, whom,
at the beginning (to the delusion of the people) he seemingly banished from the
Court at York.

And by Letters of the 24th of this instant, we were certified, that the
foresaid most courageous, The Isle and Fort of Ayremouth taken also by Sir John
Meldrum.
and valiant Commander, Sir John Meldrum, had the Isle and Fort of Ayremouth
delivered up unto him, with all the Arms, Ordnance, and Ammunition therein: So
that by this means, a clear and free passage was opened even from Hull to
Owz-Bridge, which, till now, the Fort at Ayremouth and Cawood-castle did
interrupt. It was also further certified, in the same Letters, that Shovels,
Pickaxes, Spades, and other materials, were brought in abundance to the
Leaguer at York; and above 10000 Contrymen came in, some voluntarily,
others by compulsion to help to make their approaches near the City to batter
it.

Much also about the same time, The Kings Forces durst not bid battle to the
Parl. L. General at Wantage.
we were certainly informed by Letters from Abington, that the King with his
two great Armies, Commanded by Forth and Hopton, durst not bid battle to the
Parliaments most noble Lord General, the Earl of Essex, on Wantage Downs,
where his Excellency drew in Battalia to salute them; but that they fled back
(not daring, neither, to go Westward) to Abington: whereupon my Lord General
sent out a Party of 3000 Horse and Foot, Commanded by that thrice noble, and
worthyly honored Commander, the Lord Roberts, Field-Marshall, and the Horse,
by Sir Philip Stapleton, Lieutenant General of the Horse, who came in with
such courage, and brave resolution, that 5000 of the Enemies fled in disorder,
and left the Town to the Lord Roberts, Abington taken by the noble Lord
Roberts.
who on the Lords Day, May 26, entered Abington, in the morning, the most noble
Lord Gen, being to quarter there that night. The Enemy took such a flight on
this pursuit, that they hastily marched from Abington, with most of their
Artillery and Magazine to Oxford, but yet 80 Wagons, and 5000 Foot and Horse
passed by Oxford toward Islip, the way to Worcester, Commanded by Sir Ralph
Hopton. This Party also was soon dis-heartned by 18 Troops under Command of
that valiant, active and undaunted Gentleman, Captain Temple, who was sent
from Newport Pannell with those Horse to discover the Enemy, Valiant Cap.
Temples brave exploit on the enemies at Islip.
but not to engage himself. But this brave not spirited Gallant would be in
action, and fell upon 3 Troops of the Enemies quartered at Islip, whereof
Astons own Troop was one, and took there 50 Horse, Sir Fortescue (not that
faithless wretch which you may imagine) and 17 more Prisoners, 8 packs of
Kersey from Exeter, and 150. l. in ready money, and gave such an alarm to the
enemy, that those Horse fled from Islip to Oxford, gave Hopton the alarm, in
his March to Islip, that all of them cried out, Essex is come; Essex is come;
whereupon the gates of Oxford were shut up, and they would not suffer, even
Astons own Troop, for a while, to enter. Such a terror and amazement struck
the hearts of these graceless, guilty, and Conscience-wounded Enemies of God
and goodness.

About the same time also, The most noble L. Generals merciful Proclamation.
his Excellency being in those parts about Oxford, and finding the Country
extremely pillaged, and impoverished by the Kings Cormorants; he most wisely
and mercifully caused Proclamation to be made in his Army, and in the Country
about, as follows.

ROBERT Earl of Essex, etc. Captaine-Generall of the Army, employed for the
Defense of the Protestant Religion, King, Parliament, and Kingdom.
WHereas these Countries have been very much afflicted and oppressed by the
Euemy, and we are now come to relieve them of their hard bondage. It is
therefore my express will and pleasure, and I do hereby straightly charge and
command all Officers and Soldiers of Horse, Foot, and Dragoones, belonging to
the Army under my Command, that they, and every of them, do forthwith after
Proclamation hereof made, forbear (notwithstanding any pretense whatsoever) to
plunder or spoil any of the goods of the inhabitants of these Countries, or to
offer any violence, or other prejudice unto them upon pain of death, without
mercy,

Given under my hand and Seal, May the 26. 1644. Essex.

Say, now, then ( malicious Malignants) was not this a better and more just
Proclamation, than that which came to the poor Inhabitants of those parts, A
Parallel of that Proclamation with the Oxonian Edict lately published from
Oxford.
round about from Oxford, Commanding all their Corn and Victual, upon pain
of Fire and Sword. And was it not (think you) better accepted of the said
people, than that Oxonian Edict, that in all those Countries all his Majesty's
Soldiers should have free Quarter for Horse and Man; So that the Inhabitants
were eaten up by such oppression, and perforce made Slaves and Bondmen to the
base lusts and wills of all the Dam-me, cursed crew, whose insolences were
hereby incredible, and the relation of them very fearful and grievous to
modest and tenderhearted Christians.

About the 27th of this instant, there were Letters drawn up (such was the
prudence and providence of our ever to be honored and renowned Parliamentary
Statists, A most prudent and pertinent Message sent by our Parliament in
England to the Parliament in Scotland.
to conserve and corroborate the blessed union and amity between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland) to be sent to the Parliament in Scotland,
from both the Houses of Parliament in England, expressing the obligation they
stood bound in, to the Kingdom of Scotland; the high esteem they have of
their brotherly love, for their assistance to this Nation; desiring also that
they may be united as well in Councills, as in Forces; And returning them
hearty thanks for their care of the Army in Ireland, for which they sent them
word, they had provided 30000 l. and also had sent down 20000 l. to their
Army, now with us in England, requesting them to accept their endeavors,
though their abilities answered not their desires.

Much also about the same time came credible Information by Letters out of
Gloucestershire, Beverton Castle in Gloustersh. taken by Col. Massey.
that, that most valiant, vigilant, and courageous Commander, Colonel Massey,
had taken Beverton Castle in Gloucestershire, about 12 miles from Gloucester,
and within a mile from Tedbury; which was surrendered to him, on no other
Conditions, but only for quarter for their lives: Wherein he took 60
Prisoners, with all their Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

And, Malmesbury taken by Col. Massey.
with the same success, he took the old Town of Malmesbury, wherein were 300
men, and two Sons of the Earl of Barkeshire; and 28 Officers, 400 Arms, 7
or 8 Pieces of Ordnance, besides Powder, Match, and other Ammunition and
provision; The Governor of the Town, Colonel Howard, being at the first
summoned to deliver up the Town for the use of the King and Parliament
Assembled at Westminster, returned an answer, That he would keep it for the use
of the King and Parliament Assembled at Oxford: but upon this Answer Col.
Massey fell close to the work, and after 13 hours hot fight, he, (as
aforesaid) forced the Governor to make a recantation of his error, and to cry
for mercy for his folly. And from thence he presently marched into Wiltshire,
Chippenham Garrison in Wilts taken by Col. Massey.
and possessed himself of the Garrison of Chippenham, the Soldiers therein
having only Quarter for their lives. And thus we see how admirably
successful the Lord of Hosts has made this Loyal and most active Commander
in all his Valiant and Magnanimous undertakings.

Whereupon, shortly after, The two Honorable Houses of Parliament, taking into
consideration the good service of this famous and Renowned Colonel, Col.
Massey advances into wilts with 2000. men toward the Devizes.
and that in pursuance of his foresaid good success, he was marched on with
about 2000. men to the Devizes thereby to open a passage for the bringing in of
cloth to London out of the West country: An Order was forthwith agreed on for
speedy supplying him with money and other necessaries: And another Ordinance of
Parliament was also resolved on, for the rewarding of this Noble Colonel, for
his so great and good service done to the Kingdom; and (that his never-dying
honor might not too long be unrecompensed) therefore to confirm and settle a
1000. l. a year, A most Noble and Renowned act of the Parliament in rewarding
the good Service of Col. Massey.
of Sir John Winters estate (an arch Papist in arms against the Parliament,
and one of the Queens great favorites) on him and his heirs for ever. A
singular and most highly commendable act, greatly redounding to their own just
praise, and to the encouragement of the rest of the valiant and active
Soldiers and commanders of the Parliaments Forces and Garrisons.

About the 30th. of this instant May, it pleased the Lord, to let us, the happy
inhabitants (O that our Malignants also could see their happiness therein!) of
the most famous and ever to be renowned City of London, see and know, Englands
great wonder, to Gods great glory, May 30. 1644.
that he had a purpose to do us good, and to raise us now, out of our late low
estate, and thereby to give us still more and more just cause to magnify and
omnifie his great name, in blessedly advancing all means and ways for the
good of his despised and distressed Church and Children; and to spread the
banner of the Lord Jesus Christ triumphantly in the field against his too too
long over-prided and insulting ^oes. For, about this time, notwithstanding that
by Gods admirable mercy and good providence we had now, already in the field 6
or 7 very considerable armies, as first, That of our most noble and renowned
Lord General, his Excellency the Earl of Essex in the Western parts of the
Kingdom; Secondly, that of our most loyal and loving Brethren of Scotland.
Thirdly, that of the ever most worthily honored Lord Fairfax and his most
renowned Son, Sir Thomas Fairfax. Fourthly, Above 6 brave Armies at one time in
the Kingdom on the Parliaments side.
that of the no less renowned truly noble, and to be ever honored Earl of
Manchester, all these three last mentioned armies in the Northern parts of the
Kingdom about York. Fifthly, that of the magnanimous and most courageous Sir
William Waller in the West also. Sixthly, that of the most noble and active
Earl of Denbigh, about Staffordshire and those parts: Besides, that brave
commanders forces in Lancastershire, I mean valiant Sir John Meldrum, and other
lesser forces in diverse other parts and places of the Kingdom. That
notwithstanding all these, and many, if not most of all these in great measure
raised out of the most famous City of London, yet I say, about this time (to
the glory of our wonder-working God be it spoken, the honor of the said great
City, the joy of Gods people, and the extreme terror of the malignant, The
true muster of the City forces and of Westminster at this (...).
Papisticall and Atheistical adversaries of the great and glorious Cause of
God) there was a general muster of all the City forces, yet remaining within
the line of Communication (besides 6 Regiments of the City forces, then abroad,
upon the public service) which were found to be no less than 12 regiments of
foot of the London Trained bands, containing 40 companies. Also Sir James
Harringtons regiment being the Trained bands of Westminster and that liberty,
containing 8 companies; Colonel Hudsons regiment being that of Southwarke,
containing also 8 companies; Also 4 regiments of Auxiliaries, containing 20
companies within the City. Colonel Willoughbies regiment being the Auxillaries
of the Hamlets, containing also, 8 companies; In all 48. All the companies of
each several regiment, being more than 6 Companies in a Regiment were taken
for a guard for the City and Parliament. The rest being 12 Regiments, 6
Companies in a Regiment, marched, about Noon, on Thursday May 30. 1644. to
Hyde-Parke, where Tents were pitched, and Ordnance planted; and whither the
Right Honorable Sir John Wollaston, then Lord Mayer of London, together with
the Right honorable the Lady Majoresse, and other Ladies and Gentlewomen, in
about 30 Coaches went to see this famous Muster performed, and where met them
diverse of the Lords and (...) of Parliament, who were there entertained in
great State, together with all the brave Colonels and Commanders. The other 12
were thus disposed of: 7 Companies to Guard the Works and Forts upon the
Northside of the River; 2 Companies to Guard the Southern side; 1 Company for
Westminsterh The other 2 Guarded the City, one Company thereof, at the
Exchange; the other Company, half at the Towerhill, and the other at Paul's.
The names of the Colonels whose Regiments went forth, were these: The Right
Honorable the Lord Mayors of the City of London; Col. Atkins; Col.
Penningtons; Col. Adams; Col. Warners; Col. Towers; Col. Haringtons; Col.
H^^sons; Col. Towes; Col. Willoughbies; Col. Shepherds; and Colonel Harsnets.

This, good Reader, is here mentioned not to cause our hearts to be lifted up
with pride, by the Reedish-props of the arm of flesh; No, God forbid it: God
the searcher of all hearts knows I am for from it, and should much grieve if
any should make such a sinister use of it, but unfeinedly desiring, in the
words, and with the spirit of the prophet Hosea, to ^^y out and confess, that
Ashut shall not save (...), Hosea 14. 3.
we will no^ ride (...) horses; nor will we say to the works of our hands, ye
are our gods: for in thee the fatherless finds mercy, No I say, I only do
it to show forth the admirable power and great pity of the Lord toward us, who
thus graciously raised us up, and Remembered us in our ^owestate, Psalm. 136. 23.
for his mercy endures for ever. But now to go on.

About the 3^ of this (...) May, we had certain intelligence, that Russell-Hall
in Staffordshire was surrendered to the noble Earl of Denbigh who managed the
work there with singular martial prudence and prowess: Russel-hall in
Staffordshire taken, and good prize therein, by the Earl of Denbigh.
There was taken in it, Colonel Lane, and diverse other commanders, at least
(...) other prisoners, and all the (...) in the House; They took there also
above 10000 l. worth of goods and wares that had been plundered and pillaged
from the carriers, coming from London and other parts, going toward
Lancashire; this being observed to have been one of the most thee ^ing
garrisons of the royal Cormorants, in all that County, in that they had
sometimes taken 7 ^^ore packs at a time from the Country; This garrison was a
most notorious thievish place.
so that (...) piece of service has much advantaged the security of the
Country there about, both in reguard they may have more free and fearlesse
passage for the time to come, to Coventry and London; and also in reguard that
a greater part of the goods thus taken will be restored to the proper owners.

And much about the same time we were for certain informed by letters from
Plymouth that the garrison therein sallying forth, with a considerable party
fell upon the enemies quarters at a place called Milbrooke, A brave prize taken
by Plymouth garrison.
2 miles from thence, where they took 9 pieces of ordnance a 150 prisoners, a
100 cowes and 300 sheep. In which encounter 10 of the enemies were slain and 6
of ours; And Colonel Martyn the brave Governor thereof did then also certify
that he was in a good posture of defense, only that he desired some farther
supply of provision to be sent unto him; for which purpose 3 barks were
speedily laden with victuals and all other necessaries for relief of the said
brave Town and faithful inhabitants thereof.

Much also about the same time came certain information by letters from
Nottingham to London, that, that valiant and faithful Governor of Nottingham
castle Colonel Hutchinson whom neither the power, The Garrison of Notingham
gave Newarke Garrison a brave defeat.
nor the promises of the atheistical Marquess of Newcastle could ever make to
startle from his loyalty and sincere obedience to the Parliament, had lately
sent forth a party of horse toward Newarke, where they encountered with a party
of the enemies horse under the command of Captain Thimbleby and Captain
Cartwright and after a hot skrimish and brave bickering, forcing them to fly,
they took in the pursuit between 50 and 60 horse, and about 20 officers and
gentlemen prisoners, among whom was Captain Cartwright and a Captain Lieutenant
whom the acute Rhetoric of their swords persuaded to keep them company to
Nottingham-castle, the foresaid Captain Thimbleby being slain in the fight.

And finally about the end of this Month of May, came certain News of diverse
letters intercepted, dated at Lyme, May 24., under the hands of Portescue
(formerly a Parliamenterian) Ashburnham, Limes undaunted Valout testified by
its adversaries themselves.
her Majesty's bedchamber friend, and some others of that stamp: who informed
their great masters, Bristol and Heath, by those letters, that, that villainous
Town of Lyme had destroyed more brave gentlemen of the West and men of honor,
than had been lost in all the West since these wattes began: But that they were
resolved once more to storm it for a farewell, and would dispute it line by
line, and work by work, yet feared they should be forced to leave the siege,
else the Country people (they said) would cut their throats, they were so bent
for the Parliament at Westminster: And shortly after according to the tenor of
the foresaid Letter, The Enemy bravely beaat Lime.
they assaulted this brave Town, whereupon the Towne-Souldiers suffered them
to make a breach in their Works, and then ran away from the defense of the
Work, as if indeed they had fled away from the Enemy; but by that time that 3
or 4 hundred of the Enemies were entered the breach, they instantly made use of
the advantage, and cut off, and took every man of them Prisoners, with their
Arms, and Ammunition, and had the slaughter of the Enemy from other of their
Works; and thus by Gods great mercy beat off their Enemy, and rested safe and
secure for this time also.

And here, A grateful and summary recital of all the foresaid Parliamentary
mercies of the month past.
now, having thus happily finished this Months Voyage, I shall desire to cast
Anchour, and put to shore, and make a little stay, desiring the Christian
Reader, with me, to make a brief review, and succinct recital of all the rich
Merchandise of this Months Voyage, the better to raise up our souls to a just
and gratfull valuation and admiration of them.

As, First, the brave defeat and repulse of the Enemies at Plymouth; Foxes
valiant and active performances, and taking of Budely-house in Worcestershire.

The most successful progress of the most renowned Earl of Manchesters
Forces in Lincolnshire, and taking of the Town and Lincoln.

The Pious Ordinance of Parliament, for the demolishing of all Organs and
Superstitious Monuments of Popery in Churches and Chapels, or else where;
together with valiant Captain Swanleys yet farther brave exploits in Wales;
And Colonel Massies at or about Gloucester.

The brave Citizens of Londons Petition for the re-establishment of the
State-Committee, and the happy result thereof; Together Massies brave
performances about the adverse Garrisons near Gloucester.

Lyme Stormed, and its Enemies bravely repulsed; The renowned Lord Generals
advance of his Army Westward, and a day of London, to seek the Lord for a
blessing on it; And Devon, and Corwalls defection from the bloody and barbarous
Irish.

A most devilish design and pestilent plot to have undone Scotland England
too, by a divertive War, but most blessedly crossed and prevented, with the
discomfiture and disgrace of those that plotted and acted it.

Lime; Together with a brave prize taken at Sea, by the most noble Earl of
Warwicks Ships: And Kents pious pattern of gratitude to God for its great
deliverance.

Pembrookes love and loyalty to the Parliament attested; Cawood-castle; And
Ayremouth Isle and Fort taken by valiant and virtuous Sir John Meldrum, in the
Northern parts of the Kingdom.

Lord Generals prosperous progress and advance with his Army into the West;
Valiant Captain Temples brave exploit at Islip; The gratulatory Message sent by
the Parliament in England to the Parliament in Scotland; More of renowned
Colonel Masseys admirable activity, and the Parliaments most worthy gratifying
of his good Service.

Englands great wonder to Gods great glory, in the famous Muster of so many
thousand Soldiers in and about the City of London, all completely Armed,
notwithstanding so many Armies abroad in the Field, before it; The taking of
Russell-house, that notoriously theevish Garrison; Together with the brave
defeat given to Newarke, by Nottingham Garrison; And the brave condition of
that famous Town of Lime, notwithstanding the long and tedious Siege against
it.

All which being rightly regarded, God's Ark borne up, above the worlds
swelling waves.
and seriously laid to heart, have we not still great and just cause to see,
and say, that God has most triumphantly carried and borne up his holy Arc,
the Parliaments blessed Cause, above all the raging and roaring billows and
swelling surges of the turbulent Ocean of this our greatly distracted and
disturbed Nation; carrying it on, I say, most smoothly with pleasant gales of
good things bestowed; and preserving it most happily from malice and mischief
threatened.

And therefore how great cause has England in almost infinitely bounden
gratitude to confess with holy David, and sincerely to say; Psalm. 119. 68.
Lord thou art good, and thou do good. And therefore also, to exult and
rejoice in the Lord our God; yea, and as good David says, Psalm. 44. 8.
To make our boast of God all the day long; and to praise his name for ever and
ever. With a Selah. Especially, since (as the holy Spirit of God himself
declares, in Hannahs sweet Song.) There is none holy as the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 2,
3.
for, indeed, there is none beside him; neither is there any Rock like our
God. Talk no more, therefore, so exceeding proudly (o ye Atheistical
Malignants and Popish, Irish-Rebels) let not such arrogancy come out of your
mouth: for, the Lord is a God of knowledge, Job 9. 4.
and by him actions are weighed. Yea, and as holy Job says. He is most wise in
heart, and mighty in strength; Who has hardened himself against him, and has
prospered?

ANd now I shall again put out our blessed Bark to Sea, June. 1644.
hoise up our Sails, and launch forth into the Deep, and prosecute this our
next ensuing Months Voyage: wherein we shall see how the Lord, still carries
on his glorious Arc, the Parliaments Cause, above all the furious Floods and
raging Waves of its outrageous and impious Adversaries.

And in the first place I shall desire to remember the Reader, how it most
graciously pleased the Lord to bring off his blessed Arc from a very
dangerous, and death-threatning Shelfe of devouring Quicksands, Lime most
notably releived and the Seige wholly and happily raised.
and most safely and securely to set it afloat again, carrying it on with most
pleasant and prosperous gales; I mean the happy and honorable releiving, and
raising of the Seige of that long beseiged, and greatly straightned, famous
Town of Lime in Dorsetshire, a most full, exact, and true relation whereof,
sent in a Letter to a friend at London; and coming to my hands, I have thought
fit here to insert, for the Readers better content and satisfaction, which was
as follows.

An exact and true relation of the relieving of the most resolute Garrison of
Lime in Dorsetshire.
Sir,
I Have written one Letter to you since I came into this Bay, where also I have
received yours. I bless God for present health; only, much sadness of spirit
is contracted from the sad spectacles which besieged Lime, continually offers
to our view; The most noble Lord Admiral arived at Lime.
a Town which deserves abundance of pity and love, they being so constantly
under the violence of a cruel Enemy: But God has brought our most noble Lord
Admiral to this Town, to a singular purpose, it tending directly to the
preserving of that distressed Town, it not having in it, at his Lordships
coming above a days bread, and a small quantity of ammunition. There were
then in the Town, 4000 Souls, whereof a 1000 in garrison, who though they
wanted shoes, Lymes distressed condition at his Lordships coming.
stockings, clothes and pay, and had not departed from Lyme since the
beginning of the siege; yet were all of them resolved to stand out to the last
man; and when they could do no more, to break through the Enemy with their
swords.

At my Lords first coming he sent on shore near 40 barrels of powder, The
most virtuous Lord Admiralls piety and charity to Lyme.
and some match which came along with his Lordship, purposely for their
relief; The ships under his Lordships Command did before his coming spare
what provisions they could, none coming from any other parts; and the passages
by sea being near blockt up, his Lordship contracted for 350. l. worth of corn
and other provisions being then bound for Plymouth, to be sold there, and took
order to send it into the Town; himsefe undertaking the price.

The condition and courage of the besieged did so prevail with our seamen, Yea
and of my Lords honest Seamen too.
that out of their poor overplus, they sent them above 30 pair of boots, a 100
pair of shoes, a 160 pair of stockings, some linen and old clothes, and some
quantity of fish and bread, which they had formerly saved out of their
sea-allowance. They did also unanimously give one 4th. part of their bread for
the next 4 Months amounting to 9000 weight, which their hard labor and
constant duty might advise them to have reserved rather for their own be^lies.
My Lord and the ships with him, determined to spare them 2000 weight of bread
more, and some quantities of beef, porke, shot, fish, and other necessaries.
Some of our Seamen also being desired by the Town to look to the line, while
600 of the garrison sallyed out on the Enemy, hereupon 300 men were resolved to
be sent. An assault upon the Town to the enemies great loss.
But the same day the Town received a terrible storm from the Enemy, yet with
little advantage to the besiegers, they loosing about 60; and the Town but 8
men, only some of their Commanders were then hurt; viz. Colonel Ware was shot
in the belly, but not dangerously; and Lieutenant Col. Blake was slightly hurt
in the foot. The Townsmen (of the 3 Captains that led up the forlorn hope)
killed one Captain Southern who had on the L. Pawlets own armor, and took
prisoner another, viz. Captain Aston, who was the next day brought aboard our
ship. This Captain Aston is brother to a servant of Mr. Ketchmar in Fish-street
in London, The Enemies pride and high hopes.
the Enemy refused to take off their dead, resolving in the pride of their
heart to bury them and take the Town altogether: But God afterward corrected
their daring and presumptuous cruelty. The garrison being much encouraged by
this good success, resolved to prosecute their former purpose of sallying out,
and in pursuance thereof, the 300 men were sent safely on shore, though to make
good their landing 3 or 4 of the Townsmen were slain. The most noble Lord
Admiralls Stratagem.
The same day his Lordship determined to send 2 of his ships, and all the
ship-boats fitted with men, toward Charmouth, Bird-port, and other places about
6 miles from Lyme, that the Enemies opinion of our landing men in those parts
might draw off the horse, whereby the sally might be more secure and
advantageous. And so accordingly, immediately after, the ships and boats were
sent out, at a time signified from the Town by shooting off a gun from
Daves-Fort; and giving an alarm on the East-shoar, they obtained what was in
design. For, all the day long 4 or 5 troops of horse and some hundreds of
Foot attended the moving of the ships and boats, from whence diverse great shot
and small shot played on them, which forced the Enemy to cast up a brest-worke
by the Seaside for their defense. The Enemy was mistaken and frustrated of his
hopes.
Now, the Enemy mistook our intention, supposing that these boats had in the
night taken men out of the Town with purpose to set them on shore, to get
provisions into the Town; or to fall on the rear and thereby thinking the Town
to be weakened; and therefore on the same day appointed by the Town for they
sally aforesaid, they assaulted the Town with great fury, from about 6 at
night, to about 8 of the clock, in all which time, there was such a continual
peal of small and great shot, that the Town seemed to be all on a flame; Twice
the Enemy made an orderly retreat, A very furious Assault upon the Town,
bravely received.
appearing each time in a body of about a 1000 men. The third assault was most
violent the Enemy advancing with brave resolution and being as gallantly
received by the Townsmen. A little after 8 of the clock there was a remitting
of the former fury, and about 9 almost a general silence. There were slain of
the Enemies in this assault (as some of the Town clearly computed) at least
400; The number of the slain in this Assault.
and of the garrison, not above 6 or 7 at the most killed and wounded, whereof
Major Townsend was one, who was shot in the head, but was alive at the first
relation hereof. Among the slain of the Enemies, there was found one Gentleman
that came that morning from Exeter with letters for Oxford, whither he would
fain have carried the news of the taking of Lyme; The enemies be fooled in
reckoning without their host.
but God prevented him, both in his journey and news, and the letters were
found in his pocket and sent to London, the principal thing imparted in them
being, That they found the ways to Oxford began to be obstructed; that the
Queen was better (I hardly believe it) than formerly, and much comforted in
Doctor Miroons coming unto her. But to proceed.

At last there was a parley sent to the Town, The enemies stomach, now come
down.
the Enemy now desiring leave to bury their dead, which before they had
scorned. And about this time came some more relief to the Town by Sea; in the
afternoon of which day, the Enemy had fired the Town, yet but; The enemies
rage in firing the Town.
houses burnt; and afterward again another part of the Town was fired, which
flame and combustion increased so as to burn down twenty new houses there.

And now, you may easily judge the state of poor Lyme, but if you had seen it,
as it was continually before us, your eyes certainly would have been much
affected, considering that such brave and gallant spirits, very worth a whole
nation, indeed, should be the subjects on which the rage and madness of a
base and cruel Enemy was from day to day exercised and implacably imprinted.

Who ever had then, Gods power and providence was Lymes walls and bulwarks.
but rightly known their merit and condition, I am confident, they would not
only compassionate them, but relieve them: But what was wanting in men, was
mightily supplied by the power and providence of Heaven; Whose salvation had
been all along, as their Walls and Bulwarks.

And to manifest this the more clearly, I may not here omit, that at the late
storming of this Town, one woman shot off 16 muskets upon the Enemy; and the
women of the Town generally did fill the Soldiers bandileers while they
fought. The admirable courage of the women of Lyme.
And it was credibly informed by honest inhabitants of Lyme; that a maid that
had had one of her hands cut off in the fight, being asked what course she
would take to live, The most pious reply of a maid in Lyme whole hand was shot
off.
now she had lost of her hands. Truly (said Christ, for whose Cause I am as
willing and ready to loose not only my other hand, but my life also. A sweet
and most Saint-like speech indeed. Such admirable courage it pleased the Lord
to infuse into the hearts of all the inhabitants, in all the time of this long
and sharp Siege; the continuance of their dangers having (it seemed) much
blunted the sense and fear of their daily dangers, The continuance of Limes
troubles took away the sense of fear and terror of them.
retaining in their spiris a constant cheerfulness, as being strongly
persuaded; yea, and certainly knowing they should have deliverance, either
from the affliction, or by it: as was then immediately after that last and fore
assault before mentioned, most happily visible to their eyes and sight: For,
Maurice and his mischievous Mates (being tired with the siege, and their
intolerable losses, and terrified with the fear of the Lord Generals hourly
expected approach to fall upon them, Prince Maurice leaves Lime, and raises his
Siege.
and ease the Town of them) left the Siege totally, and made have away for
fear of being taken as in a trap, between the Town, and the Generals Army, as
anon you shall hear most exactly and fully related.

About the beginning also of this instant June, came certain Information, by
Letters from that most pious Patriot, Sir Will. Armine, Dated at Sunderland, May
22th, The Earl of Calender possessed of Morpeth-Castle in Northubmerland.
That the noble and religiously affected Earl of Callender, (having about a
Month since entered the Kingdom out of Scotland, as a second, or reserve to
the greater Army of our Brethren of Scotland) was about this time entered into
Northumberland, and had got possession of Morpeth-castle in the said County;
his Army then consisting of about 8 or 10000 men. That by treachery between the
Governor of the Southshields and the Mayor of Newcastle, the Southshields was
surrendered to the enemy, without stricking one blow. And that there was a Plot
for the betraying of Sunderland, Sunderland delivered from a treacherous Plot.
also to the Enemy; which being, by Gods mercy, timely discovered by the Seamen
that lay upon the River, with much difficulty they planted two Pieces of
Ordnance commodiously, and betaking themselves to their Arms, they made good
the passage, repulsed the Enemy with strong hand, and so secured the place
against them. A reward of 200 l. bestowed on the honest Seamen for their
loyalty and good service.
For which excellent piece of service, the Parliament Ordered, that 200 l.
should be given among them as a gratuity; and the Captain that had the command
of the Shields, was laid in hold, till he also might have a just reward, by a
Council of War, for his said treachery.

Much also about the same time, Letters were read in the House of Commons in
Parliament, Valiant Capt. Swanley made commander in chief in Wales.
from the Gentry of Wales, therein supplycating the House, that Captain
Swanley, that brave Sea-Commander, an eminent person, and famous for his good
service in those parts, (as has been already fully related) might speedily
return unto them, and continue Commander in Chief among them.

Whereupon it was speedily Ordered, that the Leopard, the Swallow, and the
Providence, which he brought to the Downs with him, should be forthwith
re-victualed, and that he should be instantly recommended unto Wales, A Chain
of Gold worth 200 l. bestowed on Captain Swanley, by the Parliament.
as was desired; and being in person called to the Bar, in the Commons House
of Parliament, he had thanks returned for his good Service done, and as a token
of their good affection toward him, and for his better encouragement it was
Ordered, That a Chain of Gold of 200 l. value should be given to him; and
another of an 100 l. to Captain Smith, his valiant Vice Admiral. A brave way
to spur the Spirits of valiant Soldiers, thus to engrave Characters of honor
on their former famous and well-deserving Services.

The King (as we all too well know) made an agreement with his abominable Irish
Canibals, at Oxford, The Kings most ungodly agreement with the Irish Rebels,
to grant them a Parliament in Ireland of their own packing of Popish Natives,
and other such like most impious immunities, and they having received their
dispatch at Oxford, went away for Ireland, with great devilish joy, and
impious content to their hellish hearts. But yet his Majesty, and his accursed
Council, would not permit the honest, and well-affected Agents for the
miserable and oppressed Protestants in Ireland to have favorable admittance to
the King, nor so much as to know what he had condescended unto, it being so
much against them.

But it pleased the Lord very shortly after, Expelled him from his former
secure abode at Oxford.
to manifest to the world that he thrived and prospered accordingly; For, his
Excellency, the Parliaments Lord General, came thither with such a potent
Army against Oxford, and gave them there such a sudden alarm, that Oxford
proved too hot an habitation for his Majesty to reside in, so that he was glad
to fly after his beloved Irish-Rebels, and to leave Oxford in a very distracted
condition.

For, Valiant and active Sir Will. Waller follows the King.
upon Monday, June the 3d, 1644. about 12 of the Clock at night, he was glad
to horse and away, some 30 Coaches, with Luggages, and Court-baggages,
accompanying him, and some of those Shee-Creatures crying out, that they left
their Jewels behind them for haste; and thus the next day they got to Burford,
where the King refreshed himself; his Ladies, and Soldiers, but for a matter
of two hours space; for, noble Sir William Waller coming at the same time to
Whitney, five miles distant, gave them a sudden and sound alarm, whereat they
all most frightfully cried out, to horse, to horse, away, away; and his
Majesty with his naked Sword in his hand rode all about the Town to hasten his
men away, many of whom, as 'twas well known, being more willing to stay behind
and run to the Parliaments L. General the noble Earl of Essex, Gods justice
prosecutes the wicked with terror and disgrace.
than to serve his Majesty any longer. Ah sad effects! but most just reward of
following such wicked Counsel and wretched Counselors; and oh the admirable
justice of our most righteous God! in thus prosecuting the wilful workers of
iniquity with terrors and disgrace.

And here observe besides to this purpose, what admirable operation this
forlorn condition of the Enemies of Truth, had upon the Counsels of the
Parliament and City of London: Major Genesis Brown made Commander in chief of 3
Counties, by the Parliament.
For an Ordinance of Parliament was presently hereupon passed for the enabling
of valiant and renowned Colonel Brown (that noble Citizen, who had done much
most excellent service both in suppressing the Kentish Rebellion, and at the
battle near Alsford, where Hopton received such a fatal defeat as he could
never recover, nor recruit himself to this day) to Command in chief, as Major
General of all the forces raised and to be raised for the reducing of Oxford,
Wallingford, Greenland house and Banbury; and of all other forces raised for
the settling in peace of the Counties of Oxford, Berks and Buckingham, with
power to use and exercise Martiall-Law, according to the rules put forth by his
Excellency, the Earl of Essex, the Parliaments Lord General.

About the 4th. of this instant we had certain intelligence that noble Sir
William Waller being in pursuit of those whom his Excellency, the Lord
Generals horse had moved and pricked faster forward in their flight than they
were willing; Tewktsbery taken by Col. Massey.
and it coming speedily also to the knowledge of that most valiant and active
Commander Col. Massey, he presently also fell into martial action, and with a
considerable party marched valiantly to Tewkesbury, and after a slender dispute
about it, became master of it; and with very little loss on his side, slew
Colonel Godfrey, and a Quartermaster Genesis to that Runagado Wilmot, a rank
Papist; took Lieutenant Colonel Mynne prisoner, and other Officers and
Soldiers, together with 300 new Pikes, several other Arms, 18 Barrels of
powder, and other good purchase left in the Town; and placed a garrison therein
to prevent the Kings Army from relief there, in case they should move that way.

About the 6th. of this instant, we were credibly informed, that at a place
called Parrishaw a Town about 7 miles from Worcester, in the mid way between
Evesham and Worcester, the Kings forces passing or rather flying that way,
About 60 of the kings soldiers drowned at Parrishaw at a bridge.
they pulled up the bridge and laid the loose boards upon stones for a party of
their own forces then behind, to pass over, and then they intended to take
them away, to hinder the passage of any of the Parliaments Forces then in
pursuit of them: But the Rear of the Kings Army marched so hastily away that
the loose boards slipped away from the stones, when many were upon it, there
being a great and deep water running swiftly under the bridge, so that about
60. of them fell into the river and were drowned, among whom were some
Commanders of quallity. Thus we see still how evil haunts the wicked man at
the heels to destroy him. Sir William Waller also pursues and catches some of
them in the chase.
And Sir William Waller still pursuing them (as we were credibly informed) fell
upon a party of them, and took the Queens Sergeant Major, 3 Cornets, and about
an 100 horse: But the noble and prudent Lord General well knowing what a
considerable and sufficient party Sir William Waller had to pursue them,
marched Westward, and Colonel Masseys forces joined with Sir William Wallers
in the prosecution of this running flight of their Enemies.

And about the 8th. of this instant June, we had credible enformation touching
the siege and taking of Shudley-castle by that noble and renowned General Sir
Will. Waller, Shudley-castle taken by renowned Sir Will. Waller.
a very strong piece and of much consequence; which Sir William plied so close
with his batterring pieces, that in a short space he became master of it; for
they within came soon to a parley with him, the issue whereof was, That they
delivered up themselves prisoners, and only had quarter for all their lives:
Wherein were taken prisoners, Col. Sir William Mourton, The prisoners and
prizes.
Lieut. Colonel Sayer, Sergeant Major Aldham, Sergeant Major Floyd; 4
Captains; 7 Lieutenants; 1 Cornet; 4 Ensigns; 7 Gentlemen of quality; 289
common soldiers; one Drum; a Malignant Priest, and his 2 Sons; 80 horse; 2
Drakes; many were slain in the fight against the castle, but not a man slain
on Sir William Wallers side: A rare mercy and singular preservation.

The very same day also on which the former good service was performed, as
aforesaid, Colonel Purefoy being returned from Gloucester, and not willing to
be idle by the way, but having taken up some more strength from Coventry to
add to his own Warwick forces set upon the Earl of Northamptons-House,
commonly called Compton-House, being between Banbury and Warwick, a place or
House of very considerable-strength. Compton House in Warwickshire taken by
Col. Purfrey.
In which House they found (as was credibly informed) 5500 l. in ready money;
besides 5 or 6 earthen-pots of money, afterward found in a fish pond; they
took also an 120 prisoners, and all their Arms, 60 Horse, 400 sheep, near an
100 head of Cattle, 18 loads of excellent plunder, and other good prizes; and
there also they took prisoners, Colonel Knotsford and Captain Clarke.

And now, about the 10th. of this instant came out the Ordinance of Parliament
(mentioned a little before) printed and published, for the association of
Buckinghamshire, Berks and Oxfordshire, and a Committee was nominated therein,
Great and deserved honor put upon Sergeant Major Genesis Brown by an Ordinance of
Parliament.
for the raising of money upon Papists, Malignants and Delinquents, estates in
those Counties and likewise to settle the Excise there, and to levy money upon
the Ordinance of Parliament for the 25th. parts, for the maintenance of the
forces that are or shall be raised for the reducing of the Enemies garrisons in
those Counties. And that the said Committee have power to cut down the wood
and timber of Papists or Malignants to raise fortifications, or for other
services as there shall be occasion: And likewise that they shall call before
them the Malignant Clergy and Scholars in those Counties, and place and
displace such as they shall find occasion thereunto. And all this power was put
principally into the hands of this brave and loyal Citizen, Sergeant Major
General Brown, who was thereby also of purpose made Sergeant Major General of
all the forces raised or to be raised in all those Counties aforesaid; and he
had power (by this authority of Parliament) to assemble a Council of war as
often as he saw occasion for the executing of justice on all sorts of offenders.

About the 12. of this instant came certain information by letters and
otherwise from that most valiant and worthy Commander Sir William Brereton, of
an excellent exploit performed by that most valiant and noble Patriot of his
Country the Earl of Denbigh, The noble Earl of Denbighes brave exploit against
the kings forces at Dudley-castle
against a party of the kings horse which came to raise his siege at
Dudley-castle, the manner whereof was thus related. The King being upon his
departure from Bewdley toward Shrewsbury, sent a party of about 3000 horse
against the Earl of Denbigh at Dudley-castle; which horse coming suddenly on
them, the noble Earl sent a party of forlorn-hope commanded in chief by ever
honored Col. Mitton, Governor of Wem, who most bravely charged the Enemy, but
their force; as I said, being all horse and coming violently on, our
forlorne-hope seemed to be in a forlorn condition being on a sudden desperately
engaged and in such a danger that it was advised by the Council of War, The
great danger of Col. Mitton, and his forlorn hope.
That the Earl could not without great hazard to his whole Army attempt to
relieve the forlorn-hope, but must rather leave them to shift as they could and
keep their trenches, with their main body to receive the Enemy, if they came
on. But the noble Earl (to his perpetual honor) hating to see his dear
friends sacrifice their lives in a Cause so just, as Religion and Liberties,
and himself stand by a looker on; The Earl of Denbighes brave resolution.
resolved to relieve them (maugre all disadvantages) or dye in the attempt, and
with this martial and most noble resolution, he drew up his forces; and
himself in person, leading them on against the Enemy with admirable courage,
cried out thus to his Soldiers, Come on Sirs, follow me, for by the grace of
God I will rescue Colonel Mitton, or lay my bones in the place.

And thereupon charged them to so good purpose that he soon freed his
forlorne-hope, and in short time put the Enemies to a disorderly flight (if not
quite routed them) and was in the pursuit of them, The enemy put to flight and
pursued, by the Lord Denbigh.
diverse miles together. In which flight (as was certainly informed) the Enemy
lost above an 100 men which were slain in the place, and among them one person
of special note was then killed for whom they made much lamentation; there
were also 17 persons of quality taken prisoners, besides the common-souldiers,
and 30 more afterward at Master Dudleys House, The slain and prisoners taken.
whom that valiant and most worthy Commander Colonel Rudgeley (who with his
Staffordshire forces did singular good service in this fight) took prisoners
before they could retreat, besides Horse and Arms; and on the Earls side was
only 7 slain and some wounded.

I a little before made mention of the good hand of God upon the most valiant
and courageous garrison of Lyme, in their long and straight Siege by a furious
and cruel Enemy: And now about the 15th, The famous Seige of Lime in
Dorsetshire wholely raised.
of this instant came certain intelligence of the full and clear raising of
that famous Siege, to the perpetual shame and disgrace of Maurice, Pawlet,
Stoell, Ashburnham, Strangewayes and others; which was confirmed by a Letter
sent by the most renouned Earl of Warwick, Lord Admiral, to the Speaker of the
Honorable House of Peers in Parliament, and by Master Iesops Letter also and
others; the substance of all which, in effect, was this.

That since the most Noble and ever to be honored Earl of Warwick, performed
that brave Service in so timely relieving Lyme in the deepest of its distress;
The unsuccesfull assaults of the enemies against Lime.
and continued there, observing the occurrences and carriage of affairs as
well without as within the Town; and that the Enemies had, in the space of 4 or
5 days shot many Volleys of great and small shot into the Town, but most
unsuccessefully, the besieged answering them, still as courageously as ever at
the first; Hopton also coming to the Leaguer and hoping to have made some
recruite of his broken fragments, but was refused, and at Dartmouth also, Sir
Ralph Hoptons low ebb.
whither he came with but 7 Horse, giving out there, that he was to raise an
Army of 15000 men (if he could have got them) and Maurice also now tired with
so ^oylesome a work, and terrified also, with fear of the Parliaments Lord
Generals approach into those parts, and especially to this Town, to free it of
its fear of his forces and unneighbourly neighborhood; The enemies notable
losses at Lime Siege.
that thus, I say, after the Enemies loss of at least an 105 Officers, besides
some more superior Officers and commanders; 25 Gunners; and above 2000 common
soldiers, more than they lost at Bristol and Exeter, as some of themselves
confessed: Prince Maurice on sad and serious consideration of all these
disasters, and many more, The Seige quite raised.
about June the 14th by two of the clock in the morning, quite raised this his
siege and went clear away to Exeter.

After whose departure, the noble Lord Admiral, Master Iesop, and many others,
going into Lime, to view the Towns line, and the Enemies works, and truly
comparing the very great slenderness of the Towns line, with the extraordinary
strength and solidity of all the Enemies Works, they could not but greatly
admire what had been done by them, and were forced most freely to confess and
grant that the defense of Heaven, Heaven was Lymes munition of Rocks.
was merely and clearly their munition of rocks; and that it was little less
than a miracle that they should hold out so long and violent a Siege;
especially, the Town standing at the bottom of two hills, The Enemies
strength, the Towns weakness.
and their Works so low and thin, that in many places one might have run
over them, and a strong hand might have thrust them down, they being in
effect, as it were paper or pasteboord walls; and in the latter end of the
siege the Enemies outragiously shooting into the Town, The outrageous fury and
malice of the Enemy against Lyme.
bars of Iron, pieces of Anchors, and great Shot blown up to as great a
measure of heat as was possible (they having a Forge on purpose) which falling
on Houses fired many, yet were suddenly quenched, with only hurt (not death)
of but three men; The almost incredible courage of the Soldiers in Lime.
insomuch that all that saw and considered these things, could not choose, but
(with admiration) ingenuously confess, that certainly, there was never more
valor and undantednesse of spirit shown in the world, against a potent and
pestilent Enemy, than was in thus defending this place; The noble E. of
Warwicks testimony of Lime.
and that every man deserved (as the most noble Earl of Warwick himself
there publicly professed) some eminent badge of honor to remain to their
posterity, in memorial of this most famous Siege.

About the time of the end of the Siege, some 26 of the Enemies side came in
unto the Lord Admiral, Diverse of the enemies party come to the L Admiral,
profering their service to the Parliament.
freely and faithfully proffering their service to the Parliament, among whom
was Lieutenant Fair, an Officer of the Lord Brogall, brother to the Lord
Inchiquin, and 10 also of Inchiquins Regiment came in unto them. One Irish
woman left behind, was slain, and almost pulled in pieces by the women of
Lime.

In the Siege many houses were burnt, and yet a Granado falling into a room in
one house, 3. Children in one bed miraculously preserved.
and breaking upon a bed wherein lay 3 children, not one of them had any harm;
there was scarce a house in the whole Town, that was not battered, and scarce
a room into which, shot had not been made. At one last great fire in the
Town, two maids carrying between them a vessel of water, had three of their
hands shot off; 2. Maids lost three of their hands at once.
One of these (it is probable) was that honest maid that spoke so christianly (as
was forementioned in the relief of Lime) touching the loss of one of her
hands.

In all this, the most noble and renowned Lord Admiralls pious and singular
charitable affection to the Town, gained a most just acknowledgement from
them; That they all did owe their lives, (under God) to his most honorable
Lordship.

But above all, all honor and praise is most due to the great God of Lime, in
this his mighty, and even miraculous deliverance of it, All the praise of this
mighty preservation is due to the great God of Lime.
it being also a business of so great consequence, as by Gods mercy to bring
in the whole West Country, who resolved long before to obey no command on the
other side, till Lime was taken. O had Prince Maurice but obtained one
Commander of the Parliaments, that is God, and their good Cause, what a Victor
might he have proved, with but half the strength, which by relation, he
brought of the Country people thereabout.

The Enemies cursed the unlucky hour (as they called it) of their coming
thither, having lost, as I said before, from the first to the last, at least, 2
or 3000 Soldiers, and the Town but six score men, with the most. Ever praised
be the great God of battles for it.

And thus the Lord, at last, to the glory of his great name, and joy of his
servants, set Lime at liberty from all their former fears and dangers. Limes
deliverance a certain return of Prayer.
To all which mercies, let me add this, as a prime result of them all; that I
make no doubt, but that the prayers put up at that instant, on their behalf,
both aboard our Ships, and in other parts of the Kingdom, were a special and
speedy means to shorten their dangers, shelter their persons, and hasten this
their happy deliverance.

The thus happy relieving of this brave Garrison of Lime, by the ever renowned,
Thanks sent by the Parlia. to the most noble L. Admiral for relieving Lime.
and most highly to be honored Earl of Warwick, was (and that most
deservedly) taken by the Parliament, as a most singular and acceptable service
done to the Kingdom, who thereupon Ordered, That a Letter of thanks should be
sent unto him, from both the Houses of Parliament for his great care, love, and
loyalty therein.

And, 1 Samuel
that, not only this brave Garrison (of which we may say, as the Damesels sang
before the Arc, That Saul had slain his thousand, but David his ten thousand:
So, other Garrisons have slain their thousand, done very bravely; but this of
Lime, its ten thousands, far out-stript them all) to encourage, I say, not
only this Garrison, but that the whole Kingdom might as well in this as in
other things, see and be assured that good and faithful Service shall not be
unrewarded: Lime also rewarded with 10000 l. a year of the L. Paulets Estate.
It was, therefore Ordered by the Parliament, that 10000. l. a year, out of the
Lord Paulets Estate should be conferred upon the Town of Lime, for their
loyalty and courage in this famous Siege, which has been, indeed, to
admiration; for that, besides the straights they have been driven too; their
impregnable courage, in so stoutly defending themself from the malice of their
blood-thirsty Enemies, has sometimes caused their very water to be noisome
with the blood of those that sought their ruin and destruction. O the
admirable power, wisdom, and justice of the righteous Lord of Heaven, and
Judge of the whole World! But to go on.

At the same time, and from the same hand, and ships of the most noble Lord
Admiral at Lime, it was informed that their ships had taken upon the Seas,
Prizes taken at Sea, by the Lo. Admiralls Ships.
since their setting forth from the Downs, two Prizes, one at Dartmouth, a
Vessel laden with Oil and Salt for Holland; and the other that was brought in
unto them, was a Dutch Galliot, laden with good Commodities for the Enemy at
Aptham and Exeter, to the value of at least 8000 l. And the Master himself of
the Galliot confessed that they had for her more safe Convoy, the Company of
two Statesmen of War, who had aboard their Ships, 5 Barrels of money, amounting
to a 1000 Dollars, confined to some Malignants in Exeter. The Factor under
whose charge the money was committed, being aboard the Men of War, was loath to
be discovered, but at length was apprehended and brought before his Lordship,
and for some peremptory and unmannerly speeches to his Lordship, was put into
safe custody; And all the goods proved good prize.

From aboard the James at anchor before Lyme; June, 1. 1644.

This blessed business of Lyme and the most noble Lord Admirals singular and
seasonable supply afforded to it, did also produce immediately after these
several Orders from the Parliament.

First, Orders of Parliament touching Lime
that a letter was drawn up (as was touched before) and sent to the most noble
Lord Admiral, signifying how sensible the House was of his so great and good
service, and returning him the thanks House for the same. And truly these
Parliamentary acknowledgements, and gratulations are very good for the
public, either by land or by water; and that Excellent Lord deserves thanks
of no less demension than a Parliament.

Letter was drawn up (as from the whole House) also to the Town of Lyme to
inform them that the House took special notice of their faithful and valiant
service. And indeed, it is a grateful and most worthy act of the House, to let
no desert escape their notice: For, it is not fit that such places as have
borne the heat of the day, should take cold under the shadow of State-neglect.

Lord Mayor of the City of London was thereby desired to send notice to all
Churches and Chapels, in, and about the said City and County of Midelsex, to
desire the Ministers in their prayers, the next Lord's Day, to give thanks to
Almighty God, for the great deliverance of the said Town of Lime, from the
rage and intended malice and mischief of their outrageous enemies.

Much about the foresaid time, the Parliaments ever to be honored Lord
General, Sir Will. Belfore sent to free Lime, of its Siege, and finding it
raised, taks Weymonth and Tanton-Dean
the most noble Earl of Essex had sent out (as he was desired by the
Parliament) a Party of Horse to the relief of Lime, under the Command of that
most loyal, valiant, and most virtuous Gentleman, Sir William Belfore, but (as
ye have already heard) the Morris was done, and danced away before; Whereupon
their Horse wheeled about toward Weymouth, and after they had faced the Town,
and given them Summons, they within presently yielded, and 400 Soldiers were
content to leave their heavier weapons, and to march away with sticks only in
their hands.

The noise of Lime and Weymouth, and the Lord Generals terror, flew to
Taunton-Deane, and they also soon quitted the Garrison, and daunced after
Maurices pipe. Truly, I cannot tell what to say to these things, but must most
justly admire Gods infinite mercy, whose hand was most manifestly seen now in
the West, (as well as in the North) working all our works, there, for us.

But of the winning of these Towns, and the rest, we shall speak shortly after
more fully in their more proper place.

Much also about the foresaid time, we had certain Intelligence by Letters out
of Leicestershire, that the loyal, and right noble Lord Gray of Grooby, The
noble L. Gray of Groobies brave carriage at Leicester.
who has so bravely and faithfully defended the Town of Leicester, as having
diverse times engaged his person, and done singular good service for the
Kingdom, with that very small strength which he had there, notwithstanding
the great strength, and often incursions of the enemy in those parts; yet, that
he marched out of Leicester, and took diverse of the Kings Cormorants, or
Cavaliers, which were straggling up and down to plunder, and sent them
prisoners to Leicester; and that he fell upon their Quarters near Vlstrup,
took some Prisoners there, and made the rest retreat, and in despite of the
Enemy, and all their power, safely conducted Sir John Gells Ordnance and
Artillery, designed for Darby or Leicester.

About the 18 th. of this instant June, we had certain Information out of the
West, Preparation by Sea to help forward the reduction of the West to the
obedience of the Parliament
that the most noble Lord Admiral, sent word to his Excellency, the
Parliaments Lord General, that as his Lordship moved by Land; so he would
sail by Sea, and so be assistant to him in the clearing of those Western
coasts: And that for this purpose the noble Lord Admiral designed the James,
the Admiral of his Navy, for that business, a Ship of 875 tun, Captain
Richard Blithe being Commander thereof, and fitted with 50 Pieces of Ordnance,
and 260. men in her; Also the Constant Reformation, Captain William Battin
being Commander thereof, a Ship of 740 tun, fitted with 40 Pieces of Ordnance
and 250. men in her; The Expedition, Captain Joseph Jordan being the Commander
thereof, fitted with an 100 men and 18. pieces of Ordnance; together with some
other lesser ships, which being designed to attend the Lord Generals marches
and removes, and to move by Sea, still as his Army did by Land, and was thus
most hopeful, by Gods help, in due time to reduce all the West to the
obedience of the King and Parliament; whereof more in its due and proper place.

Much also about the same time came farther intelligence out of the Western
parts of the Kingdom, The hopeful progress of things in the Wect.
that his Excellency had sent several parties to summon Wareham, Bridge-water,
Portland-castle, and other Malignant Towns in those parts; that at least 800
men were gathered together in Somersetshire to join with his Excellency; and
that unhappy Hopton having lately then, pressed about 2000 Soldiers there,
giving out they were to resist the French from landing; but they soon finding
it otherwise, most of them deserted him, and came in unto his Excellency:
Whereupon poor sir Ralph calling a Council of War, it was resolved they
should press no more, it causing them the sooner to desert him. And thus we
see how graciously the Lord begins to carry on the work in those parts.

About the 20th. of this instant, we were most credibly informed by letters
from Manchester, from very credible hands; that notwithstanding the present
great pressures on that County of Lancashire, in this Month, by reason of that
bloody rover Prince Robbers entering the same, and spoiling and destroying all
the good of the land before him, Gods great mercy to Manchester in the midst of
Lancashires miseries.
especially at poor blood-dyed Boulton; Yet, I say, this famous Town of
Manchester, was by the good hand of God preserved from the rage and wra^h of
that furious and filching Enemy, and did even at that time, enjoy great plenty
of Food and other necessaries, yea notwithstanding that they then had 3 or 4000
Soldiers in the Town, Victuals very cheap at Manchester.
victuals of all sorts being very cheap among them; Wheat sold for 3. s. 8. d.
a measure; good butter 2. d. far. a pound the best Cheese at 2. d. bating
farthing, and flesh-meat very cheap. And that ye may know that money also was
not very scanty there; A very l^beral and bountiful Collection also there, for
Boulton.
On the 16. instant being the Lord's Day, there was a collection made among them
at Manchester for poor distressed and p^undred Boulton, at the Church and
Chapel at Salford, where was gathered 7 score pounds, besides much money that
came in after that public Collection. And was not this a rare mercy,
especially at such a time, and in such a County, to be able to be givers and
not receivers, and to live in such a height of plenty, notwithstanding so great
misery round about them. O our great and Wonder-working God, who thus do
manifest that thou not only art Good, but do Good.

Much also about the same time came farther intelligence by a letter from the
noble Lord General which was read in the Lords House of Parliament, wherein his
Excellency informed them of the taking of the Town of Weymouth (a very strong
and considerable Sea-Town) upon surrender, Weymouth taken by the L. General.
The Commanders and Officers going away on horseback with their swords and
pistols, and the Common Soldiers (as I touched before) only with staves in
their hands; He took in the Town, 27 pieces of Ordnance, and 50 other pieces
in the harbor, and all the ships near it; above an 100 barrells of Powder,
Brave prizes also taken both by Sea and by Land.
besides much Arms and Ammunition: He farther writ that the Country did daily
come in unto him in great numbers so that his Army was very much augmented in
those parts, and by a Scout of the West it was farther informed, about the same
time, that besides this brave prize at Weymouth there were taken about 2000
Arms more, at the least, and betwixt 30 and 40 ships, by the most noble Lord
Admiral.

About the 21. of this instant there came forth a most Excellent Ordinance of
Parliament, viz. For the constant payment of 200 l. a Week out of the
Excise-money, both for the support and sustenance of sick and maimed
Soldiers, An Excellent Ordinance of Parliament for constant relief to the
wives and children of Soldiers slain in the Parliaments service.
and also for the relief of the Wives and Children of such as have been slain
in the Service of the Parliament. This is indeed, a good piece of
State-Charity, to heal the miseries (as well as may be) which the Kingdom has
been necessitated to make, and it is the most possible supply and recompense,
that when we cannot give them the lives of their friends and husbands again;
yet to give them their livelyhoods: And this makes the States of the
Netherlands so to flourish, and their famous charity in this kind, engages even
divine providence to bless them with a daily prosperity.

About the 22. of this instant came information by letters from the Leaguer at
York, that the noble E. of Manchester had received a loss of about 200 men, by
the too timely springing of a Mine. Whence, this was observable among our
London Malignants, who having quick intelligence of any thing which they think
may prejudice our comfort and content, Our London Malignants Flea-bitings,
whereof I wish them many.
gave out (according to their accustomed use and manner of lying) and carried
it current from prison to prison, and from place to place, that the Earl of
Manchester had received a sore blow, enlarging it also to the purpose, that he
himself was hurt, his Forces routed, the siege at York raised, and Prince
Plunderer come to York and this they averred with Oaths and Execrations: And
their foolhardy confidence of this news was such, that when they were
answered; The Siege at Lyme was raised, Weymouth and other Towns and rich
prizes by Sea and Land taken, and with them was taken the Kings principal
Magazine for the West Country. They impudently replied all these were but a
Flea-biting to that at York; which was only the loss of those 200 men at the
Mine, all the rest of their reports, most grossly f^lse.

Now, I say, this their Flea-biting was no more but their loss of 80 pieces of
Ordnance mounted in the Town and ships; The Malignants Flea bitings.
an 180 (some writ, 200) Barrells of Powder; 2000 good muskets, 200 pair of
pistols; 60 sail of ships; besides the Town of Weymouth it self, its Forts
also, and the Castle at Sandfoot; many such Flea-bitings, I say, may the
Enemies have, I beseech the Lord.

About the 24th. of this instant we were certainly informed by letters from the
valiant, and victorious Commander, Colonel Mitton, that the noble and right
valiant Earl of Denbigh, in pursuance of some Directions from the Parliament,
advanced into Shropshire, with Directions to have intercepted 40 Barrells of
Powder going to Prince Robber; Oswestree won by the most noble Earl of Denbigh.
but the noble Earl failing thereof (it being conveyed another way into Wales)
he thought it not amiss (being so near some of his Enemies quarters) to make
some attempt upon them, yet so as that he was resolved not to loose above 24
hours; and accordingly, with the advice of Colonel Mitton, marched toward
Drayton, where he left a good reserve; and so advanced to Oswel-stree; and with
the Forlorn-hope consisting of 200 Foot and two Troops of Horse he faced the
Town about June the twenty second, at two of the clock in the afternoon, and
had a hot dispute of the business for the space of two hours, The Town is
assaulted and entered.
the Earl by that time, had made his approaches so near, and played so
fiercely upon the Enemy with both small and great shot, that a breach was made
in the wall of the Town, which he bravely entered, and with the loss of only
one man and three wounded, he bravely brake his way into the Town, The Enemies
fly to the Castle.
the Enemy flying into the Church, and then to the Castle, who were so closly
pursued, and my Lords Pioners so nimble in their Undermining (wherein Colonel
Mitton showed himself with much valor and dexterity) that they within
presently condescended to surrender the Castle, The Castle also surrendered on
quarter for their lives.
only to have quarter for their lives, which accordingly was granted them, and
thereupon, these Prisoners and Arms following were taken, viz.

Lieutenant Col. Bladwin, Capt. John Farrell, and 3. Captains more; Prisoners
and prizes taken.
3 Lieutenants; 2 Cornets; 2 Ensigns; Commissary Richard Edwards; 9 Sergeants;
9 Corporalls; and one Drum-Major; besides 305 Common Soldiers; 8 Townsmen in
Arms; 200 Muskets; a 100 Pikes and other warlike weapons, and 40 Barrels of
Powder. And of what great advantage this Town was, to those parts, especially
for the reducing of North Wales, those that know that Country do very well
know. But this Noble Earl rested not here; this success made him not forget
the directions of the Committee of both Kingdoms, nor to loose any time, but
that he hastened to expedite what was directed, and by him before resolved: And
so the very next day he Ordered his March accordingly, leaving that ever to be
honored Gentleman and brave commander, Col. Mitton, Governor of that brave
Town and Castle; a man most fit for such a trust, as Wem can witness.

And about the 28. of this instant we were credibly advertised by Letters from
Dorchester, The singular good affection of the West-Country to the Parliament.
that the Country at least 20 miles about from the said Town, being summoned to
appear there, came in most freely, and it being offered unto them, That any
one that desired a Pass to go to Exeter, Bristoll, or any other parts of the
Kings quarters, should go together on the left hand, and should have their free
Passes: and all those that were convinced in their consciences of the justness
of the cause on the Parliaments side, should go to the right, or hold up their
hands; and accordingly every one there assembled did so (not one desiring a
pass to go to the Enemy) holding up all their hands most cheerfully, this
being upon the ending of a Sermon, Mr. Peter's his good service to the kingdom.
preached then by Master Peter's, who has done great Service for the State both
by Sea and by Land, both in England, Ireland and Holland.

And much about the last of this instant June 1644. for the conclusion of this
Month; An Ordinance of Parliament was happily past, That no Lords nor Commons
who have deserted the Parliament and complied with Oxford, shall be readmitted
into the Lords House; An Ordinance of Parliament against rotten-hearted
Revolters or de^erters of the Parliament.
nor Members of the House of Commons, be any more admitted into the House of
Commons, without the consent of both Houses. A good bar, and like to be a
strong prop to the firmer stablishing of the State of the Kingdom: Who if they
had come when their pretended House at Oxford stood on its flashy gloss and
false glory, we might have thought they had come out of conscience and
affection to the Parliament at Westminster; but, now to leave their own ship
when it is upon sincking, and to crawl up the main top, Rats crawl out of ships
to the main tops, when the ship is ready to sink.
then, is but like Vermin Rats, to leave the ship for fear of drowning: And
truly in this case, One constant Royalist (though bad's the best) is more
worth than 2 of these rotten-hearted Turn-coats. But now let these ignoble
spirited Deserters and revolters, sit as they deserve, (as Britannicus said
well) it is pity either House should again be stained with the Apostasy of such
tergiversatious Bats; Revolters fitly compared to Rats and Bats.
For to be sure, those that have once known that way to Oxford, would every-
Spring and Fall, every ebbing and flowing of the tide of affairs, have been
troubled with a fit of shifting sides and parties, and be willing to take the
air 44 miles from London.

And now having thus by Gods good providence and assistance, finished this
Months Voyage also, A summary grateful review and brief recital of all the
rare Parliamentary Mercies of this month.
I shall here desire, as is most fit, to cast anchor again and to put to shore
a little to refresh our Vessel, and to bring forth all the Merchandise and
rich Commodities of this Months Adventure to a summary sight and revise,
thereby to set an edge upon our affections to stir up our most grateful hearts
the more to praise the Lord our great and good God the Father and fountain of
them.

Lime in Dorsetshire, by the most noble and renouned Lord Admiral, the Right
honorable Earl of Warwick; together with the serious consideration of the
Admirable and almost incredible courage of the Inhabitants and Soldiers
thereof, in so undauntedly defending it, by Gods most impregnable power and
assistance.

Callender in the Northern parts of the Kingdom; and the Parliaments most wise
and grateful respect to Captain Swanlyes good service in Wales.

demands and Articles of the Irish Rebels; after which he was forced to fly up
and down with as much just fright of a wounded conscience, as needless fear of
his most friendly pursuers.

The Parliaments most prudent and provident making that brave and most gallant
Citizen Colonel Brown, Sergeant Major General viz. Oxford, Berks, and
Buckinghamshire; Renouned Colonel Masseys taking of Tewksbury; And Gods just
judgment on some of the Kings Forces at Parrish^^, in their flight from Sir
William Waller, their victorious and most valiant pursuer, and his brave taking
of Shudley Castle as he past along in pursuit of the King.

Valiant and active Captain Purefreys taking of Compton House in Warwickshire
near Banbury; and a most brave defeat given to the Denbigh at Dudleycastle, to
his indelible high renown and the Enemies extreme great loss and dishonor.

The total and most remarkable raising of the long and tedious Siege of Lyme
to Gods great glory, our unexpressible comfort, and Prince Maurices eternal
shame and infamy: Together with the Parliaments most wise and worthy brave
carryage in and about that business, both in their ordering of thanks to God,
the Lord Admiral and Lyme it self; as also in bestowing a brave and
bountiful reward on the Town of Lyme for their valor and loyalty to the Cause
of God.

Sir William Belfores taking of Weymouth and Taunton-Deane; Gray of Groobies
brave carryage at Leicester; and the Lord Generals, and Lord Admiralls
preparations, both by Sea and by Land, to reduce the West to obedience to the
King and Parliament, and their hopeful progress therein.

Gods admirable goodness to Manchester in Lancastershire, together Ordinance
of Parliament for constant relief to Wives and Children of Wounded and Slain
Soldiers in the Parliaments service.

The most noble and right valiant Lord Denbighs winning of that strong and
important Town of Oswelstree with the prisoners and prizes taken therein.

And lastly, The singular good affection which wrought in the West-Country
people toward the Parliament and their upright Cause; together with an
excellent Ordinance of Parliament, against rotten-hearted Revolters, and
Deserters of the Parliament.

All these so rich, and rare Merchandises, and comfortable Commodities, brought
in unto, and by our precious Parliament, for the happy advance of Gods Cause,
thus agitated in the Kingdom, seriously considered, and rightly aestimated;
who can deny, but that our God has most admirably, this Month also carried on
his blessed Arc, God's Ark above the Worlds waves
the Parliaments Cause, above all the boisterous Billows and swelling Surges
which have tossed and tumbled it too and fro, purposing thereby to have
over-topt, or over-turned it; but our God, I say, who is Sovereign Lord of Sea
and Land, has borne up the beautiful Sail^s of his blessed Arc, and carried
it on most comfortably, and brought it home safely to its home, and harbor;
And therefore who can be so stupid, and stony-hearted, as not to acknowledge,
but that this is the Lords own Work, and it is mavelous in our eyes; and
therefore in spiritual exultation, to sing out with holy David, Psalm. 77. 16.
and say. The waters saw thee, O God, the proud waves and waters of the world,
(even wicked and bloody men) and were afraid before thee, and the great depths
were troubled at thee. So that, (as Moses also sang) The Children of Israel
went into the the midst of them upon dry ground; and the mighty waters were
so far from drowning, Exodus 14. 22.
or destroying them, that they were a wall of safeguard on their right, and on
their left hand to defend them. And therefore, as the foresaid sweet Singer of
Israel. Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy great name be all the praise
and glory of all these rare and rich mercies; of all these many and mighty
Deliverances. But now to proceed.

ANd now we shall, July. 1644.
by Gods safe assistance, put forth to Sea again, with our blessed Bark, the
Arc of our God, even our most righteous Cause, and make this our next Months
Voyage, and begin first wi^h a present touch upon the Parliaments most renowned
Lord Generals successful proceedings in the Western parts of the Kingdom;
The Parlia. L. Genesis successful in the West Country.
From whence we were certified by Letters from Chard, that about the latter
end of the last month, and beginning of this, there came in unto his
Excellency, within the circuit of twelve miles, at l^st 4000 men, who were all
drawn into Ranks and Files in a Meadow, whither his Excellency came to welcome
them, together with the noble Lord Roberts, (Lord Marshall of the Field) who
made an excellent speech unto them, which they most cheerfully accepted, with
great and frequent acclamations, they all offering themselves to live and dye
in the Parliaments Cause; and this in part, confirms what I mentioned before,
touching these West Countrymen, at Dorchester.

Plymouths brave Garrison also offered to take the Field with the most noble
Lord Roberts, who was Ordered and resolved to go into Cornwall, and a part of
that Garrison went out at that time, about seven miles from Plymouth, beat up a
quarter of the Enemies, took 44 Horse with their Riders Prisoners, Skellum
Greenvill is beaten by Plymouth Forces.
were pursued by that Skellum Greenvill, but he also was beaten back in great
disorder, with the loss of diverse of his men; Colonel Arundell, a Member of
the Oxford Junto, and Major Wiseheart, were slain; Colonel Digby, brother to
the traitorous Lord Digby, wounded in the face, and Greenvile himself closely
put to it for his life, but escaped the Gallows as yet.

Much about the same time, Darbyes brave activity.
we were also informed by Letters out of Darbysh. that, that most worthy, and
active Patriot, S. Ioh. Gel, having sent 3 troops of horse, and 2 troops of
dragoons to the E. of Denbigh, then in Lancashire, had also a small party of
Horse abroad toward Nottingham, seeking adventures, who were met by some of
the Kings Forces from Winkefield, and diverse of ours by them taken Prisoners,
but the alarm coming to Darby, a fresh Party was sent out, who in Winkefield
set upon the Enemy (as they were carousing, and rejoicing at dinner, for their
good success) where they recovered all their own men, took 80 of the Enemies
Horse and Riders, and brought them all safe to Darbie, without the loss of one
man of their own.

About the 4th. of this instant July, we had also certain news out of the
West, Barnstable shakes off the Cavilerian yoke, and returns to the Parliament.
that the greatest part of the Garrison at Barnstable, being called off by
Prince Maurice, (who, it was then said, was to go to Pendennis Castle, to be a
Lifeguard to the Queen) yet the Garrison would needs leave a stinking savor
behind them of their old trade of Plundering; Whereupon the Inhabitants
(knowing the Lord General was at hand) took courage, and stoutly resisted
them, and in the issue, bravely overcame their late tyrannical Masters; Which
the most noble Lord General understanding of, presently sent them a strong
Party of Horse, under the Command of the noble Lord Roberts, and Sir Phillip
Stapleton, to help them to beat them quite away, and keep them out from
returning again. And thus they most happyly shook off that servile Y^ak^ of
those cruel Cavees, and twice repulsed young Digby, and others whom Prince
(...) ^ent to have reduced them again under that banefull bondage, and killed
diverse of them, and took many others prisoners. And now (we hope) they begin
to taste how sweet religion and Liberty is: And o how v^liant they grow being
now sensible, I say, of what it was that made their brave Brethren of Lyme with
so much unheard of (...), to fight and stand it out against such spoylers of
their peace and conscience comforts.

Much also about the foresaid time, we had certain intelligence at London, by a
letter sent by that brave Commander Sir Thomas Midleton, to the Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons, concerning the brave and victorious raising of the
siege of Oswestree lately taken by the noble Earl of Denbigh (as was
forementioned) who left that brave Commander Colonel Mitton, The Enemy bravely
beaten at Oswestree by the Earl of Den^^es forces.
Governor of the said Town and Castle, and which presently after my Lords
departure for Lancashire, was besieged by the Kings forces of those parts,
under the Command of Colonel Marrow; which Letter containing a full relation
of the carryag^ of the whole work, I have thought fit here to insert, as it
was printed, and published by authority of Parliament, which was as follows.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
HONORED SIR,
NOt to trouble you with vain relations, whereby to hinder the other serious
employment for the Kingdoms good; May it please you to be advertised, That the
Town of Oswestree, late taken by the Forces of the Parliament, Oswestree
besieged b^ Col. Marow on the Kings side.
under my Brother Colonel Mittons Command, was upon Saturday last begun to be
begirt, and since strictly besieged by the Kings forces consisting of about
Fifteen hundred Horse, and Three thousand five hundred Foot, under the command
of Colonel Marrow; And that thereupon, in pursuance of a Council of War's
determination, occasioned by ^^^^arnest and importunate Letter from my Brother,
Colonel Mitton, directed to we, for speedy relief and raising of the siege
of the said Town; I did* upon the Lord's Day last past, with such Forces of
Horse and Foot as I then had with me, and the Foot Forces of Cheshire, all of
us then at Knotsford, upon a determinate resolution to have marched for
Manchester, and then for the service in the North: According to enjoyment of
the Committee of both Kingdoms, return and re-advance with all my said
Forces, unto a place called Spurstow heath, where that night we quartered, and
thence advanced upon Monday morning toward Whitchurch, we quartered that night
likewise in the open Fields, at a place called the Fennes in Flintshire, where
yesterday we marched toward Elsmore, and so to the said Town of Oswestree,
where the Enemy endeavored by battering and storming of the same, Sir Tho.
Midleton comes to Oswestree to aid his brother Col. Mitton.
violently to have carried it; about two of the clock in the Afternoon we came
in sight of the Town, and within three miles of it, where the Enemy having got
intelligence of our approach, prepared to receive us, the chief Forces of our
Enemy consisting of the most valiant Commanders and Soldiers, drawn out of the
garrisons of Chester, Cheshire, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, Ludlow, Denbyshire,
Flintshire, and other places. The Enemy had taken the passage of water near to
Whittington, and very furiously assaulted and charged us; but were repulsed and
forced to retire, through the courage of our Horse, who most courageously
entertained the Enemy; three several times the skirmish was doubtful, The
Enemy beaten and put to flight.
either side being forced so often to retreat, but in the end our Foot Forces
coming up, relieved the Horse, beat back the Enemy, and pursued them with such
force, that the Horse thereby encouraged, which indeed was formerly weary,
joining with the Foot; they put the Enemy to an absolute flight, in which we
pursued them Five miles toward Shrewsbury, to a place called Felton-heath, and
where likewise we remained after their flight again thence, Masters of the
Field^ In the skirmish with the Enemy, Our loss and hurt.
and in the pursuit, we lost several of our Horse, some of our Troopers; but
never a Foorman which I am yet informed of, many of the Troopers are hurt, but
I hope they will recover; I lost one Captain Williams, and one Captain
Lieutenant Fletcher (a very courageous man, being Captain Lieutenant to
Colonel Barton, in my Brigade) was dangerously shot, but I hope not mortally.
The Enemies less.
As for the Enemy, they lost many stout men, had many of them taken prisoners,
the number whereof the enclosed will manifest, some of them being of great
quality; As, the Lord Newports eldest Son: And besides, in their flight such
was their haste, that we found in the way of our pursuit of them, the high
way, as it were, strewed with store of Bread, Cheese, Bacon, and other good
provisions, The highways and passages strewed with store of the Enemies good
provision.
clothes, and such necessary appurtenance to an Army, besides some whole Veales
and Muttons new killed. The Enemy before the relief came, had taken the
Church, being the strongest hold about the Town, upon the approach of the
relief, they suddenly deserted it, and sent their two battering pieces unto
Shrewsbury. In the way also were taken by our Forces, seven Carts and Wagons
laden with provisions, as Beer, Bread and other necessaries, whereof one was
laden with Powder and other Ammunition, the Town of Oswestree I find to be a
very strong Town, and if once fortified, of great concernment, and the Key that
lets us into Wales.

SIR, I had to my aid 3. Regiments of Foot, viz. Colonel George Boothes
Regiment, a gallant Regiment led by himself on foot, to the face of the Enemy;
Another by Colonel Manwaring, and the third by Colonel Croxon, all of them
stout and gallant Commanders, and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers full
of courage and resolution. Major Louthien, Adjutant General, that brave and
faithful Commander, to whom I cannot ascribe too much honor, brought up the
Rear that day.

SIR, I rest Yours, THO: MIDDLETON.


Prisoners taken at Oswestree at the raising of the siege thereof.
Francis Lord Newport, Son and heir to the Earl of Newport, Captain Swinerton,
Captain of a Troop of Horse; twenty Welsh and Shropshire Gentlemen; one Cornet
of Horse which had no command; Lieutenant Norrell; one Quartermaster; two
Corporalls; 32 Troopers; two pieces of Artillery to come up to the walls to
save the Musketteers; seven Carryages, whereof one, of powder; 200
common-souldiers, most of them Welsh, great store of Arms, found (as was
touched before) in the ways, and ditches;
There was since also taken Major Manly and Major Whitney, under the walls of
Shrewsbury in the pursuit of them.

About the 5th. of this instant July, came certain intelligence out of the
North to London, of that most famous and glorious victory, wherewith it
graciously pleased the Lord to crown our three most noble and ever to be
renowned Generals, The most famous and glorious victory near York.
viz. Cenerall Lesley, Earl of Leven in Scotland: The most noble Earl of
Manchester; and the most renowned Lord Fairfax: Which was most happily obtained
on the second of this instant July, 1644. being Tuesday toward night; and that
within the space of less than three hours. The full and true relation of
which Fight and famous Battle, although the three most noble Generals
aforesaid sent it to London under their own hands, and diverse other relations
thereof have been published in print to show the clearness and truth of the
thing (they every one in substance agreeing one with another) yet both in
regard of the fullness and faithfulness, as also the pious enlargements of
that Copy which was written by that very reverend, learned, and pious Pastor,
and Heroicke-spirited Gentleman, Master Simon Ash, Chaplain to the most noble,
valiant, and victorious Earl of Manchester, I have therefore made choice of
his excellent relation, and here inserted it verbatim, as it was printed and
published (with only some interlacing and addition of some few material
passages culled out of other authentic copies) for the Readers better
satisfaction and much content therein; which was as follows.

A true Relation of the Fight and famous Victory, at Marstone-Moore, near
YORK, from Master Ash his own handwriting.
Upon the thirtieth of June, (being the Sabbath) toward evening, we had
certain Intelligence, that Prince Rupert, with his Army, were quartered at
Burrow-brigs, within twelve miles of York, and that he intended to fight with
us the next day. Hereupon the 3 Generals resolved that night, and in the
morning, to raise the Siege, that they might be able to encounter the great
Forces now ready to assault them, with hope to return unto the Seige, upon the
repulsion of the potent enemy. You will easily believe, that there was much
joy, and many manifestations thereof in the City, upon removing of the Forces,
which had so long begirt it on every side: And truly, many of our hearts were
oppressed with heaviness, looking upon this providence, as speaking Divine
displeasure against us, but our God has mercifully made known the
groundlesnesse of our doubts and discouragements, for ever blessed be his Name.

Upon Monday, July 1, we marched with all our Forces unto (...) (on the
S^uch-side of the River Owsed) with hope there to meet with Prince Rupert, in
his way toward York. In the afternoon our Army was set in Battali^, and our
Soldiers were full of joy, expecting to have a Battle with the Enemy,
beca^s^ we were assured by our Scouts, that the Prince with his whole Body
would pass that way. But Prince Rupert understanding our preparations for him,
did pass on the other side the River, and while a Party of his Horse did face
us on the Moore (which was near a Bridge, for their secure retreat at
pleasure) the Prince himself, with 2000 of his Horse went into York, for the
relief of that distressed people. Upon this so sad and unexpected a
disappointment, our hearts generally were filled with sorrow, but yet in the
midst of our sadness, many of us did encourage each other, unto an hopeful
expectation of a comfortable issue, from the good hand of our God: whose Name
we had uncessantly supplicated, for the happy speedying of this great
concernment. The night drawing on, we marched unto Long-Marston, (a Town at
hand) where very few had either the comfort of convenient lodging, or food our
Soldiers did drink the Wells dry, and then were necessitated to make use of
puddle water: most of our Horse quartered in the Moore that night.

Upon Tuesday morning, a Party of the Enemies Horse, having faced us a while,
wheeled back out of sight, which gave us cause to suspect, that the maine Body
was marched toward Tadcaster, (having relieved York) where he might cut off
the River, and so both scant us of Provisions, and get down suddenly into the
South. Hereupon our Foot, with Artillery, were commanded to advance toward
Tadcaster; The Scots (marching in the Van that day) being got almost to
Tadcaster, and the Earl of Manchesters Foot, being two or three miles from
Marston, we had a very hot alarm, that the Enemy with all his strength was
returned to the Moore: While our Horse ^^ced the Enemy, the whole Body of Foot
were called back, with all the^speed which they possibly could make: and (...),
hope of a Hattaile moved our Soldiers to return meerily; which also
administered matter of Comfort, unto all, who belonged to the Army.

Before our Foot could get back, (which was about two or three a clock) the
Enemy was possessed of the Moore, (a ground very advantageous) and had, in many
small Bodies, bespread themselves, that their Army did extend two miles (as
its judged) in length: yea, by the improving of this opportunity, they had by
diverse Regiments of Musketeers, so lined the bedges and ditches betwixt
themselves and us, that our Soldiers could not assault them, without very
great apparent prejudice. We were compelled to draw up our Army, and to place
it in Battalia, in a large Field of Rye, where the height of the Corn,
together with the shoures of rain which then fell, proved no small
inconvenience unto our Soldiers; yet being on an hill, we had the double
advantage of the ground, and the wind. Here the noble Commander, General
Lessey, exercised his Martial abilities, with unwearied activity and industry:
He hasted from place to place, to put all his Forces in Battle array, which
he did to the satisfaction and admiration of all that beheld it: the other two
Generals acting also in their own Armies.

How goodly a sight was this to behold, when three mighty Armies, each of which
consisted of above 20000 Horse and Foot, did with flying Colors prepare for
the Battle, and look each other in the face.

The Posture of our Army, when drawn up, was this: Most of General Lesley his
Horse, together with the Horse of the Lord Fairfax, made the right wing. The
Earl of Manchesters Horse, with some of the Scotch Horse, were the left wing.
General Lesleyes Foot were on the right hand, the Earl of Mancesters Foot
were on the left hand of the Lord Fairfax his Foot, who were the Body. There
were three or four Brigads placed for a Reserve.

Our Army being thus marshalled, toward six or seven of the clock, we advanced
about 200 paces toward the Enemy; Our Cannon (which had played one or two
hours before, from the top of the hill) was drawn forward for our best
advantage; Our Signal was a white Paper, or Handcherchiffs in our Hats; Our
Word was, God with us. The Word and Signal.
The Enemies Signal was to be without Bands and Skarff^s; Their Word was, God
and the King. Our Army in its several parts moving down the Hill, was like
unto so many thick clouds, having divided themselves into Brigades, consisting
of 800, 1000, 1200, 1500 men in a Brigade. And our Brigades of Horse consisting
of 3, and some of 4 Troops.

The Enemy (as some Prisoners reported) was amazed and daunted at our approach,
The Enemy was assaulted by ours before they expected us.
not expecting any assault till the next morning. Upon the advancing of the
Earl of Manchesters Foot (after short sitings on both sides) we caused the
Enemy to quit the hedge in a disorderly manner, where they left behind them
four Drakes. The Lord Fairfax his Brigade, on our right hand, did also beat off
the Enemy from the hedges before them, driving them from their Cannon also,
Some of ours forced to a disorderly retreat.
being two Drakes, and one Demiculvering; but being afterward received by
Marquess Newcastles Regiment of Foot and by them furiously assaulted, they
made a retreat in some disorder. This advantage being espied by a body of the
Enemies Horse, they charged through them, unto the top of the hill; but one
Regiment of the Earl of Manchesters Foot seeing the Enemy, both Horse and Foot
pursuing an advantage, did speedily wheel on the right hand upon their
flancke, and gave them so hot a charge, that they were forced to fly back
disbanded into the Moore; The Enemy put to the worst.
And these Enemies were also, so opportunely met in the Moore by a body of our
Horse, that very many of them were killed in the place, and about 200 by the
Scots Horse taken prisoners.

Before this time also Lieutenant General Cromwell had with much gallantry
charged through and through, and quite routed two of the bravest Brigades of
Horse in the Enemies right wing, Valiant Lieu. Genesis Cromwell charges Ruperts
Horse through and through.
where were the stoutest men and best horse, which Prince Rupert had. And our
Horse and Foot with undaunted courage did put the Enemies right wing to flight,
forcing them both from their Cannon and Ammunition; but when they came up to
the Enemies left wing, hoping that our right wing had done as good service as
themselves, they were disappointed; Our right wing put to the worst.
for our Horse here was beaten back: And although the Scots musketteers had
fired there most bravely, and to good purpose, to the dissipating of the
Enemies Foot; yet their Horse there, stood still in full body: But our left
wing was neither wearyed by their former hot service, nor discouraged by the
sight of that strength which they saw in the Enemy, yet unshaken and in order,
Our left wings unwearied valor in charging the enemy
but continuing ( o the strength of our God in them) and renewing their valor,
they charged every party remaining in the Field, till all were fully routed and
put to flight, and our men most admirably beating and pursuing the Enemies
about three miles at least till they came near unto York: How Prince Rupert
escaped
in so much that Prince Rupert himself and Marquess Newcastle escaped with
much difficulty, being extraordinarily well Horst; and had not Rupert played
the creep-hedge and hid himself in Bean-Lands, he had been taken.

The Earl of Manchester with much labor did rally 500 of the Soldiers who
were leaving the Field in great disorder, The Earl of Manchesters labor and
vigilance.
and brought them back again to the Battle. And the most noble and worthy
General Lesly, was much offended with his Soldiers, who shrunk from the
service of the day; and having endeavored, both by words and blows, to keep
them in the Field with much wisdom and affection, Genesis Lesseys carriage in the
fight.
he pressed this argument. Although you run from your Enemies, yet leave not
your General; though you fly from them, yet forsake not me.

Very many of the Scots both commanders and others, did singular good service
that day, The Scots good Service.
and stood stoutly to it unto the end of the fight, and did therefore very well
deserve to be sharers in the honor of the day; and three Regiments of their
Horse (which with ours made the left wing of the Army) being commanded by Major
General Lesley, did as brave and honorable service, as any who served in the
Field that day. And although the right wing of our Army, did not satisfyingly
answer men's expectations, yet the Earl of Eglington, the Earl of Lindsey, the
Lord Cooper, Sir James Lunsden, and other Scottish Commanders with many of
their Officers and Soldiers, did (as I said before) give good proof of their
stoutnesse and magnanimity.

And as for any of them of each Nation who went away, they were by their
ministers and others so sharply reproved, and this their fault in such sort
was aggravated to them, that there was great hope they would regain their
credit by good service upon the next occasion.

As for that famous and magnanimous Commander, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell his due
praise.
Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, whose prowess and prudence, as they have rendered him
most renowned, for many former successful deeds of Chevalry; So in this great
fight, they have crowned him with the never withering Laurells of fame and
honor, who with so Lyon-like courage and impregnable animosity, charged his
proudest adversaries again and again, like a Roman Marcellus indeed,
undauntedly out-daring and over-bearing his stoutest Popish and Atheistical
Antagonists, even to the end of the fight; and at last came off, as with some
wounds; so with honor and triumph inferior to none.

Colonel Sydney also, Col. Sydney his valor.
Son to the Earl of Leicester, charged with much gallantry in the head of my
Lord of Manchesters Regiment of Horse, and came off with much honor, though
with many wounds, the true badges of his honor, and was sent away afterward to
London for cure of his wounds.

And as for that truly noble and renowned Commander Sir Tho. Renowned sir Tho.
Fairfax his undaunted valor.
Fairfax, that undanted and never sufficiently praised Soldier, (whose former
famous exploits, have rendered him most magnanimous) he also lost not a jot or
title of honor this day; for although many of his Soldiers did faint and fall
back, yet his noble heart continued like the heart of a Lion, stout and
undaunted; for he stayed fighting in the Field, Col. Lamberts also.
until being dismounted and wounded, he was brought off by one of his
Soldiers. Yea, and brave Colonel Lambert and some others of their officers
went on most daringly through every difficult and dangerous adventure which
they could meet with; And L. Col. Needhams.
though I say much of their strength did unhappily shrinck from them.
Lieutenant Col. Needham, did also very manfully in his place. I nominate not
here any other of my noble Lords Officers besides Liutenant Genesis Cromwell, and
Col. Sydney, though I could have particularized Major Genesis Major Gener.
Crawford and others.
Crawford and diverse other Colonels with Lieut. Colonells, Majors and
Captains, who gained much honor by their very valiant carriages and exploits;
and therefore I hope my silence in regard of others (who under the command of
the two other Generals, did also most gallantly) will not be offensive; and
the rather because I was not so well acquainted with them. A just reproof to
many prejudicate misreporters of this fight and the soldiers therein.
And it is exceedingly ill done of those who cast aspersions upon some in the
Army in this fight who rather deserved commendations, than uncomely
calumniations. Surely, they neither Act christianly nor prudently, who take
courses to breed emulations and divisions in our Army; and who cast reproach
and discouragement upon such who are most ready to sacrifice their dearest
hea^tblood in the present service of Christ in this Kingdom.

But to be brief, I found this generally among the Soldiers (especially in my
noble Lord of Manchesters Regiments) The soldiers gave God the glory of this
victory. The Enemies did the like.
to my hearts great content, that they all gave the Lord of Hosts all the glory
of this Victory, wherein they were only instruments: Some also of the Enemies
that were taken Prisoners, have acknowledged the mere finger and hand of God
in their rout, and our victory. And it pleased me wondrous well, to hear and
see our God honored on both hands.

Yet I may not here omit a strange speech, as it was credibly reported, to
fall from Prince Rupert, upon the disapointing of his hopes, and the
dis-joynting of his Forces to their ruin; I am sure (said he) my men fought
well, Prince Ruperts atheistical speech touching this fight
and therefore know no reason of our Rout, but this, because the Devil did
help his Servants. These words, surely, intimate that he imagined, the Devil
gives the Victory in the day of Battle (a most Atheistical and heathenish
opinion) or else his Conscience told him (which he would not confess) that
God, indeed, did help his Servants. Yea, and a man of quality belonging to the
Enemy, (whose name, for some reasons, I may not mention) professed, A sad
confession of one on the Enemies side.
That his Conscience told him, Our Cause was Gods Cause; but yet his Honor
would not suffer him to take part with us.

And the Lord Grandison (who was sor^ly wounded in this fight, and under the
Chyrurgions hands for cure in York) told a friend that visited him. That he
had received 10. wounds on his body in this Battle; One wound for the breach
of every Commandment in the Decalogue. Deuteronomy. 32. 31.
See here then, good Reader, if here be not a clear assent to that of holy
Moses. Their Rock is not as our Rock, even our Enemies being judges. But to
return to to the finishing of this Fight.

The Runawayes, The Run-awayes robbed our carryages.
with other poor people, who attended the Army, did grievously plunder our
Wagons, and other Carriages; for the Wagoners, Carters, etc. being affrighted
with the flight of our own Soldiers, did leave their charge in the hands of
such as love to rob and spoil. It was a very sad sight to behold many
thousands posting away being amazed with Panick fears.

Here just occasion was given us to remember Keynton-battell at Edgehill;
Keynton battle justly remembered.
Edgehill; where the hearts of some were upheld with hopes, when others gave
up all as lost, and that with much despondencie of spirit.

Upon our cool and recollected thoughts, such of us as desired to acknowledge
God in all his ways, did firmly pitch upon these Conclusions.

The Lord saw that we are apt to rely upon the arm of flesh, Gods wisdom in
managing this victory to his due praise.
and therefore very much humane strength failed us. And besides, if the whole
Army had continued courageous, we should have ascribed the glory of the victory
unto man; and therefore it pleased the Lord, in reference to his own praise,
to lessen our strength, that so his own arm might justly be exalted.

But, I say, to go on, The Enemies being all beaten out of the Field, the most
noble Earl of Manchester, about 11 of the Clock that night, The noble E. of
Manbesters carriage among his soldiers.
did ride about to the Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, giving them many
thanks, for the exceeding good service which they had done for the Kingdom:
And he often earnestly entreated them, to give the honor of their Victory unto
God alone. He also further told them, that although he could not possibly that
night, make provisions for them, according to their deserts, and necessities;
yet, that he would without fail, endeavor their full satisfaction in that
kind, in the morning betimes.

The Soldiers, The soldiers religious replies to their General.
unanimously, (as my Lord had desired) and most cheerfully, gave God the glory
of their deliverance, and this great Victory; and told his Lordship, with much
alacrity, that though they long fasted, and were faint; yet they would
willingly want three days longer, rather than give off the Service, or leave
his Lordship.

That might we kept the Field, when the Bodies of the dead were stripped; A sad
spectacle to behold.
and in the morning there was a mortifying object to behold, when the naked
bodies of thousands lay upon the ground, and many were not altogether dead, but
lay groaning and gasping their last.

We judged that the number of the slain was at the least 3000 of the Enemies;
The number of the slain on the enemies side.
but the Country men (who were commanded to bury the dead Corpse) told us,
they, for certain, buried 4150 bodies, and we believe (as its most probable)
they were best able to know the truth, by the burying of them. Of which 4150,
two thirds were assured to be Gentlemen, and persons of quality, that is almost
2000; which (as reverend Master Ash said) was the more easily believed, by
reason of the very white and smoth skins of the many dead bodies in the field
apparently seen when they were stripped. And that those of quality, slain in
this fight, might be taken away and have a more honorable burial than the
rest, if their friends pleased; Sir Charles Lucas was desired (as was credibly
informed) to go along to view the corpse, as they lay spread on the ground, and
to choose whom he would, which he did, but would not say whom he knew of them.
But one gentleman at least, that had a bracelet of hair about his wrist, he
said he knew and desired the bracelet might be taken off, saying that an
honorable Lady should give thanks for it. As he passed along, he said in the
presence and hearing of many: Alas for King CHARLES! Unhappy King CHARLES! And
we may all most justly say: Alas poor ENGLAND! Unhappy ENGLAND! to be so
miserably rent and torn, for the satisfying of impiety, folly, and
wilfulness, in Papists, Prelates, and atheistical Malignants.

And among the dead men and horses, P. Ruperts Dog killed among the dead corpse.
which lay on the Ground, we found Prince Ruperts Dog killed, which is only
here mentioned by the way, because the Princes Dog has been so much spoken of
along time, and was more prized by his Master than creatures of much more worth.

Diverse men of good quality were found and known to be slain in the foresaid
number; The names of diverse persons of note slain in this fight.
as namely, The Lord Carey, eldest Son to the Earl of Monmouth; Colonel
Ewers, Nephew to the Lord Ewers; Colonel Roper, brother to the Lord
Baltinglasse; Sir Will. Wentworth, brother to the Earl of Strafford, late
Viceroy of the kingdom of Ireland; Sir Francis Dacres, near kinsman to the
Lord Dacres; Sir William Lambton, of an ancient family to the Bishopprick of
Durham; Colonel Slingsby, Son to Sir William Sling^by; Sir Marmaduke Louddon;
Sir Thomas Mettom; Monnsieur Saint Paula, a French Gentleman; Sir Richard
Gloedhill, made knight by the Earl of Newcastle; Lieutenant Col. Lisle, who
heretofore had done good service in Holland; Colonel Houghton, Son to sir
Gilbert Houghton; Col. Fenwicke, eldest Son to Sir John Fenwicke; Col.
Prideaux, son to BPP Prideaux; Lieut. Col. Atkins, Lieutenant Colonel to the
Marquess; Lieutenant Col. Stonywood, a Commander in the late wars of Ireland,
Davenant the Poet also, a loose lived Gentleman; and diverse others, not yet so
particularly known, but these thus named I had from credible testimony.

We also took, at least, 1500 prisoners, of which also, many were men of
quality, Prisoners taken, and the names of some of note.
and great esteem with the Enemy; viz. Sir Charles Lucas, Lieutenant Genesis to
the Horse; Porter, Major Genesis to their Foot forces; Major General Tilliard, a
very stout and able soldier, who came out of Ireland; the Lord Gorings Son;
with diverse other Field-Officers.

We took all the Enemies Cannon, Ammunition, Wagons, and Baggage. The Earl
of Manchester had for his part, Prizes taken.
ten pieces of Ordnance; one case of Drakes; about 1500 Muskets; 40 barrels of
powder; three tun of great and small bullet, 800 Pikes; besides Swords,
Bandileers, etc.

Now it is very admirable to consider (and we cannot but admire Cods rare mercy
in it) how few were slain in the Battle on our side; In the Earl of
Manchesters Army, The loss on our side.
Captain Walton had his leg shot off with a Cannon bullet; and only Captain
Pue (a foot Captain) was slain; and not above six more of our foot that we
could find slain, and about twenty wounded in the Moore. The total number that
we could reckon and find to be slain in all our Armies was at most, but between
2 and 300, of which our greatest number was among them who ran away, and the
carriage-keepers.

Many of our Soldiers (the horsemen especially) met with much gold and silver,
Our soldiers got good prize
and other Commodities of good worth; and indeed they very well deserved such
encouragements by their excellent service and brave adventures: and therefore,
as our proverb is; God is a great man of War.
Win gold and wear gold. Thus did the Lord put on righteousness as a
breast plate, and an helmet of Salvation upon his head, and he put on the
garments of vengeance for clothing and was clad with zeal, as with a cloak.
Esaias 59, 17, 18
And according to their deeds, accordingly he did repay fury to his
adversaries, and recompense to his Enemies. Yea surely, in this famous battle,
the Lord seemed to say and sound courage into the hearts of our Soldiers, as
Nehemiah to his people at the reedifying of Jerusalem, Nehim. 4. 14.
when they were molested by wicked Tobiah, Sanballet, and their accursed
accomplices. Be not afraid of them, but remember the Lord your God who is great
and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your
wives and your houses.

And thus far we have principally made worthy use of reverend and religious
Master Ash, his unquestionable authentic relation of this most famous fight
and most memorable victory, with some interlacing, I say, of some material
passages which I borrowed from most credible testimony.

And now, Certain observations collected out of all the premises, for the
farther illustrating of Gods glory.
although that our foresaid very venerable author and precious pattern (by whom
I have thus chosen to write) has in his said relation (as ye have seen)
touched upon many remarkable prints of Gods admirable providence and prudence,
by his powerful hand and strong arm, carrying on this great work in
extraordinary excellent and eminent manner, to the unexpressible honor and
glory of his great name: Yet give me leave, I pray, now to add some few more;
worthy the Readers most serious notice and observation; as adding much also (I
believe) to the praise and glory of our great and gracious Wonder-working God.

Prince Rupert had by a by-way got into York and come forth again, Observation
from our Army marching to the Associated Counties when the Enemies were
fighting.
our General, fearing the Enemies advance to the Southerly Associated
Counties, to have spoiled the kingdom that way also (which they might too
certainly have done) ours therefore marched away with their Van, the rest
following, to prevent Rupert: But he contrary to their thoughts, falls with all
his forces upon our Rear, the Van being about two or three miles forward on
their foresaid march; and by a hot alarm coming suddenly to them, forced for
haste, to return disorderly to the fight, and ere they could rally themselves
orderly into battalia, our Rear was engaged, if not routed; yet, though tired
and faint, they fell upon the Enemy.

That at the very beginning of the fight, A mighty storm of hail, rain, and
thunder, at the beginning of the fight.
just as both Armies were

Thirdly, Two or 3 Regiments of the pursuing Enemies slain and taken prisoners.
that about 2 or 3 Regiments of the Enemies side, which,

Fourthly, That God dealt with our 3 Noble Generals Armies, as Gideons Army,
of all the thousands brought together at first, he made choice of some few
hundreds to do this great work withal, The victory got by a small number.
and when we seemed to be at the lowest ebb of our strength (a constant way of
Gods admirable wisdom and power) then, on a sudden, he turned the scale, and
came in with his irresistible power, and never failing mercy, and with a small
number (just as he did at Keynton battle) got himself the Victory for us.

Fifthly, That Rupert having relieved York, must needs fight with us, and not
go into the associated Counties.
that notwithstanding when Rupert that pert, yea malepert Prince, had boldly
and adventurously got into York, and relieved it, and thereby also released
Newcastle, and many or most of the Popish partee, before enclosed within that
Citywalls; which, indeed, was the main project or design the Enemy had, at that
time; and that upon their return out of York (all safe) to the rest of their
Army, they called a Council of War, who also peremptorily resolved (which
indeed was their best, and had been our worst blow of all) to leave York and
make presently, with all their strength into the Associated Easterly and
Southern Counties ( Achitophels Council most directly) Yet, Achitophels and
Hushaies Counsel.
then, I say, that this proud and bloody hair-brained young Prince should pluck
out of his pocket the Kings Letter or Commission, to him in special (just like
Hushaies Council to cross Achitophels) charging them by no means to depart
from York until they had with all their combined powers given us battle. O
the admirable wisdom of our God, thus to cross that former fatal and
terrible Council, as it must needs have proved!

The great hopes of the enemy to cut off our rightwing, frustrated.
That the Counsels of Prince Rupert and others, had designed the most valiant
and expert Soldiers of the Popish and Atheistical party to encounter the Wing
of the Army commanded by renowned Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell (as making account,
that in beating him they won the day) and in particular, Rupert had designed
certain Troops of Horse (all Irish-Papists and Gentlemen; old Soldiers all,
who had been in service in Spain and France) to give the first charge to the
Brigade or party in which General Cromwell was; and that they did confidently
believe there was not a man of them but would dye rather than fly; but they
mist their expectations, for many of them being indeed slain in the place, all
the rest fled. Ecclesi. 9. 11.
Thus our God lets our proudest Enemies see and know; The battle is not to the
Rider nor the race to the Swift.

A foul falling out between P. Rupert and the Marquess of Newcastle.
That upon the flight and departure of the Earl of Newcastle from the battle,
there passed many warm words betwixt Prince Rupert and him in York, after the
rout; they charging each other with the Cause thereof; the Prince telling the
Marquess that he made not good his promise of assistance; and the Marquess
replying in such a manner as moved much passion and discontent; yea, and some
say blows too: And that thereupon, the Marquess of Newcastle, (with General
King, the Lord Witherington, and very many more fugitive gallants) flying away
beyond Sea to Hambrough and Holland, And Newcastle flying beyond sea is
proclaimed traitor at York.
Sir Thomas Glemham, then governor of York, did (as 'twas credibly assured and
affirmed) proclaim Newcastle a Traitor, for his deserting York and flying
beyond Sea from his colors. Thus, as our English proverb is: Thieves falling
out among themselves; True men (by Gods mercy) are like to enjoy their goods
again.

The great tyrednesse and extreme hunger and thirst which the Army endured; and
yet their admirable courage in fighting.
That notwithstanding the extreme and extraordinary wants and straits which
our Soldiers were put unto (enough to move great compassion, yea and
admiration too) and wherewith they were greatly pinched, both the night before
the battle, and sometime since also, as namely, tyrednesse in traveling and
hasty rety^ing to and fro; such want of water (much less of Beer) to drink,
that they had drained the wells even to the mud, and were necess^^ to drink
water out of dirches, and places pudled and mired with the horses feet; and
that through want of accommodation of victuals very few of the
common-souldiers had eaten above the quantity of one penny-loaf from Tuesday to
Saturday morning following; and as I said, no beer at all to be had: Yet, I
say, notwithstanding all these, that the Soldiers should fight so cheerfully
and stoutly, even by Gods admirable mercy to a glorious victory.

The Parliament Soldiers known to the Kings accursed and cursing Cormorants by
their singing of Psalms.
That in the rout of the Enemy and in their flying and scattering about, many
of them ran most frightedly and amazedly to the place where some of the
Regiments of Horse of the Parliaments side were standing on their Guard, and
all or most of their Riders were religiously singing of Psalms, to whom, as
the foresaid runawayes of the Enemy, came near, and by their singing of
Psal^ed; perceiving who they were, they all most fiercely fled back again, and
cried out, God damn them, they had like to have been taken by the Parliament
Round-heades. For they only knew them, I say, to be the Parliament Soldiers by
their singing of Psalms. A blessed badge and cognizance indeed, to be thus
distinguished from their impious Enemies, which makes me to think on that in
the Gospel; That when the Soldiers who were sent to apprehend our blessed
Savior, and he asking them whom they sought; And they answered, Jesus of
Nazareth, And Christ replying, I am he; They (says the Text) fell down
backward at those words stricken with terror and amazement. And so, I say, o
the power of godliness! what reverence and terror too it strikes into the
hearts of profaine and irreligious Wretches.

The Royalists imprecating a curse on themselves, were accordingly answered
therein by the Lord. Josh. 22. 22.
That before the Battle began (as I have it from credible information) Prince
Rupert, that bloody Plunderer, would, forsooth, to seem religious (just like a
juggling Machivilian) have a Sermon preached before him and his army, his
Chaplain took his Text out of Josuah, 22. 22. The words were these; The Lord
God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows, and Israel he shall know, if it
^e in rebellion, (...) us not this day. (...).
Now how evident a demonstration from (...) was heregiven, by the success of
that days (...) enough (one would have thought) to have (...) the most
perverse Malignant; In so much that God did so (...) himself in deciding the
controversy by denying victory and success to those who being in a false and
bloody way had yet implored the Almighty to prosper them according to the
justness of their Cause.

This glorious Victory was a most evident and clear return of Prayer.
as an undoubted return of Prayer, we having but the very Week before, been
pressing the Throne of Grace on ou^ Monthly Fast Day, and public Humiliation,
and prayer to the Lord, even for this mercy, a victory of York, ^^at York;
and the Lord heard us and granted us the desire of our Souls therein, together
with the lives and welfare of all our three most noble and renowned Generals;
Praised and for ever magnified be the Lord our God for it.

Upon the immediate next Lord's Day succeeding this famous victory, all the
three renowned Generals, The 3 Generals and all their Armies Celebrate the
next Lords day, a day of Thanksgiving.
with their whole Armies, according to their pious and (...) appointment,
celebrated a Solemn-day of most deserved and obliged Thanksgiving to the Lord,
and by their messengers to the Parliament, who brought the intimation of this
great victory, desired that a Solemn-day all over the whole Kindome might be
also appointed by their Authority, and that they might have convenient
knowledge thereof, that so they likewise might again keep it with the rest of
the Kingdom, which accordingly was forthwith a^^e^ted to by the Parliament,
and an order presently after printed and published, a Copy whereof I have
hereunto annexed.

Die Lunae, 8. Julii, 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that
Thursday come a seven-night being the eighteenth of this instant July shall be
(...) a (...) far a day of public Thankesgiving to be rendered unto Almighty
God for his great blessing and full victory (...) Prince Ruperts Army in
Yorkshire, to be kept in London and Westminster, and all (...) parts of the
Kingdom.

Hen. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Co^.

And very shortly after, a Committee of the House of Commons was appointed for
providing necessary supplies for the Northern-Armies, Order taken for supplying
the Northern Armies with necessaries; and thanks sent to the 3 Generals from
the Parliament.
and it was also ordered by the Parliament, that the Committee of both
Kingdoms should forth with send a letter of thanks to the Earl of Manchester,
General Lesley, and the Lord Fairfax, for their great courage, valor, and
fidelity expressed against Prince Rupert at the said great fight.

And yet for all these clear and real demonstrations of this so absolute and
(...) a victory, give me leave to tell the Reader (that it may stand as another
everlasting stain upon the Enemies of Truth and Honesty, The Royalists
intolerable impudence in insulting and triumphing for what they never had.
and as an indelible badge of their Atheism and unheard of (...) impiety, thus
even to mock God with thanks for what they never received) That just as they
impudently also did at Keynton or Edgehill victory, so now, they made bonefires
and caused the Bells to be rung in many places in their power and quarters; yea
and though that very night when they were so beaten out of the Field and so
many of them ran into York, yet so intolerably impudent were they (as so
indeed are all Couzening Cormorants and Malignants) as to make Bonefires, Bells
rung and bonfires made in York for joy of Ruperts Victory.
and cause ringing of Bells in the City of York, for their great victory
obtained by Prince Robber (that Prince of blood and lies) reporting openly in
the streets, that General Lesley was taken prisoner; the Lord Fairfax slain;
and 14000 prisoners taken, Monstrous lies.
but that the Prince was so careful of the welfare of the City, that he would
not bring them thither for fear of oppressing that place with them; yea and
the next morning, early (when he fled thence, betimes) he told them he must
abroad to catch more of the straggling Roundheads, and would carry all his
prisoners and ordnance taken, to the King, for else (he said) the Roundheads
in the South would not believe he had got the victory. O intolerable blasphemy
thus to go about (grossly belying their own consciences) to abuse,
Newcastle, Newark and Oxford also triumph in Ruperts ridiculous Victory.
if possibly, both God and Man! Yea at Newcastle, and at Newarke also, and
especially at Oxford, they made great Bonefires, with other triumphs by squibs
and wilde-fire, at Banbury also and Litchfield, Exeter, Bristol and all other
places, I say, where the accursed Cormorants domineered. Yea our sottish and
bewitched Mole^y'd Malignants of London also were ^o led along with a spirit of
lying (like their father the Devil) that they mightily boasted of this Robbers
vain victory over us, London malignants had a hand and a heart too in this lie.
the rouring of our whole three Armies the death and imprisonment of all our
three most renowned and precious Generals.

And thus I say, have we seen the festivity of the Royalists (...) Wit, or the
mad rage of the Malignant-Spirits, notwithstanding that God gave such an
eminent and notorious cheek to their impudence; Mr. Vines in his Sermon of
thanksgiving for this great Victory, p. 14.
(as Venerable Master Vine^ said in his Sermon of Thankesgiving for this
victory) In that upon fictious confidence of success, they must needs (as you
have heard) Antedate their Bells and Bonefires; Whereas within a few hours,
there was nothing of the Enemies, left in that field, but Bag and Baggage,
Ammunition, Ordnance, Prisoners, and Dead-Karkasses; which had, indeed (...)
more, if that noble and most renowned Commander, Sir Thomas Fairfax (who is the
honor of the fields he treads upon) had not (as he rode up and down) taken up
that sweet Word, Sir Tho. Fairfax compared to Julius Caesar.
which Caesar, once, in such a case, used, Parcite civibus, Spare the poor
deluded Countrym^n, O spare them, I pray, who are misled and know not what they
(...) A most excellent and pious Spirit and Speech, and most be^itting such a
valiant and virtuous Commander.

And thus, I say, blessed be our God that we see and know their vanity, folly,
and madness, having nothing to brag of but their own lying inventions. For, as
we have abundantly heard to Gods glory and our great comfort (as witty and
worthy Britanicus* well noted) his Majesty made Bonefires in the morning, and
our three foresaid noble Generals quenched them and put them all out again
before night.

And though now I have done with this brave Battle and famous Victory: A note
more touching Prince Robber and his brave Chivalry.
yet give me leave (Good Reader) to add this one note for a conclusion, which I
had from very credible and good information; viz. That our Malignants choice
Champion and stout Soldier Prince Robber (as valiant and courageous as they
would have the world hold him to be) yet I say this great Kill-^owe, Prince
Robber lost his Dog and his Bever, and hid himself in a Beanfield.
besides the loss of his dainty Dog (found dead among the rest of the slain)
lost also his brave Beaver in the field or flight, for found it was: and
himself (as diverse affirmed) lay hid in a Bean-field (as was touched before)
after a little service done in the field until it was dark, and then got away
into York.

And in the same place where the Marq. A Letter of the Kings to the Marquess
of Newcastle touching the Lord R^chford.
of Newcastles Commission, was found, there was also found a Letter, signed
with Charles Rex, to it, saluting the Marquess of Newcastle, by the name of
Right Trusty and most entirely beloved Cousen and Councellor; (by which we may
observe, that he was most entirely beloved that put Armies into Papists hands,
to cut the troats of Protest^nts) signifying by that Letter. That his Lordship
should take care that the Lord Viscount Rochford, should have all his Rents
paid unto him, for that he was reconciled to his Majesty: The Lord Vicount
Rochford impeached of high Treason
If, then, his Majesty spoke truth, the Lord of Rochford deserved much blame;
who was thereupon accused by the House of Commons, for adhering to the Enemies;
and upon Thursday July the 11. the said Lord coming to the House of Peers was
saluted with an impeachment of high Treason, and committed prisoner to the
Black Rod.

About the 12 of this instant, it was for certain informed, that although they
at Oxford boasted much of the relieving of Greenland-House* Greenland house
taken by Major Genesis Brown.
yet now by Gods mercy it was yielded (upon fair terms and moderate Articles)
unto Major General Brown; and that, for the present his Soldiers maintained a
Garrison in it* But, that it was resolved on not to continue it so, but to have
it demolished to the ground. The taking of this House was of great concernment
to the City of London, for by that means great quantities of provisions may be
securely convayed by water to London out of Oxfordshire, and Barkshire; and
abundance of Wood out of the Oxford Malignants estates in those parts, to
serve London for fuel all the succeeding winter.

Much also about the same time came certain intelligence, by Letters out of the
Western parts of the Kingdom, that the Forces of his Excellency, the
Parliaments most Noble Lord General, under the Command of Sir Robert Pie,
Taunton Castle taken by the Lord Generals Forces.
and Colonel Blake, had taken Taunton Castle, a piece of great strength and
concernment also in those parts; and that in it they had taken 4 Iron pieces of
Ordnance, 6 Murderers, 4 Hogsheads of Beef, a load of Iron, great store of
powder, one Demi culverin; 2 tun of Match; one powder-Mill; a great quantity of
bullets; 2 Loads of Cheese; 2 Hogsheads of Oatmeal; with great store of Salt,
Wheat, Meal and other sorts of provision, with store of Housholdstuffe and rich
movables and Colonel Reve, who commanded the Castle for the King, and the
rest of his soldiers had quarter to March away to Bridgewater, the Kings next
Garrison Town.

About the 14th. of this instant came also certain information by letters from
the truly noble Lord Denbigh, Cholmley house in Cheshire taken by the Lord
Denbigh.
that whereas he had made a show, as if he would have drawn his Forces toward
Shrewsbery, as intending to besiege it; yet indeed his private resolution (...)
upon the House of the Lord Cholmley and took it; which was a singular good
(...) of service to the State, in (...) that this House had been a very great
and long mischief to the Country in those near adjacent (...) into it.

Much also about this foresaid time we were certified by letters out of
Lincolnshire, Col. Rossiter Governor of Lincoln, his valor and activity.
of the brave activity and valor of Colonel Rossiter, Governor of Lincoln,
who weekly used to fall upon the Enemy near Newark, and that at one time he
took a Major, a Captain, and 30 Troopers and their horses. Shortly after also,
that issuing out again, he took another Major, 3 Captains, and 50 horse more
with their Riders, within three miles of Newark. The Commanders, especially,
were good prize, these not being so easily (...), as Horses, those Newarke
plunderers making a shift frequently to take an 100 horse in a hight, out of
the Villages about them; Thus that poor County of Lincoln was continually
wronged and turned by that pestilent den of plunderers.

About the 16th of this instant came certain intelligence of some late
performances, Capt. Sydenham and Capt. Carrs brave exploit against the Lord
Inchiquin.
and good Service done by Captain Sydenbam and Captain Carr, near Dorchester,
which was informed to be thus.

The Lord Inchiquin drew out of Warcha^^ about 240 horse and Dragoons, and came
against Dorchester, intending to plunder; burn, and destroy all before them:
but making some pause before they fell upon the Town, it gave Valiant Captain
Sydenham and Captain Carr, the opportunity of coming to their relief, before
they had attempted the intended mischief; and so they fell upon the said
Enemies about a mie from the Town, beat them soundly back again, took 160
prisoners with 60 horse and good store of their late gotten plunder elsewhere,
laden in a Wagon; and that some of the Enemies so taken being Irish Rogues,
even 8. of them, thus taken, had such quarter given them as they gave the
Protestants (...) Ireland, viz. That they hanged them up presently, they having
pursued their Enemies about 12 miles, killing many of them by the way.

About this foresaid (...) the honorable House of Commons in Parliament took
into confideration (having also before it passed the bill and great business
of Ordination of Ministers) the pious and religious (...) of a godly and
learned ministry, of which there was and i^ great complaint of the (...) of, A
learned and godly Ministry to be Ordained.
and not without cause (thanks to our former wicked Bishops) almost all over
the whole Kingdom: And thereupon they agreed that all such as shall have
Ordination, shall be sound men well skilled in Philosophy, Logic, and in the
Tongues. If all these and piety, especially, must precede, it is to be feared
that an age will not furnish all the Parishes in England and Wales in such a
manner. How ever, we have just cause to bless the Lord most heartily, for so
blessed and long desired a godly resolution in them, and to wait on God for the
good issue thereof.

Much also about the 18th of this instant July, came certain intimation by
Letters to London from out of Leistershire, that General Hastings that wicked
R^b-Carrier of all those parts was at Colchet^^ with about 2000 horse and Foot,
W^lne Ferry and Fort taken by the Noble L. Gray and sir John Gell.
they being all he could possibly draw out of all the Garrisons under his
Command, with some intention to walk in his accustomed way of plundring,
robbing, and spoiling the Country about him. Whereupon the truly noble and
valiant Lord Gray of (...) hearing of this partee of the Enemy, drew out of
Leicester, with all expedition, thirsting to give his old Antagonist battle,
supposing this gallant partee which Hastings had gathered together, would have
put some valor into him; But as soon as the Lord Gr^y drew near unto him, he
presently retreated to As^^by de la Zouch his old den, and kennell of refuge,
to be, there, an only spectator of the Lord Gray and Sir John Gells meeting,
who no sooner were joined together, Wilne Ferry stormed and taken.
but they fell upon Wilne-Ferry and Fort (which had been Hastings chief trap to
take the Carriers in their passage between D^rby and Leicester) with such
resolution and courage, that after 3 days siege, giving the Enemy continual
Alarms with notable thunderclaps of Cannon, both their Forces drew up close to
the Ferry and Fort, and immediately with admirable brave gallantry they stormed
it, killed 8 or 9 men, took the Governor prisoner with 2 Captains, And a brave
prize with it.
3 Lieutenants, 3 Ensigns, with their (...) and Colors, 2 Drakes, 80
Soldiers, near an 100 Gentlemen and others which came in to their assistance
with all their Arms, and brought them all into Leicester. In all which
business the Lord Gray lost but one man, and some few hurt, but thanks be to
God not mortally. As soon as this business was thus successefully finished, my
Lord presently slighted the Works, pulled down the Fort and burned the House in
its own rubbish, (...) to L^icester, the Enemy never so much as attempting to
(...) Charge.

Now during this time, The noble L. Grey's Martial Vigilance for the good of
the Country.
the prudent Lord Gray, ever desirous to preserve his asso^iation, hearing that
a party of Newarke and Belvoir Horse was come up as far as Melton, Mowbray,
to plunder the Country in his absence, he immediately sent Colonel Want with a
party of Horse to drive the Enemy out of the Country* or fight with them, which
was accordingly done and the Country thereby in the interim safely protected.

And here now, I cannot, I may not pass over (without a great (...) of impious
ingratitude) the happy remembrance of that most sweet and Solemn-day of
Thankesgiving to the Lord our all-good-giving and forgiving God, The famous
Celebration of the public Thanksgiving for the late great Victory at, or (...).
which was rarely and religiously celebrated on Thursday the 18th. of this
instant July, 1644. for that late and most admirable, yea even miraculous
Victory which the Lord our God gave unto our forces, under the command of those
three most renowned Generals in the North, near the City of York; And yet,
which happy day, our impious and heaven-out-daring Adversaries, the wretched
Royalists, had labored (as was before mentioned at the end of the description
of that famous victory) to cloud and to take off the Edge of our thankfulness,
The Enemy labored to dim the clear Sunshine of our Day of thanksgiving.
by spreading abroad false rumors, and presuming, I say, most audaciously to
mock God by outward appearances of their pretended and false joy, whereas they
had no salvation wrought for them in the thing wherein they seemed to rejoice;
and one main argument which our Malignant-Enemies used to discourage and
discountenance us, and (if it could have been) to have infused into us to
believe that there was some truth in their outward flourishes (that so I say,
Yorkes not being taken emboldned our Malignants to buz abroad their lies.
they might have cast ashes upon our heads in the day of our triumph) was
because the City of York was not yielded to us, which, said they, would not,
nay could not hold out if Prince To. had been routed. But our most wise and
merciful God would not suffer them hereby to rob him of his honor: and
therefore it is most worthy our observation that the news of Yorkes being
certainly surrendered unto the Parliaments forces, A remarkable print of
providence to dash our Malignants out of countenance.
arived at London the very Thankesgiving-day before the time set a part for the
duties of our Solemn-Thankesgiving; Which now, I say, comes here next to be
spoken of, namely; That on Thursday, July the 18th. 1644. The Lords and Commons
of Parliament joined together at Westminster in the cheerful solemnization of
this day, and every parish in and about London Assembling together, both
forenoone and afternoon to hear Sermons preached in their Churches, The
glorious rays of that Sunshine day shines forth over the kingdom.
and prayers and praises proclaimed to our so great and good God, the
Wonder-working God of this our Israel, and in a special manner this was
performed by the Right Honorable prudent and pious Lord Mayor of the City of
London, Sir John Wolaston, together with the most worthy Aldermen and Sheriffs
his Brethren, as also all the Companies of the City of London, in their Gowns
and Liveries, A narration of celebrating the Thankesgiving-day at London.
at Pauls-Church, where after the morning Sermon was ended, a volley of small
shot was triumphantly discharged, and two Ensigns or Colors were flourished
and displayed on the top of Pauls-steeple, which gave notice to the several
Forts in the fields, and thereupon the Ordnance went off round about the City;
and after the afternoones Sermon, great outward joy and thankesgiving was
expressed, both first in liberal sums of money, collected in the Churches to
refresh the loins of the poor; and afterward in ringing of Bells, and making
Bonefires in the streets that night; yea and the neighbors and parishoners of
diverse parishes in London, both Husbands and Wives supped altogether in
extraordinary solemn-manner, And of Christs-Church parish in particular.
especially in the parish of Christs-Church in London, where I my self was an
unworthy part and present eyewitness of the same; All or the greatest part of
the said whole parish both men and women, especially of the best sort and
quality, Knights, Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen; yea all well-affected
persons of fashion and ability assembled together in the great Hall of
Christs-Hospitall, to the number of about 200 men and their wives, who being
all very gravely and cheerfully met together and supper made ready, their
reverend, pious and painful Pastor, Mr. Jenkins (who indeed was the first
mover of this so solemn meeting, an act worthy a godly Divine indeed) he, I
say, began A Psalm of David, as sweet heavenly music, which all the Company
sang together, whiles the dishes of meat were brought in and set on the tables;
Then a blessing on the creatures craved and supper ended, the said reverend
Pastor, as he piously began, so he religiously concluded with thankesgiving
and another Psalm sung by them all at their tables, ere they rose, all done in
a most grave and reverend manner.

And here also I desire the godly Reader to take notice of one remarkable
passage of Gods providence about this work, which happily pre^eded this
solemn-meeting in the foresaid place; viz* That upon the Wednesday the very
immediate day before this meeting, it pleased the Lord so to order and dispose
it; How the great Hall was swept of some foul Romish-rubbish the day before
this meeting.
That, that most worthy and most deservedly ever to be honored religious and
zealous Nehemiah of our days, Sir Robert Harlow, Knight of the Bathe, came
himself to the said Hospital, and caused (by the power and authority of
Parliament most happily invested on him) a mighty great and most blasphemous
Crucifix, which had continued there in mavelous fair and fresh oy^ colors
unde^^ced for the space of above a 100 or six score years at least, upon all
the length and breadth of the wall at the upper end of that great Hall, and
only a great picture in a large frame of the manner of the donation of the
Hospitalls to the City of London, Sir Robert Halow ^night of the Bath, pulls
down and utterly demolisheth a monstrous great Crucifix in Christ's Hospital.
set before it, and that monstrous Crucifix standing behind it. This abominable
and most blasphemous Crucifix (which no man before durst touch to deface it,
King CHARLES himself having, at his sight of it, commanded the contrary) this
most pious and religious noble Knight now caused, I say, to be presently at his
coming pulled down and broken, I dare say, into 1000 pieces, (I my self being
an eyewitness and assistant in this business) it being all most gorgeously
painted on boards, neatly and closely joined together. And thus, I say, was
that fair room made far more fair, and cleanly swept of that most filthy and
Popish-dirty Corner, that night, against the next days solemn-meeting, as
aforesaid; and all the wood and boards so pulled down and broken in pieces was
reserved for this Thursday-night, the Thankesgiving Evening, and by the
children of the Hospital a great Bonefire was made of the fame, A great
Bonfire made of the said Crucifix, just at the Supper-time of the said
Parishioners.
in a great yard, called the Townditch, just at the time when the foresaid
assembly were at supper. All this foresaid solemn Celebration of this day of
Thankesgiving justly serving (besides the outward expression of christian joy
and triumph) for the shame and vexation of our audacious adversaries the
Parliaments Enemies, and all their malicious and malignant atheistical
adherents. But now to go on.

And now in the very next place comes most properly to be remembered and
informed, The manner of the surrendering up of the City of York to the
Parliaments Forces.
the manner and truth of the happy rendition and surrender of the City of York
into the Parliaments possession; Which also being fully and faithfully set out
by the pious pen and zealous heart of that most religious and truly venerable
Gentleman, Master S. Ash, I have thought fit here again to write by his Copy,
and to plow with his Heifer, and to set it down, as he has delivered it
under his own hands testimony, which was as follows.

Upon Thursday, York closely besieged again after the victory.
July the 11th. our Armies (says he) having after the foresaid famous fight
and glorious victory, closely begirt York again with a strong and straight
siege, and made very near approaches to the walls of York, and raised
batteries, whereby was made some Execution, and our men being now busy in
preparing ladders and other instruments for the storming of the Town: Hereupon
the Enemy, Preparation to storm York.
within, perceiving our serious resolution, presently sent and desired a
treaty; According to which desire, Sir William Constable and Colonel Lambert
were sent by the Lord Fairfax into the City upon other answerable hostages sent
out of the City for their security and safe return. A Treaty desired by the
City.
They went in upon the next Saturday morning, and having spent that day in
parley, they returned with this request to the three Generals, Commissioners
authorized to parley and determine of Articles of agreement.
That there might be Commissioners authorized to treat and conclude upon
Articles for the peacable surrender of the City. Our three Generals having
demanded the judgment of some Ministers, whether the work of the Treaty might
be approved and allowed on the Lord's Day, and receiving encouragement that it
might; They thereupon immediately appointed the Lord Hamby, Sir William
Constable, and Colonel Mountague to go the next day into the Town, three
Hostages being sent out of the Town for their security, who continued their
Treaty and Debate till Monday about noon, and then returned with the Articles
to be subscribed by the three Generals, The Articles of Agreement being 14 in
number, subscribed unto by the 3 Generals.
which were 14. in number, and which was done accordingly. But the particular
recital whereof I forbear, for brevities-sake, and as knowing they were
abundantly known to all that have heretofore read these relations.

Now if any upon the perusal of those Articles did conceive or imagine that
too much favor was granted to the Enemy, I desire that these (...). First,
That the benefit which could be expected for our Armies, Considerations
concerning the Articles.
or the Kingdom, by taking the Town by storm, could not possibly in any
m^asure counterveil the miserable consequences thereof, to many thousands: Who
knows how much precious blood ^ight have been spilt upon so hot a (...) the
Town could have preserved their houses and shops (...) thousand Soldiers had
broken in upon them, with heat and violence? How much would this County have
suffered in the ruin^^ of this City? And how many of our good friends in other
places (...) drive Trades with Citizens, here, would have been pinched in their
estates, by the impoverishing of their Debtors.

Upon Tuesday the Enemy went out of the Town, according to Articles, our
Soldiers were set on both sides the way, where they were to pass, for the
space of a mile from Micklegate: and the Officers according to command, went
from place to place, to prevent the doing of any wrong to the Enemies, as they
marched away. That morning very early, as I should have told you before, all
the Soldiers in the Royal Fort, which is a curious and strong work,
possessed with needless fear, did run away, and left their Arms behind them.

The fourth part of them, at least, who marched out of the Town were women,
many very poor in their apparel, and others in better fashion. Most of the
men had filled, and distempered themselves with drink; the number of the
Soldiers, as we conjectured, was not above a thousand, besides the sick and
wounded persons.

When the Enemies were departed, our three Generals went together into the
City, attended with many of their Officers. The first house they entered, was
the Minster-Church, where A Psalm was sung, and thanks given unto God by
Master Robert Duglas, Chaplain to the Lord Leven, for the giving of that City
into our hands, upon such easy terms; At which time notice was given, that
Thursday after should be kept by the whole Army, as a day of Thankesgiving for
that great mercy, which accordingly was observed.

Now the three most noble Generals also (as was credibly informed) Manchester,
Leven, and Fairfax, with the Committee of those parts, as a most real
testimony of thanks to God both for their great Victory at YORK and for this
taking of the City of YORK, A singular wise and satisfactory Message of the 3.
Generals to the Parliament.
sent to the Parliament, presently after their possession thereof, desiring
that Propositions of Peace might be prepared and sent to the King to show their
true desire of Peace, notwithstanding this great Victory and advantage against
the Kings party. But withal, desiring that they might treat with their Swords
in their hands, and that the War might be prosecuted, Propositions of Peace.
as a special means (next to Gods blessing) to bring about the better terms
and ascertaine the reallity and expedition of the work; And they also desired
that business about religion might be settled with all convenient speed in the
Church, Business of Religion to be expedited.
now that we had so good success. Now, surely, to desire Propositions of Peace
may go forward, can argue nothing but a true and clear desiring of Peace and
the happy setlement of the Kingdom in quiet, the great thing so much (at least
pretended to be) desired by the adverse party; And this cannot but content (I
hope) the great Vapors of Peace in our Malignants, Malignants mouths stopped.
who desire any Peace, be it ever so bad, so it be Peace. And now to proceed.

About the 20th. of this instant, we had certain information by the foresaid
reverend and religious Gentleman Mr Ash his letters, The Lord of Manchester
advances Southward.
that the most noble Earl of Manchester advanced from YORK more Southward to
refresh his Soldiers; and that night, being Saturday night, and all the next
Lord's Day his Foot quartered in ^adcaster and the other Towns thereabout, and
his Horse near Pontefract, a strong Garrison of the Enemies, and from thence
on the Monday following his Lordship remooved to Doncaster, and quartered
therein both his Horse and Foot, in other Towns thereabout; from whence he
sent 200 Dragoones, commanded by Lieutenant Col. Lilburne, to quarter in
Tickhill, about five miles from Doncaster, Tickhill taken by the Earl of
Manchesters forces.
where the Enemy had a long time quartered, where was a strong Castle, called
Tickhill-castle, which was pallisadoed and environed with a broad Mote and a
Counter-scarfe, in which was 80 Musketeers and a Troop of Horse armed, which
did great oppression and injury to the Co^ntry thereabout, both by laying heavy
burdens and taxes upon them, and which did much interrupt the trade and
transportation of cloth from Leedes, Hallifax and other parts of Bawtree, The
ill neighborhood of Tickhill.
their Horse also bringing in frequently 20, 30, 40, horses at a time laden
with cloth; which oftentimes upon the payment of twenty shil. a horse-load
they again released. Now upon the Dragoones coming into the Town, they took
prisoners, a Captain, a Cornet, a Quartermaster and some other Soldiers, and
about thirty horses belonging to the said Castle. The Governor of the Castle,
understanding hereby, that my Lords Army was so near, The Castle summoned.
and being now summoned, the next day, to surrender the same to the King and
Parliament, did admit parley with the said Lieutenant Col. Lilburne, which
conference produced this conclusion, That three of the chief Gentlemen therein
should come to my Lords quarters to Doncaster upon a safe convoy (...) for
their return; which being done, and the Gentlemen coming accordingly, on
Thursday, July the 25th. it was agreed that the said Castle should be yielded
up the next day upon four or five fair and honorable Articles, Articles of
Agreement concluded on and sealed to.
befitting Gentlemen and Soldiers; which Articles were sealed by both parties
accordingly, and then his Lordship, with Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, Major Genesis
Crawford and many other chief Officers (guarded by a brave Troop of Horse)
rode to Tickhill, the Friday following in the afternoon to take possession of
it, My Lord of Manchester takes possession of the Castle.
and to see the Articles on our side exactly performed, whither being come, the
Drawbridge let down, and a lane made by our Dragoones (to whom his Lordship
had given strict charge not to offer offense in the least measure by word or
deed to the Soldiers of the Garrison, who were to pass by them) they all came
out with passes in their hands to the several places of their desired abode
who also were safely convoyed by our Troop of Horse; and so his Lordship and
his Officers, with twenty Musketteers only entered, and possession being taken,
and some hurries appeased, my Lord with his attendants, gave solemn thanks to
God there, for giving in that place of so much concernment upon most easy
terms and without the loss of one drop of blood. There were in the Castle
Major M^nekton, the Governor; Colonel Redhead, Major Redhead, and diverse
Captains, with some of their Wives. There was left in the Castle, one
Iron-piece mounted, about in hundred Muskets, sixty Horse and Arms, some
Powder and Match, above an 100 quarters of grain, many barrels of salt butter,
store of cheese, powdered Bee^e, and some beasts and sheep with other necessary
provisions.

About the 23. of this instant came certain information by letters out of
Gloucestershire that the valiant Colonel L^ughor^^, Governor of (...) and
Captain Moulton with his valiant and courageous Sayle^s, Col. (...) T horns and
Cap. Moultons brave performances in Penb^ookshire.
understanding of Gerrards (...) approach to Pe^brook with the Earl of Carbery
and his Welsh and Irish-Papists, our forces, there, joined in a body to oppose
them; and the inhabitants of the County, to show the^^ willingness to assist
them in this great (...) the defense of their religion, laws, and liberties;
First, The forwardness of the inhabitants of the County to help against the
Enemy.
(...) books and P^pish pictures (apt to seduce) to be brought forth and burnt,
and then afterward joined themselves in a complete bo^y with their other
friends already in arms against the common Enemy, who marching into
Pembrookeshire our Forces met them, and notwithstanding all their power, fell
courageously upon them, and in a short space did notable execution upon them,
Both Armies meet and the Enemies are discomfited.
made the Welsh fly apace to their own homes and holes in the Mountains with
great loss unto them, even Gerrard himself hardly escaping by flight. In this
fight Colonel Laughorne and Captain Moulton flew and took prisoners, at least
500 of the Enemies, they also took diverse Arms, and many carryages with most
of their baggage, yea the Enemy was so routed, The slain, prisoners and prizes
taken.
as 'twas verily believed, they could never be able to get into a considerable
body again against them; Colonel Laughorne also resolving to follow the
pursuit, not leaving till he has totally subdued them to the obedience of the
King and Parliament. In this fight also, Captain Moulton and the brave Sailors
deserved much praise and due respect for their undanted activity in this, as in
former performances: And it was credibly assured that since this brave
Sea-commander Captain Moulton cast the last Irish-rebells overboard into the
Sea, there have not any more been seen to pass out of Ireland.

About the 26th of this instant, we had certain intelligence by letters out of
Worcestershire, that there went a party of Horse from Wor^ester unto Evesham
with an intent to have surprised some of the Earl of Denbighs Forces, A most
brave defeat given to the Enemy at Evesham by the Earl of Den^ighs and Warwick
Forces.
who were there a fortifying Evesham. But the vigilant and valiant Earl of
Denbighs and Warwickshire forces having private notice thereof in their march
that way dispatched 600 Horse thither presently, 300 whereof were to come in
upon one side of the Town, and the other to wheel about and to come in by the
other way upon the Enemies Rear; upon the coming in of the first party of the
Enemies, ours began to retreat, and the Enemies thinking they fled began to
follow them; But instantly they were set upon by our other party, which wheeled
about upon the Enemies Rear, and skirmished with them a while, till at last, 50
of them were slain in the place, and 120 Horse, and about 40 or 50 prisoners
taken with the loss of only two or three men of ours, at the most, the rest
of the Enemy got back into Worcester.

About the 28th of this instant we were credibly informed by letters out of the
Western parts of the Kingdom, that the King about this time, marching with his
Forces into Devonshire, and passing by Chard in Sommersetshire toward Honyton
in Devonshire, the way to Exetor. A Regiment of the Kings horse, commanded in
chief by that upstart Lord, and rotten Runagado, Henry Piercy; who, Another
brave defeat given by Lyme garrison to the Enemies at Collyton.
desirous (as it appeared) to visit Lyme, took up his quarters about Collyton,
a Town within 3 miles of Lyme, and gave them an alarm; which notwithstanding
the Garrison at first, slighting; yet, after a little pawse, considering and
perceiving the Enemies design was only in a bravado to give them a visit, and
so a vale to return back again to Collyton; and renowned Lyme doubting whether
it might not be taken a little unkindly if no regreet were given on so friendly
a visit: Lyme therefore to acquit themselves of that suspected guilt, suddenly
sent out young Captain Hercules Pine, Capt. Herl, Capt. Bragg, and some others,
with a partee of about an 120 horse, who ere the Enemies had well digested
their Supper at Collyton, suddenly fell in among them, took as many horse of
the Enemy as they carried out with them, viz. between an 100 and sixscore,
besides 55 prisoners, Prisoners and prizes taken.
whereof one was a Major of that Regiment; 2 or 3 Captains and some other
Officers, above an 100 Arms, very good pillage found about those they took,
and brought them all safe into Lyme; that whole Regiment, by this notable
exploit, being totally routed and dispersed.

But yet this brave and most active Garrison rested not here, but made another
gallant adventure with the like partee of horse and came to Chard in
Sommersetshire, Another defeat at Chard in Sommersetshire by Lime Garrison.
12 miles from Lyme, where the King being scarce got out of the Town with his
main body, they surprised 11 gallant Horses, all with rich saddles and
furniture, conceived to be the Kings own Stable horses, which they brought to
Lyme, with some prisoners of the Enemies partee.

And about the 30th and 31th, of this instant July, we were certainly informed
by yet more frequent letters out of the West that upon his Excellencies, Our
most noble Lord Generals brave and victorious advance and progress in the
West.
the most Noble Lord Generals advance toward Plymouth, the Forces which were
then, under that Apostate Greenvile being about 3000, were stricken with such a
panick fear, that they quitted their quarters there, and raised themselves from
their several trenches and holds; so as his Excellencies Forces immediately
after, Diverse brave Garrisons and much Ordnance taken by ours in the West.
possessed themselves of several considerable Garrisons; as namely,
Mount-Stamford, where they took fo^re pieces of Ordnance. Plympton, where they
took 8 pieces of Ordnance. Salt Ash, and in it a great Fort with some pieces
of Ordnance, and many Arms. Lanson also and diverse other small Garrisons
thereabout, which all instantly yielded to my Lord General. That presently
after, my Lord General sent a party against Greenviles-house at Tavestock
(Plymouth men having also about this time taken the field, and being in all
between 2 and three thousand Horse and Foot) whither they being come, Greenvils
house at Tavestoke taken.
those within the House hung out a white flag and desired a parley; but our
brave Soldiers had no patience to stand upon terms and treaties, but suddenly
and resolutely stormed the House, got over the walls and soon entered the
House, they within crying out for quarter, which was granted to all except
bloody Irish-Rogues. Rich prizes and pillage taken in the House.
There was taken in the House two pieces of Cannon, an 150 prisoners, very near
1000 Arms, a ^oomefull of excellent good Muskets, many pair of pistols,
excellent pillage for the Soldiers, even at least 3000 pound in money and
plate, and other provisions in great quantity. From thence his Excellency
advanced toward Lanceston and took it, and in it 40 barrells of powder; And,
that Skellum Greenvile being gotten to Newbridge, Newbridge taken by our Forces.
which is a passage into Cornwall, his Excellency sending a considerable party
thither, set upon Greenviles Forces where they found some hot opposition for a
while; but at last, ours got the bridge and Town too, with the loss of some 40
of our men, but there were slain on the Enemies side, A hot skirmish at
Newbridge.
near upon 200, and many prisoners on their side taken; and that a party of
the noble and right valiant Lord Roberts Brigade (being sent to pursue
Greenvile and his Army, which was reported to be near 3000 strong horse and
foot) over-took him and forced their passage over Horsbridge fell fiercely on
him and routed most of his forces about a place called Listithell, Greenvils
Forces routed with much loss to him.
in Cornwall, where many of his men were slain and a 150 taken prisoners, and
that now they had no considerable Enemy left them in Cornwall, so as they might
proceed according to their own designs, leaving the most noble Lord Roberts
with a reasonable party in Cornwall, totally to keep it down and to reduce
that whole County, by presenting a full body to the East; Our Forces come to
Bodmin in Cornwall.
Intimating likewise that now, that had advanced toward Bodmin, and that in
their passage from Newbridge (as aforesaid) they had taken Tadcaster and Foy,
and that in all they had taken from the Enemy, 17 or 18 pieces of Ordnance,
Tadcaster and Foy taken and many ships therein.
and many ships of good value in Foy, which the Enemy quitted, and yet it was a
place of great consequence, and a Haven-Towne in Cornwall. And thus the West
also, (as ye have heard) is in a very fair way and hopeful condition, as well
as the North, to be timely reduced to the obedience of the Parliament,
especially, The hopeful condition of the Western parts to be reduced to the
Parliament.
if the Kings forces (now gathered into a body in those parts) be well backed
with a party of the Parliaments, to come as a reserve upon his Rear, which was
(about this time) seriously recommended to the farther consideration and speedy
dispatch of the Committee of both Kingdoms, and also of the Western
Committee; and money and other necessary supplies to be sent speedily to his
Excellency the most noble and renowned Lord General of the Parliaments Forces.

And thus now have we by Gods good providence and gracious guide and
assistance, brought our Bark back again most prosperously into the Haven or
Harbor of this Months rest and repose also, full fraught and richly laden
with rare Commodities; most worthy the serious reveiw, rumination and
recogitation of every pious and prudent Christian Reader: Wherefore I shall
here now cast Anchour and make a stay to rest and refresh this our weary and
weather-beaten Bark, to rig and trim it and fit it for another Voyage,
whenever God gives a fair occasion thereunto. In which interim, let me here
now unlade and lay open in a summary and short occular sight and review, A
grateful summary recital of all the rich Parliamentary-mercys of this Month.
all the most rare, rich, and indeed, unvaluable Parliamentary-prizes, and
Kingdome-commodities, which God has purchased for us in this last Months
happy Voyage and honorable adventure.

Oxford to raise the Siege at Lyme; Darbyshires activity; Barnstables revolt
from the King to the Parliament; And the second brave defeat given to the Enemy
at Oswestree by the most noble and renowned Lord Denbighs Forces.

Parliaments three most renowned and victorious Generals, the most religious
and renowned Earl of Manchester, his Excellency General Lesley, and the ever
to be honored valiant and victorious Lord Fairfax, against that barbarous and
bloody hair-braind ignoble Rupert, the disgrace of his progenitors and
indelible stain of his Posterity.

R^chfords disloyalty to the Parliament in special and Kingdom in general;
The taking of Greenland-house by Major General Brown; And Taunton-castle by
the most Noble Lord Generals Forces.

In the taking of Cholmley-house by the most noble Earl of Denbigh; Rossiter
Governor of Lincoln his valor and activity against the Common-Enemy; Captain
Sydenham^ and Captain Carrs most brave exploit against the Lord Inchiquin; and
the religious resolution of the Parliament to establish a learned and godly
Ministry.

In the taking of Wilne-Ferry and Fort by the noble Lord Gray and valiant and
faithful Sir John Gell; the said Lord Greys valor and Celebration of the Day
of Thankesgiving at London for the most famous victory which God gave us at the
great and bloody fight nere the City of York.

In the most happy surrendering up of the City of York it self unto the three
most noble Lord Generals forementioned, and the pious Generals made and sent
to the Parliament in point of farther thankfulness to God, and satisfaction
even to the worst of men.

In the most noble, renowned and truly religious Earl of Manchesters
Tickhill-castle and farther prosperous proceedings since the last great victory
at York.

And lastly, In the brave defeates given to the Roysterly-regall Enemies,
Laughorn and Capt. Moulton in Pembrookeshire; by the noble Earl of Denbighs and
Warwick Forces, at Evesham; the famous and ever to be renowned Garrison of Lyme
at Colliton and Chard; and finally in the most noble and renowned Lord
Generals brave and victorious and famous progress into Devonshire and
Cornwall and all those Western parts, wherein hitherto by Gods power and
providence, he might worthily say, as conquering Caesar said, Veni, vidi, vici;
even all, for the most part either voluntarily coming in unto him, or
violently enforced thereunto, by his valiant and victorious forces. All which
most seriously and religiously considered, have we not, good Reader, great
cause justly and ingenuously to confess and acknowledge, to see and say with
holy Samuel, EBEN-EZER, 1 Samuel 7. 12.
and to make this the glorious and gracious Motto of our Parliamentary Bark,
the Ark of our God, most deeply ingraving it with indelible characters of
golden-gratefull Remembrance. EBEN-EZER
HITHERTO HAS THE LORD HELPED US. And therefore zelously and constantly to
conclude and hold (maugre all malicious contradiction whatsoever) that our
title is most truly and infallibly ratified from heaven, by all those manifold
and even miraculous premises and patterns thereof; GODS ARK overtops the
Worlds waves
that GOD'S Ark has most triumphantly over-topped and been born above all the
Worlds boisterous Billows and swelling surges. And hitherto the Lords most
faithful and glorious Cause, blessedly embarked in our most pious Parliament;
has (in all its just undertakings) most impregnably prevailed and been
preserved against all the Malignant Atheistical and Papisticall Machinations,
Plots and Practizes that men or devils were ever able to invent and foment
against Gods Truth, and a glorious and pure Gospel-Reformation. In so much that
now upon all these serious considerations of the Enemies combinations, and
injurious conjurations on the one side, and our Gods most omnipotent and
omniprudent frustrations of them all, thus from time to time, we may most
worthily say as the holy Prophet once said, especially on the gracious and most
grateful recordation of that most memorable and admirable victory at
Marston-Heath near York, and also all those late forementioned Western
victories even of this last Month of July, we may say and that most worthily,
as the LORD God himself said by the holy Prophet. Micah 4. 11, 12, 13.
Now also many nations are gathered together against thee (O English ISRAEL)
that say, let her be defiled, and let our eyes look on Zions defilement. But
they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his Counsel.
For he has gathered them together, as sheaves into the barn-floor. And has
said to all our renowned Generals and to their Armies. Arise and thresh O
daughter of Zion; for I have made thy horn as iron, and thy horses hoofes as
brass, and thou shall beat and bruise in pieces (as with a strong flale) many
people; and I will consecrate their gain to my self, says the Lord, and their
substance to the Lord of the whole Earth. This Scripture most properly
appropriated to England.
And have not thou ( o England, as then Zion was promised) seen all this come
to pass for thy sake upon thine Enemies; Even many nations brought together,
English, Irish, Dutch, French, Walloons and who not, that could be, and was not
gathered against thee to defile and spoil thee, yea to glut their accursed eyes
and hearts with wicked joy at thy ruin and defilements: But ah wicked fools!
how ignorant and unacquainted were they with the Lords Counsels, and how far
his thoughts were above and against their thoughts; who brought them but
together (at York and else where) like so many Sheaves on the barn-floar of
Marston-Heath, and there and then most graciously and gloriously said to our
renouned Generals, Commanders and Soldiers; Arise, arise, and thresh those
Sheaves of shame and dishonor, for I have made your Swords and instruments of
war as Iron flales, and your horses hoofs as brass to trample on them and tear
them in pieces: And then did the Lord also most triumphantly consecrate unto
himself (and we as we were able most worthily) gave their gain and substance,
even all the honor and glory of these great and most famous victories, to the
Lord our God alone, whose strong arm alone got us and gave us these glorious
victories over all those our fierce and furious Enemies. Yea he alone I say,
According to their deeds, Esaias 59. 18.
accordingly has repayed fury to his Churches and Childrens adversaries,
recompense to his Enemies, and to the (Irish) I stand he has repayed and will
yet still repay recompense. And thus indeed it must needs be, for, Their
strength and defense was departed from them and our God had made them as bread
for us to eat and devour. Number. 14. 9.
Yea our God has for us wounded and broken in pieces the heads of these
Leviathans and given them as meat to us his poor despised people; Psalm. 74 14.
And has wounded the hairy scalps of all these that th^s went on in their
insatiable wickedness. Psalm. 68. 21.
That thus therefore the great name of the Lord might be feared from the North
to the West, and his glorious splendor from the rising of the Sun; for even
then when the Enemies came in like a flood: Esaias 59. 19.
then did the Lord lift up his Standard against them.

And truly the Lord has dealt with all our proud Enemies all along in a most
eminent and evident manner (had we but eyes and hearts of undersanding to see
and perceive it) even ever since these last most notorious and odious plots and
practizes of the Atheistical Royalists in the abominable business of the
accursed cessation and confederation with the bloody Rogues and Rebels of
Ireland, just as it is most notably set forth by the Prophet Ezekiel concerning
Pharaoh King of Egypt. Eze. 32. 2, 3, 4.
Our proud Enemies were like young Lions of the nations, and as a Whale in the
sea; and came out of their rivers, and troubled our waters with their feet, Our
Enemies (as a whale) are caught in Gods not to their ruin.
and fouled our rivers with mud and blood. But the Lord our God did (then)
spread out a net over them, with a company of many people, who brought them up
into his net and dragged them, and there the Lord left them, as fish upon
dry-land, and cast them forth upon the open field, and caused the fouls of the
heaven to remain upon them, and (had they been left unburied) all the beasts of
the land had been filled with them; as those inhumane bloody Irish-Rebels
suffered many of our poor English Protestants to be devoured by hogs and dogs
left unburied in their fields and ditches.

And now therefore good Christian and candid Reader, thou who have any true
English-ingenuity and piety sparkling in thy soul, speak from thy heart and
conscience, and tell me truly, have we not great and everlasting cause, with
most cordiall-exultation and ravishing joy of Soul and Spirit, to break out
again and again into holy Moses his most excellent short and sweet expression
of GODS infinite and admirable goodness; Who is like unto thee o Lord among
the gods, Exodus 15. 11.
who is like unto thee? glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
Wonders. Let every one of us therefore jointly and severally, with that sweet
Singer of Israel holy David, with heart and voice sing and say; I will remember
the Works of the Lord, surely I will remember his Wonders of old and of late,
Psalm. 77. 11, 12. 14, 15.
I will meditate also of all his works, and talk of all his excellent doings.
For who is so great a God as our God, yea thou art God that do wonders, thou
have declared strength among the people; Thou have with thy strong arm
redeemed thy people, even the sons of Jacob and Joseph. It is better, therefore
(as the same Psalmograph, Psalm. 118. 8, 9.
sweetly) to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man: Yea it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in princes. And who (then)
would not fear thee, O King of nations? for unto thee alone, indeed, does
appertain all honor and glory; for as much as among all the wisemen of the
nations, and in all their Kingdoms, Jer. 10. 7.
there is none like unto thee our God.

Finally, therefore (good Reader) to shut up all, all that I can say herein,
(having said so much already in my two former parts of this our
Parliamentary-Chronicle) is and shall be only this; That, me thinks, The
close of all.
all these so many and so manifest evidences of Gods best presence with us, and
of Gods all powerful hand of providence thus admirably upholding us in the
Innocence and Integrity of our Cause, which he so clearly makes and ownes to be
his Cause, by all those late and former Northern and Western Victories and
other most specious returns of prayers, What use we are to make of all the
forementioned Parliamentary-mercies.
should make us walk more yea most comfortably and confidently with our God:
That our God having thus enabled us to overcome the Bears and the Lions of
impious and audacious opposition of the work of Reformation in Church, and
state, will not fail also to deliver into our hands and unto our believing
hearts the greatest seeming Goliahs and uncircumcised Philistims of proud and
lewd reluctancies and obstructions, which either men or devils can raise up
against Gods glorious cause and unspotted Truth, Christians must Wait and
Believe.
which is great and shall prevail; only let us wisely wait and believe; for
as I have often (on these like occasions) said to my Christian friends; who have
still been harping and hammering on this demand; I, but when shall this be? (A
too curious and indeed unchristianly question) Beggars must be no carvers,
Beggars must be no carvers. Habbuc. 2. 3.
neither of the time nor means. But the true Beleiver makes not haste, but is
willing to wait; because the Vision which is for an appointed time, at the end
shall speak and will not lie; Only though it tarry, yet wait for it, because
it will surely come, and will not tarry: as the Prophet most pertinently and
excellently.

In sum, Let me advise thee (good Reader) who ever thou art, (as holy Moses
advised and encouraged his fainting Israelites in their greatest strait, of
Pharaoh and his furious Host behind them, the Red Sea before them, In what
posture Gods people are to wait on God for deliverance.
and impassable hills and mountains on both sides of them) Fear not, but stand
still, in immovable true faith, holy universal Obedience, and heavenly
harmonious Unity one with another (O take heed of intestine Divisions which
spoil us) in this triple pious posture, I say, Let us all (void of all slavish
fear) stand still and see the Salvation of our God: Whereunto, the Lord in
Christ (through whom only we are able to do this and all things) graciously
enable us. Amen, and Amen.

The Authors humble request to the Courteous Reader.
Courteous Reader.
I Must and do ingenuously acknowledge that in the publication of the second
Part of our Parliamentary-Chronicle, I committed two real errors by
misinformation, given unto me by two known friends, whom I much credited; The
one of them thou shall find Page 246. and in the Table or Index, in the
Alphabet B: In both which Sir John Byron is said to be slain at Burford,
whereas he was but sorely wounded and silenced, as dead all the time of his
cure; which mistake, I beseech thee good Reader, (who have, or may have that
second Part) utterly to obliterate and put out. The other mistake (by like
misinformation, thou shall find, Page 332, 333. concerning the putting of the
Commission of Array in Execution; Viz. That Colonel Rudgeley was there said to
be a principal agent therein. Which in truth is far otherwise; He being all
along even ever since these unhappy wars began, a most absolute Antagonist
against that illegal Commission, and a most loyal and constant friend to the
Parliaments Cause, having both in his person and in his purse, manifested
himself a true Patriot to his Country, in the County of Stafford, and a
principal actour in the winning of Stafford Town and Castle, and also of
Chillingford-House from the Kings Cormorants. All which I having lately had
from most singular and substantial testimony, to be most true, have chosen
rather to take the shame on my self, tha^ to suffer so noble a Gentleman to
receive any eclipse of his honor, by mine or my friends mistake. I therefore
earnestly beseech thee, good Reader, in the pages forecited, to correct and
amend with thy pen also this so material mistake therein.

The Authors promise of part of Requital for the foresaid favor.
ANd in part of requital of thy fore-desired friendly favor, I shall (good
Reader) both promise (as I hope, I have now in this third Part performed) more
care for the future: And also hasten out (for thy full content) the fourth Part
of this Parliamentary-Chronicle; which I intend, if the Lord permit, to
complete and bring up to the very present time of its immediate publication,
with all the most famous, admirable, and almost incredible Victories and
Successes of this last Summer and Autumn-Season, I having even now, almost
quite finished and fitted the said promised fourth Part for the Printers
Press, if, at least, I find (as I hope I shall) this my present third Part, so
courteously accepted as to make the speedier way, for the coming forth
thereof, and so consequently for the completing of this so fair and famous a
History.

Thine J. V.

FINIS
An Exact Table of all the most material Passages of this third Part of the
Parliamentary-Chronicle.
A
THe Arc and Parliament compared together. Page 1. The Assembly of Divines
petition the Parliament. 2. The Assemblies petition for Reformation. 4
Apprentices provided for. 31 The Authors grateful remembrance of Gods
goodness to him. 37 The Associated Counties cared for. 55 The Isle of Axholm
taken. 147 The Bishop of Armagh his memorial. 153 The famous Victory at
Alsford. 185 Axholm Island taken. 202 The famous defeat at Aulton. 95 The Earl
of Argyle in Scotland. 230 The Isle and Fort of Ayremouth taken. 234 Abington
taken by the Lord Roberts. ibid. Arundell Castle besieged and taken. 122
Association of Hampshire, Surry, and Sussex. 57 Army of the Earl of Newcastle
declining. 67 Ammunition conveyed to Gloucester and how. 200 A^lesbury to be
betrayed. 135 Advance of the Scots into England 136
B.
Burleigh-house taken. 7 Colonel Brown beats the Kentish Rebels. 13 Sir
William Brereton wins Houghton Castle. 18 Beverly pitifully plundered. 30
Bullenbrook Castle taken. 67 A new Broad Seal. 71 The Scots march from Barwick
into England. 137 Burlington taken. 154 Biddle-house taken. 167 Bradfords
Victory obtained by Colonel Lambert. 168 Burleigh house garrison active. 171
Sir William Belfore in Hampshire. 172 Bredport taken. 175 Burleigh-house in
Dorsetshire. 176 Colonel Bears brave defeat given to the Enemy. 182 Colonel
Bellasis beaten. 200 Basing-house defeated. 209 Banbury Forces beaten. 211 Sir
William Breretons brave performances. 84 The enemy ^^ated at Budely. 217 Col.
Boles slain. 97 Belvoir forces beaten. 110 Major Genesis Brown made Commander in
chief of 3 Counties. 249 Major Genesis Brown much honored. 251 Sir William
Belfore at Lime. 257 Bewley-house taken. 17 Sir Bazill Brooks plot discovered.
118 A Bristoll ship taken. 124 Banstable shakes off the Cavalerian yoke. 265
Beverton Castle taken. 236 A brave Bonefire of Popish trinkets. 128 Bloody Sir
John Byron. 129 Burton upon Trent taken. 131 Bodmin in Cornwall taken. 297
Beggars must be no carvers. 303
C.
Colonel Cromwell beats the Earl of Newcastle. 6 Col. Cromwell takes
Stamford in Line. 7 Clubmen in Lincoln beaten. 8 Col. Cromwels Letter showing
his Victory at Gainsbrough. 8 General Cavendish slain at Gainsbrough. 9
Canterbury Malignants rise. 15 City Malignants Imprisoned. 27 A Covenant or
Oath to be taken in London. 24 A Commission to Sir Will. Waller. 28 Sir
Alexander Carews plot at Plymouth. 29 Care taken for Apprentices. 31
Christs-Hospitall relieved by the Parliament. 37 Cambden Cormorants beaten. 49
The Kings Cormorants beaten at Newport Pannell. 55 The Lord Capell beaten at
Wem. 62 Cessation in Ireland justified by the King. 68 Contrary effects to the
Irish Cess^tion. 71 A Council of State for the 3 Kingdoms. 147 Sir William
Constables good service in the North. 154 The Covenant taken, the manner how.
157 Sir William Constables good service at York. 160 Cheshire much aimed at by
the King. 161 Church Government. 162 Covenant taken in Leicester. 169
Chester-bridge in Yorkshire, taken by Sir William Constable. 171 The Earl of
Carberies pride and cruelty. 177 The E. of Carbery quite vanquished. 181
Cathedral at Westminst. reformed. 184 Cawood-castle taken. 202 Crowland
regained. 203 Correspondence with the Swedes. 204 Commissioners for the New
Broad scale. 88 Carnarvan Town and Castle taken. 224 Covenant taken by the
House of Peers. 90 Commanders in Arms take the Covenant. 90 Covenant sealed
with loan of 100000 l at London. 90 The Earl of Callender stirs in Scotland.
230 The L. Crawford saluted by Sir Will. Waller. 98 Canterbury Minister
reformed. 101 Cawood Castle in Yorksh. taken. 233 Chippingham Garrison taken.
237 A Chain of gold bestowed by the Parliament on Capt. Swanley. 248 The Kings
Commanders caught at Cards and Dice 112 Compton-house taken. 251 3 Children in
one bed miraculously preserved. 254 Coventry Forces take Holt-house. 117
Coventry forces take Bewley-house. ibid. Citizens of London invite the
Parliament to a Feast. 124 Covenant to be taken over the whole Kingdom. 157 A
Collection for sick and wounded soldiers by an Ordnance. 33 Leiut. Genesis
Cromwells due praise. 273 Major Genesis Crafords valor. 273 Croyland subdued. 132
Cholmmy-house taken. 285 A brave defeat given to the Enemy at Chard. 296
D.
A rich Danish ship taken. 20. Delinquents woods to be cut down. 36 A brave
defeat given to the Enemies of Cambden. 49 A great design against London. 52
The Kings Declaration justifying the Irish cessation. 68 Defection of the
Northern Counties from the King. 68 A Declaration touching the great Seal 72 A
Declaration touching the cessation in Ireland. 70 A brave Defeat given to the
Enemy by Col. Rudgeley. 78 A Declaration consented to by England and Scotland.
142 The Parliaments Declaration sent to Oxford. 152 Diverse Delinquent Lords
etc. names. 153 Da^by Forces take Kings Milus 156 The Parliaments Declaration
took good effect at Oxford. 175 Delinquents reclaimed. 174 Durham fled unto by
Newcastle. 228 A brave Defeat given to the Enemy by Col. Fox. 216 The Kings
Declaration against the Covenant. 91 Deserters of Oxford. 92 Lord Digby beaten
at Plymouth. 94 The Enemy beaten at Dunscot. 95 The Famous Defeat at Aulton. 95
The Devizes molested by Col. Massye. 237 The Lord Denbigh takes Russell-Hall.
239 A brave Defeat given to the Enemy at Nottingham. 240 The Lord Denbigh
against Dudley Forces. 251 The great Danger and Deliverance of Col. Mitton.
ibid. The Lord Denbigh wins Oswestree. 260 The Danes our underhand Enemies. 116
The Danes vexed by the Sweeds. 117 The great Design of the Royalists. 121
Darbies brave activity. 265 A desperate Design against Nottingham 133
E.
England likned to the Sea. 1 Ambassadors sent from France into Scotland. 54
English-plantations taken care of. 58 English-Irish Soldiers revolt from the
King. 61 England and Scotland consent in a Declaration. 142 Exploits of the
Parliaments Forces. 155 Explaits of Pool. ibid. Exploits of Warwick Castle. 156
Exploits of Sir Thomas Fairfax. ibid. Exploits of Pool against Prince Rupert.
163 Exploits of Col. Massye about Gloucester. 92 Exploits yet more of Colonel
Massyes. 227 Englands just objurgation. 229 Englands great wonder, to Gods
great glory, Anno 1644. 237 Enemy bravely beaten at Oswestree. 266 The low Ebb
of the Parliaments Army. 22 Estates of Malignants sequestered. 153 Enemy bravely
beaten at Lyme. 241 A brave Defeat given to the Enemy at Evesham. 295
F.
The Fellowship a brave ship taken by the Parliaments Forces. 27 Fuel provided
for, for the City of London. 35 The Lord Fairfax his Victory at Hull. 38 Sir
Thomas Fairfax at Horn-Castle. 47 France sends into Scotland. 54 A brave Fight
at Stamford. 75 Sir Tho. Fairfax. 156 Lord Fairfax, Victorious at Hull. 163 The
Lord Fairfaxes Forces conjoined with Sir Tho. Fairfaxes. 202 L. Fairfax and the
Scots conjoined. 210 Fidelity of the Scots to England. 211 Col. Fox Victorious
at Budely. 217 Forces of Northampton beat the Enemy. 95 Sir Thomas Fairfax
stormeth Gains-borough. 102 Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Valor at Marston-Moor Fight.
274 Sir Tho. Fairfax compared to Julius Caesar. 284 Foy in the West taken. 297
G.
Gally-slaves of Satan are Wicked Men. 2 Gods glory is our Alpha and Omega.
ibid. Gainsbrough won. 6 Gainsbrough taken again. 51 Lord Gorings Letter
intercepted and read in Parliament 155 Lord Generals just praise. 167 Gallows
set up at Oxford and the cause 174 Sir Richard Greenviles defection from the
Parliament. 174 Gloucesters good condition. 182 Gloucester releived with
necessaries. 192 Sir John Gell Victorious at Muck-bridge. 199 Gloucesters
Ammunition how conveyed thither. 200 The Lord Generals advance with his Army.
228 Gainsbrough stormed by Sir Thomas Fairfax. 102 Grafton house taken. 103 The
Lord Generals Merciful Proclamation. 235 The Lord Gray of Grooby his brave
carriage at Leicester. 257 The Lord General successful in the West. 264 3
Garnsey Gentlemen mightily preserved. 122 Greenvill beaten at Plymouth. 265
Government of the Church. 162 Greenland-house taken. 285 Lord Gray of Grooby
and Sir John Gells forces take Wellney Fort. 287 The Lord General victorious
in the West. 296 Greenvils house at Tavestocke taken. 297
H.
Sir Edward Hales taken prisoner. 15 Houghton Castle in Cheshire taken. 18 The
Earl of Hollands trunk seized on. 27 Hull besieged. 30 Hull remarkably
preserved. 31 Horn-castles famous Victory. 42 Hulls victory related by Sir John
Meldrums Letter. 39 Hampshire, Surry, and Sussex Associated. 57 30 or 40 of our
Horse, beat 1000 of the Enemies Horse. 65 Hilsey house taken. 167 Lord
Hastings vexes the honest inhabitants of Leicester. 169 Hinckly house. 170
Saul's house decreaseth David's house increases. 173 Haverford west in Wales
strangely taken. 180 The Lady Hopton and two hundred prisoners taken. 194 House
of Peers take the Covenant. 90 Sir Ralph Hopton writes to Sir William Waller.
99 Sir Ralph Hoptons low ebb. 253 Hollanders underhand Enemies to the
Parliament. 116 Sir Tho. Holts house taken. 117 Hildsden house taken. 131 Sir
Robert Harlow pulls down a mighty crucifix at Christs-Hospitall in London. 290
I.
Capt. Johnsons brave courage. 45 Intelligencers and Spies voted against 49
Irish Massacree. 69 About 1500 Irish Rogues cast away at Sea by a storm. 172 A
Land storm also on the Irish. ibid A Welsh jest. 179 Captain Jordans good
success at Sea 182 The Lord John, brother to the Duke of Lenox slain. 190
Irish Rebels accorded with by the King 248 Justice of God prosecutes the
wicked. 249
K.
The Earl of Kingstone slain. 7 Kentish Malignants rise in Rebellion. 11 The
King sends Letters into Scotland. 54 The 3 Kingdoms to have one Council of
State. 147 King Milus taken. 156 The Kings great aim at Cheshires County. 161
The Kings children cared for by the Parliament. 175 Kentish-mens brave
behavior at Alsford. 193 Kents memorable gratitude to God. 232 The Kings party
unsuccessefull ever since the Irish cessation. 102 The Kings Forces frighted.
234 The Kings ungodly agreement with Ireland. 248 The King pursued by Sir
William Waller. 248
L.
Sir Michael Levesey at Yawlden in Kent. 14 Londoners Petition against a
pretended peace. 23 Londoners take an Oath. 24 A Loan of an 100000. l. to be
raised in London for the Scots. 38 Lincoln taken. 51 Letters sent by the King
into Scotland. 54 London must be starved up. 55 A Letter sent from Oxford to
the Parliaments Lord General. 152 A Letter from the Lord Goring intercepted
and read in Parliament. 155 Leicestershire men victorious at Hinckly. 170 Col.
Lamberts brave victory at Bradford. 168 Col. Lambert again Victorious. 171 Col.
Laughorn in Penbrookshire. 77 London Regiments brave valor at Alsford. 193
Col. Lambert beats Bellassys in Yorkshire. 200 Captain Lays Valor at Wareham.
81 Solemn League or Covenant farther pressed. 88 London petitions the
Parliament for the settling of the State Committee. 225 Lyme stormed by the
Enemy, and bravely repulsed. 228 Lymes condition related. 231 Lymes brave
carriage against Prince Maurice. ibid. Lymes valor testified by the Enemy. 240
Lymes seige wholly raised. 243. and 252 Lyme bravely beats the Enemy. 241 The
Kings Letter to the Lord Mayor of London. 121 General Lesleyes carriage at
Marstone Moore fight. 273 Col. Lamberts valor. 274 Laystolk Garrison quitted.
132 Col. Laughorns brave performances in Pembrookshire. 294 Lyme garrison gives
the Enemy a brave defeat. 296
M
Malignants of London imprisoned. 27 Sir John Meldrum at Hull. 39 Captain
Moodies brave courage. 45 Earl of Manchester victorious at Horncastle. 42
Colonel Massies good service at Tewksbury. 48 Earl of Manchester takes in
Lincoln. 51 Earl of Manchester takes Gainesborough. 51 Earl of Manchesters
care for the associated Counties. 55 Malignants estates sequestered. 153
Kings-Milus taken by Darby Forces. 156 Members of Parliament that took the
Covenant their names and number. 157 Milford-Haven taken. 161 Colonel Mitton
beats Prince Rupert. 161 Colonel Massey still victorious. 183 Malignants
mouths stopped. 194 At Munk-bridge Sir John Gell victorious 199 Letters of Mart
granted against the Parliaments Enemies. 84 Earl of Manchester again victorious
at Lincoln. 217 Colonel Massies brave exploits about Gloucester. 92 Colonel
Massey at Wotton garrison. 93 Colonel Massyes just praise. 227 Sir Thomas
Middletons brave performances. 84 Montrosse beaten in Scotland. 230 A Message
sent from England to Scotland. 236 Col. Massey victorious. 236 Malmsbury taken
by Colonel Massye. ibid. Colonel Massey still Victorious. 237 Colonel
Massies good services rewarded by the Parliament. 237 Morpeth-castle taken by
the Scots. 247 Colonel Mitton his great danger and deliverance. 251 Two Maids
had three of their hands shot off together. 254 Gods mercy to Manchester in the
midst of her misery. 258 Malignants in London their Fleabiting. 260
Marston^Moores most famous victory described. 269 Sir John Meldrum storms
Gainesborough. 103 Monuments of Superstition to be demolished. 222 The Earl of
Manchesters labor and vigilance at York fight. 273 A learned and godly
Ministry to be ordained. 287 Captain Moultons brave performances in
Pembrookeshire 294
N
The Earl of Newcastle beaten from Gainesborough. 6 Mewcastle besieges Hull.
30 Newcastle in great straites. 39 The Kings forces frighted from
New-port-pannell. 55 Newcastles declining condition. 67 Northern Counties leave
the Earl of Newcastle. 68 Newcastles forces beaten by Colonel Rudgeley. 78
Namptwich bravely relieved with a glorious victory. 142 Names of diverse
delinquents or malignants. 153 Names and number of Parliament members that took
the Covenant. 157 Newcastle besieged by the Scots. 158 Northampton garrisons
good service. 162 Nottingham preserved from a notable plot. 163 Northampton
forces took the Princes troop. 168 Colonel Norton at Southampton. 172 Names
of reclaimed delinquents. 174 The E. of Newcastles great loss. 183 The Earl of
Northampton beaten by Colonel Bear. 18^ Newcastle flies to Durham. 208
Newcastle got into York. 209 Northamptons forces revenged on Banbury. 211
Northampton forces victorious. 95 A notable plot against. Nottinghamcastle. 104
Newarke garrison beaten. 240 Colonel Needhams valor. 274 Another desperate
plot against Nottingham. 133 Newbridge in the West taken. 297
O
Ordinance of Parliament against the Kentish rebels. 16 Oxfords proclamation
to starve up the City of London. 18 An Oath or Covenant taken by Londoners. 24
Ordinance of Parliament to search (...) and carriages. 30 Ordinance for a
collection for sick and (...) soldiers. 33 A charitable Order in Parliament
for Christs-Hospitall. 37 Ordinance against Spies. 49 Oxfords Propositions for
a pretended Peace. 152 Ordinance for taking the Covenant. 157 Oxford sets up
gallows and why. 174 Ordinance for sanctifying the Sabbath. 199 Ordinance for
demolishing of Organs, etc. 222 Oxford Spiders sack poison from hole some
flowers 91 Oxford deserted by many. 92 Oswestree taken. 260 Ordinance of
Parliament against rotten revolters from the Parliament. 260 The Enemies
bravely beaten at Oswestree. 266 Ordinance for the well governing of the City
of London. 100 Serjea^t Major Ogle a notable traitor and plotter. 135
Observations on the fight at Marston-Moore. 278
P
Parliament compared to God Ark. 1 Proclamation from Oxford to starve London.
18 Alderman Pennington made Lieutenant of the Tower of London. 19 Four
Proclamations sent to the Lord Mayor of London at one time. 35 Captain Players
brave resolution and courage. 45 A great Plot against London. 52 A plot to
hinder the Scots advance. 53 The Plot to starve the City of London frustrated.
55 Plantations abroad cared for by the Parliament. 58 Almost two hundred
thousand English Protestants massacred in Ireland. 69 A Plot against
Southampton discovered. 148 Propositions for a pretended peace. 152 Pools
exploits. 155 A Plot against the Scots discovered. 161 Preachers at London to
be provided for. 162 A Plot against Nottingham discovered. 163 Pools exploits
against Prince Rupert. ibid. The Princes Troop taken. 168 The Palsgrave takes
the Covenant in Holland. 172 The Parliaments care for the pious institution of
the Kings Children. 175 Capt. Tho. Pyne. 175 Capt. Tho. Pyne his just praise.
176 Pembrookshire hopefully reduced to the Parliament. 176 Pembrookshires brave
resolution. 178 Captain Tho. Pyne victorious at Collyton. 184 Preachers greatly
wanted in Wales. 202 Master P^ynnes honor attested out of Holland. 203
Plymouth gives the Enemy a brave Defeat. 215 Pools brave performances. 81 A
Plot against Gloucester. 94 A Plot to undo England and Scotland. 229 A brave
Prize taken at Sea. 232 Master John Pym honorably mentioned as deserved. 99 A
Plot to convey the two young Princes from Saint Jamses to Oxford. 99 A Plot
against Nottingham Castle. 124 The Earl of Pembrookes just praise. 233 Plymouth
garrison takes a brave prize 240 A Pack of Plots. 109 Plymouths Seige deserted.
111 An admirable providence by Pilchards at Plymouth. 112 Parishaw bridge
destroyed 60 Royalists 250 Prizes at Sea taken by our ships. 256 Preparation by
Sea to help the West affairs. 257 Prizes taken by Sea and Land. 259 A Plot
against the Parliament. 118 The Parliament invited to a feast by the Londoners.
124 Pretended peace petitioned against. 23 A Plot against Southampton
discovered. 1^^ A Plot of Religion to divide the City and Parliament. 134
Propositions for Peace to be tendered to the King. 292
R.
Reformation petitioned for by the Assembly of Divines. 4 Rebellion in Kent. 11
Rebellion at Canterbury appeased. 15 Col. Rudgely bravely defeats the Enemy. 78
Return of the Trained Bands of London and Westminster, to London. 99
Russell-Hall in Staffordshire taken. 239 About 60 Royalists drowned together.
250 Revolters from the Parliament. 262 Rats crawl up ships Masts when the ship
is ready to sink. 262 Reformation in King Henry sevenths chapel at
Westminster. 113 Reformation in Canterbury-Minster. 101 Prince Ruperts
atheistical speech. 275 Royalists impudency in triumphing for what they never
had. 283 Colonel Rossiters activity. 285 Lord Rochford impeached of High
Teason. 285
S.
Stamford in Lincolnshire taken. 7 A Ship of Denmark taken. 20 Spies and
Intelligencers ordered against. 49 Soldiers revolt from the King at Bristol.
61 Surrey, Sussex, and Hampshire associated. 57 The Lord Saulton a Scottish
Popish Lord apprehended. 75 The Scots march from Barwick fully related. 137
Stamford mount near Plymouth. 75 The Scots successful progress in the
North. 154 Capt. Swanley successful at Milford Haven. 161 Sir John Stowell
slain at Southampton. 170 The Sweds desire to associate with our Parliament.
173 Capt. Swanley Victorious in Penbrookshire. 176 Sir John Stepney a brave
Welsh surveyour, a pretty jest of him. 179 The Scots pass over Tyne. 183
Security the bane of safety. 184 Sanctification of the Sabbath day ordered. 199
Captain Swanley still victorious in Wales. 202 Sweathland and England respond
together. 204 Selbies famous victory. 205 Scotlands fidelity to England. 211 A
new great Seal of England. 86 Captain Swanley still victorious. 224 Sweet
Sympathy twixt the Parliament and City of London. 226 Secrecy is the Key of
certainty. 226 Colonel Sydenhams Valiant Exploits. 101 Serjeant-Major Skippon
takes Glaston house. 103 Sunderland preserved from a treacherous Plot. 247
Capt. Swanley honored with a chain of Gold by the Parliament. 248 Capt.
Swanley Commander in chief in Wales. 247 Sh^^ly-Castle taken. 250 Swedes vex
the Danes who would have vexed us. 117 A brave Ship taken. 123 Sick and mained
soldiers cared for by the Parliament. 33 Col. Sydneys valor at
Marestone-Moore fight. 273 Col. Sydenhams brave valor. 286 Scots advance into
England. 136
T.
Trunkes to be searched and other carriage. 32 Tewksbury looked unto by Colonel
Massey. 48 Sir Henry Talbot surprised in his quarters. 146 Tadcaster taken. 173
Tinby Town and Castle taken. 181 Triumphant return of the Trained Bands of
London and Westmin. 99 Capt. Temples brave Exploits at (...) 235 Tewksbury
taken. 249 Taunton-Dean taken. 257 P^pish trinkets burnt. 128 Taunton Castle
taken. 285 Public Thanksgiving famously celebrated at London for the glorious
Victory at Marstone Moore. 288 T^ckhill taken. 293 Tastcaster in the West
taken. 297
V.
Aglorious Victory at Namptwich. 142 Sir Henry Vaughan a Welsh Commander his
valor described. 179 Victory at Selby. 205 Col. Vavasor beaten. 93 A
Universal plot against the Protestant Religion over all Christendom. 116
Victory at Marstone-Moore. 269 Use of all this History. 302
W.
Wicked men compared to the Waves of the Sea. 1 Lord Willough by of Parham wins
Gainsbrough. 6 Sir Thomas Walsingham taken prisoner by Kentish Rebels. 12 Sir
William Waller has his Commission to advance. 28 Sir John Wollaston chosen
Lord Mayor of London. 34 Sir John Wollastons fidelity cleared by a great
trial. 35 Woods of Delinquents cut down. 36 Wem Forces beat the Lord Capell.
60 Lord Willoug^by of P^rtham takes B^llingbrook Castle. 67 Sir William Waller
apprehends the Lord Saulton. 75 Warwick Castles Exploits. 156 Whi^by in
Yorkshire taken. 156 Col. Waights good service. 171 Westminster Cathedral
bravely reformed. 184 Sir William Waller at Winchester. 192 Whitechurch in
Dorcetshire taken. 195 Isle of Wights love to Sir William Waller. ibid. Waltham
house taken by Colonel White-head. 201 Sir William Waller heats the Enemy at
Basing. 299 The Earl of Warwick made Lord high Admiral of England. 83 Warwick
Castles brave Service. ibid. Sir John Winter beaten from Newnham. 93 Wotton
Garrison spoiled by Colonel Massey. ibid. Sir William Waller sends a present
to the Lord Craford, a (...) of Sack. 98 At Wantage the Kings Forces are
frighted. 234 The Women of Lymes admirable courage at that siege. 246 Sir Will.
Waller pursues the King. 248 10000. l. Proffered to Capt. White to be a taitor
to his Country. 106 Col. Weight beats the Kings Cormorants of Belvoir. 110 Sir
William Waller takes Shudley Castle. 250 Weymouth taken by Sir William ^elfore.
257. Western affairs going on successefully. 258 Wives and children of
soldiers slain or maimed provided for. 259 Windsor-castles brave exploits
about Redding. 113 Sir William Waller takes Arundell Castle. 122 Winsby fight.
133 Windsor Castle to be betrayed. 135 Weln Ferry and Fort taken. 287 Western
parts hopefully reduced to the Parliament. 298 Our enemies, as Whales, caught
in Gods net. 301 Wait and believe is a Christians duty. 303
Y
Goods service done at York by Sir William Constable. 160 York is Newcastles
last shelter. 209 The Yoke of Cavalerian slavery Shaken off by Barnstable. ^65
(...) Marston-Moor Victory. 291.
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Jan. 31. 1644. Ja. Cranford.


