The Most Honble. William Marquess of Lothian


TWO SERMONS PREACHED Before His MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER, And the ESTATES
of PARLIAMENT. By the appointment of the Provincial Synod of Lothian and
Tweddale.

Upon Sabbath the 7th. of May, 1693. Unto which is subjoyned the Sermon
Preached at the opening up of the Synod. May 2. 1693.

By Mr. William Vetch Minister of Peebles.

From Haggai, 2.4.

And Col: 4.17.

Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, to be sold by Alexander Henderson, Book
seller in the Lochen-booths, Anno 1693.

UNTO HIS GRACE WILLIAM DUKE of HAMILTON THEIR MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER For
the Ancient KINGDOM of SCOTLAND, etc.
MAY it please your Grace, If I had an Offering, that might be any way
Acceptable, There is none to whom it is so much due, as unto your Grace; And
that because I drew my first Breath, and had my first Education, where the
Ancient, and Noble Family of Douglas was the Grand Planet, Regnant in that
Hemisphaere.

Secondly, Your Grace, by the Alwise Providence of GOD, and the Choice of our
Great, and Gracious Protestant King, being made his Majesty's High Commissioner
to this Parliament: Stand in the place of Zerubbabel, in my Text, and are
chiefly concerned to notice, What GOD calls for at your Hands, in Order to the
Building up the walls of Our second Temple, the foundations whereof have been
wonderfully and mercifully laid some Years ago; And now, Your Grace, and this
Honorable and High Court of Parliament, are again called to carry on this
begun Work, both by the Providence of GOD, that has put a New Opportunity in
Your hands; And the Call of the Preached Word Awakening and stirring You up
unto the Work. And O that Your Grace, and this Honorable Court, may give such
a speedy Return to both these Calls as this Jewish Government did: For we may
see from the first chapter of this prophecy of Haggai, that within the space
of three weeks and three days; after this Prophets first sermon, they fell
zealouslie to the work, and that with great courage and unanimitie; And also
without any further delay, or any visible dissent among them, and whereas the
stoutest of them before had no great mind to the work, now when alarmed by the
Prophet, in the Name of the LORD, the very weakest and most timorous, are
forward, and bold to carry it on. Thirdly, And who could be so fit in all the
Nation for this Work, as Your Grace; Being not only of so Noble a Descent,
where Valor and Courage has been remarkablie for so many Ages Connatural to
the Family: (And let it not be lost in You, especially when called to lay it
out on so Noble an Interprize, as the Propagation and Protection of Religion,
Liberty and Property:) But also, being advanced to Represent the Chief Family
of the Kingdom, and whom GOD has blessed with a Goodly Person, Excellent
parts, a Numerous, Noble, and Hopeful Progeny: A Blessing that fitts You to
speak with Your Enemies in the gate; And that Divine Hand, that has now
promoted Your Grace, to so high a Trust, wherein Ye may do great things for the
Advancement of CHRIST'S Kingdom, will look for some proportionable Return: If
the Great Landlord of the World expect a Rent from the meanest Cottage: What a
large Revenue must he look for, from so great Families; For, to whom much is
given, of them much will be required. Learn to pay this, and it will draw down
not only Blessings on Your self, but on your Posterity. It was the Honor of
Abraham's House, that from Father to Son, (...) many Generations they were Heirs
of the same Promise. Heb: 11.9. O that there were such a Succession to be found
in the House of the Nobility, and Gentry of our Land: But alace Plenty
abused, disposes to Sin, and Vice: And it is toe Ordinary for the Greatest,
and bravest Spirits, to think the Power of Religion, a base and mean thing,
which takes off from their Grandeure, and Esteem among men, and that the
strictness of it, is inglorious: But a Conjunction of Goodness and greatness
together, is the most Lovelie and comfortable thing in the World; And greatness
without Goodness will be a Tastless Cordial at the Long Run.

I have presumed to thrust these following Sheets under Your Graees Patrocinie,
being persuaded that a Favorable Smile from such a Potent Prince, will give
them sufficient Protection; And although the Fabric be mean, yet the
Statliness of the Frontispiece may beget a Curiosity in many to look into it:
hoping that your Grace will Pardon wherein I have presumed, and will Favorably
accept of the small token of my Sincere affection to your Grace, and those Noble
Families (for they that have not Gold must offer Goats Hair) I make Bold to
subscribe myself,

Your GRACES Most Humble Servant, In the LORD, WILLIAM VETCH.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
THERE is none in my Station, (I confess) so unfit to appear in Print, as I am,
But the restless importunity of so many persons of all ranks, occasions me to
do violence to my own inclinations, in publishing the ensuing sermons; which
you have here laid before you, with little addition, or alteration: Only let me
tell you, that although I opened up this text, Haggai 2: 4. As it referred to
the preceding and subsequent verses of the Chapter, by way of Lecture, and did
intermit according to the Custom; yet I have thought fit to put it, and the
Forenoons Sermon together as one Entire Discourse.

Another Reason moving me to this undertaking is, That several things spoken in
that Great Auditory upon this Subject, are Misrepresented, Mistaken, and
Mis-improven, which this may be a mean to Cure, and Remove.

The Entertainment I acknowledge is so Course and Mean, that I cannot promise
it an universal Acceptance: Seeing too too many in our Day, (wherein Fancy and
Opinion, that Witch and Enchantress has got the Ascendant of Religion and
Reason) are more devoted to what may please their palate, then prolong their
health, and life. But if it may (as it is) be any wise serviceable to the
public good of the Church, and the work in hand, and any way profitable to any
particular well wisher, of that Interest; I have attained my End. I am,

One of ZIONS Well-wishers, And thy Servant, W. V.

The First SERMON
HAGGAI 2: 4: Yet now be strong. O Zerubbabel, says the LORD, be strong, O
Joshua, son of Josedech the high Priest, and be strong all ye People of the
Land, says the LORD, and work: For I am with you, says the LORD of Hosts.


I Shall for Lecture open up these words, as they referr unto the preceding
and subsequent part of the Chapter, and observe somethings from them, and then
go on, and prosecute that Doctrine, which I think most suitable to this
Occasion; I shall not have time to give a large, or Critical Explanation of the
Text, with Respect to the persons mentioned in it, or the Prophet that
delivered this Message, or annent the time that he was sent to that People, for
fear I come short of the main things I purpose to speak to this Honorable
Auditorie.

We do not read that this People of the Jews, to whom this Propher Haggai was
sent, had immediately after their return from the Babylonish Captivity, any
Prophet among them, and yet they had such as were able to direct them in their
work: But they proving sinfully and shamefully negligent and sloathful, for a
considerable while after their return, in the work of Reformation which GOD had
called them unto: And for which they had the Civil Authority even Cyrus his
grant. The LORD at length raised up this prophet Haggai, and after him
Zechariah, to awaken and stir them up to their duty, in carrying on this Work
that was begun several years ago.

Their neglect and carelessness in this matter was occasioned partly from their
own timerousness and weakness, being but few when compared with their
Ancestors who builded the first Temple, and with the multitude of Enemies that
at present opposed them, and no wonder they were timorous, having been so long
houled and kept at under in Babylon. Where their long affliction and Captivity
had dispirited them.

Partly this neglect was occasioned from the bold and violent opposition of
enemies that did what they could to mart the begun work of GOD in the Land;
Such as Sanballat the Horonite, and his Accomplices.

Partly from their too too much minding the things of the world, and preferring
them to the things of GOD, as we have them reproved for it chapter 1st. ver.
4th. Is it time for you, O Ye, to dwell in your Cicled houses, and this housely
waste? and this is a disease that abounds much in our days!

This second chapter wherein my text lves, is full of encouragement for them,
to proceed in the work, notwithstanding of the discouragements on the one hand,
and the oppositions they met with on the other.

The first encouragement lys in the latter words of the text, from the promise
of GOD's Presence with them in this work, For I am with You, says the LORD of
hosts: therefore be strong and work; you need not fear all your enemies that
oppose you, when I am with you.

The second encouragement for removing their timerousness, and spiriting them
to their work is taken from the standing Covenant that was between GOD and
them, and that of a long and old date, even since the day that he had brought
them out of the land of Egypt; where we have to admire GOD's faithfulness to
them in keeping this Covenant, when they were guilty of many breaches thereof
to him. Verse 5. According to the Word that I covenanted with you; when ye came
out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains with you, fear ye not.

The third Encouragement to go on in their work is taken from the Lords promise
to compense the external despicableness and meanness of this fabric they had
begun, and about which they were so discouraged, because it had not that
Extensiveness and Largeness of Building, neither had they Solomon's riches to
give it that internal splendour and Glory that Solomon's Temple had, all this the
LORD promises to make up, with his own Glory and the Mediators personal
presence, verse 7: 8, 9.

The 4. encouragement to proceed in the begun work is: that although for their
neglect they were falsen under many Judgments, and especially that of famine,
as in the preceding Chapter Verse, 6. Ye have sown much, and brung in little,
and also in this Chapter, When they came to an heap of twenty Measures, they
proved but ten, when they came to the Press to draw out fifty Vessels full, it
filled but twenty, Verse 16. By which ye might easily have conjectured that I
had a controversy with you; And itconcerned you to have enquired unto the
causes of my controversy: But now says the LORD If ye will proceed in the
work, O Zerubbabel, Joshua and the people. I will remove these Judgments, and
bring Blessings in the room of them.

The last Argument which is very considerable to move and encourage them to go
on in their work, and should have great weight with us; Who are afraid of the
Nations about us is the LORDS promising Safety and Security to them, in the
midst of great Commotions, and desolating Judgments upon the Nations round
about; As if he would say, though I make Kings and Nations fall by the Ears and
destroy one another, though you may hear it or see it, yet it shall not come
near you, and this ye see in the last verses of the Chapter, and it is like
that sweet Promise to the Church, Psalm: 91.7, 8. Verses, A thousand shall fall
at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: But it shall not come nigh
thee; Only with thine eyes shall thou behold and see the reward of the wicked.

In the Verse we have read to you more, particularly we have these things to be
considered. 1. The Exhortation be strong and work, this is the Call which the
LORD sends by the Prophet Haggai. 2. We have the persons to whom this Call and
Message is directed and sent, and that is to Zerubbabel to Joshua, and to all
the People: Magistrates Ministers and People, they are the Persons to whom this
Call comes. 3. We have the person calling, and that is the LORD of Hosts, by
his Prophet Haggai. Thus says the LORD of Hosts. 4. We have the Arguments
which the LORD makes use of in this Verse, to press them unto the giving of a
Cordial and present Obedience unto this Call and Message, and these Arguments
are two, which ye would do well to take notice of, one of them is taken from
the Patience of GOD, another is taken from the Promise of GOD. That which is
taken from the Patience and Forbearance of GOD, lies in the first Words of the
Verse (yet now) after so long a foreslowing and neglect of the Work in you; (as
if the LORD would say) and after so long Patience and Forbearance in me, it
concerns you to fall upon this Work that I call you to, I might have come and
destroyed you after I brought you out of Babylon, for your unanswerableness to
My Command, yet have I forborne and stretched out My Patience toward you, and
put a new opportunity in your hands, and given you a new Call, ought not My
former Patience and Forebearance, and My present Goodness to lead you to
Repentance, to mourn over and redress the wrongs that you have been formerly
guilty of.

The second Argument that he backs this Call withal, is in the last words of
the Text, and that is the promise of his being with them in this undertaking,
For I am with you says the LORD of Hosts.

5ly. We have this message delivered with a double note of attention, to the
leading men in Church and State, (persons too incident to be heedless)
importing no less than this, that it concerned such as them at this very
Juncture, to give ready Obedience to GOD's Call, to be Zealous, and so a good
example, to all the people under them: this note of attention calls all to take
special notice of GOD's Messenger now unexpectedly sent to them, and also of
the message that he carries.

And then in the last place we have this remarkable, Thus says the LORD,
thrice repeated, the design of which I take to be this to clear, and confirm
them in this call, as if the Prophet Haggai had said, it is not my message, a
sick-brain fancy, or notion of mine, but it is the command of JEHOVAH the Lord
of Hosts.

I might observe from these words several things; As

(1.) That the People of GOD may be called by a wonderful cast of Providenee,
and an Extraordinary Hand of GOD, out of great trouble and affliction, to
carry on a work of Reformation, and yet when they are most clearly called to
it, it may meet with great Rubbs and and impediments: You see they were called
to this, and yet it meets with great opposition; and they also notwithstanding
of GODS Call, were careless and superficial in prosecuting this so great, so
necessary, and so profitable a work.

(2lie.) I might observe this, That the LORD takes special notice of His
people, how they manage precious opportunities for His glory, his Churches
good, and the advancement of Religion which are put in their hands, and
therefore he sends this Prophet Haggai to reprove their by past disobedience
and negligence, and to awaken them to their duty for the future. But the main
Doctrine which I take to comprehend the very scope of the words is this, That
it is the duty of all ranks of people in a land, to be strong and join
cordiallie and unanimouslie together to carry on a begun work of Reformation,
when the LORD eminently calls them to it, and promises to be with them in it.
And this is the Doctrine, that through the LORDS Assistance, I purpose to stand
on, in prosecuting whereof, I shall follow this method.

1. To show you what is meant here by, (be strong) and that I shall do first
positively, showing what it truly imports. 2. Negativelie, what it prohibites.

In the next place, I shall give you the Reasons of the doctrine, why all ranks
of persons in a Land, should be strong and join cordially together, to carry
on a begun work of Reformation, when the LORD eminently calls them to it.

And lastly, I shall give you the use of all; This is the work that lies before
me. First, then by Being strong, is positively, and plainly meant in Scripture
phrase, to take courage and resolution, that persons of all ranks, whom GOD
calls to his Service, should put on courage and resolution, especially such as
GOD sets up in public Offices; Ye may see this clear in the case of Joshua, in
his first chapter, verse 9, When the LORD calls forth Joshua to install him in
a public Office, which he was to manage for bringing the People of GOD through
Jordan, out of the wilderness, and to bring them to the possession of Canaan,
and to go before them as their Captain General in the Wars, by which they were
to execute GODS threatened judgments in destroying these Nations that were
accursed, and were to meet with many a bloody Rancounter in the doing
thereof; how does the LORD in order to all this, encourage Joshua, in this 9
verse, Have not I commanded thee? Be strong, and of a good courage, be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the LORD thy GOD is with thee,
whithersoever thou go. Magistrates are to be men of courage, Exodus 18.21.
Thou shall (says the LORD to Moses,) provide thee able men, out of all the
people, such as fear GOD, men of truth, hating covetousness. The Original word
in the Hebrew, is men of courage and strength; Yea, they that are in public
Office must not only put on courage and resolution, but they must evidence it
in the right management of the trust put in their hands Nehemiah chap. 6.11.
Should such a man as I flee; Nay, I will neither fear, nor flee, but stand it
out against Sanballat, and all his Accomplices, and all their power, their
scoffs, their threats, their plots, this was the Answer he gave to such as were
telling him such frightfull stories. That the Enemies would be too strong for
him, that they would runn him and that work down, that he was come from
Artaxerxes with a new Commission to propagate and carry on; but he puts on
Courage and Resolution as an Antidote against all these Fears: I say, That
persons that are Magistrates and Ministers, and such as have a public Trust
committed to them by the LORD, should be men of great courage, especially in a
time when Reformation and Temple-work is in hand, as in my Text.

Samuel was a man of courage, 1 Samuel 15.25. to the 30 verse, when he told King
Saul plainly his sins, And That GOD had rejected him therefore, and rent the
Kingdom from him.

Elijah also was a man of great Resolution and Courage, as you may see in that
conference between Obadiab and him, 1 Kings 18. ver. 15. etc. And when he told
a threatening Abab, ver. 18. That it was he and his fathers house that troubled
Israel, in that he had forsaken the LORD and followed Baalim.

And the Priests of the LORD were men of Courage; 2 Chronicles. 26.17, 18: when they
resisted King Vzziah, invading the Churches privileges

2ly. I take this to be meant by (be strong and work) to be Livelie, Active,
and diligent, in the work which they were now called to by the LORD, that they
not only have a fittedness for their work, but that they be faithful and
diligent in the dispatch of it, and indeed I find that the Wise man. Eccles: 9:
10. does commend diligence and activitie in all a man's lawful bussiness in the
world: Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, etc. How
much more commendable must it be, to be active and diligent in the great
concernments of GOD and of His House, and Glory, that must be a thing much
more regarded than the concerns of our own houses; And that 1st because the
matters of God are preferable to our matters, that is the thing, that should be
upon the heart, and Conscience, and affections of every person, of public
trust, they should set the matters of GOD foremost, like those persons, Psalm:
137 ver: 5, 6. If I forgetthee, O Zion; If I prefer not thee, to my chief Joy,
let my right hand forget her cunning; and let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth.

Secondly. This diligence and Activitie for GOD and his matters with which we
are entrusted, is the diligence that brings in the greatest Reward: though
alace it is little believed; there are many of you that hears me this day, that
if you would lay out your selves in places and stations for GOD and his work,
it would bring you a greater reward, than you are aware of, and you will be
made to see that your neglect in this thing will be of dreadful consequence at
the long run, and that the persuite of the things of the world, which divert
you from this main business, will bring you no comfort, and be of no
signification, except it be to disquiet your conscience, and increase your
torment.

Thirdly, From this consideration, People of all Ranks should be moved to great
Faithfulness, Activity and Diligence in the Matters of GOD, because the
Enemies that oppose this Work, are very diligent, lively and active, Psalm:
38.19. Verse, But mine Enemies are lively, and they are strong, and they that
bate me wrongfully are multiplied. The Godly man complains here of his Enemies
(you see) That they were strong and livey, but does this discourage him; Nay,
but on the contrare, it awakens him to a more vigorous prosecution of his Work.

Thirdly, This Exhortation being directed to all sorts of Persons, Statesmen,
Churchmen, and Commons (to be strong and work) it calls all those cordially to
unite and join together to build up the Temple of GOD, whose foundations are
already laid, and then they shall accomplish the Prophecy of the latter days,
Zeph: 3.9. For then will I turn to the people a pure Language, that they may
all call upon the Name of the LORD to serve him with one consent: And as the
words are rendered in the Original Language, they shall serve the LORD with one
Shoulder; I suppose that many may have heard of the Father that had a great
many Sons, and when he was going to make his Latter Will, he called for them,
and commended unto them a keeping of Unity, and Harmony together in their
Converse and Business, which would greatly tend to their Comfort and Advantage,
and to demonstrate this to them, he caused bring a Sheaf of Arrows, closely
tied together, and gave them to the Eldest to break, but he could not break
them, and so he gave them to the Younger sucessively, and they could not break
them, but when they were divided, they were easily broken, so it is with
Magistrates, Ministers, and People in the Land; When they unanimously and
cordially join together in the Work of GOD, they cannot easily be broken, and
destroyed; We say, vis unita fortior, and Unanimity in the work of GOD when all
join together as it were with one Shoulder without lying by, or interfeiring,
or drawing back, or obstructing one another is a good taken of a thriving work,
when Magistrates make such Laws as authorize only the true worship of GOD, and
take care to see them duly execute, that such as hinder uniformity in
Religious Worship may be removed, that so the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
Government of the House of the GOD of Heaven, may be according to the Laws of
the GOD of heaven through the whole Land: For purity of Doctrine does not
consist in a Lawless Liberty or Tolleration for men to do, and say what they
please in matters of Religion: But it consists in a joint uniformity to Worship
GOD, according to his own precept, and this promise (they shall all serve the
LORD with one Consent) which was calculate for the latter days: So much then
you see is employed in this Exhortation (be strong) viz: Courage and Resolution,
Activity and Diligence, with Unity and Harmony.

In the next place I come to show you negatively what this Exhortation (be
strong) prohibits, or what is not meant by it. As 1. It forbids timorousness,
for men to be possessed with a humane or slavish fear, that keeps them back
from their Duty to GOD, and His Work in their Station, this is a thing very
unbecoming to such as are Zerubbabels, Joshuas, and Nehemiahs, should such
persons as they fear, Whom had they to be afraid of, but cursed Canaanites,
and such as were no better in after Generations: What could Nehemiah and these
that were with with him be afraid of, when he was come from Babylon, clothed
with the Kings Letters and Authority, in order to the carrying on of the
forslowed work of Reformation; surely he had not the King, neither the GOD of
Heaven; nor the honest party of the Land to be afraid of; I know none that
might be a terror to him, and them that were joined with him but the Gerizzim
party, who were sinfully united to oppose violently and cunningly the building
of the Temple, and the true Worship of GOD, that they would so gladly have
destroyed: Let me say it to this Honorable and High Court of Parliament
without offense, and in all Humility, what have you to be afraid of, that you
should be Faint hearted in the Work of GOD; surely it cannot be of the GOD of
Heaven, nor of our Gracious King and Queen, not of the Protestant Princes
abroad, nor of such as are true Protestants at home; sure all these will be
Cordial Friends to our carrying on the Work of Reformation, and when ye have
all these on your side, you may well be strong, and put on Courage and
Resolution, for you have a mighty great backing: But of whom are you indeed
afraid? Is it of the Pope, or of the French King, and his Allies, or is it of
the Gerizzim party of these Lands, That they get up their head again, and that
ye and your Posterity, and Estates be ruined? Surely the Midwives of Egypt
will rise up in Judgment against you, who were in worse Circumstances then you
are, and yet were not afraid of the wrath of the King, but even over the Belly
of Dangerous Laws befriended the Children of Israel: How much more should ye
whom GOD in his Providence has raised up to Midwive out the Churches
deliverance, and are under the terror of no bad Laws, to frighten you from
your work: Put on Courage and Resolution to help your Traveling Mother the
Church, to bring forth the Man-Child of a Glorious Reformation, and then I may
promise ye shall be blessed as these Midwives were, Exodus 1.21. Of whom it is
said, because they feared the LORD, be made them houses: That is he preserved,
and Increased, Propagated, and Enriched them and their Familys. Will you read
and believe that Scripture, Isaiah 51.12, 13. verses, compared with the 7
verse, I even I am be, that comfort you, who art thou that thou should be
afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man that shall be made as
grass, and forgettest the LORD thy Maker, Who has stretched forth the Heavens,
and laid the foundations of the Earth? And have feared continualie every day,
because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, and
where is the fury of the oppressor. And verse 7. Fear ye not the reproach of
men, neither be afraid of their revilings. For verse 8. The Moth shall eat them
like a Garment, and the Worms shall eat them like Wool, but my Righteousness
shall be for ever, and my Salvation from Generation to Generation. But if these
Enemies were never so formidable, and numerous. Let me bespeak you as the
Leaders of the Philistines did their Army, 1 Samuel 4: 9. O Be strong and quite
your selves like men; do your duty with Resolution, Courage, and Faithfulness,
and the LORD shall be with you to deliver the Land from these Taskmasters: But
if ye be not strong, etc: then you may provoke GOD to let us fall before the
Philistines, even at Ebenezar, verse 1. and 2. The place where GOD has hitherto
helped, will you take that prophetical Encouragement for the latter days to
animate you to the work, Dan. 11.32. For tho such as do wickedly against the
Covenant, be Corrupted by Flatteries, yet the People that know their GOD shall
be strong and do Exploits: And if there be still any of you false and
faint-hearted, in the Matters of GOD and the King, then I Proclaim Gideons
Proclamation, Judges. 7.3. Whosever is fearful and afraid, let him return and
depart early from mount Gilead: And that Proclamation, Deuteronomy: 20. and 8 verse,
And who is there that is fearful and faint-hearted, let him go and return unto
his house, lest his Brethrens Heart faint as well as his Heart.

Secondly, This Call, be strong and work, thrice repeated, and thrice backed
with, Thus says the LORD, prohibites all further delay of the matter, this
People had done it too too long. You that are Magistrates, Ministers, and people
would delay this business no longer, for by so doing: 1st. You discourage
friends, and begets many fears in them, and doubtings what may be the Issue of
such delays, and whether this begun work will thrive or not, and this cannot
but beget a great deal of sorrow in the hearts of the Godly,

Secondly. This gives great encouragement to the opposite party, and puts a
further opportunity in their hands, to gather to a greater strength against
the present work, to mar it, and if they could to overturn it: yea your fears
and backwardness gives the enemies to take greater heart and Courage: Therefore
let me say to you as the Gibeonites did to Joshua, chap. 10, 6. Slack not thy
hand, from thy servants, come up to us quickly and save us, for all the Kings
of the Amorites, that dwell in the mountains are gathered together against us.
You see the sad effects of a short delay, Exodus: 32, 1. When Moses stayed but
forty days upon the mount, the people fell to Idolatry, and what if your
lingering to bring us out of the sad, I had almost said, Sodom like state, that
we have too long been into; draw down remarkable Judgments on us, as it did
on that people. Gen: 19, 16, 17 ver: and are there not many of the people of
GOD crying out, as it is Judges 5, 28. Why are his Chariot wheels so long of
coming.

Thirdly, This Call in my Text ( be strong, etc.) prohibits a Laish
carelessness, and a Gallios unconcernedness in the great matters amongst your
hands, and calls for Seriousness, Wisdom, and diligence in the managing of so
great a Trust, and not to be like that People, of whom it was said, they dwelt
carelessly, Judges 18.27. They were a quiet and secure people, and the Danites
came upon them, and burnt their City with fire: Ye know Gallios Character, Acts
18.17. verse, He cared for none of these things: And is there any thing under
Heaven, that we should be so much concerned about, or careful of, as the Work
of GOD committed to us. And Magistrates, and all other persons concerned would
often Remember, that as it is Great Trust, that is committed to them, so they
must Answer for the right or wrong Management of it before an Impartial Judge,
which should make us to endeavor so to act in our Station, as we may be
approven, and accepted of him in that day. But peradventure this Argument will
have greater weight with many, GOD in His Providence, has put our Religion,
Libertys, and Properties in one bottom, and he must have been very blind that
did not see, that when our Religion was almost gone, our Liberties and
Properties were following hard, and running the same fate, the one was going
with the other. Therefore we would do well to have a special respect to, and
care of the Work of GOD, now while we are called to recover it, and establish
it, for it is the surest mean, for preserving our Liberties and properties, and
if we neglect the one, GOD may be provoked, to permit our Enemies to Rob us
of all.

Fourthly, This Exhortation (be strong) seeing it calls (as we have said) to
unity and Harmony) so on the other hand it prohibites Magistrates, Ministers
and people to fall into divisions and factions; for that will indeed make them
weak, and so mar, and retard the work they are called to, If Satan and his
instruments can make GODS Ministers and people, to differ and clash among
themselves, they know it will prove a notable mean to forslow the work of GOD
among your hands; divide and impera is a Stratagem still made use of in all
Ages; and it is not out of fashion yet, and O that we may not have no more
reason to lament the divisions of our Reuben, Viz: (our rulers as the first
born were) with that Lamentation, with which Deborah and Barak Lamented their
divisions, because they came not out to help the LORD against the mighty, but
abode among the sheepfolds; when they were eminently called, to arise and
unanimously to appear, and join for the reviving of the Work of GOD, that was
lying in the Ashes, and though all the people of GOD in the Land were called to
join with them, from all Corners; and help them in this work; Yet many lurked
and withdrew, fearing that Undertaking might not prosper, and then if they had
joined, their Estates would have been Ruined; how was Deborah, and Barab
affected with this, as we may read in that doubled Lamentation, Judges, 5.15.
and 16. verses, verse 15. For the divisions of Reuben, there were great
thoughts of Heart, and these divisions the more they thought on them, were more
deeply affecting and wounding, and therefore they must sigh and lament it over
again. verse 16. For the divisions of Reuben, there were great searchings of
heart enquiring (as it were) what might be the cause of these lamentable
divisions, as also what might be the Cure.

I come now to the Reasons of the Doctrine, which show you why all Ranks of
people in the Land, should be strong and join cordially and unanimously
together to carry on a begun work of Reformation.

Reason 1. Because it is GODS Work; the building of His House, and the
reforming of His Church from corruptions that it has been defiled with; is the
most Honorable, Eminent, and special Work, that GOD calls the Children of men
to, in this World. David did see, and think it to be a very Honorable and
Excellent Work, when he made so many, and great preparations to bring home the
Ark, which was forty years out of its place: When he mustered up Thirty
thousand of the chosen men of Israel to bring it from Kirjath Jearim: and we
may not only see his fortitude and courrage in this Undertaking but his Zeal,
as ye have it set down, Psalm: 132. I will not go up to my bed, nor give sleep
to mine eyes, nor slumber to mine eye lids, till I find out a place for the
Mighty GOD of Jacob. And when they came to the Ark, you see what is their
supplication. Verse 8. Arise, O LORD to thy rest; We are come to carry GOD
back again; (so to speak) and the Ark of GOD, that has been so long out of the
Land, and out of the Sanctuary, we see also how gladly, he would have been at
the building of the Temple, and what preparations he had made for it, But when
he saw that the honor was to be conferred upon his Son Solomon, how does he
press him to forwardness, and faithfulness in that matter. 1 Chronicles: 22. to the
14* Now my Son, The LORD be with thee, only the LORD give thee Wisdom and
Understanding; and give thee Charge concerning Israel, that thou may keep
the Law of the LORD thy GOD, then shall thou prosper, if thou take heed to
fulfill the Statutes and Judgments, which the LORD charged Moses with
concerning Israel: Be strong, and of good Courage, dread not nor be dismayed:
So that you see what estimate this great and holy man, put upon the work of
GOD, and how concerned he was about it, as the principal business he had to do
in the World, and 1 Samuel 2.30. verse: GOD has said, he that honors me, I
will honor. O how dangerous is it, to have an opportunity put in our hand, to
serve GOD, and his Interest: and not to guide it well, and what ever figure any
of You may make in the World; yet you only signify so far in the sight of GOD,
as You act for him in your Station and Generation, and do you not know, that
many may stand for a great sum and make a great figure in the eyes of men,
that will stand but for ciphers in Heavens Arithmetic.

Reason second. As it is GODS Work so he visiblie, clearly, and eminently,
calls us to it, and that by these six Calls.

First, By the call of his word; for the Reformation we are called to, is that
which is suited unto GODS Law, contained in his written Word, and the LORD has
Honored Scotland beyond many other Nations of the World, in that he has
written unto us the great things of his Law, Hosea, 8.12. O that we may not
count them a light thing: And may it not be said of us; as Psalm: 146: 19, 20:
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his Judgments unto Israel. He
has not dealt so with every Nation. Have we then GODS Laws, His Statutes, and
his Judgments, then certainly we have them either for something, or nothing,
and can they be given us for any thing else, but to direct our service and
obedience to GOD, and is there any of you, the honorable members of this
Parliament, that will make Laws and promulgatt them, and would not take it ill,
if the people did not Obey: Would you not Judge such disobedient persons to the
Law to be Rebels, and punish them accordingly: Of how much sorer punishment
will they be found worthy, that take no heed to the Laws of GOD, revealled in
His Word, that they may give a Constant and Conscientious Obedience thereunto.

Now the Reformation that we are called to is most suitable unto this Divine
Law, which has been owned contended for, and witnessed to by the Godly party in
the Land, and that of all Ranks both while they lived, and when they dyed, and
that as the purest Reformation of any Protestant Church; and this was testified
many years ago, by a great man of this Nation; who Blessed GOD that he was born
in a Church, whose Reformation was purer then that of England, of France, or
Geneva: And seeing we have Ordinances, Means, and Opportunities again put in
our hands: Persons of all Ranks had need to take Care to manage them so, as we
may give a good account of the Trust committed to us. But least I transgress
too far and trespass upon your patience. I shall Close at this time.

The Second SERMON
HAGGAI 2: 4: Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the LORD, be strong, O
Joshua, son of Josedech the high Priest, and be strong all ye People of the
Land, says the LORD, and work: For I am with you, says the LORD of Hosts.


THERE is nothing more to be lamented by the Sons of Men, then this one thing,
that we have sinned our selves unto such a benighted and dark Condition, as
that we can neither take up our danger aright to flee from it, nor our Duty,
and what is the rightest season for the right performance the reof: So that in
this Case we are more to be pitied then the beasts of the field. For the Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; But Israel does not know, My
People does not consider: Isaiah, 1.3. Yea, Jer: 8.7: Yea then the birds of the
Air, for the stork in the Heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle
and the Cran, and the Swallow, observe the time of her coming, but My People
know not the Judgment of the LORD; And is it not a great piece of
Condescending Love and Mercy in GOD, that when we neither know nor consider our
Work, nor the season of it, he Condesends to send Messengers to put us in mind
of both; This people when they proved Negligent in the greatest and most
Important bunness, in which their happiness was folded up: He sends the Prophet
Haggai, to tell them what they had to do, and what they had neglected, and that
if they would mourn for what Sins they had committed, and what duties they had
neglected, and be zealous and careful for the future in answering and obeying
what GOD called them unto, all bygones should be bygones. (If I may so speak)
yet now be Strong, etc. You know the Doctrine I was upon: That it is the duty
of all Ranks of People in a Land to join Cordially and unanimously together to
carry on a begun work of Reformation, when the LORD Eminently calls unto it,
and promises to be with them in it. I am come the length of the 2d. reason of
the Doctrine, to show (this Honorable Auditory) that as this work, is the work
of GOD, so he does Eminently call you to it, and that first by the call of his
word, as I have touched: for if the Laws of Heaven given to the Jewish Church,
did obliedge them to renounce all Idolarrie, and false worship, and to reform
and worship GOD, precisely according to the Divine Iustitution, do they not
equally oblige us, are they not the rule in our day, as well as they were in
their day, he (...) not given us these statutes, laws and Judgments for that
very end, that he gave them to the Church of old, which if we do we shall live
in them, and which if we disobey and despise, they will not a little contribute
to aggravate our Condemnation.

The second Call, To carry on a begun work of Reformation, is that of eminent
and remarkable providence, when there has been nothing for many years, but a
mixture of sad things to the Land, and the work of GOD in it, carried on by the
black Horses, and speckled Horses, (if I may say so) strange and sad
dispensations of Providence, whereby Jacob was given to the spoil, and Israel
to the Robbers, whereby we were brought unto the brink of the pit, and ready to
perish, all our expectations failing us upon the right and left hand, giving
all up for lost, both our Civil and Sacred concerns, that at such a nick of
distress as this, the LORD should by his wonderful providence raise up a
Deliverer to his own Church, another Cyrus; Yea and greater then Cyrus, to give
us such Reviving from our bondage, as we are Witnesses to this day, this is a
thing that Remarkably calls us to observe the doing of the LORD, and he who
sees it not to be the doing of JEHOVAH must be lamentably blind: And does not
our great and Gracious King; be speak you the Honorable Members of Parliament
in the words that David bespoke his Princes. 1 Chronicles. 22.17 Verse, To the end:
David also commanded all the Princes of Israel to help Solomon his Son, saying,
is not the LORD your GOD with you; and has He not given you Rest on every
side, for he has given the inhabitants of the Land unto mine hand, and the
Land is subdued before the LORD, and before his people. Verse, 19 Now therefore
set your heart and your Soul to seek the LORD your GOD; Arise therefore, and
build ye the sanctuary of the LORD GOD, to bring the Ark of the Covenant of the
LORD, and the holy Vessels of GOD into the house, that is to be built to the
Name of the LORD. This is a thing that any thinking Person, when they seriously
consider: Cannot but admire, and say, that this is a remarkable and Eminent
call of the providence of GOD, to carry on a begun work of Reformation when
such an undeserved, and unexpected opportunity is put in our hands, and I am
sure nothing will make his Majesty more renowned in after Generations of the
World, than that he has kept so just a proportion, between his first
declarations for the saftie and good of the Protestant Religion, and his future
actings; and in this he Acts like the high and Noble Family of whom he is
descended, who have been the great Protectours, and Propogators of the
Protestant Religion and is not this a new call of his Providence: that though
we these years bygone, have not so well manage opportunities pur in our hand,
for advancing the work of GOD; he gives us this one opportunity more: For if he
had not showed his more then ordinary care these years bygone to preserve the
work that he had begun, and to keep the Ark in its returning from being
overturned by special casts of providence, this begun deliverance had been
utterly frustrated, and spoiled by our ill management; but O that we could
admire the wisdom and goodness of GOD (and I take it as a Token for good) that
he has preserved his begun work over the Belly of the cunningest and strongest
devices of adversaries, and of the undexterous and careless management of
friends.

The third Call, To carry on the work of Reformation, is from our Mother the
Church of Scotland, and that natural duty, and becoming kindness, that we owe
to her, as such who is not yet got out of her Ruins, she calls to us who are
her professed Children, as the Jewish Church did of old to hers, by the Prophet
Isaiah Chap: 51, 18. verse. Is there none to guide her among all the Sons whom
She has brought forth? is there none that takes her by the hand, of all the
Sons that She has brought up? They would be counted unnatural Children, that
would no help their natural Mother, that gave them a natural life, out of her
afflictions and distresses; how much more unnatural Children must they be, that
will not help that Mother out of her miseries and troubles (Especially when an
Eminent Opportunity is put in their hands) from whom they pretend to derive a
Spiritual and Eternal Life: They that refuse to do this, they evidence
themselves to be bastards, and not true sons of the Church. These persons
hearts are like to that Mother, that said to King Solomon, she would have him
to divide the Child, but the true Mother was of another Sentiment, who said I
would rather ye should be Mother, false as you are than the Child should be
divided; And by this she discovered her natural Affection. I say then, we
Evidence, our selves to be Bastards, and not true Children of the Church, that
are nor for advancing the work of the House of GOD, for setting up all the
Pillars and Ordinances thereof. The Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, and
Government of the House of the GOD of Heaven, according to the Laws of the GOD
of Heaven, (the work must not be divided) and doing what in us lies Nehemiah
like, for that end, he was a man concerned in the City of his GOD, and
sepulchers of his Fathers that were lying wast, he was a man that sought the
welfare of Israel, And what did he? I will tell you what he did, he obtained
Letters from the King to Reverse Letters and Orders that the Enemies of GOD had
received for hindering of the building, for you will see in the Book of Ezra,
Chap: 4: from the 4: verse, That the people of the Land who were Gerizzim party
did exceedingly weaken the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in
the building. And verse 5: They hired Counselors against them to frustrate
their purpose, and the S. verse gives an account who they were, Rehum the
Chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their Companions,
mentioned verse 9. And when they obtained these Letters, they soon put them in
execution to mar the prosperity of the People, and Work of GOD; as you see in
the 23: verse, of that Chapter, Now when the Copy of Artaxerxes Letter was read
before Reburn, and Shimshai, the scribe and their Companions, they went up in
haste to Jerusalem, and to the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power,
etc. But honest and good Nehemiah was much concerned for this, and was at no
quiet till he procured Letters from the King, that his stop might be taken
away, that stood in the way of the Reformation, he is made the Remarkable
Instrument to discover this plot, that was for overturning the new begun Work
of GOD and removing the impediments, and was never at rest till he got the Work
set on foot again.

Now if the LORD in His Wonderful and gracious Providence, raise up some such
Courtier or Cup bearer in our day ( Nehemiah-like) when the case of our Church,
and the Work of GOD in the Land, runs so much parallel with this, to get the
plots and Plotters discovered, that opose this begun Work of GOD, the Letters
ranverse, and the Impediments removed, and Instructions from the King, to carry
on the begun Work of GOD; Should not this be observed, as a new and Eminent
call of GOD, for Clearing, Confirming, and Encouraging all Ranks of people in
the Land, to build up the Walls of the LORDS Temple among us; And in this
glass of Providence may we not see clearly, that new Plots are like old Plots,
new Opposition to the Work of GOD, like the old Oppositions, and new
Deliverances like old Deliverances.

The Fourth Call to carry on this begun work of Reformation, is from the Noble
Examples and Presidents in Scripture, who when ever the Providence of GOD put
an opportunity in their hands, opened the doors of the House of the LORD, set
up the Instituted Worship of GOD and removed the corruptions and defilements
that Idolaters and others had brought unto the Temple, ye see a famous Instance
of this Worthy of our Imitation in that good King Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles: 29: and
3: verse, He in the first Year of his Reign, in the first month, opened the
doors of the house of the LORD, and repaired them, and he brought in the
Priests and the Levites and gathered them together unto the East street; and
said unto them, Hear me ye Levites, sanctify your selves, and sanctify the
house of the LORD GOD of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of
the holy place. Verse 6. For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which
was evil in the eyes of the LORD our GOD, and have foresaken him, and have
turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD, and turned their
backs, etc. See also what good Jehosaphat and tender Josiah did in this matter,
for Recovering and Advancing the work of Reformation; as they were great men,
so they were greatly concerned in their day and Generation for the Truths of
GOD, for which they bear an honorable and savourie character in all Ages,
while others that were opposers of GODS work have a black mark put upon them.

The Fifth Call, To carry on this work of Reformation, is from the eminent
Apostasy, and abounding wickedness, and profanitie that has followed thereupon
in our Land; great backslidings, as they call for great Repentings, so also for
Remarkable and great Returnings; especially when GOD gives unto People repeated
calls thereunto: and have not we had such Remarkable and Repeated Calls, both
from the Word, and eminent providence; GOD has again and again spoken to us
in that language that he spoke to His Church in the days of Jeremiah, as you
may see in his third chapter the 1, the 14, and 22 verses, where we have the
call for Returning thrice repeated, And O that the Inhabitants of our Land
might give in such an answer as is recorded in that 22 verse, Return ye
backsliding children, there is the Call, and I will heal your backslidings,
there is the motive, And O that we could give in such an answer as follows,
Behold we come unto Thee, for Thou art the LORD our GOD. O ye who pretend to be
concerned in the work of Reformation, will ye see if ye can prevent Souls from
going down to the pit: Let there be such Laws made and revived, and carefully
put in execution, as may suppress crying and abounding abominations,
inconsistent with a true and through Reformation, such as Sabbath-breaking,
swearing, drunkenness, and whoredom, the predominant sins in our Age, that
cannot but draw down vengeance on the Land if not prevented. As also, all
Antichristianism error, and ungodliness, and seeing the season of doing this
is put in the hands of Magistrates and Ministers, if they join not together and
make a right use of it, for the end given, then it is likely to draw down that
threatened judgment, Ezekiel. 24.13. verse, Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee. And that judgment which our Savior
pronounced upon that people who had a day and season of Reformation and
Salvation given them, but they made ill use of it, and therefore you see, Luke
19.41. how He laments their folly, (and that with tears,) before He pronounce
their doom, if thou had known even thou, at least in this thy day the things
which belong unto thy peace, but now they are bid from thine eyes. And we know
not how soon the day may come, when our Enemies shall cast a trench against us,
and lay us and out Temple even with the ground, because we know not the time of
our visitation; We never read that Christ wept but twice, and one of them was
at the prospect of the death and burial of His Ancient Spouse, the Jewish
Church: We have had a Three years and an half Gospel-day, which is thought to
have been the time that CHRIST the Sun of Righteousness, after He appeared to
preach the Gospel, shined in the Orb of Gospel Ordinances unto this Church, And
yet that day proved not the day of their deliverance, but only of their Trial,
and of ripening of them for a more desolating strock of Judgment, under which
they ly unto this very day, And may we not be afraid that this be our very
case, for we have had as long a season, and are like as badly to improve it:
And therefore I may put this Question to one and all of you to resolve;
Whether this be a time of trial, or a time of deliverance that we are under?
(for several judicious Christians do doubt of it) But you who are the Members
of this Honorable Parliament have an opportunity to put in your hands, which if
you manage well, may give a decision unto this Question: And O that you may
have wisdom, Courage, and Resolution given you so to do.

The sixth Gall, To carry on this begun work of Reformation, is GOD's promise
to be with you, whom he calls and employs in this public service, and this is
plainly, and I may say powerfully expressed in the last words of the Text ( for I
am with you) this is a clear and Comfortable promise, and then he backs it with
power and Authority, and O that it might be so upon our hearts, when he says, I
am with you says, the LORD of hosts, This tittle JEHOVAH is thrice repeated,
but in the last place it is thus expressed the LORD of hosts, which must import
some what beyond the former two, and has certainly a great Emphasis in it, the
scope of which I take to be for removing their fears, and stirring up their
Zeal and Courage: As if he would say ye are but a few ct weak Company to
undertake the Reformation, who have been in misery under the Babylonish
Captivity, and fiery furnace of a prolonged affliction, and so have not that
Courage that is necessary to carry on my work: But if you would study and
endeavor to have right uptakings of me, as the LORD of hosts, Stronger by far
than all your Enemies, then ye will not be afraid to go on in the work, when
you see I am able to secure you against all oppositions; And indeed right
uptakings of GOD and his promised presence, will be argument enough to put Life
and Courage in the most timorous Member of this house, to act vigorously for
GOD and his intrests, when inferior Creatures are backed with superior, they
will put on courage, and venture far: a cowardly Soldier or Servant when he is
under a courageous Captain or Master, will be quite another thing than alone
how much more should Magistrates, Ministers, and people be valiant for the
truth, when they have GOD to own them. Psalm 118, 6. The LORD is on my side: I
will not fear what man can do unto me: and how safe and secure will that Land
and that Church, be about whom the LORD will be as a wall of fire; whatever
carnal reason may say to the contrair, and to have God not only to be a wall of
fire round about, But to be the Glory in the midst of us, must be a desirable
state, for as this will reflect comfort upon us who are lodged within such
blessed Boundarie, so it will reflect terror upon the Adversaries, which will
make them not only not to come neat, but to flee away as you have it; Psalm:
48.3.4.5. and 6 Verse. GOD is known in her palaces for a Refuge. For Lo, the
Kings were Assembled they passed by together, they saw it, and so they
marvelled, they were troubled, and hasted away, fear took hold on them and pain
as a Woman in Travel: And O what a Rich promise have we for such a security,
if we will but answer GODS Call, and be found in our duty, Zech. 2.5. For I
says the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the
glory in the mdst of her: Why should we be afraid, for if we under so many
eminent Calls of GOD, and so many gracious promises of his presence and
conduct, then we are under a Captain General that never failed his Church, and
can accomplish their complete deliverance, over the greatest enemies that
oppose it, he can lay Pharaoh and his Army in the deepths of the Sea, and
divide the mighty waters that his Redeemed might pass through, He can make the
little hills and great mountains to get out of the Way, Psalm: 114, verse 3. The
sea saw it, and fled, Jordan was driven back, The mountarns skipped like Rams,
and the little hills like Lambs: why what was the matter, could not thou O Sea,
have kept still thy ordinary motion and currents? and you little hills and great
mountains your ordinary posture, and place, and have stopped the deliverance of
the Church out of Egypt, and their march toward Canaan? Was it the terror of
Pharaoh, and his host, or of Moses, and the armies of Israel, that made you
quite your ground, and give way: No, no, it was for none of these, if they had
not been headed by the Mighty GOD of Jacob; it was the presence of JEHOVAH that
made the Earth to tremble, the depths dry up, and the mountains get out of the
Churches way: verse 5. What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? Thou
Jordan, that thou wast driven back? Verse 6. Ye mountains that ye skipped like
Rams, and ye little hills like Lambs? ver. 7. Tremble thou Earth, at the
presence of the LORD, at the presence of the GOD of Jacob. What need you fear
then to throw down the Groves? Repair GODS Altar, and build His house, Gideon,
and Nehemiah like, when the LORD of Hosts is with you: may you not clearly see,
that your help is in the Name of the Lord, but your fear is in the name of man!
Are you Zerubbabels, Joshuas, and Nehemiahs? Persons in public Trust? then ye
ought to carry like God, because ye are in Gods place, And carry by your
Offices that Tittle in the World, Psalm. 82.6. I said ye are Gods, etc. And
among other things ye should resemble Him in Courage, and Holiness, are none of
the least. What a vile sight is it to see a drunken god! or a swearing god! (if
I may so express it) And how unbecoming a thing is it also to see a trembling
god! You that ought to be a terror to others, and would be so, if you manage
that Office and Trust aright, with that Courage, Resolution, and Boldness, yet
when you faint in it, in order to the work of God, it says that other persons,
and inferiors too, are a terror to you.

Now for removing of this distemper of Humane and slavish fear, that Courage
and Resolution may take its place. Let me recommend this one Remedy unto one
and all of you, especially such as stand in public Office, and it is a cure
with a (probatum est) tried, and left to Magistrates, and Ministers, by that
great man Moses, Heb. 11.27. verse, it is said there, He feared not the wrath
of a King, as seeing Him who is invisible: And yet any might think he had great
reason to be afraid of so potent an Enemy, who with his Ancestors had
detained the Church in bondage for four hundred years, and so it is like
questioned neither his power, nor his right to detain them; But the Text tells
you what was the Antidote against this fear, Viz. That by Faith be saw Him who
is invisible; his faith was at work in heaven to get God to counsel, assist,
and strengthen him, while his hands were at work on Earth, to relieve the
Church and people of GOD from their Long and sore Bondage, I wish that all the
great Ones of the Land, and especially such as are in public Office had the
Exercise of this Faith, by which they might take up the Almighty power of God,
and his Every where Presence, that so their fears and faint-heartedness, might
be removed, if Moses had been possessed with many peoples fears in our day;
it is like he would have made an Act of Comprehension, and Compounded with
Pharaoh, and so matted the Churches deliverance: This was the Remedy, that
good Hezekiah also made use of, to encouradge his Subjects and Soldiers,
against the fears and threats of a very bold and huffie Adversary, as you may
read 2 Chronicles: 32. Verse 7. Be strong and Courageous, be not afraid, nor
dismayed for the King of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is with him:
for there is more with us then with him. Verse 8. With him is an arm of flesh,
but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And while
he made use of this excellent Remedy, for their Support and Encouragement,
under such sad Circumstances, how succesful was it for the relief of the
spirits of that people: Therefore it is said in the Latter part of the 8.
Verse. The People rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah King of Judah.

But did this great King, and his people rest so upon the LORD, as to neglect
the use of Ordinary means? No, for we see Verse 5. That he strengthened himself,
by the use of all outward means, and built up all the wall that was broken, and
he raised it up to the Towers, and another wall without, and repaired Millo in
the City of David, and made Darts and Shields in abundance. And verse 6. He set
Captains of war over the People, and gathered them together to him in the
street of the gate of the City: And yet he counted all these outward lawful
means, but as a Quick sand in comparison, for you see in the 7. and 8. verses,
which we have read, he dropped his main Anchor upon the ROCK of Ages; And the
Issue declared that he was no looser thereby.

I come in the next place to the use of the Doctrine. And first, It reproves
one and all of us, in the different, Stations, Offices, and Circumstances that
we are into, for our negligence and unconcernedness in carrying on this work of
God, when such a rich occasion, and eminent call has been put in our hands. But
if we will mourn for our bygone negligence, and amend our ways for the future,
and fall vigorously to this Reformation Work which my Text calls us to; then we
may expect that God will pardon bypast neglects, when he sees our future
faithfulness and diligence.

The second Use is, To Exhort one and all of you. Especially the Members of
this Honorable and High Court of Parliament, carefully to set about this begun
work of Reformation, and to take notice of Gods call to you this day, for this
end and purpose: For, if I know any thing of the mind of GOD, this is the
Message he has commanded me to deliver you, and what obedience ye give to it,
the Divine Eye will certainly observe: And if ye will answer Gods call aright,
there is a sixfold Reformation, that all of us in our Stations must endeavor.

The First is, Personal Reformation, which God calls for at the Hands of every
person in particular, Ezeck: 18. Verse 30. Pepent and turn your selves from all
your Transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. And verse 31. Cast
away from you, all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make
you a new Heart, and a new Spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? And
this personal Reformation is not only commanded in the Old, but also in the New
Testament, 2 Cor: 7: 1: Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. Heb: 12.1. Let us lay
aside every weight, Yea, and our predominant sins that so easily beset us: All
which Scriptures tells us, both the necessity of this Reformation, and the
difficulty of it, which should awaken us unto great diligence and care there
about.

And as this personal Reformation is Commanded of GOD, so it is Commanded to
others by those that have tried it, and found the good of it themselves: as
David did to his Son Solomon, and his Princes, 1 Chronicles. 22.19. Now set your
heart, and your Soul to seek the LORD your GOD: And it is recorded to the
Commendation of Jehosophat, 2 Chro: 20.3 That he set himself to seek the LORD
Kings, Nobles, Gentry, Ministers and others, will be bad Reformers of such as
are under their Charge, who seek not the LORD themselves: O that our Closets,
our Consciences, and our Conversations might be witnesses to our Personal
Reformation; It is clear enough from Scripture, that the LORD may make use of
great Persons for the Church, and Children, who yet may be Strangers unto
personal Reformation themselves, as Jehu and Joash were but one of the best
motives to make persons in public trust, careful for the Reformation of
others, is to be truly Reformed themselves.

A Second Reformation which we should endeavor in our station, and that is
Family Reformation what an Excellent pattern, does David lay before us for this,
Psalm: 101. Particularly the 7 Verse, He that works in deceit, shall not dwell
in my House. And how is Abraham commended by the LORD for this thing? Genesis 18
19 Verse. For I know him that he will Command his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the LORD. O what a heavy Reckoning will many Masters of
Families and Parents meet with, for their neglect of this at the great day,
besides the Judgments that it draws down upon them, and their Families in this
World: one Instance whereof ye have, not to name others. Zech. 14.17 Verse: And
it shall be, that whose will not come up of all the Families of the Earth unto
Jerusalem, to worship the King, the LORD of Hosts, even upon them shall be no
rain. Which tells us, that persons and families who make no Conscience to
attend upon the public Instituted worship of GOD, it is to be feared that they
are strangers to a personal and family Reformation at home; whereas persons
that make Conscience of family Reformation will not dare to slight and neglect
the public Instituted worship of GOD.

A Third Reformation, That we should endeavor in our stations, and that is
Sanctuary Reformation, Hezekiah is an excellent pattern in this, who himself
set about it so timeoussie, 2 Chronicles: 29.3. verse, In the first year of his
reign, in the first month did he open the doors of the house of the Lord, and
commanded the rubbish to be taken out, and set up Priests and Officers therein,
and gave them a strict charge to mind their work; Lamenting the defilements and
corruptions that had crept into it: To this I may add the necessity and
profitableness of Universities and School Reformation, a thing greatly
necessary in order to Sanctuary and public Reformation; For where Seminaries
of Learning are tainted, they prove the Bane of the Church, and State also.

A Fourth Reformation, That we should endeavor in our Stations, is Judieatorie
Reformation, That all the Judicatories in the Land, from the highest to the
lowest, may be reformed: for upon search it will be found that many of them are
not filled with such persons, as have sound principles disposing them to
Advance the present work of Reformation, neither true loyalty to their
Majesty's, nor affection to the Established Government, Great care therefore
should be taken by the supreme Judicatorie of this Nation, that truth which is
fallen in our streets, and Judgment, may be raised to their feet again, And
that the iniquity, oppression, and Injustice, for which the Land mourns, may
be removed, and we may have no more occasion for that Complaint, Isa: 59.14,
15. verses, And judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands a far
of, for Truth is fallen in the streets, and Equity cannot enter: You in whom is
lodged the Supreme Power, would take care, that the poor, who hang to long on,
and cannot get their Cause discussed, may get Justice Executed speedily, and
that without partiality.

5ly, You should also take special Care, of Military, or Army Reformation,
that such Officers only get and keep their Commissions, as are true to the
Established Government: You have had sufficient warnings of these things
already, to make you warry in time coming, but I must freely tell you that
friendship Interest, and Covetousness does often spoil these things.

Lastly, You are called in your Stations, to mind a National Reformation, that
the LORD may be worshipped according to the present Established Government
(which is most suitable to the Word of GOD, and to which we stand greatly
obliedged) from the one End unto the other, according to the Example of good
Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles: 16: 4: And Jehosophat dwelt at Jerusalem, and be went out
again through the people, from Beersheba to Mount Ephraim, and brought them
back unto the LORD GOD of their Fathers: Your Care and Zeal in this Matter
would make you bear that excellent name in future Ages; The repairers of the
Breach of the Church of Seotland, and the restorers of the Paths to dwell in,
Isa. 58: 12: This would be a mean to prevail with the LORD to come and dwell
among us, and fill his House with his Glory. Magistrates should command it,
Ministers should preach it, the People should pray for it, and Soldiers
oversee it, where it is needful: And if all persons concerned would act
Cordially and unanimously with Resolution and Couradge in their several
Stations, as they are called and Employed: I doubt not but our Land might yet
be called JEHOVA Shamma, the LORD is there.

But that I may shut up this Discourse, I shall only add a few Motives; and but
name them to press you to this Duty.

The First Motive is this, That if you whom GOD has put in Public Trust, and
Authority, take care to build GODS House, ye shall be no looser by it, for this
is the way to engage GOD to build, and perpetuate your houses: If ye will
establish His Throne, that he may reign in the Hearts of the Inhabitants of the
Land, in and by his own Ordinances; This will be a notable Mean for
establishing the Kings Throne, Proverbs, 29: 14: Psalm: 89: 2: 3: 4: verses, etc.

The Second Motive is this, That the Generations to come, will bless you, who
were Instrumental in your places, to recover the Ruined Work of GOD in the
Land, and to get the pure Gospel Light set up every where: To let the
Wilderness-Travellers see the way to the Kingdom: Will not the posterity that
came After us, and get the good of this Reformation, say, blessed be such a
Noble family, and such a Gentleman's family and posterity, who laid out
themselves for the true worship of GOD, who when it was ready to be swallowed
up and extinguished, who recovered it out of the hand of the Enemy, and
delivered it cleanly and safely down to us their posterity, or else we had
perished in superstition and darkness.

Thirdly, This should press you to a through and universal Refotmation in the
Land, because it will be a notable Bulwark, to defend us from the invasions of
adversaries, and I lay it before you that are States men, and are for State
policy, as one of Heavens politics, for the securing the Nation, under the
prospect of most imminent dangers, you have a tried instance of this, 2 Chronicles:
17.7. Also in the third year of Jehosophats Reign, he sent to his Princes, even
to Banhael, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariab, and to Nathaneel, and to Micajah,
to teach in the citys of Judah, and with them he sent Levites, verse 8 and 9.
They taught in Judah; and had the Book of the Law of the LORD with them, and
went throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people: and the 10
verse tells us, what a great security it brought along with it, to the Land,
For the Fear of the LORD, fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were
round about Judah: so that they made no war against Jehosophat, this you see is
the sweet advantage, that arises from true and through Reformation, and should
not this move you to make use of it, and then you will have GOD's security, and
GOD's security is the best security.

Show your selves therefore Men of Courage, and Zeal for GOD, and his cause,
and interests, and ye need not question, but he will be for you.

Lastly, And I shall add no more, your being active and faithful for GOD and
his work, will upon a reflection, even under troubles and trials in this World,
be very supporting, and refreshing, But O What a cordial will it be in a dying
hour, when all the Compositions of Apothecaties have lost their Relish, and
when neither Riches, nor Honors, nor pleasures of this World, will have any
significancie: with good Hezekiah, Isaiah, 38: 2, 3. verses. Turn your faces to
the wall, and pray, Remember now, O LORD, I beseech Thee, how I have walked
before Thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight. I say this will be the Great support, and Consolations of
your hearts, who are persons of public trust, when ye come to the last step,
between time and eternity: Let me therefore with all humility and earnestness,
Beseech you, O Zerubabel, his Majesty's high Commissioner, and you who are the
Officers of State, and you the rest of the Members of this honorable
Parliament, in the words of my Text, Yet Now, O Zerubabel, be strong, says the
LORD, and be strong O Joshua, Son of Josedech the high Priest; and be strong
all ye people of the land, says the LORD; and work, for I am with you, says
the LORD of Hosts; Even so be it. AMEN.

FINIS.
Col: 4.17. And say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the LORD; that thou fulfill it.


THE Occasion of the Apostle Paul, his writing this Epistle from Rome, while he
was Prisoner there, unto this Church of Collosse seems to be from the
Information he bad by Epaphras the Minister of the place, holding forth the
danger, that, that Church was into, of being corrupted both in her principles
and worship, and that as well from Jews upon the one hand, as Gentiles upon the
other.

The Apostles scope in this Epistle, is to confirm them, in the Doctrine
Preached by Epaphras, their honest Minister, and to press them to the further
knowledge and practice of Godliness; and that both as to the General and
special duties of Christianity, in the conclusion of this Epistle, which is
from the 9 Verse to the End. We have several salutations, wherein some are
saluted and Commended as Verses 10.11. Some saluted and exhorted, that they may
stand perfect and complete in all the will of GOD, as Verse 12: etc. Some are
saluted and directed, as Verse 16, and some are saluted and admonished as in
this Text: And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the LORD, that thou fulfill it. As if the Apostle Paul would say to
the People, Commend me also to Archippus your Minister, and tell him from me,
to take heed that he do not his work carelessly, and by halfs; But as he has
received his Commission from the LORD, so let him fulfill it, and that by the
constant and diligent performing of all the duties belonging to so great and
weighty a Charge.

Whither this Archippus was Colleague to Epaphras, or whither he was Pastor of
the Laodecean Church, (as some Interpreters assert, and the connection with the
proceeding verse, seems to favor it) I shall not determine, and it is a matter
of no great importance; for wherever he was Minister, it is like he was fallen
Remiss in his Office, A Fault, that I fear too too many of us may be charged
with, which remissnes flows sometimes I conceive from prevalent corruption
within, and too much love of the world without, As also from these
discouragements that Ministers often meet with from their people, either upon
the account of their unprofitableness, under the means and pains bestowed upon
them, or upon the account of that opposition which their people make to the
work of GOD among their hands.

Their words at first view, fall into two parts, viz. an injunction and a
message, The injunction is to the people, in these words, and say to Arcbippus,
the message they are to tell him from the Apostle, is to take heed to his
Ministry, how he has received it, and how he may fulfill it aright.

But this verse being an Exhortation, contains more particularly in it these
four things, First, The person exhorted, the Lazy Minister. 2. The thing he is
exhorted to take heed to thy Ministry, etc. 3. We have the Arguments pressing
this heedfulness: 1. Its a trust, and persons must take heed to their trust,
because it is not so much their own matters, as others they are to be concerned
about. 2. It is a great trust that Ministers have committed to them, when they
have the Precious, and Immortal Souls of Men, to take care about.

The fourth thing in the words, is the modus, or the manner how he is to notice
and manage this Ministry, he is to heed it and manage it so, as to fulfill it.
And these that would discharge this Office aright, must carefully mind not only
the Extensiveness, but also the Intensiveness of this Work, for the mere tale
of duties will not be sufficient to fulfill this Ministry, except they have
their proportionable weight and measure, even such as will make them pass, when
tried and weighted in the balance of the Sanctuary.

Their words affoords us three Doctrines; the first Doctrine is this, That
People perceiving their Minister fail in the Office of his Ministry, may and
ought to admonish him, but in Love, and with all due respect to his Person and
Office, 1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but Exhort him as a Father, etc.

There is no power of Jurisdiction in the People from this Text, to inflict
Church Censures on their Minister: For all that is said here, infers no
more, then such an admonition as any private Christian may give him.

The second Doctrine is, That great Heedfulness is required of Ministers in
order to the right discharge of their Office.

The third Doctrine is, That among other Considerations pressing us to fulfill
this Ministry, this should be none of the least, that we have received it of
the LORD.

Of the first Doctrine I shall say no more, and this third Observation will be
touched in the Prosecution of the second, which is that I shall insist upon, as
being most proper to this Occasion.

And that I may do it as briefly as possible, I shall in the first place show
you some of these Qualifications employed in this Heedfulness (that the Text
calls for) which are necessary to the right fulfilling of a Man's Ministry.

Secondly, I shall give you the Reasons of the Doctrine, and thirdly the use of
All.

The first Qualification then employed here, as necessary to make a Minister
take heed to manage his Office a right is, Wisdom and Knowledge, and that not
only in the Speculative, but in the practical part of Religion. I think both
these are needful to make a Minister apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. or else his
Ministry will be rather Art-work, then Heart-work. Unsanctified wits have been
in all Ages greatly prejudicial to the Church, and we have not wanted sad
Instances thereof in our day.

I say then, that the Ministers of Christ, must be men of Knowledge, for they
are Watchmen, and Watchmen must have Eyes in their Head, therefore they are
called Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9: Come let us go to the Seer, they are to point out to
the People their Way, their Danger, and their Duty, as we may also see from
Isaiah 21. and 6. Verse to the 13. Verse, And if they be blind, what hurt may
suddenly befall the Church, Isaiah 9. Verse 16. For the leaders of this People
cause them to Err, and they that are led of them are destroyed.

Ignorance causes Error, and Error Destruction, therefore said the Apostle Paul
to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and
to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed
them, viz: With Knowledge and Understanding, that they may be soundly
principled, and right in the Faith, and he gives the reason of it, Verses 29.
and 30. For grievous wolves will enter in amongst you, speaking perverse things
to corrupt your People, and to draw Disciples after them.

Ministers should be like the beasts about Christ's Throne, Rev: 4.6. Full of
Eyes within and without, before and behind: Within looking to the Frame and
Constitution of their own Hearts, without to the Duties they ought to perform,
and the Snares and Dangers they must beware of, in following of their Duty:
They must have Eyes looking before them unto God for Counsel and Direction, and
they must have eyes looking behind them unto the flocks which they lead. Every
Minister is as it were the Treasurer of the place where he lives, Malachy 2.7.
For the Priests lips should keep Knowledge, and the people should seek the law
at his mouth, and if the Ministers want this Treasury of Spiritual knowledge
and Wisdom, they will not be able to distinguish aright between Truth and
Error, Sin and Duty: They cannot instruct the Ignoant, resolve doubts, quiet
the troubled Conscience feed the Hungry, and comfort the discouraged Soul. Let
Antichrist have blind and ignorant Watchmen, but Our LORD JESUS CHRIST should
have such Ministers as are thoroughly furnished for every Good Work, 2 Timothy: 3:
17: That the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works.

The second Qualification employed in this Take heed, (for a Ministers right
discharging of his Office) is painfulness and diligence, for knowledge must
issue unto action: Ministers are Angels, and Angels are not only full of Eyes
(as I said before) but also full of Hands and Wings. Ezekiel: 1: 8: And they had
the Hands of a Man under their Wings on their four sides, etc: Therefore it is
said, Rev: 4: 8: That they rest not day nor night, they know much, therefore
they Act much.

The Heathen could tell us that unpractical knowledge signifies nothing, Scire
tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.

And the Egyptians painted a Tongue with a hand under it to show that
knowledge, when practiced was good. And we see that the blessing is not
promised to the bare knowledge, but to the practice of Commanded duties, John.
13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them, and Rev: 22.
Verse 14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right
to the Tree of Life, and enter in through the Gates unto the City. We are
Spiritual harvest men, and the Crop is very precious, which we are to gather
in, If it be lost by our sloth, we will pay dear for it.

The third qualification employed here (in this, Take heed to your Ministry) is
faithfulness: O how much need had we to take heed that we do our Ministerial
work faithfully, now faithfulness is a proportioning our obedience to the
Command: to be impartial in all the Administrations of the house of GOD: See
what a charge the Apostle Paul gives Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.21. I Charge thee
before GOD, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the elect Angels that thou observe
these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality. Where we see that he that is partial cannot be faithful, an
unfaithful Minister is perfidious both to GOD and man. Zeph. 3.4. It is said
there, their Prophets are light and Treacherous persons: Treacherous Persons in
the Hebrew, as a Learned Interpreter observes, is Viri Praevaricationum qui
debitam Deo and populo fidem pariter violaverint. And it is the highest
Treachery that can be, to be false to GOD and Robb Him of the Souls of men;
That is worthy of our Consideration recorded. Ezekiel: 3.20. Because thou have not
given him warning; He shall die in his sin, but his Blood shall I require at
thine hand. Now if a Minister may Perish for not warning of Sinners, much more
for Encouraging them to Sin, by corrupt Doctrine, and a Lewd life, for If death
be in an Gmission, much more must it be in positive Evils. Let me add one word
more on this head, that a faithful minister, must be a fearless Minister, he
must not be afraid of the faces of men, when he is to deliver the Truths of
GOD. The LORD four times in one Verse. Ezekiel. 2.6. Forbids the Prophet to fear.
And thou Son of man be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words,
though Briers and Thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorphions:
Be not affraied of their words, nor dismayed at their ^ooks, though they be a
Rebellious House.

A Fourth qualification necessary for managing this office employed in this
exhortation (take heed to thy Ministry) is prudence which is necessary to
direct us in the dexterous management of all the parts of our work, and more
especially as to the Methods whereby, and the Seasons wherein they may be done
to the best advantage, and there is no part of our Ministerial work, which
requires more prudence in the right managing of it, then that of Reproof, to do
that so as it may be accepted as a kindness by the person reproved, and as an
excellent Oil that will not break the head, as the Psalmist expresses it.
Psalm: 141. Verse, 5. Let the Righteous Smite me, it shall be a kindness; and
let them reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil; which shall not break my
head: For as faithfulness and wisdom ponders the necessity of the duty; So
prudence does consider the fittest time, and manner of application with respect
to the person, with what prudence and dexterity did Nathan prepare David in
that Parable. 2 Samuel: 12. from the first Verse to the 6th. before he came to
touch him in the quick with; Thou art the man, Verse 7.

Fifthly, if we would take heed to fulfill this Ministry, we must be sincere
and serious Ecles: 9.10. And it is not Liklie that we will press Gospel Truths
and holiness, seriously home upon others, until we know the sweet and good of
them our selves, and the Apostle tells us. 2 Cor: 1.12. Verse. That sincerity
in our work and walk will be no small ground of our rejoicing, when our
consciences within, and beholders without can testify, that we endeavored
sincerely and carefully to Manage this trust committed to us, and Ministers had
need to take heed to this, because their work lying about spiritual things they
are more apt to be deceived by hypocrisies creeping in both to their hearts and
duties, and many a time the frequencie of them, is like to take away the
fervencie of them: Ministers therefore would often mind that word, to keep them
diligent at their work, 1 Cor: 9.27. Least when I preach the Gospel to others,
I my self be a cast away.

6ly. This take heed, includes constancy and perservance, we must not think to
do this work by fits and starts; Nor be like these foolish Galatians, Galatians
3 chap. and 3 ver. To begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh, we must not
put our hand to the plough and look back, Ye know what CHRIST says of such,
Luke 9.62. They are not fit for the Kingdom of GOD, they are not fit for
managing of his Kingdom aright in this world, and if they do not that, they may
be afraid to be shut out of his Kingdom in the next.

I come next to the Reasons of the doctrine, why Ministers must be very
heedfull, and careful about their Ministerial work, and that 1st. Because it
is a great trust far above any other trust in this world, when immortal Souls
are committed to us, about which the thoughts of the most high have been
concerned from Eternity, and for the Redemption of which GOD manifested in the
flesh, shed his precious blood: and for espousing of whom he has put us unto
the Ministry. I think we should never go this errand, but with Abraham's
servant. Genesis 24 12. We should pray, O LORD GOD and Father of My Master JESUS
CHRIST, (Who has promised him a great backing and a numerous seed, upon which
he may see the satisfaction of the travel of his Soul) send me good speed this
day, and put forth thy power in the preached Gospel, that Thy people may be a
willing people, O but it be a high and a great calling to trade about the
saving of Souls, one of which is a more precious Jewel than the whole world can
purchase or redeem, And CHRIST tells us this out of his own Mouth, Matthew:
16.26. Surely of all other persons Ministers should be most diligent, who have
both their own Souls to save, and others.

The second reason why we must take heed to our Ministerial work is, because it
is a difficult work, partly from the various and numerous enemies that oppose
it, Satan that roaring lion, and restless enemy of the Church standing at our
right hand. Zech. 3.1. Also what principalities and powers and spiritual
wickednessess in high places, what rulers of the darkness of this world have we
to wrestle against. Ephesians: 6.12, yea what opposition from men among whom we live,
some with open violence breaking down as far as they can the carved work:
others under a vizour and pretense to build with us, like the false apostles;
intending nothing less then to bring us back to abandoned Corruptions in the
House of GOD.

Partly from our own Ignorance (the work is made difficult) which disables us
to manage this trust to the best advantage, how hard is it for Ministers to
speak aright to the various Cases and Conditions of their People, and to find
fit words to hold forth the Evil of Sin by, the Loveliness of Christ, The
beauty of Holiness, the danger of living carelessly and unconcernedly under the
means of Grace, and repeated offers of the Gospel.

The third Reason why Ministers had need to take heed to their Ministry is
this, that there has been Ministers in the Church, (and we have had sad
Instances of it in our days) professing and pretending highly for CHRIST, and
the purest work of Reformation, that afterward when the Occasion and Tentation
offered, have betrayed the cause, discovered their rottenness, and ruined the
Church, and Work of GOD, as far as they could. Some of them bewitched and
enticed with the Riches of this World so to do, like Judas and Demas: Others
with the Honors of this World, like Diotrephes, and O how many Archippus-like
even in the best of times would be found Coldriffe and Remiss in this great
Work.

4ly. We must take heed to our Ministry, if we consider what a great LORD and
Master we have received it from. And whose Eye is always upon us, to see how
we manage this trust as it was upon the Angels of the seven Churches, and his
writting to them since he Ascended, and discovering their failures and short
comings, with the punishments due thereunto, should be a warning to Ministers
in all succeeding Ages of the Church, to take heed to their Ministry.

5ly We had need to take heed to our Ministry, when we consider with what a
severe certification, our great LORD and Master has committed it unto us, Ezekiel:
17, 18. ver. Son of man I have made thee a Watchman to the house of Israel,
therefore bear the word at my mouth, and give them a warning from me, when I
say unto the wicked thou shall surely die, and thou give him not warning
from me, nor speak to warn the Wicked from his wicked way, to save his life,
the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at
thine hand.

6ly Ministers had need to take heed to mannadge their trust aright, seeing a
severe account will be required of them, for it is a stewardship that must be
reckoned for, and none of us know how soon that message may be sent unto us,
Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship, and whether we have received more
or fewer talents, we would always remember to be so laying them out, and
improving of them, as those that must give an account. Heb. 13: 17.

Lastly. Such Ministers as have been heedfull and faithful, shall be greatly
rewarded, Dan: 12 3 And they that be Wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and
ever. Matt: 24.25, 26, 27. who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his
Lord has made ruler over his household to give them meat in due season, Blessed
is that servant whom his LORD when he comes shall find him so doing; Verily I
say unto you, that he shall make him Ruler over all his goods. Rev: 2.10. Be
thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. We would
keep constantly and closely to this work, and prosecute it with the greatest
diligence that believe such a reward as this, which will eternaly compense all
the labor and toil in this World: We would also frequently consider what
severe punishments shall be inflicted on the heedless and sloathful servant,
Matt: 24 Verse 48. Unto the end; But, and if that evil servant shall say my
Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servant, and to
eat and drink with the drunken. The Lord of that servant shall come in a day,
when he Looks not for him, and an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut
him asunder, and appoint him his portion with hypocrites, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

I come now to the use of the Doctrine, is heedfulness, in managing of the
Ministerial work so necessary in all the forementioned respects; Then let all
of us that bear this office take heed to out Ministry, for this is the voice
and call of my Text to every one of us, and especially with respect to those
two things that ly in the latter part of the words.

The first is to take heed how, and from whom we received this Ministry,
whether from the LORD JESUS CHRIST or not, who is the only LORD and head of the
Church, and whose prerrogative it is to set up and send forth Officers unto his
Church, Ezekiel: 2 3. And He said unto him Son of man, I send thee unto the
Children of Israel, I Who sit upon the Saphirine throne, as you have it in the
first Chapter of this Prophecy of Ezekiel: 26: Verse, And who has all power in
mine hand. Christ is invested with all power in Heaven and in Earth, Matthew: 28:
and 18: Verse, and therefore sends forth Officers unto all Nations. And for
this End, we must see that we be come in at the right door, for there are some,
as Christ tells us, who call themselves Sheepherds, that come not in at this
doar, Jo: 10: 1: Verse, But climb up another way, if we be right Ministers of
Christ, we must come in at three doors. 1. The door of an Internal call of GOD
upon the Soul. 2. The door of the External call of the People. 3. The door of a
legal Mission and Ordination, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytry.

A second thing that lies in the latter end of the Text, about which we must
take special heed is this, that when ever we find out selves entered by the
right door unto this great and difficult Work, we must take heed to fulfill it:
Every Minister must take heed to fill up a right both the doing part, and the
suffering part of his Ministry, so as the work may not suffer or be blamed on
his Account: The Apostle took care of this, and sets it as a Copy before their
Collossians, Chapter first, 24: Verse, Who now rejoice in my sufferings for
you, and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ, in my
flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church. The metaphor may be taken from
a piece of curious drawn work, that the person, in filling up thereof, never
puts in a stitch, but they look on both sides to see it be rightly done, and
they Papper it over to keep it cleanly that they may get the masters
approbation, so should both Ministers and Christians be very careful, both in
their doing and suffering work, that they fill it up with all dexterity, and
keep it so as it may be presented with all purity; For I do believe that GOD
has cut out so much doing and suffering work for his Church in the world, and
that this is divided and subdivided to several Societies, and Persons, every
one their part: So much for the Church in such an Age and place of the World,
and so much for such an other Age and place of the World, and every Person
ought to notice what is their particular allotment, that they may do it both
proportionably, and commendablie, and not be like an Ignorant, careless, and
nesty seamster, to whom in a suit of curious Hangings was committed: The doing
of a head, or a hand, or a Leg, and when it comes to be set together, it is
either not filled up, or disproportionable, or fullied, and so mars the beauty
of the whole suite, and when the master comes in and sees how unhandsome it is,
and calls the persons guilty; How will they be ashamed? with what care then
should Ministers and people that profess Religion, to obey GODS Commands, and
follow the noble Example of CHRIST and His Apostles, so mind to fill up what
proportion, of either doing or suffering work that is committed to them as they
may be able to abide the trial of that day, and not be ashamed. This is that
which the Apostle Paul seems to call all the People of GOD to, both ministers
and others in this Text, with respect to the doing part, and in that of the
first Chapter 24 Verse, formerly cited as to the suffering part, but alace this
is too little heeded by many.

Now that we may discharge our Ministerial work well; Let me Entreat our care
as to these four things.

First, Let us take care to be well seen in all parts of our work, the
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government of the Church; and the Duties
Relating to these.

Secondly, Let us be well seen into the cases of our People, that we may know
how to instruct, Exhort, Reprove, and warn them both suitably and seasonably,
as to their various cases and Conditions.

Thirdly, In the doing of these things, let us always keep our eye upon the
right Rule, which we are to work and walk by; every Calling has some Rule to
work by, which requires some Study to know, or else a Person will but Bungle
in his work. Now no calling has a sure Rule, but the Christian calling,
therefore it is that others vary in their Methods: But the Christian has one
standing Rule (The word of GOD) which is able to make the man of GOD perfect:
this we must precisely keep by, and must not make the impositions of men,
Education, Custom, Example, or Antiquity, our Rule, or any part of it, which
the woman of Samaria pleads. Job: 4.20. For the justification of their worship
in Mount Gerizzim, being two hundred Years standing, But CHRIST Told her,
Verse. 22. Ye Worship ye know not what, you have the wills, Examples, and
Traditions of men for the warrant of your worship, but that is neither Law nor
Light, nor Rule to you, seeing ye want my word which is the true Standart, and
your good Intentions will neither make that worship which you dote upon
acceptable to GOD, or profitable to you: For all Corrupt and false worship
carries no other Character in the Estimation of GOD, but such as is recorded.
Hosea. 11.12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit; we would bewar of being of that number, and endeavor to be of the
tribe of Judah which rules with GOD, and is faithful with the Saints.

Lastly, If we would fulfill our Ministry aright, Let us wrestle much with the
LOKD for his promised Spirit to teach us all things that concern the discharge
of so great an office, to put us and keep us in a right frame for our work, to
instruct us by a strong hand both what, and, how to speak to our people: And
that he would make it first savorie to our own Souls, and then go along with us
in the dispensing of the word and seal it on the hearts of the hearers; for
the Kings message is best belived and obeyed when it has the King's seal at it,
then peoples faith will not stand in the wisdom of Man's words, but in the power
of GOD. 1. Cor: 2.4.5. And my speech and my preaching, was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power, that
your faith may not stand in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God. And in
the whole of our work, let us chiefly aim at the good of Souls, the enlargement
of CHRIST's Kingdom, and the Glory of GOD, from Whom, and by Whom, and to Whom
are all things, to Him be Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

